8

WOOD v. MILYARD
Opinion of the Court

Magistrate Judge caught the State’s computation error
and recommended that the petition be dismissed as untimely, notwithstanding the State’s timeliness concession.
Id., at 204. The District Court adopted the recommendation, and the Court of Appeals upheld the trial court’s
sua sponte dismissal of the petition as untimely. Ibid.
Concluding that it would make “scant sense” to treat
AEDPA’s statute of limitations differently from other
threshold constraints on federal habeas petitioners, we
held “that district courts are permitted, but not obliged, to
consider, sua sponte, the timeliness of a state prisoner’s
habeas petition.” Id., at 209; ibid. (noting that Habeas
Corpus Rule 5(b) places “ ‘a statute of limitations’ defense
on a par with ‘failure to exhaust state remedies, a procedural bar, [and] non-retroactivity.’ ”). Affording federal
courts leeway to consider a forfeited timeliness defense
was appropriate, we again reasoned, because AEDPA’s
statute of limitations, like the exhaustion doctrine, “implicat[es] values beyond the concerns of the parties.” Day,
547 U. S., at 205 (quoting Acosta v. Artuz, 221 F. 3d 117,
123 (CA2 2000)); 547 U. S., at 205–206 (“The AEDPA
statute of limitation promotes judicial efficiency and conservation of judicial resources, safeguards the accuracy of
state court judgments by requiring resolution of constitutional questions while the record is fresh, and lends finality to state court judgments within a reasonable time.”
(internal quotation marks omitted)).
We clarified, however, that a federal court does not have
carte blanche to depart from the principle of party presentation basic to our adversary system. See Greenlaw v.
United States, 554 U. S. 237, 243–244 (2008). Only where
the State does not “strategically withh[o]ld the [limitations] defense or cho[o]se to relinquish it,” and where the
petitioner is accorded a fair opportunity to present his
position, may a district court consider the defense on its
own initiative and “ ‘determine whether the interests of

