2

WOOD v. MILYARD
THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

that a State “must” plead any limitations defense in its
answer. Id., at 212–213 (quoting Rule 5(b) (emphasis
deleted)). Moreover, the rule does not conflict with the
habeas statute, which imposes a 1-year period of limitations without any indication that typical forfeiture rules
do not apply. Id., at 213 (citing 28 U. S. C. §2244(d)(1)).
Finally, the rule does not interfere with historical practice.
Prior to the enactment of a habeas statute of limitations in
the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996
(AEDPA), habeas practice included no limitations period at all, much less one immune to forfeiture. 547 U. S.,
at 212.
As the dissent in Day further explained, id., at 214,
AEDPA’s statute of limitations is distinguishable from the
equitable defenses that we have traditionally permitted
federal habeas courts to raise sua sponte. See, e.g., Granberry, supra, at 133 (holding that appellate courts may
consider a habeas petitioner’s failure to exhaust state remedies despite a State’s forfeiture of the defense). Those
judicially created defenses were rooted in concerns of comity and finality that arise when federal courts collaterally
review state criminal convictions. Day, 547 U. S., at 214.
But those same concerns did not lead this Court to recognize any equitable time bar against habeas petitions. Id.,
at 214–215. Thus, nothing in this Court’s pre-existing
doctrine of equitable defenses supported the Day Court’s
“decision to beef up the presumptively forfeitable ‘limitations period’ of §2244(d) by making it the subject of sua
sponte dismissal.” Id., at 215–216.
For these reasons, I believe that the Day Court was
wrong to hold that district courts may raise sua sponte
forfeited statute of limitations defenses in habeas cases. I
therefore would not extend Day’s reasoning to proceedings
in the courts of appeals. Appellate courts, moreover, are
particularly ill suited to consider issues forfeited below.
Unlike district courts, courts of appeals cannot permit a

