10

WOOD v. MILYARD
Opinion of the Court

not overlook. It typically takes a district court more
time to decide a habeas case on the merits, than it does to
resolve a petition on threshold procedural grounds. See
Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, R. Hanson &
H. Daley, Federal Habeas Corpus Review: Challenging
State Court Criminal Convictions 23 (NCJ–155504, 1995)
(district courts spent an average of 477 days to decide a
habeas petition on the merits, and 268 days to resolve
a petition on procedural grounds). When a court of appeals
raises a procedural impediment to disposition on the merits, and disposes of the case on that ground, the district
court’s labor is discounted and the appellate court acts
not as a court of review but as one of first view.
In light of the foregoing discussion of the relevant considerations, we hold that the Tenth Circuit abused its
discretion when it dismissed Wood’s petition as untimely.
In the District Court, the State was well aware of the
statute of limitations defense available to it and of the
arguments that could be made in support of the defense.
See supra, at 5–6. Yet the State twice informed the District Court that it “will not challenge, but [is] not conceding” the timeliness of Wood’s petition. See supra, at 3.
Essentially, the District Court asked the State: Will you
oppose the petition on statute of limitations grounds? The
State answered: Such a challenge would be supportable,
but we won’t make the challenge here.
“[W]aiver is the ‘intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known right.’ ” Kontrick v. Ryan, 540 U. S.
443, 458, n. 13 (2004) (quoting United States v. Olano, 507
U. S. 725, 733 (1993)). The State’s conduct in this case fits
that description. Its decision not to contest the timeliness
of Wood’s petition did not stem from an “inadvertent error,” as did the State’s concession in Day. See 547 U. S.,
at 211. Rather, the State, after expressing its clear and
accurate understanding of the timeliness issue, see supra,
at 5–6, deliberately steered the District Court away from

