Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

the petitioner had failed to exhaust relief available in
state court. Ibid. See Habeas Corpus Rule 5(b) (listing “failure to exhaust state remedies” as a threshold bar
to federal habeas relief). Despite the State’s failure to
raise the nonexhaustion argument in the District Court,
the Seventh Circuit accepted the argument and ruled for
the State on that ground. We granted certiorari to decide
whether a court of appeals has discretion to address a nonexhaustion defense that the State failed to raise in the
district court. Id., at 130.
Although “express[ing] our reluctance to adopt rules
that allow a party to withhold raising a defense until after
the ‘main event’ . . . is over,” id., at 132, we nonetheless
concluded that the bar to court of appeals’ consideration of
a forfeited habeas defense is not absolute. Id., at 133. The
exhaustion doctrine, we noted, is founded on concerns
broader than those of the parties; in particular, the doctrine fosters respectful, harmonious relations between the
state and federal judiciaries. Id., at 133–135. With that
comity interest in mind, we held that federal appellate
courts have discretion, in “exceptional cases,” to consider a
nonexhaustion argument “inadverten[tly]” overlooked by
the State in the District Court. Id., at 132, 134.5
In Day, we affirmed a federal district court’s authority
to consider a forfeited habeas defense when extraordinary
circumstances so warrant. 547 U. S., at 201. There, the
State miscalculated a time span, specifically, the number
of days running between the finality of Day’s state-court
conviction and the filing of his federal habeas petition.
Id., at 203. As a result, the State erroneously informed
the District Court that Day’s petition was timely. Ibid. A
——————
5 Although our decision in Granberry v. Greer, 481 U. S. 129 (1987),
did not expressly distinguish between forfeited and waived defenses, we
made clear in Day v. McDonough, 547 U. S. 198 (2006), that a federal
court has the authority to resurrect only forfeited defenses. See infra,
at 8–9.

