(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

WOOD v. MILYARD, WARDEN, ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE TENTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–9995. Argued February 27, 2012—Decided April 24, 2012
In 1987, petitioner Patrick Wood was convicted of murder and other
crimes by a Colorado court and sentenced to life imprisonment. Wood
filed a federal habeas petition in 2008. After receiving Wood’s petition, the U. S. District Court asked the State if it planned to argue
that the petition was untimely. In response, the State twice informed
the District Court that it would “not challenge, but [was] not conceding,” the timeliness of Wood’s petition. Thereafter, the District Court
rejected Wood’s claims on the merits. On appeal, the Tenth Circuit
ordered the parties to brief both the merits and the timeliness of
Wood’s petition. After briefing, the court held the petition time
barred, concluding that the court had authority to raise timeliness on
its own motion, and that the State had not taken the issue off the table by declining to raise a statute of limitations defense in the District Court.
Held:
1. Courts of appeals, like district courts, have the authority—
though not the obligation—to raise a forfeited timeliness defense on
their own initiative in exceptional cases. Pp. 4–9.
(a) “Ordinarily in civil litigation, a statutory time limitation is
forfeited if not raised in a defendant’s answer or in an amendment
thereto.” Day v. McDonough, 547 U. S. 198, 202. An affirmative defense, once forfeited, is excluded from the case and, as a rule, cannot
be asserted on appeal.
In Granberry v. Greer, 481 U. S. 129, 133, this Court recognized a
modest exception to the rule that a federal court will not consider a
forfeited defense. There, the Seventh Circuit addressed a nonexhaustion defense the State raised for the first time on appeal. The exhaustion doctrine, this Court noted, is founded on concerns broader

