Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

responsive action, Wood filed a request for a ruling on his
motion and accompanying request for counsel. The state
court then granted Wood’s plea for the appointment of
counsel, but the record is completely blank on any further
action regarding the 1995 motion. Second, Wood filed a
new pro se motion for postconviction relief in Colorado
court in 2004. On the first page of his second motion, he
indicated that “[n]o other postconviction proceedings [had
been] filed.” Record in No. 08–cv–00247 (D Colo.), Doc.
15–5 (Exh. E), p. 1. The state court denied Wood’s motion
four days after receiving it.
Wood filed a federal habeas petition in 2008, which the
District Court initially dismissed as untimely. App. 41a–
46a. On reconsideration, the District Court vacated the
dismissal and instructed the State to file a preanswer
response “limited to addressing the affirmative defenses of
timeliness . . . and/or exhaustion of state court remedies.”
Id., at 64a–65a. On timeliness, the State represented in
its preanswer response: “Respondents will not challenge,
but are not conceding, the timeliness of Wood’s [federal]
habeas petition.” Id., at 70a. Consistently, in its full answer to Wood’s federal petition, the State repeated: “Respondents are not challenging, but do not concede, the
timeliness of the petition.” Id., at 87a.
Disposing of Wood’s petition, the District Court dismissed certain claims for failure to exhaust state remedies, and denied on the merits Wood’s two remaining
claims—one alleging a double jeopardy violation and one
challenging the validity of Wood’s waiver of his Sixth
Amendment right to a jury trial. Id., at 96a–111a. On
appeal, the Tenth Circuit ordered the parties to brief,
along with the merits of Wood’s double jeopardy and Sixth
Amendment claims, “the timeliness of Wood’s application
for [federal habeas relief].” Id., at 129a. After briefing,
the Court of Appeals affirmed the denial of Wood’s petition
without addressing the merits; instead, the Tenth Circuit

