4

PORTER v. MCCOLLUM
Per Curiam

conducted a 2-day evidentiary hearing, during which
Porter presented extensive mitigating evidence, all of
which was apparently unknown to his penalty-phase
counsel. Unlike the evidence presented during Porter’s
penalty hearing, which left the jury knowing hardly any
thing about him other than the facts of his crimes, the new
evidence described his abusive childhood, his heroic mili
tary service and the trauma he suffered because of it, his
long-term substance abuse, and his impaired mental
health and mental capacity.
The depositions of his brother and sister described the
abuse Porter suffered as a child. Porter routinely wit
nessed his father beat his mother, one time so severely
that she had to go to the hospital and lost a child. Porter’s
father was violent every weekend, and by his siblings’
account, Porter was his father’s favorite target, particu
larly when Porter tried to protect his mother. On one
occasion, Porter’s father shot at him for coming home late,
but missed and just beat Porter instead. According to his
brother, Porter attended classes for slow learners and left
school when he was 12 or 13.
To escape his horrible family life, Porter enlisted in the
Army at age 17 and fought in the Korean War. His com
pany commander, Lieutenant Colonel Sherman Pratt,
testified at Porter’s postconviction hearing. Porter was
with the 2d Division, which had advanced above the 38th
parallel to Kunu-ri when it was attacked by Chinese
forces. Porter suffered a gunshot wound to the leg during
the advance but was with the unit for the battle at Kunu
ri. While the Eighth Army was withdrawing, the 2d Divi
sion was ordered to hold off the Chinese advance, enabling
the bulk of the Eighth Army to live to fight another day.
As Colonel Pratt described it, the unit “went into position
there in bitter cold night, terribly worn out, terribly
weary, almost like zombies because we had been in con
stant—for five days we had been in constant contact with

