12

PORTER v. MCCOLLUM
Per Curiam

sentencing judge.” Strickland, supra, at 700. The judge
and jury at Porter’s original sentencing heard almost
nothing that would humanize Porter or allow them to
accurately gauge his moral culpability. They learned
about Porter’s turbulent relationship with Williams, his
crimes, and almost nothing else. Had Porter’s counsel
been effective, the judge and jury would have learned of
the “kind of troubled history we have declared relevant to
assessing a defendant’s moral culpability.” Wiggins, su
pra, at 535. They would have heard about (1) Porter’s
heroic military service in two of the most critical—and
horrific—battles of the Korean War, (2) his struggles to
regain normality upon his return from war, (3) his child
hood history of physical abuse, and (4) his brain abnormal
ity, difficulty reading and writing, and limited schooling.
See Penry v. Lynaugh, 492 U. S. 302, 219 (1989)
(“ ‘[E]vidence about the defendant’s background and char
acter is relevant because of the belief, long held by this
society, that defendants who commit criminal acts that are
attributable to a disadvantaged background . . . may be
less culpable’ ”). Instead, they heard absolutely none of
that evidence, evidence which “might well have influenced
the jury’s appraisal of [Porter’s] moral culpability.” Wil
liams, 529 U. S., at 398.
On the other side of the ledger, the weight of evidence in
aggravation is not as substantial as the sentencing judge
thought. As noted, the sentencing judge accepted the
jury’s recommendation of a death sentence for the murder
of Williams but rejected the jury’s death-sentence recom
mendation for the murder of Burrows. The sentencing
judge believed that there were four aggravating circum
stances related to the Williams murder but only two for
the Burrows murder. Accordingly, the judge must have
reasoned that the two aggravating circumstances that
were present in both cases were insufficient to warrant a
death sentence but that the two additional aggravating

