Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

5

Per Curiam

the enemy fighting our way to the rear, little or no sleep,
little or no food, literally as I say zombies.” 1 Tr. 138 (Jan.
4, 1996). The next morning, the unit engaged in a “fierce
hand-to-hand fight with the Chinese” and later that day
received permission to withdraw, making Porter’s regi
ment the last unit of the Eighth Army to withdraw. Id., at
139–140.
Less than three months later, Porter fought in a second
battle, at Chip’yong-ni. His regiment was cut off from the
rest of the Eighth Army and defended itself for two days
and two nights under constant fire. After the enemy broke
through the perimeter and overtook defensive positions on
high ground, Porter’s company was charged with retaking
those positions. In the charge up the hill, the soldiers
“were under direct open fire of the enemy forces on top of
the hill. They immediately came under mortar, artillery,
machine gun, and every other kind of fire you can imagine
and they were just dropping like flies as they went along.”
Id., at 150. Porter’s company lost all three of its platoon
sergeants, and almost all of the officers were wounded.
Porter was again wounded and his company sustained the
heaviest losses of any troops in the battle, with more than
50% casualties. Colonel Pratt testified that these battles
were “very trying, horrifying experiences,” particularly for
Porter’s company at Chip’yong-ni. Id., at 152. Porter’s
unit was awarded the Presidential Unit Citation for the
engagement at Chip’yong-ni, and Porter individually
received two Purple Hearts and the Combat Infantryman
Badge, along with other decorations.
Colonel Pratt testified that Porter went absent without
leave (AWOL) for two periods while in Korea. He ex
plained that this was not uncommon, as soldiers some
times became disoriented and separated from the unit,
and that the commander had decided not to impose any
punishment for the absences. In Colonel Pratt’s experi
ence, an “awful lot of [veterans] come back nervous

