14

PORTER v. MCCOLLUM
Per Curiam

experts identified perceived problems with the tests that
Dr. Dee used and the conclusions that he drew from them,
it was not reasonable to discount entirely the effect that
his testimony might have had on the jury or the sentenc
ing judge.
Furthermore, the Florida Supreme Court, following the
state postconviction court, unreasonably discounted the
evidence of Porter’s childhood abuse and military service.
It is unreasonable to discount to irrelevance the evidence
of Porter’s abusive childhood, especially when that kind of
history may have particular salience for a jury evaluating
Porter’s behavior in his relationship with Williams. It is
also unreasonable to conclude that Porter’s military ser
vice would be reduced to “inconsequential proportions,”
788 So. 2d, at 925, simply because the jury would also
have learned that Porter went AWOL on more than one
occasion. Our Nation has a long tradition of according
leniency to veterans in recognition of their service, espe
cially for those who fought on the front lines as Porter
did.8 Moreover, the relevance of Porter’s extensive combat
experience is not only that he served honorably under
extreme hardship and gruesome conditions, but also that
the jury might find mitigating the intense stress and
mental and emotional toll that combat took on Porter.9
——————
So. 2d, at 921, but it did not consider Porter’s mental health evidence in
its discussion of nonstatutory mitigating evidence, id., at 924.
8 See Abbott, The Civil War and the Crime Wave of 1865–70, 1 Soc.
Serv. Rev. 212, 232–234 (1927) (discussing the movement to pardon or
parole prisoners who were veterans of the Civil War); Rosenbaum, The
Relationship Between War and Crime in the United States, 30 J. Crim.
L. & C. 722, 733–734 (1940) (describing a 1922 study by the Wisconsin
Board of Control that discussed the number of veterans imprisoned in
the State and considered “the greater leniency that may be shown to ex
service men in court”).
9 Cf. Cal. Penal Code Ann. §1170.9(a) (West Supp. 2009) (providing a
special hearing for a person convicted of a crime “who alleges that he or
she committed the offense as a result of post-traumatic stress disorder,

