8

PORTER v. MCCOLLUM
Per Curiam

rect to find “the additional nonstatutory mitigation to be
lacking in weight because of the specific facts presented.”
Id., at 925. Like the postconviction court, the Florida
Supreme Court reserved judgment regarding counsel’s
deficiency. Ibid.6 Two justices dissented, reasoning that
counsel’s failure to investigate and present mitigating
evidence was “especially harmful” because of the divided
vote affirming the sentence on direct appeal—“even with
out the substantial mitigation that we now know ex
isted”—and because of the reversal of the heinous, atro
cious, and cruel aggravating factor. Id., at 937 (Anstead,
J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).
Porter thereafter filed his federal habeas petition. The
District Court held Porter’s penalty-phase counsel had
been ineffective. It first determined that counsel’s per
formance had been deficient because “penalty-phase coun
sel did little, if any investigation . . . and failed to effec
tively advocate on behalf of his client before the jury.”
Porter v. Crosby, No. 6:03–cv–1465–Orl–31KRS, 2007 WL
1747316, *23 (MD Fla., June 18, 2007). It then deter
mined that counsel’s deficient performance was prejudi
cial, finding that the state court’s decision was contrary to
clearly established law in part because the state court
failed to consider the entirety of the evidence when re
——————
6 The postconviction court stated defense counsel “was not ineffective
for failing to pursue mental health evaluations and . . . [Porter] has
thus failed to show sufficient evidence that any statutory mitigators
could have been presented.” Record 1210. It is not at all clear whether
this stray comment addressed counsel’s deficiency. If it did, then it was
at most dicta, because the court expressly “decline[d] to make a deter
mination regarding whether or not Defense Counsel was in fact defi
cient here.” Id., at 1206. The Florida Supreme Court simply para
phrased the postconviction court when it stated “trial counsel’s decision
not to pursue mental evaluations did not exceed the bounds for compe
tent counsel.” Porter v. State, 788 So. 2d 917, 923–924 (2001) (per
curiam). But that court also expressly declined to answer the question
of deficiency. Id., at 925.

