2

PORTER v. MCCOLLUM
Per Curiam

I
Porter was convicted of two counts of first-degree mur
der for the shooting of his former girlfriend, Evelyn Wil
liams, and her boyfriend Walter Burrows. He was sen
tenced to death on the first count but not the second.
In July 1986, as his relationship with Williams was
ending, Porter threatened to kill her and then left town.
When he returned to Florida three months later, he at
tempted to see Williams but her mother told him that
Williams did not want to see him. He drove past Williams’
house each of the two days prior to the shooting, and the
night before the murder he visited Williams, who called
the police. Porter then went to two cocktail lounges and
spent the night with a friend, who testified Porter was
quite drunk by 11 p.m. Early the next morning, Porter
shot Williams in her house. Burrows struggled with Por
ter and forced him outside where Porter shot him.
Porter represented himself, with standby counsel, for
most of the pretrial proceedings and during the beginning
of his trial. Near the completion of the State’s case in
chief, Porter pleaded guilty. He thereafter changed his
mind about representing himself, and his standby counsel
was appointed as his counsel for the penalty phase. Dur
ing the penalty phase, the State attempted to prove four
aggravating factors: Porter had been “previously con
victed” of another violent felony (i.e., in Williams’ case,
killing Burrows, and in his case, killing Williams);2 the
murder was committed during a burglary; the murder was
committed in a cold, calculated, and premeditated man
——————
2 It is an aggravating factor under Florida law that “[t]he defendant
was previously convicted of another capital felony or of a felony involv
ing the use or threat of violence to the person.”
Fla. Stat.
§921.141(5)(b) (1987). In Porter’s case, the State established that factor
by reference to Porter’s contemporaneous convictions stemming from
the same episode: two counts of murder and one count of aggravated
assault. Tr. 5 (Mar. 4, 1988).

