Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

13

Per Curiam

circumstances present with respect to the Williams mur
der were sufficient to tip the balance in favor of a death
sentence. But the Florida Supreme Court rejected one of
these additional aggravating circumstances, i.e., that
Williams’ murder was especially heinous, atrocious, or
cruel, finding the murder “consistent with . . . a crime of
passion” even though premeditated to a heightened de
gree. 564 So. 2d, at 1063–1064. Had the judge and jury
been able to place Porter’s life history “on the mitigating
side of the scale,” and appropriately reduced the ballast on
the aggravating side of the scale, there is clearly a reason
able probability that the advisory jury—and the sentenc
ing judge—“would have struck a different balance,” Wig
gins, 539 U. S., at 537, and it is unreasonable to conclude
otherwise.
The Florida Supreme Court’s decision that Porter was
not prejudiced by his counsel’s failure to conduct a thor
ough—or even cursory—investigation is unreasonable.
The Florida Supreme Court either did not consider or
unreasonably discounted the mitigation evidence adduced
in the postconviction hearing. Under Florida law, mental
health evidence that does not rise to the level of establish
ing a statutory mitigating circumstance may nonetheless
be considered by the sentencing judge and jury as mitigat
ing. See, e.g., Hoskins v. State, 965 So. 2d 1, 17–18 (Fla.
2007) (per curiam). Indeed, the Constitution requires that
“the sentencer in capital cases must be permitted to con
sider any relevant mitigating factor.” Eddings v. Okla
homa, 455 U. S. 104, 112 (1982). Yet neither the postcon
viction trial court nor the Florida Supreme Court gave any
consideration for the purpose of nonstatutory mitigation to
Dr. Dee’s testimony regarding the existence of a brain
abnormality and cognitive defects.7 While the State’s
——————
7 The Florida Supreme Court acknowledged that Porter had pre
sented evidence of “statutory and nonstatutory mental mitigation,” 788

