6

PORTER v. MCCOLLUM
Per Curiam

wrecks. Our [veterans’] hospitals today are filled with
people mentally trying to survive the perils and hardships
[of] . . . the Korean War,” particularly those who fought in
the battles he described. Id., at 153.
When Porter returned to the United States, he went
AWOL for an extended period of time.3 He was sentenced
to six months’ imprisonment for that infraction, but he
received an honorable discharge. After his discharge, he
suffered dreadful nightmares and would attempt to climb
his bedroom walls with knives at night.4 Porter’s family
eventually removed all of the knives from the house.
According to Porter’s brother, Porter developed a serious
drinking problem and began drinking so heavily that he
would get into fights and not remember them at all.
In addition to this testimony regarding his life history,
Porter presented an expert in neuropsychology, Dr. Dee,
who had examined Porter and administered a number of
psychological assessments. Dr. Dee concluded that Porter
suffered from brain damage that could manifest in impul
sive, violent behavior. At the time of the crime, Dr. Dee
testified, Porter was substantially impaired in his ability
to conform his conduct to the law and suffered from an
extreme mental or emotional disturbance, two statutory
mitigating circumstances, Fla. Stat. §921.141(6). Dr. Dee
also testified that Porter had substantial difficulties with
——————
3 Porter explained to one of the doctors who examined him for compe
tency to stand trial that he went AWOL in order to spend time with his
son. Record 904.
4 Porter’s expert testified that these symptoms would “easily” warrant
a diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 2 Tr. 233 (Jan. 5,
1996). PTSD is not uncommon among veterans returning from combat.
See Hearing on Fiscal Year 2010 Budget for Veterans’ Programs before
the Senate Committee on Veterans’ Affairs, 111th Cong., 1st Sess., 63
(2009) (uncorrected copy) (testimony of Eric K. Shinseki, Secretary of
Veterans Affairs (VA), reporting that approximately 23 percent of the
Iraq and Afghanistan war veterans seeking treatment at a VA medical
facility had been preliminarily diagnosed with PTSD).

