Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

3

Per Curiam

ner; and the murder was especially heinous, atrocious, or
cruel. The defense put on only one witness, Porter’s ex
wife, and read an excerpt from a deposition. The sum
total of the mitigating evidence was inconsistent testi
mony about Porter’s behavior when intoxicated and testi
mony that Porter had a good relationship with his son.
Although his lawyer told the jury that Porter “has other
handicaps that weren’t apparent during the trial” and
Porter was not “mentally healthy,” he did not put on any
evidence related to Porter’s mental health. 3 Tr. 477–478
(Jan. 22, 1988).
The jury recommended the death sentence for both
murders. The trial court found that the State had proved
all four aggravating circumstances for the murder of
Williams but that only the first two were established with
respect to Burrows’ murder. The trial court found no
mitigating circumstances and imposed a death sentence
for Williams’ murder only. On direct appeal, the Florida
Supreme Court affirmed the sentence over the dissent of
two justices, but struck the heinous, atrocious, or cruel
aggravating factor. Porter v. State, 564 So. 2d 1060 (1990)
(per curiam). The court found the State had not carried its
burden on that factor because the “record is consistent
with the hypothesis that Porter’s was a crime of passion,
not a crime that was meant to be deliberately and ex
traordinarily painful.” Id., at 1063 (emphasis deleted).
The two dissenting justices would have reversed the pen
alty because the evidence of drunkenness, “combined with
evidence of Porter’s emotionally charged, desperate, frus
trated desire to meet with his former lover, is sufficient to
render the death penalty disproportional punishment in
this instance.” Id., at 1065–1066 (Barkett, J., concurring
in part and dissenting in part).
In 1995, Porter filed a petition for postconviction relief
in state court, claiming his penalty-phase counsel failed to
investigate and present mitigating evidence. The court

