10

PORTER v. MCCOLLUM
Per Curiam

ing professional norms at the time of Porter’s trial, counsel
had an “obligation to conduct a thorough investigation of
the defendant’s background.” Williams v. Taylor, 529
U. S. 362, 396 (2000). The investigation conducted by
Porter’s counsel clearly did not satisfy those norms.
Although Porter had initially elected to represent him
self, his standby counsel became his counsel for the pen
alty phase a little over a month prior to the sentencing
proceeding before the jury. It was the first time this law
yer had represented a defendant during a penalty-phase
proceeding. At the postconviction hearing, he testified
that he had only one short meeting with Porter regarding
the penalty phase. He did not obtain any of Porter’s
school, medical, or military service records or interview
any members of Porter’s family. In Wiggins v. Smith, 539
U. S. 510, 524, 525 (2003), we held counsel “fell short of
. . . professional standards” for not expanding their inves
tigation beyond the presentence investigation report and
one set of records they obtained, particularly “in light of
what counsel actually discovered” in the records. Here,
counsel did not even take the first step of interviewing
witnesses or requesting records. Cf. Bobby v. Van Hook,
ante, at 6–8 (holding performance not deficient when
counsel gathered a substantial amount of information and
then made a reasonable decision not to pursue additional
sources); Strickland, 466 U. S., at 699 (“[Counsel’s] deci
sion not to seek more character or psychological evidence
than was already in hand was . . . reasonable”). Beyond
that, like the counsel in Wiggins, he ignored pertinent
avenues for investigation of which he should have been
aware. The court-ordered competency evaluations, for
example, collectively reported Porter’s very few years of
regular school, his military service and wounds sustained
in combat, and his father’s “over-disciplin[e].” Record
902–906. As an explanation, counsel described Porter as
fatalistic and uncooperative. But he acknowledged that

