2

MILNER v. DEPARTMENT OF NAVY
ALITO, J., concurring

ment has the burden of proving the existence of . . . a
compilation for such a purpose”). In my view, this phrase
reasonably encompasses information used to fulfill official
security and crime prevention duties.
“Law enforcement purposes.” The ordinary understand
ing of law enforcement includes not just the investigation
and prosecution of offenses that have already been com
mitted, but also proactive steps designed to prevent crimi
nal activity and to maintain security. A “law enforcement
officer” is defined as one “whose duty it is to preserve the
peace,” Black’s Law Dictionary 796 (5th ed. 1979), and
fulfilling that duty involves a range of activities. Police on
the beat aim to prevent crime from occurring, and they no
less carry out “law enforcement purposes” than officers
investigating a crime scene. Similarly, a “law-enforcement
agency” is charged with “the apprehension of alleged
offenders as well as crime detection and prevention.” R. De
Sola, Crime Dictionary 82 (1982) (emphasis added).
Crime prevention and security measures are critical to
effective law enforcement as we know it. There can be no
doubt, for example, that the Secret Service acts with a
law enforcement purpose when it protects federal officials
from attack, even though no investigation may be ongoing.
Likewise, steps by law enforcement officers to prevent
terrorism surely fulfill “law enforcement purposes.” Par
ticularly in recent years, terrorism prevention and na
tional security measures have been recognized as vital to
effective law enforcement efforts in our Nation. Indeed,
“[a]fter the September 11th attacks on America,” the
priorities of the Federal Bureau of Investigation “shifted
dramatically,” and the FBI’s “top priority became the
prevention of another terrorist attack.” Hearings before
the Subcommittee on Science, the Departments of State,
Justice, and Commerce, and Related Agencies of the
House Committee on Appropriations, 109th Cong., 2d
Sess., pt. 10, 232 (2006) (testimony of FBI Director Robert

