Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

exemption and, indeed, specifically rejects the Low 2
construction. According to the Report: “Operating rules,
guidelines, and manuals of procedure for Government
investigators or examiners would be exempt from disclo
sure [under Exemption 2], but this exemption would not
cover . . . employee relations and working conditions and
routine administrative procedures.” H. R. Rep. No. 1497,
89th Cong., 2d Sess., 10 (1966). But the Senate Report
says exactly the opposite, explaining in support of a Low 2
interpretation that the phrase “internal personnel rules
and practices of an agency” means “rules as to personnel’s
use of parking facilities or regulation of lunch hours,
statements of policy as to sick leave, and the like.”
S. Rep., at 8.6 In Rose, we gave reasons for thinking the
Senate Report the more reliable of the two. See 425 U. S.,
at 366. But the more fundamental point is what we said
before: Legislative history, for those who take it into ac
count, is meant to clear up ambiguity, not create it. See
supra, at 9; Wong Yang Sung v. McGrath, 339 U. S. 33, 49
(1950) (declining to consult legislative history when that
“history is more conflicting than the text is ambiguous”).
When presented, on the one hand, with clear statutory
language and, on the other, with dueling committee re
ports, we must choose the language.
The Government also advances, in support of Crooker’s
High 2 approach, an argument based on subsequent legis
lative action. Congress, the Government notes, amended
Exemption 7(E) in 1986 to cover law enforcement records
whose production “would disclose techniques and proce
dures for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions,
——————
6 We are perplexed that the dissent takes seriously Crooker’s notion
that the reports are “reconcilable.” Post, at 4. To strip the matter to its
essentials, the House Report says: “Exemption 2 means A, but not B.”
The Senate Report says: “Exemption 2 means B.” That is the very
definition of “irreconcilable.”

