Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

their duties”). According to the Government, this inter
pretation makes sense because “the phrase ‘personnel
rules and practices of an agency’ is logically understood to
mean an agency’s rules and practices for its personnel.”
Id., at 20 (emphasis added).
But the purported logic in the Government’s definition
eludes us. We would not say, in ordinary parlance, that a
“personnel file” is any file an employee uses, or that a
“personnel department” is any department in which an
employee serves. No more would we say that a “personnel
rule or practice” is any rule or practice that assists an
employee in doing her job. The use of the term “personnel”
in each of these phrases connotes not that the file or de
partment or practice/rule is for personnel, but rather that
the file or department or practice/rule is about personnel—
i.e., that it relates to employee relations or human re
sources. This case well illustrates the point. The records
requested, as earlier noted, are explosives data and maps
showing the distances that potential blasts travel. This
information no doubt assists Navy personnel in storing
munitions. But that is not to say that the data and maps
relate to “personnel rules and practices.” No one staring
at these charts of explosions and using ordinary language
would describe them in this manner.
Indeed, the Government’s “clean slate” construction
reaches such documents only by stripping the word “per
sonnel” of any real meaning. Under this interpretation,
an agency’s “internal personnel rules and practices” ap
pears to mean all its internal rules and practices. That is
because agencies necessarily operate through personnel,
and so all their internal rules and practices are for per
sonnel. The modifier “personnel,” then, does no modifying
work; it does not limit the class of internal rules and
practices that Exemption 2 covers. What is most naturally
viewed as the provision’s key word—the term that ought

