Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

ALITO, J., concurring

S. Mueller III). Today, “[t]he FBI’s number one priority
continues to be the prevention of terrorist attacks against
the United States.” Hearings before the Senate Commit
tee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs,
111th Cong., 2d Sess, p. ___ (Sept. 22, 2010) (testimony of
Mueller). If crime prevention and security measures do
not serve “law enforcement purposes,” then those charged
with law enforcement responsibilities have little chance of
fulfilling their duty to preserve the peace.
The context of Exemption 7 confirms that, read natu
rally, “law enforcement purposes” involve more than just
investigation and prosecution. As Exemption 7’s subpara
graphs demonstrate, Congress knew how to refer to these
narrower activities. See, e.g., §552(b)(7)(A) (information
that “could reasonably be expected to interfere with en
forcement proceedings”); §552(b)(7)(E) (information that
“would disclose techniques and procedures for law en
forcement investigations or prosecutions”).
Congress’
decision to use different language to trigger Exemption 7
confirms that the concept of “law enforcement purposes”
sweeps in activities beyond investigation and prosecution.
See Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain, 542 U. S. 692, 711, n. 9
(2004) (applying the “usual rule” that “ when the legis
lature uses certain language in one part of the statute
and different language in another, the court assumes different meanings were intended” (internal quotation marks
omitted)).
“Compiled for law enforcement purposes.” This Court
has given a fairly broad meaning to “compiled” under
§552(b)(7). In John Doe Agency, we held that information
need not have been originally “compiled for law enforce
ment purposes” to satisfy Exemption 7’s threshold re
quirement. Rather, “even though . . . documents were put
together at an earlier time for a different purpose,” they
may fall within Exemption 7 if they are later assembled
for law enforcement purposes. 493 U. S., at 154–155. For

