2

MILNER v. DEPARTMENT OF NAVY
Syllabus
ment) in storing munitions at a naval base in Washington State.
Stating that disclosure would threaten the security of the base and
surrounding community, the Navy invoked Exemption 2 and refused
to release the data. The District Court granted the Navy summary
judgment, and the Court of Appeals affirmed, relying on the High 2
interpretation.

Held: Because Exemption 2 encompasses only records relating to em
ployee relations and human resources issues, the explosives maps
and data requested here do not qualify for withholding under that
exemption. Pp. 6–19.
(a) Exemption 2 shields only those records relating to “personnel
rules and practices.” When used as an adjective in this manner, the
key statutory word “personnel” refers to human resources matters.
For example, a “personnel department” deals with employee prob
lems and interviews applicants for jobs. FOIA Exemption 6 provides
another example, protecting certain “personnel . . . files” from disclo
sure. §552(b)(6). “[T]he common and congressional meaning of . . .
‘personnel file’ ” is a file maintained by a human resources office col
lecting personal information about employees, such as examination
results and work performance evaluations. Rose, supra, at 377. Ex
emption 2 uses “personnel” in the exact same way. An agency’s “per
sonnel rules and practices” all share a critical feature: They concern
conditions of employment in federal agencies—such matters as hiring
and firing, work rules and discipline, compensation and benefits.
These items currently fall within the so-called Low 2 exemption. And
under this Court’s construction of the statutory language, Low 2 is all
of 2.
FOIA’s purpose reinforces this reading. The statute’s goal is
“broad disclosure,” and the exemptions must be “given a narrow com
pass.” Department of Justice v. Tax Analysts, 492 U. S. 136, 151. A
narrow construction stands on especially firm footing with respect to
Exemption 2, which was intended to hem in the expansive withhold
ing that occurred under the prior APA exemption for “internal man
agement” records.
Exemption 2, as interpreted here, does not reach the requested ex
plosives information. The data and maps, which calculate and visu
ally portray the magnitude of hypothetical detonations, in no way re
late to “personnel rules and practices,” as that term is most naturally
understood. Pp. 6–10.
(b) The Government’s two alternative readings of Exemption 2
cannot be squared with the statute. Pp. 10–17.
(c) While the Navy has a strong security interest in shielding the
explosives data and maps from public disclosure, the Government
has other tools at hand to protect such information: FOIA Exemption

