12

MILNER v. DEPARTMENT OF NAVY
Opinion of the Court

or would disclose guidelines for law enforcement investi
gations or prosecutions if such disclosure could reason
ably be expected to risk circumvention of the law.”
§552(b)(7)(E). That amendment, the Government con
tends, codified Crooker’s “circumvention of the law” stan
dard and, in so doing, ratified Crooker’s holding. Brief for
Respondent 42–43. The dissent likewise counts as signifi
cant that Congress “t[ook] note” of Crooker in revising
FOIA. Post, at 9; see post, at 2.
But the Government and the dissent neglect the key
feature of the 1986 amendment: Congress modified not
Exemption 2 (the subject of Crooker), but instead Exemp
tion 7(E). And the Crooker construction of Exemption 2
renders Exemption 7(E) superfluous and so deprives that
amendment of any effect. See, e.g., TRW Inc. v. Andrews,
534 U. S. 19, 31 (2001) (noting canon that statutes should
be read to avoid making any provision “superfluous, void,
or insignificant” (internal quotation marks omitted)). We
cannot think of any document eligible for withholding
under Exemption 7(E) that the High 2 reading does not
capture: The circumvention standard is the same, and the
law enforcement records listed in Exemption 7(E) are
“predominantly internal.” So if Congress had agreed with
Crooker’s reading of Exemption 2, it would have had no
reason to alter Exemption 7(E). In that event, Congress
would either have left the statute alone (on the theory that
Crooker would do the necessary work) or would have
amended Exemption 2 specifically to ratify Crooker. The
decision instead to amend Exemption 7(E) suggests that
Congress approved the circumvention standard only as to
law enforcement materials, and not as to the wider set of
records High 2 covers. Perhaps this legislative action does
not show that Congress affirmatively disagreed with
Crooker; maybe Congress was agnostic about whether the
circumvention standard should apply to other records.
But one thing is clear: The 1986 amendment does not

