8

MILNER v. DEPARTMENT OF NAVY
Opinion of the Court

difficulty identifying the records that qualify for withhold
ing under this reading: They are what now commonly fall
within the Low 2 exemption. Our construction of the
statutory language simply makes clear that Low 2 is all of
2 (and that High 2 is not 2 at all, see infra, at 10–14).
The statute’s purpose reinforces this understanding of
the exemption. We have often noted “the Act’s goal of
broad disclosure” and insisted that the exemptions be
“given a narrow compass.” Department of Justice v. Tax
Analysts, 492 U. S. 136, 151 (1989); see Department of
Interior v. Klamath Water Users Protective Assn., 532 U. S.
1, 7–8 (2001).5 This practice of “constru[ing] FOIA exemp
tions narrowly,” Department of Justice v. Landano, 508
U. S. 165, 181 (1993), stands on especially firm footing
with respect to Exemption 2. As described earlier, Con
gress worded that provision to hem in the prior APA ex
emption for “any matter relating solely to the internal
management of an agency,” which agencies had used to
prevent access to masses of documents. See Rose, 425
U. S., at 362. We would ill-serve Congress’s purpose by
——————
—to the agency’s “personnel rules and practices.” And the information
must be “internal”; that is, the agency must typically keep the records
to itself for its own use. See Webster’s 1180 (“internal” means “existing
or situated within the limits . . . of something”). An agency’s human
resources documents will often meet these conditions.
5 The dissent would reject this longstanding rule of construction in
favor of an approach asking courts “to turn Congress’ public informa
tion objectives into workable agency practice.” Post, at 8–9 (opinion of
BREYER, J.). But nothing in FOIA either explicitly or implicitly grants
courts discretion to expand (or contract) an exemption on this basis. In
enacting FOIA, Congress struck the balance it thought right—generally
favoring disclosure, subject only to a handful of specified exemptions—
and did so across the length and breadth of the Federal Government.
See, e.g., John Doe Agency v. John Doe Corp., 493 U. S. 146, 152–153
(1989). The judicial role is to enforce that congressionally determined
balance rather than, as the dissent suggests, post, at 4–6, to assess case
by case, department by department, and task by task whether disclo
sure interferes with good government.

