4

MILNER v. DEPARTMENT OF NAVY
BREYER, J., dissenting

Cong., 1st Sess., p. 8 (1965)). But it also noted that the
House Report described the exemption as protecting from
disclosure “ ‘[o]perating rules, guidelines, and manuals of
procedure for Government investigators or examiners.’ ”
670 F. 2d, at 1060 (quoting H. R. Rep. No. 1497, 89th
Cong., 2d Sess., p. 10 (1966)). “[U]pon reflection,” it
thought the views of the two Houses “reconcilable” if one
understood both sets of examples as referring to internal
staff information (both minor personnel matters and staff
instruction matters) that the public had no legitimate
interest in learning about. 670 F. 2d, at 1065. And it
accepted this view in light of its hesitation to “apply indi
vidual provisions of the statute woodenly, oblivious to
Congress’ intention that FOIA not frustrate law enforce
ment efforts.” Id., at 1066. At the same time it found no
other exemption that would protect internal documents in
which there is no legitimate public interest in disclosure—
a category that includes, say, building plans, safe combi
nations, computer passwords, evacuation plans, and the
like.
After examining in depth the legislative history and
relevant precedent, the court adopted an approach based
on a prior opinion by Circuit Judge Leventhal, as well as
language used by this Court in Department of Air Force v.
Rose, 425 U. S. 352, 369 (1976). The D. C. Circuit held
that a document fits within the literal language of Exemp
tion 2 and is exempt from disclosure if (1) it “meets the
test of ‘predominant internality,’ ” i.e., the document is
“not of legitimate public interest,” and (2) “disclosure
significantly risks circumvention of agency regulations or
statutes.” Crooker, supra, at 1056, 1074; see also Rose,
supra, at 369 (suggesting that Exemption 2 might apply
where “disclosure may risk circumvention of agency regu
lation”). This test, based upon Congress’ broader FOIA
objectives and a “common sense” view of what information
Congress did and did not want to make available, Crooker,

