Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

text is generally read the same way each time it appears”).
That exemption, just a few short paragraphs down from
Exemption 2, protects from disclosure “personnel and
medical files and similar files the disclosure of which
would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of per
sonal privacy.” §552(b)(6). Here too, the statute uses the
term “personnel” as a modifier meaning “human re
sources.” See Tr. of Oral Arg. 32 (“[The Court:] It’s [an]
H. R. file, right? [The Government:] That’s generally
true”). As we recognized in Rose, “the common and con
gressional meaning of . . . ‘personnel file’ ” is the file “show
ing, for example, where [an employee] was born, the
names of his parents, where he has lived from time to
time, his . . . school records, results of examinations, [and]
evaluations of his work performance.” 425 U. S., at 377.
It is the file typically maintained in the human resources
office—otherwise known (to recall an example offered
above) as the “personnel department.” Ibid.
Exemption 2 uses “personnel” in the exact same way.
An agency’s “personnel rules and practices” are its rules
and practices dealing with employee relations or human
resources. The D. C. Circuit, in a pre-Crooker decision,
gave as examples “matters relating to pay, pensions,
vacations, hours of work, lunch hours, parking, etc.”
Jordan, 591 F. 2d, at 763; see supra, at 3. That “etc.” is
important; we doubt any court could know enough about
the Federal Government’s operations to formulate a com
prehensive list. But all the rules and practices referenced
in Exemption 2 share a critical feature: They concern the
conditions of employment in federal agencies—such mat
ters as hiring and firing, work rules and discipline, com
pensation and benefits.4 Courts in practice have had little
——————
4 Government records also must satisfy the other requirements of
Exemption 2 to be exempt from disclosure. Information must “relat[e]
solely”—meaning, as usual, “exclusively or only,” Random House 1354

