Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

have previously noted, those measures “reflec[t] a determination that quality legal representation is necessary” in
all capital proceedings to foster “fundamental fairness
in the imposition of the death penalty.” McFarland, 512
U. S., at 855, 859.
That understanding of §3599’s terms and origins goes
far toward resolving the parties’ dispute over what standard should apply. We know that before §3599’s passage,
courts used an “interests of justice” standard to decide
substitution motions in all cases—and that today, they
continue to do so in all non-capital proceedings. We know,
too, that in spinning off §3599, Congress enacted a set of
reforms to improve the quality of lawyering in capital
litigation. With all those measures pointing in one direction, we cannot conclude that Congress silently prescribed
a substitution standard that would head the opposite way.
Adopting a more stringent test than §3006A’s would deprive capital defendants of a tool they formerly had, and
defendants facing lesser penalties still have, to handle
serious representational problems. That result clashes
with everything else §3599 does. By contrast, utilizing
§3006A’s standard comports with the myriad ways that
§3599 seeks to promote effective representation for persons threatened with capital punishment.
The dearth of support for the State’s alternative standard reinforces the case for borrowing from §3006A. Recall
that the State thinks substitution proper “only when . . .
counsel is completely denied”—which, the State says,
occurs when counsel lacks the requisite experience; “actively represents conflicting interests”; or has “total[ly]
desert[ed]” the client. Brief for Petitioner 15, 35, 38. As
the State acknowledges, this test comes from . . . well,
from nowhere. The State conceded during argument that
Congress has not considered (much less adopted) the
standard in any context; neither has a federal court used
it in any case. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 16. Indeed, the stand-

