Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

here lies the rub: The statute fails to specify how a court
should decide such a motion. Section 3599 says not a word
about the standard a court should apply when addressing
a request for a new lawyer.
The parties offer us two alternative ways to fill this
statutory hole. Clair argues, and the Ninth Circuit
agreed, that district courts should decide substitution
motions brought under §3599 “in the interests of justice.”
That standard derives from 18 U. S. C. §3006A, which
governs the appointment and substitution of counsel in
federal non-capital litigation. By contrast, the State contends that district courts may replace an appointed lawyer
under §3599 only when the defendant has suffered an
“actual or constructive denial” of counsel. Brief for Petitioner 33. That denial occurs, the State asserts, in just
three situations: when the lawyer lacks the qualifications
necessary for appointment under the statute; when he has
a “disabling conflict of interest”; or when he has “completely abandoned” the client. Id., at 34. On this matter, we
think Clair, not the State, gets it right.
A trip back in time begins to show why. Prior to 1988,
§3006A governed the appointment of counsel in all federal
criminal cases and habeas litigation, regardless whether
the matter involved a capital or a non-capital offense.
That section provided counsel as a matter of right to most
indigent criminal defendants, from pre-trial proceedings
through appeal. See §§3006A(a)(1), (c) (1982 ed.). In
——————
ed shall represent the defendant throughout every subsequent stage of
available judicial proceedings, including pretrial proceedings, trial,
sentencing, motions for new trial, appeals, applications for writ of
certiorari to the Supreme Court of the United States, and all available
post-conviction process, together with applications for stays of execution and other appropriate motions and procedures, and shall also
represent the defendant in such competency proceedings and proceedings for executive or other clemency as may be available to the
defendant.”

