4

MARTEL v. CLAIR
Syllabus
tence. But the “interests of justice” standard takes into account
whether a substitution motion will cause undue delay. Pp. 9–12.
2. The District Court did not abuse its discretion in denying Clair’s
second request for new counsel under §3599’s “interests of justice”
standard. In reviewing substitution motions, the courts of appeals
have pointed to several relevant considerations, including: the timeliness of the motion; the adequacy of the district court’s inquiry into
the defendant’s complaint; and the asserted cause for that complaint,
including the extent of the conflict or breakdown in communication
between lawyer and client. Because a trial court’s decision on substitution is so fact-specific, it deserves deference and may be overturned
only for an abuse of discretion.
Here, the District Court received Clair’s second substitution motion
on the eve of deciding his 10-year-old habeas petition. Just three
months earlier, Clair had written the court to complain about his attorneys. After making proper inquiry, the court learned that Clair
and his counsel had settled their dispute and turned once more to
ruling on Clair’s habeas petition, only to receive a second letter six
weeks later. In it Clair maintained his general assertion that his
lawyers were not trying to prove his innocence, but he also alleged a
new and significant charge of attorney error: that counsel had refused to investigate particular, newly located physical evidence.
Such a charge normally would require the court to make further inquiry; a district court cannot usually rule on a substitution motion
without exploring why a defendant wants new counsel. But here, the
motion’s timing precludes a holding that the District Court abused its
discretion. The court received the letter while putting the finishing
touches on its denial of Clair’s habeas petition. After years of litigation, an evidentiary hearing, and post-hearing briefing, the court had
instructed the parties that it would accept no further submissions.
All proceedings had therefore come to a close, and a new attorney
could have done nothing further in the District Court. In those circumstances, the District Court acted within its discretion in denying
Clair’s substitution motion. Pp. 13–16.

403 Fed. Appx. 276, reversed and remanded.
KAGAN, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

