Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

trying to prove his innocence, Clair now alleged that counsel had refused to investigate particular, newly located
physical evidence. That evidence, according to Clair,
might have shown that the police had suppressed Brady
material, that his trial counsel had been ineffective in
investigating the murder, or that he had not committed
the offense. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 45–46. Especially in a
case lacking physical evidence, built in part on sincerecanted witness testimony, those possibilities cannot be
blithely dismissed. In the mine run of circumstances,
Clair’s new charge would have required the court to make
further inquiry before ruling on his motion for a new
attorney.
But here, the timing of that motion precludes a holding
that the District Court abused its discretion. The court
received Clair’s second letter while putting the finishing
touches on its denial of his habeas petition. (That lengthy
decision issued just two weeks later.) After many years
of litigation, an evidentiary hearing, and substantial posthearing briefing, the court had instructed the parties that
it would accept no further submissions. See App. 3–4; Tr.
of Oral Arg. 4–5. The case was all over but the deciding;
counsel, whether old or new, could do nothing more in the
trial court proceedings. At that point and in that forum,
Clair’s conflict with his lawyers no longer mattered.
Clair, to be sure, wanted to press his case further in the
District Court. He desired a new lawyer, after examining
the physical evidence, to make whatever claims followed
from it. But, notably, all of those claims would have been
new; as the District Court later found in ruling on Clair’s
Rule 60(b) motion, the physical evidence did not relate to
any of the claims Clair had previously made in his habeas
petition. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 9–10. A substitute
lawyer thus would have had to seek an amendment of that
petition, as well as an evidentiary hearing or, more likely,
a stay to allow exhaustion of remedies in state court. See

