Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

request for appointment of counsel, which the District
Court granted under §3599. Clair and his counsel filed an
initial petition for habeas relief in 1994 and, after exhausting state remedies, an amended petition the following
year. The petition alleged more than 40 claims, involving
such matters as jury selection and composition, sufficiency
of the evidence, prosecutorial misconduct, nondisclosure
of exculpatory materials relating to state witnesses, and
ineffectiveness of trial counsel. In the late 1990’s, two
associates from the firm representing Clair took jobs at
the Office of the Federal Public Defender (FPD), and the
court substituted that office as counsel of record. The
court held an evidentiary hearing on Clair’s habeas petition in August 2004, and the parties submitted posthearing briefs by February 2005. The court subsequently
informed the parties that it viewed the briefing “to be
complete and d[id] not wish to receive any additional
material” about the petition. App. 3–4.
On March 16, 2005, Clair sent a letter to the court
stating that the FPD attorneys “no longer . . . ha[d] [his]
best interest at hand” and that he did not want them to
continue to represent him. Id., at 24; see id., at 18–25.
Clair alleged that the lawyers had repeatedly dismissed
his efforts to participate in his own defense. Prior to the
evidentiary hearing, Clair wrote, he had become so frustrated with the attorneys that he enlisted a private detective to look into his case. But the lawyers, Clair charged,
refused to cooperate with the investigator; they were
seeking only to overturn his death sentence, rather than to
prove his innocence. As a result, Clair felt that he and his
counsel were not “on the same team.” Id., at 23.
The District Court responded by asking both parties to
address Clair’s motion to substitute counsel. See id., at
18. The State noted that “[w]hat the trial court does with
respect to appointing counsel is within its discretion,
providing the interests of justice are served.” Id., at 29.

