2

MARTEL v. CLAIR
Opinion of the Court

Clair from custody, Hessling returned from an evening out
to find Rodgers’ dead body in the master bedroom, naked
from the waist down and beaten, stabbed, and strangled.
Some jewelry and household items were missing from the
house. See People v. Clair, 2 Cal. 4th 629, 644–647, 828
P. 2d 705, 713–714 (1992); App. to Pet. for Cert. 23–24.
The district attorney charged Clair with Rodgers’ murder and sought the death penalty. No forensic evidence
linked Clair to the crime; instead, the main evidence
against Clair came from his former girlfriend, Pauline
Flores. Although she later recanted her testimony, see
App. 36–42, Flores stated at trial that she and Clair were
walking in the neighborhood on the night of the murder
and split up near the Henriksen-Hessling house. When
they reunited about an hour later, Flores recounted, Clair
was carrying jewelry and other items and had blood on his
right hand. According to Flores, Clair explained to her
that he had “just finished beating up a woman.” Clair, 2
Cal. 4th, at 647, 828 P. 2d, at 714. The prosecution then
introduced a tape recording of a talk between Flores and
Clair several months after the murder, which Flores had
made in cooperation with the police. On that tape, Clair
at one point denied committing the murder, but also made
several inculpatory statements. For example, when Flores
told Clair that she had seen blood on him, he replied “Ain’t
on me no more” and “They can’t prove nothing.” App. to
Pet. for Cert. 53 (internal quotation marks omitted). And
in response to her continued probing, Clair explained
“[W]hat you fail to realize, how . . . they gonna prove I was
there . . . ? There ain’t no . . . fingerprints, ain’t no . . .
body seen me go in there and leave out there.” Id., at 53–
54 (internal quotation marks omitted). The jury convicted
Clair and sentenced him to death. The California Supreme Court upheld the verdict, and this Court denied
review, Clair v. California, 506 U. S. 1063 (1993).
Clair commenced federal habeas proceedings by filing a

