4

MARTEL v. CLAIR
Opinion of the Court

The State further advised the court that “nothing in
[Clair’s] letter require[d] a change” of counsel because the
FPD lawyers had provided appropriate representation and
substitution would delay the case. Ibid. Clair replied to
the court’s request through his FPD attorneys on April 26,
2005. Their letter stated: “After meeting with Mr. Clair,
counsel understands that Mr. Clair wants the [FPD] to
continue to serve as his counsel in this case at this time.”
Id., at 27. On the basis of that representation, the court
determined that it would “take no further action on the
matter at this time.” Id., at 33.
But the issue resurfaced just six weeks after the court’s
decision. On June 16, 2005, Clair wrote a second letter to
the court asking for substitution of counsel. That letter
again asserted a “total break down of communication”
between Clair and the FPD; according to Clair, he was “no
longer able to trust anybody within that office.” Id., at 62–
63. In explaining the source of the problem, Clair reiterated each of the points made in his prior complaint. And
then he added one more. Clair recounted that his private
investigator had recently learned that the police and district attorney’s office were in possession of fingerprints
and other physical evidence from the crime scene that had
never been fully tested. The FPD lawyers, Clair asserted,
were doing nothing to analyze this evidence or otherwise
follow up on its discovery. Clair attributed this failure,
too, to the FPD’s decision to focus on his sentence, rather
than on questions of guilt.
Two weeks later, the District Court denied Clair’s renewed request for substitution without further inquiry.
The court stated: “It does not appear to the Court that a
change of counsel is appropriate. It appears that [Clair’s]
counsel is doing a proper job. No conflict of interest or
inadequacy of counsel is shown.” Id., at 61. On the same
day, the court denied Clair’s habeas petition in a detailed
opinion. Clair v. Brown, Case No. CV 93–1133 GLT (CD

