(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MARTEL, WARDEN v. CLAIR
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–1265. Argued December 6, 2011—Decided March 5, 2012
Respondent Clair was charged with capital murder for the 1984 slaying
of Linda Rodgers. The main evidence at his trial in California state
court came from statements Clair made to his former girlfriend in a
conversation that she secretly recorded for the police. He was convicted and sentenced to death, and his verdict was upheld on direct
review.
In 1994, Clair commenced federal habeas proceedings by filing a
request for appointment of counsel, which the District Court granted
under 18 U. S. C. §3599. That statute entitles indigent capital habeas petitioners like Clair to appointed counsel. It also contemplates
that appointed counsel may be “replaced . . . upon motion of the defendant,” §3599(e), but it does not specify a standard for district
courts to use in evaluating those motions. Clair’s counsel filed his initial habeas petition in 1994, and in the late 1990’s, when two associates from the firm representing Clair moved to the Office of the Federal Public Defender (FPD), the FPD was substituted as counsel of
record. The District Court held an evidentiary hearing on Clair’s habeas petition in August 2004, and the parties submitted their posthearing briefs by February 2005. The court subsequently told the
parties that it did not wish to receive further material about the petition. In March, Clair moved to substitute counsel, claiming that his
attorneys were seeking only to overturn his death sentence, not to
prove his innocence. After the court asked the parties to address the
motion, Clair’s counsel informed it that they had met with Clair and
that he wanted the FPD to continue representing him. The court accordingly decided that it would take no action. Six weeks later, however, Clair filed another substitution motion, adding one more charge
to his earlier claims: that his private investigator had discovered that

