10

MARTEL v. CLAIR
Opinion of the Court

ard is new to the State’s own attorneys. As noted earlier,
when Clair first requested a change of counsel, the State
responded that substitution is a “matter . . . of trial court
discretion,” based on “the interests of justice.” App. 29;
see supra, at 3–4. Only later did the State devise its
present proposal. Inventiveness is often an admirable
quality, but here we think the State overdoes it. To be
sure, we must infer a substitution standard for §3599; in
that sense, we are writing on a blank slate. But in undertaking that task, we prefer to copy something familiar
than concoct something novel. That enables courts to rely
on experience and precedent, with a standard already
known to work effectively.
Still worse, the State’s proposed test guts §3599’s provision for substitution motions. See §3599(e) (2006 ed.)
(appointed counsel may be “replaced . . . upon motion of
the defendant”). According to the State, a court may not
change counsel under §3599 even if the attorney-client
relationship has broken down, so long as the lawyer has
the required qualifications and is “act[ing] as an advocate.” Brief for Petitioner 35. And that is so, continues
the State, even when substitution will not cause delay or
other prejudice—because again, the defendant retains a
functioning lawyer. See id., at 34. That approach, as
already noted, undermines Congress’s efforts in §3599 to
enhance representation in capital cases. See supra, at 8–
9. And beyond that, it renders §3599’s substitution provision superfluous. Even in the absence of that provision, a
court would have to ensure that the defendant’s statutory
right to counsel was satisfied throughout the litigation; for
example, the court would have to appoint new counsel if
the first lawyer developed a conflict with or abandoned the
client. So by confining substitution to cases in which the
defendant has no counsel at all, the State’s proposal effectively deletes §3599’s substitution clause.
The State counters that only its approach comports with

