Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
client.
The Court adopts Clair’s approach, based on the history of §3599.
Before 1988, §3006A governed both capital and non-capital cases, authorizing courts to appoint counsel for federal habeas petitioners and
providing that in all cases in which a court had appointed counsel,
substitution motions should be decided “in the interests of justice.”
§3006A(c). Thus, a court in those days would have used that standard to evaluate a request like Clair’s. In 1988, Congress enacted
what is now §3599, thus displacing §3006A for persons facing execution. The new statute grants federal capital defendants and capital
habeas petitioners enhanced rights of representation. Habeas petitioners facing execution now receive counsel as a matter of right, see
§3599(a)(2), and in multiple ways the statute aims to improve the
quality of their representation: it provides them with more experienced counsel than §3006A demands, authorizes higher rates of compensation, and provides more money for investigative and expert
services. These measures “reflec[t] a determination that quality legal
representation is necessary” in all capital proceedings to foster “fundamental fairness in the imposition of the death penalty.” McFarland v. Scott, 512 U. S. 849, 855, 859. Given this context, the Court
cannot conclude that Congress silently prescribed a substitution
standard that would make it more difficult for those facing capital
punishment to substitute counsel. Adopting a more stringent test
than §3006A’s would deprive capital defendants of a tool they formerly had, and non-capital defendants still have, to handle serious representational problems. By contrast, utilizing §3006A’s standard
comports with the myriad ways that §3599 seeks to promote effective
representation for persons facing capital punishment. Pp. 6–9.
(b) The dearth of support for the State’s alternative standard reinforces this conclusion. The State concedes that Congress has not
considered its standard in any context; neither has a federal court
used it in any case. The Court prefers to use a familiar standard, already known to work, than to try out a new one. Moreover, the
State’s proposed test would gut §3599’s substitution provision, because even absent that provision courts would have an obligation to
ensure that the defendant’s statutory right to counsel was satisfied
throughout the litigation. The State counters that only its approach
comports with the rule that habeas petitioners generally have no
Sixth Amendment right to counsel. But Congress declined to track
that Amendment in providing statutory rights to counsel in both
§3006A and §3599. Thus, the scope of the Amendment cannot answer the statutory question presented here. The State also contends
that the “interests of justice” standard will permit substitution motions to become a mechanism to defer enforcement of a death sen-

