2

MARTEL v. CLAIR
Syllabus
certain physical evidence from the crime scene had never been fully
tested, but that Clair’s attorneys had done nothing to analyze this evidence or follow up on its discovery. The court denied the renewed
motion without further inquiry. On the same day, it also denied
Clair’s habeas petition.
Clair sought review of his substitution motion pro se, and the FPD
appealed the habeas ruling. The Ninth Circuit asked the FPD to address whether substitution was now warranted, and after the FPD
informed the court that the attorney-client relationship had broken
down, the court provided Clair with a new lawyer. Clair then asked
the District Court to vacate the denial of his habeas petition under
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 60(b), arguing that he should be allowed to explore the significance of the new physical evidence for his
case. The District Court rejected his request, and Clair appealed.
Consolidating his appeals, the Ninth Circuit vacated the District
Court’s denial of both his substitution request and his habeas petition. Holding that the “interests of justice” standard used in noncapital cases, see 18 U. S. C. §3006A, should govern substitution motions like Clair’s, it ruled that the District Court abused its discretion
by failing to inquire into the complaints in Clair’s second letter. Because Clair had already received new counsel on appeal, the court decided the best remedy was to treat Clair’s new counsel as though he
had been appointed in June 2005 and to allow him to make whatever
submissions he would have made then, including a motion to amend
Clair’s habeas petition in light of new evidence.

Held:
1. When evaluating motions to substitute counsel in capital cases
under 18 U. S. C. §3599, courts should employ the same “interests of
justice” standard that applies in non-capital cases under §3006A.
Pp. 6–12.
(a) Although §3599 guarantees that indigent capital defendants
and petitioners seeking federal habeas relief in capital cases will receive the assistance of counsel, see, e.g., §§3599(a)(1), (a)(2), (e), and
contemplates that an appointed attorney may be “replaced by similarly qualified counsel upon the attorney’s own motion or upon motion of the defendant,” §3599(e), the statute fails to specify how a
court should decide such a motion. Clair argues, and the Ninth Circuit agreed, that district courts should use the “in the interests of
justice” standard of §3006A, which governs the appointment and substitution of counsel in federal non-capital litigation. By contrast, the
State contends that an appointed lawyer can only be replaced when
the defendant has suffered an “actual or constructive denial” of counsel—that is, when the lawyer lacks the requisite statutory qualifications, has a conflict of interest, or has completely abandoned the

