14

MARTEL v. CLAIR
Opinion of the Court

er wanted to substitute counsel. The court thus turned its
attention once again to ruling on Clair’s habeas petition—
only to receive another letter requesting a change in
representation.
If that second letter had merely recapitulated the
charges in the first, this case would be relatively simple.
Even then, the court might have done well to make further
inquiry of Clair and his counsel. As all Circuits agree,
courts cannot properly resolve substitution motions without probing why a defendant wants a new lawyer. See,
e.g., United States v. Iles, 906 F. 2d 1122, 1130 (CA6 1990)
(“It is hornbook law that ‘[w]hen an indigent defendant
makes a timely and good faith motion requesting that
appointed counsel be discharged and new counsel appointed, the trial court clearly has a responsibility to determine
the reasons for defendant’s dissatisfaction . . .’ ” (quoting 2
W. LaFave & J. Israel, Criminal Procedure §11.4, p. 36
(1984))). Moreover, an on-the-record inquiry into the
defendant’s allegations “permit[s] meaningful appellate
review” of a trial court’s exercise of discretion. United
States v. Taylor, 487 U. S. 326, 336–337 (1988). But here
the court had inquired, just a short time earlier, into
Clair’s relationship with his lawyers. The court knew that
Clair had responded to that inquiry by dropping his initial
complaints. And the court had reason to think, based on
10 years of handling the case, that those charges lacked
merit: Perhaps most important, the court knew that the
lawyers had raised many challenges not just to Clair’s
sentence, but to his conviction, including to the sufficiency
of the State’s evidence. See, e.g., App. to Pet. for Cert. 27–
69. Especially at this stage of the litigation, those factors
would have provided ample basis to reject a simple reprise
of Clair’s allegations.
What complicates this case is that in his second letter,
Clair added a new and significant charge of attorney error.
Beyond asserting generally that his lawyers were not

