2

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION 

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment


I

Section 1500 bars jurisdiction in the CFC over “any
claim for or in respect to which the plaintiff . . . has pend
ing in any other court any suit or process against the
United States” or any agent of the United States. In
Keene, we construed this statute to “turn on whether the
plaintiff’s other suit was based on substantially the same
operative facts as the Court of Claims action, at least if
there was some overlap in the relief requested.” Id., at
212. It was irrelevant for purposes of §1500, we observed,
that the two suits proceeded on different legal theories.
Id., at 212. Because the plaintiff’s actions both sought the
same monetary relief, albeit on different theories, we held
that the CFC lacked jurisdiction. Id., at 217–218. We
thus found “it unnecessary to consider” whether §1500
barred a CFC claim that was based on substantially the
same operative facts as another suit but that sought dif
ferent relief. See id., at 212, n. 6, 216.
As construed in Keene, §1500 bars the Nation’s CFC
action. As the majority holds, see ante, at 9–10, the Na
tion’s CFC and District Court actions are based on nearly
identical facts. The two actions also seek overlapping
relief: Both complaints request money to remedy the same
injury—the Government’s alleged breach of its fiduciary
duty to maintain accurate accounts of the Nation’s assets.
The Nation does not dispute that its District Court com
plaint requests such relief.1 See Brief for Respondent 51
(“If . . . the accounting reveals that assets that belong to
the Nation do not appear on the books, it may be appro
priate to order equitable restitution of those assets”). The
Nation’s CFC complaint is fairly read to do the same. The
——————
1 The

majority characterizes the Nation’s District Court complaint as
seeking “equitable relief,” ante, at 2, but does not mention that the
complaint seeks, among other things, equitable monetary relief such as
disgorgement and restitution, see App. to Pet. for Cert. 91a.

