4

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment

argued only that Keene required dismissal of the Nation’s
CFC action because the Nation’s two actions were based
on the same facts and sought overlapping relief. Deciding
this case on the basis of Keene would have been the “far
more prudent course than recharacterizing the case in an
attempt to reach premature decision on an important
question.” Missouri v. Jenkins, 495 U. S. 33, 80 (1990)
(KENNEDY, J., concurring in part and concurring in judg
ment). Instead, discarding the restraint we exhibited in
Keene, the Court unnecessarily chooses to hold that §1500
bars jurisdiction in the CFC whenever a plaintiff’s CFC
action is based on substantially the same facts as a suit
pending elsewhere.3 This reading of §1500 is, in my opin
ion, incorrect.
A
Since the enactment of §1500 in 1868, Congress has
expanded the avenues by which persons with legitimate
claims against the United States may obtain relief. See
ante, at 6. In some circumstances, Congress has chosen to
require plaintiffs to file actions in two different courts to
obtain complete relief relating to a single set of operative
facts. For example, with some exceptions, the CFC has no
power to issue equitable relief. See Bowen v. Massachu
——————
3 The

majority does not contend that the facts of this case require it to
decide this question. It justifies its decision to reach the question on
the ground that its rule would eliminate “an unnecessary and compli
cated remedial inquiry” and would decrease “the expense and duration
of litigation.” Ante, at 9. It provides no reason to believe, however, that
inquiry into relief requested is unduly complicated in the vast majority
of cases. Cf. Loveladies Harbor, Inc. v. United States, 27 F. 3d 1545,
1552 (CA Fed. 1994) (en banc) (“The principles of Casman [v. United
States, 135 Ct. Cl. 647 (1956)] . . . are not that difficult to comprehend
or apply”). More importantly, the majority does not explain why the
benefits it perceives to result from deciding this question today out
weigh the potential for its reading of the statute to leave some plaintiffs
with incomplete recompense for their injuries. See infra, this page and
5–6.

