(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
No. 09–846.

Argued November 1, 2010—Decided April 26, 2011

Respondent Tohono O’odham Nation (Nation) filed suit in Federal Dis
trict Court against federal officials who managed tribal assets held in
trust by the Federal Government, alleging violations of fiduciary duty
and requesting equitable relief. The next day, the Nation filed this
action against the United States in the Court of Federal Claims
(CFC), alleging almost identical violations and requesting money
damages. The CFC case was dismissed under 28 U. S. C. §1500,
which bars CFC jurisdiction over a claim if the plaintiff has another
suit “for or in respect to” that claim pending against the United
States or its agents in another court. The Federal Circuit reversed,
finding that the two suits were not for or in respect to the same claim
because, although they shared operative facts, they did not seek over
lapping relief.
Held:
1. Two suits are for or in respect to the same claim, precluding CFC
jurisdiction, if they are based on substantially the same operative
facts, regardless of the relief sought in each suit. Pp. 2–9.
(a) Since 1868, Congress has restricted the jurisdiction of the
CFC and its predecessors when related actions are pending else
where. Keene Corp. v. United States, 508 U. S. 200, 212, held that
two suits are for or in respect to the same claim when they are “based
on substantially the same operative facts . . . , at least if there [is]
some overlap in the relief requested,” but it reserved the question
whether the jurisdictional bar operates if suits based on the same op
erative facts do not seek overlapping relief. The rule now codified in
§1500 was first enacted to curb duplicate lawsuits by residents of the
Confederacy who, in seeking to recover for cotton taken by the Fed
eral Government, sued the Government in the Court of Claims and,

