2

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

see ante, at 5, refers to “operative facts,” and not to the
remedies a plaintiff seeks. See ante, at 4. Section 1500
speaks of “the time when the cause of action . . . arose,” a
time antedating the commencement of suit. The Court
infers, therefore, that a “claim” or “cause of action” is
discrete from a pleading’s request for relief. See ante, at 4.
In fact, however, entitlement to relief is essential to the
existence of a claim or cause of action, which arises when a
person suffers a harm capable of judicial redress. See 2 J.
Story, Equity Jurisprudence §1521a, p. 741 (8th ed. 1861)
(“[T]he cause of action . . . arises when . . . the party has a
right to apply to a court . . . for relief.”).
A plaintiff may not, §1500 instructs, petition both the
CFC and a district court, invoking in each a distinct legal
theory appropriate to the forum, but seeking redress for a
single injury. When Congress bars a plaintiff from obtain
ing complete relief in one suit, however, and does not call
for an election of remedies, Congress is most sensibly read
to have comprehended that the operative facts give rise to
two discrete claims. Casman v. United States, 135 Ct. Cl.
647 (1956), as JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR spells out, see ante, at
5, is the paradigm case. There, a discharged federal em
ployee, complaining of wrongful termination, sought rein
statement in a district-court action and backpay in the
Court of Claims. Section 1500 does not stand in the way,
the Court of Claims held in Casman, when the plaintiff
suffered two distinct injuries, for which she seeks discrete
forms of relief within the exclusive competence of different
courts. See 135 Ct. Cl., at 649–650 (claim for backpay
“entirely different” from claim for reinstatement). The
Federal Circuit, in my view, rightly adhered to Casman in
Loveladies Harbor, Inc. v. United States, 27 F. 3d 1545
(1994) (en banc), and rightly did so in this case.
While I agree with much of JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s opin
ion concurring in the judgment, I do not agree with her
conclusion that §1500 bars the Nation’s CFC action.

