4

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
Opinion of the Court

recently in 1948. See Act of June 25, 1948, 62 Stat. 942;
Keene, 508 U. S., at 206–207.
The text of §1500 reflects a robust response to the prob
lem first presented by the cotton claimants. It bars juris
diction in the CFC not only if the plaintiff sues on an
identical claim elsewhere—a suit “for” the same claim—
but also if the plaintiff’s other action is related although
not identical—a suit “in respect to” the same claim. The
phrase “in respect to” does not resolve all doubt as to the
scope of the jurisdictional bar, but “it does make it clear
that Congress did not intend the statute to be rendered
useless by a narrow concept of identity.” Id., at 213. It
suggests a broad prohibition, regardless of whether
“claim” carries a special or limited meaning. Cf. United
States v. Jones, 131 U. S. 1 (1889) (“claim” in the Little
Tucker Act refers only to requests for money).
Of the two constructions of “for or in respect to” the
same claim that Keene permits—one based on facts alone
and the other on factual plus remedial overlap—the for
mer is the more reasonable interpretation in light of the
statute’s use of a similar phrase in a way consistent only
with factual overlap. The CFC bar applies even where the
other action is not against the Government but instead
against a “person who, at the time when the cause of
action alleged in such suit or process arose, was, in respect
thereto, acting or professing to act, directly or indirectly
under the authority of the United States.” The statute
refers to a person who acts under color of federal law in
respect to a cause of action at the time it arose. But at
that time, the person could not act in respect to the relief
requested, for no complaint was yet filed. This use of the
phrase “in respect to a cause of action” must refer to op
erative facts and not whatever remedies an aggrieved
party might later request. A person acts under color of
federal law in respect to a cause of action by claiming or
wielding federal authority in the relevant factual context.

