Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

of action alleged in such suit or process arose, was, in
respect thereto, acting or professing to act, directly or
indirectly under the authority of the United States.”
The rule is more straightforward than its complex wording
suggests. The CFC has no jurisdiction over a claim if the
plaintiff has another suit for or in respect to that claim
pending against the United States or its agents.
The question to be resolved is what it means for two
suits to be “for or in respect to” the same claim. Keene
Corp. v. United States, 508 U. S. 200 (1993), provided a
partial answer. It held that two suits are for or in respect
to the same claim when they are “based on substantially
the same operative facts . . . , at least if there [is] some
overlap in the relief requested.” Id., at 212. The Keene
case did not decide whether the jurisdictional bar also
operates if the suits are based on the same operative facts
but do not seek overlapping relief. Still, Keene narrows
the permissible constructions of “for or in respect to” a
claim to one of two interpretations. Either it requires
substantial factual and some remedial overlap, or it re
quires substantial factual overlap without more.
Congress first enacted the jurisdictional bar now codi
fied in §1500 to curb duplicate lawsuits brought by resi
dents of the Confederacy following the Civil War. The
so-called “cotton claimants”—named for their suits to
recover for cotton taken by the Federal Government—sued
the United States in the Court of Claims under the Aban
doned Property Collection Act, 12 Stat. 820, while at the
same time suing federal officials in other courts, seeking
relief under tort law for the same alleged actions. See
Keene, supra, at 206–207; Schwartz, Section 1500 of the
Judicial Code and Duplicate Suits Against the Govern
ment and Its Agents, 55 Geo. L. J. 573, 574–580 (1967).
Although the rule embodied in §1500 originated long ago,
Congress reenacted the statute at various times, most

