8

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
Opinion of the Court

statute would operate in similar fashion. The now
accepted test in preclusion law for determining whether
two suits involve the same claim or cause of action de
pends on factual overlap, barring “claims arising from the
same transaction.” Kremer v. Chemical Constr. Corp., 456
U. S. 461, 482, n. 22 (1982); see also Restatement (Second)
of Judgments §24 (1980). The transactional test is of
course much younger than the rule embodied in §1500, but
even in the 19th century it was not uncommon to identify
a claim for preclusion purposes based on facts rather than
relief. See J. Wells, Res Adjudicata and Stare Decisis
§241, p. 208 (1878) (“The true distinction between de
mands or rights of action which are single and entire, and
those which are several and distinct, is, that the former
immediately arise out of one and the same act or contract,
and the latter out of different acts or contracts” (internal
quotation marks omitted)); 2 H. Black, Law of Judgments
§726, p. 866 (1891) (The test for identity is: “Would the
same evidence support and establish both the present and
the former cause of action?”). Reading §1500 to depend on
the underlying facts and not also on the relief requested
gives effect to the principles of preclusion law embodied in
the statute.
There is no merit to the Nation’s assertion that the
interpretation adopted here cannot prevail because it is
unjust, forcing plaintiffs to choose between partial reme
dies available in different courts. The hardship in this
case is far from clear. The Nation could have filed in the
CFC alone and if successful obtained monetary relief to
compensate for any losses caused by the Government’s
breach of duty. It also seems likely that Indian tribes in
the Nation’s position could go to district court first without
losing the chance to later file in the CFC, for Congress has
provided in every appropriations Act for the Department
of Interior since 1990 that the statute of limitations on
Indian trust mismanagement claims shall not run until

