Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment

CFC complaint alleges that the Government has failed
“to keep and render clear and accurate accounts.” App. to
Pet. for Cert. 66a. It claims that by reason of this and
other alleged breaches of fiduciary duty, the Nation “has
been damaged in such amounts as may be proven at trial.”
Id., at 67a. And the complaint requests “a determination
that the Defendant is liable to the Nation in damages for
the injuries and losses caused as a result of Defendant’s
breaches of fiduciary duty” and a “determination of the
amount of damages due the Nation.” Id., at 72a–73a.
Thus, just like the District Court complaint, the CFC
complaint requests money to remedy the Government’s
alleged failure to keep accurate accounts.2
Because the Nation’s two complaints are “based on
substantially the same operative facts” and there is “at
least . . . some overlap in the relief requested,” Keene, 508
U. S., at 212, §1500 bars jurisdiction over the Nation’s
CFC action.
II
The case does not present the question, left open in
Keene, “whether common facts [alone] are sufficient to bar
a CFC action where a similar case is pending elsewhere.”
Ante, at 9. Indeed, for most of the history of this case, the
Government did not even argue that common facts were
sufficient to preclude CFC jurisdiction; until its petition
for rehearing in the Court of Appeals, the Government
——————
2 In reaching the opposite conclusion, the Court of Appeals relied on
the fact that the Nation’s District Court complaint seeks equitable
relief whereas its CFC complaint seeks damages. See 559 F. 3d 1284,
1288–1289 (CA Fed. 2009). Keene makes clear, however, that actions
based on substantially the same operative facts implicate §1500 so long
as they seek overlapping relief. See Keene Corp. v. United States, 508
U. S. 200, 212 (1993). The formal label affixed to the form of relief
sought is irrelevant. In this case, both the Nation’s CFC complaint and
its District Court complaint seek money to remedy the Government’s
alleged failure to keep accurate accounts.

