8

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment

understood the term “claim” in §1500 to describe the
particular relief sought in the Court of Claims. Cf. Com
missioner v. Keystone Consol. Industries, Inc., 508 U. S.
152, 159 (1993).
Determining the meaning of “claim” is only part of the
inquiry, however. The question remains what constitutes
a suit or process “for or in respect to” a CFC claim. The
purpose and history of the statute elucidate the meaning
of this ambiguous phrase. As the majority explains, Con
gress enacted the statute to prevent “duplicative lawsuits”
brought by the so-called “cotton claimants” in the after
math of the Civil War. Keene, 508 U. S., at 206; see ante,
at 3. The cotton claimants sought monetary compensation
for seized cotton in the Court of Claims pursuant to the
Abandoned Property Collection Act, 12 Stat. 820. Because
they had difficulty satisfying the statutory requirement
that, to obtain compensation, they must not have given aid
or comfort to participants in the rebellion, see §3 of the
Act, they also sought relief—either in the form of money
damages or actual cotton—in separate lawsuits against
federal officials on tort theories such as conversion. “It
was these duplicative lawsuits that induced Congress” to
enact §1500’s predecessor. Keene, 508 U. S., at 206.
This historical backdrop sheds light on what Congress
would have understood to be a suit or process “for or in
respect to” a “claim” in the Court of Claims. Congress
undoubtedly intended to preclude a claim for money in the
——————
mand for money in the context of the CFC. See 28 U. S. C. §1491(a)(1)
(conferring jurisdiction in the CFC over “any claim against the United
States founded either upon the Constitution, or any Act of Congress
or any regulation of an executive department, or upon any express or
implied contract with the United States, or for liquidated or unliqui
dated damages in cases not sounding in tort” (emphasis added)). Of
course, since §1500’s enactment, Congress has authorized the CFC
to issue relief other than money damages in certain cases. See
§1491(a)(2).

