10

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION 

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment


2

None of the majority’s reasons for its contrary construc
tion of the statute is convincing. First, the majority rea
sons that the phrase “claim for or in respect to” must refer
only to factual overlap because the statute uses the phrase
“cause of action . . . in respect thereto” (which the majority
paraphrases as “in respect to a cause of action”) in a way
that is “consistent only with factual overlap.” Ante, at 4.
This point rests on a misreading of the statutory text. The
statute asks whether a plaintiff has pending a “suit or
process” for or in respect to the plaintiff’s CFC claim—not
whether it has pending a “cause of action” for or in respect
to that claim.8 Even if the term “cause of action” refers
only to operative facts—such that the inquiry whether a
person was acting under color of federal law in respect to
a cause of action is purely factual in nature—a “suit or
process” will inevitably include a request for relief.
Second, the majority states that, “in light of the unique
remedial powers of the CFC,” requiring remedial overlap
would make no sense because it would result in a “very
limited application” of the statute. Ante, at 5, 6. Here, the
majority overlooks the nearly 150-year history of the
statute. It was the cotton claimants’ parallel requests for
duplicative relief that prompted passage of §1500 in the
first place. Since then, litigants have continued to seek
duplicative relief against the Government in two courts, as
Keene and this very case illustrate. See 508 U. S., at 204–
205 (seeking tort damages in the District Court and com
pensation on a takings theory in the CFC); supra, at 1–3
(seeking restitution and disgorgement in the District
——————
8 Section 1500 refers to the “cause of action alleged in such suit or
process” only for the limited purpose of determining whether the other
suit or process is against an agent of the United States. When the
plaintiff’s other action is against the United States itself, the term
“cause of action” has no relevance to the §1500 inquiry.

