Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

Although the two phrases are not identical—one is in
respect to a claim, the other a cause of action—they are
almost so, and there is reason to think that both phrases
refer to facts alone and not to relief. As the Keene Court
explained, “the term ‘claim’ is used here synonymously
with ‘cause of action.’ ” 508 U. S., at 210. And if either of
the two phrases were to include both operative facts and a
specific remedy, it would be the one that uses the term
“cause of action” rather than “claim.” “Cause of action” is
the more technical term, while “claim” is often used in a
commonsense way to mean a right or demand. Here, for
the reasons stated in the preceding paragraph, “in respect
to a cause of action” refers simply to facts without regard
to judicial remedies. So, if the phrase with the more tech
nical of the two terms does not embrace the concept of
remedy, it is reasonable to conclude that neither phrase
does. Even if the terms “claim” or “cause of action” include
the request for relief, the phrase “for or in respect to” gives
the statutory bar a broader scope.
Reading the statute to require only factual and not also
remedial overlap makes sense in light of the unique reme
dial powers of the CFC. The CFC is the only judicial
forum for most non-tort requests for significant monetary
relief against the United States. See 28 U. S. C. §1491
(2006 ed. and Supp. III); §1346(a)(2) (2006 ed.). Unlike
the district courts, however, the CFC has no general power
to provide equitable relief against the Government or its
officers. Compare United States v. King, 395 U. S. 1, 2–3
(1969), with 5 U. S. C. §702; see also United States v.
Alire, 6 Wall. 573, 575 (1868) (“[T]he only judgments
which the Court of Claims are authorized to render
against the government . . . are judgments for money
found due from the government to the petitioner”). The
distinct jurisdiction of the CFC makes overlapping relief
the exception and distinct relief the norm. For that rea
son, a statute aimed at precluding suits in the CFC that

