2

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
Syllabus
at the same time, sued federal officials in other courts, seeking tort
relief for the same actions. Section 1500’s robust response to this
problem bars CFC jurisdiction not only if the plaintiff sues on an
identical claim elsewhere, but also if the other action is related but
not identical. The phrase “in respect to” does not resolve all doubt as
to the bar’s scope, but it suggests a broad prohibition, regardless of
whether “claim” carries a special or limited meaning. Pp. 2–4.
(b) Keene permits two constructions of “for or in respect to” the
same claim, one based on facts alone and the other on factual plus
remedial overlap. The former is the more reasonable interpretation
in light of the statute’s use of a similar phrase in a way consistent
only with factual overlap. The CFC bar applies where the other ac
tion is against a “person who, . . . when the cause of action . . . arose,
was, in respect thereto, acting” under color of federal law. But at the
time that a cause of action arose, the person could not act in respect
to the relief requested, for no complaint was yet filed. Although the
phrase at issue involves a “claim” rather than a cause of action, there
is reason to think that both phrases refer to facts alone and not to re
lief. As Keene explained, “ ‘claim’ is used here synonymously with
‘cause of action,’ ” 508 U. S., at 210. And if the phrase that uses
“cause of action,” the more technical term, does not embrace the con
cept of remedy, it is reasonable to conclude that neither phrase does.
Pp. 4–5.
(c) This reading also makes sense in light of the CFC’s unique
remedial powers. Because the CFC is the only judicial forum for
most nontort requests for significant monetary relief against the
United States and because it has no general power to provide equita
ble relief against the Government or its officers, a statute aimed at
precluding duplicate CFC suits would be unlikely to require remedial
overlap. Remedial overlap was even more unusual when §1500’s rule
was first enacted in 1868. The Federal Circuit could identify no pur
pose the statute served in light of that court’s precedent. But courts
should not render statutes nugatory through construction. The stat
ute’s purpose is clear from its origins—the need to save the Govern
ment from redundant litigation—and the conclusion that two suits
are for or in respect to the same claim when they share substantially
the same operative facts allows the statute to achieve that aim. Con
centrating on operative facts is also consistent with the doctrine of
claim preclusion, or res judicata. The Nation errs in arguing that
this Court’s interpretation unjustly forces plaintiffs to choose be
tween partial remedies available in different courts. The Nation
could have recovered any losses in the CFC alone. Even if some
hardship were shown, this Court “enjoy[s] no ‘liberty to add an excep
tion . . . to remove apparent hardship.’ ” Keene, supra, at 217–218.

