6

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment

the same operative facts, but seeking completely different
relief, would implicate §1500,” our decision in Keene ex
pressly preserved the Casman holding. 508 U. S., at 212,
n. 6. The consequence of today’s decision is clear: The
Casman rule is no longer good law. Under the majority’s
reading of §1500, because Casman’s two suits were based
on common facts, §1500 barred jurisdiction in the CFC
over his backpay claim even though he could not have
obtained backpay in his District Court action.
The jurisdictional scheme governing actions against the
United States often requires other plaintiffs to file two
actions in different courts to obtain complete relief in
connection with one set of facts. As just one example, an
action seeking injunctive relief to set aside agency action
must proceed in district court, but a claim that the same
agency action constitutes a taking of property requiring
just compensation must proceed in the CFC. See, e.g.,
Alaska v. United States, 32 Fed. Cl. 689 (1995). After
today’s decision, §1500 may well prevent a plaintiff from
pursuing a takings claim in the CFC if an action to set
aside the agency action is pending in district court. This
type of plaintiff may face a choice between equally unat
tractive options: forgo injunctive relief in the district court
to preserve her claim for monetary relief in the CFC, or
pursue injunctive relief and hope that the statute of limi
tations on her takings claim, see 28 U. S. C. §2501, does
not expire before the district court action is resolved.5
——————
5 The majority apparently doubts that its holding puts the Nation to a
similarly difficult choice. It first suggests that the Nation could file
solely in the CFC to obtain damages for the Government’s alleged
breaches of fiduciary duty. See ante, at 8. The Nation could indeed
choose to file only in the CFC—just as any plaintiff could choose to
forgo injunctive relief to pursue money damages in the CFC—but the
Nation believes it is entitled to more than monetary relief. The Na
tion’s District Court action seeks an equitable accounting to remedy the
same breaches of fiduciary duty, and the CFC has held that it lacks
jurisdiction to issue a preliability accounting. See Klamath and Modoc

