Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment

Court of Claims when the plaintiff was pursuing a suit
“for” the same money in district court. Because, however,
some cotton claimants sought return of the cotton itself in
district court, it was also necessary to preclude jurisdiction
in the Court of Claims when the plaintiff’s other action
was “in respect to” that demand for money—i.e., when the
plaintiff was seeking duplicative relief. Had the courts
awarded such plaintiffs both the cotton itself and money
damages, the plaintiffs would have obtained twice what
they deserved. In this way, Congress eschewed “a narrow
concept of identity” that would have permitted plaintiffs to
pursue and obtain duplicative relief to remedy the very
same harm. Id., at 213.
The legislative history confirms Congress’ intent to
preclude requests for duplicative relief. The statute’s
sponsor explained that the purpose of the statute was “to
put to their election that large class of persons having
cotton claims[,] . . . who are here at the same time endeav
oring to prosecute their claims, and have filed them in the
Court of Claims, so that after they put the Government to
the expense of beating them once in a court of law they
can turn around and try the whole question in the Court of
Claims.”7 Cong. Globe, 40th Cong., 2d Sess., 2769 (1868)
(statement of Sen. Edmunds); see also Matson Nav. Co.,
284 U. S., at 355–356. Congress thus appears to have had
in mind cases in which “the whole question” could be tried
in the Court of Claims. The statute’s history does not
suggest that Congress intended to require an election
between two nonduplicative forms of relief available ex
clusively in two different courts. In such a case, “the
whole question” could not be tried in either court.
——————
7 Because

§1500’s jurisdictional bar applies only when the other suit
is pending, “there is a good argument that, even when first enacted, the
statute did not actually perform the preclusion function emphasized by
its sponsor.” Keene, 508 U. S., at 217.

