Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

Court of Claims, is filed first. The Tecon holding is not
presented in this case because the CFC action here was
filed after the District Court suit.
Still, the Court of Appeals was wrong to allow its prece
dent to suppress the statute’s aims. Courts should not
render statutes nugatory through construction. In fact the
statute’s purpose is clear from its origins with the cotton
claimants—the need to save the Government from bur
dens of redundant litigation—and that purpose is no less
significant today. The conclusion that two suits are for or
in respect to the same claim when they are based on sub
stantially the same operative facts allows the statute to
achieve its aim. Keene, supra, at 206. Developing a fac
tual record is responsible for much of the cost of litigation.
Discovery is a conspicuous example, and the preparation
and examination of witnesses at trial is another. The form
of relief requested matters less, except insofar as it affects
what facts parties must prove. An interpretation of §1500
focused on the facts rather than the relief a party seeks
preserves the provision as it was meant to function, and it
keeps the provision from becoming a mere pleading rule,
to be circumvented by carving up a single transaction into
overlapping pieces seeking different relief. Cf. Casman v.
United States, 135 Ct. Cl. 647 (1956) (CFC had jurisdiction
notwithstanding common facts in district court suit be
cause the plaintiff sought different relief in each forum).
Concentrating on operative facts is also consistent with
the doctrine of claim preclusion, or res judicata, which
bars “repetitious suits involving the same cause of action”
once “a court of competent jurisdiction has entered a final
judgment on the merits.” Commissioner v. Sunnen, 333
U. S. 591, 597 (1948). The jurisdictional bar in §1500 was
enacted in part to address the problem that judgments in
suits against officers were not preclusive in suits against
the United States. Matson Nav. Co. v. United States, 284
U. S. 352, 355–356 (1932). So it is no surprise that the

