Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., concurring

was merely human.” Post, at 27 (ALITO, J., dissenting).
But the CLS chapter that brought this lawsuit does not
want to be just a Christian group; it aspires to be a recog
nized student organization. The Hastings College of Law
is not a legislature. And no state actor has demanded that
anyone do anything outside the confines of a discrete,
voluntary academic program. Although it may be the case
that to some “university students, the campus is their
world,” post, at 13 (internal quotation marks omitted), it
does not follow that the campus ought to be equated with
the public square.
The campus is, in fact, a world apart from the public
square in numerous respects, and religious organizations,
as well as all other organizations, must abide by certain
norms of conduct when they enter an academic commu
nity. Public universities serve a distinctive role in a mod
ern democratic society. Like all specialized government
entities, they must make countless decisions about how to
allocate resources in pursuit of their role. Some of those
decisions will be controversial; many will have differential
effects across populations; virtually all will entail value
judgments of some kind. As a general matter, courts
should respect universities’ judgments and let them man
age their own affairs.
The RSO forum is no different. It is not an open com
mons that Hastings happens to maintain. It is a mecha
nism through which Hastings confers certain benefits and
pursues certain aspects of its educational mission. Having
exercised its discretion to establish an RSO program, a
university must treat all participants evenhandedly. But
the university need not remain neutral—indeed it could
not remain neutral—in determining which goals the pro
gram will serve and which rules are best suited to facili
tate those goals. These are not legal questions but policy
questions; they are not for the Court but for the university
to make. When any given group refuses to comply with

