6

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

ALITO, J., dissenting 


against religious groups because it prohibits those groups
“from selecting officers and members dedicated to a par
ticular set of religious ideals or beliefs” but “permits politi
cal, social and cultural student organizations to select
officers and members dedicated to their organization’s
ideals and beliefs.” Id., at 79. In response, Hastings
admitted that its Nondiscrimination Policy “permits politi
cal, social, and cultural student organizations to select
officers and members who are dedicated to a particular set
of ideals or beliefs.” Id., at 93. The Court states that
“Hastings interprets the Nondiscrimination Policy, as it
relates to the RSO program, to mandate acceptance of all
comers.” Ante, at 4. But this admission in Hastings’
answer shows that Hastings had not adopted this inter
pretation when its answer was filed.
Within a few months, however, Hastings’ position
changed. In July 2005, Mary Kay Kane, then the dean of
the law school, was deposed, and she stated: “It is my view
that in order to be a registered student organization you
have to allow all of our students to be members and full
participants if they want to.” App. 343. In a declaration
filed in October 2005, Ms. Chapman provided a more
developed explanation, stating: “Hastings interprets the
Nondiscrimination Policy as requiring that student or
ganizations wishing to register with Hastings allow any
Hastings student to become a member and/or seek a lead
ership position in the organization.” Id., at 349.
Hastings claims that this accept-all-comers policy has
existed since 1990 but points to no evidence that the policy
was ever put in writing or brought to the attention of
members of the law school community prior to the dean’s
deposition. Indeed, Hastings has adduced no evidence of
the policy’s existence before that date. And while Dean
Kane and Ms. Chapman stated, well after this litigation
had begun, that Hastings had such a policy, neither they
nor any other Hastings official has ever stated in a deposi

