24

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
Opinion of the Court

people of California disapprove.” Brief for Hastings 35;
id., at 33–34 (citing Cal. Educ. Code §66270 (prohibiting
discrimination on various bases)). State law, of course,
may not command that public universities take action
impermissible under the First Amendment. But so long as
a public university does not contravene constitutional
limits, its choice to advance state-law goals through the
school’s educational endeavors stands on firm footing.
In sum, the several justifications Hastings asserts in
support of its all-comers requirement are surely reason­
able in light of the RSO forum’s purposes.20
3
The Law School’s policy is all the more creditworthy in
view of the “substantial alternative channels that remain
open for [CLS-student] communication to take place.”
Perry Ed. Assn., 460 U. S., at 53. If restrictions on access
to a limited public forum are viewpoint discriminatory, the
ability of a group to exist outside the forum would not cure
the constitutional shortcoming. But when access barriers
are viewpoint neutral, our decisions have counted it sig­
nificant that other available avenues for the group to
exercise its First Amendment rights lessen the burden
created by those barriers. See ibid.; Cornelius, 473 U. S.,
at 809; Greer v. Spock, 424 U. S. 828, 839 (1976); Pell, 417
U. S., at 827–828.
In this case, Hastings offered CLS access to school facili­
ties to conduct meetings and the use of chalkboards and
generally available bulletin boards to advertise events.
App. 232–233. Although CLS could not take advantage of
RSO-specific methods of communication, see supra, at 3,
the advent of electronic media and social-networking sites
reduces the importance of those channels. See App. 114–
——————
20 Although the Law School has offered multiple justifications for its
all-comers policy, we do not suggest that each of them is necessary for
the policy to survive constitutional review.

