Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

31

Opinion of the Court

Finding Hastings’ open-access condition on RSO status
reasonable and viewpoint neutral, we reject CLS’ free­
speech and expressive-association claims.27
IV
In its reply brief, CLS contends that “[t]he peculiarity,
incoherence, and suspect history of the all-comers policy
all point to pretext.” Reply Brief 23. Neither the District
Court nor the Ninth Circuit addressed an argument that
Hastings selectively enforces its all-comers policy, and this
Court is not the proper forum to air the issue in the first
instance.28 On remand, the Ninth Circuit may consider
—————— 

the Law School’s regulation by dropping access barriers, they may

express any viewpoint they wish—including a discriminatory one. Cf. 

Rumsfeld v. Forum for Academic and Institutional Rights, Inc., 547

U. S. 47, 60 (2006) (“As a general matter, the Solomon Amendment
regulates conduct, not speech. It affects what law schools must do—
afford equal access to military recruiters—not what they may or may
not say.”). Today’s decision thus continues this Court’s tradition of
“protect[ing] the freedom to express ‘the thought that we hate.’ ” Post,
at 1 (ALITO, J., dissenting) (quoting United States v. Schwimmer, 279
U. S. 644, 655 (1929) (Holmes, J., dissenting)).
27 CLS briefly argues that Hastings’ all-comers condition violates the
Free Exercise Clause. Brief for Petitioner 40–41. Our decision in
Smith, 494 U. S. 872, forecloses that argument. In Smith, the Court
held that the Free Exercise Clause does not inhibit enforcement of
otherwise valid regulations of general application that incidentally
burden religious conduct. Id., at 878–882. In seeking an exemption
from Hastings’ across-the-board all-comers policy, CLS, we repeat,
seeks preferential, not equal, treatment; it therefore cannot moor its
request for accommodation to the Free Exercise Clause.
28 Finding the Ninth Circuit’s analysis cursory, the dissent repeatedly
urges us to resolve the pretext question. See, e.g., post, at 2, 31–35, and
17, n. 2. In doing so, the dissent forgets that “we are a court of review,
not of first view.” Cutter v. Wilkinson, 544 U. S. 709, 718, n. 7 (2005).
When the lower courts have failed to address an argument that de­
served their attention, our usual practice is to remand for further
consideration, not to seize the opportunity to decide the question
ourselves. That is especially true when we agree to review an issue on
the understanding that “[t]he material facts . . . are undisputed,” as

