Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

29

ALITO, J., dissenting

out students with disfavored beliefs. Asked at oral argu
ment whether CLS could require applicants to pass a test
on the Bible, Hastings’ attorney responded: “If it were
truly an objective knowledge test, it would be okay.” Tr. of
Oral Arg. 52. The long history of disputes about the
meaning of Bible passages belies any suggestion that it
would be an easy task to determine whether the grading of
such a test was “objective.”
Third, the Court argues that the accept-all-comers
policy, by bringing together students with diverse views,
encourages tolerance, cooperation, learning, and the de
velopment of conflict-resolution skills. Ante, at 23. These
are obviously commendable goals, but they are not un
dermined by permitting a religious group to restrict mem
bership to persons who share the group’s faith. Many
religious groups impose such restrictions. See, e.g., Brief
for Agudath Israel of America as Amicus Curiae 3
(“[B]ased upon millennia-old Jewish laws and traditions,
Orthodox Jewish institutions . . . regularly differentiate
between Jews and non-Jews”). Such practices are not
manifestations of “contempt” for members of other faiths.
Cf. ante, at 6 (opinion of STEVENS, J.) (invoking groups
that have “contempt for Jews, blacks, and women”). Nor
do they thwart the objectives that Hastings endorses. Our
country as a whole, no less than the Hastings College of
Law, values tolerance, cooperation, learning, and the
amicable resolution of conflicts. But we seek to achieve
those goals through “[a] confident pluralism that conduces
to civil peace and advances democratic consensus
building,” not by abridging First Amendment rights. Brief
for Gays and Lesbians for Individual Liberty as Amicus
Curiae 35.
Fourth, the Court observes that Hastings’ policy “incor
porates—in fact, subsumes—state-law proscriptions on
discrimination.” Ante, at 23. Because the First Amend
ment obviously takes precedence over any state law, this

