4

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

KENNEDY, J., concurring


intellectual contexts. A vibrant dialogue is not possible if
students wall themselves off from opposing points of view.
The school’s objectives thus might not be well served if,
as a condition to membership or participation in a group,
students were required to avow particular personal beliefs
or to disclose private, off-campus behavior. Students
whose views are in the minority at the school would likely
fare worse in that regime. Indeed, were those sorts of
requirements to become prevalent, it might undermine the
principle that in a university community—and in a law
school community specifically—speech is deemed persua
sive based on its substance, not the identity of the
speaker. The era of loyalty oaths is behind us. A school
quite properly may conclude that allowing an oath or
belief-affirming requirement, or an outside conduct re
quirement, could be divisive for student relations and
inconsistent with the basic concept that a view’s validity
should be tested through free and open discussion. The
school’s policy therefore represents a permissible effort to
preserve the value of its forum.
In addition to a circumstance, already noted, in which it
could be demonstrated that a school has adopted or en
forced its policy with the intent or purpose of discriminat
ing or disadvantaging a group on account of its views,
petitioner also would have a substantial case on the merits
if it were shown that the all-comers policy was either
designed or used to infiltrate the group or challenge its
leadership in order to stifle its views. But that has not
been shown to be so likely or self-evident as a matter of
group dynamics in this setting that the Court can declare
the school policy void without more facts; and if there were
a showing that in a particular case the purpose or effect of
the policy was to stifle speech or make it ineffective, that,
too, would present a case different from the one before us.
These observations are offered to support the analysis
set forth in the opinion of the Court, which I join.

