6

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

Opinion of the Court 


ual conduct.” App. 226. CLS also excludes students who
hold religious convictions different from those in the
Statement of Faith. Id., at 227.
On September 17, 2004, CLS submitted to Hastings an
application for RSO status, accompanied by all required
documents, including the set of bylaws mandated by CLSNational. Id., at 227–228. Several days later, the Law
School rejected the application; CLS’s bylaws, Hastings
explained, did not comply with the Nondiscrimination
Policy because CLS barred students based on religion and
sexual orientation. Id., at 228.
CLS formally requested an exemption from the Nondis­
crimination Policy, id., at 281, but Hastings declined to
grant one. “[T]o be one of our student-recognized organi­
zations,” Hastings reiterated, “CLS must open its mem­
bership to all students irrespective of their religious be­
liefs or sexual orientation.” Id., at 294. If CLS instead
chose to operate outside the RSO program, Hastings
stated, the school “would be pleased to provide [CLS] the
use of Hastings facilities for its meetings and activities.”
Ibid. CLS would also have access to chalkboards and
generally available campus bulletin boards to announce its
events. Id., at 219, 233. In other words, Hastings would
do nothing to suppress CLS’s endeavors, but neither would
it lend RSO-level support for them.
Refusing to alter its bylaws, CLS did not obtain RSO
status. It did, however, operate independently during the
2004–2005 academic year. CLS held weekly Bible-study
meetings and invited Hastings students to Good Friday
and Easter Sunday church services. Id., at 229. It also
hosted a beach barbeque, Thanksgiving dinner, campus
lecture on the Christian faith and the legal practice, sev­
eral fellowship dinners, an end-of-year banquet, and other
informal social activities. Ibid.
On October 22, 2004, CLS filed suit against various
Hastings officers and administrators under 42 U. S. C.

