10

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
Opinion of the Court

Litigants, we have long recognized, “[a]re entitled to
have [their] case tried upon the assumption that . . . facts,
stipulated into the record, were established.” H. Hackfeld
& Co. v. United States, 197 U. S. 442, 447 (1905).7 This
entitlement is the bookend to a party’s undertaking to be
bound by the factual stipulations it submits. See post, at
10 (ALITO, J., dissenting) (agreeing that “the parties must
be held to their Joint Stipulation”). As a leading legal
reference summarizes:
“[Factual stipulations are] binding and conclusive . . . ,
and the facts stated are not subject to subsequent
variation. So, the parties will not be permitted to
deny the truth of the facts stated, . . . or to maintain a
contention contrary to the agreed statement, . . . or to
suggest, on appeal, that the facts were other than as
stipulated or that any material fact was omitted. The
burden is on the party seeking to recover to show his
or her right from the facts actually stated.” 83
C. J. S., Stipulations §93 (2000) (footnotes omitted).
This Court has accordingly refused to consider a party’s
argument that contradicted a joint “stipulation [entered]
at the outset of th[e] litigation.” Board of Regents of Univ.
of Wis. System v. Southworth, 529 U. S. 217, 226 (2000).
——————
80 (First Amended Verified Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive
Relief).
7 Record evidence, moreover, corroborates the joint stipulation con­
cerning Hastings’ all-comers policy. The Law School’s then-Chancellor
and Dean testified, for example, that “in order to be a registered stu­
dent organization you have to allow all of our students to be members
and full participants if they want to.” App. 343. Hastings’ Director of
Student Services confirmed that RSOs must “be open to all students”—
“even to students who may disagree with [an RSO’s] purposes.” Id., at
320 (internal quotation marks omitted). See also id., at 349 (“Hastings
interprets the Nondiscrimination Policy as requiring that student
organizations wishing to register with Hastings allow any Hastings
student to become a member and/or seek a leadership position in the
organization.”).

