12

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

Ms. Chapman requesting permission to set up an “advice
table” on a campus patio on August 23 and 24 so that
members of CLS could speak with students at the begin
ning of the fall semester. Id., at 298. This request—
merely to set up a table on a patio—could hardly have
interfered with any other use of the law school’s premises
or cost the school any money. But although the request
was labeled “time sensitive,” ibid., Ms. Chapman did not
respond until the dates in question had passed, and she
then advised the student that all further inquiries should
be made through CLS’s attorney. Id., at 297–298.
In September 2005, CLS tried again. Through counsel,
CLS sought to reserve a room on campus for a guest
speaker who was scheduled to appear on a specified date.
Id., at 302–303. Noting Ms. Chapman’s tardy response on
the prior occasion, the attorney asked to receive a re
sponse before the scheduled date, but once again no an
swer was given until after the date had passed. Id., at
300.
Other statements in the majority opinion make it seem
as if the denial of registration did not hurt CLS at all. The
Court notes that CLS was able to hold Bible-study meet
ings and other events. Ante, at 6. And “[a]lthough CLS
could not take advantage of RSO-specific methods of com
munication,” the Court states, “the advent of electronic
media and social-networking sites reduces the importance
of those channels.” Ante, at 24.
At the beginning of the 2005 school year, the Hastings
CLS group had seven members, App. to Pet. for Cert. 13a,
so there can be no suggestion that the group flourished.
And since one of CLS’s principal claims is that it was
subjected to discrimination based on its viewpoint, the
majority’s emphasis on CLS’s ability to endure that dis
crimination—by using private facilities and means of
communication—is quite amazing.
This Court does not customarily brush aside a claim of

