32

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

evidence in the record that the policy was announced as a
pretext.
The adoption of a facially neutral policy for the purpose
of suppressing the expression of a particular viewpoint is
viewpoint discrimination. See Crawford v. Board of Ed. of
Los Angeles, 458 U. S. 527, 544 (1982) (“[A] law neutral on
its face still may be unconstitutional if motivated by a
discriminatory purpose”). A simple example illustrates
this obvious point. Suppose that a hated student group at
a state university has never been able to attract more than
10 members. Suppose that the university administration,
for the purpose of preventing that group from using the
school grounds for meetings, adopts a new rule under
which the use of its facilities is restricted to groups with
more than 25 members. Although this rule would be
neutral on its face, its adoption for a discriminatory reason
would be illegal.
Here, CLS has made a strong showing that Hastings’
sudden adoption and selective application of its accept-all
comers policy was a pretext for the law school’s unlawful
denial of CLS’s registration application under the Nondis
crimination Policy.
Shifting policies. When Hastings denied CLS’s applica
tion in the fall of 2004, the only policy mentioned was the
Nondiscrimination Policy. In July 2005, the former dean
suggested in a deposition that the law school actually
followed the very different accept-all-comers policy. In
March of this year, Hastings’ brief in this Court rolled out
still a third policy. As is recognized in the employment
discrimination context, where issues of pretext regularly
arise, “[s]ubstantial changes over time in [an] employer’s
——————
pay fees which are subsidies for speech they find objectionable, even
offensive,” solely upon a majority vote of the student body. See 529
U. S., at 230, 235. That is no different in principle than an accept-all
comers policy that places all student organizations at risk of take-over
by a majority that is hostile to a group’s viewpoint.

