18

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
Opinion of the Court

We later relied on Healy in Widmar. In that case, a
public university, in an effort to avoid state support for
religion, had closed its facilities to a registered student
group that sought to use university space for religious
worship and discussion. 454 U. S., at 264–265. “A univer­
sity’s mission is education,” we observed, “and decisions of
this Court have never denied a university’s authority to
impose reasonable regulations compatible with that mis­
sion upon the use of its campus and facilities.” Id., at 268,
n. 5. But because the university singled out religious
organizations for disadvantageous treatment, we sub­
jected the university’s regulation to strict scrutiny. Id., at
269–270. The school’s interest “in maintaining strict
separation of church and State,” we held, was not “suffi­
ciently compelling to justify . . . [viewpoint] discrimination
against . . . religious speech.” Id., at 270, 276 (internal
quotation marks omitted).
Most recently and comprehensively, in Rosenberger, we
reiterated that a university generally may not withhold
benefits from student groups because of their religious
outlook. The officially recognized student group in Rosen
berger was denied student-activity-fee funding to distrib­
——————
basis of its expressive content, acts are not shielded from regulation
merely because they express a discriminatory . . . philosophy.” (emphasis
added)). As discussed infra, at 28–31, Hastings’ all-comers policy is
paradigmatically viewpoint neutral. The dissent’s contention that “the
identity of the student group” is the only “way of distinguishing Healy,”
post, at 16, is thus untenable.
The dissent’s description of Healy also omits the Healy Court’s
observation that “[a] college administration may . . . requir[e] . . . that a
group seeking official recognition affirm in advance its willingness to
adhere to reasonable campus law. Such a requirement does not impose
an impermissible condition on the students’ associational rights. . . . It
merely constitutes an agreement to conform with reasonable standards
respecting conduct. . . . [T]he benefits of participation in the internal
life of the college community may be denied to any group that reserves
the right to violate any valid campus rules with which it disagrees.”
408 U. S., at 193–194.

