16

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

that universities should be permitted to impose restric
tions on speech that would not be tolerated elsewhere.
Brief for American Association of Presidents of Independ
ent Colleges and Universities 11–12.
The Healy Court would have none of this. Unlike the
Court today, the Healy Court emphatically rejected the
proposition that “First Amendment protections should
apply with less force on college campuses than in the
community at large.” 408 U. S., at 180. And on one key
question after another—whether the local SDS chapter
was independent of the national organization, whether the
group posed a substantial threat of material disruption,
and whether the students’ responses to the committee’s
questions about violence and disruption signified a will
ingness to engage in such activities—the Court drew
its own conclusions, which differed from the college
president’s.
The Healy Court was true to the principle that when it
comes to the interpretation and application of the right to
free speech, we exercise our own independent judgment.
We do not defer to Congress on such matters, see Sable
Communications of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U. S. 115, 129
(1989), and there is no reason why we should bow to uni
versity administrators.
In the end, I see only two possible distinctions between
Healy and the present case. The first is that Healy did not
involve any funding, but as I have noted, funding plays
only a small part in this case. And if Healy would other
wise prevent Hastings from refusing to register CLS, I see
no good reason why the potential availability of funding
should enable Hastings to deny all of the other rights that
go with registration.
This leaves just one way of distinguishing Healy: the
identity of the student group. In Healy, the Court warned
that the college president’s views regarding the philosophy
of the SDS could not “justify the denial of First Amend

