2

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

Syllabus 

Hastings rejected CLS’s application for RSO status on the ground
that the group’s bylaws did not comply with Hastings’ open-access
policy because they excluded students based on religion and sexual
orientation.
CLS filed this suit for injunctive and declaratory relief under 42
U. S. C. §1983, alleging that Hastings’ refusal to grant the group
RSO status violated its First and Fourteenth Amendment rights to
free speech, expressive association, and free exercise of religion. On
cross-motions for summary judgment, the District Court ruled for
Hastings. The court held that the all-comers condition on access to a
limited public forum was both reasonable and viewpoint neutral, and
therefore did not violate CLS’s right to free speech. Nor, in the
court’s view, did Hastings impermissibly impair CLS’s right to ex
pressive association: Hastings did not order CLS to admit any stu
dent, nor did the school proscribe any speech; Hastings merely placed
conditions on the use of school facilities and funds. The court also re
jected CLS’s free exercise argument, stating that the Nondiscrimina
tion Policy did not single out religious beliefs, but rather was neutral
and of general applicability. The Ninth Circuit affirmed, ruling that
the all-comers condition on RSO recognition was reasonable and
viewpoint neutral.

Held:
1. The Court considers only whether a public institution’s condi
tioning access to a student-organization forum on compliance with an
all-comers policy violates the Constitution. CLS urges the Court to
review, instead, the Nondiscrimination Policy as written—prohibiting
discrimination on enumerated bases, including religion and sexual
orientation. The policy’s written terms, CLS contends, target solely
those groups that organize around religious beliefs or that disapprove
of particular sexual behavior, and leave other associations free to
limit membership to persons committed to the group’s ideology. This
argument flatly contradicts the joint stipulation of facts the parties
submitted at the summary-judgment stage, which specified: “Hast
ings requires that [RSOs] allow any student to participate, . . . re
gardless of [her] status or beliefs. For example, the Hastings Democ
ratic Caucus cannot bar students holding Republican political beliefs
. . . .” This Court has long recognized that parties are bound by, and
cannot contradict, their stipulations. See, e.g., Board of Regents of
Univ. of Wis. System v. Southworth, 529 U. S. 217, 226. The Court
therefore rejects CLS’s attempt to escape from the stipulation and
shift its target to Hastings’ policy as written. Pp. 8–12.
2. The all-comers policy is a reasonable, viewpoint-neutral condi
tion on access to the RSO forum; it therefore does not transgress
First Amendment limitations. Pp. 12–31.

