Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

KENNEDY, J., concurring

place. Many educational institutions, including respon
dent Hastings College of Law, have recognized that the
process of learning occurs both formally in a classroom
setting and informally outside of it. See id., at 233. Stu
dents may be shaped as profoundly by their peers as by
their teachers. Extracurricular activities, such as those in
the Hastings “Registered Student Organization” program,
facilitate interactions between students, enabling them to
explore new points of view, to develop interests and tal
ents, and to nurture a growing sense of self. See Board of
Ed. of Independent School Dist. No. 92 of Pottawatomie
Cty. v. Earls, 536 U. S. 822, 831, n. 4 (2002) (participation
in extracurricular activities is “ ‘a significant contributor to
the breadth and quality of the educational experience’ ”).
The Hasting program is designed to allow all students to
interact with their colleagues across a broad, seemingly
unlimited range of ideas, views, and activities. See Re
gents of Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke, 438 U. S. 265, 312, 313,
n. 48 (1978) (opinion of Powell, J.) (“[A] great deal of learn
ing . . . occurs through interactions among students . . .
who have a wide variety of interests, talents, and perspec
tives; and who are able, directly or indirectly, to learn
from their differences and to stimulate one another to
reexamine even their most deeply held assumptions about
themselves and their world” (alteration in original; inter
nal quotation marks omitted)).
Law students come from many backgrounds and have
but three years to meet each other and develop their
skills. They do so by participating in a community that
teaches them how to create arguments in a convincing,
rational, and respectful manner and to express doubt and
disagreement in a professional way. A law school furthers
these objectives by allowing broad diversity in registered
student organizations. But these objectives may be better
achieved if students can act cooperatively to learn from
and teach each other through interactions in social and

