Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

regardless of [her] status or beliefs. Thus, for exam­
ple, the Hastings Democratic Caucus cannot bar stu­
dents holding Republican political beliefs from becom­
ing members or seeking leadership positions in the
organization.” App. 221 (Joint Stipulation ¶18) (em­
phasis added; citations omitted).5
Under the District Court’s local rules, stipulated facts are
deemed “undisputed.” Civil Local Rule 56–2 (ND Cal.
2010). See also Pet. for Cert. 2 (“The material facts of this
case are undisputed.”).6
——————
5 In its briefs before the District Court and the Court of Appeals, CLS
several times affirmed that Hastings imposes an all-comers rule on
RSOs. See, e.g., Plaintiff’s Notice of Motion for Summary Judgment
and Memorandum in Support of Motion for Summary Judgment in No.
C 04 4484 JSW (ND Cal.), p. 4 (“Hastings interprets the [Nondiscrimi­
nation Policy] such that student organizations must allow any student,
regardless of their status or beliefs, to participate in the group’s activi­
ties and meetings and to become voting members and leaders of the
group.”); Brief for Appellant in No. 06–15956 (CA9), pp. 29–30 (“Hast­
ings illustrates the application of the Nondiscrimination Policy by
explaining that for the Hastings Democratic Caucus to gain recogni­
tion, it must open its leadership and voting membership to Republi­
cans.”). In a hearing before the District Court, CLS’s counsel reiterated
that “it’s important to understand what Hastings’ policy is. According
to . . . the stipulated facts, Hastings requires . . . that registered student
organizations allow any student to participate, become a member or
seek leadership positions in the organization regardless of their status
or beliefs.” App. 438 (capitalization and internal quotation marks
omitted). And at oral argument in this Court, counsel for CLS ac­
knowledged that “the Court needs to reach the constitutionality of the
all-comers policy as applied to CLS in this case.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 59
(emphasis added). We repeat, in this regard, that Hastings’ all-comers
policy is hardly novel. Other law schools have adopted similar re­
quirements. See supra, at 4–5; Brief for Association of American Law
Schools as Amicus Curiae 20, n. 5.
6 The dissent spills considerable ink attempting to create uncertainty
about when the all-comers policy was adopted. See post, at 2, 3, 5, 6, 7,
8, 10, 11. What counts, however, is the parties’ unqualified agreement
that the all-comers policy currently governs. CLS’s suit, after all, seeks
only declaratory and injunctive—that is, prospective—relief. See App.

