22

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

precedent, this was viewpoint discrimination.5
It bears emphasis that permitting religious groups to
limit membership to those who share the groups’ beliefs
would not have the effect of allowing other groups to dis
criminate on the basis of religion. It would not mean, for
example, that fraternities or sororities could exclude stu
dents on that basis. As our cases have recognized, the
right of expressive association permits a group to exclude
an applicant for membership only if the admission of that
person would “affec[t] in a significant way the group’s
ability to advocate public or private viewpoints.” Dale,
530 U. S., at 648. Groups that do not engage in expressive
association have no such right. Similarly, groups that are
dedicated to expressing a viewpoint on a secular topic (for
example, a political or ideological viewpoint) would have
no basis for limiting membership based on religion be
cause the presence of members with diverse religious
beliefs would have no effect on the group’s ability to ex
press its views. But for religious groups, the situation is
very different. This point was put well by a coalition of
Muslim, Christian, Jewish, and Sikh groups: “Of course
there is a strong interest in prohibiting religious discrimi
nation where religion is irrelevant. But it is fundamen
tally confused to apply a rule against religious discrimina
tion to a religious association.” Brief for American Islamic
Congress et al. as Amici Curiae 3.
Sexual orientation. The Hastings Nondiscrimination
Policy, as interpreted by the law school, also discriminated
on the basis of viewpoint regarding sexual morality. CLS
——————
5 It is not at all clear what JUSTICE STEVENS means when he refers to
religious “status” as opposed to religious belief. See ante, at 2, n. 1.
But if by religious status he means such things as the religion into
which a person was born or the religion of a person’s ancestors, then
prohibiting discrimination on such grounds would not involve viewpoint
discrimination. Such immutable characteristics are quite different
from viewpoint.

