4

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

Syllabus 

because of their religious outlook. “Once it has opened a limited
[public] forum,” the Court emphasized, “the State must respect the
lawful boundaries it has itself set.” 515 U. S, at 829. It may “not ex
clude speech where its distinction is not reasonable in light of the
purpose served by the forum, . . . nor may it discriminate against
speech on the basis of . . . viewpoint.” Ibid. Pp. 17–19.
(c) Hastings’ all-comers policy is reasonable, taking into account
the RSO forum’s function and “all the surrounding circumstances.”
Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Defense & Ed. Fund, Inc., 473 U. S. 788,
809. Pp. 19–28.
(1) The Court’s inquiry is shaped by the educational context in
which it arises: “First Amendment rights must be analyzed in light of
the special characteristics of the school environment.” Widmar, 454
U. S., at 268, n. 5. This Court is the final arbiter of whether a public
university has exceeded constitutional constraints. The Court has,
however, cautioned courts to resist “substitut[ing] their own notions
of sound educational policy for those of . . . school authorities,” for
judges lack the on-the-ground expertise and experience of school ad
ministrators. Board of Ed. of Hendrick Hudson Central School Dist.,
Westchester Cty. v. Rowley, 458 U. S. 176, 206. Because schools enjoy
“a significant measure of authority over the type of officially recog
nized activities in which their students participate,” Board of Ed. of
Westside Community Schools (Dist. 66) v. Mergens, 496 U. S. 226,
240, the Court approaches its task here mindful that Hastings’ deci
sions about the character of its student-group program are due de
cent respect. Pp. 19–21.
(2) The justifications Hastings asserts in support of its all
comers policy are reasonable in light of the RSO forum’s purposes.
First, the policy ensures that the leadership, educational, and social
opportunities afforded by RSOs are available to all students. RSOs
are eligible for financial assistance drawn from mandatory student
activity fees; the policy ensures that no Hastings student is forced to
fund a group that would reject her as a member. Second, the policy
helps Hastings police the written terms of its Nondiscrimination Pol
icy without inquiring into an RSO’s motivation for membership re
strictions. CLS’s proposal that Hastings permit exclusion because of
belief but forbid discrimination due to status would impose on Hast
ings the daunting task of trying to determine whether a student or
ganization cloaked prohibited status exclusion in belief-based garb.
Third, Hastings reasonably adheres to the view that its policy, to the
extent it brings together individuals with diverse backgrounds and
beliefs, encourages tolerance, cooperation, and learning among stu
dents. Fourth, the policy incorporates state-law discrimination pro
scriptions, thereby conveying Hastings’ decision to decline to subsi

