Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

ALITO, J., dissenting

tion, affidavit, or declaration when this policy took effect.
Hastings’ effort to portray the accept-all-comers policy
as merely an interpretation of the Nondiscrimination
Policy runs into obvious difficulties. First, the two policies
are simply not the same: The Nondiscrimination Policy
proscribes discrimination on a limited number of specified
grounds, while the accept-all-comers policy outlaws all
selectivity. Second, the Nondiscrimination Policy applies
to everything that Hastings does, and the law school does
not follow an accept-all-comers policy in activities such as
admitting students and hiring faculty.
In an effort to circumvent this problem, the Court writes
that “Hastings interprets the Nondiscrimination Policy, as
it relates to the RSO program, to mandate acceptance of all
comers.” Ante, at 4 (emphasis added). This puts Hastings
in the implausible position of maintaining that the Non
discrimination Policy means one thing as applied to the
RSO program and something quite different as applied to
all of Hastings’ other activities. But the Nondiscrimina
tion Policy by its terms applies fully to all components of
the law school, “including administration [and] faculty.”
App. 220.
Third, the record is replete with evidence that, at least
until Dean Kane unveiled the accept-all-comers policy in
July 2005, Hastings routinely registered student groups
with bylaws limiting membership and leadership positions
to those who agreed with the groups’ viewpoints. For
example, the bylaws of the Hastings Democratic Caucus
provided that “any full-time student at Hastings may
become a member of HDC so long as they do not exhibit a
consistent disregard and lack of respect for the objective of
the organization as stated in Article 3, Section 1.” App. to
Pet. for Cert. 118a (emphasis added). The constitution of
the Association of Trial Lawyers of America at Hastings
provided that every member must “adhere to the objec
tives of the Student Chapter as well as the mission of

