Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

ALITO, J., dissenting

JUSTICE STEVENS joins, acknowledges this rule. See ante,
at 13.
JUSTICE STEVENS also maintains that the Nondiscrimi
nation Policy is viewpoint neutral because it prohibits all
groups, both religious and secular, from engaging in reli
gious speech. See ante, at 3. This argument is also con
trary to established law. In Rosenberger, the dissent,
which JUSTICE STEVENS joined, made exactly this argu
ment. See 515 U. S., at 895–896 (opinion of Souter, J.).
The Court disagreed, holding that a policy that treated
secular speech more favorably than religious speech dis
criminated on the basis of viewpoint.4 515 U. S., at 831.
The Court reaffirmed this holding in Good News Club, 533
U. S., at 112, and n. 4.
Here, the Nondiscrimination Policy permitted member
ship requirements that expressed a secular viewpoint. See
App. 93. (For example, the Hastings Democratic Caucus
and the Hastings Republicans were allowed to exclude
members who disagreed with their parties’ platforms.)
But religious groups were not permitted to express a
religious viewpoint by limiting membership to students
who shared their religious viewpoints. Under established
——————
4 In Rosenberger the university argued that the denial of student
activity funding for all groups that sought to express a religious view
point was “facially neutral.” See Brief for Respondents in Rosenberger
v. Rector & Visitors of Univ. of Va., O. T. 1994, No. 94–329, p. 2; 515
U. S., at 824–825. The Rosenberger dissenters agreed that the univer
sity’s policy did not constitute viewpoint discrimination because “it
applie[d] to Muslim and Jewish and Buddhist advocacy as well as to
Christian,” and it “applie[d] to agnostics and atheists as well as it does
to deists and theists.” Id., at 895–896 (opinion of Souter, J.); cf. ante, at
2–3 (opinion of STEVENS, J.) (asserting that under Hastings’ Nondis
crimination Policy “all acts of religious discrimination” are prohibited
(emphasis added)). But the Court flatly rejected this argument. See
515 U. S., at 831 (“Religion may be a vast area of inquiry, but it also
provides, as it did here, a specific premise, a perspective, a standpoint
from which a variety of subjects may be discussed and considered”).

