Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
(a) The Court’s limited public forum decisions supply the appro
priate framework for assessing both CLS’s free-speech and expres
sive-association claims; those decisions recognize that a governmen
tal entity, in regulating property in its charge, may impose
restrictions on speech that are reasonable in light of the purposes of
the forum and viewpoint neutral, e.g., Rosenberger v. Rector and Visi
tors of Univ. of Va., 515 U. S. 819, 829. CLS urges the Court to apply
to its expressive-association claim a different line of cases—decisions
in which the Court has rigorously reviewed restrictions on associa
tional freedom in the context of public accommodations, e.g., Roberts
v. United States Jaycees, 468 U. S. 609, 623. But, because CLS’s ex
pressive-association and free-speech arguments merge—who speaks
on its behalf, CLS reasons, colors what concept is conveyed—it makes
little sense to treat the claims as discrete. Instead, three observa
tions lead the Court to analyze CLS’s arguments under limited
public-forum precedents.
First, the same considerations that have led the Court to apply a
less restrictive level of scrutiny to speech in limited public forums, as
compared to other environments, apply with equal force to expressive
association occurring in a limited public forum. Speech and expres
sive-association rights are closely linked. See id., at 622. When
these intertwined rights arise in exactly the same context, it would
be anomalous for a speech restriction to survive constitutional review
under the limited-public-forum test only to be invalidated as an im
permissible infringement of expressive association. Second, the strict
scrutiny the Court has applied in some settings to laws that burden
expressive association would, in practical effect, invalidate a defining
characteristic of limited public forums—the State’s authority to “re
serv[e] [them] for certain groups.” Rosenberger, 515 U. S., at 829.
Third, this case fits comfortably within the limited-public-forum
category, for CLS may exclude any person for any reason if it forgoes
the benefits of official recognition. The Court’s expressive-association
decisions, in contrast, involved regulations that compelled a group to
include unwanted members, with no choice to opt out. See, e.g., Boy
Scouts of America v. Dale, 530 U. S. 640, 648. Application of the less
restrictive limited-public-forum analysis better accounts for the fact
that Hastings, through its RSO program, is dangling the carrot of
subsidy, not wielding the stick of prohibition. Pp. 12–17.
(b) In three cases, this Court held that public universities had
unconstitutionally singled out student groups for disfavored treat
ment because of their points of view. See Healy v. James, 408 U. S.
169; Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U. S. 263; and Rosenberger. Most re
cently and comprehensively, in Rosenberger, the Court held that a
university generally may not withhold benefits from student groups

