Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of the Court

decent respect.16
2
With appropriate regard for school administrators’
judgment, we review the justifications Hastings offers in
defense of its all-comers requirement.17 First, the open­
access policy “ensures that the leadership, educational,
and social opportunities afforded by [RSOs] are available
——————
16 The dissent mischaracterizes the nature of the respect we accord to
Hastings. See post, at 1, 15–16, 27. As noted supra, at 19–20, this
Court, exercising its independent judgment, must “interpre[t] and
appl[y] . . . the right to free speech.” Post, at 16. But determinations of
what constitutes sound educational policy or what goals a student­
organization forum ought to serve fall within the discretion of school
administrators and educators. See, e.g., Board of Ed. of Hendrick
Hudson Central School Dist., Westchester Cty. v. Rowley, 458 U. S. 176,
206 (1982).
17 Although the dissent maintains it is “content to address the consti­
tutionality of Hastings’ actions under our limited public forum cases,”
post, at 17, it resists the import of those cases at every turn. For
example, although the dissent acknowledges that a university has the
authority to set the boundaries of a limited public forum, post, at 17, 24,
the dissent refuses to credit Hastings’ all-comers policy as one of those
boundaries. See ibid. (insisting that “Hastings’ regulations . . . impose
only two substantive limitations: A group . . . must have student
members and must be non-commercial.”). In short, “the design of the
RSO forum,” post, at 26, which the dissent discusses at length, post, at
24–31, is of its own tailoring.
Another example: The dissent pointedly observes that “[w]hile there
can be no question that the State of California could not impose [an all­
comers] restrictio[n] on all religious groups in the State, the Court now
holds that Hastings, a state institution, may impose these very same
requirements on students who wish to participate in a forum that is
designed to foster the expression of diverse viewpoints.” Post, at 27. As
noted supra, at 12–13, and n. 11, this difference reflects the lesser
standard of scrutiny applicable to limited public forums compared to
other forums. The dissent fights the distinction between state prohibi
tion and state support, but its real quarrel is with our limited public
forum doctrine, which recognizes that distinction. CLS, it bears repeti­
tion, remains free to express whatever it will, but it cannot insist on an
exemption from Hastings’ embracive all-comers policy.

