Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

ALITO, J., dissenting

tions and Students §34.10 (June 22, 1990) (hereinafter
Hastings Regulations). Access to the forum is not limited
to groups devoted to particular purposes. The regulations
provide that a group applying for registration must submit
an official document including “a statement of its purpose,”
id., at 83a (Hastings Regulations §34.10.A.1 (emphasis
added)), but the regulations make no attempt to define the
limits of acceptable purposes. The regulations do not
require a group seeking registration to show that it has a
certain number of members or that its program is of inter
est to any particular number of Hastings students. Nor do
the regulations require that a group serve a need not met
by existing groups.
The regulations also make it clear that the registration
program is not meant to stifle unpopular speech. They
proclaim that “[i]t is the responsibility of the Dean to
ensure an ongoing opportunity for the expression of a
variety of viewpoints.” Id., at 82a (Hastings Regulations
§33.11). They also emphatically disclaim any endorse
ment of or responsibility for views that student groups
may express. Id., at 85a (Hastings Regulations §34.10.D).
Taken as a whole, the regulations plainly contemplate
the creation of a forum within which Hastings students
are free to form and obtain registration of essentially the
same broad range of private groups that nonstudents may
form off campus. That is precisely what the parties in this
case stipulated: The RSO forum “seeks to promote a diver
sity of viewpoints among registered student organizations,
including viewpoints on religion and human sexuality.”
App. 216 (emphasis added).
The way in which the RSO forum actually developed
corroborates this design. As noted, Hastings had more
than 60 RSOs in 2004–2005, each with its own independ
ently devised purpose. Some addressed serious social
issues; others—for example, the wine appreciation and
ultimate Frisbee clubs—were simply recreational. Some

