14

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
Opinion of the Court

equivalent of speech itself”). It therefore makes little
sense to treat CLS’s speech and association claims as
discrete. See Citizens Against Rent Control/Coalition for
Fair Housing v. Berkeley, 454 U. S. 290, 300 (1981). In­
stead, three observations lead us to conclude that our
limited-public-forum precedents supply the appropriate
framework for assessing both CLS’s speech and associa­
tion rights.
First, the same considerations that have led us to apply
a less restrictive level of scrutiny to speech in limited
public forums as compared to other environments, see
supra, at 12–13, and n. 11, apply with equal force to ex­
pressive association occurring in limited public forums. As
just noted, speech and expressive-association rights are
closely linked. See Roberts, 468 U. S., at 622 (Associa­
tional freedom is “implicit in the right to engage in activi­
ties protected by the First Amendment.”). When these
intertwined rights arise in exactly the same context, it
would be anomalous for a restriction on speech to survive
constitutional review under our limited-public-forum test
only to be invalidated as an impermissible infringement of
expressive association. Accord Brief for State Universities
and State University Systems as Amici Curiae 37–38.
That result would be all the more anomalous in this case,
for CLS suggests that its expressive-association claim
plays a part auxiliary to speech’s starring role. See Brief
for Petitioner 18.
Second, and closely related, the strict scrutiny we have
applied in some settings to laws that burden expressive
association would, in practical effect, invalidate a defining
characteristic of limited public forums—the State may
“reserv[e] [them] for certain groups.” Rosenberger, 515
U. S., at 829. See also Perry Ed. Assn., 460 U. S., at 49
(“Implicit in the concept” of a limited public forum is the
State’s “right to make distinctions in access on the basis of
. . . speaker identity.”); Cornelius, 473 U. S., at 806 (“[A]

