34

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

Office of Student Services, which was charged with re
viewing the bylaws of applicant groups to ensure that they
were in compliance with the law school’s policies.
Nonenforcement. Since it appears that no one was told
about the accept-all-comers policy before July 2005, it is
not surprising that the policy was not enforced. The re
cord is replete with evidence that Hastings made no effort
to enforce the all-comers policy until after it was pro
claimed by the former dean. See, e.g., App. to Pet. for
Cert. 118a (Hastings Democratic Caucus); id., at 110a
(Association of Trial Lawyers of America at Hastings); id.,
at 146a–147a (Vietnamese American Law Society); id., at
142a–143a (Silent Right); App. 192 (La Raza). See gener
ally supra, at 7–8. If the record here is not sufficient to
permit a finding of pretext, then the law of pretext is dead.
The Court—understandably—sidesteps this issue. The
Court states that the lower courts did not address the
“argument that Hastings selectively enforces its all-comer
policy,”11 that “this Court is not the proper forum to air the
issue in the first instance,” and that “[o]n remand, the
Ninth Circuit may consider CLS’s pretext argument if,
and to the extent, it is preserved.” Ante, at 31–32.
Because the Court affirms the entry of summary judg
ment in favor of respondents, it is not clear how CLS will
be able to ask the Ninth Circuit on remand to review its
claim of pretext. And the argument that we should not
——————
11 As

previously noted, CLS consistently argued in the courts below
that Hastings had applied its registration policy in a discriminatory
manner. See supra, at 9–10, n. 1. The Court would ignore these
arguments because counsel for CLS acknowledged below that Hastings
has an all-comers policy. See ante, at 9, n. 5 (quoting examples). But
as the Court itself acknowledges, counsel for CLS stated at oral argu
ment in this Court that “the Court needs to . . . reach the constitution
ality of the all-comers policy as applied to CLS in this case.” Tr. of Oral
Arg. 59 (emphasis added); ante, at 9, n. 5. And as the record shows,
CLS has never ceded its argument that Hastings applies its accept-all
comers policy unequally.

