30

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

would not justify the Hastings policy even if it were true—
but it is not. The only Hastings policy considered by the
Court—the accept-all-comers policy—goes far beyond any
California antidiscrimination law. Neither Hastings nor
the Court claims that California law demands that state
entities must accept all comers. Hastings itself certainly
does not follow this policy in hiring or student admissions.
Nor is it at all clear that California law requires Hast
ings to deny registration to a religious group that limits
membership to students who share the group’s religious
beliefs. Hastings cites no California court decision or
administrative authority addressing this question. In
stead, Hastings points to a statute prohibiting discrimina
tion on specified grounds, including religion or sexual
orientation, “in any program or activity conducted by”
certain postsecondary educational institutions. Cal. Educ.
Code Ann. §66270 (West Supp. 2010) (emphasis added).
Hastings, however, does not conduct the activities of the
student groups it registers. Indeed, Hastings disclaims
such responsibility, stating both in its regulations and its
Handbook for Student Organizations that it “does not
sponsor student organizations and therefore does not
accept liability for activities of student organizations.”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 85a (Hastings Regulations §34.10.D);
App. 250. In addition, as CLS notes, another provision of
California law specifically exempts “any funds that are
used directly or indirectly for the benefit of student or
ganizations” from a ban on state funding of private groups
that discriminate on any of the grounds listed in §66270.
See §92150 (West Supp. 2010).
The authority to decide whether §66270 or any other
provision of California law requires religious student
groups at covered institutions to admit members who do
not share the groups’ religious views is of course a ques
tion of state law that we cannot resolve. The materials
that have been brought to our attention, however, provide

