Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

ALITO, J., dissenting

foreclose neutral and generally applicable membership
requirements unrelated to ‘status or beliefs.’ ” Brief for
Respondent Hastings College of Law 5. Hastings’ brief
goes on to note with seeming approval that some regis
tered groups have imposed “even conduct requirements.”
Ibid. Hastings, however, has not told us which “conduct
requirements” are allowed and which are not—although
presumably requirements regarding sexual conduct fall
into the latter category.
When this case was in the District Court, that court
took care to address both the Nondiscrimination Policy
and the accept-all-comers policy. See, e.g., App. to Pet. for
Cert. 8a–9a, 16a–17a, 21a–24a, 26a, 27a, 32a, 44a, 63a.
On appeal, however, a panel of the Ninth Circuit, like the
Court today, totally ignored the Nondiscrimination Policy.
CLS’s argument in the Ninth Circuit centered on the
Nondiscrimination Policy, and CLS argued strenuously, as
it had in the District Court, that prior to the former dean’s
deposition, numerous groups had been permitted to re
strict membership to students who shared the groups’
views.1 Nevertheless, the Ninth Circuit disposed of CLS’s
——————
1 CLS consistently argued in the courts below that Hastings had ap
plied its registration policy in a discriminatory manner. See, e.g.,
Plaintiff’s Notice of Motion for Summary Judgment and Memorandum
in Support of Motion for Summary Judgment in No. C 04–4484–JSW
(ND Cal.), pp. 6–7 (“Hastings allows other registered student organiza
tions to require that their members and/or leaders agree with the
organization’s beliefs and purposes”). CLS took pains to bring forward
evidence to substantiate this claim. See supra, at 7–8.
CLS’s brief in the Court of Appeals reiterated its contention that
Hastings had not required all RSOs to admit all student applicants.
CLS’s brief stated that “Hastings allows other registered student
organizations to require that their leaders and/or members agree with
the organization’s beliefs and purposes.” Brief for Appellant in No. 06–
15956 (CA9), pp. 14–15 (citing examples). See also id., at 54–55 (“Hast
ings routinely recognizes student groups that limit membership or
leadership on the basis of belief. . . . Hastings’ actual practice demon
strates that the forum is not reserved to student organizations that do

