26

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

organizations focused on a subject but did not claim to
promote a particular viewpoint on that subject (for exam
ple, the Association of Communications, Sports & Enter
tainment Law); others were defined, not by subject, but by
viewpoint. The forum did not have a single Party Politics
Club; rather, it featured both the Hastings Democratic
Caucus and the Hastings Republicans. There was no
Reproductive Issues Club; the forum included separate
pro-choice and pro-life organizations. Students did not see
fit to create a Monotheistic Religions Club, but they have
formed the Hastings Jewish Law Students Association
and the Hastings Association of Muslim Law Students. In
short, the RSO forum, true to its design, has allowed
Hastings students to replicate on campus a broad array of
private, independent, noncommercial organizations that is
very similar to those that nonstudents have formed in the
outside world.
The accept-all-comers policy is antithetical to the design
of the RSO forum for the same reason that a state-imposed
accept-all-comers policy would violate the First Amend
ment rights of private groups if applied off campus. As
explained above, a group’s First Amendment right of
expressive association is burdened by the “forced inclu
sion” of members whose presence would “affec[t] in a
significant way the group’s ability to advocate public or
private viewpoints.” Dale, 530 U. S., at 648. The Court
has therefore held that the government may not compel a
group that engages in “expressive association” to admit
such a member unless the government has a compelling
interest, “ ‘unrelated to the suppression of ideas, that
cannot be achieved through means significantly less re
strictive of associational freedoms.’ ” Ibid. (quoting Rob
erts, 468 U. S., at 623).
There can be no dispute that this standard would not
permit a generally applicable law mandating that private
religious groups admit members who do not share the

