4

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

Opinion of the Court 


crimination. [Hasting’s] policy on nondiscrimination
is to comply fully with applicable law.
“[Hastings] shall not discriminate unlawfully on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry,
disability, age, sex or sexual orientation. This nondis­
crimination policy covers admission, access and
treatment in Hastings-sponsored programs and activi­
ties.” Id., at 220.
Hastings interprets the Nondiscrimination Policy, as it
relates to the RSO program, to mandate acceptance of all
comers: School-approved groups must “allow any student
to participate, become a member, or seek leadership posi­
tions in the organization, regardless of [her] status or
beliefs.” Id., at 221.2 Other law schools have adopted
similar all-comers policies. See, e.g., Georgetown Univer­
sity Law Center, Office of Student Life: Student Organi
zations, available at http://www.law.georgetown.edu/
StudentLife/StudentOrgs/NewGroup.htm (All Internet
——————
2 “Th[is] policy,” Hastings clarifies, “does not foreclose neutral and
generally applicable membership requirements unrelated to ‘status or
beliefs.’ ” Brief for Hastings 5. So long as all students have the oppor
tunity to participate on equal terms, RSOs may require them, inter alia,
to pay dues, maintain good attendance, refrain from gross misconduct,
or pass a skill-based test, such as the writing competitions adminis­
tered by law journals. See ibid. The dissent trumpets these neutral,
generally applicable membership requirements, arguing that, in truth,
Hastings has a “some-comers,” not an all-comers, policy. Post, at 2, 3,
8–9, 10, 23–24, 32–33 (opinion of ALITO, J.). Hastings’ open-access
policy, however, requires only that student organizations open eligibil­
ity for membership and leadership regardless of a student’s status or
beliefs; dues, attendance, skill measurements, and comparable uni­
formly applied standards are fully compatible with the policy. The
dissent makes much of Hastings’ observation that groups have imposed
“even conduct requirements.” Post, at 9, 23–24. But the very example
Hastings cites leaves no doubt that the Law School was referring to
boilerplate good-behavior standards, e.g., “[m]embership may cease . . .
if the member is found to be involved in gross misconduct,” App. 173
(cited in Brief for Hastings 5).

