Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

instant dispute, therefore, with the limited-public-forum
decisions as our guide.
B
As earlier pointed out, supra, at 1, 12–13, we do not
write on a blank slate; we have three times before consid­
ered clashes between public universities and student
groups seeking official recognition or its attendant bene­
fits. First, in Healy, a state college denied school affilia­
tion to a student group that wished to form a local chapter
of Students for a Democratic Society (SDS). 408 U. S., at
170. Characterizing SDS’s mission as violent and disrup­
tive, and finding the organization’s philosophy repugnant,
the college completely banned the SDS chapter from cam­
pus; in its effort to sever all channels of communication
between students and the group, university officials went
so far as to disband a meeting of SDS members in a cam­
pus coffee shop. Id., at 174–176. The college, we noted,
could require “that a group seeking official recognition
affirm in advance its willingness to adhere to reasonable
campus law,” including “reasonable standards respecting
conduct.” Id., at 193. But a public educational institution
exceeds constitutional bounds, we held, when it “restrict[s]
speech or association simply because it finds the views
expressed by [a] group to be abhorrent.” Id., at 187–188.15
——————
15 The dissent relies heavily on Healy, post, at 13–17, but its other­
wise exhaustive account of the case elides the very fact the Healy Court
identified as dispositive: The president of the college explicitly denied
the student group official recognition because of the group’s viewpoint.
See 408 U. S, at 187 (“The mere disagreement of the President with the
group’s philosophy affords no reason to deny it recognition.”). In this
case, in contrast, Hastings denied CLS recognition not because the
school wanted to silence the “viewpoint that CLS sought to express
through its membership requirements,” post, at 17, n. 2, but because
CLS, insisting on preferential treatment, declined to comply with the
open-access policy applicable to all RSOs, see R. A. V. v. St. Paul, 505
U. S. 377, 390 (1992) (“Where the [State] does not target conduct on the

