Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

29

Opinion of the Court

points of view, Hastings’ all-comers requirement draws no
distinction between groups based on their message or
perspective. An all-comers condition on access to RSO
status, in short, is textbook viewpoint neutral.25
2
Conceding that Hastings’ all-comers policy is “nominally
neutral,” CLS attacks the regulation by pointing to its
effect: The policy is vulnerable to constitutional assault,
CLS contends, because “it systematically and predictably
burdens most heavily those groups whose viewpoints are
out of favor with the campus mainstream.” Brief for Peti­
tioner 51; cf. post, at 1 (ALITO, J., dissenting) (charging
that Hastings’ policy favors “political[ly] correc[t]” student
expression). This argument stumbles from its first step
because “[a] regulation that serves purposes unrelated to
the content of expression is deemed neutral, even if it has
an incidental effect on some speakers or messages but not
——————
25 Relying

exclusively on Board of Regents of Univ. of Wis. System v.
Southworth, 529 U. S. 217 (2000), the dissent “would not be so quick to
jump to th[e] conclusion” that the all-comers policy is viewpoint neu­
tral. Post, at 31, and 31–32, n. 10. Careful consideration of South
worth, however, reveals how desperate the dissent’s argument is. In
Southworth, university students challenged a mandatory student­
activity fee used to fund student groups. Finding the political and
ideological speech of certain groups offensive, the student-challengers
argued that imposition of the fee violated their First Amendment
rights. 529 U. S., at 221. This Court upheld the university’s choice to
subsidize groups whose expression some students found distasteful, but
we admonished that the university could not “prefer some viewpoints to
others” in the distribution of funds. Id., at 233. We cautioned that the
university’s referendum process, which allowed students to vote on
whether a student organization would receive financial support, risked
violation of this principle by allowing students to select groups to fund
based on their viewpoints. Id., at 235. In this case, in contrast, the all­
comers policy governs all RSOs; Hastings does not pick and choose
which organizations must comply with the policy on the basis of view­
point. App. 221. Southworth accordingly provides no support for the
dissent’s warped analysis.

