8

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

ALITO, J., dissenting 


ATLA.” Id., at 110a. A student could become a member of
the Vietnamese American Law Society so long as the
student did not “exhibit a consistent disregard and lack of
respect for the objective of the organization,” which cen
ters on a “celebrat[ion] [of] Vietnamese culture.” Id., at
146a–147a. Silenced Right limited voting membership to
students who “are committed” to the group’s “mission” of
“spread[ing] the pro-life message.” Id., at 142a–143a. La
Raza limited voting membership to “students of Raza
background.” App. 192. Since Hastings requires any
student group applying for registration to submit a copy of
its bylaws, see id., at 249–250, Hastings cannot claim that
it was unaware of such provisions. And as noted, CLS was
denied registration precisely because Ms. Chapman re
viewed its bylaws and found them unacceptable.
We are told that, when CLS pointed out these discrep
ancies during this litigation, Hastings took action to en
sure that student groups were in fact complying with the
law school’s newly disclosed accept-all-comers policy. For
example, Hastings asked La Raza to revise its bylaws to
allow all students to become voting members. App. to Pet.
for Cert. 66a. See also Brief for State of Michigan et al. as
Amici Curiae 2, n. 1 (relating anecdotally that Hastings
recently notified the Hastings Democrats that “to main
tain the Club’s standing as a student organization,” it
must “open its membership to all students, regardless of
party affiliation”). These belated remedial efforts suggest,
if anything, that Hastings had no accept-all-comers policy
until this litigation was well under way.
Finally, when Hastings filed its brief in this Court, its
policy, which had already evolved from a policy prohibiting
certain specified forms of discrimination into an accept-all
comers policy, underwent yet another transformation.
Now, Hastings claims that it does not really have an
accept-all-comers policy; it has an accept-some-comers
policy. Hastings’ current policy, we are told, “does not

