2

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

KENNEDY, J., concurring


of thought and experiment that is at the center of our
intellectual and philosophic tradition”). These considera
tions supported the Court’s conclusion that, under the
First Amendment, a limited forum for student-run publi
cations did not permit the exclusion of a paper for the
reason that it was devoted to expressing religious views.
Rosenberger is distinguishable from the instant case in
various respects. Not least is that here the school policy in
question is not content based either in its formulation or
evident purpose; and were it shown to be otherwise, the
case likely should have a different outcome. Here, the
policy applies equally to all groups and views. And, given
the stipulation of the parties, there is no basis for an
allegation that the design or purpose of the rule was, by
subterfuge, to discriminate based on viewpoint.
An objection might be that the all-comers policy, even if
not so designed or intended, in fact makes it difficult for
certain groups to express their views in a manner essen
tial to their message. A group that can limit membership
to those who agree in full with its aims and purposes may
be more effective in delivering its message or furthering
its expressive objectives; and the Court has recognized
that this interest can be protected against governmental
interference or regulation. See Boy Scouts of America v.
Dale, 530 U. S. 640 (2000). By allowing like-minded stu
dents to form groups around shared identities, a school
creates room for self-expression and personal develop
ment. See Board of Regents of Univ. of Wis. System v.
Southworth, 529 U. S. 217, 229 (2000) (“The University’s
whole justification for [its student activity program] is
that it springs from the initiative of the students, who
alone give it purpose and content in the course of their
extracurricular endeavors”).
In the instant case, however, if the membership qualifi
cation were enforced, it would contradict a legitimate
purpose for having created the limited forum in the first

