Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

ALITO, J., dissenting

to register CLS, it claimed that the CLS bylaws impermis
sibly discriminated on the basis of religion and sexual
orientation. As interpreted by Hastings and applied
to CLS, both of these grounds constituted viewpoint
discrimination.
Religion. The First Amendment protects the right of
“ ‘expressive association’ ”—that is, “the right to associate
for the purpose of speaking.” Rumsfeld v. Forum for Aca
demic and Institutional Rights, Inc., 547 U. S. 47, 68
(2006) (quoting Boy Scouts of America v. Dale, 530 U. S.
640, 644 (2000)). And the Court has recognized that “[t]he
forced inclusion of an unwanted person in a group in
fringes the group’s freedom of expressive association if the
presence of that person affects in a significant way the
group’s ability to advocate public or private viewpoints.”
Dale, supra, at 648.
With one important exception, the Hastings Nondis
crimination Policy respected that right. As Hastings
stated in its answer, the Nondiscrimination Policy “per
mit[ted] political, social, and cultural student organiza
tions to select officers and members who are dedicated to a
particular set of ideals or beliefs.” App. 93. But the policy
singled out one category of expressive associations for
disfavored treatment: groups formed to express a religious
message. Only religious groups were required to admit
students who did not share their views. An environmen
talist group was not required to admit students who re
——————
discrimination Policy are not moot. If, as the Court assumes, the
parties stipulated that the only relevant policy is the accept-all-comers
policy, then the District Court should not have addressed the constitu
tionality of the Nondiscrimination Policy. But the District Court
approved both policies, and the Court of Appeals affirmed the judg
ment. That judgment remains binding on CLS, so it is only appropriate
that CLS be permitted to challenge that determination now. The
question of the constitutionality of the Nondiscrimination Policy falls
comfortably within the question presented, and CLS raised that issue
in its brief. See Brief for Petitioner 41–46.

