4

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

ALITO, J., dissenting 


Hastings Jewish Law Students Association and the Hast
ings Association of Muslim Law Students), groups that
promote social causes (e.g., both pro-choice and pro-life
groups), groups organized around racial or ethnic identity
(e.g., the Black Law Students Association, the Korean
American Law Society, La Raza Law Students Associa
tion, and the Middle Eastern Law Students Association),
and groups that focus on gender or sexuality (e.g., the
Clara Foltz Feminist Association and Students Raising
Consciousness at Hastings). See App. 236–245; Brief for
Petitioner 3–4.
Not surprisingly many of these registered groups were
and are dedicated to expressing a message. For example,
Silenced Right, a pro-life group, taught that “all human
life from the moment of conception until natural death is
sacred and has inherent dignity,” id., at 244, while Law
Students for Choice aimed to “defend and expand repro
ductive rights,” id., at 243. The American Constitution
Society sought “to counter . . . a narrow conservative vi
sion” of American law,” id., at 236, and the UC Hastings
Student Animal Defense Fund aimed “at protecting the
lives and advancing the interests of animals through the
legal system,” id., at 245.
Groups that are granted registration are entitled to
meet on university grounds and to access multiple chan
nels for communicating with students and faculty—
including posting messages on designated bulletin boards,
sending mass e-mails to the student body, distributing
material through the Student Information Center, and
participating in the annual student organizations fair.
App. to Pet. for Cert. 7a, 85a. They may also apply for
limited travel funds, id., at 7a, which appear to total about
$4,000 to $5,000 per year, App. 217—or less than $85 per
registered group. Most of the funds available to RSOs
come from an annual student activity fee that every stu
dent must pay. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 89a–93a.

