Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

materials as visited June 24, 2010, and included in Clerk
of Court’s case file) (Membership in registered groups
must be “open to all students.”); Hofstra Law School Stu­
dent Handbook 2009–2010, p. 49, available at http://
law.hofstra.edu/pdf/StudentLife/StudentAffairs/Handbook/
stuhb_handbook.pdf (“[Student] organizations are open to
all students.”). From Hastings’ adoption of its Nondis­
crimination Policy in 1990 until the events stirring this
litigation, “no student organization at Hastings . . . ever
sought an exemption from the Policy.” App. 221.
In 2004, CLS became the first student group to do so.
At the beginning of the academic year, the leaders of a
predecessor Christian organization—which had been an
RSO at Hastings for a decade—formed CLS by affiliating
with the national Christian Legal Society (CLS-National).
Id., at 222–223, 225. CLS-National, an association of
Christian lawyers and law students, charters student
chapters at law schools throughout the country. Id., at
225. CLS chapters must adopt bylaws that, inter alia,
require members and officers to sign a “Statement of
Faith” and to conduct their lives in accord with prescribed
principles. Id., at 225–226; App. to Pet. for Cert. 101a.3
Among those tenets is the belief that sexual activity
should not occur outside of marriage between a man and a
woman; CLS thus interprets its bylaws to exclude from
affiliation anyone who engages in “unrepentant homosex­
——————
3 The

Statement of Faith provides:

“Trusting in Jesus Christ as my Savior, I believe in: 

•	 One God, eternally existent in three persons, Father, Son and Holy
Spirit.
•	 God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth.
•	 The Deity of our Lord, Jesus Christ, God’s only Son conceived of the
Holy Spirit, born of the virgin Mary; His vicarious death for our sins
through which we receive eternal life; His bodily resurrection and
personal return.
•	 The presence and power of the Holy Spirit in the work of regeneration.
•	 The Bible as the inspired Word of God.” App. 226.

