28

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
Opinion of the Court

29) that the Law School lacks any legitimate interest—let
alone one reasonably related to the RSO forum’s pur­
poses—in urging “religious groups not to favor co­
religionists for purposes of their religious activities.” Brief
for Petitioner 43; id., at 50. CLS’s analytical error lies in
focusing on the benefits it must forgo while ignoring the
interests of those it seeks to fence out: Exclusion, after all,
has two sides. Hastings, caught in the crossfire between a
group’s desire to exclude and students’ demand for equal
access, may reasonably draw a line in the sand permitting
all organizations to express what they wish but no group
to discriminate in membership.24
D
We next consider whether Hastings’ all-comers policy is
viewpoint neutral.
1
Although this aspect of limited-public-forum analysis
has been the constitutional sticking point in our prior
decisions, as earlier recounted, supra, at 17–19, we need
not dwell on it here. It is, after all, hard to imagine a
more viewpoint-neutral policy than one requiring all
student groups to accept all comers. In contrast to Healy,
Widmar, and Rosenberger, in which universities singled
out organizations for disfavored treatment because of their
——————
24 In arguing that the all-comers policy is not reasonable in light of
the RSO forum’s purposes, the dissent notes that Title VII, which
prohibits employment discrimination on the basis of religion, among
other categories, provides an exception for religious associations. Post,
at 28, n. 8. The question here, however, is not whether Hastings could,
consistent with the Constitution, provide religious groups dispensation
from the all-comers policy by permitting them to restrict membership to
those who share their faith. It is instead whether Hastings must grant
that exemption. This Court’s decision in Employment Div., Dept. of
Human Resources of Ore. v. Smith, 494 U. S. 872, 878–882 (1990),
unequivocally answers no to that latter question. See also infra, at 31,
n. 27.

