20

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

jected global warming. An animal rights group was not
obligated to accept students who supported the use of
animals to test cosmetics. But CLS was required to admit
avowed atheists. This was patent viewpoint discrimina
tion. “By the very terms of the [Nondiscrimination Policy],
the University . . . select[ed] for disfavored treatment
those student [groups] with religious . . . viewpoints.”
Rosenberger, 515 U. S., at 831. It is no wonder that the
Court makes no attempt to defend the constitutionality of
the Nondiscrimination Policy.
Unlike the Court, JUSTICE STEVENS attempts a defense,
contending that the Nondiscrimination Policy is viewpoint
neutral. But his arguments are squarely contrary to
established precedent.
JUSTICE STEVENS first argues that the Nondiscrimina
tion Policy is viewpoint neutral because it “does not regu
late expression or belief at all” but instead regulates con
duct. See ante, at 2 (concurring opinion). This Court has
held, however, that the particular conduct at issue here
constitutes a form of expression that is protected by the
First Amendment. It is now well established that the
First Amendment shields the right of a group to engage in
expressive association by limiting membership to persons
whose admission does not significantly interfere with the
group’s ability to convey its views. See Dale, supra, at
648; Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U. S. 609, 623
(1984); see also New York State Club Assn., Inc. v. City of
New York, 487 U. S. 1, 13 (1988) (acknowledging that an
“association might be able to show that it is organized for
specific expressive purposes and that it will not be able to
advocate its desired viewpoints nearly as effectively if it
cannot confine its membership to those who share the
same sex, for example, or the same religion”); Widmar,
supra, at 268–269 (“[T]he First Amendment rights of
speech and association extend to the campuses of state
universities”). Indeed, the opinion of the Court, which

