Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

ALITO, J., dissenting

denied registration, i.e., the school’s written Nondiscrimi
nation Policy, or the policy that Hastings belatedly un
veiled when it filed its brief in this Court. Overwhelming
evidence, however, shows that Hastings denied CLS’s
application pursuant to the Nondiscrimination Policy and
that the accept-all-comers policy was nowhere to be found
until it was mentioned by a former dean in a deposition
taken well after this case began.
The events that gave rise to this litigation began in
2004, when a small group of Hastings students sought to
register a Hastings chapter of CLS, a national organiza
tion of Christian lawyers and law students. All CLS
members must sign a Statement of Faith affirming belief
in fundamental Christian doctrines, including the belief
that the Bible is “the inspired Word of God.” App. 226. In
early 2004, the national organization adopted a resolution
stating that “[i]n view of the clear dictates of Scripture,
unrepentant participation in or advocacy of a sexually
immoral lifestyle is inconsistent with an affirmation of the
Statement of Faith, and consequently may be regarded by
CLS as disqualifying such an individual from CLS mem
bership.” Id., at 146. The resolution made it clear that “a
sexually immoral lifestyle,” in CLS’s view, includes engag
ing in “acts of sexual conduct outside of God’s design for
marriage between one man and one woman.” Ibid. It was
shortly after this resolution was passed that the Hastings
chapter of CLS applied to register with the law school.
Hastings sponsors an active program of “registered
student organizations” (RSOs) pursuant to the law school’s
avowed responsibility to “ensure an opportunity for the
expression of a variety of viewpoints” and promote “the
highest standards of . . . freedom of expression,” App. to
Pet. for Cert. 82a, 74a. During the 2004–2005 school year,
Hastings had more than 60 registered groups, including
political groups (e.g., the Hastings Democratic Caucus and
the Hastings Republicans), religious groups (e.g., the

