2

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

STEVENS, J., concurring


formal recognition—while continuing to exclude gay and
non-Christian students (as well as, it seems, students who
advocate for gay rights).
In the dissent’s view, by refusing to grant CLS an ex
emption from the Nondiscrimination Policy, Hastings
violated CLS’s rights, for by proscribing unlawful dis
crimination on the basis of religion, the policy discrimi
nates unlawfully on the basis of religion. There are nu
merous reasons why this counterintuitive theory is
unsound. Although the First Amendment may protect
CLS’s discriminatory practices off campus, it does not
require a public university to validate or support them.
As written, the Nondiscrimination Policy is content and
viewpoint neutral. It does not reflect a judgment by school
officials about the substance of any student group’s
speech. Nor does it exclude any would-be groups on the
basis of their convictions. Indeed, it does not regulate
expression or belief at all. The policy is “directed at the
organization’s activities rather than its philosophy,” Healy
v. James, 408 U. S. 169, 188 (1972). Those who hold reli
gious beliefs are not “singled out,” post, at 19 (ALITO, J.,
dissenting); those who engage in discriminatory conduct
based on someone else’s religious status and belief are
singled out.1 Regardless of whether they are the product
——————
1 The dissent appears to accept that Hastings may prohibit discrimi
nation on the basis of religious status, though it rejects the notion that
Hastings may do the same for religious belief. See, e.g., post, at 22, n. 5,
28. If CLS sought to exclude a Muslim student in virtue of the fact that
he “is” Muslim, the dissent suggests, there would be no problem in
Hastings forbidding that. But if CLS sought to exclude the same
student in virtue of the fact that he subscribes to the Muslim faith,
Hastings must stand idly by. This proposition is not only unworkable
in practice but also flawed in conception. A person’s religion often
simultaneously constitutes or informs a status, an identity, a set of
beliefs and practices, and much else besides. (So does sexual orienta
tion for that matter, see ante, at 22–23, notwithstanding the dissent’s
view that a rule excluding those who engage in “unrepentant homosex

