Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

Opinion of the Court

ual orientation, but rather “on the basis of a conjunction of
conduct and the belief that the conduct is not wrong.”
Brief for Petitioner 35–36 (emphasis deleted). Our deci­
sions have declined to distinguish between status and
conduct in this context. See Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U. S.
558, 575 (2003) (“When homosexual conduct is made
criminal by the law of the State, that declaration in and of
itself is an invitation to subject homosexual persons to
discrimination.” (emphasis added)); id., at 583 (O’Connor,
J., concurring in judgment) (“While it is true that the law
applies only to conduct, the conduct targeted by this law is
conduct that is closely correlated with being homosexual.
Under such circumstances, [the] law is targeted at more
than conduct. It is instead directed toward gay persons as
a class.”); cf. Bray v. Alexandria Women’s Health Clinic,
506 U. S. 263, 270 (1993) (“A tax on wearing yarmulkes is
a tax on Jews.”). See also Brief for Lambda Legal Defense
and Education Fund, Inc., et al. as Amici Curiae 7–20.
Third, the Law School reasonably adheres to the view
that an all-comers policy, to the extent it brings together
individuals with diverse backgrounds and beliefs, “encour­
ages tolerance, cooperation, and learning among stu­
dents.” App. 349.19 And if the policy sometimes produces
discord, Hastings can rationally rank among RSO­
program goals development of conflict-resolution skills,
toleration, and readiness to find common ground.
Fourth, Hastings’ policy, which incorporates—in fact,
subsumes—state-law proscriptions on discrimination,
conveys the Law School’s decision “to decline to subsidize
with public monies and benefits conduct of which the
——————
19 CLS’s predecessor organization, the Hastings Christian Fellowship
(HCF), experienced these benefits first-hand when it welcomed an
openly gay student as a member during the 2003–2004 academic year.
That student, testified another HCF member, “was a joy to have” in the
group and brought a unique perspective to Bible-study discussions. See
App. 325, 327.

