Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

31

ALITO, J., dissenting

little support for the majority’s suggested interpretation.
In sum, Hastings’ accept-all-comers policy is not reason
able in light of the stipulated purpose of the RSO forum: to
promote a diversity of viewpoints “among”—not within—
“registered student organizations.” App. 216 (emphasis
added).9
B
The Court is also wrong in holding that the accept-all
comers policy is viewpoint neutral. The Court proclaims
that it would be “hard to imagine a more viewpoint
neutral policy,” ante, at 28, but I would not be so quick to
jump to this conclusion. Even if it is assumed that the
policy is viewpoint neutral on its face,10 there is strong
——————
9 Although we have held that the sponsor of a limited public forum
“must respect the lawful boundaries it has itself set,” Rosenberger, 515
U. S., at 829, the Court now says that, if the exclusion of a group is
challenged, the sponsor can retroactively redraw the boundary lines in
order to justify the exclusion. See ante, at 21, n. 17. This approach
does not respect our prior holding.
10 In Board of Regents of Univ. of Wis. System v. Southworth, 529
U. S. 217 (2000), the Court considered a university rule permitting the
“defund[ing]” of a registered student group through a student referen
dum. See id., at 224–225. “To the extent the referendum substitutes
majority determinations for viewpoint neutrality,” the Court observed,
“it would undermine the constitutional protection the [university’s
registered student organization] program requires.” Id., at 235. “The
whole theory of viewpoint neutrality is that minority views are treated
with the same respect as are majority views.” Ibid.
Hastings’ accept-all-comers policy bears a resemblance to the South
wark referendum process. Both permit the majority to silence a disfa
vored organization. There is force to CLS’s argument that “[a]llowing
all students to join and lead any group, even when they disagree with
it, is tantamount to establishing a majoritarian heckler’s veto” and
“potentially turn[s] every group into an organ for the already-dominant
opinion.” Brief for Petitioner 51.
The Court attempts to distinguish Southworth as involving a funding
mechanism for student groups that operated selectively, based on
groups’ viewpoints. Ante, at 29, n. 25. But that mechanism—a student
referendum process—placed all students at risk of “being required to

