12

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
Opinion of the Court

its target to Hastings’ policy as written. This opinion,
therefore, considers only whether conditioning access to a
student-organization forum on compliance with an all­
comers policy violates the Constitution.10
III 

A

In support of the argument that Hastings’ all-comers
policy treads on its First Amendment rights to free speech
and expressive association, CLS draws on two lines of
decisions. First, in a progression of cases, this Court has
employed forum analysis to determine when a governmen­
tal entity, in regulating property in its charge, may place
limitations on speech.11 Recognizing a State’s right “to
preserve the property under its control for the use to
which it is lawfully dedicated,” Cornelius v. NAACP Legal
Defense & Ed. Fund, Inc., 473 U. S. 788, 800 (1985) (inter­
——————
10 The dissent, in contrast, devotes considerable attention to CLS’s
arguments about the Nondiscrimination Policy as written. Post, at 2, 3,
5, 18–23. We decline to address these arguments, not because we agree
with the dissent that the Nondiscrimination Policy is “plainly” uncon­
stitutional, post, at 18, but because, as noted, supra, at 8–12, that
constitutional question is not properly presented.
11 In conducting forum analysis, our decisions have sorted govern­
ment property into three categories. First, in traditional public forums,
such as public streets and parks, “any restriction based on the content
of . . . speech must satisfy strict scrutiny, that is, the restriction must
be narrowly tailored to serve a compelling government interest.”
Pleasant Grove City v. Summum, 555 U. S. ___ (2009) (slip op., at 6).
Second, governmental entities create designated public forums when
“government property that has not traditionally been regarded as a
public forum is intentionally opened up for that purpose”; speech
restrictions in such a forum “are subject to the same strict scrutiny as
restrictions in a traditional public forum.” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 7).
Third, governmental entities establish limited public forums by opening
property “limited to use by certain groups or dedicated solely to the
discussion of certain subjects.” Ibid. As noted in text, “[i]n such a
forum, a governmental entity may impose restrictions on speech that
are reasonable and viewpoint-neutral.” Ibid.

