16

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
Opinion of the Court

468 U. S., at 623 (“There can be no clearer example of
an intrusion into the internal structure or affairs of
an association than” forced inclusion of unwelcome
participants.). 14
In diverse contexts, our decisions have distinguished
between policies that require action and those that with­
hold benefits. See, e.g., Grove City College v. Bell, 465
U. S. 555, 575–576 (1984); Bob Jones Univ. v. United
States, 461 U. S. 574, 602–604 (1983). Application of the
less-restrictive limited-public-forum analysis better ac­
counts for the fact that Hastings, through its RSO pro­
gram, is dangling the carrot of subsidy, not wielding the
stick of prohibition. Cf. Norwood v. Harrison, 413 U. S.
455, 463 (1973) (“That the Constitution may compel tol­
eration of private discrimination in some circumstances
does not mean that it requires state support for such
discrimination.”).
In sum, we are persuaded that our limited-public-forum
precedents adequately respect both CLS’s speech and
expressive-association rights, and fairly balance those
rights against Hastings’ interests as property owner and
educational institution. We turn to the merits of the
——————
14 CLS also brackets with expressive-association precedents our deci­
sion in Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of
Boston, Inc., 515 U. S. 557 (1995). There, a veterans group sponsoring
a St. Patrick’s Day parade challenged a state law requiring it to allow
gay individuals to march in the parade behind a banner celebrating
their Irish heritage and sexual orientation. Id., at 572. In evaluating
that challenge, the Hurley Court focused on the veterans group’s
interest in controlling the message conveyed by the organization. See
id., at 573–581. Whether Hurley is best conceptualized as a speech or
association case (or both), however, that precedent is of little help to
CLS.
Hurley involved the application of a statewide public­
accommodations law to the most traditional of public forums: the
street. That context differs markedly from the limited public forum at
issue here: a university’s application of an all-comers policy to its
student-organization program.

