Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

speaker may be excluded from” a limited public forum “if
he is not a member of the class of speakers for whose
especial benefit the forum was created.”).
An example sharpens the tip of this point: Schools,
including Hastings, see App. to Pet. for Cert. 83a, ordinar­
ily, and without controversy, limit official student-group
recognition to organizations comprising only students—
even if those groups wish to associate with nonstudents.
See, e.g., Volokh, Freedom of Expressive Association and
Government Subsidies, 58 Stan. L. Rev. 1919, 1940 (2006).
The same ground rules must govern both speech and
association challenges in the limited-public-forum context,
lest strict scrutiny trump a public university’s ability to
“confin[e] a [speech] forum to the limited and legitimate
purposes for which it was created.” Rosenberger, 515
U. S., at 829. See also Healy, 408 U. S., at 189 (“Associa­
tional activities need not be tolerated where they infringe
reasonable campus rules.”).
Third, this case fits comfortably within the limited­
public-forum category, for CLS, in seeking what is effec­
tively a state subsidy, faces only indirect pressure to mod­
ify its membership policies; CLS may exclude any person
for any reason if it forgoes the benefits of official recogni­
tion.13 The expressive-association precedents on which
CLS relies, in contrast, involved regulations that com
pelled a group to include unwanted members, with no
choice to opt out. See, e.g., Dale, 530 U. S., at 648 (regula­
tion “forc[ed] [the Boy Scouts] to accept members it [did]
not desire” (internal quotation marks omitted)); Roberts,
——————
13 The fact that a university “expends funds to encourage a diversity
of views from private speakers,” this Court has held, does not justify it
in “discriminat[ing] based on the viewpoint of private persons whose
speech it facilitates.” Rosenberger, 515 U. S., at 834. Applying limited­
public-forum analysis (which itself prohibits viewpoint discrimination)
to CLS’s expressive association claim, we emphasize, does not upset
this principle.

