22

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
Opinion of the Court

to all students.” Brief for Hastings 32; see Brief for
American Civil Liberties Union et al. as Amici Curiae 11.
Just as “Hastings does not allow its professors to host
classes open only to those students with a certain status or
belief,” so the Law School may decide, reasonably in our
view, “that the . . . educational experience is best promoted
when all participants in the forum must provide equal
access to all students.” Brief for Hastings 32. RSOs,
we count it significant, are eligible for financial assistance drawn from mandatory student-activity fees, see
supra, at 3; the all-comers policy ensures that no Hastings
student is forced to fund a group that would reject her as a
member.18
Second, the all-comers requirement helps Hastings
police the written terms of its Nondiscrimination Policy
without inquiring into an RSO’s motivation for member­
ship restrictions. To bring the RSO program within CLS’s
view of the Constitution’s limits, CLS proposes that Hast­
ings permit exclusion because of belief but forbid discrimi­
nation due to status. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 18. But that
proposal would impose on Hastings a daunting labor.
How should the Law School go about determining whether
a student organization cloaked prohibited status exclusion
in belief-based garb? If a hypothetical Male-Superiority
Club barred a female student from running for its presi­
dency, for example, how could the Law School tell whether
the group rejected her bid because of her sex or because,
by seeking to lead the club, she manifested a lack of belief
in its fundamental philosophy?
This case itself is instructive in this regard. CLS con­
tends that it does not exclude individuals because of sex­
——————
18 CLS notes that its “activities—its Bible studies, speakers, and din­
ners—are open to all students,” even if attendees are barred from
membership and leadership. Reply Brief 20. Welcoming all comers as
guests or auditors, however, is hardly equivalent to accepting all
comers as full-fledged participants.

