Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Syllabus
dize conduct disapproved by the State. So long as a public school
does not contravene constitutional limits, its choice to advance state
law goals stands on firm footing. Pp. 21–24.
(3) Hastings’ policy is all the more creditworthy in light of the
“substantial alternative channels that remain open for [CLS-student]
communication to take place.” Perry Ed. Assn. v. Perry Local Educa
tors’ Assn., 460 U. S. 37, 53. Hastings offered CLS access to school
facilities to conduct meetings and the use of chalkboards and certain
bulletin boards to advertise events. Although CLS could not take ad
vantage of RSO-specific methods of communication, the advent of
electronic media and social-networking sites lessens the importance
of those channels. Private groups, such as fraternities and sororities,
commonly maintain a presence at universities without official school
affiliation. CLS was similarly situated: It hosted a variety of activi
ties the year after Hastings denied it recognition, and the number of
students attending those meetings and events doubled. “The variety
and type of alternative modes of access present here,” in short, “com
pare favorably with those in other [limited public] forum cases where
[the Court has] upheld restrictions.” Id., at 53–54. Pp. 24–25.
(4) CLS’s arguments that the all-comers policy is not reason
able are unavailing. CLS contends that there can be no diversity of
viewpoints in a forum when groups are not permitted to form around
viewpoints, but this argument confuses CLS’s preferred policy with
constitutional limitation—the advisability of Hastings’ policy does
not control its permissibility. A State’s restriction on access to a lim
ited public forum, moreover, “need not be the most reasonable or the
only reasonable limitation.” Cornelius, 473 U. S., at 808. CLS’s con
tention that Hastings’ policy will facilitate hostile takeovers of RSOs
by student saboteurs bent on subverting a group’s mission is more
hypothetical than real; there is no history or prospect of RSO
hijackings at Hastings. Cf. National Endowment for Arts v. Finley,
524 U. S. 569, 584. Finally, CLS’s assertion that Hastings lacks any
legitimate interest in urging religious groups not to favor co
religionists erroneously focuses on the benefits the group must forgo,
while ignoring the interests of those it seeks to fence out. Hastings,
caught in the crossfire between a group’s desire to exclude and stu
dents’ demand for equal access, may reasonably draw a line in the
sand permitting all organizations to express what they wish but no
group to discriminate in membership. Pp. 25–28.
(d) Hastings’ all-comers policy is viewpoint neutral. Pp. 28–31.
(1) The policy draws no distinction between groups based on
their message or perspective; its requirement that all student groups
accept all comers is textbook viewpoint neutral. Pp. 28–29.
(2) Conceding that the policy is nominally neutral, CLS asserts

