Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

27

ALITO, J., dissenting

groups’ beliefs. Religious groups like CLS obviously en
gage in expressive association, and no legitimate state
interest could override the powerful effect that an accept
all-comers law would have on the ability of religious
groups to express their views. The State of California
surely could not demand that all Christian groups admit
members who believe that Jesus was merely human.
Jewish groups could not be required to admit anti-Semites
and Holocaust deniers. Muslim groups could not be forced
to admit persons who are viewed as slandering Islam.
While there can be no question that the State of Califor
nia could not impose such restrictions on all religious
groups in the State, the Court now holds that Hastings, a
state institution, may impose these very same require
ments on students who wish to participate in a forum that
is designed to foster the expression of diverse viewpoints.
The Court lists four justifications offered by Hastings in
defense of the accept-all-comers policy and, deferring to
the school’s judgment, ante, at 21, the Court finds all those
justifications satisfactory, ante, at 21–24. If we carry
out our responsibility to exercise our own independent
judgment, however, we must conclude that the justifica
tions offered by Hastings and accepted by the Court are
insufficient.
The Court first says that the accept-all-comers policy is
reasonable because it helps Hastings to ensure that “ ‘lead
ership, educational, and social opportunities’ ” are afforded
to all students. Ante, at 21–22 (quoting Brief for Respon
dent Hastings College of Law 32). The RSO forum, how
ever, is designed to achieve these laudable ends in a very
different way—by permitting groups of students, no mat
ter how small, to form the groups they want. In this way,
the forum multiplies the opportunity for students to serve
in leadership positions; it allows students to decide which
educational opportunities they wish to pursue through
participation in extracurricular activities; and it permits

