Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

27

Opinion of the Court

seek leadership positions in—groups pursuing missions
wholly at odds with their personal beliefs. And if a rogue
student intent on sabotaging an organization’s objectives
nevertheless attempted a takeover, the members of that
group would not likely elect her as an officer.
RSOs, moreover, in harmony with the all-comers policy,
may condition eligibility for membership and leadership
on attendance, the payment of dues, or other neutral
requirements designed to ensure that students join be­
cause of their commitment to a group’s vitality, not its
demise. See supra, at 4, n. 2. Several RSOs at Hastings
limit their membership rolls and officer slates in just this
way. See, e.g., App. 192 (members must “[p]ay their dues
on a timely basis” and “attend meetings regularly”); id., at
173 (members must complete an application and pay dues;
“[a]ny active member who misses a semester of regularly
scheduled meetings shall be dropped from rolls”); App. to
Pet. for Cert. 129a (“Only Hastings students who have
held membership in this organization for a minimum of
one semester shall be eligible to be an officer.”).23
Hastings, furthermore, could reasonably expect more
from its law students than the disruptive behavior CLS
hypothesizes—and to build this expectation into its educa­
tional approach. A reasonable policy need not anticipate
and preemptively close off every opportunity for avoidance
or manipulation. If students begin to exploit an all-comers
policy by hijacking organizations to distort or destroy their
missions, Hastings presumably would revisit and revise
its policy. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 41 (counsel for Hastings);
Brief for Hastings 38.
Finally, CLS asserts (and the dissent repeats, post, at
——————
23 As Hastings notes, other “checks [are also] in place” to prevent
RSO-sabotage. Brief for Hastings 43, n. 16. “The [Law] School’s
student code of conduct applies to RSO activities and, inter alia, prohib­
its obstruction or disruption, disorderly conduct, and threats.” Ibid.
(internal quotation marks and brackets omitted).

