36

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

views, ended the group’s affiliation with the national
organization, and changed the group’s message. The new
leadership would likely proclaim that the group was “vi
tal” but rectified, while CLS, I assume, would take the
view that the old group had suffered its “demise.”
Whether a change represents reform or transformation
may depend very much on the eye of the beholder.
JUSTICE KENNEDY takes a similarly mistaken tack. He
contends that CLS “would have a substantial case on the
merits if it were shown that the all-comers policy was . . .
used to infiltrate the group or challenge its leadership in
order to stifle its views,” ante, at 4 (concurring opinion),
but he does not explain on what ground such a claim could
succeed. The Court holds that the accept-all-comers policy
is viewpoint neutral and reasonable in light of the pur
poses of the RSO forum. How could those characteristics
be altered by a change in the membership of one of the
forum’s registered groups? No explanation is apparent.
In the end, the Court refuses to acknowledge the conse
quences of its holding. A true accept-all-comers policy
permits small unpopular groups to be taken over by stu
dents who wish to change the views that the group ex
presses. Rules requiring that members attend meetings,
pay dues, and behave politely, see ante, at 27, would not
eliminate this threat.
The possibility of such takeovers, however, is by no
means the most important effect of the Court’s holding.
There are religious groups that cannot in good conscience
agree in their bylaws that they will admit persons who do
not share their faith, and for these groups, the conse
quence of an accept-all-comers policy is marginalization.
See Brief for Evangelical Scholars (Officers and 24 Former
Presidents of the Evangelical Theological Society) et al. as
Amici Curiae 19 (affirmance in this case “will allow every
public college and university in the United States to ex
clude all evangelical Christian organizations”); Brief for

