4

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

STEVENS, J., concurring


has thus given no reason to be skeptical of the basic
design, function, or rationale of the Nondiscrimination
Policy.
What the policy does reflect is a judgment that dis
crimination by school officials or organizations on the
basis of certain factors, such as race and religion, is less
tolerable than discrimination on the basis of other factors.
This approach may or may not be the wisest choice in the
context of a Registered Student Organization (RSO) pro
gram. But it is at least a reasonable choice. Academic
administrators routinely employ antidiscrimination rules
to promote tolerance, understanding, and respect, and to
safeguard students from invidious forms of discrimination,
including sexual orientation discrimination.3 Applied to
the RSO context, these values can, in turn, advance nu
merous pedagogical objectives.
See post, at 3–4
(KENNEDY, J., concurring).
It is critical, in evaluating CLS’s challenge to the Non
discrimination Policy, to keep in mind that an RSO pro
gram is a limited forum—the boundaries of which may be
delimited by the proprietor. When a religious association,
or a secular association, operates in a wholly public set
ting, it must be allowed broad freedom to control its mem
bership and its message, even if its decisions cause offense
to outsiders. Profound constitutional problems would
arise if the State of California tried to “demand that all
Christian groups admit members who believe that Jesus
——————
3 In a case about an antidiscrimination policy that, even if ill-advised,
is explicitly directed at preventing religious discrimination, it is rather
hard to swallow the dissent’s ominous closing remarks. See post, at 37
(suggesting that today’s decision “point[s] a judicial dagger at the heart
of” religious groups in the United States (internal quotation marks
omitted)). Although the dissent is willing to see pernicious antireligi
ous motives and implications where there are none, it does not seem
troubled by the fact that religious sects, unfortunately, are not the only
social groups who have been persecuted throughout history simply for
being who they are.

