Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

name her assailant or provide any other information about
the assault. Jordan did not immediately notify her supe
riors of the assault Ortiz reported and Ortiz’s consequent
fears about her safety. Taking the incident report home in
her workbag, Jordan submitted it upon her return to work
two days later.
Ortiz endeavored to follow Jordan’s advice about staying
in the company of friends. But later in the day, feeling ill,
she returned to her room and fell asleep. Three other
inmates were in the room when Ortiz went to sleep. They
were gone when she awoke to find Schultz standing over
her, one hand fondling her left breast, the fingers of the
other hand inside her underwear penetrating her vagina.
Bright’s investigation began two days after the second
assault. During its course, Bright placed Ortiz in solitary
confinement. Ortiz maintained that Bright isolated her in
retaliation for her accusations against Schultz. Bright,
however, testified that she segregated Ortiz because Ortiz
continued to discuss the investigation with other inmates,
disobeying Bright’s repeated instructions to refrain from
speaking about it.
In her §1983 action, Ortiz claimed that Jordan did
nothing to ward off Schultz’s second sexual assault, de
spite Jordan’s awareness of the substantial risk of that
occurrence. Bright, Ortiz charged, retaliated against her
because she resisted Bright’s efforts to induce her to re
tract her accounts of Schultz’s assaults. (Schultz, having
resigned from state employment, could not be found and
served with process.) The District Court, noting multiple
factual disputes material to Ortiz’s claims and the officers’
defense of qualified immunity, denied summary judgment
to Jordan and Bright, 211 F. Supp. 2d, at 923–930;4 nei
——————
4 As to Jordan, the District Court determined, inter alia, that “a jury
could reasonably find . . . that Ortiz did inform Jordan of Schultz’s
identity,” and that “Ortiz made Jordan aware that [Ortiz] reasonably

