(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ORTIZ v. JORDAN ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–737.

Argued November 1, 2010—Decided January 24, 2011

Petitioner Ortiz, a former inmate in an Ohio reformatory, brought a
civil rights action under 42 U. S. C. §1983 seeking a judgment for
damages against superintending prison officers. On two consecutive
nights during her incarceration, Ortiz stated, she was sexually as
saulted by a corrections officer. Although she promptly reported the
first assault, she further alleged, respondent Jordan, a case manager
in her living unit, did nothing to ward off the second sexual assault,
despite Jordan’s awareness of the substantial risk of that occurrence.
Ortiz further charged that respondent Bright, a prison investigator,
retaliated against Ortiz for her accusations by placing her, shackled
and handcuffed, in solitary confinement in a cell without adequate
heat, clothing, bedding, or blankets. The responses of both officers,
she said, violated her right, safeguarded by the Eighth and Four
teenth Amendments, to reasonable protection from violence while in
custody.
Jordan and Bright moved for summary judgment on pleas of
“qualified immunity.” The District Court, noting factual disputes
material to Ortiz’s claims and the officers’ qualified immunity de
fenses, denied the summary judgment motion. The officers did not
appeal that ruling. The case proceeded to trial, and the jury returned
a verdict against Jordan and Bright. They sought judgment as a
matter of law, pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 50(a), both
at the close of Ortiz’s evidence and at the close of their own presenta
tion. But they did not contest the jury’s liability finding by renewing,
under Rule 50(b), their request for judgment as a matter of law. Nor
did they request a new trial under Rule 59(a). The District Court en
tered judgment for Ortiz. On appeal, Jordan and Bright urged, inter
alia, that the District Court should have granted their motion for

