2

ORTIZ v. JORDAN
Syllabus
summary judgment based on their qualified immunity defense. The
Sixth Circuit agreed and reversed the judgment entered on the jury’s
verdict, holding that both defendants were sheltered from Ortiz’s suit
by qualified immunity.

Held: A party may not appeal a denial of summary judgment after a
district court has conducted a full trial on the merits. A qualified
immunity plea, not upheld at the summary judgment stage, may be
pursued at trial, but at that stage, the plea must be evaluated in
light of the character and quality of the evidence received in court.
Ordinarily, orders denying summary judgment are interlocutory and
do not qualify as “final decisions” subject to appeal under 28 U. S. C.
§1291. Because a qualified immunity plea can spare an official not
only from liability but from trial, this Court has recognized a limited
exception to the categorization of summary judgment denials as non
appealable orders. Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U. S. 511, 525–526. The
exception permits an immediate appeal when summary judgment is
denied to a defendant who urges that qualified immunity shelters her
from suit. Id., at 527. Such an immediate appeal is not available,
however, when the district court determines that factual issues genu
inely in dispute preclude summary adjudication. Johnson v. Jones,
515 U. S. 304, 313. Here, Jordan and Bright sought no immediate
appeal from the denial of their summary judgment motion. Nor did
they avail themselves of Rule 50(b), which permits the entry of judg
ment, postverdict, for the verdict loser if the court finds the evidence
legally insufficient to sustain the verdict. Absent such a motion, an
appellate court is “powerless” to review the sufficiency of the evidence
after trial. Unitherm Food Systems, Inc. v. Swift-Eckrich, Inc., 546
U. S. 394, 405. This Court need not address the officers’ argument
that a qualified immunity plea raising a “purely legal” issue is pre
served for appeal by an unsuccessful summary judgment motion even
if the plea is not reiterated in a Rule 50(b) motion. Cases fitting that
bill typically involve disputes about the substance and clarity of pre
existing law. In this case, however, what was controverted was not
the pre-existing law, but the facts that could render Jordan and
Bright answerable under §1983, e.g., whether Jordan was adequately
informed, after the first assault, of the assailant’s identity and of
Ortiz’s fear of a further assault. Because the dispositive facts were
disputed, the officers’ qualified immunity defenses did not present
“ ‘neat abstract issues of law.’ ” Johnson, 515 U. S., at 317. To the ex
tent that Jordan and Bright urge Ortiz has not proved her case, they
were, by their own account, obliged to raise that sufficiency-of-the
evidence issue by postverdict motion for judgment as a matter of law
under Rule 50(b). They did not do so. The Sixth Circuit, therefore,
had no warrant to upset the jury’s decision on their liability. Pp. 6–

