Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

character as simply a step along the route to final judg
ment. See Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp., 337
U. S. 541, 546 (1949). Once the case proceeds to trial, the
full record developed in court supersedes the record exist
ing at the time of the summary judgment motion. A quali
fied immunity defense, of course, does not vanish when a
district court declines to rule on the plea summarily. The
plea remains available to the defending officials at trial;
but at that stage, the defense must be evaluated in light of
the character and quality of the evidence received in court.
When summary judgment is sought on a qualified im
munity defense, the court inquires whether the party
opposing the motion has raised any triable issue barring
summary adjudication. “[O]nce trial has been had,” how
ever, “the availability of official immunity should be de
termined by the trial record, not the pleadings nor the
summary judgment record.” 15A C. Wright, A. Miller, &
E. Cooper, Federal Practice & Procedure §3914.10, p. 684
(2d ed. 1992 and Supp. 2010). After trial, if defendants
continue to urge qualified immunity, the decisive question,
ordinarily, is whether the evidence favoring the party
seeking relief is legally sufficient to overcome the defense.
See Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 50(a), (b) (stating conditions on
which judgment may be granted as a matter of law).
In the case before us, the Court of Appeals, although
purporting to review the District Court’s denial of the
prison officials’ pretrial summary-judgment motion, 316
Fed. Appx., at 453, several times pointed to evidence
presented only at the trial stage of the proceedings, see
id., at 453–454. The appeals court erred, but not fatally,
by incorrectly placing its ruling under a summary
judgment headline. Its judgment was infirm, however,
because Jordan’s and Bright’s failure to renew their mo
tion for judgment as a matter of law under Federal Rule of
Civil Procedure 50(b) left the appellate forum with no
warrant to reject the appraisal of the evidence by “the

