10

ORTIZ v. JORDAN
Opinion of the Court

reasonable measures to abate it” (internal quotation
marks omitted)); Crawford-El v. Britton, 523 U. S. 574,
592 (1998) (First Amendment shields prisoners from
“retaliation for protected speech”).7 What was contro
verted, instead, were the facts that could render Jordan
and Bright answerable for crossing a constitutional line.
Disputed facts relevant to resolving the officials’ immunity
pleas included: Was Jordan adequately informed, after the
first assault, of the identity of the assailant, see App. 4,
and of Ortiz’s fear of a further assault? What, if anything,
could Jordan have done to distance Ortiz from the assail
ant, thereby insulating her against a second assault? See
id., at 4–5.8 Did Bright place and retain Ortiz in solitary
confinement as a retaliatory measure or as a control
needed to safeguard the integrity of the investigation? 9
In sum, the qualified immunity defenses asserted by
Jordan and Bright do not present “neat abstract issues of
law.” See Johnson, 515 U. S., at 317 (quoting 15A C.
——————
7 The Court of Appeals held that Ortiz’s complaint had not properly
tied her claim against Bright to the First Amendment. 316 Fed. Appx.,
at 455. “When an issue not raised by the pleadings is tried by the
parties’ express or implied consent,” however, “it must be treated in all
respects as if raised in the pleadings.” Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 15(b)(2).
Bright, like the District Court, recognized the First Amendment inter
ests at stake in Ortiz’s claim against her. See App. 11 (District Court,
in ruling on Rule 50(a) motion, inquired into Bright’s authority to
“regulat[e] speech of inmates”); id., at 20 (Bright’s counsel argued
that Ortiz’s segregation “would not have had a chilling effect” on her
speech).
8 Relevant to that matter, Bright testified at trial that, had Jordan
“reported the first incident immediately, ‘the proper people would
have taken a role in protecting Mrs. Ortiz.’ ” 316 Fed. Appx., at 457
(Daughtrey, J., dissenting).
9 Apart from Bright’s testimony, the defense produced no evidence
that Ortiz “continually” talked about the assaults or in any other way
interfered with the investigation. See Tr. 271, 397 (Bright’s testimony
acknowledging absence of any documentation regarding Ortiz’s conduct
during investigation).

