2

ORTIZ v. JORDAN
THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

notice of appeal in a civil case generally must be filed
“within thirty days” after entry of the relevant judgment
or order); Fed. Rule App. Proc. 4(a)(1)(A).
This case is the ordinary case. Even if the order deny
ing summary judgment qualified under the collateral
order doctrine as an appealable “final decision” under
§1291, the time for filing that appeal expired long before
trial. Ante, at 7–8. The Court of Appeals therefore lacked
jurisdiction to review the order. I would reverse the
judgment on that ground alone and remand for further
proceedings.
The majority proceeds to consider the additional ques
tion whether Jordan and Bright’s failure to file a Rule
50(b) motion deprived the Court of Appeals of the
“ ‘powe[r]’ ” to review the sufficiency of the trial evidence.
See ante, at 3–4, 8 (quoting Unitherm Food Systems, Inc.
v. Swift-Eckrich, Inc., 546 U. S. 394, 405 (2006)). The
Court does so because it concludes that the Court of
Appeals did not confine itself to the pretrial record and
instead reviewed the trial evidence. Ante, at 3.
I do not think it necessary to reach beyond the question
presented. It is clear from the opinion that the appeals
court reviewed the order denying summary judgment, and
that was error. The Court of Appeals explained that
“[a]lthough courts normally do not review the denial of a
summary judgment motion after a trial on the merits,”
this case “is an exception to th[at] rule.” 316 Fed. Appx.
449, 453 (CA6 2009). And to support that conclusion, the
court cited Goff v. Bise, 173 F. 3d 1068 (1999), in which
the Eighth Circuit reviewed an order denying summary
judgment. Finally, the Court of Appeals equated its re
view in this case to the review of an “interlocutory appea[l]
of qualified immunity,” which suggests that the court saw
itself as reviewing the interlocutory order denying sum
mary judgment. 316 Fed. Appx., at 453. Whether, in
erroneously reviewing the order denying summary judg

