(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNION PACIFIC RAILROAD CO. v. BROTHERHOOD 

OF LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS AND TRAINMEN 

GENERAL COMMITTEE OF ADJUSTMENT,

CENTRAL REGION 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–604.

Argued October 7, 2009—Decided December 8, 2009

The Railway Labor Act (RLA or Act) was enacted to promote peaceful
and efficient resolution of labor disputes. As amended, the Act man
dates arbitration of “minor disputes” before panels composed of two
representatives of labor and two of industry, with a neutral referee as
tiebreaker. Union Pacific R. Co. v. Price, 360 U. S. 601, 610–613. To
supply arbitrators, Congress established the National Railroad Ad
justment Board (NRAB or Board), a board of 34 private persons rep
resenting labor and industry in equal numbers. 45 U. S. C. §153
First (a). Before resorting to arbitration, employees and carriers
must exhaust the grievance procedures in their collective-bargaining
agreement (hereinafter CBA), see §153 First (i), a stage known as
“on-property” proceedings. As a final prearbitration step, the parties
must attempt settlement “in conference” between representatives of
the carrier and the grievant-employee. §152 Second, Sixth. The RLA
contains instructions concerning the place and time of conferences,
but does not “supersede the provisions of any agreement (as to con
ferences) . . . between the parties,” §152 Sixth; in common practice
the conference may be as informal as a telephone conversation. If the
parties fail to achieve resolution, either may refer the matter to the
NRAB. §153 First (i). Submissions to the Board must include “a full
statement of the facts and all supporting data bearing upon the dis
putes.” Ibid. Parties may seek court review of an NRAB panel order
on one or more stated grounds: “failure . . . to comply with the re
quirements of [the RLA], . . . failure of the order to conform, or con


2

UNION PACIFIC R. CO. v. LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS AND
TRAINMEN GEN. COMM. OF ADJUSTMENT
Syllabus

fine itself, to matters within the scope of the division’s jurisdiction, or
. . . fraud or corruption by a member of the division making the or
der.” §153 First (q). Courts of Appeals have divided on whether, in
addition to the statutory grounds for judicial review stated in §153
First (q), courts may review NRAB proceedings for due process viola
tions.
After petitioner Union Pacific Railroad Co. (hereinafter Carrier)
charged five of its employees with disciplinary violations, their union
(hereinafter Union) initiated grievance proceedings pursuant to the
CBA. The Union asserts that the parties conferenced all five dis
putes and the Carrier concedes that they conferenced at least two.
Dissatisfied with the outcome of the on-property proceedings, the Un
ion sought arbitration before the NRAB’s First Division. Both parties
filed submissions in the five cases, but neither mentioned conferenc
ing as a disputed matter. Yet, in each case, both parties necessarily
knew whether the Union and the Carrier had conferred; and the
Board’s governing rule, published in Circular One, which prescribes
Board procedures, instructs carriers and employees to “set forth all
relevant, argumentative facts,” 29 CFR §301.5(d), (e). Just prior to
the hearing, one of the arbitration panel’s industry representatives
objected, sua sponte, that the on-property record included no proof of
conferencing. The Carrier thereafter embraced that objection. The
referee allowed the Union to submit evidence of conferencing. The
Union did so, but it maintained that the proof-of-conferencing issue
was untimely raised, indeed forfeited, as the Carrier had not objected
before the date set for argument. The panel, in five identical deci
sions, dismissed the petitions for want of jurisdiction. The record
could not be supplemented to meet the no-proof-of-conferencing objec
tion, the panel reasoned, for as an appellate tribunal, the panel was
not empowered to consider de novo evidence and arguments. The Un
ion sought review in the Federal District Court, which affirmed the
Board’s decision. On appeal, the Seventh Circuit observed that the
“single question” at issue was whether written documentation of the
conference in the on-property record was a necessary prerequisite to
NRAB arbitration, and determined that there was no such prerequi
site in the statute or rules. But instead of resting its decision on the
Union’s primary, statute-based argument—that the panel erred in
ruling that it lacked jurisdiction over the cases—it reversed on the
ground that the NRAB’s proceedings were incompatible with due
process.
Held:
1. The Seventh Circuit erred in resolving the Union’s appeal under
a constitutional, rather than a statutory, headline. This Court
granted certiorari to address whether NRAB orders may be set aside


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

3

Syllabus
for failure to comply with due process notwithstanding §153 First
(q)’s limited grounds for review. But so long as a respondent does not
“seek to modify the judgment below,” true here, the respondent may
“rely upon any matter appearing in the record in support of the
judgment.” Blum v. Bacon, 457 U. S. 132, 137, n. 5. The Seventh
Circuit understood that the Union had pressed “statutory and consti
tutional” arguments, but observed that both arguments homed in on
a “single question”: is written documentation of the conference in the
on-property record a necessary prerequisite to NRAB arbitration?
Answering this “single question” in the negative, the Seventh Circuit
effectively resolved the Union’s core complaint. Because nothing in
the Act elevates to jurisdictional status the obligation to conference
minor disputes or to prove conferencing, a negative answer to the
“single question” leaves no doubt about the Union’s entitlement, in
accord with §153 First (q), to vacation of the Board’s orders. Given
this statutory ground for relief, there is no due process issue alive in
this case, and no warrant to answer a question that may be conse
quential in another case. Nevertheless, the grant of certiorari here
enables this Court to reduce confusion, clouding court as well as
Board decisions, over matters properly typed “jurisdictional.” Pp. 10–
12.
2. Congress authorized the Board to prescribe rules for presenting
and processing claims, §153 First (v), but Congress alone controls the
Board’s jurisdiction. By refusing to adjudicate the instant cases on
the false premise that it lacked “jurisdiction” to hear them, the NRAB
panel failed “to conform, or confine itself, to matters [Congress
placed] within the scope of [NRAB] jurisdiction,” §153 First (q).
Pp. 12–17.
(a) Not all mandatory “prescriptions, however emphatic, ‘are . . .
properly typed “jurisdictional.” ’ ” Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp., 546 U. S.
500, 510. Subject-matter jurisdiction properly comprehended refers
to a tribunal’s “ ‘power to hear a case,’ ” and “ ‘can never be forfeited or
waived.’ ” Id., at 514. In contrast, a “claim-processing rule” does not
reduce a tribunal’s adjudicatory domain and is ordinarily “forfeited if
the party asserting the rule waits too long to raise the point.” Kon
trick v. Ryan, 540 U. S. 443, 456. For example, this Court has held
nonjurisdictional and forfeitable the provision in Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 requiring complainants to file a timely discrimina
tion charge with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC) before proceeding to court, Zipes v. Trans World Airlines,
Inc., 455 U. S. 385, 393. In contrast, the Court has reaffirmed the ju
risdictional character of 28 U. S. C. §2107(a)’s time limitation for fil
ing a notice of appeal. Bowles v. Russell, 551 U. S. 205, 209–211.
Here, the requirement that parties to minor disputes, as a last


4

UNION PACIFIC R. CO. v. LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS AND
TRAINMEN GEN. COMM. OF ADJUSTMENT
Syllabus

chance prearbitration, attempt settlement “in conference,” is imposed
on carriers and grievants alike, but satisfaction of that obligation
does not condition the Board’s adjudicatory authority, which extends
to “all disputes between carriers and their employees ‘growing out of
grievances or out of the interpretation or application of agreements
concerning rates of pay, rules, or working conditions . . . ,’ ” Slocum v.
Delaware, L. & W. R. Co., 339 U. S. 239, 240 (quoting §153 First (i)).
When a CBA’s grievance procedure has not been followed, resort to
the Board would ordinarily be objectionable as premature, but the
conference requirement is independent of the CBA process. Rooted in
§152, the RLA’s “[g]eneral duties” section, and not moored to the
NRAB’s “[e]stablishment[,] . . . powers[,] and duties” set out in §153
First, conferencing is often informal in practice, and is no more “ju
risdictional” than is the presuit resort to the EEOC held nonjurisdic
tional and forfeitable in Zipes. And if the conference requirement is
not “jurisdictional,” then failure initially to submit proof of conferenc
ing cannot be of that genre. And although the Carrier alleges that
NRAB decisions support characterizing conferencing as jurisdic
tional, if the NRAB lacks authority to define its panels’ jurisdiction,
surely the panels themselves lack that authority. Furthermore,
NRAB panels have variously addressed the matter. Pp. 12–15.
(b) Neither the RLA nor Circular One could plausibly be read to
require, as a prerequisite to the NRAB’s exercise of jurisdiction, sub
mission of proof of conferencing. Instructions on party submissions
are claim-processing, not jurisdictional, rules. The Board itself has
recognized that conferencing may not be a “question in dispute,” and
when that is so, proof thereof need not accompany party submissions.
It makes sense to exclude at the arbitration stage newly presented
“data” supporting the employee’s grievance, 29 CFR §301(d)—
evidence the carrier had no opportunity to consider prearbitration.
But conferencing is not a fact bearing on the merits of a grievance.
Moreover, the RLA respects the parties’ right to order for themselves
the conference procedures they will follow. See 45 U. S. C. §152
Sixth. Pp. 16–17.
522 F. 3d 746, affirmed.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

