Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

tirely within the control of the person who delivers it. And
it is the speaker who takes credit—or blame—for what is
ultimately said.
This rule follows from Central Bank of Denver, N. A. v.
First Interstate Bank of Denver, N. A., 511 U. S. 164
(1994), in which we held that Rule 10b–5’s private right of
action does not include suits against aiders and abettors.
See id., at 180. Such suits—against entities that contrib
ute “substantial assistance” to the making of a statement
but do not actually make it—may be brought by the SEC,
see 15 U. S. C. A. §78t(e), but not by private parties. A
broader reading of “make,” including persons or entities
without ultimate control over the content of a statement,
would substantially undermine Central Bank. If persons
or entities without control over the content of a statement
could be considered primary violators who “made” the
statement, then aiders and abettors would be almost
nonexistent.6
This interpretation is further supported by our recent
decision in Stoneridge. There, investors sued “entities
who, acting both as customers and suppliers, agreed to
arrangements that allowed the investors’ company to
mislead its auditor and issue a misleading financial
statement.” 552 U. S., at 152–153. We held that dis
missal of the complaint was proper because the public
——————
6 The dissent correctly notes that Central Bank involved secondary,
not primary, liability. Post, at 4 (opinion of BREYER, J.). But for Cen
tral Bank to have any meaning, there must be some distinction be
tween those who are primarily liable (and thus may be pursued in
private suits) and those who are secondarily liable (and thus may not
be pursued in private suits).
We draw a clean line between the two—the maker is the person or
entity with ultimate authority over a statement and others are not. In
contrast, the dissent’s only limit on primary liability is not much of a
limit at all. It would allow for primary liability whenever “[t]he specific
relationships alleged . . . warrant [that] conclusion”—whatever that
may mean. Post, at 11.

