2

JANUS CAPITAL GROUP, INC. v. FIRST DERIVATIVE 

TRADERS
Syllabus 





Atlanta, Inc., 552 U. S. 148, 165, but, in analyzing the question at is
sue, the Court is mindful that it must give “narrow dimensions . . . to
a right . . . Congress did not authorize when it first enacted the stat
ute and did not expand when it revisited” it, id., at 167. Pp. 5–10.
(1) For Rule 10b–5 purposes, the maker of a statement is the
person or entity with ultimate authority over the statement, includ
ing its content and whether and how to communicate it. Without
control, a person or entity can merely suggest what to say, not
“make” a statement in its own right. This rule follows from Central
Bank of Denver, N. A. v. First Interstate Bank of Denver, N. A., 511
U. S. 164, 180, which held that Rule 10b–5’s private right of action
does not include suits against aiders and abettors who contribute
“substantial assistance” to the making of a statement but do not ac
tually make it. Reading “make” more broadly, to include persons or
entities lacking ultimate control over a statement, would substan
tially undermine Central Bank by rendering aiders and abettors al
most nonexistent. The Court’s interpretation is also suggested by
Stoneridge, 552 U. S., at 161, and accords with the narrow scope that
must be given the implied private right of action, id., at 167. Pp. 6–8.
(2) The Court rejects the Government’s contention that “make”
should be defined as “create,” thereby allowing private plaintiffs to
sue a person who provides the false or misleading information that
another person puts into a statement. Adopting that definition would
be inconsistent with Stoneridge, supra, at 161, which rejected a pri
vate Rule 10b–5 suit against companies involved in deceptive trans
actions, even when information about those transactions was later
incorporated into false public statements. First Derivative notes the
uniquely close relationship between a mutual fund and its invest
ment adviser, but the corporate formalities were observed, and reap
portionment of liability in light of this close relationship is properly
the responsibility of Congress, not the courts. Furthermore, First
Derivative’s rule would read into Rule 10b–5 a theory of liability
similar to—but broader than—control-person liability under §20(a).
Pp. 8–10.
(b) Although JCM may have been significantly involved in prepar
ing the prospectuses, it did not itself “make” the statements at issue
for Rule 10b–5 purposes. Its assistance in crafting what was said
was subject to Janus Investment Fund’s ultimate control. Pp. 10–12.
566 F. 3d 111, reversed.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, and ALITO, JJ., joined. BREYER, J., filed a
dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined.

