Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

BREYER, J., dissenting

implement measures to curb” a trading strategy called
“market timing.” Second Amended Complaint ¶6 (here­
inafter Complaint), App. to Pet. for Cert. 60a. The
complaint adds that Janus Management knew that these
“market timing” statements were false; that the
statements were material; that the market, in pricing
securities (including related securities) relied upon the
statements; that as a result, when the truth came out
(that Janus Management indeed permitted “market
timing” in the Janus Fund), the price of relevant shares
fell; and the false statements thereby caused respondent
significant economic losses. Complaint ¶¶4–10, id., at
60a–63a. Cf. Stoneridge Investment Partners, LLC v.
Scientific-Atlanta, Inc., 552 U. S. 148, 157 (2008) (identi­
fying the elements of “a typical §10(b) private action”).
The majority finds the complaint fatally flawed,
however, because (1) Rule 10b–5 says that no “person”
shall “directly or indirectly . . . make any untrue statement
of a material fact,” (2) the statements at issue appeared in
the Janus Fund’s prospectuses, and (3) only “the person or
entity with ultimate authority over the statement, includ­
ing its content and whether and how to communicate it”
can “make” a false statement. Ante, at 2–3, 5–6.
But where can the majority find legal support for the
rule that it enunciates? The English language does not
impose upon the word “make” boundaries of the kind the
majority finds determinative. Every day, hosts of corpo­
rate officials make statements with content that more
senior officials or the board of directors have “ultimate
authority” to control. So do cabinet officials make state­
ments about matters that the Constitution places within
the ultimate authority of the President. So do thousands,
perhaps millions, of other employees make statements
that, as to content, form, or timing, are subject to the
control of another.
Nothing in the English language prevents one from

