6

JANUS CAPITAL GROUP, INC. v. FIRST DERIVATIVE 

TRADERS
Opinion of the Court 


ners, LLC v. Scientific-Atlanta, Inc., 552 U. S. 148, 165
(2008), but “[c]oncerns with the judicial creation of a pri
vate cause of action caution against its expansion,” ibid.
Thus, in analyzing whether JCM “made” the statements
for purposes of Rule 10b–5, we are mindful that we must
give “narrow dimensions . . . to a right of action Congress
did not authorize when it first enacted the statute and did
not expand when it revisited the law.” Id., at 167.
1
One “makes” a statement by stating it. When “make” is
paired with a noun expressing the action of a verb, the
resulting phrase is “approximately equivalent in sense” to
that verb. 6 Oxford English Dictionary 66 (def. 59) (1933)
(hereinafter OED); accord, Webster’s New International
Dictionary 1485 (def. 43) (2d ed. 1934) (“Make followed by
a noun with the indefinite article is often nearly equiva
lent to the verb intransitive corresponding to that noun”).
For instance, “to make a proclamation” is the approximate
equivalent of “to proclaim,” and “to make a promise” ap
proximates “to promise.” See 6 OED 66 (def. 59). The
phrase at issue in Rule 10b–5, “[t]o make any . . . state
ment,” is thus the approximate equivalent of “to state.”
For purposes of Rule 10b–5, the maker of a statement is
the person or entity with ultimate authority over the
statement, including its content and whether and how to
communicate it. Without control, a person or entity can
merely suggest what to say, not “make” a statement in its
own right. One who prepares or publishes a statement on
behalf of another is not its maker. And in the ordinary
case, attribution within a statement or implicit from sur
rounding circumstances is strong evidence that a state
ment was made by—and only by—the party to whom it is
attributed. This rule might best be exemplified by the
relationship between a speechwriter and a speaker. Even
when a speechwriter drafts a speech, the content is en




