4

JANUS CAPITAL GROUP, INC. v. FIRST DERIVATIVE 

TRADERS
BREYER, J., dissenting 





saying that several different individuals, separately or
together, “make” a statement that each has a hand in
producing. For example, as a matter of English, one can
say that a national political party has made a statement
even if the only written communication consists of uniform
press releases issued in the name of local party branches;
one can say that one foreign nation has made a statement
even when the officials of a different nation (subject to its
influence) speak about the matter; and one can say that
the President has made a statement even if his press
officer issues a communication, sometimes in the press
officer’s own name. Practical matters related to context,
including control, participation, and relevant audience,
help determine who “makes” a statement and to whom
that statement may properly be “attributed,” see ante, at
11, n. 11—at least as far as ordinary English is concerned.
Neither can the majority find support in any relevant
precedent. The majority says that its rule “follows from
Central Bank of Denver, N. A. v. First Interstate Bank of
Denver, N. A., 511 U. S. 164 (1994),” in which the Court
“held that Rule 10b–5’s private right of action does not
include suits against aiders and abettors.” Ante, at 7. But
Central Bank concerns a different matter. And it no more
requires the majority’s rule than free air travel for small
children requires free air travel for adults.
Central Bank is a case about secondary liability, liability
attaching, not to an individual making a false statement,
but to an individual helping someone else do so. Central
Bank involved a bond issuer accused of having made
materially false statements, which overstated the values
of property that backed the bonds. Central Bank also
involved a defendant that was a bank, serving as inden­
ture trustee, which was supposed to check the bond is­
suer’s valuations. The plaintiffs claimed that the bank
delayed its valuation checks and thereby helped the issuer
make its false statements credible. The question before

