8

JANUS CAPITAL GROUP, INC. v. FIRST DERIVATIVE 

TRADERS
Opinion of the Court 





could not have relied on the entities’ undisclosed deceptive
acts. Id., at 166–167. Significantly, in reaching that
conclusion we emphasized that “nothing [the defendants]
did made it necessary or inevitable for [the company] to
record the transactions as it did.” Id., at 161.7 This em
phasis suggests the rule we adopt today: that the maker of
a statement is the entity with authority over the content
of the statement and whether and how to communicate it.
Without such authority, it is not “necessary or inevitable”
that any falsehood will be contained in the statement.
Our holding also accords with the narrow scope that we
must give the implied private right of action. Id., at 167.
Although the existence of the private right is now settled,
we will not expand liability beyond the person or entity
that ultimately has authority over a false statement.
2
The Government contends that “make” should be de
fined as “create.” Brief for United States as Amicus Cu
riae 14–15 (citing Webster’s New International Dictionary
1485 (2d ed. 1958) (defining “make” as “[t]o cause to exist,
appear, or occur”)). This definition, although perhaps
appropriate when “make” is directed at an object unasso
ciated with a verb (e.g., “to make a chair”), fails to capture
its meaning when directed at an object expressing the
action of a verb.
Adopting the Government’s definition of “make” would
also lead to results inconsistent with our precedent. The
Government’s definition would permit private plaintiffs to
sue a person who “provides the false or misleading infor
mation that another person then puts into the statement.”
——————
7 We agree that “no one in Stoneridge contended that the equipment
suppliers were, in fact, the makers of the cable company’s misstate
ments.” Post, at 8. If Stoneridge had addressed whether the equipment
suppliers were “makers,” today’s decision would be unnecessary. The
point is that Stoneridge’s analysis suggests that they were not.

