Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

The majority also refers to Stoneridge, but that case
offers it no help. In Stoneridge, firms that supplied
electronic equipment to a cable television company agreed
with the cable television company to enter into a series of
fraudulent sales and purchases, for example, a sale at an
unusually high price, thereby providing funds which the
suppliers would use to buy advertising from the cable
television company. These arrangements enabled the
cable television company to fool its accountants (and
ultimately the public) into believing that it had more
revenue (for example, advertising revenue) than it really
had. As part of the agreement, the companies exchanged
letters and backdated contracts to conceal the fraud.
Investors subsequently sued the cable television company,
some of its officers, its auditors, and the equipment
suppliers, as well, claiming that all of them had engaged
in a scheme to defraud securities purchasers. In respect to
most of the defendants, investors identified allegedly
materially false statements contained in the cable
television company’s financial statements or similar documents. But in respect to the equipment suppliers, in­
vestors claimed that the relevant deceptive conduct was
in the letters, backdated contracts, and related oral
conversations about the scheme. The investors argued
that the equipment suppliers, “by participating in the
transactions,” violated §10(b) and Rule 10b–5. Stoneridge,
552 U. S., at 155.
The Court held that the equipment suppliers could not
be found liable for securities fraud in a private suit under
§10(b). But in doing so, it did not deny that the equipment
suppliers had made the false statements contained in the
letters, contracts, and conversations. See id., at 158–159.
Rather, the Court said the issue in the case was whether
“any deceptive statement or act respondents made was not
actionable because it did not have the requisite proximate
relation to the investors’ harm.” Ibid. (emphasis added).

