Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

BREYER, J., dissenting

the Court concerned the bank’s liability—a secondary
liability for “aiding and abetting” the bond issuer, who (on
the theory set forth) was primarily liable.
The Court made this clear. The question presented was
“whether private civil liability under §10(b) extends . . . to
those who do not engage in the manipulative or deceptive
practice, but who aid and abet the violation.” 511 U. S., at
167 (emphasis added). The Court wrote that “aiding and
abetting liability reaches persons who do not engage in the
proscribed activities at all, but who give a degree of aid to
those who do.” Id., at 176 (emphasis added). The Court
described civil law “aiding and abetting” as “ ‘know[ing]
that the other’s conduct constitutes a breach of duty and
giv[ing] substantial assistance or encouragement to the
other . . . .’ ” Id., at 181 (quoting Restatement (Second) of
Torts §876(b) (1977); emphasis added). And it reviewed a
Court of Appeals decision that had defined the elements of
aiding and abetting as “(1) a primary violation of §10(b);
(2) recklessness by the aider and abettor as to the exis­
tence of the primary violation; and (3) substantial assis
tance given to the primary violator by the aider and abet­
tor.” 511 U. S., at 168 (emphasis added). Faced with this
question, the Court answered that §10(b) and Rule 10b–5
do not provide for this kind of “aiding and abetting” liabil­
ity in private suits.
By way of contrast, the present case is about primary
liability—about individuals who allegedly themselves
“make” materially false statements, not about those who
help others to do so. The question is whether Janus Man­
agement is primarily liable for violating the Act, not
whether it simply helped others violate the Act. The
Central Bank defendant concededly did not make the false
statements in question (others did), while here the defen­
dants allegedly did make those statements. And a rule
(the majority’s rule) absolving those who allegedly did
make false statements does not “follow from” a rule (Cen

