2

JANUS CAPITAL GROUP, INC. v. FIRST DERIVATIVE 

TRADERS
Opinion of the Court 





by mutual fund investors. Janus Investment Fund has no
assets apart from those owned by the investors. JCM
provides Janus Investment Fund with investment advi
sory services, which include “the management and admin
istrative services necessary for the operation of [Janus]
Fun[d],” App. 225a, but the two entities maintain legal
independence. At all times relevant to this case, all of
the officers of Janus Investment Fund were also officers of
JCM, but only one member of Janus Investment Fund’s
board of trustees was associated with JCM. This is more
independence than is required: By statute, up to 60 per
cent of the board of a mutual fund may be composed of
“interested persons.” See 54 Stat. 806, as amended, 15
U. S. C. §80a–10(a); see also 15 U. S. C. A. §80a–2(a)(19)
(2009 ed. and Feb. 2011 Supp.) (defining “interested
person”).
As the securities laws require, Janus Investment Fund
issued prospectuses describing the investment strategy
and operations of its mutual funds to investors. See 15
U. S. C. §§77b(a)(10), 77e(b)(2), 80a–8(b), 80a–2(a)(31),
80a–29(a)–(b). The prospectuses for several funds repre
sented that the funds were not suitable for market timing
and can be read to suggest that JCM would implement
policies to curb the practice.1 For example, the Janus
——————
1 Market timing is a trading strategy that exploits time delay in mu
tual funds’ daily valuation system. The price for buying or selling
shares of a mutual fund is ordinarily determined by the next net asset
value (NAV) calculation after the order is placed. The NAV calculation
usually happens once a day, at the close of the major U. S. markets.
Because of certain time delays, however, the values used in these
calculations do not always accurately reflect the true value of the
underlying assets. For example, a fund may value its foreign securities
based on the price at the close of the foreign market, which may have
occurred several hours before the calculation. But events might have
taken place after the close of the foreign market that could be expected
to affect their price. If the event were expected to increase the price of
the foreign securities, a market-timing investor could buy shares of a

