OCTOBER TERM, 2010

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

WALKER, WARDEN, ET AL. v. MARTIN
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–996.

Argued November 29, 2010—Decided February 23, 2011

While most States set determinate time limits for collateral relief appli
cations, California courts “appl[y] a general ‘reasonableness’ stan
dard” to judge whether a habeas petition is timely filed, Carey v. Saf
fold, 536 U. S. 214, 222. Under that standard, “a [habeas] petition
should be filed as promptly as the circumstances allow . . . ,” In re
Clark, 5 Cal. 4th 750, 765, n. 5, 855 P. 2d 729, 738, n. 5. Three deci
sions, Clark, In re Robbins, 18 Cal. 4th 770, 959 P. 2d 311, and In re
Gallego, 18 Cal. 4th 825, 959 P. 2d 290, describe California’s timeli
ness requirement. A prisoner must seek habeas relief without “sub
stantial delay,” e.g., Robbins, 18 Cal. 4th, at 780, 959 P. 3d, at 317, as
“measured from the time the petitioner or counsel knew, or reasona
bly should have known, of the information offered in support of the
claim and the legal basis of the claim,” id., at 787, 959 P. 2d, at 322.
All California courts have “original jurisdiction in habeas corpus pro
ceedings.” Cal. Const., Art. VI, §10. Because a habeas petitioner
may skip over the lower courts and file directly in the California Su
preme Court, that court rules on a staggering number of habeas peti
tions each year. A summary denial citing Clark and Robbins means
that the petition is rejected as untimely. California courts, however,
have discretion to bypass a timeliness issue and, instead, summarily
reject the petition for want of merit.
Respondent Martin was convicted of murder and robbery, and was
sentenced to life in prison without parole. After the California Su
preme Court denied Martin’s first state habeas petition, he filed a
federal habeas petition. The District Court ordered a stay to permit
Martin to return to state court to raise ineffective-assistance-of
counsel claims he had not previously aired. Martin raised those
claims in his second habeas petition in the California Supreme Court,


2

WALKER v. MARTIN
Syllabus
but gave no reason for his failure to assert the additional claims until
nearly five years after his sentence and conviction became final. The
California Supreme Court denied the petition, citing Clark and Rob
bins. Having exhausted his state-court remedies, Martin filed an
amended federal habeas petition. The District Court dismissed his
belatedly asserted claims as untimely under California law. The
Ninth Circuit vacated that order and directed the District Court to
determine the “adequacy” of the State’s time bar. Again rejecting
Martin’s petition, the District Court found California’s bar an ade
quate state ground for denying Martin’s new pleas. Concluding that
the time bar was not firmly defined or consistently applied, the Ninth
Circuit remanded for a determination of the merits of Martin’s
claims.

Held: California’s timeliness requirement qualifies as an independent
state ground adequate to bar habeas corpus relief in federal court.
Pp. 7–13.
(a) Absent showings of “cause” and “prejudice,” see Wainwright v.
Sykes, 433 U. S. 72, 84–85, federal habeas relief will be unavailable
when (1) “a state court [has] declined to address a prisoner’s federal
claims because the prisoner had failed to meet a state procedural re
quirement,” and (2) “the state judgment rests on independent and
adequate state procedural grounds,” Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S.
722, 729–730. P. 7.
(b) A “rule can be ‘firmly established’ and ‘regularly followed,’ ” and
therefore adequate, “even if the appropriate exercise of discretion
may permit consideration of a federal claim in some cases but not
others.” Beard v. Kindler, 558 U. S. ___, ___. California’s time rule,
although discretionary, meets this “firmly established” criterion. The
California Supreme Court framed the requirement in a trilogy of
cases, instructing habeas petitioners to “alleg[e] with specificity” the
absence of substantial delay, good cause for delay, or eligibility for
one of four exceptions to the time bar. Gallego, 18 Cal. 4th, at 838,
959 P. 2d, at 299. And California’s case law made it plain that Mar
tin’s nearly five-year delay was “substantial.” See, e.g., id., at 829–
831, 838, and n. 13, 959 P. 2d, at 293–294, 299, and n. 13. The Court
finds unpersuasive Martin’s argument that the terms “reasonable
time” period and “substantial delay” make California’s rule too vague
to be regarded as “firmly established.” While indeterminate language
is typical of discretionary rules, application of those rules in particu
lar circumstances can supply the requisite clarity. Congressional
statutes and this Court’s decisions have employed time limitations
that are not stated in precise, numerical terms. For example, current
federal habeas prescriptions limit the time for filing a petition to one
year. The clock runs from “the date on which the [supporting] facts


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
. . . could have been discovered through . . . due diligence.” 28
U. S. C. §2255(f)(4). Although “ ‘due diligence’ is an inexact measure
of how much delay is too much,” Johnson v. United States, 544 U. S.
295, 309, n. 7, “use of an imprecise standard is no justification for de
priving [a rule’s] language of any meaning,” ibid. Nor is California’s
time rule vulnerable on the ground that it is not regularly followed.
Each year, the California State Supreme Court summarily denies
hundreds of habeas petitions by citing Clark and Robbins. Contrary
to Martin’s argument, California’s time bar is not infirm simply be
cause a court may opt to bypass the Clark/Robbins assessment and
summarily dismiss a petition on the merits, if that is the easier path.
Nor should a discretionary rule be disregarded automatically upon a
showing that outcomes under the rule vary from case to case. Discre
tion enables a court to home in on case-specific considerations and to
avoid the harsh results that may attend consistent application of an
unyielding rule. A state ground may be found inadequate when a
court has exercised its discretion in a surprising or unfair manner,
but Martin makes no such contention here. Pp. 7–12.
(c) This decision leaves unaltered the Court’s repeated recognition
that federal courts must carefully examine state procedural require
ments to ensure that they do not operate to discriminate against
claims of federal rights. See, e.g., Brown v. Western R. Co. of Ala.,
338 U. S. 294, 298–299. On the record here, however, there is no ba
sis for concluding that California’s rule operates in such a discrimina
tory manner. P. 13.
357 Fed. Appx. 793, reversed.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

