8

SCHWAB v. REILLY
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

B
The Court’s account, however, shuts from sight the vital
part played by the fourth entry on Schedule C—current
market value—when a capped exemption is claimed. A
debtor who estimates a market value below the cap, and
lists an identical amount as the value of her claimed ex­
emption, thereby signals that her aim is to keep the listed
property in her possession, outside the estate-in­
bankruptcy. In contrast, a debtor who estimates a market
value above the cap, and above the value of her claimed
exemption, thereby recognizes that she cannot shelter the
property itself and that the trustee may seek to sell it for
whatever it is worth.7 Schedule C’s final column, in other
words, alerts the trustee whether the debtor is claiming a
right to retain the listed property itself as her own, a right
secured to her if the trustee files no timely objection.8
Because an asset’s market value is key to determining
——————
7 By authorizing exemption of assets that a debtor would want to
keep in kind, such as her jewelry and car, but limiting the exemptible
value of this property, Congress struck a balance between debtors’
and creditors’ interests: Debtors can reclaim items helpful to their
fresh start after bankruptcy, but only if those items are of modest
value. Assets of larger worth, however, are subject to liquidation so
that creditors may obtain a portion of the item’s value. Cf. In re Price,
370 F. 3d 362, 378 (CA3 2004) (“[B]ankruptcy law is bilateral, replete
with protections and policy considerations favoring both debtors and
creditors.”).
8 The significance of market value is what differentiates capped ex­
emptions from uncapped ones that permit debtors to exempt certain
property in kind regardless of its worth. See supra, at 7, n. 5. For
uncapped exemptions, the nature of the property the debtor has re­
claimed is clear: If the exemption is valid, the debtor gets the asset in
full every time. For capped exemptions, however, market value is a
crucial component in determining whether the debtor gets the item
itself or a sum of money representing a share of the item’s liquidation
value. Reading Bankruptcy Rule 4003(b) to require objections to
valuation thus does not, as the Court contends, “elid[e] the distinction”
between capped and uncapped exemptions, ante, at 12 (emphasis
added), but instead accounts for that distinction.

