2

SCHWAB v. REILLY
Syllabus
her creditors on notice that she intended to exempt the equipment’s
full value, even if it turned out to be more than the amounts she de
clared and that the Code allowed. She asserted that the estate had
forfeited its claim to any portion of that value because Schwab had
not objected within the Rule 4003(b) period, and that she would dis
miss her petition rather than sell her equipment.
The Bankruptcy Court denied Schwab’s motion and Reilly’s condi
tional motion to dismiss. The District Court denied Schwab relief, re
jecting his argument that neither the Code nor Rule 4003(b) requires
a trustee to object to a claimed exemption where the amount the
debtor declares as the exemption’s value is within the limits the Code
prescribes. Affirming, the Third Circuit agreed that Reilly’s Schedule
C entries indicated her intent to exempt the equipment’s full value.
Relying on Taylor, it held that Schwab’s failure to object entitled
Reilly to exempt the full value of her equipment, even though that
value exceeded the amounts that Reilly declared and the Code per
mitted.

Held: Because Reilly gave “the value of [her] claimed exemption[s]” on
Schedule C dollar amounts within the range the Code allows for what
it defines as the “property claimed as exempt,” Schwab was not re
quired to object to the exemptions in order to preserve the estate’s
right to retain any value in the equipment beyond the value of the
exempt interest. Pp. 6–23.
(a) Reilly’s complicated view of the trustee’s statutory obligation,
and her reading of Schedule C, does not accord with the Code. Pp. 6–
15.
(1) The parties agree that this case is governed by §522(l), which
states that a Chapter 7 debtor must “file a list of property that the
debtor claims as exempt under subsection (b) of this section,” and
that “[u]nless a party in interest objects, the property claimed as ex
empt on such list is exempt.” Reilly asserts that the “property
claimed as exempt” refers to all of the information on Schedule C, in
cluding the estimated market value of each asset. Schwab and
amicus United States counter that because the Code defines such
property as an interest, not to exceed a certain dollar amount, in a
particular asset, not as the asset itself, the value of the property
claimed exempt should be judged on the dollar value the debtor as
signs the interest, not on the value the debtor assigns the asset.
Pp. 6–9.
(2) Schwab and the United States are correct. The portion of
§522(l) that resolves this case is not, as Reilly asserts, the provision
stating that the “property claimed as exempt on [Schedule C] is ex
empt” unless an interested party objects. Rather, it is the portion
that defines the objection’s target, namely, the “list of property that

