12

SCHWAB v. REILLY
Opinion of the Court

elides the distinction between these provisions and provi­
sions such as §§522(d)(5) and (6), see, e.g., Duncan v.
Walker, 533 U. S. 167, 174 (2001), particularly based upon
an entry on Schedule C—Reilly’s estimate of her equip­
ment’s market value—to which the Code does not refer in
defining the “property claimed as exempt.”10
For all of these reasons, we conclude that Schwab was
entitled to evaluate the propriety of the claimed exemp­
tions based on three, and only three, entries on Reilly’s
Schedule C: the description of the business equipment in
which Reilly claimed the exempt interests; the Code provi­
——————
10 The dissent’s approach does not avoid these concerns. The dissent
insists that “a debtor’s market valuation [of the equipment in which she
claims an exempt interest] is an essential factor in determining the
nature of the ‘interest’ [the] debtor lists as exempt” (and thus in deter­
mining whether the claimed exemption is objectionable), because
“without comparing [the debtor’s] market valuation of the equipment to
the value of her claimed exemption” the trustee “could not comprehend
whether [the debtor] claimed a monetary or an in-kind ‘interest’ in [the]
equipment.” Post, at 9, n. 9. This argument overlooks the fact that
there is another way the trustee could discern from the “face of the
debtor’s filings,” post, at 7, n. 6, whether the debtor claimed as exempt
a “monetary or an in-kind ‘interest’ in” her equipment, post, at 9, n. 9:
The trustee could simply consult the Code provisions the debtor listed
as governing the exemption in question. Here, those provisions,
§§522(d)(5) and (d)(6), expressly describe the exempt interest as an
“interest” “not to exceed” a specified dollar amount. Accordingly, it was
entirely appropriate for Schwab to view Reilly’s schedule entries as
exempting an interest in her business equipment in the (declared and
unobjectionable) amounts of $1,850 and $8,868. Viewing the entries
otherwise, i.e., as exempting the equipment in kind or in full no matter
what its dollar value, would unnecessarily treat the exemption as
violating the limits imposed by the Code provisions that govern it, as
well as ignore the distinction between those provisions and the provi­
sions that “authoriz[e] reclamation of the property in full without any
cap on value,” post, at 7, n. 5. And it would do all of this based on
information (identical dollar amounts in columns three and four of
Schedule C) that Schwab and one of his amici say often result from a
default setting in commercial bankruptcy software. See Reply Brief for
Petitioner 15; Brief for Nat. Assn. of Bankruptcy Trustees 13, n. 15.

