Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

sions governing the claimed exemptions; and the amounts
Reilly listed in the column titled “value of claimed exemp­
tion.” In reaching this conclusion, we do not render the
market value estimate on Reilly’s Schedule C superfluous.
We simply confine the estimate to its proper role: aiding
the trustee in administering the estate by helping him
identify assets that may have value beyond the dollar
amount the debtor claims as exempt, or whose full value
may not be available for exemption because a portion of
the interest is, for example, encumbered by an unavoidable
lien. See, e.g., 3 W. Norton, Bankruptcy Law and Practice
§56:7 (3d ed. 2009); Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae
16; Dept. of Justice, Executive Office for U. S. Trustees,
Handbook for Chapter 7 Trustees, p. 8–1 (2005), http://
www.justice.gov /ust/eo/private_trustee/library/chapter07/
docs/7handbook1008/Ch7_Handbook.pdf (as visited June
14, 2010, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file). As
noted, most assets become property of the estate upon
commencement of a bankruptcy case, see 11 U. S. C. §541,
and exemptions represent the debtor’s attempt to reclaim
those assets or, more often, certain interests in those
assets, to the creditors’ detriment. Accordingly, it is at
least useful for a trustee to be able to compare the value of
the claimed exemption (which typically represents the
debtor’s interest in a particular asset) with the asset’s
estimated market value (which belongs to the estate sub­
ject to any valid exemption) without having to consult
separate schedules.11
——————
11 The

dissent’s argument that the estimate plays a greater role, and
is “vital,” post, at 8, to determining whether the value a debtor assigns
the “property claimed as exempt” (here, an interest in certain business
equipment) is objectionable, see post, at 8−9, lacks statutory support
because the governing Code provisions phrase the exemption limit as a
simple dollar amount. The dissent’s view, see post, at 7−9, might be
plausible if the Code stated that the debtor could exempt an interest in
her equipment “not to exceed” a certain percentage of the equipment’s

