18

SCHWAB v. REILLY
Opinion of the Court

amount the debtor lists as the “value claimed exempt” is
not within statutory limits, a test the value ($ unknown)
in Taylor failed, and the values ($8,868 and $1,850) in this
case pass.
We adhere to this test. Doing otherwise would not only
depart from Taylor and ignore the presumption that par­
ties act lawfully and with knowledge of the law, cf. United
States v. Budd, 144 U. S. 154, 163 (1892); it would also
require us to expand the statutory definition of “property
claimed as exempt” and the universe of information an
interested party must consider in evaluating the validity
of a claimed exemption. Even if the Code allowed such
expansions, they would be ill advised. As evidenced by the
differences between Reilly’s Schedule C and the schedule
in Taylor, preprinted bankruptcy schedules change over
time. Basing the definition of the “property claimed as
exempt,” and thus an interested party’s obligation to
object under §522(l), on inferences that party must draw
from evolving forms, rather than on the facial validity of
the value the debtor assigns the “property claimed as
exempt” as defined by the Code, would undermine the
predictability the statute is designed to provide.17 For all
of these reasons, we take Reilly’s exemptions at face value
and find them unobjectionable under the Code, so the
——————
17 Reilly insists that our conclusion should nonetheless be avoided
because “procedures that burden the debtor’s exemption entitlements,
like those that impair a debtor’s discharge generally, are to be con­
strued narrowly.” Brief for Respondent 33 (citing Kawaauhau v.
Geiger, 523 U. S. 57, 62 (1998)). This argument misses the mark for
two reasons. First, the only burdens our conclusion imposes are bur­
dens the Code itself prescribes, specifically, the burdens the Code
places on debtors to state their claimed exemptions accurately and to
conform such claims to statutory limits. Second, and in any event,
Geiger and the other cases Reilly cites emphasize in the discharge
context the importance of limiting exceptions to discharge to “those
plainly expressed,” a principle that supports our approach here. Ibid.
(internal quotation marks omitted).

