Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
the debtor claims as exempt under subsection (b).” Section 522(b)
does not define the “property claimed as exempt” by reference to the
estimated market value. It refers only to property defined in §522(d),
which in turn lists 12 categories of property that a debtor may claim
as exempt. Most of these categories and all the ones applicable here
define “property” as the debtor’s “interest”—up to a specified dollar
amount—in the assets described in the category, not as the assets
themselves. Schwab had no duty to object to the property Reilly
claimed as exempt because its stated value was within the limits the
Code allows. Reilly’s contrary view does not withstand scrutiny be
cause it defines the target of a trustee’s objection based on Schedule
C’s language and dictionary definitions of “property” at odds with the
Code’s definition. The Third Circuit failed to account for the Code’s
definition and for provisions that permit debtors to exempt certain
property in kind or in full regardless of value. See, e.g., §522(d)(9).
Schwab was entitled to evaluate the claimed exemptions’ propriety
based on three Schedule C entries: the description of the business
equipment in which Reilly claimed the exempt interests; the Code
provisions governing the claimed exemptions; and the amounts Reilly
listed in the column titled “value of claimed exemption.” This conclu
sion does not render Reilly’s market value estimate superfluous. It
simply confines that estimate to its proper role: aiding the trustee in
administering the estate by helping him identify assets that may
have value beyond the amount the debtor claims as exempt, or whose
full value may not be available for exemption. This interpretation is
consistent with the historical treatment of bankruptcy exemptions.
Pp. 9–15.
(b) Taylor does not dictate a contrary conclusion. While both Tay
lor and this case concern the consequences of a trustee’s failure to ob
ject to a claimed exemption within Rule 4003’s time period, Taylor es
tablishes and applies the straightforward proposition that an
interested party must object to a claimed exemption if the amount
the debtor lists as the “value claimed exempt” is not within statutory
limits. In Taylor, the value listed in Schedule C (“$ unknown”) was
not plainly within those limits, but here, the values ($8,868 and
$1,850) are within Code limits and thus do not raise the warning flag
present in Taylor. Departing from Taylor would not only ignore the
presumption that parties act lawfully and with knowledge of the law;
it would also require the Court to expand the statutory definition of
“property claimed as exempt” and the universe of information an in
terested party must consider in evaluating an exemption’s validity.
Even if the Code allowed such expansions, they would be ill advised.
Basing the definition of “property claimed exempt,” and thus an in
terested party’s obligation to object under §522(l), on inferences that

