Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of the Court

FMV.”19 Such a declaration will encourage the trustee to
object promptly to the exemption if he wishes to challenge
it and preserve for the estate any value in the asset be­
yond relevant statutory limits.20 If the trustee fails to
object, or if the trustee objects and the objection is over­
ruled, the debtor will be entitled to exclude the full value
of the asset. If the trustee objects and the objection is
sustained, the debtor will be required either to forfeit the
portion of the exemption that exceeds the statutory allow­
ance, or to revise other exemptions or arrangements with
her creditors to permit the exemption. See Fed. Rule
——————
19 The dissent’s observations about the poor fit between our admoni­
tion and a form entry calling for a dollar amount, see post, at 15, simply
reflect the tension between the Code’s definition of “property claimed
as exempt” (i.e., an interest, not to exceed a certain dollar amount, in
Reilly’s business equipment) and Reilly’s attempt to convert into a
dollar value an improper claim to exempt the equipment itself, “ ‘what­
ever [its value] turns out to be.’ ” In re Reilly, 534 F. 3d 173, 178−179
(CA3 2008). As the dissent concedes, “[s]ection 522(d) catalogs exemp­
tions of two types.” Post, at 7, n. 5. “Most exemptions—and all of those
Reilly invoked—place a monetary limit on the value of the property the
debtor may reclaim,” and such exemptions are distinct from those made
pursuant to Code provisions that “authoriz[e] reclamation of the prop­
erty in full without any cap on value.” Ibid. Nothing about Reilly’s
Schedule entries establishes that Schwab should have treated Reilly’s
claim for $10,718, an unobjectionable amount under the Code provi­
sions she expressly invoked, as an objectionable claim for thousands of
dollars more than those provisions allow, or as a claim for an uncapped
exemption under Code provisions she did not invoke and the dissent
admits are “not at issue here.” Ibid.
20 A trustee will not always file an objection. As the United States
observes, Schwab did not do so in this case with respect to certain
assets (perishable foodstuffs from Reilly’s commercial kitchen) that
could not be readily sold. See Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae
28, n. 7 (explaining that Schwab could have objected to Reilly’s claim of
a wildcard exemption for an interest in the food totaling $2,036 because
this claim, combined with her wildcard claims for an interest of $8,868
in her business equipment and interests totaling $26 in her bank
accounts, placed the total value of the interests she claimed exempt
under the wildcard provision $975 above then-applicable limits).

