22

SCHWAB v. REILLY
Opinion of the Court

Bkrtcy. Proc. 1009(a). Either result will facilitate the
expeditious and final disposition of assets, and thus enable
the debtor (and the debtor’s creditors) to achieve a fresh
start free of the finality and clouded-title concerns Reilly
describes. See Brief for Respondent 57–59 (arguing that
“[u]nder [Schwab’s] interpretation of Rule 4003(b), a
debtor would never have the certainty of knowing whether
or not he or she may keep her exempted property until the
case had ended”); id., at 66.21
For all of these reasons, the policy considerations Reilly
cites support our approach. Where, as here, a debtor
accurately describes an asset subject to an exempt interest
and on Schedule C declares the “value of [the] claimed
exemption” as a dollar amount within the range the Code
allows, interested parties are entitled to rely upon that
value as evidence of the claim’s validity. Accordingly, we
hold that Schwab was not required to object to Reilly’s
claimed exemptions in her business equipment in order to
——————
21 Reilly’s

clouded-title argument arises only if one accepts her flawed
conception of the exemptions in this case. According to Reilly, “once the
thirty-day deadline passed without objection” to her claim, she was
“entitled to know that she would emerge from bankruptcy with her
cooking equipment intact.” Brief for Respondent 57. There are two
problems with this argument. First, it assumes that the property she
claimed as exempt was the full value of the equipment. That assump­
tion is incorrect for the reasons we explain. Second, her argument
assumes that a claim to exempt the full value of the equipment would,
if unopposed, entitle her to the equipment itself as opposed to a pay­
ment equal to the equipment’s full value. That assumption is at least
questionable. Section 541 is clear that title to the equipment passed to
Reilly’s estate at the commencement of her case, and §§522(d)(5) and
(6) are equally clear that her reclamation right is limited to exempting
an interest in the equipment, not the equipment itself. Accordingly, it
is far from obvious that the Code would “entitle” Reilly to clear title in
the equipment even if she claimed as exempt a “full” or “100%” interest
in it (which she did not). Of course, it is likely that a trustee who fails
to object to such a claim would have little incentive to do anything but
pass title in the asset to the debtor. But that does not establish the
statutory entitlement Reilly claims.

