4

SCHWAB v. REILLY
Opinion of the Court

Reilly opposed Schwab’s motion. She argued that by
equating on Schedule C the total value of the exemptions
she claimed in the equipment with the equipment’s esti­
mated market value, she had put Schwab and her credi­
tors on notice that she intended to exempt the equipment’s
full value, even if that amount turned out to be more than
the dollar amount she declared, and more than the Code
allowed. Id., at 165a. Citing §522(l), Reilly asserted that
because her Schedule C notified Schwab of her intent to
exempt the full value of her business equipment, he was
obliged to object if he wished to preserve the estate’s right
to retain any value in the equipment in excess of the
$10,718 she estimated. Because Schwab did not object
within the time prescribed by Rule 4003(b), Reilly asserted
that the estate forfeited its claim to such value. Id., at
165a. Reilly further informed the Bankruptcy Court that
exempting her business equipment from the estate was so
important to her that she would dismiss her bankruptcy
case if doing so was the only way to avoid the equipment’s
sale at auction.3
The Bankruptcy Court denied both Schwab’s motion to
auction the equipment and Reilly’s conditional motion to
dismiss her case. See In re Reilly, 403 B. R. 336 (Bkrtcy.
Ct. MD Pa. 2006). Schwab sought relief from the District
Court, arguing that neither the Code nor Rule 4003(b)
requires a trustee to object to a claimed exemption where
the amount the debtor declares as the “value of [the
——————
3 Reilly’s desire to avoid the equipment’s auction is understandable
because the equipment, which Reilly’s parents purchased for her
despite their own financial difficulties, has “ ‘extraordinary sentimental
value.’ ” Brief for Respondent 5 (quoting App. 152a–153a). But the
sentimental value of the property cannot drive our decision in this case,
because sentimental value is not a basis for construing the Bankruptcy
Code. Because the Code imposes limits on exemptions, many debtors
who seek to take advantage of the Code are, no doubt, put to the
similarly difficult choice of parting with property of “extraordinary
sentimental value.” Id., at 152a−153a; see infra, at 19–23.

