16

SCHWAB v. REILLY 

Opinion of the Court 


III 

The Court of Appeals erred in holding that our decision
in Taylor dictates a contrary conclusion. See 534 F. 3d, at
178. Taylor does not rest on what the debtor “meant” to
exempt. 534 F. 3d, at 178. Rather, Taylor applies to the
face of a debtor’s claimed exemption the Code provisions
that compel reversal here.
The debtor in Taylor, like the debtor here, filed a sched­
ule of exemptions with the Bankruptcy Court on which the
debtor described the property subject to the claimed ex­
emption, identified the Code provision supporting the
exemption, and listed the dollar value of the exemption.
Critically, however, the debtor in Taylor did not, like the
debtor here, state the value of the claimed exemption as a
specific dollar amount at or below the limits the Code
allows. Instead, the debtor in Taylor listed the value of
the exemption itself as “$ unknown”:
Schedule B-4. ─Property Claimed Exempt
Type of
Property

Proceeds from
lawsuit

Location, Description,
and, So Far As Relevant
to the Claim of Exemp­
tion, Present Use of
Property
Winn v. TWA
Claim for lost wages

Specify the
Statute
Creating the
Exemption

Value Claimed
Exempt

11 U. S. C.
522(b)(d)

$ unknown

The interested parties in Taylor agreed that this entry
——————
the estimate must be viewed as part of the exemption and is therefore
subject to the Rule. See Brief for Respondent 40−41. The dissent
ranges far beyond even this unavailing argument in suggesting that the
market value estimate served as “an essential factor in determining the
nature of the ‘interest’ a debtor lists as exempt,” post, at 9, n. 9, even
before 1991 when that estimate did not appear on the schedule of
“property claimed as exempt” (former Schedule B−4), but rather ap­
peared on former “Schedule B–2,” post, at 7, n. 6, which merely listed
the debtor’s “personal property” as of the date of the petition filing.
Interim Fed. Rule Bkrtcy. Proc. Official Form 6, Schedules B–2, B–4
(1979).

