20

SCHWAB v. REILLY
Opinion of the Court

the Code. See Lamie, 540 U. S., at 534, 538; Hartford, 530
U. S., at 6; United States v. Locke, 471 U. S. 84, 95 (1985).
Reilly nonetheless contends that our approach creates
perverse incentives for trustees and creditors to sleep on
their rights. See Brief for Respondent 64, n. 10, 67–69.
Again, we disagree. Where a debtor intends to exempt
nothing more than an interest worth a specified dollar
amount in an asset that is not subject to an unlimited or
in-kind exemption under the Code, our approach will
ensure clear and efficient resolution of competing claims to
the asset’s value. If an interested party does not object to
the claimed interest by the time the Rule 4003 period
expires, title to the asset will remain with the estate pur­
suant to §541, and the debtor will be guaranteed a pay­
ment in the dollar amount of the exemption. If an inter­
ested party timely objects, the court will rule on the
objection and, if it is improper, allow the debtor to make
appropriate adjustments.18
Where, as here, it is important to the debtor to exempt
the full market value of the asset or the asset itself, our
decision will encourage the debtor to declare the value of
her claimed exemption in a manner that makes the scope
of the exemption clear, for example, by listing the exempt
value as “full fair market value (FMV)” or “100% of
——————
18 We disagree that Reilly’s approach to exemptions would more effi­
ciently dispose of competing claims to the asset. On Reilly’s view, a
trustee would be encouraged (if not obliged) to object to claims to
exempt a specific dollar amount of interest in an asset whenever the
value of the exempt interest equaled the debtor’s estimate of the asset’s
market value. Where the debtor genuinely intended to claim nothing
more than the face value of the exempt interest (which is rational if a
debtor wishes to ensure that his aggregate exemptions remain within
statutory limits), such an approach would engender needless objections
and litigation, particularly if the equation that would precipitate the
objection often results from a default software entry. See Reply Brief
for Petitioner 15; Brief for Nat. Assn. of Bankruptcy Trustees 13, n. 15.

