12

SCHWAB v. REILLY
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

tees, sooner or later, must attempt to ascertain the market
value of exempted assets. They must do so to determine
whether sale of the items would likely produce surplus
proceeds for the estate above the value of the claimed
exemption, see §704(a)(1); the only question, then, is when
this market valuation must occur—(1) within 30 days or
(2) at any time before discharge? Removing valuation
from Rule 4003’s governance thus does little to reduce the
labors trustees must undertake.
The 30-day objection period, I note, does not impose on
trustees any additional duty, but rather guides the exer­
cise of existing responsibilities; under Rule 4003(b), a
trustee must rank evaluation of the debtor’s exemptions as
a priority item in his superintendence of the estate.13 And
if the trustee entertains any doubt about the accuracy of a
debtor’s estimation of market value, the procedure for
interposing objections is hardly arduous. The trustee need
only file with the court a simple declaration stating that
an item’s value exceeds the amount listed by the debtor.14
——————
arises: Why are trustees granted a full 30 days to lodge objections?
Under the Court’s reading of the Rule, trustees need only compare a
debtor’s Schedule C to the text of the exemption prescriptions to assess
an exemption claim’s facial validity, with no further investigation
necessary. That comparison should take no more than minutes, surely
not a month.
13 Trustees, it bears noting, historically had valuation duties far more
onerous than they have today. Rule 4003’s predecessor required
trustees in the first instance, rather than debtors, to estimate the
market value of property claimed as exempt. See Rule 403(b) (1975).
Trustees had to provide this valuation to the court within 15 days of
their appointment. See ibid.
14 The leading bankruptcy treatise supplies an illustrative valuation
objection:
“[Name of Trustee], the duly qualified and acting trustee of the estate
of the debtor, would show the court the following:
“1. The debtor is not entitled under [the automobile exemption] to an
interest of more than $3,225 in an automobile. The automobile claimed
by debtor as exempt . . . has a value substantially greater than $3,225.

