Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

rendered the debtor’s claimed exemption objectionable on
its face because the exemption concerned an asset (lawsuit
proceeds) that the Code did not permit the debtor to ex­
empt beyond a specific dollar amount. See 503 U. S., at
642. Accordingly, although this case and Taylor both
concern the consequences of a trustee’s failure to object to
a claimed exemption within the time specified by Rule
4003, the question arose in Taylor on starkly different
facts. In Taylor, the question concerned a trustee’s obliga­
tion to object to the debtor’s entry of a “value claimed
exempt” that was not plainly within the limits the Code
allows. In this case, the opposite is true. The amounts
Reilly listed in the Schedule C column titled “Value of
Claimed Exemption” are facially within the limits the
Code prescribes and raise no warning flags that warranted
an objection.16 See supra, at 8.
Taylor supports this conclusion. In holding otherwise,
the Court of Appeals focused on what it described as Tay
lor’s “ ‘unstated premise’ ” that “ ‘a debtor who exempts the
entire reported value of an asset is claiming the “full
amount,” whatever it turns out to be.’ ” 534 F. 3d, at 179.
But Taylor does not rest on this premise. It establishes
and applies the straightforward proposition that an inter­
ested party must object to a claimed exemption if the
——————
16 See, e.g., Barroso-Herrans, 524 F. 3d, at 345 (explaining that Sche­
dule C entries listing the value of a claimed exemption as “unknown,”
“to be determined,” or “100%” are “ ‘red flags to trustees and creditors,’
and therefore put them on notice that if they do not object, the whole
value of the asset—whatever it might later turn out to be—will be
exempt” (quoting 1 Collier on Bankruptcy ¶8.06[1][c][ii] (15th ed. rev.
2007); citation and some internal quotation marks omitted)). The
dissent concedes that a debtor’s exemption schedule “must give notice
sufficient to cue the trustee that an objection may be in order,” and
rightly observes that the sufficiency of a particular cue, or “ ‘ warning
flag,’ ” may lie “in the eye of the beholder.” Post, at 14. In this case,
however, the Code itself breaks the tie between what might otherwise
be two equally tenable views.

