Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

cannot rely on the fact that the amount the debtor de­
clares as the “value of [the] claimed exemption” is within
statutory limits. Instead, the trustee’s duty to object turns
on whether the interplay of various schedule entries sup­
ports an inference that the debtor “intended” to exempt a
dollar value different than the one she wrote on the form.
534 F. 3d, at 178. This complicated view of the trustee’s
statutory obligation, and the strained reading of Schedule
C on which it rests, is inconsistent with the Code.5
The parties agree that this case is governed by §522(l),
which states that a Chapter 7 debtor must “file a list of
property that the debtor claims as exempt under subsec­
tion (b) of this section,” and further states that “[u]nless a
party in interest objects, the property claimed as exempt
on such list is exempt.” The parties further agree that the
“list” to which §522(l) refers is the “list of property . . .
claim[ed] as exempt” currently known as “Schedule C.”
See Schedule C.6 The parties, like the Courts of Appeals,
disagree about what information on Schedule C defines
the “property claimed as exempt” for purposes of evaluat­
ing an exemption’s propriety under §522(l). Reilly asserts
that the “property claimed as exempt” is defined by refer­
ence to all the information on Schedule C, including the
estimated market value of each asset in which the debtor
claims an exempt interest. Schwab and the United States
as amicus curiae argue that the Code specifically defines
the “property claimed as exempt” as an interest, the value
of which may not exceed a certain dollar amount, in a
particular asset, not as the asset itself. Accordingly, they
——————
5 The forms, rules, treatise excerpts, and policy considerations on
which the dissent relies, see post, at 4−16, must be read in light of the
Bankruptcy Code provisions that govern this case, and must yield to
those provisions in the event of conflict.
6 Bankruptcy Rule 4003 specifies the time within which the debtor
must file Schedule C, as well as the time within which interested
parties must object to the exemptions claimed thereon.

