4

SCHWAB v. REILLY
Syllabus
party must draw from preprinted bankruptcy schedules that evolve
over time, rather than on the facial validity of the value the debtor
assigns the “property claimed as exempt” as defined by the Code,
would undermine the predictability the statute is designed to pro
vide. Pp. 16–18.
(c) Reilly’s argument threatens to convert the Code’s goal of giving
debtors a fresh start into a free pass. By permitting a debtor “to
withdraw from the estate certain interests in property, . . . up to cer
tain values,” Rousey v. Jacoway, 544 U. S. 320, 325, Congress bal
anced the difficult choices that exemption limits impose on debtors
with the economic harm that exemptions visit on creditors. This
Court should not alter that balance by requiring trustees to object to
claimed exemptions based on form entries beyond those governing an
exemption’s validity under the Code. In rejecting Reilly’s approach,
the Court does not create incentives for trustees and creditors to
sleep on their rights. The decision reached here encourages a debtor
wishing to exempt an asset’s full market value or the asset itself to
declare the value of the claimed exemption in a way that makes its
scope clear. Such declarations will encourage the trustee to object
promptly and preserve for the estate any value in the asset beyond
relevant statutory limits. If the trustee fails to object, or his objection
is overruled, the debtor will be entitled to exclude the asset’s full
value. If the objection is sustained, the debtor will be required either
to forfeit the portion of the exemption exceeding the statutory allow
ance or to revise other exemptions or arrangements with creditors to
permit the exemption. See Rule 1009(a). Either result will facilitate
the expeditious and final disposition of assets, and thus enable the
debtor and creditors to achieve a fresh start free of Reilly’s finality
and clouded-title concerns. Pp. 19–22.

534 F. 3d 173, reversed and remanded.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which STEVENS,
SCALIA, KENNEDY, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. GINSBURG, J.,
filed a dissenting opinion, in which ROBERTS, C. J., and BREYER, J.,
joined.

