(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SMITH v. CAIN, WARDEN
CERTIORARI TO THE CRIMINAL DISTRICT COURT OF 

LOUISIANA, ORLEANS PARISH

No. 10–8145. Argued November 8, 2011—Decided January 10, 2012
Petitioner Juan Smith was convicted of first-degree murder based on
the testimony of a single eyewitness. During state postconviction relief proceedings, Smith obtained police files containing statements by
the eyewitness contradicting his testimony. Smith argued that the
prosecution’s failure to disclose those statements violated Brady v.
Maryland, 373 U. S. 83. Brady held that due process bars a State
from withholding evidence that is favorable to the defense and material to the defendant’s guilt or punishment. See id., at 87. The state
trial court rejected Smith’s Brady claim, and the Louisiana Court of
Appeal and Louisiana Supreme Court denied review.
Held: Brady requires that Smith’s conviction be reversed. The State
does not dispute that the eyewitness’s statements were favorable to
Smith and that those statements were not disclosed to Smith. Under
Brady, evidence is material if there is a “reasonable probability that,
had the evidence been disclosed, the result of the proceeding would
have been different.” Cone v. Bell, 556 U. S. 449, 469–470. A “reasonable probability” means that the likelihood of a different result is
great enough to “undermine[ ] confidence in the outcome of the trial.”
Kyles v. Whitley, 514 U. S. 419, 434. Evidence impeaching an eyewitness’s testimony may not be material if the State’s other evidence
is strong enough to sustain confidence in the verdict. United States v.
Agurs, 427 U. S. 97, 112–113, and n. 21. Here, however, the eyewitness’s testimony was the only evidence linking Smith to the crime,
and the eyewitness’s undisclosed statements contradicted his testimony. The eyewitness’s statements were plainly material, and the
State’s failure to disclose those statements to the defense thus violated Brady. Pp. 2–4.


2

SMITH v. CAIN
Syllabus

Reversed and remanded.
ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which SCALIA,
KENNEDY, GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined. THOMAS, J., filed a dissenting opinion.

