Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Per Curiam

pre-empted by the FAA. The state court found unpersuasive this Court’s interpretation of the FAA, calling it “tendentious,” id., at 51a, and “created from whole cloth,” id.,
at 53a. It later concluded that “Congress did not intend
for the FAA to be, in any way, applicable to personal
injury or wrongful death suits that only collaterally derive
from a written agreement that evidences a transaction
affecting interstate commerce, particularly where the
agreement involves a service that is a practical necessity
for members of the public,” id., at 84a. The court thus
concluded that the FAA does not pre-empt the state public policy against predispute arbitration agreements that
apply to claims of personal injury or wrongful death
against nursing homes.
The West Virginia court’s interpretation of the FAA was
both incorrect and inconsistent with clear instruction in
the precedents of this Court. The FAA provides that a
“written provision in . . . a contract evidencing a transaction involving commerce to settle by arbitration a controversy thereafter arising out of such contract or transaction
. . . shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable, save upon
such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation
of any contract.” 9 U. S. C. §2. The statute’s text includes
no exception for personal-injury or wrongful-death claims.
It “requires courts to enforce the bargain of the parties to
arbitrate.” Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. v. Byrd, 470 U. S.
213, 217 (1985). It “reflects an emphatic federal policy in
favor of arbitral dispute resolution.” KPMG LLP v. Cocchi, 565 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (per curiam) (slip op., at 3)
(quoting Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler ChryslerPlymouth, Inc., 473 U. S. 614, 631 (1985); internal quotation marks omitted).
As this Court reaffirmed last Term, “[w]hen state law
prohibits outright the arbitration of a particular type of
claim, the analysis is straightforward: The conflicting rule
is displaced by the FAA.” AT&T Mobility LLC v. Concep-

