2

UNITED STATES v. JUVENILE MALE
Per Curiam

juvenile supervision, finding that respondent had failed to
comply with the requirements of the prerelease program.
The court sentenced respondent to an additional 6-month
term of official detention, to be followed by a period of
supervision until his 21st birthday. The Government,
invoking SORNA’s juvenile registration provisions, argued
that respondent should be required to register as a sex
offender, at least for the duration of his juvenile supervi
sion. As “special conditions” of his supervision, the court
ordered respondent to register as a sex offender and to
keep his registration current. App. to Pet. for Cert. 39a.
The Ninth Circuit vacated the sex-offender-registration
requirements of the District Court’s order. 590 F. 3d 924
(2010). The Court of Appeals determined that “retroactive
application of SORNA’s provision covering individuals who
were adjudicated juvenile delinquents because of the
commission of certain sex offenses before SORNA’s pas
sage violates the Ex Post Facto Clause of the United
States Constitution.” Id., at 927. The court thus held that
“SORNA’s juvenile registration provision may not be
applied retroactively to individuals adjudicated delinquent
under the [FJDA].” Id., at 928.
The United States asks us to grant certiorari to review
the Ninth Circuit’s determination that SORNA violates
the Ex Post Facto Clause as applied to individuals who
were adjudicated juvenile delinquents under the FJDA
prior to SORNA’s enactment. Before we can address that
question, however, we must resolve a threshold issue of
mootness. Before the Ninth Circuit, respondent chal
lenged only the conditions of his juvenile supervision
requiring him to register as a sex offender. But on May 2,
2008, respondent’s term of supervision expired, and thus
he no longer is subject to those sex-offender-registration
conditions. As such, this case likely is moot unless re
spondent can show that a decision invalidating the sex
offender-registration conditions of his juvenile supervision

