(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

NEVADA COMMISSION ON ETHICS v. CARRIGAN
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF NEVADA
No. 10–568.

Argued April 27, 2011—Decided June 13, 2011

Nevada’s Ethics in Government Law requires public officials to recuse
themselves from voting on, or advocating the passage or failure of, “a
matter with respect to which the independence of judgment of a rea
sonable person in his situation would be materially affected by,” inter
alia, “[h]is commitment in a private capacity to the interests of oth
ers,” Nev. Rev. Stat. §281A.420(2) (2007), which includes a “commit
ment to a [specified] person,” e.g., a member of the officer’s household
or the officer’s relative, §281A.420(8)(a)–(d), and “[a]ny other com
mitment or relationship that is substantially similar” to one enumer
ated in paragraphs (a)–(d), §281A.420(8)(e).
Petitioner (Commission) administers and enforces Nevada’s law.
The Commission investigated respondent Carrigan, an elected local
official who voted to approve a hotel/casino project proposed by a
company that used Carrigan’s long-time friend and campaign man
ager as a paid consultant. The Commission concluded that Carrigan
had a disqualifying conflict of interest under §281A.420(8)(e)’s catch
all provision, and censured him for failing to abstain from voting on
the project. Carrigan sought judicial review, arguing that the Ne
vada law violated the First Amendment. The State District Court
denied the petition, but the Nevada Supreme Court reversed, holding
that voting is protected speech and that §281A.420(8)(e)’s catchall
definition is unconstitutionally overbroad.
Held: The Nevada Ethics in Government Law is not unconstitutionally
overbroad. Pp. 3–11.
(a) That law prohibits a legislator who has a conflict both from vot
ing on a proposal and from advocating its passage or failure. If it was
constitutional to exclude Carrigan from voting, then his exclusion
from advocating during a legislative session was not unconstitu
tional, for it was a reasonable time, place, and manner limitation.


2

NEVADA COMM’N ON ETHICS v. CARRIGAN
Syllabus
See Clark v. Community for Creative Non-Violence, 468 U. S. 288,
293. Pp. 3–4.
(b) “[A] ‘universal and long-established’ tradition of prohibiting cer
tain conduct creates ‘a strong presumption’ that the prohibition is
constitutional.’ ” Republican Party of Minn. v. White, 536 U. S. 765,
785. Here, dispositive evidence is provided by “early congressional
enactments,” which offer “ ‘contemporaneous and weighty evidence of
the Constitution’s meaning,’ ” Printz v. United States, 521 U. S. 898,
905. Within 15 years of the founding, both the House and the Senate
adopted recusal rules. Federal conflict-of-interest rules applicable to
judges also date back to the founding. The notion that Nevada’s
recusal rules violate legislators’ First Amendment rights is also in
consistent with long-standing traditions in the States, most of which
have some type of recusal law. Pp. 4–8.
(c) Restrictions on legislators’ voting are not restrictions on legisla
tors’ protected speech. A legislator’s vote is the commitment of his
apportioned share of the legislature’s power to the passage or defeat
of a particular proposal. He casts his vote “as trustee for his con
stituents, not as a prerogative of personal power.” Raines v. Byrd,
521 U. S. 811, 821. Moreover, voting is not a symbolic action, and the
fact that it is the product of a deeply held or highly unpopular per
sonal belief does not transform it into First Amendment speech.
Even if the mere vote itself could express depth of belief (which it
cannot), this Court has rejected the notion that the First Amendment
confers a right to use governmental mechanics to convey a message.
See, e.g., Timmons v. Twin Cities Area New Party, 520 U. S. 351. Doe
v. Reed, 561 U. S. ___, distinguished. Pp. 8–10.
(d) The additional arguments raised in Carrigan’s brief were not
decided below or raised in his brief in opposition and are thus consid
ered waived. P. 11.

126 Nev. 28, 236 P. 3d 616, reversed and remanded.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, THOMAS, GINSBURG, BREYER, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. KENNEDY, J., filed a concurring opinion. ALITO, J.,
filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.

