Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

postpetition, not all taxes incurred postpetition are “in­
curred by the estate.” That an estate cannot incur liability
until it exists does not mean that every liability that
arises after that point automatically becomes the estate’s
liability. And there is no textual basis to focus on when
the liability is incurred, as opposed to whether the liability
is incurred “by the estate.”
Alternately, petitioners contend that a tax should be
considered “incurred by the estate” so long as it is payable
out of estate assets. Income from postpetition sales of
farm assets is considered property of the estate. See
§1207(a). Petitioners argue that even if the debtor—and
not the estate—is liable for a tax, the tax is still “incurred
by the estate” because the funds the debtor uses to pay the
tax are property of the estate. But that too strains the
text beyond what it can bear. To concede that someone
other than the estate is liable for filing the return and
paying the tax, and yet maintain that the estate is the one
that has “incurred” the tax, defies the ordinary meaning of
“incur” as bringing a liability upon oneself.
The dissent, echoing both of these points, urges that
we “simply . . . consider the debtor and estate as merged.”
Post, at 11. “The English language,” the dissent reasons,
“permits this reading” and “do[es] not require” our read­
ing. Post, at 8–9. But any reading of “tax . . . incurred by
the estate” that is contingent on merging the debtor and
estate—despite Congress’ longstanding efforts to distinguish between when tax liabilities are borne by the debtor
or borne by the estate—is not a natural construction of the
statute as written.
Moreover, these alternative readings create a conflict
between §503(b) and §346(b). Petitioners consider postpe­
tition state or local income taxes, like federal income
taxes, to be “incurred by the estate” under §503(b). See
Tr. of Oral Arg. 4–5. But §346(b) requires that such taxes
be borne by the Chapter 12 debtor, not the estate. It is

