16

HALL v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

Congress’ intent with respect to §1222(a)(2)(A), that provi­
sion merely carved out an exception to the pre-existing
priority classification scheme. The exception could only
apply to claims “entitled to priority under section 507” in
the first place. That pre-existing scheme was in turn
premised on antecedent, decades-old understandings
about the scope of §503(b) and the division of tax liabilities
between estates and debtors. See Dewsnup v. Timm, 502
U. S. 410, 419 (1992) (“When Congress amends the bank­
ruptcy laws, it does not write ‘on a clean slate’ ”). If Con­
gress wished to alter these background norms, it needed to
enact a provision to enable postpetition income taxes to be
collected in the Chapter 12 plan in the first place.
The dissent concludes otherwise by an inverted analysis.
Rather than demonstrate that such claims were treated as
§507 priority claims in the first place, the dissent begins
with the single Senator’s stated purpose for the exception
to that priority scheme. Post, at 7. It then reasons back­
wards from there, and in the process upsets background
norms in both Chapters 12 and 13.
Certainly, there may be compelling policy reasons for
treating postpetition income tax liabilities as dischargeable. But if Congress intended that result, it did not so
provide in the statute. Given the statute’s plain language,
context, and structure, it is not for us to rewrite the stat­
ute, particularly in this complex terrain of interconnected
provisions and exceptions enacted over nearly three dec­
ades. Petitioners’ position threatens ripple effects beyond
this individual case for debtors in Chapter 13 and the
broader bankruptcy scheme that we need not invite. As
the Court of Appeals noted, “Congress is entirely free to
change the law by amending the text.” 617 F. 3d, at 1167.
—————— 

§503(b)(1)(A)(i), notwithstanding the Government’s contrary represen­
tations on both points. Post, at 12. Because employment taxes are not 

at issue in this case, we offer no opinion on either question. 


