14

HALL v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

implausible to maintain that taxes are “incurred by the
estate” when §346(b) specifically prohibits such taxes from
being “taxed to or claimed by the estate.”
To buttress their counterintuitive readings of the text,
petitioners and the dissent suggest that there is a long
history of treating postpetition taxes as administrative
expenses entitled to priority. Both point to two legislative
Reports accompanying the 1978 enactment of §503. But
neither snippet from which they quote is inconsistent with
today’s holding,8 and we have cautioned against “allowing
ambiguous legislative history to muddy clear statutory
language.” Milner v. Department of Navy, 562 U. S. ___,
___ (2011) (slip op., at 9).
Petitioners also point to cases suggesting that postpeti­
tion taxes were treated as administrative expenses. E.g.,
United States v. Noland, 517 U. S. 535, 543 (1996) (cor­
porate Chapter 11 debtor); Nicholas v. United States,
384 U. S. 678, 687–688 (1966) (corporate Chapter XI case
under predecessor Bankruptcy Act). But those cases
involve corporate debtors and are therefore inapposite.
Among estates that are not separately taxable, those
involving corporate debtors have long been singled out by
——————
8 The House Report stated—after noting that, in addition to prepeti­
tion taxes, “certain other taxes are entitled to priority”—that “[t]axes
arising from the operation of the estate after bankruptcy are entitled to
priority as administrative expenses.” H. R. Rep., at 193. That is still
true. Many taxes arising after bankruptcy, as in individual-debtor
Chapter 7 or 11 cases, remain entitled to priority as administrative
expenses. The Senate Report, meanwhile, stated: “In general, adminis­
trative expenses include taxes which the trustee incurs in administer­
ing the debtor’s estate, including taxes on capital gains from sales of
property by the trustee and taxes on income earned by the estate during
the case.” S. Rep., at 66 (emphasis added). That likewise remains true.
Administrative expenses still include income taxes that “the trustee,”
as opposed to the debtor, has incurred—again, as in individual-debtor
Chapter 7 or 11 cases.

