12

HALL v. UNITED STATES
BREYER, J., dissenting

1399, say that the Chapter 12 estate is not separate from
the debtor for tax purposes—a concept consistent, not at
odds, with merging the two for this bankruptcy purpose.
Nor is the majority’s reading free of conceptual problems. If we read the phrase tax “incurred by the estate”
as excluding tax liabilities incurred while the farmer is in
Chapter 12 bankruptcy, we must read it as excluding not
only capital gains taxes but also other kinds of taxes, such
as an employer’s share of Social Security taxes, Medicare
taxes, or other employee taxes. But no one claims that all
of these taxes fall outside the scope of the term “administrative expenses.” See In re Ryan, 228 B. R. 746 (Bkrtcy.
Ct. Ore. 1999) (treating postpetition employment taxes
as administrative expenses in a Chapter 12 proceeding);
IRS Chief Counsel Advice No. 200518002 (May 6, 2005),
2005 WL 1060956 (assuming that some postpetition federal taxes can be treated as administrative expenses in a
Chapter 12 bankruptcy).
In fact, the Government, realizing it cannot go this far,
concedes that many of these other (e.g., employer) taxes
are “administrative expenses,” but only, it suggests, because they fall within a different part of the “administrative expenses” definition, namely 11 U. S. C. §503(b)(1)(A),
which says that “administrative expenses” include “the
actual, necessary costs and expenses of preserving the
estate including . . . wages, salaries, and commissions for
services rendered after the commencement of the case.”
(Emphasis added.) See Brief for United States 27–28,
n. 11. Employment taxes, however, do not fit easily within
the rubric “wages, salaries, and commissions.” They may
well be “necessary costs and expenses of preserving the
estate.” But then so are the capital gains taxes at issue
here.
Finally, the majority makes what I believe to be its
strongest argument. Ante, at 9–12. Chapter 13, it points
out, allows individuals (typically those who are not farm-

