Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

BREYER, J., dissenting

reason for treating taxes incurred by a corporate debtor
differently from those incurred by an individual Chapter
12 debtor. To the contrary, since corporations can file
for bankruptcy under Chapter 12, the majority’s argument
implies that the treatment of postpetition taxes in Chapter
12 proceedings turns on whether the debtor happens to be
a corporation. See §101(18)(B) (2006 ed.) (defining “family
farmer” to include certain corporations); §109(f) (“Only
a family farmer or family fisherman with regular annual
income may be a debtor under chapter 12”); Brief for
United States 26, n. 9 (“[T]he estate of a corporate (as
opposed to individual) Chapter 12 debtor . . . could be
viewed as incurring post-petition income taxes . . . collectible as administrative expenses . . . rather than outside the
bankruptcy case as required for an individual Chapter 12
debtor”).
The majority does not point to any adverse consequences
that might arise were bankruptcy law to treat taxes incurred in administering the bankruptcy estate (i.e., taxes
incurred after filing and before Plan confirmation) as
administrative expenses. The effect of doing so would
simply be to consider the debtor and estate as merged for
purposes of determining which taxes fall within the Bankruptcy’s Code’s definition of “administrative expenses,”
i.e., determining for that purpose that the estate may
“incur” tax liabilities on behalf of the whole (with the ultimate liability assigned to the debtor), much like a
married couple filing jointly, 26 U. S. C. §6013(a), or an
affiliated group of corporations filing a consolidated tax
return, §1501. Cf. In re Lumara Foods of America, Inc., 50
B. R. 809, 815 (Bkrtcy. Ct. ND Ohio 1985) (describing the
history of §503(b)(1)(B)(i) and concluding that “the elevation [of a tax] to an administrative priority is dependent
upon when the tax accrued”). In fact, the very tax provisions that separate the estate from the individual debtor
in Chapter 7 and Chapter 11 proceedings, §§1398 and

