2

HALL v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
the Chapter 12 plan. Pp. 4−17.
(a) The phrase “incurred by the estate” bears a plain and natural
reading. A tax “incurred by the estate” is a tax for which the estate
itself is liable. Only certain estates are liable for federal income taxes. IRC §§1398 and 1399 define the division of responsibilities for the
payment of taxes between the estate and the debtor on a chapter-bychapter basis. Under those provisions, a Chapter 12 estate is not a
separately taxable entity. The debtor—not the trustee—is generally
liable for taxes and files the only tax return. The postpetition income
taxes are thus not “incurred by the estate.” Pp. 4−5.
(b) Section 346 of the Bankruptcy Code and its longstanding interplay with IRC §§1398 and 1399 reinforce that whether an estate “incurs” taxes turns on Congress’ chapter-specific guidance on which estates are separately taxable. The original §346 established that state
or local income taxes could be imposed only on the estate in an individual-debtor Chapter 7 or 11 bankruptcy, and only on the debtor in
a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Congress applied the framework of §346 to
federal taxes two years later: IRC §1398 and 1399 established that
the estate is separately taxable in individual-debtor Chapter 7 or 11
cases, and not separately taxable in Chapter 13 (and now Chapter
12) cases. The Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005 subsequently amended §346, expressly aligning its
assignment of state or local taxes with the IRC separate taxable entity rules for federal taxes. This Court assumes that Congress is
aware of existing law when it passes legislation, and the existing law
at the enactment of §1222(a)(2)(A) indicated that an estate’s liability
for taxes turned on separate taxable entity rules. Pp. 6−9.
(c) Chapter 13, on which Chapter 12 was modeled, further bolsters
this Court’s holding. Established understandings hold that postpetition income taxes are not “incurred by the [Chapter 13] estate” under
§503(b) because they are the liability of the Chapter 13 debtor alone.
The Government has also long hewed to this position. Section
1305(a)(1), which gives holders of postpetition claims the option of
collecting postpetition taxes within the bankruptcy case, would be
superfluous if postpetition tax liabilities were automatically collectible inside the bankruptcy. It is thus clear that postpetition income
taxes are not automatically collectible in a Chapter 13 plan and are
not administrative expenses under §503(b). To hold otherwise in
Chapter 12 would disrupt settled practices in Chapter 13 cases.
Pp. 9−12.
(d) None of the contrary arguments by petitioners and the dissent
overcomes the statute’s plain language, context, and structure.
There is no textual basis for giving “incurred by the estate” a temporal meaning, such that it refers to all taxes “incurred postpetition.”

