2

HALL v. UNITED STATES
BREYER, J., dissenting

nate what is at stake in this case. Roughly speaking, the
chapter requires that a holder of a secured claim receive
the full amount of that claim up to the value of the collateral securing the loan. The claim may be paid over an
extended period. If the claim exceeds the value of the
collateral, the creditor is given an unsecured claim in the
remainder. §§506(a), 1225(a)(5).
The holder of a §507 priority claim (a category that
includes, among other things, domestic support obligations, debts for taxes incurred before filing the bankruptcy
petition, and administrative expenses) must receive the
full amount of the priority claim in deferred cash payments paid over the life of the Plan. §1222(a)(2).
The holder of an ordinary unsecured claim—i.e., an
unsecured claim of a kind not listed in §507—may receive
at least a partial payment from the amount left over after
the payment of the secured and §507 priority claims. This
amount may well be more than zero, for the Plan must
provide that the farmer will devote all “disposable income”
(as defined by §1225(b)(2)) or property of equivalent value
to the repayment of his debts over the next three years
(sometimes extended to five years). §§1222(c), 1225(b)(1).
And that amount must prove sufficient to provide the unsecured creditor with no less than that creditor would receive in a Chapter 7 liquidation. §1225(a)(4).
Once the farmer completes his Plan payments, he will
receive a discharge even if his payments did not fully
satisfy all unsecured claims. The Code does not, however,
permit all debts to be discharged. There are categories
of nondischargeable debts (including, for example, secured
claims), which creditors can pursue after bankruptcy.
§1228(a).
For present purposes, it is important to understand that
if the debtor owes too much money to his §507 priority
creditors, he may not have sufficient assets or future
income to pay all his secured creditors and his §507 prior-

