8

HALL v. UNITED STATES
BREYER, J., dissenting

trative expenses” as “including . . . any tax . . . incurred by
the estate.” §503(b)(1)(B)(i) (2006 ed.). But after this
point, we part company.
The majority believes that the words any tax “incurred by the estate” cannot include postpetition taxes. It
emphasizes that tax law does not treat a Chapter 12
bankruptcy estate as a “separate taxable entity,” i.e., as
separate from the farmer-debtor for federal income tax
purposes. 26 U. S. C. §§1398, 1399. This means that
there is just one entity—the debtor—for these purposes.
And §346 of the Bankruptcy Code makes clear that any
state and local income tax liabilities incurred by a Chapter
12 estate must also be taxed to the debtor. The majority
says that these provisions mean that only the debtor, and
not the estate, can “ ‘incu[r]’ ” taxes within the meaning of
11 U. S. C. §503(b)(1)(B)(i). Ante, at 4–5.
In my view, however, these tax law circumstances do
not require the majority’s narrow reading of this Bankruptcy Code provision. That is to say, the phrase tax
“incurred by the [bankruptcy] estate” can include a tax
incurred by the farmer while managing his estate in the
midst of his bankruptcy proceedings, i.e., between the time
the farmer files for Chapter 12 bankruptcy and the time
the bankruptcy court confirms the farmer’s Chapter 12
Plan.
The bankruptcy estate is in existence during this time.
Cf. §1227(b) (property of the estate vests in the debtor
at confirmation unless the Plan provides otherwise). The
bankruptcy court has jurisdiction over the farmer’s assets
during this time. See §§541, 1207; 4 Norton §61:1, at 61–2
(§541’s “broad definition of estate property . . . centralizes
all of the estate’s assets under the jurisdiction of the bankruptcy court”). And, as a matter of both the English language and bankruptcy principles, one can consider a tax
liability that the farmer incurs during this period (such as
a capital gains tax arising from a sale of a portion of his

