2

HERTZ CORP. v. FRIEND
Syllabus
Court, and provides that if “a final judgment on the appeal” in a court
of appeals “is not issued before the end” of 60 days (with a possible
10-day extension), “the appeal shall be denied”—makes far too much
of too little. The Court normally does not read statutory silence as
implicitly modifying or limiting its jurisdiction that another statute
specifically grants. E.g., Felker v. Turpin, 518 U. S. 651, 660–661.
Here, replicating similar, older statutes, §1254 specifically gives the
Court jurisdiction to “revie[w] . . . [b]y writ of certiorari” cases that
are “in the courts of appeals” when it grants the writ. The Court thus
interprets §1453(c)’s “60-day” requirement as simply requiring a
court of appeals to reach a decision within a specified time—not to
deprive this Court of subsequent jurisdiction to review the case. See,
e.g., Aetna Casualty & Surety Co. v. Flowers, 330 U. S. 464, 466–467.
Pp. 4–5.
2. The phrase “principal place of business” in §1332(c)(1) refers to
the place where a corporation’s high level officers direct, control, and
coordinate the corporation’s activities, i.e., its “nerve center,” which
will typically be found at its corporate headquarters. Pp. 5–19.
(a) A brief review of the legislative history of diversity jurisdic
tion demonstrates that Congress added §1332(c)(1)’s “principal place
of business” language to the traditional state-of-incorporation test in
order to prevent corporations from manipulating federal-court juris
diction as well as to reduce the number of diversity cases. Pp. 5–10.
(b) However, the phrase “principal place of business” has proved
more difficult to apply than its originators likely expected. After
Congress’ amendment, courts were uncertain as to where to look to
determine a corporation’s “principal place of business” for diversity
purposes. If a corporation’s headquarters and executive offices were
in the same State in which it did most of its business, the test seemed
straightforward. The “principal place of business” was in that State.
But if those corporate headquarters, including executive offices, were
in one State, while the corporation’s plants or other centers of busi
ness activity were located in other States, the answer was less obvi
ous. Under these circumstances, for corporations with “far-flung”
business activities, numerous Circuits have looked to a corporation’s
“nerve center,” from which the corporation radiates out to its con
stituent parts and from which its officers direct, control, and coordi
nate the corporation’s activities. However, this test did not go far
enough, for it did not answer what courts should do when a corpora
tion’s operations are not far-flung but rather limited to only a few
States. When faced with this question, various courts have focused
more heavily on where a corporation’s actual business activities are
located, adopting divergent and increasingly complex tests to inter
pret the statute. Pp. 10–13.

