Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
(c) In an effort to find a single, more uniform interpretation of
the statutory phrase, this Court returns to the “nerve center” ap
proach: “[P]rincipal place of business” is best read as referring to the
place where a corporation’s officers direct, control, and coordinate the
corporation’s activities. In practice it should normally be the place
where the corporation maintains its headquarters—provided that the
headquarters is the actual center of direction, control, and coordina
tion, i.e., the “nerve center,” and not simply an office where the corpo
ration holds its board meetings. Pp. 13–19.
(i) Three sets of considerations, taken together, convince the
Court that the “nerve center” approach, while imperfect, is superior
to other possibilities. First, §1332(c)(1)’s language supports the ap
proach. The statute’s word “place” is singular, not plural. Its word
“principal” requires that the main, prominent, or most important
place be chosen. Cf., e.g., Commissioner v. Soliman, 506 U. S. 168,
174. And the fact that the word “place” follows the words “State
where” means that the “place” is a place within a State, not the State
itself. A corporation’s “nerve center,” usually its main headquarters,
is a single place. The public often considers it the corporation’s main
place of business. And it is a place within a State. By contrast, the
application of a more general business activities test has led some
courts, as in the present case, to look, not at a particular place within
a State, but incorrectly at the State itself, measuring the total
amount of business activities that the corporation conducts there and
determining whether they are significantly larger than in the next
ranking State. Second, administrative simplicity is a major virtue in
a jurisdictional statute. Sisson v. Ruby, 497 U. S. 358, 375. A “nerve
center” approach, which ordinarily equates that “center” with a cor
poration’s headquarters, is simple to apply comparatively speaking.
By contrast, a corporation’s general business activities more often
lack a single principal place where they take place. Third, the stat
ute’s legislative history suggests that the words “principal place of
business” should be interpreted to be no more complex than an ear
lier, numerical test that was criticized as too complex and impractical
to apply. A “nerve center” test offers such a possibility. A general
business activities test does not. Pp. 14–17.
(ii) While there may be no perfect test that satisfies all admin
istrative and purposive criteria, and there will be hard cases under
the “nerve center” test adopted today, this test is relatively easier to
apply and does not require courts to weigh corporate functions, assets
or revenues different in kind, one from the other. And though this
test may produce results that seem to cut against the basic rationale
of diversity jurisdiction, accepting occasionally counterintuitive re
sults is the price the legal system must pay to avoid overly complex

