(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

HERTZ CORP. v. FRIEND ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1107. Argued November 10, 2009––Decided February 23, 2010
Respondents, California citizens, sued petitioner Hertz Corporation in a
California state court for claimed state-law violations. Hertz sought
removal to the Federal District Court under 28 U. S. C. §§1332(d)(2),
1441(a), claiming that because it and respondents were citizens of dif
ferent States, §§1332(a)(1), (c)(1), the federal court possessed diver
sity-of-citizenship jurisdiction. Respondents, however, claimed that
Hertz was a California citizen, like themselves, and that, hence, di
versity jurisdiction was lacking under §1332(c)(1), which provides
that “a corporation shall be deemed to be a citizen of any State by
which it has been incorporated and of the State where it has its prin
cipal place of business.” To show that its “principal place of business”
was in New Jersey, not California, Hertz submitted a declaration
stating, among other things, that it operated facilities in 44 States,
that California accounted for only a portion of its business activity,
that its leadership is at its corporate headquarters in New Jersey,
and that its core executive and administrative functions are primar
ily carried out there. The District Court concluded that it lacked di
versity jurisdiction because Hertz was a California citizen under
Ninth Circuit precedent, which asks, inter alia, whether the amount
of the corporation’s business activity is “significantly larger” or “sub
stantially predominates” in one State. Finding that California was
Hertz’s “principal place of business” under that test because a plural
ity of the relevant business activity occurred there, the District Court
remanded the case to state court. The Ninth Circuit affirmed.
Held:
1. Respondents’ argument that this Court lacks jurisdiction under
§1453(c)—which expressly permits appeals of remand orders such as
the District Court’s only to “court[s] of appeals,” not to the Supreme

