16

HERTZ CORP. v. FRIEND
Opinion of the Court

Co., 526 U. S. 574, 583 (1999)). So courts benefit from
straightforward rules under which they can readily assure
themselves of their power to hear a case. Arbaugh, supra,
at 514.
Simple jurisdictional rules also promote greater predict
ability. Predictability is valuable to corporations making
business and investment decisions. Cf. First Nat. City
Bank v. Banco Para el Comercio Exterior de Cuba, 462
U. S. 611, 621 (1983) (recognizing the “need for certainty
and predictability of result while generally protecting the
justified expectations of parties with interests in the cor
poration”). Predictability also benefits plaintiffs deciding
whether to file suit in a state or federal court.
A “nerve center” approach, which ordinarily equates
that “center” with a corporation’s headquarters, is simple
to apply comparatively speaking. The metaphor of a cor
porate “brain,” while not precise, suggests a single loca
tion. By contrast, a corporation’s general business activi
ties more often lack a single principal place where they
take place. That is to say, the corporation may have sev
eral plants, many sales locations, and employees located in
many different places. If so, it will not be as easy to de
termine which of these different business locales is the
“principal” or most important “place.”
Third, the statute’s legislative history, for those who
accept it, offers a simplicity-related interpretive bench
mark. The Judicial Conference provided an initial version
of its proposal that suggested a numerical test. A corpora
tion would be deemed a citizen of the State that accounted
for more than half of its gross income. Mar. Committee
Rept. 14–15; see supra, at 8. The Conference changed its
mind in light of criticism that such a test would prove too
complex and impractical to apply. Sept. Committee Rept.
2; see also H. Rep. 1706, at 28; S. Rep. 1830, at 31. That
history suggests that the words “principal place of busi
ness” should be interpreted to be no more complex than

