14

HERTZ CORP. v. FRIEND
Opinion of the Court

tions. Having done so, we now return to, and expand,
Judge Weinfeld’s approach, as applied in the Seventh
Circuit. See, e.g., Scot Typewriter Co., 170 F. Supp., at
865; Wisconsin Knife Works, 781 F. 2d, at 1282. We con
clude that “principal place of business” is best read as
referring to the place where a corporation’s officers direct,
control, and coordinate the corporation’s activities. It is
the place that Courts of Appeals have called the corpora
tion’s “nerve center.” And in practice it should normally
be the place where the corporation maintains its head
quarters—provided that the headquarters is the actual
center of direction, control, and coordination, i.e., the
“nerve center,” and not simply an office where the corpora
tion holds its board meetings (for example, attended by
directors and officers who have traveled there for the
occasion).
Three sets of considerations, taken together, convince us
that this approach, while imperfect, is superior to other
possibilities. First, the statute’s language supports the
approach. The statute’s text deems a corporation a citizen
of the “State where it has its principal place of business. ”
28 U. S. C. §1332(c)(1).
The word “place” is
in the singular, not the plural. The word “principal” re
quires us to pick out the “main, prominent” or “leading”
place. 12 Oxford English Dictionary 495 (2d ed. 1989)
(def. (A)(I)(2)). Cf. Commissioner v. Soliman, 506 U. S.
168, 174 (1993) (interpreting “principal place of business”
for tax purposes to require an assessment of “whether any
one business location is the ‘most important, consequen
tial, or influential’ one”). And the fact that the word
“place” follows the words “State where” means that the
“place” is a place within a State. It is not the State itself.
A corporation’s “nerve center,” usually its main head
quarters, is a single place. The public often (though not
always) considers it the corporation’s main place of busi
ness. And it is a place within a State. By contrast, the

