20

MAGWOOD v. PATTERSON
Opinion of the Court

successive” or not.15
Ironically, in an effort to effectuate what they believe is
Congress’ intent not to give any unfair benefit to habeas
petitioners, the State and the dissent propose an alterna
tive rule that would “close our doors to a class of habeas
petitioners seeking review without any clear indication
that such was Congress’ intent.” Castro v. United States,
540 U. S. 375, 381 (2003). Many examples can be given,
but one suffices to illustrate this point. Suppose that a
petitioner files an application raising 10 meritorious
claims challenging his conviction. The district court
grants a conditional writ based on one of them, without
reaching the remaining nine. Upon retrial, the state court
commits the same 10 legal mistakes. (These are new
errors, but no more new than the sentencing error in
Magwood’s case.) Is an application presenting those same
10 claims—now based on the errors in the new judg
ment—“second or successive”? Under the opportunity
based rule advanced by the State and the dissent, the
answer must be yes. All 10 claims would have to be dis
missed. See §2244(b)(1) (requiring dismissal of any claim
presented in a prior application). The State attempts to
avoid this “procedural anomal[y],” Castro, supra, at 380,
by suggesting that we treat the nine unadjudicated claims
as part of a first application, because they were never
adjudicated on the merits. Cf. Slack, 529 U. S., at
478–481; Martinez-Villareal, 523 U. S., at 643–645. As for
the adjudicated claim, “[r]espondents assume that state
judges will follow instructions imposed by federal courts,”
and if not, “that federal courts will consider a petitioner’s
claim that the state court violated due process by failing to
——————
15 The dissent’s concern that such a petitioner may “reraise every
argument against a sentence that was rejected by the federal courts
during the first round of federal habeas review,” post, at 12, is similarly
hyperbolic. It will not take a court long to dispose of such claims where
the court has already analyzed the legal issues.

