16

MAGWOOD v. PATTERSON

Opinion of the Court
Opinion of THOMAS, J. 


B

The dissent similarly errs by interpreting the phrase
“second or successive” by reference to our longstanding
doctrine governing abuse of the writ. AEDPA modifies
those abuse-of-the-writ principles and creates new statu
tory rules under §2244(b). These rules apply only to “sec
ond or successive” applications. The dissent contends that
this reading renders AEDPA inapplicable to a broad range
of abusive claims that would have been barred under prior
rules. Yet, the dissent fails to cite any case in which this
Court has dismissed a claim as successive or abusive if the
petitioner raised it in an application challenging a new
judgment.
The dissent’s conclusion that our reading of §2254 “un
moor[s] the phrase ‘second or successive’ from its textual
and historical underpinnings,” post, at 8, is unwarranted.
Pre-AEDPA usage of the phrase “second or successive” is
consistent with our reading. A review of our habeas
precedents shows that pre-AEDPA cases cannot affirma
tively define the phrase “second or successive” as it ap
pears in AEDPA. Congress did not even apply the phrase
“second or successive” to applications filed by state prison
ers until it enacted AEDPA. The phrase originally arose
in the federal context, see §2255 (1946 ed., Supp. II), and
applied only to applications raising previously adjudicated
claims, see Sanders v. United States, 373 U. S. 1, 12
(1963). After this Court interpreted the law to permit
dismissal of “abusive” claims—as distinguished from
“successive” claims, see ibid.—Congress codified restric
tions on both types of claims in §2244(b), but still without
using the phrase “second or successive.” See §2244(b)
(1964 ed., Supp. IV) (providing rules governing applica
tions filed by state as well as federal prisoners). It was not
until 1996 that AEDPA incorporated the phrase “second or
successive” into §2244(b). In light of this complex history
of the phrase “second or successive,” we must rely upon

