Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

in custody to serve the others”).9
III
Appearing to recognize that Magwood has the stronger
textual argument, the State argues that we should rule
based on the statutory purpose. According to the State, a
“one opportunity” rule is consistent with the statutory
text, and better reflects AEDPA’s purpose of preventing
piecemeal litigation and gamesmanship.
We are not persuaded. AEDPA uses the phrase “second
or successive” to modify “application.” See §§2244(b)(1),
(2). The State reads the phrase to modify “claims.” See,
e.g., Brief for Respondents 51 (“Congress’ intent for
AEDPA was to eradicate successive claims”). We cannot
replace the actual text with speculation as to Congress’
intent. We have previously found Congress’ use of the
word “application” significant, and have refused to adopt
an interpretation of §2244(b) that would “elid[e] the differ
ence between an ‘application’ and a ‘claim,’ ” Artuz, 531
U. S., at 9; see also Gonzalez v. Crosby, 545 U. S. 524, 530
(2005) (“[F]or purposes of §2244(b), an ‘application’ for
habeas relief is a filing that contains one or more
‘claims’ ”). Therefore, although we agree with the State
that many of the rules under §2244(b) focus on claims,
that does not entitle us to rewrite the statute to make the
phrase “second or successive” modify claims as well.10
The State’s reading leads to a second, more fundamental
——————
9 Our focus on the judgment accords with current filing requirements.
See Habeas Corpus Rule 2(b) (requiring any petitioner to “ask for relief
from the state-court judgment being contested”); Rule 2(e) (prescribing
that any “petitioner who seeks relief from judgments of more than one
state court must file a separate petition covering the judgment or
judgments of each court”).
10 The dissent recognizes that the phrase “second or successive” ap
plies to an application as a whole, see post, at 2–4 (opinion of KENNEDY,
J.), but departs in other significant ways from the statutory text, see
infra, at 14–15.

