Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of the Court

D
The dissent’s concern that our rule will allow “petition
ers to bring abusive claims so long as they have won any
victory pursuant to a prior federal habeas petition,” post,
at 14, is greatly exaggerated. A petitioner may not raise
in federal court an error that he failed to raise properly in
state court in a challenge to the judgment reflecting the
error. If a petitioner does not satisfy the procedural re
quirements for bringing an error to the state court’s atten
tion—whether in trial, appellate, or habeas proceedings,
as state law may require—procedural default will bar
federal review. See Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722,
729–730 (1991); O’Sullivan v. Boerckel, 526 U. S. 838, 848
(1999) (stating that the petitioner’s “failure to present
three of his federal habeas claims to the [state court] in a
timely fashion has resulted in a procedural default of
those claims”). In this case, the State argued that Mag
wood procedurally defaulted his fair-warning claim by
failing to raise it properly in his collateral challenge to the
1986 judgment, and sought dismissal on that ground.
Only after ruling that Magwood did not procedurally
default the claim did the District Court sua sponte con
sider whether §2244(b) barred review.14 We leave that
procedural-default ruling to the Court of Appeals to review
in the first instance. Here, we underscore only that proce
dural-default rules continue to constrain review of claims
in all applications, whether the applications are “second or
——————
[the petitioner] is attempting to challenge the constitutionality of a
proceeding which obviously occurred after he filed, and obtained relief,
in his first habeas petition”).
14 See 481 F. Supp. 2d 1262, 1267 (MD Ala. 2007) (“This court split
the proceedings on the current petition into two stages: Stage I (deter
mining whether the claims were procedurally defaulted) and Stage II
(considering the merits of the claims that were not procedurally de
faulted)”). Few of Magwood’s claims survived the initial cut.

