Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

265 U. S. 224, 230 (1924), this would force federal courts
to address twice (or thrice, or more) the same claims of
error. The State and the victims would have to bear anew
the “ significant costs of federal habeas corpus review,”
McCleskey, supra, at 490–491, all because the petitioner
previously succeeded on a wholly different, discrete, and
possibly unrelated claim.
The Court’s suggestion that “[i]t will not take a court
long to dispose of such claims where the court has already
analyzed the legal issues,” ante, at 20, n. 15, misses the
point. This reassurance will be cold comfort to overworked
state district attorneys, who will now have to waste time
and resources writing briefs analyzing dozens of claims
that should be barred by abuse-of-the-writ principles. It is
difficult to motivate even the most dedicated professionals
to do their best work, day after day, when they have to
deal with the dispiriting task of responding to previously
rejected or otherwise abusive claims. But that is exactly
what the Court is mandating, under a statute that was
designed to require just the opposite result. If the analy
sis in this dissent is sound it is to be hoped that the States
will document the ill effects of the Court’s opinion so that
its costs and deficiencies are better understood if this
issue, or a related one, can again come before the Court.
The Court’s new exception will apply not only to death
penalty cases like the present one, where the newly raised
claim appears arguably meritorious. It will apply to all
federal habeas petitions following a prior successful peti
tion, most of which will not be in death cases and where
the abusive claims the Court now permits will wholly lack
merit. And, in this vein, it is striking that the Court’s
decision means that States subject to federal habeas re
view henceforth receive less recognition of a finality inter
est than the Federal Government does on direct review of
federal criminal convictions. See United States v. Parker,
101 F. 3d 527, 528 (CA7 1996) (Posner, C. J.) (“A party

