2

MAGWOOD v. PATTERSON
Opinion of the Court

rari, and now reverse. Because Magwood’s habeas appli
cation1 challenges a new judgment for the first time, it is
not “second or successive” under §2244(b).
I
After a conviction for a drug offense, Magwood served
several years in the Coffee County Jail in Elba, Alabama,
under the watch of Sheriff C. F. “Neil” Grantham. During
his incarceration, Magwood, who had a long history of
mental illness, became convinced that Grantham had
imprisoned him without cause, and vowed to get even
upon his release. Magwood followed through on his
threat. On the morning of March 1, 1979, shortly after his
release, he parked outside the jail and awaited the sher
iff’s arrival. When Grantham exited his car, Magwood
shot him and fled the scene.
Magwood was indicted by a grand jury for the murder of
an on-duty sheriff, a capital offense under Alabama Code
§13–11–2(a)(5) (1975).2 He was tried in 1981. The prose
cution asked the jury to find Magwood guilty of aggra
vated murder as charged in the indictment, and sought
the death penalty. Magwood pleaded not guilty by reason
of insanity; however, the jury found him guilty of capital
murder under §13–11–2(a)(5), and imposed the sentence of
death based on the aggravation charged in the indictment.
——————
1 Although 28 U. S. C. §2244(b) refers to a habeas “application,” we
use the word “petition” interchangeably with the word “application,” as
we have in our prior cases.
2 At the time of the murder, Alabama Code §13–11–2(a) provided: “If
the jury finds the defendant guilty, it shall fix the punishment at death
when the defendant is charged by indictment with any of the following
offenses and with aggravation, which must also be averred in the
indictment . . . .” The offenses included “murder of any . . . sheriff . . .
while . . . on duty or because of some official or job-related act.” §13–
11–2(a)(5). The same statute set forth a list of “aggravating circum
stances,” §13–11–6, but the trial court found that none existed in
Magwood’s case.

