Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
pre-AEDPA abuse-of-the-writ rules where §2244(b) mandates stricter
requirements. Pp. 13–15.
(c) This Court’s interpretation of §2244(b) is consistent with its
precedents. Because none of the pre-AEDPA cases that the State in
vokes, e.g., Wong Doo v. United States, 265 U. S. 239, applies “second
or successive” to an application challenging a new judgment, these
cases shed no light on the question presented here. Nor do postAEDPA cases contradict the approach adopted here. Only Burton v.
Stewart, 549 U. S. 147, comes close to addressing the threshold ques
tion whether an application is “second or successive” if it challenges a
new judgment, and that decision confirms that the existence of a new
judgment is dispositive. In holding that both of the petitioner’s ha
beas petitions had challenged the same judgment, this Court in Bur
ton expressly recognized that had there been a new judgment inter
vening between the habeas petitions, the result might have been
different. Here, there is such an intervening judgment. This is Mag
wood’s first application challenging that intervening judgment.
Magwood challenges not the trial court’s error in his first sentencing,
but the court’s new error when it conducted a full resentencing and
reviewed the aggravating evidence afresh. Pp. 15, 17–21.
(d) Because Magwood has not attempted to challenge his underly
ing conviction, the Court has no occasion to address the State’s objec
tion that this reading of §2244(b) allows a petitioner who obtains a
conditional writ as to his sentence to file a subsequent application
challenging not only his resulting, new sentence, but also his original,
undisturbed conviction. Nor does the Court address whether Mag
wood’s fair-warning claim is procedurally defaulted or whether the
Eleventh Circuit erred in rejecting his ineffective-assistance-of
counsel claim. Pp. 21–22.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to Part IV–
B. SCALIA, J., joined in full, and STEVENS, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR,
JJ., joined, except as to Part IV–B. BREYER, J., filed an opinion concur
ring in part and concurring in the judgment, in which STEVENS and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. KENNEDY, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which
ROBERTS, C. J., and GINSBURG and ALITO, JJ., joined.

