Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

for example, argues that he can only challenge previously
unraised errors made during sentencing. Brief for Peti
tioner 21, n. 8. Indeed, Magwood goes further and sug
gests that even the sentencing would not be reopened in a
case where a court’s order leads the trial court to revise
only the defendant’s term of supervised release. Id., at 28,
n. 11. If the Court is adopting this some-parts-of-the
criminal-judgment exception to the “second or successive”
application bar, it is unclear why the error that Magwood
now raises is a “new error” at all. After all, Magwood did
not challenge his death eligibility in his first habeas peti
tion but only disputed that he should not get the death
penalty, as a matter of discretion, if the trial court prop
erly weighed all of the aggravating and mitigating factors.
The state trial court conducted this reweighing and had no
reason to reconsider the uncontested finding that Mag
wood is death eligible. It is hard to see how the trial
court’s failure to reconsider sua sponte its previous death
eligibility finding is a “new error,” any more than its fail
ure to reconsider the various errors that may have taken
place at the guilt phase would have been new errors.
The Court contends the approach dictated by Panetti
“considerably undermine[s]—if not render[s] superfluous,”
ante, at 14, the exceptions in §2244(b)(2), which allow a
petitioner to bring a claim in a “second or successive”
application based on certain factual discoveries or based
on a new Supreme Court precedent that has been applied
retroactively. The Court seems to be saying that applying
Panetti’s rule would make the exceptions superfluous,
because any claim that would satisfy the exceptions would
necessarily satisfy the more general rule derived from the
abuse-of-the-writ doctrine. But the Court misconceives
the scope of the rule that an application is only “second or
successive” if it raises for the first time a claim that could
have been raised before. A second petition raising a claim
that could have been raised in a prior petition, even

