18

MAGWOOD v. PATTERSON
Opinion of the Court

rejected the petitioner’s argument “that his 1998 and 2002
petitions challenged different judgments.” Id., at 155; see
id., at 156–157. Although petitioner had styled his first
petition as a challenge to the 1994 conviction and his
second petition as a challenge to the 1998 sentence, we
concluded that both attacked the same “judgment” be
cause the 1998 sentence was already in place when the
petitioner filed his first application for federal habeas
relief. See id., at 156. In other words, the judgment he
challenged in his 1998 application was “the same one
challenged in the subsequent 2002 petition”; it “was the
judgment pursuant to which [the petitioner] was being
detained.” Ibid. (emphasis added). We expressly recog
nized that the case might have been different had there
been a “new judgment intervening between the two ha
beas petitions.” Ibid. There was no such judgment in
Burton, but there is such an intervening judgment here.
This is Magwood’s first application challenging that
intervening judgment. The errors he alleges are new. It is
obvious to us—and the State does not dispute—that his
claim of ineffective assistance at resentencing turns upon
new errors. But, according to the State, his fair-warning
claim does not, because the state court made the same
mistake before. We disagree. An error made a second
time is still a new error. That is especially clear here,
where the state court conducted a full resentencing and
reviewed the aggravating evidence afresh. See Sentencing
Tr., R. Tab 1, at R–25 (“The Court in f[or]mulating the
present judgment has considered the original record of the
trial and sentence. . . . The present judgment and sentence
has been the result of a complete and new assessment of all
of the evidence, arguments of counsel, and law” (emphasis
added)).13
——————
13 Cf. Walker v. Roth, 133 F. 3d 454, 455 (CA7 1997) (“None of these
new claims were raised in his first petition, nor could they have been;

