Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

looked to the nature of the claim raised in the second-in
time habeas petition to determine that the application was
not “second or successive.” Ibid.
The above principles apply to a situation, like the pre
sent one, where the petitioner in his first habeas proceed
ing succeeds in obtaining a conditional grant of relief,
which allows the state court to correct an error that oc
curred at the original sentencing. Assume, as alleged
here, that in correcting the error in a new sentencing
proceeding, the state court duplicates a different mistake
that also occurred at the first sentencing. The second
application is “second or successive” with respect to that
claim because the alleged error “could and should have”
been raised in the first petition. Woodard, 464 U. S., at
379 (opinion of Powell, J.). Put another way, under abuse
of-the-writ principles, a petitioner loses his right to chal
lenge the error by not raising a claim at the first opportu
nity after his claim becomes ripe. On the other hand, if
the petitioner raises a claim in his second habeas petition
that could not have been raised in the earlier petition—
perhaps because the error occurred for the first time dur
ing resentencing—then the application raising the claim is
not “second or successive” and §2244(b)(2)’s bar does not
apply.
Although the above-cited authorities are adequate to
show that the application in this case is “second or succes
sive,” it must be noted that no previous case from this
Court has dealt with the precise sequence of events here:
A petitioner attempts to bring a previously unraised claim
after a second resentencing proceeding that followed a
grant of federal habeas relief. The conclusion that such an
application is barred as “second or successive” unless the
claim was previously unavailable is consistent with the
approach of every court of appeals that has considered the
issue, although some of those cases highlight subtleties
that are not relevant under abuse-of-the-writ principles.

