Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

one attacked in an earlier petition, it cannot be said that
the two petitions are ‘successive’ ” (emphasis in original))).
The District Court rejected the State’s argument that
Magwood had procedurally defaulted the fair-warning
claim by failing to present it adequately to the state
courts, noting that Magwood had presented the claim both
in his Rule 20 petition and on appeal from the denial of
that petition. See 481 F. Supp. 2d, at 1285–1286; supra,
at 5. Addressing the merits, the District Court ruled that
Magwood’s death sentence was unconstitutional because
“at the time of the offense conduct, Magwood did not have
fair notice that he could be sentenced to death absent at
least one aggravating circumstance enumerated in former
1975 Ala. Code §13–11–6.” 481 F. Supp. 2d, at 1285. The
District Court also found the state court’s grounds for
rejecting Magwood’s ineffective-assistance claim unrea
sonable in light of clearly established federal law, noting
that Magwood’s attorney in fact had engaged substan
tively in the “complete and new” resentencing, and al
though the attorney could not be expected to object on
state-law grounds foreclosed by precedent, he was clearly
ineffective for failing to raise the federal fair-warning
claim. Id., at 1294 (internal quotation marks omitted).
The Court of Appeals reversed in relevant part. See 555
F. 3d 968 (CA11 2009). It concluded that the first step in
determining whether §2244(b) applies is to “separate the
new claims challenging the resentencing from the old
claims that were or should have been presented in the
prior application.” Id., at 975 (internal quotation marks
omitted). Under the Court of Appeals’ approach, any
claim that “challenge[s] the new, amended component of
the sentence” should be “regarded as part of a first peti
tion,” and any claim that “challenge[s] any component of
the original sentence that was not amended” should be
“regarded as part of a second petition.” Ibid. Applying
this test, the court held that because Magwood’s fair

