2

MAGWOOD v. PATTERSON
Syllabus
ond and successive” because he had an opportunity to raise it in his
first application but did not. Magwood counters that §2244(b) should
not apply to a first application challenging a new judgment interven
ing between habeas applications. This Court agrees. The phrase
“second or successive” is not defined by AEDPA and it is a “term of
art.” Slack v. McDaniel, 529 U. S. 473, 486. To determine its mean
ing, the Court looks first to the statutory context. Section 2244(b)’s
limitations apply only to a “habeas corpus application under §2254,”
i.e., an application on “behalf of a person in custody pursuant to the
judgment of a State court,” §2254(b)(1). Both §2254(b)’s text and the
relief it provides indicate that “second or successive” must be inter
preted with respect to the judgment challenged. A §2254 petitioner
“seeks invalidation . . . of the judgment authorizing [his] confine
ment,” Wilkinson v. Dotson, 544 U. S. 74, 83. If a conditional writ is
granted, “the State may seek a new judgment (through a new trial or
a new sentencing proceeding).” Ibid. The State errs in contending
that, if §2254 is relevant at all, “custody” and not “judgment,” is the
proper reference because unlawful “custody” is the “substance” re
quirement for habeas relief. This argument is unpersuasive. Section
2254 articulates the kind of custody that may be challenged under
§2254. Because §2254 applies only to custody pursuant to a state
court judgment, that “judgment” is inextricable and essential to re
lief. It is a requirement that distinguishes §2254 from other statutes
permitting constitutional relief. See, e.g., §§2255, 2241. The State’s
“custody”-based rule is also difficult to justify because applying “sec
ond or successive” to any subsequent application filed before a pris
oner’s release would require a prisoner who remains in continuous
custody for an unrelated conviction to satisfy §2244(b)’s strict rules to
challenge the unrelated conviction for the first time. Nothing in the
statutory text or context supports such an anomalous result. Pp. 8–
13.
(b) This Court is also not convinced by the State’s argument that a
“one opportunity” rule would be consistent with the statute and
should be adopted because it better reflects AEDPA’s purpose of pre
venting piecemeal litigation and gamesmanship. AEDPA uses “sec
ond or successive” to modify “application,” not “claim” as the State
contends, and this Court has refused to adopt an interpretation of
§2244(b) that would “elid[e] the difference between an ‘application’
and a ‘claim,’ ” Artuz v. Bennett, 531 U. S. 4, 9. The State’s reading
also reflects a more fundamental error. It would undermine or ren
der superfluous much of §2244(b)(2). In some circumstances, it would
increase the restrictions on review by applying pre-AEDPA abuse-of
the-writ rules where §2244(b)(2) imposes no restrictions. In others, it
would decrease the restrictions on review by applying more lenient

