(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MAGWOOD v. PATTERSON, WARDEN, ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–158.

Argued March 24, 2010—Decided June 24, 2010

Petitioner Magwood was sentenced to death for murder. After the Ala
bama courts denied relief on direct appeal and in postconviction pro
ceedings, he sought federal habeas relief. The District Court condi
tionally granted the writ as to his sentence, mandating that he be
released or resentenced. The state trial court sentenced him to death
a second time. He filed another federal habeas application, challeng
ing this new sentence on the grounds that he did not have fair warn
ing at the time of his offense that his conduct would permit a death
sentence under Alabama law, and that his attorney rendered ineffec
tive assistance during the resentencing proceeding. The District
Court once again conditionally granted the writ. The Eleventh Cir
cuit reversed, holding in relevant part that Magwood’s challenge to
his new death sentence was an unreviewable “second or successive”
challenge under 28 U. S. C. §2244(b) because he could have raised his
fair-warning claim in his earlier habeas application.
Held: The judgment is reversed and the case is remanded.
555 F. 3d 968, reversed and remanded.
JUSTICE THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to
Part IV–B, concluding that because Magwood’s habeas application
challenges a new judgment for the first time, it is not “second or suc
cessive” under §2244(b). Pp. 8–15, 17–22.
(a) This case turns on when a claim should be deemed to arise in a
“second or successive habeas corpus application.” §§2244(b)(1), (2).
The State contends that §2244(b), as amended by the Antiterrorism
and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), should be read to
bar claims that a prisoner had a prior opportunity to present. Under
this “one opportunity” rule, Magwood’s fair-warning claim was “sec

