Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

in the litigation, . . . [t]he Commonwealth will win[, a]nd
the Commonwealth will lose.” Ibid. Nor would sending
the matter to state court even avoid the prospect that “a
federal judge will resolve which part of the Common
wealth will prevail,” ibid., since the state-court loser could
always ask this Court to review the matter by certiorari.
(Or is that appeal also to be disallowed on grounds of
sovereign immunity? But see Cohens v. Virginia, 6
Wheat. 264 (1821).)6 And of course precisely the same
thing would happen if respondents specifically waived
their sovereign-immunity objections in this very case. Yet
no one would contend that despite the waiver, sovereign
immunity forbade the suit. So also here: If, by reason of
Ex parte Young, there has been no violation of sovereign
immunity, the prospect of a federal judge’s resolving
VOPA’s dispute with respondents does not make it so.
We do not doubt, of course, that there are limits on the
Federal Government’s power to affect the internal opera
tions of a State. See, e.g., Printz v. United States, 521
U. S. 898 (1997) (Congress may not commandeer state
officers); Coyle v. Smith, 221 U. S. 559, 579 (1911) (Con
gress may not dictate a State’s capital). But those limits
must be found in some textual provision or structural
premise of the Constitution. Additional limits cannot be
smuggled in under the Eleventh Amendment by barring a
suit in federal court that does not violate the State’s sov
ereign immunity. 7
——————
6 The dissent agrees that because of the “ ‘constitutional plan,’ ” post,
at 8, n. 3 (quoting McKesson Corp. v. Division of Alcoholic Beverages
and Tobacco, Fla. Dept. of Business Regulation, 496 U. S. 18, 30 (1990),
this Court can adjudicate disputes between state agencies without
offending sovereign immunity. But explaining away exceptions to its
theory does not advance the ball. It has not demonstrated that sover
eign immunity has anything at all to say about federal courts’ adjudi
cating interagency disputes.
7 We have no occasion to pass on other questions of federalism lurk
ing in this case, such as whether the DD or PAIMI Acts are a proper

