8

VIRGINIA OFFICE FOR PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY
v. STEWART
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

another in its own courts (as Virginia did here); it is quite
another thing for such a dispute to be resolved in federal
court against the State’s wishes. For this reason, the
Court’s examples of other suits pitting state entities
against one another are inapposite. In each of those hy
potheticals, the State consented to having a particular
forum resolve its internal conflict. That is not true here.3
In sum, the “special sovereignty interests” implicated
here make this case “sufficiently different from that giving
rise to the traditional Ex parte Young action so as to pre
clude the availability of that doctrine.” Seminole Tribe,
517 U. S., at 73. I would cling to reality and not extend
the fiction of Ex parte Young to cover petitioner’s suit.
II
The Court offers several justifications for its expansion
of Ex parte Young. None is persuasive.
The Court first contends that whether the Ex parte
Young fiction should be applied turns only on the “relief
sought” in a case. Ante, at 8–9 (internal quotation marks
omitted). The Court is correct that several of our prior
cases have focused on the nature of the relief requested.
See, e.g., Edelman, 415 U. S., at 664–671. That may well
be because “the difference between the type of relief
barred by the Eleventh Amendment and that permitted
——————
3 Sovereign immunity principles would of course not prohibit this
Court from reviewing the federal questions presented by this suit if it
had been filed in state court. See ante, at 11. We have held that “it is
inherent in the constitutional plan that when a state court takes
cognizance of a case, the State assents to appellate review by this Court
of the federal issues raised in the case whoever may be the parties to
the original suit, whether private persons, or the state itself.” McKes
son Corp. v. Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco, Fla. Dept. of
Business Regulation, 496 U. S. 18, 30 (1990) (internal quotation marks
and citation omitted). By contrast, there is nothing “inherent in the
constitutional plan” that warrants lower federal courts handling
intrastate disputes absent a State’s consent.

