12

VIRGINIA OFFICE FOR PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY
v. STEWART
Opinion of the Court

3
A weightier objection, perhaps, is the relative novelty of
this lawsuit. Respondents rightly observe that federal
courts have not often encountered lawsuits brought by
state agencies against other state officials. That does give
us pause. Lack of historical precedent can indicate a
constitutional infirmity, see, e.g., Free Enterprise Fund v.
Public Company Accounting Oversight Bd., 561 U. S. ____,
____ (2010) (slip op., at 25), and our sovereign-immunity
decisions have traditionally warned against “ ‘anomalous
and unheard-of proceedings or suits,’ ” Alden, 527 U. S., at
727 (quoting Hans, 134 U. S., at 18).
Novelty, however, is often the consequence of past con
stitutional doubts, but we have no reason to believe that is
the case here. In order to invoke the Ex parte Young
exception to sovereign immunity, a state agency needs two
things: first, a federal right that it possesses against its
parent State; and second, authority to sue other state
officials to enforce that right, free from any internal veto
wielded by the state government. These conditions will
rarely coincide—and at least the latter of them cannot
exist without the consent of the State that created the
agency and defined its powers.
See post, at 3–4
(KENNEDY, J., concurring). We are unaware that the
necessary conditions have ever presented themselves
except in connection with the DD and PAIMI Acts, and the
parties have referred us to no examples.8 Thus, the ap
——————
exercise of Congress’s enumerated powers. As JUSTICE KENNEDY ob
serves, whether the Acts run afoul of some other constitutional pro
vision (i.e., besides the Eleventh Amendment) “cannot be permitted
to distort the antecedent question of jurisdiction.” Post, at 5 (concur
ring opinion).
8 We think greatly exaggerated the dissent’s concern that, “[g]iven the
number of state agencies across the country that enjoy independent
litigating authority,” today’s decision “could potentially lead to all sorts
of litigation in federal courts addressing internal state government

