4

VIRGINIA OFFICE FOR PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY
v. STEWART 

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting


sidering whether Ex parte Young applied. After deciding
the plaintiffs “clearly satisfie[d]” the “straightforward
inquiry,” the Court went on to examine whether Congress
had created a detailed remedial scheme like the one in
Seminole Tribe. 535 U. S., at 645, 647–648 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Only after determining that
Congress had not done so did the Court conclude that the
suit could go forward under Ex parte Young.
If Verizon’s formulation set forth the only requirements
for bringing an action under Ex parte Young, two of our
recent precedents were wrongly decided. In Seminole
Tribe, the Court acknowledged that it had often “found
federal jurisdiction over a suit against a state official when
that suit seeks only prospective injunctive relief in order
to end a continuing violation of federal law.” 517 U. S., at
73 (internal quotation marks omitted). The Court held,
however, that the “situation presented” there was “suffi
ciently different from that giving rise to the traditional Ex
parte Young action so as to preclude the availability of
that doctrine.” Ibid.2
In Coeur d’Alene Tribe, the Court recognized that an
“allegation of an ongoing violation of federal law where the
requested relief is prospective is ordinarily sufficient to
invoke the Young fiction.” 521 U. S., at 281 (emphasis
added). The Court held, however, that the action could
not proceed under Ex parte Young because it implicated
“special sovereignty interests”—in that case, the State’s
——————
2 While I agree that in Seminole Tribe “we refused to permit suit to
proceed” under Ex parte Young because Congress “had foreclosed
recourse to the doctrine,” ante, at 7, n. 3, that simply confirms my point
that the availability of Young depends on more than just whether
Verizon’s prescribed inquiry is satisfied. In short, Seminole Tribe
makes clear that a plaintiff who files a “complaint alleg[ing] an ongoing
violation of federal law and seeks relief properly characterized as
prospective,” Verizon, 535 U. S., at 645 (internal quotation marks
omitted), may nonetheless be barred from pursuing an action under
Young.

