2

VIRGINIA OFFICE FOR PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY
v. STEWART
KENNEDY, J., concurring

Id., at 668; see Pennhurst State School and Hospital v.
Halderman, 465 U. S. 89, 103 (1984) (“Under the theory
of Young, such a suit [for restitution] would not be one
against the State since the federal-law allegation would
strip the state officer of his official authority. Neverthe
less, retroactive relief was barred by the Eleventh
Amendment”). And Pennhurst declined to extend Young
to suits alleging a state-law violation, for without the need
to ensure the supremacy of federal law there was no justi
fication for restricting state sovereignty. 465 U. S., at
105–106.
The “straightforward inquiry” of Verizon Md. derives
from Edelman and Pennhurst, both of which defined im
portant limits on Young in order to respect state sover
eignty while still adhering to principles necessary to im
plement the Supremacy Clause. As a result, Verizon Md.
incorporates the very balancing it might at first seem to
reject. Verizon Md. itself was an easy case, for it involved
the same kind of preenforcement assertion of a defense
that was at issue in Young. But when Young’s application
is explored in novel contexts, as in Idaho v. Coeur d’Alene
Tribe of Idaho, 521 U. S. 261 (1997), and also in this case,
the inquiry “proves more complex,” Verizon Md., supra, at
648 (KENNEDY, J., concurring).
In this case, in my view, the Virginia Office for Protec
tion and Advocacy may rely on Young, despite the some
what striking novelty of permitting a state agency to sue
officials of the same State in federal court. In the posture
of the case as it comes before the Court, it must be as
sumed that VOPA has a federal right to the records it
seeks, and so the extension of Young would vindicate the
Supremacy Clause. To be balanced against this important
interest is the need to preserve “the dignity and respect
afforded a State, which the immunity is designed to pro
tect.” Coeur d’Alene, supra, at 268. Permitting a state
agency like VOPA to sue officials of the same State does

