Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

KENNEDY, J., concurring

implicate the State’s important sovereign interest in using
its own courts to control the distribution of power among
its own agents. But the affront to the State’s dignity is
diminished to some extent when it is noted that if the
State had elected the alternate course of designating a
private protection and advocacy system it then would have
avoided any risk of internal conflict while still participat
ing in the federal program. The availability of that alter
nate course does not, in my view, weigh much in favor of
the validity of the underlying federal scheme, but the only
question here is the reach of the Young exception.
Virginia’s concern that the holding here upsets the
federal balance is further mitigated by the various protec
tions built into the structure of federal litigation to ensure
that state officials do not too often call upon the federal
courts to resolve their intramural disputes.
First, and most important, state law must authorize an
agency or official to sue another arm of the State. If
States do not wish to see their internal conflicts aired in
federal court, they need not empower their officers or
agencies to sue one another in a federal forum. And if
state officers are not by state law empowered to sue, they
may invoke federal jurisdiction only in their personal
capacities.
Second, to the extent there is some doubt under state
law as to an officer’s or agency’s power to sue, or any other
state-law issue that may be dispositive, federal courts
should abstain under Railroad Comm’n of Tex. v. Pullman
Co., 312 U. S. 496 (1941). Pullman recognizes the impor
tance of state sovereignty by limiting federal judicial
intervention in state affairs to cases where intervention is
necessary. If an open question of state-law would resolve
a dispute, then federal courts may wait for the resolution
of the state-law issue before adjudicating the merits.
Likewise, certification of questions of state law to the state
courts may pretermit an otherwise sensitive federal con

