10

VIRGINIA OFFICE FOR PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY
v. STEWART
Opinion of the Court

court as a plaintiff.5
But even if it were true that the State’s dignity were
offended in some way by the maintenance of this action in
federal court, that would not prove respondents’ case.
Denial of sovereign immunity, to be sure, offends the
dignity of a State; but not every offense to the dignity of a
State constitutes a denial of sovereign immunity. The
specific indignity against which sovereign immunity pro
tects is the insult to a State of being haled into court
without its consent. That effectively occurs, our cases
reasonably conclude, when (for example) the object of the
suit against a state officer is to reach funds in the state
treasury or acquire state lands; it does not occur just
because the suit happens to be brought by another state
agency. Respondents’ asserted dignitary harm is simply
unconnected to the sovereign-immunity interest.
The dissent complains that applying Ex parte Young to
this lawsuit divides Virginia against itself, since the op
posing parties are both creatures of the Commonwealth.
Post, at 7. Even if that were a distinctive consequence of
letting this suit proceed in federal court, it would have
nothing to do with the concern of sovereign-immunity—
whether the suit is against an unconsenting State, rather
than against its officers. But it is not a consequence of the
federal nature of the forum. The same result will follow if
the federal claim is sued upon in state court, as the dis
sent would require. There also, “[w]hatever the decision
——————
5 The dissent accuses us of circular reasoning, because we “wrongly
assum[e] [that] Virginia knew in advance the answer to the question
presented in this case.” Post, at 10. That would be true if we were
relying on the Commonwealth’s waiver of sovereign immunity. We are
not. We rely upon Ex parte Young. We say that Virginia has only itself
to blame for the position in which it finds itself, not because it con
sented to suit, but because it created a state entity to sue, instead of
leaving the task to a private entity. It did not have to know that this
would allow suit in federal court. Know or not know, Ex parte Young
produces that result.

