10

VIRGINIA OFFICE FOR PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY
v. STEWART 

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting


concurring). But I am aware of no doctrine to the effect
that an unconstitutional establishment is insulated from
challenge simply because a constitutional alternative is
available. And here the public and private systems are
not interchangeable alternatives in any event.
The Court’s analysis is also circular; it wrongly assumes
Virginia knew in advance the answer to the question
presented in this case. Only after concluding that Ex parte
Young applies to this arrangement—that for the first time
in history a state agency may sue an unwilling State in
federal court—can the Court suggest that Virginia know
ingly exposed its officers to suit in federal court.
In a similar vein, the Court asserts that because Vir
ginia law authorizes petitioner to exercise independent
litigating authority, petitioner should be treated the same
“as any other litigant.” Ante, at 13. But petitioner is not
like any other litigant. While it is true petitioner enjoys
some independence from the State’s executive branch, that
does not mean petitioner is independent from the State.
As noted, petitioner certainly views itself as “The Com
monwealth of Virginia,” App. 10, and would presumably
invoke sovereign immunity itself if sued. As a matter of
sovereign immunity law, it should make no difference how
a State chooses to allocate its governmental powers among
different state agencies or officials.
The Court is wrong to suggest that simply because
petitioner possesses independent litigating authority, it
may sue state officials in federal court. See ante, at 13
(“the Eleventh Amendment presents no obstacle” since it
“was Virginia law that created [petitioner] and gave it the
power to sue state officials”). There is more to this case
than merely whether petitioner needs the approval of the
Attorney General to sue, and the Virginia Code provisions
cited by the Court say nothing about actions against the
State in federal court.
If independent litigating authority is all that it takes,

