8

VIRGINIA OFFICE FOR PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY
v. STEWART
Opinion of the Court

We see no reason for a different result here. Although
respondents argue that VOPA’s status as a state agency
changes the calculus, there is no warrant in our cases for
making the validity of an Ex parte Young action turn on
the identity of the plaintiff. To be sure, we have been
willing to police abuses of the doctrine that threaten to
evade sovereign immunity. To do otherwise “would be
to adhere to an empty formalism.” Coeur d’Alene Tribe,
supra, at 270. But (as the dissent concedes, post, at 8
(opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.)) the limits we have recognized
reflect the principle that the “general criterion for deter
mining when a suit is in fact against the sovereign is the
effect of the relief sought,” Pennhurst, supra, at 107, not
who is bringing the lawsuit. Thus, Ex parte Young cannot
be used to obtain an injunction requiring the payment of
funds from the State’s treasury, see Edelman v. Jordan,
415 U. S. 651, 666 (1974); or an order for specific perform
ance of a State’s contract, see id., at 666–667; In re Ayers,
123 U. S. 443 (1887).
Coeur d’Alene Tribe, on which respondents heavily rely,
is an application of this principle. There we refused to
allow an Indian Tribe to use Ex parte Young to obtain
injunctive and declaratory relief establishing its exclusive
right to the use and enjoyment of certain submerged lands
in Idaho and the invalidity of all state statutes and regu
lations governing that land. 521 U. S., at 265. We deter
mined that the suit was “the functional equivalent of a
quiet title suit against Idaho,” would “extinguish . . . the
State’s control over a vast reach of lands and waters long
deemed by the State to be an integral part of its territory,”
and thus was barred by sovereign immunity. Id., at 282.
——————
funds—which are the chief statutory features respondents point to—
does not demonstrate that Congress has “displayed an intent not to
provide the ‘more complete and more immediate relief’ that would
otherwise be available under Ex parte Young.” Verizon Maryland, 535
U. S., at 647 (quoting Seminole Tribe, 517 U. S., at 75).

