2

VIRGINIA OFFICE FOR PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY
v. STEWART
Syllabus
that they are immune from suit under the Eleventh Amendment, but
the court held that the suit was permitted by the doctrine of Ex parte
Young, 209 U. S. 123, which normally allows federal courts to award
prospective relief against state officials for violations of federal law.
The Fourth Circuit reversed, finding that Ex parte Young did not ap
ply because the suit was brought by a state agency.

Held: Ex parte Young allows a federal court to hear a lawsuit for pro
spective relief against state officials brought by another agency of the
same State. Pp. 4–13.
(a) Absent a waiver of sovereign immunity by a State itself or a
valid abrogation by Congress, federal courts may not entertain a pri
vate person’s suit against a State. Pp. 4–5.
(b) The doctrine of Ex parte Young, which establishes an important
limitation on the sovereign-immunity principle, is accepted as neces
sary to “permit the federal courts to vindicate federal rights.” Penn
hurst State School and Hospital v. Halderman, 465 U. S. 89. It rests
on the premise that when a federal court commands a state official to
do nothing more than refrain from violating federal law, he is not the
State for sovereign-immunity purposes. It does not apply “when ‘the
state is the . . . party in interest.’ ” Id., at 101. Pp. 5–6.
(c) Entertaining VOPA’s action is consistent with precedent and
does not offend the distinctive interests protected by sovereign im
munity. Pp. 6–13.
(1) Verizon Md. Inc. v. Public Serv. Comm’n of Md., 535 U. S.
635, held that, in determining the Ex parte Young doctrine’s applica
bility, “a court need only conduct a ‘straightforward inquiry into
whether [the] complaint alleges an ongoing violation of federal law
and seeks relief properly characterized as prospective.’ ” Id., at 645.
VOPA’s suit satisfies that inquiry. Respondents concede that the ac
tion would be proper were VOPA a private organization rather than a
state agency. The “general criterion for determining when a suit is in
fact against the sovereign is the effect of the relief sought,” Penn
hurst, supra, at 107, not who is bringing the lawsuit. This Court ap
plied that criterion in Idaho v. Coeur d’Alene Tribe of Idaho, 521 U. S.
261, which held that an Indian Tribe could not invoke Ex parte Young
to bring what was essentially a quiet title suit that would “extinguish
[Idaho’s] control over . . . lands and waters long deemed . . . an inte
gral part of its territory.” Id., at 282. Respondents have advanced no
argument that the relief sought here threatens a similar invasion of
Virginia’s sovereignty. Pp. 7–9.
(2) Respondents claim that a State’s dignity is diminished when
a federal court adjudicates a dispute between its components. But a
State’s stature is not diminished to any greater degree when its own
agency sues to enforce its officers’ compliance with federal law than

