Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

under Ex parte Young will not in many instances be that
between day and night.” Id., at 667. But the Court is
wrong to draw a negative implication from those cases and
categorically conclude that there can be no other basis for
determining whether to extend Ex parte Young’s fiction.
The thrust of the Court’s argument appears to be that,
because the relief sought here is no different from that
which could be sought in a suit by a private protection and
advocacy system, the doctrine of Ex parte Young should
also apply to a suit brought by a state system. Ante, at 7–
9. But private entities are different from public ones:
They are private. When private litigants are involved, the
State is not turned against itself.
Contrary to the Court’s suggestion, see ante, at 9, there
is indeed a real difference between a suit against the State
brought by a private party and one brought by a state
agency. It is the difference between eating and cannibal
ism; between murder and patricide. While the ultimate
results may be the same—a full stomach and a dead
body—it is the means of getting there that attracts notice.
I would think it more an affront to someone’s dignity to be
sued by a brother than to be sued by a stranger. While
neither may be welcomed, that does not mean they would
be equally received.
The Court also contends that petitioner’s ability to sue
state officials in federal court “is a consequence of Vir
ginia’s own decision to establish a public [protection and
advocacy] system.” Ibid. This cannot mean that Virginia
has consented to an infringement on its sovereignty. That
argument was rejected below, and petitioner did not seek
certiorari on that issue. See Virginia v. Reinhard, 565
F. 3d 110, 116–118 (CA4 2009); Pet. for Cert. i.
Instead the Court claims that “Virginia has only itself to
blame”—if it wanted to avoid its current predicament, it
could have chosen to establish a private entity instead.
Ante, at 9–10, and n. 5; see also ante, at 3 (KENNEDY, J.,

