Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

Respondents have advanced no argument that the relief
sought in this case threatens any similar invasion of Vir
ginia’s sovereignty. Indeed, they concede that the very
injunction VOPA requests could properly be awarded by a
federal court at the instance of a private P&A system.
2
Respondents and the dissent argue that entertaining
VOPA’s lawsuit in a federal forum would nevertheless
infringe Virginia’s sovereign interests because it dimin
ishes the dignity of a State for a federal court to adjudicate
a dispute between its components. See Brief for Respon
dents 23–26; post, at 4–8 (arguing that “ ‘special sover
eignty interests’ ” bar VOPA’s lawsuit (quoting Coeur
d’Alene Tribe, supra, at 281)). We disagree. As an initial
matter, we do not understand how a State’s stature could
be diminished to any greater degree when its own agency
polices its officers’ compliance with their federal obliga
tions, than when a private person hales those officers into
federal court for that same purpose—something everyone
agrees is proper.4 And in this case, of course, VOPA’s
power to sue state officials is a consequence of Virginia’s
own decision to establish a public, rather than a private,
P&A system. We fail to perceive what Eleventh Amend
ment indignity is visited on the Commonwealth when, by
operation of its own laws, VOPA is admitted to federal
——————
4 The dissent compares VOPA’s lawsuit to such indignities as “canni
balism” and “patricide,” since it is a greater “affront to someone’s
dignity to be sued by a brother than to be sued by a stranger.” Post, at
9. We think the dissent’s principle of familial affront less than univer
sally applicable, even with respect to real families, never mind govern
mental siblings. Most of us would probably prefer contesting a testa
mentary disposition with a relative to contesting it with a stranger.
And confining one’s child to his room is called grounding, while confin
ing a stranger’s child is called kidnaping. Jurisdiction over this case
does not depend on which is the most apt comparison.

