Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

agency claiming to possess federal rights. Although we
have never encountered such a suit before, we are satis
fied that entertaining VOPA’s action is consistent with our
precedents and does not offend the distinctive interests
protected by sovereign immunity.
1
In Verizon Md. Inc. v. Public Serv. Comm’n of Md., 535
U. S. 635 (2002), we held that “[i]n determining whether
the doctrine of Ex parte Young avoids an Eleventh Amend
ment bar to suit, a court need only conduct a ‘straightfor
ward inquiry into whether [the] complaint alleges an
ongoing violation of federal law and seeks relief properly
characterized as prospective.’ ” Id., at 645 (quoting Idaho
v. Coeur d’Alene Tribe of Idaho, 521 U. S. 261, 296 (1997)
(O’Connor, J., concurring in part and concurring in judg
ment)). There is no doubt VOPA’s suit satisfies that
straightforward inquiry. It alleges that respondents’
refusal to produce the requested medical records violates
federal law; and it seeks an injunction requiring the pro
duction of the records, which would prospectively abate
the alleged violation. Respondents concede that were
VOPA a private organization rather than a state agency,
the doctrine would permit this action to proceed.3
——————
3 The

dissent is mistaken when it claims that applying the Verizon
Maryland test would mean two of our cases were “wrongly decided.”
Post, at 4 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.). We discuss the first of those
cases, Coeur d’Alene Tribe, below. Infra, at 8. As for the second,
Seminole Tribe, supra, it is inapposite. The reason we refused to
permit suit to proceed in that case was that the Indian Gaming Regula
tory Act created an alternative remedial scheme that would be under
mined by permitting Ex parte Young suits; Congress, we said, had
foreclosed recourse to the doctrine. See Seminole Tribe, supra, at 73–
76.
Respondents now argue—for the first time in this litigation—that
the DD and PAIMI Acts have the same effect here. We reject that
suggestion. The fact that the Federal Government can exercise over
sight of a federal spending program and even withhold or withdraw

