4

VIRGINIA OFFICE FOR PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY
v. STEWART
KENNEDY, J., concurring

troversy. Lehman Brothers v. Schein, 416 U. S. 386, 391
(1974) (Certification “helps build a cooperative judicial
federalism”).
Finally, federal law does not often create rights for state
officials or agencies to assert against other arms of the
State. True, officials may assert that their personal fed
eral rights are violated by unlawful state action, for exam
ple where the State engages in discriminatory employ
ment practices. But the statutory framework in the case
now before the Court is unusual in that it vests a state
agency itself with federal rights against the State. Stat
utes tend to protect the rights of individuals, not officers
or agencies, and the Constitution’s rights-creating Clauses
protect persons rather than officers. Because the Young
exception is available only to those who assert federal
violations, the paucity of federal rights vested in govern
ment officials makes the scope of the holding here a nar
row one.
All this is simply to underscore that the program at
issue may present constitutional questions but that the
parties do not raise them in this litigation. Virginia does
not argue, for example, that Congress exceeded its spend
ing power under Article I, §8 by forcing a state that wishes
to designate a public agency as its advocacy system to
allow intramural suits like the instant one or by requiring
that the agency be structured as Congress directs. E.g., 42
U. S. C. §15043(a)(2)(G) (system must “be independent of
any agency that provides treatment, services, or habilita
tion to individuals with developmental disabilities”);
§15044(a)(2) (“[N]ot more than 1/3 of the members of the
governing board may be appointed by the chief executive
officer of the State”). Young—a court-made doctrine based
on convenience, fiction, or both—neither implicates nor
subsumes these more fundamental concerns regarding the
excessive exercise of federal power. The Court should be
most cautious before deciding cases that might later lead

