Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 138, Orig.
_________________

STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA, PLAINTIFF v. STATE 

OF NORTH CAROLINA 

ON EXCEPTIONS TO THE REPORT OF THE SPECIAL MASTER
[January 20, 2010]

CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS, with whom JUSTICE THOMAS,
JUSTICE GINSBURG, and JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR join, concur
ring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part.
The Court correctly rejects the Special Master’s formu
lation of a new test for intervention in original actions,
and correctly denies the city of Charlotte leave to inter
vene. The majority goes on, however, to misapply our
established test in granting intervention to Duke Energy
Carolinas, LLC (Duke Energy), and the Catawba River
Water Supply Project (CRWSP).
The result is literally unprecedented: Even though
equitable apportionment actions are a significant part of
our original docket, this Court has never before granted
intervention in such a case to an entity other than a State,
the United States, or an Indian tribe. Never. That is
because the apportionment of an interstate waterway is a
sovereign dispute, and the key to intervention in such an
action is just that—sovereignty. The Court’s decision to
permit nonsovereigns to intervene in this case has the
potential to alter in a fundamental way the nature of our
original jurisdiction, transforming it from a means of
resolving high disputes between sovereigns into a forum
for airing private interests. Given the importance of
maintaining the proper limits on that jurisdiction, I re
spectfully dissent.


2

SOUTH CAROLINA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

I
Two basic principles have guided the exercise of our
constitutionally conferred original jurisdiction. The first is
an appreciation that our original jurisdiction, “delicate
and grave,” Louisiana v. Texas, 176 U. S. 1, 15 (1900), was
granted to provide a forum for the peaceful resolution of
weighty controversies involving the States. “The model
case for invocation of this Court’s original jurisdiction is a
dispute between States of such seriousness that it would
amount to casus belli if the States were fully sovereign.”
Texas v. New Mexico, 462 U. S. 554, 571, n. 18 (1983). In
determining whether to exercise original jurisdiction, we
accordingly focus on “the nature of the interest of the
complaining State,” and in particular the “seriousness and
dignity” of the claim asserted. Mississippi v. Louisiana,
506 U. S. 73, 77 (1992) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Original jurisdiction is for the resolution of state claims,
not private claims. To invoke that jurisdiction, a State
“must, of course, represent an interest of her own and not
merely that of her citizens or corporations.” Arkansas v.
Texas, 346 U. S. 368, 370 (1953); see Kansas v. Colorado,
533 U. S. 1, 8–9 (2001); Pennsylvania v. New Jersey, 426
U. S. 660, 665 (1976) (per curiam) (It is “settled doctrine
that a State has standing to sue only when its sovereign or
quasi-sovereign interests are implicated and it is not
merely litigating as a volunteer the personal claims of its
citizens”). And in deciding whether a State meets that
requirement, this Court considers whether the State is “in
full control of [the] litigation.” Kansas v. Colorado, supra,
at 8.
The second guiding principle is a practical one: We are
not well suited to assume the role of a trial judge. See
Ohio v. Wyandotte Chemicals Corp., 401 U. S. 493, 498
(1971). We have attempted to address that reality by
relying on the services of able special masters, who have
become vitally important in allowing us to manage our


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

original docket. But the responsibility for the exercise of
this Court’s original jurisdiction remains ours alone under
the Constitution.
These two considerations—that our original jurisdiction
is limited to high claims affecting state sovereignty, and
that practical realities limit our ability to act as a trial
court—converge in our standard for intervention in origi
nal actions. We articulated that standard in New Jersey v.
New York, 345 U. S. 369, 373 (1953) (per curiam). There,
we denied the city of Philadelphia’s motion for leave to
intervene in an action, to which the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania was already a party, involving the appor
tionment of the Delaware River. Id., at 373–374. We set
out the following test for intervention in an original action:
“An intervenor whose state is already a party should have
the burden of showing some compelling interest in his own
right, apart from his interest in a class with all other
citizens and creatures of the state, which interest is not
properly represented by the state.” Id., at 373.
This exacting standard is grounded on a “necessary
recognition of sovereign dignity,” id., at 373, under which
“the state, when a party to a suit involving a matter of
sovereign interest, ‘must be deemed to represent all its
citizens,’ ” id., at 372 (quoting Kentucky v. Indiana, 281
U. S. 163, 173–174 (1930)). In applying that doctrine to
motions to intervene, the New Jersey v. New York test
precludes a State from being “judicially impeached on
matters of policy by its own subjects,” and prevents the
use of the Court’s original jurisdiction to air “intramural
dispute[s]” that should be settled in a different forum—
namely, within the States. 345 U. S., at 373.
The New Jersey v. New York test is also “a working rule
for good judicial administration.” Ibid. Without it, “there
would be no practical limitation on the number of citizens,
as such, who would be entitled to be made parties.” Ibid.
Indeed, the Court observed that allowing Philadelphia to


4

SOUTH CAROLINA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

intervene would have made it difficult to refuse attempts
to intervene by other users of water from the Delaware
River, including other cities, and even “[l]arge industrial
plants.” Ibid. The New Jersey v. New York test, properly
applied, provides a much-needed limiting principle that
prevents the expansion of our original proceedings “to the
dimensions of ordinary class actions,” ibid., or “town
meeting lawsuits,” id., at 376 (Jackson, J., dissenting).
See also Ohio v. Wyandotte Chemicals Corp., supra, at
504; Utah v. United States, 394 U. S. 89, 95–96 (1969) (per
curiam).
II
Applying these principles, this Court has never granted
a nonsovereign entity’s motion to intervene in an equitable
apportionment action. The reason is straightforward: An
interest in water is an interest shared with other citizens,
and is properly pressed or defended by the State. And a
private entity’s interest in its particular share of the
State’s water, once the water is allocated between the
States, is an “intramural dispute” to be decided by each
State on its own. New Jersey v. New York, supra, at 373.
The interests of a State’s citizens in the use of water
derive entirely from the State’s sovereign interest in the
waterway. If the State has no claim to the waters of an
interstate river, then its citizens have none either. See
Hinderlider v. La Plata River & Cherry Creek Ditch Co.,
304 U. S. 92, 102 (1938). We have long recognized, there
fore, that the State must be deemed to represent its citi
zens’ interests in an equitable apportionment action. See
United States v. Nevada, 412 U. S. 534, 539 (1973) (per
curiam) (“For the purposes of dividing the waters of an
interstate stream with another State, [a State] has the
right, parens patriae, to represent all the nonfederal users
in its own State insofar as the share allocated to the other
State is concerned”). Precisely because the State repre


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

sents all its citizens in an equitable apportionment action,
these citizens have no claim themselves against the other
State. They are instead “bound by the result reached
through representation by their respective States,” regard
less of whether those citizens are parties to the suit.
Nebraska v. Wyoming, 515 U. S. 1, 22 (1995).
This basic principle applies without regard to whether
the State agrees with and will advance the particular
interest asserted by a specific private entity. The State
“ ‘must be deemed to represent all its citizens,’ ” New Jer
sey v. New York, supra, at 372 (quoting Kentucky v. Indi
ana, supra, at 173–174; emphasis added), not just those
who subscribe to the State’s position before this Court.
The directive that a State cannot be “judicially impeached
on matters of policy by its own subjects,” New Jersey v.
New York, supra, at 373, obviously applies to the case in
which a subject disagrees with the position of the State.
A State’s citizens also need not be made parties to an
equitable apportionment action because the Court’s judg
ment in such an action does not determine the water
rights of any individual citizen. We made that clear long
ago in two decisions arising from the same dispute, Wyo
ming v. Colorado, 298 U. S. 573 (1936), and Wyoming v.
Colorado, 309 U. S. 572 (1940). In those cases, Wyoming
sought to enforce this Court’s earlier decree apportioning
the Laramie River. See Wyoming v. Colorado, 260 U. S. 1
(1922). We held that the decree controlled the allocation
of water between Wyoming and Colorado, not within
them. As we recognized, our decision apportioning the
river did not “withdraw water claims dealt with therein
from the operation of local laws relating to their transfer
or . . . restrict their utilization in ways not affecting the
rights of one State and her claimants as against the other
State and her claimants.” 298 U. S., at 584. Thus, al
though the decree referred to particular uses of water in
Colorado, we held that those individual uses could vary


6

SOUTH CAROLINA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

from the terms set out in the decree, so long as the total
diversion of water in Colorado was no greater than the
decree allowed. See id., at 584–585; 309 U. S., at 579–581.
We reiterated the point in Nebraska v. Wyoming, 325 U. S.
589, 627 (1945), observing that the apportionment of a
waterway between the States has only an “indirect effect”
on the rights of individuals within the States.
All this explains our long history of rejecting attempts
by nonsovereign entities to intervene in equitable appor
tionment actions. New Jersey v. New York was itself an
equitable apportionment suit, and we denied intervention
in that case. We have also summarily denied motions to
intervene in other water disputes between the States. See
Arizona v. California, 514 U. S. 1081 (1995); Arizona v.
California, 345 U. S. 914 (1953); Nebraska v. Wyoming,
296 U. S. 548 (1935); Wisconsin v. Illinois, 279 U. S. 821
(1929). And we have strongly intimated in other decisions
(albeit in dictum) that private entities can rarely, if ever,
intervene in original actions involving the apportionment
of interstate waterways. See United States v. Nevada,
supra, at 538 (“[I]ndividual users of water . . . ordinarily
would have no right to intervene in an original action in
this Court”); Nebraska v. Wyoming, 515 U. S., at 22 (“We
have said on many occasions that water disputes among
States may be resolved by compact or decree without the
participation of individual claimants”).1
——————
1 The

majority contends that this dissent reads our precedents to
establish “a rule against nonstate intervention” in equitable appor
tionment actions. Ante, at 7, n. 3. The number of nonsovereigns that
the Court should permit to intervene in water disputes is small—
indeed, it was zero until today. But that does not mean that a private
entity could not satisfy the New Jersey v. New York test by, for exam
ple, asserting water-use rights that are not dependent upon the rights
of state parties. A private party (or perhaps a Compact Clause entity)
with a federal statutory right to a certain quantity of water might have
a compelling interest in an equitable apportionment action that is not
fairly represented by the States. The putative intervenors in this case,


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

The majority contends that the result in this case is not
a “new development,” and that its holding is supported by
“nearly 90 years” of precedent. Ante, at 6–7. But in sup
port of those statements, the majority cites only four
decisions in which the Court has granted a motion to
intervene in an original suit—and of course none in which
this Court granted the motion of a nonsovereign entity to
intervene in an equitable apportionment action. The cases
the majority cites demonstrate what constitutes a “compel
ling interest in [the intervenor’s] own right, apart from his
interest in a class with all other citizens and creatures of
the state.” New Jersey v. New York, supra, at 373. But
the intervenor interests in those cases were quite different
from the general shared interest in water at issue here.
Take Arizona v. California, 460 U. S. 605 (1983). There
we allowed several Indian Tribes to intervene in a water
dispute. Id., at 615. As the Court in that case made clear,
however, the Indian Tribes were allowed to intervene
because they were sovereign entities. Ibid. The Court
distinguished New Jersey v. New York on that very
ground. See 460 U. S., at 615, n. 5.
The other cases relied upon by the majority are even
farther afield. See Maryland v. Louisiana, 451 U. S. 725
(1981); Texas v. Louisiana, 426 U. S. 465 (1976) (per cu
riam); Oklahoma v. Texas, 258 U. S. 574 (1922). None was
an equitable apportionment action. Two involved bound
ary disputes in which the Court allowed nonsovereign
intervenors to claim title to certain parcels of property.
See Texas v. Louisiana, supra, at 466 (permitting inter
vention by the city of Port Arthur, Texas); Oklahoma v.
Texas, supra, at 580–581 (same for private parties). A
claim to title in a particular piece of property is quite
different from a general interest shared by all citizens in
the State’s waters. And it would be particularly inapt to
—————— 

however, do not hold rights of this sort. 



8

SOUTH CAROLINA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

draw general conclusions about intervention from Okla
homa v. Texas, in which the Court took the southern half
of the Red River into receivership. See 258 U. S., at 580.
In subsequently allowing persons to intervene to assert
claims to the subject property, the Court relied explicitly
on the fact that the receiver had possession and control of
the claimed parcels, and “no other court lawfully [could]
interfere with or disturb that possession or control.” Id.,
at 581.
The majority’s reliance on Maryland v. Louisiana is
equally unavailing. There, several States challenged the
constitutionality of Louisiana’s application of a tax on
natural gas that was brought into that State. 451 U. S., at
728. In two sentences within a long footnote, the Court
mentioned that it was permitting a group of pipeline
companies to intervene and challenge the tax. Id., at 745,
n. 21. The Court made clear that the pipeline companies
were able to intervene in light of the particular circum
stances in that case—namely, Louisiana’s tax was “di
rectly imposed on the owner of imported gas,” and “the
pipelines most often own[ed] the gas.” Ibid. Again, an
interest in a tax imposed only on discrete parties is obvi
ously different from a general interest shared by all citi
zens of the State.
III
Charlotte, Duke Energy, and CRWSP claim a variety of
specific needs for water to justify their intervention. But
all those particular needs derive from an interest in the
water of the Catawba River. That interest is not exclu
sive, but is instead shared “with all other citizens and
creatures of the state.” New Jersey v. New York, 345 U. S.,
at 373. The State’s “citizens and creatures” certainly put
the Catawba’s water and flow to different uses—many for
drinking water, some for farming or recreation, others for
generating power. That does not, however, make their


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

interest in the water itself unique. And it is the respective
interests of the States in the water itself that are being
litigated in this original action—not the claims of particu
lar citizens that they be allowed to put the water to speci
fied uses. The latter subject is “an intramural dispute
over the distribution of water within the [State],” ibid.,
and is not the subject of this original proceeding.
The majority recognizes as much with respect to Char
lotte, ante, at 16–18, but departs from these principles in
granting intervention to Duke Energy and CRWSP. The
majority’s reasons for doing so do not withstand scrutiny.
The majority initially contends that Duke Energy
should be allowed to intervene because it possesses “rele
vant information” that we are “likely to consider.” Ante, at
14, 16. Nonparties often do, but that is not a “compelling
interest” justifying intervention. I have little doubt that
Philadelphia possessed pertinent information in New
Jersey v. New York, but we did not permit Philadelphia to
intervene on that ground. Parties to litigation have ready
means of access to relevant information held by nonpar
ties, and those nonparties can certainly furnish such
information on their own if they consider it in their best
interests (through, for example, participation as amici
curiae).
The majority also states that Duke Energy has compel
ling interests in its hydroelectric operations along the
river, and in “the amount of water that Duke Energy
needs to sustain its operations and provide electricity to
the region.” Ante, at 15. These are simply interests in a
particular use of water or its flow. Even if Duke Energy
uses water for particularly important purposes, its inter
ests are no different in kind from the interests of any other
entity that relies on water for its commercial operations.
Finally, the majority asserts that Duke Energy “has a
unique and compelling interest in protecting the terms of
its existing [Federal Energy Regulatory Commission


10

SOUTH CAROLINA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

(FERC)] license and the [Comprehensive Licensing Agree
ment (CRA)] that forms the basis of Duke Energy’s pend
ing renewal application.” Ibid. And the majority contends
that neither State represents these interests because
“[n]either State has signed the CRA or expressed an inten
tion to defend its terms,” and because North Carolina has
even expressed its intent to challenge the terms of the
CRA in this action. Ante, at 16.
Again, all this amounts to is an articulation of the rea
son Duke Energy asserts a particular interest in the wa
ters of the Catawba. Other citizens of North Carolina
doubtless have reasons of their own, ones they find as
important as Duke Energy believes its to be. Weighing
those interests is an “intramural” matter for the State.
New Jersey v. New York, supra, at 373. In addition, the
Federal Government is doubtless familiar with the pend
ing FERC proceedings, and it sees no corresponding need
for us to grant Duke Energy’s motion to intervene. See
Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 20, n. 3.
As for CRWSP, the Special Master concluded that it
should be allowed to intervene, but only because its posi
tion was “similar analytically to Charlotte’s.” First In
terim Report of Special Master, O. T. 2008, No. 138, Orig.,
p. 25. The Court rejects Charlotte’s motion, but nonethe
less allows CRWSP to intervene on a ground not relied
upon by the Special Master. According to the majority,
CRWSP should be allowed to intervene because, as a
bistate entity, its full range of interests cannot be repre
sented entirely by either North or South Carolina. See
ante, at 11–14.
CRWSP’s motion arguably presents a different case
from that of Duke Energy, one not definitively resolved by
this Court in New Jersey v. New York. At the end of the
day, however, I agree with the Special Master’s premise—
CRWSP’s position is really no different from Charlotte’s. I
disagree with her conclusion, of course, because I agree


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

with the Court that Charlotte should not be allowed to
intervene.
A bistate entity cannot be allowed to intervene merely
because it embodies an “intermingling of state interests.”
Ante, at 13, n. 6. The same would be true of any bistate
entity, or indeed any corporation or individual conducting
business in both States. An exception for such cases
would certainly swallow the New Jersey v. New York rule.
Entities with interests in both States must seek to vindi
cate those interests within each State. Bistate entities are
not States entitled to invoke our original jurisdiction, and
should not be effectively accorded an automatic right to
intervene as parties in cases within that jurisdiction.
With respect to both Duke Energy and CRWSP, the
majority further relies on its conclusion that the States
will not “properly represent” the interests of those entities.
Ante, at 13; see ante, at 16. If by that the Court means
that the States may adopt positions adverse to Duke
Energy and CRWSP, that surely cannot be enough. The
guiding principle articulated in New Jersey v. New York is
“that the state, when a party to a suit involving a matter
of sovereign interest, ‘must be deemed to represent all its
citizens,’ ” and may not be “judicially impeached on mat
ters of policy by its own subjects.” 345 U. S., at 372–373
(quoting Kentucky v. Indiana, 281 U. S., at 173–174). This
case involves a “matter of sovereign interest”—the equita
ble apportionment of water—and the States therefore
“properly represen[t]” the shared interests in water of “all”
their citizens, including Duke Energy and CRWSP. 345
U. S., at 372–373. An interest is “not properly repre
sented” by a State, id., at 373, when it is not a sovereign
interest but instead a parochial one, such as the interests
held to justify intervention in the cases on which the
majority relies. See supra, at 7–8.
The majority also pays little heed to the practical con
straints on this Court’s original jurisdiction. It is hard to


12

SOUTH CAROLINA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

see how the arguments the Court accepts today could not
also be pressed by countless other water users in either
North or South Carolina. Under the Court’s analysis, I
see “no practical limitation on the number of citizens, as
such, who would be entitled to be made parties.” New
Jersey v. New York, supra, at 373. To the extent interven
tion is allowed for some private entities with interests in
the water, others who also have an interest will feel com
pelled to intervene as well—and we will be hard put to
refuse them. See Utah v. United States, 394 U. S., at 95–
96 (denying intervention to a corporation that sought to
quiet its title to land because, “[i]f [it were] admitted,
fairness would require the admission of any of the other
120 private landowners who wish to quiet their title . . . ,
greatly increasing the complexity of this litigation”). An
equitable apportionment action will take on the character
istics of an interpleader case, with all those asserting
interests in the limited supply of water jostling for their
share like animals at a water hole. And we will find our
selves in a “quandary whereby we must opt either to pick
and choose arbitrarily among similarly situated litigants
or to devote truly enormous portions of our energies to
[original] matters.” Ohio v. Wyandotte Chemicals Corp.,
401 U. S., at 504.
Allowing nonsovereign entities to intervene as parties
will inevitably prolong the resolution of this and other
equitable apportionment actions, which already take
considerable time. Intervenors do not come alone—they
bring along more issues to decide, more discovery re
quests, more exceptions to the recommendations of the
Special Master. In particular, intervention makes settling
a case more difficult, as a private intervenor has the right
to object to a settlement agreement between the States, if
not the power to block a settlement altogether. Cf. Fire
fighters v. Cleveland, 478 U. S. 501, 529 (1986).
And all this for what? The Special Master, and through


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

her the Court, can have the benefit of the views of those
seeking to intervene by according them the status of amici
curiae. “Where he presents no new questions, a third
party can contribute usually most effectively and always
most expeditiously by a brief amicus curiae and not by
intervention.” Bush v. Viterna, 740 F. 2d 350, 359 (CA5
1984) (per curiam) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Courts often treat amicus participation as an alternative
to intervention. See 7C C. Wright, A. Miller, & M. Kane,
Federal Practice and Procedure §1913, p. 495, and n. 26
(2007) (citing examples). And this Court often denies
motions to intervene while granting leave to participate as
an amicus in original actions generally, see, e.g., Kentucky
v. Indiana, 445 U. S. 941 (1980); United States v. Califor
nia, 377 U. S. 926 (1964); cf. New Hampshire v. Maine,
426 U. S. 363, 365, n. 2 (1976), and in equitable appor
tionment actions specifically, see, e.g., Arizona v. Califor
nia, 530 U. S. 392, 419, n. 6 (2000); Nebraska v. Wyoming,
507 U. S. 584, 589–590 (1993).
Nebraska v. Wyoming is particularly instructive on this
point. The Court there adopted the recommendation of
the Special Master to deny intervention to certain entities.
See id., at 589–590; Second Interim Report of Special
Master, O. T. 1991, No. 108, Orig., pp. 108–109. The
interests of those entities in the water dispute were quite
similar to the interests of the entities seeking to intervene
here: One operated a powerplant and a reservoir on the
Laramie River, and another was a power district seeking
to protect its FERC license. See First Interim Report of
Special Master, O. T. 1988, No. 108, Orig., pp. 11–14, 9a.
While it adopted the Special Master’s recommendation to
deny intervention, the Court nonetheless permitted those
entities to participate as amici. See 507 U. S., at 589–590;
Nebraska v. Wyoming, 502 U. S. 1055 (1992).2 The major
——————
2 No

party filed exceptions to the Special Master’s recommendation to


14

SOUTH CAROLINA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

ity does not explain why that familiar and customary
approach might be inadequate in this case.
*
*
*
Our original jurisdiction over actions between States is
concerned with disputes so serious that they would be
grounds for war if the States were truly sovereign. Texas
v. New Mexico, 462 U. S., at 571, n. 18. A dispute between
States over rights to water fits that bill; a squabble among
private entities within a State over how to divvy up that
State’s share does not. A judgment in an equitable appor
tionment action binds the States; it is not binding with
respect to particular uses asserted by private entities.
Allowing intervention by such entities would vastly com
plicate and delay already complicated and lengthy actions.
And the benefits private entities might bring can be read
ily secured, as has typically been done, by their participa
tion as amici curiae.
In light of all this, it is difficult to understand why the
Court grants nonsovereign entities leave to intervene in
this equitable apportionment action, and easy to under
stand why the Court has never before done so in such a
case.
I would grant South Carolina’s exceptions, and deny the
motions to intervene.

——————
deny intervention in Nebraska v. Wyoming. The Special Master later
allowed one of the entities, Basin Electric Power Cooperative, to inter
vene as a party based on changed circumstances. See Addendum to
Reply Brief for Duke Energy 2–5. That decision was never reviewed by
the Court.

