10

HUI v. CASTANEDA
Opinion of the Court

exception in §2679(b)(2)(A) impliedly repealed pre-existing
immunity provisions to the extent of any inconsistency.
“As we have emphasized, repeals by implication are not
favored and will not be presumed unless the intention of
the legislature to repeal is clear and manifest.” Hawaii v.
Office of Hawaiian Affairs, 556 U. S. ___, ___–___ (2009)
(slip op., at 10–11) (internal quotation marks and altera
tion omitted). Respondents have pointed to nothing in
§2679(b)’s text or drafting history that suggests that Con
gress intended to repeal the more comprehensive immu
nity provided by §233(a).
Finally, respondents contend that other features of §233
show that subsection (a) does not make the remedy under
the FTCA exclusive of all other actions against PHS per
sonnel. Respondents first note §233’s lack of a procedure
for “scope certification” in federal-court actions. Under the
FTCA, “certification by the Attorney General that the
defendant employee was acting within the scope of his
office or employment at the time of the incident out of
which the claim arose” transforms an action against an
individual federal employee into one against the United
States. §2679(d)(1). Because §233 does not provide a
similar mechanism for scope certification in federal-court
actions,9 respondents contend that PHS defendants seek
ing to invoke the immunity provided by §233(a) must rely
on the FTCA’s scope certification procedure, set forth in
§2679(d). Section 2679(d), respondents note, is in turn
subject to the “limitations and exceptions” applicable to
actions under the FTCA—including the exception for
Bivens actions provided by §2679(b)(2). See §2679(d)(4).
——————
9 Section 233(c) includes such a provision for state-court actions, au
thorizing removal to federal court “[u]pon a certification by the Attor
ney General that the defendant was acting in the scope of his employ
ment at the time of the incident out of which the suit arose,” but unlike
§2679(d) it does not prescribe a particular mechanism for substituting
the United States in federal-court actions.

