(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

HUI ET AL. v. CASTANEDA, AS PERSONAL REPRESENTA-

TIVE OF THE ESTATE OF CASTANEDA, ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1529. Argued March 2, 2010—Decided May 3, 2010
While detained by immigration authorities, Francisco Castaneda per
sistently sought treatment for a bleeding, suppurating lesion. Al
though a U. S. Public Health Service (PHS) physician’s assistant and
three outside specialists repeatedly advised that Castaneda urgently
needed a biopsy, petitioners—a PHS physician and a commissioned
PHS officer—denied the request. After Castaneda was released from
custody, tests confirmed that he had metastatic cancer. He then filed
this suit, raising medical negligence claims against the United States
under the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA), 28 U. S. C. §§1346, 2671–
2680, and constitutional claims against petitioners under Bivens v.
Six Unknown Fed. Narcotics Agents, 403 U. S. 388, 397. When Cas
taneda died, respondents, his representative and heir, were substi
tuted as plaintiffs. The District Court denied petitioners’ motion to
dismiss the Bivens action, rejecting their claim of absolute immunity
under 42 U. S. C. §233(a), which provides: “The [FTCA] remedy
against the United States provided by [28 U. S. C. §§1346(b) and
2672] for damage for personal injury, including death, resulting from
the performance of medical . . . or related functions . . . by any [PHS]
commissioned officer or employee . . . while acting within the scope of
his office or employment, shall be exclusive of any other civil action or
proceeding by reason of the same subject-matter against the officer or
employee.” (Emphasis added.) The Ninth Circuit affirmed.
Held: The immunity provided by §233(a) precludes Bivens actions
against individual PHS officers or employees for harms arising out of
constitutional violations committed while acting within the scope of
their office or employment. Pp. 5–13.
(a) The Court’s inquiry begins and ends with §233(a)’s text, which

