6

HUI v. CASTANEDA
Opinion of the Court

does the provision’s inclusive reference to all civil proceed
ings arising out of “the same subject-matter.” We have
previously cited §233(a) to support the contention that
“Congress follows the practice of explicitly stating when it
means to make FTCA an exclusive remedy.” Carlson, 446
U. S., at 20. The meaning of §233(a) has become no less
explicit since we last made that observation.
Our reading of §233(a)’s text is not undermined by the
fact that the provision preceded our decision in Bivens.
Contrary to the view of the Court of Appeals, that a Bivens
remedy had not yet been recognized when §233(a) was
enacted does not support the conclusion that Congress, in
making the remedy provided by the FTCA “exclusive of
any other civil action,” did not mean what it said. Lan
guage that broad easily accommodates both known and
unknown causes of action.
The later enacted Federal Employees Liability Reform
and Tort Compensation Act of 1988 (Westfall Act), 102
Stat. 4563, further supports this understanding of §233(a).
The Westfall Act amended the FTCA to make its remedy
against the United States the exclusive remedy for most
claims against Government employees arising out of their
official conduct.5 In providing this official immunity,
Congress used essentially the same language as it did in
§233(a), stating that the remedy against the United States
is “exclusive of any other civil action or proceeding,”
§2679(b)(1). Notably, Congress also provided an exception
for constitutional violations. Pursuant to §2679(b)(2), the
immunity granted by §2679(b)(1) “does not extend or apply
to a civil action against an employee of the Government
——————
5 Prior to the Westfall Act amendments, the FTCA authorized substi
tution of the United States as a defendant in suits against federal
employees for harms arising out of conduct undertaken in the scope of
their employment, see 28 U. S. C. §1346(b) (1982 ed.), but it made that
remedy “exclusive” only for harms resulting from a federal employee’s
operation of a motor vehicle, §2679(b).

