Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

from custody on February 5. A week later, biopsy results
confirmed that Castaneda was suffering from penile can
cer. The next day, Castaneda had his penis amputated,
and he began chemotherapy after tests confirmed that the
cancer had metastasized to his groin. The treatment was
unsuccessful, and Castaneda died in February 2008.
Three months before his death, Castaneda filed suit
against petitioners in the United States District Court for
the Central District of California. As relevant, Castaneda
raised medical negligence claims against the United
States under the FTCA and Bivens claims against peti
tioners for deliberate indifference to his serious medical
needs in violation of his Fifth, Eighth, and Fourteenth
Amendment rights.2 After Castaneda’s death, respon
dents—Castaneda’s sister, Yanira Castaneda, and his
daughter, Vanessa Castaneda (by and through her
mother, Lucia Pelayo)—amended the complaint to substi
tute themselves as plaintiffs. Yanira and Vanessa Casta
neda are respectively the representative of and heir to
Castaneda’s estate.
Petitioners moved to dismiss the claims against them,
contending that §233(a) gives them absolute immunity
from Bivens actions by making a suit against the United
States under the FTCA the exclusive remedy for harms
caused by PHS personnel in the course of their medical or
related duties. The District Court denied the motion,
concluding that §233(a)’s text and history evidence a
congressional intent to preserve Bivens actions. Casta
——————
2 In

Bivens v. Six Unknown Fed. Narcotics Agents, 403 U. S. 388, 397
(1971), this Court recognized an implied cause of action for damages
against federal officers alleged to have violated the petitioner’s Fourth
Amendment rights. We subsequently found such a remedy available
for violations of an individual’s rights under the Cruel and Unusual
Punishments Clause of the Eighth Amendment and the Due Process
Clause. See Carlson v. Green, 446 U. S. 14, 17–19 (1980); Davis v.
Passman, 442 U. S. 228, 230 (1979).

