8

HUI v. CASTANEDA
Opinion of the Court

federal remedy was also available under the FTCA. 446
U. S., at 16–17. Many of our subsequent Bivens decisions
likewise addressed only the existence of an implied cause
of action for an alleged constitutional violation. See, e.g.,
Wilkie v. Robbins, 551 U. S. 537, 549 (2007) (declining “to
devise a new Bivens damages action for retaliating against
the exercise of ownership rights”); Bush v. Lucas, 462
U. S. 367, 368 (1983) (declining to “authorize a new non
statutory damages remedy for federal employees whose
First Amendment rights are violated by their superiors”).
This case presents the separate question whether peti
tioners are immune from suit for the alleged violations.
To determine a defendant’s amenability to suit, we con
sider whether he or she may claim the benefits of official
immunity for the alleged misconduct. Because petitioners
invoke only the immunity provided by §233(a), the ques
tion in this case is answered solely by reference to whether
that provision gives petitioners the immunity they claim.6
As noted, the text of §233(a) plainly indicates that it
precludes a Bivens action against petitioners for the harm
alleged in this case. Respondents offer three arguments in
support of their claim that it does not. None persuades us
that §233(a) means something other than what it says.
Respondents first contend that §233(a) incorporates the
entirety of the FTCA, as amended by the Westfall Act,
through its reference to §1346(b).7 Section 1346(b) in turn
refers to “the provisions of chapter 171,” which constitute
——————
6 We express no opinion as to whether a Bivens remedy is otherwise
available in these circumstances, as the question is not presented in
this case.
7 Section 1346(b) provides in pertinent part that, “[s]ubject to the
provisions of chapter 171 of [Title 28], the district courts . . . shall have
exclusive jurisdiction of civil actions on claims against the United
States, for money damages . . . for injury or loss of property, or personal
injury or death caused by the negligent or wrongful act or omission of
any employee of the Government while acting within the scope of his
office or employment.”

