4

CIGNA CORP. v. AMARA
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

what they did decide. And this, bear in mind, is not just a
guess as to what the District Court would have done if it
had known that its §502(a)(1)(B) relief was (as we today
hold) improper. The apparent answer to that is that it
would have denied relief, since it thought itself con
strained by “certain cases from this Court that [have]
narrowed [§502(a)(3)],” ante, at 16. No, the course the
Court guesses about is what the District Court would have
done if it had known both that §502(a)(1)(B) denies relief
and that §502(a)(3) provides it. This speculation upon
speculation hardly renders our discussion of §502(a)(3)
relevant to the decision below; it is utterly irrelevant.
Why the Court embarks on this peculiar path is beyond
me. It cannot even be explained by an eagerness to
demonstrate—by blatant dictum, if necessary—that, by
George, plan members misled by an SPD will be compen
sated. That they will normally be compensated is not in
doubt. As the opinion for the Court notes, ante, at 10, the
Second Circuit has interpreted ERISA as permitting the
invalidation of plan amendments not preceded by proper
notice, by reason of §204(h), which reads:
“An applicable pension plan may not be amended so
as to provide for a significant reduction in the rate of
future benefit accrual unless the plan administrator
provides the notice described in paragraph (2) to each
applicable individual . . . .” 29 U. S. C. §1054(h)(1).
This provision appears a natural fit to respondents’ claim,
which is not that CIGNA was prohibited from changing its
plan, but that CIGNA “failed to give them proper notice of
changes to their benefits.” Ante, at 1. It was inapplicable
here only because of the peculiar facts of this case and the
manner in which respondents chose to argue the case. 2
——————
2 The District Court found that §204(h) was unhelpful because
CIGNA had provided a valid notice of its decision to freeze benefits
under the old plan. If the new plan were invalidated because of a

