Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
and is used to prevent fraud. Second, the part of the remedy holding
CIGNA to its promise that the new plan would not take from its em
ployees previously accrued benefits resembles estoppel, also a tradi
tional equitable remedy. Third, the injunctions require the plan ad
ministrator to pay already retired beneficiaries money owed them
under the plan as reformed. Equity courts possessed the power to
provide monetary “compensation” for a loss resulting from a trustee’s
breach of duty, or to prevent the trustee’s unjust enrichment. That
surcharge remedy extended to a breach of trust committed by a fidu
ciary encompassing any violation of duty imposed on that fiduciary.
Pp. 16–20.
2. Because §502(a)(3) authorizes “appropriate equitable relief” for
violations of ERISA, the relevant standard of harm will depend on
the equitable theory by which the District Court provides relief. That
court is to conduct the analysis in the first instance, but there are
several equitable principles that it might apply on remand. Neither
ERISA’s relevant substantive provisions nor §502(a)(3) sets a particu
lar standard for determining harm. And equity law provides no gen
eral principle that “detrimental reliance” must be proved before a
remedy is decreed. To the extent any such requirement arises, it is
because the specific remedy being contemplated imposes that re
quirement. Thus, when a court exercises authority under §502(a)(3)
to impose a remedy equivalent to estoppel, a showing of detrimental
reliance must be made. However, equity courts did not insist on a
detrimental reliance showing where they ordered reformation where
a fraudulent suppression, omission, or insertion materially affected
the substance of a contract. Nor did they require a detrimental reli
ance showing when they ordered surcharge. They simply ordered a
trust or beneficiary made whole following a trustee’s breach of trust.
This flexible approach belies a strict detrimental reliance require
ment. To be sure, a fiduciary can be surcharged under §502(a)(3)
only upon a showing of actual harm, and such harm may consist of
detrimental reliance. But it might also come from the loss of a right
protected by ERISA or its trust-law antecedents. It is not difficult to
imagine how the failure to provide proper summary information here,
in violation of ERISA, injured employees even if they did not them
selves act in reliance on the summaries. Thus, to obtain relief by
surcharge for violations of §§102(a) and 104(b), a plan participant or
beneficiary must show that the violation caused injury, but need
show only actual harm and causation, not detrimental reliance.
Pp. 20–22.
348 Fed. Appx. 627, vacated and remanded.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,

