Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

Rather than attempting to read the District Judge’s
palm, I would simply remand. If the District Court dis
misses the case based on an incorrect reading of Mertens,
the Second Circuit can correct its error, and if the Second
Circuit does not do so this Court can grant certiorari. The
Court’s discussion of the relief available under §502(a)(3)
and Mertens is purely dicta, binding upon neither us nor
the District Court. The District Court need not read any
of it—and, indeed, if it takes our suggestions to heart, we
may very well reverse. Even if we adhere to our dicta that
contract reformation, estoppel, and surcharge are “ ‘dis
tinctively equitable’ remedies,” ante, at 18, it is far from
clear that they are available remedies in this case. The
opinion for the Court does not say (much less hold) that
they are and disclaims the implication, see ante, at 20.
Contract reformation is a standard remedy for altering
the terms of a writing that fails to express the agreement
of the parties “owing to the fraud of one of the parties and
mistake of the other.” 27 Williston on Contracts §69:55,
p. 160 (4th ed. 2010). But here, the Court would be em
ploying that doctrine to alter the terms of a contract in
response to a third party’s misrepresentations—not those
of a party to the contract. The SPD is not part of the
ERISA plan, and it was not written by the plan’s sponsor.
Although in this case CIGNA wrote both the plan and the
SPD, it did so in different capacities: as sponsor when
writing the plan, and as administrator when preparing the
SPD. ERISA “carefully distinguishes these roles,” ante, at
15; see also Beck, 551 U. S., at 101, and nothing the Court
cites suggests that they blend together when performed by
——————
defective §204(h) notice, the freeze would return to force, and respon
dents would be worse off. Respondents might (and likely should) have
argued that the notice for the freeze was itself void, but they “argued
none of these things,” and the District Court declined to “make these
arguments now on [their] behalf.” 559 F. Supp. 2d 192, 208 (Conn.
2008).

