16

CIGNA CORP. v. AMARA 

Opinion of the Court 


B

If §502(a)(1)(B) does not authorize entry of the relief
here at issue, what about nearby §502(a)(3)? That provi
sion allows a participant, beneficiary, or fiduciary “to
obtain other appropriate equitable relief ” to redress viola
tions of (here relevant) parts of ERISA “or the terms of the
plan.” 29 U. S. C. §1132(a)(3) (emphasis added). The
District Court strongly implied, but did not directly hold,
that it would base its relief upon this subsection were it
not for (1) the fact that the preceding “plan benefits due”
provision, §502(a)(1)(B), provided sufficient authority; and
(2) certain cases from this Court that narrowed the appli
cation of the term “appropriate equitable relief,” see, e.g.,
Mertens, 508 U. S. 248; Great-West, 534 U. S. 204. Our
holding in Part II–A, supra, removes the District Court’s
first obstacle. And given the likelihood that, on remand,
the District Court will turn to and rely upon this alterna
tive subsection, we consider the court’s second concern.
We find that concern misplaced.
We have interpreted the term “appropriate equitable
relief ” in §502(a)(3) as referring to “ ‘those categories of
relief ’ ” that, traditionally speaking (i.e., prior to the
merger of law and equity) “ ‘were typically available in
equity.’ ” Sereboff, 547 U. S., at 361 (quoting Mertens, 508
U. S., at 256). In Mertens, we applied this principle to a
claim seeking money damages brought by a beneficiary
against a private firm that provided a trustee with actuar
ial services. We found that the plaintiff sought “nothing
other than compensatory damages” against a nonfiduci
ary. Id., at 253, 255 (emphasis deleted). And we held that
such a claim, traditionally speaking, was legal, not equi
table, in nature. Id., at 255.
In Great-West, we considered a claim brought by a fidu
ciary against a tort-award-winning beneficiary seeking
monetary reimbursement for medical outlays that the plan
had previously made on the beneficiary’s behalf. We noted

