6

CIGNA CORP. v. AMARA
Opinion of the Court

CIGNA sent the employees a newsletter that said the new
plan would “significantly enhance” its “retirement pro
gram,” would produce “an overall improvement in . . .
retirement benefits,” and would provide “the same benefit
security” with “steadier benefit growth.” App. 990a, 991a,
993a. CIGNA also told its employees that they would “see
the growth in [their] total retirement benefits from
CIGNA every year,” id., at 952a, that its initial deposit
“represent[ed] the full value of the benefit [they] earned
for service before 1998,” Record E–503 (Exh. 98), and that
“[o]ne advantage the company will not get from the re
tirement program changes is cost savings.” App. 993a.
In fact, the new plan saved the company $10 million
annually (though CIGNA later said it devoted the savings
to other employee benefits). Its initial deposit did not
“represen[t] the full value of the benefit” that employees
had “earned for service before 1998.” And the plan made a
significant number of employees worse off in at least the
following specific ways:
First, the initial deposit calculation ignored the fact that
the old plan offered many CIGNA employees the right to
retire early (beginning at age 55) with only somewhat
reduced benefits. This right was valuable. For example,
as of January 1, 1998, respondent Janice Amara had
earned vested age-55 retirement benefits of $1,833 per
month, but CIGNA’s initial deposit in her new-plan indi
vidual retirement account (ignoring this benefit) would
have allowed her at age 55 to buy an annuity benefit of
only $900 per month.
Second, as we previously indicated but did not explain,
supra at 5, the new plan adjusted CIGNA’s initial deposit
downward to account for the fact that, unlike the old
plan’s lifetime annuity, an employee’s survivors would
receive the new plan’s benefits (namely, the amount in the
employee’s individual account) even if the employee died
before retiring. The downward adjustment consisted of

