Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

Regardless, we have found that ERISA carefully distin
guishes these roles. See, e.g., Varity Corp., 516 U. S., at
498. And we have no reason to believe that the statute
intends to mix the responsibilities by giving the adminis
trator the power to set plan terms indirectly by including
them in the summary plan descriptions. See CurtissWright Corp. v. Schoonejongen, 514 U. S. 73, 81–85 (1995).
Finally, we find it difficult to reconcile the Solicitor
General’s interpretation with the basic summary plan
description objective: clear, simple communication. See
§§2(a), 102(a), 29 U. S. C. §1001(a), 1022(a) (2006 ed.). To
make the language of a plan summary legally binding
could well lead plan administrators to sacrifice simplicity
and comprehensibility in order to describe plan terms in
the language of lawyers. Consider the difference between
a will and the summary of a will or between a property
deed and its summary. Consider, too, the length of Part I
of this opinion, and then consider how much longer Part I
would have to be if we had to include all the qualifications
and nuances that a plan drafter might have found impor
tant and feared to omit lest they lose all legal significance.
The District Court’s opinions take up 109 pages of the
Federal Supplement. None of this is to say that plan
administrators can avoid providing complete and accurate
summaries of plan terms in the manner required by
ERISA and its implementing regulations. But we fear
that the Solicitor General’s rule might bring about com
plexity that would defeat the fundamental purpose of the
summaries.
For these reasons taken together we conclude that the
summary documents, important as they are, provide
communication with beneficiaries about the plan, but that
their statements do not themselves constitute the terms of
the plan for purposes of §502(a)(1)(B). We also conclude
that the District Court could not find authority in that
section to reform CIGNA’s plan as written.

