2

CIGNA CORP. v. AMARA
Syllabus
terms of the plan reformed. Step 2: It ordered CIGNA to enforce the
plan as reformed. Step 2 orders recovery of the benefits provided by
the “terms of [the reformed] plan” and is thus consistent with
§502(a)(1)(B). However, that provision—which speaks of “enforc[ing]”
the plan’s terms, not changing them—does not suggest that it author
izes a court to alter those terms here, where the change, akin to re
forming a contract, seems less like the simple enforcement of a con
tract as written and more like an equitable remedy. Nor can the
Court accept the Solicitor General’s alternative rationale: that the
District Court enforced the summary plan descriptions and that they
are plan terms. That reading cannot be squared with ERISA §102(a),
which obliges plan administrators to furnish summary plan descrip
tions, but does not suggest that information about the plan provided
by those disclosures is itself part of the plan.
Nothing in
§502(a)(1)(B) suggests the contrary. The Solicitor General’s reading
also cannot be squared with the statute’s division of authority be
tween a plan’s sponsor—who, like a trust’s settlor, creates the plan’s
basic terms and conditions, executes a written instrument containing
those terms and conditions, and provides in that instrument a proce
dure for making amendments—and the plan’s administrator—a trus
tee-like fiduciary who manages the plan, follows its terms in doing so,
and provides participants with the summary plan descriptions. ERISA carefully distinguishes these roles, and there is no reason to be
lieve that the statute intends to mix the responsibilities by giving the
administrator the power to set plan terms indirectly in the summa
ries, even when, as here, the administrator is also the plan sponsor.
Finally, it is difficult to reconcile an interpretation that would make a
summary’s language legally binding with the basic summary plan
description objective of clear, simple communication. Pp. 12–15.
(b) This Court has interpreted §502(a)(3)’s phrase “appropriate
equitable relief” as referring to “ ‘those categories of relief ’ ” that, be
fore the merger of law and equity,“ ‘were typically available in eq
uity.’ ” Sereboff v. Mid Atlantic Medical Services, Inc., 547 U. S. 356,
361. This case—concerning a beneficiary’s suit against a plan fiduci
ary (whom ERISA typically treats as a trustee) about the terms of a
plan (which ERISA typically treats as a trust)—is the kind of lawsuit
that, before the merger, could have been brought only in an equity
court, where the remedies available were traditionally considered eq
uitable remedies. The District Court’s injunctions obviously fall
within this category. The other relief it ordered closely resembles
three forms of traditional equitable relief. First, what the court did
here may be regarded as the reformation of the plan’s terms, in order
to remedy false or misleading information CIGNA provided. The
power to reform contracts is a traditional power of an equity court

