Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

unsurprising. The vast majority of eyewitness identifications that the State uses in criminal prosecutions are
obtained in lineup, showup, and photograph displays
arranged by the police. Our precedents reflect that practical reality.
It is also beside the point. Our due process concerns
were not predicated on the source of suggestiveness.
Rather, “[i]t is the likelihood of misidentification which
violates a defendant’s right to due process,” Biggers, 409
U. S., at 198, and we are concerned with suggestion insofar as it has “corrupting effect[s]” on the identification’s
reliability. Brathwaite, 432 U. S., at 114. Accordingly,
whether the police have created the suggestive circumstances intentionally or inadvertently, the resulting identification raises the same due process concerns. It is no
more or less likely to misidentify the perpetrator. It is
no more or less powerful to the jury. And the defendant
is no more or less equipped to challenge the identification through cross-examination or prejudiced at trial. The
arrangement-focused inquiry thus untethers our doctrine
from the very “ ‘evidentiary interest’ ” it was designed to
protect, inviting arbitrary results. Id., at 113, n. 14.
Indeed, it is the majority’s approach that lies in tension
with our precedents. Whereas we previously disclaimed
the crabbed view of suggestiveness as “the result of police procedures intentionally designed to prejudice an accused,” Wade, 388 U. S., at 235, the majority’s focus on
police rigging and improper conduct will revive it. Whereas our precedents were sensitive to intentional and unintentional suggestiveness alike, see supra, at 2–3, today’s
decision narrows our concern to intentionally orchestrated
suggestive confrontations. We once described the “primary evil to be avoided” as the likelihood of misidentification.
Biggers, 409 U. S., at 198. Today’s decision, however,
means that even if that primary evil is at its apex, we
need not avoid it at all so long as the suggestive circum-

