Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

sarily suggestive identification procedure.
The Court
adopted a judicial screen for reliability as a course preferable to a per se rule requiring exclusion of identification
evidence whenever law enforcement officers employ an
improper procedure. The due process check for reliability,
Brathwaite made plain, comes into play only after the
defendant establishes improper police conduct. The very
purpose of the check, the Court noted, was to avoid depriving the jury of identification evidence that is reliable,
notwithstanding improper police conduct. 432 U. S., at
112–113.6
Perry’s contention that improper police action was not
essential to the reliability check Brathwaite required is
echoed by the dissent. Post, at 3–4. Both ignore a key
premise of the Brathwaite decision: A primary aim of excluding identification evidence obtained under unnecessarily suggestive circumstances, the Court said, is to deter
law enforcement use of improper lineups, showups, and
photo arrays in the first place. See 432 U. S., at 112.
Alerted to the prospect that identification evidence improperly obtained may be excluded, the Court reasoned,
police officers will “guard against unnecessarily suggestive
procedures.” Ibid. This deterrence rationale is inapposite
in cases, like Perry’s, in which the police engaged in no
improper conduct.
Coleman v. Alabama, 399 U. S. 1 (1970), another decision in the Stovall line, similarly shows that the Court has
linked the due process check, not to suspicion of eyewitness testimony generally, but only to improper police
arrangement of the circumstances surrounding an identi——————
6 The Court’s description of the question presented in Brathwaite
assumes that improper state action occurred: “[Does] the Due Process
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment compe[l] the exclusion, in a state
criminal trial, apart from any consideration of reliability, of pretrial
identification evidence obtained by a police procedure that was both
suggestive and unnecessary.” 432 U. S., at 99.

