14

PERRY v. NEW HAMPSHIRE
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

1986); see also Green v. Loggins, 614 F. 2d 219, 223 (CA9
1980). Today’s decision nonetheless precludes even the
possibility that an unintended confrontation will meet
that bar, mandating summary dismissal of every such
claim at the threshold.
Finally, the majority questions how to “rationally distinguish suggestiveness from other factors bearing on the
reliability of eyewitness evidence,” such as “poor vision” or
a prior “grudge,” ante, at 13–14, and more broadly, how to
distinguish eyewitness evidence from other kinds of arguably unreliable evidence. Ante, at 14–15. Our precedents,
however, did just that. We emphasized the “ ‘formidable
number of instances in the records of English and American trials’ ” of “miscarriage[s] of justice from mistaken
identification.” Wade, 388 U. S., at 228. We then observed
that “ ‘the influence of improper suggestion upon identifying witnesses probably accounts for more miscarriages of
justice than any other single factor.’ ” Id., at 229. Moreover, the majority points to no other type of evidence that
shares the rare confluence of characteristics that makes
eyewitness evidence a unique threat to the fairness of
trial. Jailhouse informants, cf. ante, at 15, unreliable as
they may be, are not similarly resistant to the traditional
tools of the adversarial process and, if anything, are met
with particular skepticism by juries.
It would be one thing if the passage of time had cast
doubt on the empirical premises of our precedents. But
just the opposite has happened. A vast body of scientific
literature has reinforced every concern our precedents
articulated nearly a half-century ago, though it merits
barely a parenthetical mention in the majority opinion.
Ante, at 14. Over the past three decades, more than two
thousand studies related to eyewitness identification have
been published. One state supreme court recently appointed a special master to conduct an exhaustive survey
of the current state of the scientific evidence and conclud-

