4

PERRY v. NEW HAMPSHIRE
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

reliability. Brathwaite, 432 U. S., at 114. Eyewitness
evidence derived from suggestive circumstances, we have
explained, is uniquely resistant to the ordinary tests of the
adversary process. An eyewitness who has made an identification often becomes convinced of its accuracy. “Regardless of how the initial misidentification comes about,
the witness thereafter is apt to retain in his memory the
image of the photograph rather than of the person actually
seen, reducing the trustworthiness of subsequent . . .
courtroom identification.” Simmons v. United States, 390
U. S. 377, 383–384 (1968) (emphasis added); see also
Wade, 388 U. S., at 229 (witness is “not likely” to recant).
Suggestion bolsters that confidence.
At trial, an eyewitness’ artificially inflated confidence in
an identification’s accuracy complicates the jury’s task of
assessing witness credibility and reliability. It also impairs the defendant’s ability to attack the eyewitness’
credibility. Stovall, 388 U. S., at 298. That in turn jeopardizes the defendant’s basic right to subject his accuser
to meaningful cross-examination. See Wade, 388 U. S.,
at 235 (“[C]ross-examination . . . cannot be viewed as an
absolute assurance of accuracy and reliability . . . where so
many variables and pitfalls exist”). The end result of
suggestion, whether intentional or unintentional, is to
fortify testimony bearing directly on guilt that juries find
extremely convincing and are hesitant to discredit. See
id., at 224 (“[A]t pretrial proceedings . . . the results might
well settle the accused’s fate and reduce the trial itself to a
mere formality”); Gilbert, 388 U. S., at 273 (“[T]he witness’
testimony of his lineup identification will enhance the
impact of his in-court identification on the jury”).
Consistent with our focus on reliability, we have declined to adopt a per se rule excluding all suggestive identifications. Instead, “reliability is the linchpin” in deciding
admissibility. Brathwaite, 432 U. S., at 114. We have
explained that a suggestive identification procedure “does

