Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

research indicating that as many as one in three eyewitness identifications is inaccurate). See also post, at 14–17.
We do not doubt either the importance or the fallibility of
eyewitness identifications. Indeed, in recognizing that
defendants have a constitutional right to counsel at
postindictment police lineups, we observed that “the annals of criminal law are rife with instances of mistaken
identification.” Wade, 388 U. S., at 228.
We have concluded in other contexts, however, that the
potential unreliability of a type of evidence does not alone
render its introduction at the defendant’s trial fundamentally unfair. See, e.g., Ventris, 556 U. S., at 594, n. (declining to “craft a broa[d] exclusionary rule for uncorroborated
statements obtained [from jailhouse snitches],” even
though “rewarded informant testimony” may be inherently
untrustworthy); Dowling, 493 U. S., at 353 (rejecting argument that the introduction of evidence concerning
acquitted conduct is fundamentally unfair because such
evidence is “inherently unreliable”). We reach a similar
conclusion here: The fallibility of eyewitness evidence does
not, without the taint of improper state conduct, warrant a
due process rule requiring a trial court to screen such
evidence for reliability before allowing the jury to assess
its creditworthiness.
Our unwillingness to enlarge the domain of due process
as Perry and the dissent urge rests, in large part, on our
recognition that the jury, not the judge, traditionally determines the reliability of evidence. See supra, at 7. We
also take account of other safeguards built into our adversary system that caution juries against placing undue
weight on eyewitness testimony of questionable reliability.
These protections include the defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to confront the eyewitness. See Maryland v.
Craig, 497 U. S. 836, 845 (1990) (“The central concern of
the Confrontation Clause is to ensure the reliability of the
evidence against a criminal defendant.”). Another is the

