Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

ent in the manner in which the prosecution presents
the suspect to witnesses for pretrial identification.” Ibid.
(emphasis added). To illustrate the improper suggestion it
was concerned about, the Court pointed to police-designed
lineups where “all in the lineup but the suspect were
known to the identifying witness, . . . the other participants in [the] lineup were grossly dissimilar in appearance
to the suspect, . . . only the suspect was required to wear
distinctive clothing which the culprit allegedly wore, . . .
the witness is told by the police that they have caught the
culprit after which the defendant is brought before the
witness alone or is viewed in jail, . . . the suspect is pointed out before or during a lineup, . . . the participants in the
lineup are asked to try on an article of clothing which fits
only the suspect.” Id., at 233 (footnotes omitted). Beyond
genuine debate, then, prevention of unfair police practices
prompted the Court to extend a defendant’s right to counsel to cover postindictment lineups and showups. Id., at
235.
Perry’s argument, reiterated by the dissent, thus lacks
support in the case law he cites. Moreover, his position
would open the door to judicial preview, under the banner
of due process, of most, if not all, eyewitness identifications. External suggestion is hardly the only factor that
casts doubt on the trustworthiness of an eyewitness’ testimony. As one of Perry’s amici points out, many other
factors bear on “the likelihood of misidentification,” post,
at 9—for example, the passage of time between exposure
to and identification of the defendant, whether the witness
was under stress when he first encountered the suspect,
how much time the witness had to observe the suspect,
how far the witness was from the suspect, whether the
suspect carried a weapon, and the race of the suspect and
the witness. Brief for American Psychological Association
as Amicus Curiae 9–12. There is no reason why an identification made by an eyewitness with poor vision, for ex-

