12

PERRY v. NEW HAMPSHIRE
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Thus, far from indicating that improper police conduct is a
prerequisite, Coleman merely held that there had been no
influence on the witness. In fact, in concluding that the
lineup was not “ ‘so impermissibly suggestive as to give
rise to a very substantial likelihood of irreparable misidentification,’ ” Coleman indicates that the two-step inquiry is not truncated at the threshold by the absence of
police misconduct.
Third, the majority emphasizes that we should rely on
the jury to determine the reliability of evidence. See ante,
at 15–16. But our cases are rooted in the assumption that
eyewitness identifications upend the ordinary expectation
that it is “the province of the jury to weigh the credibility
of competing witnesses.” Kansas v. Ventris, 556 U. S. 586,
594, n. (2009). As noted, jurors find eyewitness evidence
unusually powerful and their ability to assess credibility
is hindered by a witness’ false confidence in the accuracy
of his or her identification. That disability in no way depends on the intent behind the suggestive circumstances.
The majority’s appeals to protecting the jury’s domain,
moreover, appeared in dissent after dissent from our decisions. See Foster v. California, 394 U. S. 440, 447
(1969) (Black, J., dissenting) (“[T]he jury is the sole tribunal to weigh and determine facts” and “must . . . be allowed to hear eyewitnesses and decide for itself whether it
can recognize the truth”); Simmons, 390 U. S., at 395
(Black, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (“The
weight of the evidence . . . is not a question for the Court
but for the jury”). So too does the majority’s assurance
that other constitutional protections like the Sixth
Amendment rights to compulsory process and confrontation can suffice to expose unreliable identifications. Compare ante, at 6, with Foster, 394 U. S., at 448–449 (Black,
J., dissenting) (“The Constitution sets up its own standards of unfairness in criminal trials,” including the Sixth
Amendment “right to compulsory process” and “right to

