Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

gorically exempts all eyewitness identifications derived
from suggestive circumstances that were not policemanipulated—however suggestive, and however unreliable—from our due process check. The majority thus
appears to graft a mens rea requirement onto our existing
rule.4
As this case illustrates, police intent is now paramount.
As the Court acknowledges, Perry alleges an “accidental
showup.” Brief for Petitioner 34 (emphasis added); see
ante, at 4. He was the only African-American at the scene
of the crime standing next to a police officer. For the
majority, the fact that the police did not intend that
showup, even if they inadvertently caused it in the course
of a police procedure, ends the inquiry. The police were
questioning the eyewitness, Blandon, about the perpetrator’s identity, and were intentionally detaining Perry in
the parking lot—but had not intended for Blandon to
identify the perpetrator from her window. Presumably, in
the majority’s view, had the police asked Blandon to move
to the window to identify the perpetrator, that could have
made all the difference. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 32, 37.
I note, however, that the majority leaves what is required by its arrangement-focused inquiry less than clear.
In parts, the opinion suggests that the police must arrange
an identification “procedure,” regardless of whether they
“inten[d] the arranged procedure to be suggestive.” Ante,
at 2, n. 1; see also ante, at 7–8. Elsewhere, it indicates
that the police must arrange the “suggestive circumstances” that lead the witness to identify the accused. See
——————
4 The majority denies that it has imposed a mens rea requirement, see
ante, at 2, n. 1, but by confining our due process concerns to policearranged identification procedures, that is just what it has done. The
majority acknowledges that “whether or not [the police] intended the
arranged procedure to be suggestive” is irrelevant under our precedents, ibid., but still places dispositive weight on whether or not the
police intended the procedure itself.

