Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

this front. Ibid. That was no list of “primary aim[s].” Nor
was it a ringing endorsement of the primacy of deterrence.
We simply underscored, in responding to Brathwaite,
that our rule was not without deterrence benefits. To
the contrary, we clarified that deterrence was a subsidiary
concern to reliability, the “driving force” of our doctrine. It
is a stretch to claim that our rule cannot apply wherever
“[t]his deterrence rationale is inapposite.” Ante, at 11.
Second, the majority states that Coleman v. Alabama,
399 U. S. 1 (1970), held that “[n]o due process violation
occurred . . . because nothing ‘the police said or did
prompted’ ” the identification and shows that our rule is
linked “only to improper police arrangement.” Ante, at
11–12. That misreads the decision. In Coleman, the
petitioners challenged a witness’ in-court identification of
them at trial on grounds that it had been tainted by a
suggestive pretrial lineup. We held that no due process
violation occurred because the in-court identification appeared to be “entirely based upon observations at the
time of the assault and not at all induced by the conduct of
the lineup,” and thus could not be said to stem from an
identification procedure “ ‘so impermissibly suggestive as
to give rise to a very substantial likelihood of irreparable
misidentification.’ ” 399 U. S., at 5–6 (plurality opinion).
We then dismissed each of the asserted suggestive influences as having had no bearing on the identification at all:
The petitioners claimed that the police intimated to the
witness that his attackers were in the lineup; we found the
record “devoid of evidence that anything the police said or
did” induced the identification. Id., at 6. The petitioners
claimed that they alone were made to say certain words;
we found that the witness identified petitioners before
either said anything. One petitioner claimed he was
singled out to wear a hat; we found that the witness’
identification “d[id] not appear . . . based on the fact that
he remembered that [the attacker] had worn a hat.” Ibid.

