2

PERRY v. NEW HAMPSHIRE
Syllabus
inquiry into the reliability of an eyewitness identification when the
identification was not procured under unnecessarily suggestive circumstances arranged by law enforcement. Pp. 6–19.
(a) The Constitution protects a defendant against a conviction
based on evidence of questionable reliability, not by prohibiting introduction of the evidence, but by affording the defendant means to
persuade the jury that the evidence should be discounted as unworthy of credit. Only when evidence “is so extremely unfair that its
admission violates fundamental conceptions of justice,” Dowling v.
United States, 493 U. S. 342, 352 (internal quotation marks omitted),
does the Due Process Clause preclude its admission.
Contending that the Due Process Clause is implicated here, Perry
relies on a series of decisions involving police-arranged identification
procedures. See Stovall v. Denno, 388 U. S. 293; Simmons v. United
States, 390 U. S. 377; Foster v. California, 394 U. S. 440; Neil v. Biggers, 409 U. S. 188; and Manson v. Brathwaite, 432 U. S. 98. These
cases detail the approach appropriately used to determine whether
due process requires suppression of an eyewitness identification
tainted by police arrangement. First, due process concerns arise only
when law enforcement officers use an identification procedure that is
both suggestive and unnecessary. Id., at 107, 109; Biggers, 409 U. S.,
at 198. Even when the police use such a procedure, however, suppression of the resulting identification is not the inevitable consequence. Brathwaite, 432 U. S., at 112–113; Biggers, 409 U. S., at
198–199. Instead, due process requires courts to assess, on a case-bycase basis, whether improper police conduct created a “substantial
likelihood of misidentification.” Id., at 201. “[R]eliability [of the eyewitness identification] is the linchpin” of that evaluation.
Brathwaite, 432 U. S., at 114. Where the “indicators of [a witness’]
ability to make an accurate identification” are “outweighed by the
corrupting effect” of law enforcement suggestion, the identification
should be suppressed. Id., at 114, 116. Otherwise, the identification,
assuming no other barrier to its admission, should be submitted to
the jury. Pp. 6–10.
(b) Perry argues that it was mere happenstance that all of the cases in the Stovall line involved improper police action. The rationale
underlying this Court’s decisions, Perry asserts, calls for a rule requiring trial judges to prescreen eyewitness evidence for reliability
any time an identification is made under suggestive circumstances.
This Court disagrees.
If “reliability is the linchpin” of admissibility under the Due Process Clause, Brathwaite, 432 U. S., at 114, Perry contends, it should
not matter whether law enforcement was responsible for creating the
suggestive circumstances that marred the identification. This argu-

