(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

PERRY v. NEW HAMPSHIRE
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
No. 10–8974. Argued November 2, 2011—Decided January 11, 2012
Around 3 a.m. on August 15, 2008, the Nashua, New Hampshire Police
Department received a call reporting that an African-American male
was trying to break into cars parked in the lot of the caller’s apartment building. When an officer responding to the call asked eyewitness Nubia Blandon to describe the man, Blandon pointed to her
kitchen window and said the man she saw breaking into the car was
standing in the parking lot, next to a police officer. Petitioner Barion
Perry’s arrest followed this identification.
Before trial, Perry moved to suppress Blandon’s identification on
the ground that admitting it at trial would violate due process. The
New Hampshire trial court denied the motion. To determine whether
due process prohibits the introduction of an out-of-court identification
at trial, the Superior Court said, this Court’s decisions instruct a twostep inquiry: The trial court must first decide whether the police used
an unnecessarily suggestive identification procedure; if they did, the
court must next consider whether that procedure so tainted the resulting identification as to render it unreliable and thus inadmissible. Perry’s challenge, the court found, failed at step one, for Blandon’s identification did not result from an unnecessarily suggestive
procedure employed by the police. A jury subsequently convicted
Perry of theft by unauthorized taking.
On appeal, Perry argued that the trial court erred in requiring an
initial showing that police arranged a suggestive identification procedure. Suggestive circumstances alone, Perry contended, suffice to
require court evaluation of the reliability of an eyewitness identification before allowing it to be presented to the jury. The New Hampshire Supreme Court rejected Perry’s argument and affirmed his
conviction.
Held: The Due Process Clause does not require a preliminary judicial

