Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

239 (describing lack of lineup regulations addressing
“risks of abuse and unintentional suggestion”). “Persons
who conduct the identification procedure may suggest,
intentionally or unintentionally, that they expect the
witness to identify the accused.” Moore v. Illinois, 434
U. S. 220, 224 (1977). The implication is that even police
acting with the best of intentions can inadvertently signal
“ ‘that’s the man.’ ” Wade, 388 U. S., at 236; see also Kirby
v. Illinois, 406 U. S. 682, 690–691 (1972) (“[I]t is always
necessary to ‘scrutinize any pretrial confrontation . . .’ ”).2
In Wade itself, we noted that the “potential for improper
influence [in pretrial confrontations] is illustrated by the
circumstances . . . [i]n the present case.” 388 U. S., at
233–234. We then highlighted not the lineup procedure,
but rather a preprocedure encounter: The two witnesses
who later identified Wade in the lineup had seen Wade
outside while “await[ing] assembly of the lineup.” Id., at
234. Wade had been standing in the hallway, which happened to be “observable to the witnesses through an open
door.” Ibid. One witness saw Wade “within sight of
an FBI agent”; the other saw him “in the custody of the
agent.” Ibid. In underscoring the hazards of these circumstances, we made no mention of whether the encounter had been arranged; indeed, the facts suggest that it
was not.
More generally, our precedents focus not on the act of
suggestion, but on suggestion’s “corrupting effect” on
——————
2 Wade held that the dangers of pretrial identification procedures
necessitated a right to counsel; that same day, Stovall held that a
defendant ineligible for the Wade rule was still entitled to challenge the
confrontation as a due process violation. Because the two were companion cases advancing interrelated rules to avoid unfairness at trial
resulting from suggestive pretrial confrontations, Wade’s exposition of
the dangers of suggestiveness informs both contexts. See Manson v.
Brathwaite, 432 U. S. 98, 112 (1977) (“Wade and its companion cases
reflect the concern that the jury not hear eyewitness testimony unless
that evidence has aspects of reliability”).

