Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
ment removes Brathwaite’s statement from its mooring, attributing
to it a meaning that a fair reading of the opinion does not bear. The
due process check for reliability, Brathwaite made plain, comes into
play only after the defendant establishes improper police conduct.
Perry’s contention also ignores a key premise of Brathwaite: A primary aim of excluding identification evidence obtained under unnecessarily suggestive circumstances is to deter law enforcement use of
improper procedures in the first place. This deterrence rationale is
inapposite in cases, like Perry’s, where there is no improper police
conduct. Perry also places significant weight on United States v.
Wade, 388 U. S. 218, describing it as a decision not anchored to improper police conduct. But the risk of police rigging was the very
danger that prompted the Court in Wade to extend a defendant’s
right to counsel to cover postindictment lineups and showups.
Perry’s position would also open the door to judicial preview, under
the banner of due process, of most, if not all, eyewitness identifications. There is no reason why an identification made by an eyewitness with poor vision or one who harbors a grudge against the defendant, for example, should be regarded as inherently more reliable
than Blandon’s identification here. Even if this Court could, as Perry
contends, distinguish “suggestive circumstances” from other factors
bearing on the reliability of eyewitness evidence, Perry’s limitation
would still involve trial courts, routinely, in preliminary examinations, for most eyewitness identifications involve some element of
suggestion. Pp. 10–14.
(c) In urging a broadly applicable rule, Perry maintains that eyewitness identifications are uniquely unreliable. The fallibility of
eyewitness evidence does not, without the taint of improper state
conduct, warrant a due process rule requiring a trial court to screen
the evidence for reliability before allowing the jury to assess its creditworthiness. The Court’s unwillingness to adopt such a rule rests,
in large part, on its recognition that the jury, not the judge, traditionally determines the reliability of evidence. It also takes account
of other safeguards built into the adversary system that caution juries against placing undue weight on eyewitness testimony of questionable reliability. These protections include the defendant’s Sixth
Amendment rights to counsel and to confront and cross-examine the
eyewitness, eyewitness-specific instructions warning juries to take
care in appraising identification evidence, and state and federal rules
of evidence permitting trial judges to exclude relevant evidence if its
probative value is substantially outweighed by its prejudicial impact
or potential for misleading the jury. Many of these safeguards were
availed of by Perry’s defense. Given the safeguards generally applicable in criminal trials, the introduction of Blandon’s eyewitness tes-

