(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SCHINDLER ELEVATOR CORP. v. UNITED STATES EX
REL. KIRK
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 10–188.

Argued March 1, 2011—Decided May 16, 2011

The public disclosure bar of the False Claims Act (FCA) generally fore
closes private parties from bringing qui tam suits to recover falsely or
fraudulently obtained federal payments where those suits are “based
upon the public disclosure of allegations or transactions in a criminal,
civil, or administrative hearing, in a congressional, administrative, or
Government Accounting Office report, hearing, audit, or investiga
tion, or from the news media.” 31 U. S. C. §3730(e)(4)(A). Respon
dent Kirk brought such a suit, alleging that his former employer, pe
titioner Schindler Elevator Corp., had submitted hundreds of false
claims for payment under its federal contracts. To support his alle
gations, Kirk pointed to information his wife received from the Labor
Department (DOL) in response to three requests for records she filed
under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 5 U. S. C. §552.
Granting Schindler’s motion to dismiss, the District Court concluded,
inter alia, that the FCA’s public disclosure bar deprived it of jurisdic
tion over Kirk’s allegations that were based on information disclosed
in a Government “report” or “investigation.” The Second Circuit va
cated and remanded, holding, in effect, that an agency’s response to a
FOIA request is neither a “report” nor an “investigation.”
Held: A federal agency’s written response to a FOIA request for records
constitutes a “report” within the meaning of the FCA’s public disclo
sure bar. Pp. 4–14.
(a) “[R]eport” in this context carries its ordinary meaning. Pp. 4–8.
(1) Because the FCA does not define “report,” the Court looks
first to the word’s ordinary meaning. See, e.g., Gross v. FBL Finan
cial Services, Inc., 557 U. S. ___, ___. Dictionaries define “report” as,
for example, something that gives information. This ordinary mean


2

SCHINDLER ELEVATOR CORP. v. UNITED STATES 

EX REL. KIRK 

Syllabus 

ing is consistent with the public disclosure bar’s generally broad
scope, see, e.g., Graham County Soil and Water Conservation Dist. v.
United States ex rel. Wilson, 559 U. S. ___, ___, as is evidenced by the
other sources of public disclosure in §3730(e)(4)(A), especially “news
media.” Pp. 4–6.
(2) Nor is there any textual basis for adopting a narrower defini
tion of “report.” The Second Circuit committed the very error this
Court reversed in Graham County. In applying the noscitur a sociis
canon to conclude that a narrower meaning for “report” was man
dated, the court failed to consider all of the sources of public disclo
sure listed in the statute—in particular, the reference to “news me
dia.” See 559 U. S., at ___. Applying the ordinary meaning of
“report” also does not render superfluous the other sources of public
disclosure in §3730(e)(4)(A). Pp. 6–8.
(b) The DOL’s three written FOIA responses in this case, along
with the accompanying records produced to Mrs. Kirk, are “reports”
within the public disclosure bar’s ordinary meaning. FOIA requires
each agency receiving a request to “notify the person making such re
quest of [its] determination and the reasons therefor.” 5 U. S. C.
§552(a)(6)(A)(i). Like other federal agencies, the DOL has adopted
FOIA regulations mandating a written response. Such agency re
sponses plainly fall within the broad, ordinary meaning of “report”
as, e.g., something that gives information. Moreover, any records
produced along with such responses are part of the responses, just as
if they had been produced as an appendix to a printed report. Pp. 8–
9.
(c) This Court is not persuaded by assertions that it would be
anomalous to read the public disclosure bar to encompass written
FOIA responses. Pp. 9–14.
(1) The Court’s holding is not inconsistent with the public disclo
sure bar’s drafting history. If anything, the drafting history supports
this Court’s holding. Kirk’s case seems a classic example of the “op
portunistic” litigation that the public disclosure bar is designed to
discourage. Id., at ___. Anyone could identify a few regulatory filing
and certification requirements, submit FOIA requests until he dis
covers a federal contractor who is out of compliance, and potentially
reap a windfall in a qui tam action under the FCA. Pp. 9–11.
(2) Nor will extending the public disclosure bar to written FOIA
responses necessarily lead to unusual consequences. Kirk argues
that the Court’s ruling would allow a suit by a qui tam relator pos
sessing records whose release was required by FOIA even absent a
request, but bar an action by a relator who got the same documents
by way of a FOIA request. Even assuming, as Kirk does, that unre
quested records are not covered by the public disclosure bar, the


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
Court is not troubled by the different treatment. By its plain terms,
the bar applies to some methods of public disclosure and not to oth
ers. See Graham County, 559 U. S., at ___. It would not be anoma
lous if some methods of FOIA disclosure fell within the bar’s scope
and some did not. Moreover, Kirk’s assertion that potential defen
dants will now insulate themselves from liability by making a FOIA
request for incriminating documents is pure speculation. Cf. id., at
___. There is no suggestion that this has occurred in those Circuits
that have long held that FOIA responses are “reports” within the
public disclosure bar’s meaning. Pp. 11–13.
(3) Even if the foregoing extratextual arguments were accepted,
Kirk and his amici have provided no principled way to define “report”
to exclude FOIA responses without excluding other documents—e.g.,
the Justice Department’s annual report of FOIA statistics—that are
indisputably reports. Pp. 13–14.
(d) Whether Kirk’s suit is “based upon . . . allegations or transac
tions” disclosed in the reports at issue is a question to be resolved on
remand. P. 14.
601 F. 3d 94, reversed and remanded.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, and ALITO, JJ., joined. GINSBURG, J., filed
a dissenting opinion, in which BREYER and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.
KAGAN, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.

