Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1555
_________________

MOHAMED ALI SAMANTAR, PETITIONER v. BASHE 

ABDI YOUSUF ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT

[June 1, 2010]


JUSTICE SCALIA, concurring in the judgment.
The Court’s admirably careful textual analysis, ante, at
7–13, demonstrates that the term “foreign state” in the
provision “a foreign state shall be immune from the juris
diction of the courts of the United States and of the
States,” 28 U. S. C. §1604, does not include foreign offi
cials. Yet the Court insists on adding legislative history to
its analysis. I could understand that (though not agree
with it) if, in the absence of supposed legislative-history
support, the Court would reach a different result. Or even
if there was something in the legislative history that
clearly contradicted the Court’s result, and had to be
explained away. That is not the situation here (or at least
the Court’s opinion does not think it to be so). The Court
assures us, however (if this could be thought assurance),
that legislative history is “ ‘not generally so misleading’ ”
that it should “ ‘never’ ” be used. Ante, at 10, n. 9 (quoting
Wisconsin Public Intervenor v. Mortier, 501 U. S. 597,
611–612, n. 4 (1991)). Surely that is damning by faint
praise. And the Court’s mention of the past practice of
using legislative history, ante, at 10, n. 9, does not support
the Court’s use of it today. The past practice was “not the
practice of using legislative history for the purpose of
giving authoritative content to the meaning of a statutory
text,” Mortier, supra, at 622 (SCALIA, J., concurring in


2

SAMANTAR v. YOUSUF
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

judgment).
The Court’s introduction of legislative history serves no
purpose except needlessly to inject into the opinion a mode
of analysis that not all of the Justices consider valid. And
it does so, to boot, in a fashion that does not isolate the
superfluous legislative history in a section that those of us
who disagree categorically with its use, or at least dis
agree with its superfluous use, can decline to join. I there
fore do not join the opinion, and concur only in the result.
The Court relies on legislative history to support three
of its positions. First, after explaining why the phrase
“agency or instrumentality” in the definition of “foreign
state,” see §1603(a), (b), does not refer to natural persons,
ante, at 9–10, the Court says “[n]or does anything in the
legislative history suggest that Congress intended the
term ‘agency or instrumentality’ to include individuals,”
ante, at 10, n. 9. According to the Court, “the legislative
history, like the statute, speaks in terms of entities.” Ibid.
Apparently, the legislative history must be consulted, not
to show that it supports the Court’s textual analysis, or
even to explain why its seeming contradiction of the
Court’s analysis is inconsequential, but to show nothing
more than that it contains the same ambiguous language
as the text. This is beyond all reason.
Second, after concluding its review of the statute’s text,
the Court states that the “legislative history makes clear
that Congress did not intend the [Foreign Sovereign Im
munities Act of 1976] to address position-based individual
immunities such as diplomatic and consular immunity,”
ante, at 13, n. 12. See also ante, at 17. It cites for this
proposition a House Committee Report that we have no
reason to believe was read (much less approved) by the
Senate—or, indeed, by the Members of the House who
were not on the Committee—or even, for that matter, by
the members of the Committee, who never voted on the
Report. In any case, the quoted excerpt does not address


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

“position-based individual immunities” in general but only
“consular and diplomatic immunity,” which is not at issue
here. Unless consular and diplomatic immunity, on the
one hand, and, on the other hand, what is at issue here—
state-agent immunity—are always treated the same
(which I doubt and the Court does not attempt to estab
lish), the passage contributes nothing to analysis of the
present case.
The same footnote also quotes a portion of the same
House Report as follows:
“ ‘The bill does not attempt to deal with questions of
discovery. . . . [I]f a plaintiff sought to depose a diplo
mat in the United States or a high-ranking official of
a foreign government, diplomatic and official immu
nity would apply.’ ” Ante, at 13, n. 12.
If anything, this passage cuts against the Court’s result.
The two sentences omitted from the above quotation read
as follows:
“Existing law appears to be adequate in this area. For
example, if a private plaintiff sought the production of
sensitive governmental documents of a foreign state,
concepts of governmental privilege would apply.”
H. R. Rep. No. 94–1487, p. 23 (1976).
Thus, the House Report makes it clear that the bill’s
failure to deal with discovery applies to both discovery
against sovereigns and discovery against foreign officials.
But the latter would have been unnecessary if the bill
dealt only with sovereigns. The implication (if any) is that
the bill’s provisions regarding immunity from suit apply to
both sovereigns and foreign officials.
Third, and finally, the Court points to legislative history
to establish the purpose of the statute. See ante, at 17,
and n. 19. This is particularly puzzling, because the en
acted statutory text itself includes findings and a declara


4

SAMANTAR v. YOUSUF
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

tion of purpose—the very same purpose (surprise!) that
the Court finds evidenced in the legislative history. See
28 U. S. C. §1602. To make matters worse, the Court
itself notes this statutory declaration of purpose twice
earlier, in the body of its opinion, see ante, at 6, 13. If
those textual references to the statute itself were deleted,
the footnoted citation of legislative history would at least
perform some function. As it is, however, it adds nothing
except the demonstration of assiduous law-clerk research.
It should be no cause for wonder that, upon careful
examination, all of the opinion’s excerpts from legislative
history turn out to be, at best, nonprobative or entirely
duplicative of text. After all, legislative history is almost
never the real reason for the Court’s decision—and make
weights do not deserve a lot of the Court’s time.

