NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press. No. 08–1555 [June 1, 2010] JUSTICE STEVENS delivered the opinion of the Court. From 1980 to 1986 petitioner Mohamed Ali Samantar was the First Vice President and Minister of Defense of Somalia, and from 1987 to 1990 he served as its Prime Minister. Respondents are natives of Somalia who allege that they, or members of their families, were the victims of torture and extrajudicial killings during those years. They seek damages from petitioner based on his alleged au thorization of those acts. The narrow question we must decide is whether the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976 (FSIA or Act), 28 U. S. C. §§1330, 1602 et seq., pro vides petitioner with immunity from suit based on actions taken in his official capacity. We hold that the FSIA does not govern the determination of petitioner’s immunity from suit. Respondents are members of the Isaaq clan, which included well-educated and prosperous Somalis who were subjected to systematic persecution during the 1980’s by the military regime then governing Somalia. They allege that petitioner exercised command and control over mem
bers of the Somali military forces who tortured, killed, or arbitrarily detained them or members of their families; that petitioner knew or should have known of the abuses perpetrated by his subordinates; and that he aided and abetted the commission of these abuses.1 Respondents’ complaint sought damages from petitioner pursuant to the Torture Victim Protection Act of 1991, 106 Stat. 73, note following 28 U. S. C. §1350, and the Alien Tort Statute, 28 U. S. C. §1350. Petitioner, who was in charge of Somalia’s armed forces before its military regime collapsed, fled Somalia in 1991 and is now a resident of Virginia. The United States has not recognized any entity as the gov ernment of Somalia since the fall of the military regime. See Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 4. Respondents filed their complaint in November 2004, and petitioner promptly moved to dismiss. The District Court stayed the proceedings to give the State Depart ment an opportunity to provide a statement of interest regarding petitioner’s claim of sovereign immunity. Each month during the ensuing two years, petitioner advised the court that the State Department had the matter “ ‘still under consideration.’ ” No. 1:04cv1360 (ED Va., Aug. 1, 2007), App. to Pet. for Cert. 44a. In 2007, having received no response from the State Department, the District Court reinstated the case on its active docket. The court con cluded that it did not have subject-matter jurisdiction and granted petitioner’s motion to dismiss. The District Court’s decision rested squarely on the
FSIA.2 The FSIA provides that a “foreign state shall be immune from the jurisdiction” of both federal and state courts except as provided in the Act, 28 U. S. C. §1604, and the District Court noted that none of the parties had argued that any exception was applicable, App. to Pet. for Cert. 46a–47a. Although characterizing the statute as silent on its applicability to the officials of a foreign state, the District Court followed appellate decisions holding that a foreign state’s sovereign immunity under the Act extends to “ ‘an individual acting in his official capacity on behalf of a foreign state,’ ” but not to “ ‘an official who acts beyond the scope of his authority.’ ” Id., at 47a (quoting 399 (CA4 2004)). The court rejected respondents’ argu ment that petitioner was necessarily acting beyond the scope of his authority because he allegedly violated inter national law.3 The Court of Appeals reversed, rejecting the District Court’s ruling that the FSIA governs petitioner’s immu nity from suit. It acknowledged “the majority view”
among the Circuits that “the FSIA applies to individual officials of a foreign state.” 552 F. 3d 371, 378 (CA4 2009).4 It disagreed with that view, however, and con cluded, “based on the language and structure of the stat ute, that the FSIA does not apply to individual foreign government agents like [petitioner].” Id., at 381.5 Having found that the FSIA does not govern whether petitioner enjoys immunity from suit, the Court of Appeals re manded the case for further proceedings, including a determination of whether petitioner is entitled to immu nity under the common law. Id., at 383–384. We granted certiorari. 557 U. S. ___ (2009). The doctrine of foreign sovereign immunity developed as a matter of common law long before the FSIA was enacted 461 U. S. 480, 486 (1983), we explained that in Schooner tice Marshall concluded that . . . the United States had impliedly waived jurisdiction over certain activities of
foreign sovereigns.” The Court’s specific holding in Schoo ner Exchange was that a federal court lacked jurisdiction over “a national armed vessel . . . of the emperor of France,” id., at 146, but the opinion was interpreted as extending virtually absolute immunity to foreign sover eigns as “a matter of grace and comity,” Verlinden, 461 U. S., at 486. Following Schooner Exchange, a two-step procedure developed for resolving a foreign state’s claim of sovereign immunity, typically asserted on behalf of seized vessels. 36 (1945); Ex parte Peru, 318 U. S. 578, 587–589 (1943); Navemar, 303 U. S. 68, 74–75 (1938). Under that proce dure, the diplomatic representative of the sovereign could request a “suggestion of immunity” from the State De partment. Ex parte Peru, 318 U. S., at 581. If the request was granted, the district court surrendered its jurisdic tion. Id., at 588; see also Hoffman, 324 U. S., at 34. But “in the absence of recognition of the immunity by the Department of State,” a district court “had authority to decide for itself whether all the requisites for such immu nity existed.” Ex parte Peru, 318 U. S., at 587; see also Compania Espanola, 303 U. S., at 75 (approving judicial inquiry into sovereign immunity when the “Department of 445 F. 2d 501, 503, and n. 2 (CA2 1971) (evaluating sov ereign immunity when the State Department had not responded to a request for its views). In making that decision, a district court inquired “whether the ground of immunity is one which it is the established policy of the [State Department] to recognize.” Hoffman, 324 U. S., at 36. Although cases involving individual foreign officials as defendants were rare, the same two-step procedure was typically followed when a foreign official asserted immu
Thomson, 189 F. Supp. 319 (SDNY 1960).6 Prior to 1952, the State Department followed a general practice of requesting immunity in all actions against friendly sovereigns, but in that year the Department announced its adoption of the “restrictive” theory of sover eign immunity. Verlinden, 461 U. S., at 486–487; see also Letter from Jack B. Tate, Acting Legal Adviser, Depart ment of State, to Acting Attorney General Philip B. Perlman (May 19, 1952), reprinted in 26 Dept. State Bull. 984–985 (1952). Under this theory, “immunity is confined to suits involving the foreign sovereign’s public acts, and does not extend to cases arising out of a foreign state’s strictly commercial acts.” Verlinden, 461 U. S., at 487. This change threw “immunity determinations into some disarray,” because “political considerations sometimes led the Department to file ‘suggestions of immunity in cases where immunity would not have been available under the U. S. 677, 690 (2004) (quoting Verlinden, 461 U. S., at 487). Congress responded to the inconsistent application of sovereign immunity by enacting the FSIA in 1976. Altmann, 541 U. S., at 690–691; see also Verlinden, 461 U. S., at 487–488. Section 1602 describes the Act’s two primary purposes: (1) to endorse and codify the restrictive theory of sovereign immunity, and (2) to transfer primary responsibility for deciding “claims of foreign states to immunity” from the State Department to the courts.7
After the enactment of the FSIA, the Act—and not the pre-existing common law—indisputably governs the de termination of whether a foreign state is entitled to sover eign immunity. What we must now decide is whether the Act also covers the immunity claims of foreign officials. We begin with the statute’s text and then consider petitioner’s reliance on its history and purpose. The FSIA provides that “a foreign state shall be immune from the jurisdiction of the courts of the United States and of the States” except as provided in the Act. §1604. Thus, if a defendant is a “foreign state” within the meaning of the Act, then the defendant is immune from jurisdiction unless one of the exceptions in the Act applies. See §§1605–1607 (enumerating exceptions). The Act, if it applies, is the “sole basis for obtaining jurisdiction over a Amerada Hess Shipping Corp., 488 U. S. 428, 439 (1989). The question we face in this case is whether an individual sued for conduct undertaken in his official capacity is a “foreign state” within the meaning of the Act. The Act defines “foreign state” in §1603 as follows: “(a) A ‘foreign state’ . . . includes a political subdivi
sion of a foreign state or an agency or instrumentality of a foreign state as defined in subsection (b). “(b) An ‘agency or instrumentality of a foreign state’ means any entity— “(1) which is a separate legal person, corporate or otherwise, and “(2) which is an organ of a foreign state or political subdivision thereof, or a majority of whose shares or other ownership interest is owned by a foreign state or political subdivision thereof, and “(3) which is neither a citizen of a State of the United States as defined in section 1332(c) and (e) of this title, nor created under the laws of any third country.” The term “foreign state” on its face indicates a body politic that governs a particular territory. See, e.g., Re statement §4 (defining “state” as “an entity that has a defined territory and population under the control of a government and that engages in foreign relations”). In §1603(a), however, the Act establishes that “foreign state” has a broader meaning, by mandating the inclusion of the state’s political subdivisions, agencies, and instrumentali ties. Then, in §1603(b), the Act specifically delimits what counts as an agency or instrumentality. Petitioner argues that either “foreign state,” §1603(a), or “agency or instru mentality,” §1603(b), could be read to include a foreign official. Although we agree that petitioner’s interpretation is literally possible, our analysis of the entire statutory text persuades us that petitioner’s reading is not the meaning that Congress enacted. We turn first to the term “agency or instrumentality of a foreign state,” §1603(b). It is true that an individual official could be an “agency or instrumentality,” if that term is given the meaning of “any thing or person through which action is accomplished,” In re Terrorist Attacks on
Sept. 11, 2001, 538 F. 3d 71, 83 (CA2 2008). But Congress has specifically defined “agency or instrumentality” in the FSIA, and all of the textual clues in that definition cut against such a broad construction. First, the statute specifies that “ ‘agency or instrumen tality . . .’ means any entity” matching three specified characteristics, §1603(b) (emphasis added), and “entity” typically refers to an organization, rather than an individ ual. See, e.g., Black’s Law Dictionary 612 (9th ed. 2009). Furthermore, several of the required characteristics apply awkwardly, if at all, to individuals. The phrase “separate legal person, corporate or otherwise,” §1603(b)(1), could conceivably refer to a natural person, solely by virtue of the word “person.” But the phrase “separate legal person” typically refers to the legal fiction that allows an entity to hold personhood separate from the natural persons who Banco Para el Comercio Exterior de Cuba, 462 U. S. 611, 625 (1983) (“Separate legal personality has been described as ‘an almost indispensable aspect of the public corpora tion’ ”). It is similarly awkward to refer to a person as an “organ” of the foreign state. See §1603(b)(2). And the third part of the definition could not be applied at all to a natural person. A natural person cannot be a citizen of a State “as defined in section 1332(c) and (e),” §1603(b)(3), because those subsections refer to the citizenship of corpo rations and estates. Nor can a natural person be “created under the laws of any third country.” Ibid.8 Thus, the
terms Congress chose simply do not evidence the intent to include individual officials within the meaning of “agency U. S. 468, 474 (2003) (describing §1603(b) as containing “indicia that Congress had corporate formalities in mind”). Petitioner proposes a second textual route to including an official within the meaning of “foreign state.” He ar gues that the definition of “foreign state” in §1603(a) sets out a nonexhaustive list that “includes” political subdivi sions and agencies or instrumentalities but is not so lim ited. See Brief for Petitioner 22–23. It is true that use of the word “include” can signal that the list that follows is meant to be illustrative rather than exhaustive.10 And, to
be sure, there are fewer textual clues within §1603(a) than within §1603(b) from which to interpret Congress’ silence regarding foreign officials. But even if the list in §1603(a) is merely illustrative, it still suggests that “foreign state” does not encompass officials, because the types of defen United States, 261 U. S. 514, 519 (1923) (“[A] word may be known by the company it keeps”). Moreover, elsewhere in the FSIA Congress expressly mentioned officials when it wished to count their acts as equivalent to those of the foreign state, which suggests that officials are not included within the unadorned term 85, 103 (2007) (“Drawing meaning from silence is particu larly inappropriate . . . [when] Congress has shown that it knows how to [address an issue] in express terms”). For example, Congress provided an exception from the general grant of immunity for cases in which “money damages are sought against a foreign state” for an injury in the United States “caused by the tortious act or omission of that foreign state or of any official or employee of that foreign state while acting within the scope of his office.” §1605(a)(5) (emphasis added). The same reference to officials is made in a similar, later enacted exception. See 28 U. S. C. A. §1605A(a)(1) (Supp. 2009) (eliminating immunity for suits “in which money damages are sought against a foreign state” for certain acts “engaged in by an official, employee, or agent of such foreign state while acting within the scope of his or her office, employment, or agency”); see also §1605A(c) (creating a cause of action against the “foreign state” and “any official, employee, or
agent” thereof).11 If the term “foreign state” by definition includes an individual acting within the scope of his office, the phrase “or of any official or employee . . .” in 28 U. S. C. §1605(a)(5) would be unnecessary. See Dole Food Co., 538 U. S., at 476–477 (“[W]e should not construe the statute in a manner that is strained and, at the same time, would render a statutory term superfluous”). Other provisions of the statute also point away from reading “foreign state” to include foreign officials. Con gress made no express mention of service of process on individuals in §1608(a), which governs service upon a foreign state or political subdivision. Although some of the methods listed could be used to serve individuals—for example, by delivery “in accordance with an applicable international convention,” §1608(a)(2)—the methods specified are at best very roundabout ways of serving an individual official. Furthermore, Congress made specific remedial choices for different types of defendants. See §1606 (allowing punitive damages for an agency or in strumentality but not for a foreign state); §1610 (affording a plaintiff greater rights to attach the property of an agency or instrumentality as compared to the property of a foreign state). By adopting petitioner’s reading of “foreign state,” we would subject claims against officials to the more limited remedies available in suits against states,
without so much as a whisper from Congress on the sub ject. (And if we were instead to adopt petitioner’s other textual argument, we would subject those claims to the different, more expansive, remedial scheme for agencies). The Act’s careful calibration of remedies among the listed types of defendants suggests that Congress did not mean to cover other types of defendants never mentioned in the text. In sum, “[w]e do not . . . construe statutory phrases in Morton, 467 U. S. 822, 828 (1984). Reading the FSIA as a whole, there is nothing to suggest we should read “foreign state” in §1603(a) to include an official acting on behalf of the foreign state, and much to indicate that this meaning was not what Congress enacted.12 The text does not ex pressly foreclose petitioner’s reading, but it supports the view of respondents and the United States that the Act does not address an official’s claim to immunity. Petitioner argues that the FSIA is best read to cover his claim to immunity because of its history and purpose. As discussed at the outset, one of the primary purposes of the FSIA was to codify the restrictive theory of sovereign immunity, which Congress recognized as consistent with extant international law. See §1602. We have observed
that a related purpose was “codification of international law at the time of the FSIA’s enactment,” Permanent 551 U. S. 193, 199 (2007), and have examined the relevant common law and international practice when interpreting the Act, id., at 200–201. Because of this relationship between the Act and the common law that it codified, petitioner argues that we should construe the FSIA con sistently with the common law regarding individual im munity, which—in petitioner’s view—was coextensive with the law of state immunity and always immunized a for eign official for acts taken on behalf of the foreign state. Even reading the Act in light of Congress’ purpose of codifying state sovereign immunity, however, we do not think that the Act codified the common law with respect to the immunity of individual officials. The canon of construction that statutes should be inter preted consistently with the common law helps us inter pret a statute that clearly covers a field formerly governed by the common law.13 But the canon does not help us to decide the antecedent question whether, when a statute’s coverage is ambiguous, Congress intended the statute to govern a particular field—in this case, whether Congress intended the FSIA to supersede the common law of official immunity.14
Petitioner argues that because state and official immu nities are coextensive, Congress must have codified official immunity when it codified state immunity. See Brief for Petitioner 26–30. But the relationship between a state’s immunity and an official’s immunity is more complicated than petitioner suggests, although we need not and do not resolve the dispute among the parties as to the precise scope of an official’s immunity at common law. The very authority to which petitioner points us, and which we have previously found instructive, see, e.g., Permanent Mission, 551 U. S., at 200, states that the immunity of individual officials is subject to a caveat not applicable to any of the other entities or persons15 to which the foreign state’s immunity extends. The Restatement provides that the “immunity of a foreign state . . . extends to . . . any other public minister, official, or agent of the state with respect to acts performed in his official capacity if the effect of exercising jurisdiction would be to enforce a rule of law against the state.” Restatement §66 (emphasis added).16
And historically, the Government sometimes suggested immunity under the common law for individual officials even when the foreign state did not qualify. See, e.g., son to presume that when Congress set out to codify state immunity, it must also have, sub silentio, intended to codify official immunity. Petitioner urges that a suit against an official must always be equivalent to a suit against the state because acts taken by a state official on behalf of a state are acts of the state. See Brief for Petitioner 26. We have recog nized, in the context of the act of state doctrine, that an official’s acts can be considered the acts of the foreign state, and that “the courts of one country will not sit in judgment” of those acts when done within the territory of 250, 252, 254 (1897). Although the act of state doctrine is distinct from immunity, and instead “provides foreign states with a substantive defense on the merits,” Altmann, 541 U. S., at 700, we do not doubt that in some circum stances the immunity of the foreign state extends to an individual for acts taken in his official capacity. But it does not follow from this premise that Congress intended to codify that immunity in the FSIA. It hardly furthers Congress’ purpose of “clarifying the rules that judges should apply in resolving sovereign immunity claims,” id., at 699, to lump individual officials in with foreign states without so much as a word spelling out how and when individual officials are covered.17
Petitioner would have a stronger case if there were any indication that Congress’ intent to enact a comprehensive solution for suits against states extended to suits against individual officials. But to the extent Congress contem plated the Act’s effect upon officials at all, the evidence points in the opposite direction. As we have already men tioned, the legislative history points toward an intent to leave official immunity outside the scope of the Act. See n. 12, supra. And although questions of official immunity did arise in the pre-FSIA period, they were few and far between.18 The immunity of officials simply was not the particular problem to which Congress was responding when it enacted the FSIA. The FSIA was adopted, rather, to address “a modern world where foreign state enter prises are every day participants in commercial activities,” and to assure litigants that decisions regarding claims against states and their enterprises “are made on purely legal grounds.” H. R. Rep., at 7. We have been given no reason to believe that Congress saw as a problem, or wanted to eliminate, the State Department’s role in de terminations regarding individual official immunity.19
Finally, our reading of the FSIA will not “in effect make the statute optional,” as some Courts of Appeals have feared, by allowing litigants through “artful pleading . . . to take advantage of the Act’s provisions or, alternatively, Philippine Nat. Bank, 912 F. 2d 1095, 1102 (CA9 1990). Even if a suit is not governed by the Act, it may still be barred by foreign sovereign immunity under the common law. And not every suit can successfully be pleaded against an individual official alone.20 Even when a plain tiff names only a foreign official, it may be the case that the foreign state itself, its political subdivision, or an agency or instrumentality is a required party, because
that party has “an interest relating to the subject of the action” and “disposing of the action in the person’s absence may . . . as a practical matter impair or impede the per 19(a)(1)(B). If this is the case, and the entity is immune from suit under the FSIA, the district court may have to dismiss the suit, regardless of whether the official is im mune or not under the common law. See Republic of (“[W]here sovereign immunity is asserted, and the claims of the sovereign are not frivolous, dismissal of the action must be ordered where there is a potential for injury to the interests of the absent sovereign”). Or it may be the case that some actions against an official in his official capacity should be treated as actions against the foreign state itself, as the state is the real party in interest. Cf. official-capacity suit is, in all respects other than name, to be treated as a suit against the entity. It is not a suit against the official personally, for the real party in inter est is the entity” (citation omitted)). We are thus not persuaded that our construction of the statute’s text should be affected by the risk that plaintiffs may use artful pleading to attempt to select between application of the FSIA or the common law. And we think this case, in which respondents have sued petitioner in his personal capacity and seek damages from his own pockets, is properly governed by the common law because it is not a claim against a foreign state as the Act defines that term. Although Congress clearly intended to supersede the common-law regime for claims against foreign states, we find nothing in the statute’s origin or aims to indicate that Congress similarly wanted to codify the law of foreign official immunity.
Our review of the text, purpose, and history of the FSIA leads us to the conclusion that the Court of Appeals cor rectly held the FSIA does not govern petitioner’s claim of immunity. The Act therefore did not deprive the District Court of subject-matter jurisdiction. We emphasize, how ever, the narrowness of our holding. Whether petitioner may be entitled to immunity under the common law, and whether he may have other valid defenses to the grave charges against him, are matters to be addressed in the first instance by the District Court on remand. The judg ment of the Court of Appeals is affirmed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. It is so ordered.
——————
1 Although we do not set out respondents’ allegations in detail, the
District Court’s written opinion contains a comprehensive summary,
describing not only the abuses respondents suffered but also the his
torical context in which the abuses occurred, as well as some of the
attempts to establish a stable government in Somalia in recent years.
See No. 1:04cv1360 (ED Va., Aug. 1, 2007), App. to Pet. for Cert. 31a–
43a.


——————
2 Petitioner

argued that, in addition to his immunity under the FSIA,
the complaint should be dismissed on a number of other grounds, which
the District Court did not reach. See id., at 45a, n. 11.
3 Because we hold that the FSIA does not govern whether an individ
ual foreign official enjoys immunity from suit, we need not reach
respondents’ argument that an official is not immune under the FSIA
for acts of torture and extrajudicial killing. See Brief for Respondents
51–53. We note that in determining petitioner had not acted beyond
the scope of his authority, the District Court afforded great weight to
letters from the Somali Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to the
State Department, App. to Pet. for Cert. 55a, in which the TFG sup
ported petitioner’s claim of immunity and stated “the actions attributed
to [petitioner] in the lawsuit . . . would have been taken by [petitioner]
in his official capacities,” App. 104. Although the District Court de
scribed the TFG as “recognized by the United States as the governing
body in Somalia,” App. to Pet. for Cert. 54a, the United States does not
recognize the TFG (or any other entity) as the government of Somalia,
see Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 5.


——————
4 Compare 552 F. 3d, at 381 (holding the FSIA does not govern the
immunity of individual foreign officials), and Enahoro v. Abubakar, 408
F. 3d 877, 881–882 (CA7 2005) (same), with Chuidian v. Philippine
Nat. Bank, 912 F. 2d 1095, 1103 (CA9 1990) (concluding that a suit
against an individual official for acts committed in his official capacity
must be analyzed under the FSIA), In re Terrorist Attacks on September
11, 2001, 538 F. 3d 71, 83 (CA2 2008) (same), Keller v. Central Bank of
Nigeria, 277 F. 3d 811, 815 (CA6 2002) (same), Byrd v. Corporacion
Forestal y Industrial de Olancho S. A., 182 F. 3d 380, 388 (CA5 1999)
(same), and El-Fadl v. Central Bank of Jordan, 75 F. 3d 668, 671
(CADC 1996) (same).
5 As an alternative basis for its decision, the Court of Appeals held
that even if a current official is covered by the FSIA, a former official is
not. See 552 F. 3d, at 381–383. Because we agree with the Court of
Appeals on its broader ground that individual officials are not covered
by the FSIA, petitioner’s status as a former official is irrelevant to our
analysis.


——————
6 Diplomatic

and consular officers could also claim the “specialized
immunities” accorded those officials, Restatement (Second) of Foreign
Relations Law of the United States §66, Comment b (1964–1965)
(hereinafter Restatement), and officials qualifying as the “head of state”
could claim immunity on that basis, see Schooner Exchange v. McFad
don, 7 Cranch 116, 137 (1812) (describing “the exemption of the person
of the sovereign” from “a jurisdiction incompatible with his dignity”).
7 The full text of §1602, entitled “Findings and declaration of pur


——————
pose,” reads as follows:
“The Congress finds that the determination by United States courts
of the claims of foreign states to immunity from the jurisdiction of such
courts would serve the interests of justice and would protect the rights
of both foreign states and litigants in United States courts. Under
international law, states are not immune from the jurisdiction of
foreign courts insofar as their commercial activities are concerned, and
their commercial property may be levied upon for the satisfaction of
judgments rendered against them in connection with their commercial
activities. Claims of foreign states to immunity should henceforth be
decided by courts of the United States and of the States in conformity
with the principles set forth in this chapter.”


——————
8 Petitioner

points out that §1603(b)(3) describes only which defen
dants cannot be agencies or instrumentalities. He suggests that it
therefore tells us nothing about which defendants can be covered by
that term. Brief for Petitioner 46. Even if so, reading §1603(b) as
petitioner suggests would leave us with the odd result that a corpora
tion that is the citizen of a state is excluded from the definition under
§1603(b)(3), and thus not immune, whereas a natural person who is the
citizen of a state is not excluded, and thus retains his immunity.


——————
9 Nor does anything in the legislative history suggest that Congress
intended the term “agency or instrumentality” to include individuals.
On the contrary, the legislative history, like the statute, speaks in
terms of entities. See, e.g., H. R. Rep. No. 94–1487, p. 15 (1976) (here
inafter H. R. Rep.) (“The first criterion, that the entity be a separate
legal person, is intended to include a corporation, association, founda
tion, or any other entity which, under the law of the foreign state where
it was created, can sue or be sued in its own name”).
JUSTICE SCALIA may well be correct that it is not strictly necessary to
confirm our reading of the statutory text by consulting the legislative
history, see post, at 1–2 (opinion concurring in judgment). But as the
Court explained some years ago in an opinion authored by Justice
White:
“As for the propriety of using legislative history at all, common sense
suggests that inquiry benefits from reviewing additional information
rather than ignoring it. As Chief Justice Marshall put it, ‘[w]here the
mind labours to discover the design of the legislature, it seizes every
thing from which aid can be derived.’ United States v. Fisher, 2 Cranch
358, 386 (1805). Legislative history materials are not generally so
misleading that jurists should never employ them in a good-faith effort
to discern legislative intent. Our precedents demonstrate that the
Court’s practice of utilizing legislative history reaches well into its past.
See, e.g., Wallace v. Parker, 6 Pet. 680, 687–690 (1832). We suspect
that the practice will likewise reach well into the future.” Wisconsin
Public Intervenor v. Mortier, 501 U. S. 597, 611–612, n. 4 (1991) (altera
tion in original).
10 See 2A N. Singer & J. Singer, Sutherland Statutory Construction


—————— 

§47.7, p. 305 (7th ed. 2007) (“[T]he word ‘includes’ is usually a term of 

enlargement, and not of limitation” (some internal quotation marks

omitted)). 



——————
11 Petitioner argues that §1605A abrogates immunity for certain acts
by individual officials, which would be superfluous if the officials were
not otherwise immune. See Brief for Petitioner 41–43. But the import
of §1605A is precisely the opposite. First, §1605A(a)(1) eliminates the
immunity of the state for certain acts of its officers; it says a “foreign
state shall not be immune” in a suit “in which money damages are
sought against a foreign state.” As it does not expressly refer to the
immunity of individual officers, it adds nothing to petitioner’s argu
ment. Second, the creation of a cause of action against both the “for
eign state” and “any official, employee, or agent” thereof, §1605A(c),
reinforces the idea that “foreign state” does not by definition include
foreign officials.


——————
12 Nor

is it the case that the FSIA’s “legislative history does not even
hint of an intent to exclude individual officials,” Chuidian, 912 F. 2d, at
1101. The legislative history makes clear that Congress did not intend
the FSIA to address position-based individual immunities such as
diplomatic and consular immunity. H. R. Rep., at 12 (“The bill is not
intended . . . . to affect either diplomatic or consular immunity”). It also
suggests that general “official immunity” is something separate from
the subject of the bill. See id., at 23 (“The bill does not attempt to deal
with questions of discovery. . . . [I]f a plaintiff sought to depose a
diplomat in the United States or a high-ranking official of a foreign
government, diplomatic and official immunity would apply”).


——————
13 Congress “is understood to legislate against a background of com
mon-law . . . principles,” Astoria Fed. Sav. & Loan Assn. v. Solimino,
501 U. S. 104, 108 (1991), and when a statute covers an issue previ
ously governed by the common law, we interpret the statute with the
presumption that Congress intended to retain the substance of the
common law. See Isbrandtsen Co. v. Johnson, 343 U. S. 779, 783 (1952)
(“Statutes which invade the common law . . . are to be read with a
presumption favoring the retention of long-established and familiar
principles, except when a statutory purpose to the contrary is evident”).
14 We find similarly inapposite petitioner’s invocation of the canon
that a statute should be interpreted in compliance with international
law, see Murray v. Schooner Charming Betsy, 2 Cranch 64, 118 (1804),


——————
and his argument that foreign relations and the reciprocal protection of
United States officials abroad would be undermined if we do not adopt
his reading of the Act. Because we are not deciding that the FSIA bars
petitioner’s immunity but rather that the Act does not address the
question, we need not determine whether declining to afford immunity
to petitioner would be consistent with international law.
15 The Restatement does not apply this caveat to the head of state,
head of government, or foreign minister. See Restatement §66.
Whether petitioner may be entitled to head of state immunity, or any
other immunity, under the common law is a question we leave open for
remand. See 552 F. 3d 371, 383 (CA4 2009). We express no view on
whether Restatement §66 correctly sets out the scope of the common
law immunity applicable to current or former foreign officials.
16 Respondents contend that this caveat refers to “the compulsive
effect of the judgment on the state,” Brief for Respondents 42, but
petitioner disputes that meaning, Reply Brief for Petitioner 17–18. We
need not resolve their dispute, as it is enough for present purposes that
the Restatement indicates a foreign official’s immunity may turn upon
a requirement not applicable to any other type of defendant.


——————
17 The courts of appeals have had to develop, in the complete absence
of any statutory text, rules governing when an official is entitled to
immunity under the FSIA. For example, Courts of Appeals have
applied the rule that foreign sovereign immunity extends to an individ
ual official “for acts committed in his official capacity” but not to “an
official who acts beyond the scope of his authority.” Chuidian, 912


——————
F. 2d, at 1103, 1106. That may be correct as a matter of common-law
principles, but it does not derive from any clarification or codification
by Congress. Furthermore, if Congress intended the FSIA to reach
individuals, one would expect the Act to have addressed whether former
officials are covered, an issue it settled with respect to instrumentali
ties, see Dole Food Co. v. Patrickson, 538 U. S. 468, 478 (2003)
(“[I]nstrumentality status [must] be determined at the time suit is
filed”).
18 A study that attempted to gather all of the State Department deci
sions related to sovereign immunity from the adoption of the restrictive
theory in 1952 to the enactment of the FSIA reveals only four decisions
related to official immunity, and two related to head of state immunity,
out of a total of 110 decisions. Sovereign Immunity Decisions of the
Dept. of State, May 1952 to Jan. 1977 (M. Sandler, D. Vagts, & B.
Ristau eds.), in Digest of U. S. Practice in Int’l Law 1020, 1080 (1977)
(hereinafter Digest).
19 The FSIA was introduced in accordance with the recommendation


——————
of the State Department. H. R. Rep., at 6. The Department sought and
supported the elimination of its role with respect to claims against
foreign states and their agencies or instrumentalities. See Hearings on
H. R. 11315 before the Subcommittee on Administrative Law and
Governmental Relations of the House of Representatives Committee on
the Judiciary, 94th Cong., 2d Sess., 34 (1976) (testimony of Monroe
Leigh, Legal Adviser, Dept. of State) (“[I]t is our judgment . . . that the
advantages of having a judicial determination greatly outweigh the
advantage of being able to intervene in a lawsuit”). But the Depart
ment has from the time of the FSIA’s enactment understood the Act to
leave intact the Department’s role in official immunity cases. See
Digest 1020 (“These decisions [of the Department regarding the immu
nity of officials] may be of some future significance, because the Foreign
Sovereign Immunities Act does not deal with the immunity of individ
ual officials, but only that of foreign states and their political subdivi
sions, agencies and instrumentalities”).
20 Furthermore, a plaintiff seeking to sue a foreign official will not be
able to rely on the Act’s service of process and jurisdictional provisions.
Thus, a plaintiff will have to establish that the district court has
personal jurisdiction over an official without the benefit of the FSIA
provision that makes personal jurisdiction over a foreign state auto
matic when an exception to immunity applies and service of process has
been accomplished in accordance with 28 U. S. C. §1608. See §1330(b)
(“Personal jurisdiction over a foreign state shall exist as to every claim
for relief over which the district courts have jurisdiction under subsec
tion (a),” i.e., claims for which the foreign state is not entitled to immu
nity, “where service has been made under section 1608 of this title”).

