2

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
Opinion of the Court

meet the Board’s quorum requirement, §153(b). The four
sitting members decided to take action in an effort to
preserve the Board’s authority to function. On December
20, 2007, the Board made two delegations of its authority,
effective as of midnight December 28, 2007. First, the
Board delegated to the general counsel continuing author
ity to initiate and conduct litigation that would normally
require case-by-case approval of the Board. See Minute of
Board Action (Dec. 20, 2007), App. to Brief for Petitioner
4a–5a (hereinafter Board Minutes). Second, the Board
delegated “to Members Liebman, Schaumber and Kir
sanow, as a three-member group, all of the Board’s pow
ers, in anticipation of the adjournment of the 1st Session
of the 110th Congress.” Id., at 5a. The Board expressed
the opinion that its action would permit the remaining two
members to exercise the powers of the Board “after [the]
departure of Members Kirsanow and Walsh, because the
remaining Members will constitute a quorum of the three
member group.” Ibid.
The Board’s minutes explain that it relied on “the statu
tory language” of §3(b), as well as an opinion issued by the
Office of Legal Counsel (OLC), for the proposition that the
Board may use this delegation procedure to “issue deci
sions during periods when three or more of the five seats
on the Board are vacant.” Id., at 6a. The OLC had con
cluded in 2003 that “if the Board delegated all of its pow
ers to a group of three members, that group could continue
to issue decisions and orders as long as a quorum of two
members remained.” Dept. of Justice, OLC, Quorum
Requirements, App. to Brief for Respondent 3a. In seek
ing the OLC’s advice, the Board agreed to accept the
OLC’s answer regarding its ability to operate with only
two members, id., at 1a, n. 1, and the Board in its minutes
therefore “acknowledged that it is bound” by the OLC
opinion. Board Minutes 6a. The Board noted, however,
that it was not bound to make this delegation; rather, it

