8

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
Opinion of the Court

cedes that its practice was to reconstitute a delegee group
when one group member’s term expired. Brief for Respon
dent 39, n. 27.3 That our interpretation of the delegation
provision is consistent with the Board’s longstanding
practice is persuasive evidence that it is the correct one,
notwithstanding the Board’s more recent view. See Bowen
v. Georgetown Univ. Hospital, 488 U. S. 204, 214 (1988).
In sum, a straightforward understanding of the text,
which requires that no fewer than three members be
vested with the Board’s full authority, coupled with the
Board’s longstanding practice, points us toward an inter
pretation of the delegation clause that requires a delegee
group to maintain a membership of three.
III
Against these points, the Government makes several
arguments that we find unconvincing. It first argues that
§3(b) authorizes the Board’s action by its plain terms,
notwithstanding the somewhat fictional nature of the
delegation to a three-member group with the expectation
that within days it would become a two-member group. In
——————
actually participate in the decision. That circumstance thus also
presents the problem of the possible inferiority of two-member deci
sionmaking. That the Board found it necessary to reconstitute groups
only when there was a vacancy, and not when there was a disqualifica
tion, suggests that its practice was driven by more than its belief in
the “superiority of three-member groups,” post, at 10 (KENNEDY, J.,
dissenting).
3 It also has not been the Board’s practice to issue decisions when the
Board’s membership has fallen to two. For about a 2-month period in
1993–1994, and a 1-month period in 2001–2002, the Board had only
two members and did not issue decisions. Brief for Respondent 5, n. 4.
In 2005, the Board did delegate its authority to a three-member group,
of which two members issued a few orders as a quorum during a 3-day
period in which the Board’s (and the group’s) membership fell below
three. Ibid. But the two-member Board at issue in this case, extending
over two years, is unprecedented in the history of the post-Taft-Hartley
Board.

