2

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
Syllabus
shall not impair the right of the remaining members to exercise all of
the powers of the Board”; (3) the Board quorum requirement, which
mandates that “three members of the Board shall, at all times, con
stitute a quorum of the Board”; and (4) the group quorum provision,
which provides that “two members shall constitute a quorum” of any
delegee group. This reading is consonant with the Board quorum re
quirement of three participating members “at all times,” and it gives
material effect to the delegation clause’s three-member rule. It also
permits the vacancy clause to operate to provide that vacancies do
not impair the Board’s ability to take action, so long as the quorum is
satisfied. And it does not render inoperative the group quorum pro
vision, which continues to authorize a properly constituted three
member delegee group to issue a decision with only two members
participating when one is disqualified from a case. The Govern
ment’s contrary reading allows two members to act as the Board ad
infinitum, dramatically undercutting the Board quorum require
ment’s significance by allowing its permanent circumvention. It also
diminishes the delegation clause’s three-member requirement by
permitting a de facto two-member delegation. By allowing the Board
to include a third member in the group for only one minute before her
term expires, this approach also gives no meaningful effect to the
command implicit in both the delegation clause and the Board quo
rum requirement that the Board’s full power be vested in no fewer
than three members. Second, had Congress intended to authorize
two members to act on an ongoing basis, it could have used straight
forward language. The Court’s interpretation is consistent with the
Board’s longstanding practice of reconstituting a delegee group when
one group member’s term expired. Pp. 4–9.
(b) The Government’s several arguments against the Court’s inter
pretation—that the group quorum requirement and vacancy clause
together permit two members of a three-member group to constitute
a quorum even when there is no third member; that the vacancy
clause establishes that a vacancy in the group has no effect; and that
reading the statute to authorize the Board to act with only two mem
bers advances the congressional objective of Board efficiency—are
unconvincing. Pp. 9–14.

564 F. 3d 840, reversed and remanded.
STEVENS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., joined. KENNEDY, J., filed a
dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined.

