12

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
Opinion of the Court

group.5 Given the difference between a panel constituted
to decide particular cases and the creation of a standing
panel plenipotentiary, which will decide many cases aris
ing long after the third member departs, there is no basis
for reading the statutes similarly. Moreover, our reading
of the court of appeals quorum provision was informed by
the longstanding practice of allowing two judges from the
initial panel to proceed to judgment in the case of a va
cancy, see ibid., and as we have already explained, the
Board’s practice has been precisely the opposite.
Finally, we are not persuaded by the Government’s
argument that we should read the statute to authorize the
Board to act with only two members in order to advance
the congressional objective of Board efficiency. Brief for
Respondent 26. In the Government’s view, Congress’
establishment of the two-member quorum for a delegee
group reflected its comfort with pre-Taft-Hartley practice,
when the then-three-member Board regularly issued
decisions with only two members. Id., at 24. But it is
unsurprising that two members regularly issued Board
decisions prior to Taft-Hartley, because the statute then
provided for a Board quorum of two. See 29 U. S. C.
§153(b) (1946 ed.). Congress changed that requirement to
a three-member quorum for the Board. As we noted
above, if Congress had wanted to allow the Board to con
tinue to operate with only two members, it could have kept
the Board quorum requirement at two.6
——————
5 In any event, if the analogy to the appellate courts were correct,
then one might have to examine each Board decision individually.
Petitioner’s case was not initially assigned to a three-member panel
and thereafter decided by two members after one member had retired.
Instead, by the time petitioner’s case came before the Board, Member
Kirsanow had long departed. In practical terms, petitioner’s case was
both assigned to and decided by a two-member delegee group.
6 We have no doubt that Congress intended “to preserve the ability of
two members of the Board to exercise the Board’s full powers, in limited
circumstances,” post, at 12, as when a two-member quorum of a prop

