Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

sion, and look to the vacancy clause to determine whether
vacancies in excess of that number have any effect on an
entity’s authority to act.
The Government argues that the vacancy clause estab
lishes that a vacancy in the group has no effect. But the
clause speaks to the effect of a vacancy in the Board on the
authority to exercise the powers of the Board; it does not
provide a delegee group authority to act when there is a
vacancy in the group. It is true that any vacancy in the
group is necessarily also a vacancy in the Board (although
the converse is not true), and that a group exercises the
(delegated) “powers of the Board.” But §3(b) explicitly
distinguishes between a group and the Board throughout,
and in light of that distinction we do not think “Board”
should be read to include “group” when doing so would
negate for all practical purposes the command that
a delegation must be made to a group of at least three
members.
Some courts have nonetheless interpreted the quorum
and vacancy provisions of §3(b) by analogizing to an appel
late panel, which may decide a case even though only two
of the three initially assigned judges remain on the panel.
See Photo-Sonics, Inc. v. NLRB, 678 F. 2d 121, 122–123
(CA9 1982). The governing statute provides that a case
may be decided “by separate panels, each consisting of
three judges,” 28 U. S. C. §46(b), but that a “majority of
the number of judges authorized to constitute a court or
panel thereof . . . shall constitute a quorum,” §46(d). We
have interpreted that statute to “requir[e] the inclusion of
at least three judges in the first instance,” but to allow a
two-judge “quorum to proceed to judgment when one
member of the panel dies or is disqualified.” Nguyen v.
United States, 539 U. S. 69, 82 (2003). But §46, which
addresses the assignment of particular cases to panels, is
a world apart from this statute, which authorizes the
standing delegation of all the Board’s powers to a small

