Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

Furthermore, if Congress had intended to allow for a
two-member Board, it is hard to imagine why it would
have limited the Board’s power to delegate its authority by
requiring a delegee group of at least three members. Nor
do we have any reason to surmise that Congress’ overrid
ing objective in amending §3(b) was to keep the Board
operating at all costs; the inclusion of the three-member
quorum and delegation provisions indicate otherwise. Cf.
Robert’s Rules of Order §3, p. 20 (10th ed. 2001) (“The
requirement of a quorum is a protection against totally
unrepresentative action in the name of the body by an
unduly small number of persons”).
IV
In sum, we find that the Board quorum requirement and
the three-member delegation clause should not be read as
easily surmounted technical obstacles of little to no im
port. Our reading of the statute gives effect to those pro
visions without rendering any other provision of the stat
ute superfluous: The delegation clause still operates to
allow the Board to act in panels of three, and the group
quorum provision still operates to allow any panel to issue
a decision by only two members if one member is disquali
fied. Our construction is also consistent with the Board’s
longstanding practice with respect to delegee groups. We
thus hold that the delegation clause requires that a
delegee group maintain a membership of three in order to
exercise the delegated authority of the Board.
We are not insensitive to the Board’s understandable
desire to keep its doors open despite vacancies.7 Nor are
——————
erly constituted delegee group issues a decision for the Board in a
particular case. But we doubt “Congress intended to preserve” the preTaft-Hartley practice of two members acting for the Board when the
third seat was vacant, post, at 11, because it declined to preserve the
pre-Taft-Hartley two-member Board quorum.
7 Former Board members have identified turnover and vacancies as a

