10

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
Opinion of the Court

other words, that only two members must participate to
transact business in the name of the group, does not estab
lish that the group itself can exercise the Board’s author
ity when the group’s membership falls below three.
The Government nonetheless contends that quorum
rules “ordinarily” define the number of members that is
both necessary and sufficient for an entity to take an
action. Brief for Respondent 20. Therefore, because of the
quorum provision, if “at least two members of a delegee
group actually participate in a decision . . . that should be
the end of the matter,” regardless of vacancies in the
group or on the Board. Ibid. But even if quorum provi
sions ordinarily provide the rule for dealing with vacan
cies—i.e., even if they ordinarily make irrelevant any
vacancies in the remainder of the larger body—the quo
rum provisions in §3(b) do no such thing. Rather, there is
a separate clause addressing vacancies. The vacancy
clause, recall, provides that “[a] vacancy in the Board shall
not impair the right of the remaining members to exercise
all of the powers of the Board.” §153(b) (2006 ed.). We
thus understand the quorum provisions merely to define
the number of members who must participate in a deci
——————
satisfied or else the power of any entity to which the Board has dele
gated authority is suspended. See Laurel Baye Healthcare of Lake
Lanier, Inc. v. NLRB, 564 F. 3d 469, 475 (2009) (“[T]he Board quorum
provision establishes that the power of the Board to act exists [only]
when the Board consists of three members. The delegee group’s dele
gated power to act . . . ceases when the Board’s membership dips below
the Board quorum of three members” (citation omitted)). The Board
may not, of course, itself take any action absent sufficient membership
to muster a quorum (three), and in that sense a quorum requirement
establishes a minimum membership level. Our conclusion that the
delegee group ceases to exist once there are no longer three Board
members to constitute the group does not cast doubt on the prior
delegations of authority to nongroup members, such as the regional
directors or the general counsel. The latter implicates a separate
question that our decision does not address.

