(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NATIONAL LABOR 

RELATIONS BOARD 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1457. Argued March 23, 2010—Decided June 17, 2010
The Taft-Hartley Act increased the size of the National Labor Relations
Board (Board) from three members to five, see 29 U. S. C. §153(a),
and amended §3(b) of the National Labor Relations Act to increase
the Board’s quorum requirement from two members to three and to
allow the Board to delegate its authority to groups of at least three
members, see §153(b). In December 2007, the Board—finding itself
with only four members and expecting two more vacancies—
delegated, inter alia, its powers to a group of three members. On De
cember 31, one group member’s appointment expired, but the others
proceeded to issue Board decisions for the next 27 months as a two
member quorum of a three-member group. Two of those decisions
sustained unfair labor practice complaints against petitioner, which
sought review, challenging the two-member Board’s authority to is
sue orders. The Seventh Circuit ruled for the Government, conclud
ing that the two members constituted a valid quorum of a three
member group to which the Board had legitimately delegated its
powers.
Held: Section 3(b) requires that a delegee group maintain a member
ship of three in order to exercise the delegated authority of the Board.
Pp. 4–14.
(a) The first sentence of §3(b), the so-called delegation clause, au
thorizes the Board to delegate its powers only to a “group of three or
more members.” This clause is best read to require that the delegee
group maintain a membership of three in order for the delegation to
remain valid. First, that is the only way to harmonize and give
meaningful effect to all of §3(b)’s provisions: (1) the delegation clause;
(2) the vacancy clause, which provides that “[a] vacancy in the Board

