6

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
Opinion of the Court

Board shall, at all times, constitute a quorum of the
Board”; and (4) the group quorum provision, which pro
vides that “two members shall constitute a quorum” of any
delegee group. See §153(b).
Interpreting the statute to require the Board’s powers to
be vested at all times in a group of at least three members
is consonant with the Board quorum requirement, which
requires three participating members “at all times” for the
Board to act. The interpretation likewise gives material
effect to the three-member requirement in the delegation
clause. The vacancy clause still operates to provide that
vacancies do not impair the ability of the Board to take
action, so long as the quorum is satisfied. And the inter
pretation does not render inoperative the group quorum
provision, which still operates to authorize a three
member delegee group to issue a decision with only two
members participating, so long as the delegee group was
properly constituted. Reading §3(b) in this manner, the
statute’s various pieces hang together—a critical clue that
this reading is a sound one.
The contrary reading, on the other hand, allows two
members to act as the Board ad infinitum, which dramati
cally undercuts the significance of the Board quorum
requirement by allowing its permanent circumvention.
That reading also makes the three-member requirement
in the delegation clause of vanishing significance, because
it allows a de facto delegation to a two-member group, as
happened in this case. Under the Government’s approach,
it would satisfy the statute for the Board to include a third
member in the group for only one minute before her term
expires; the approach gives no meaningful effect to the
command implicit in both the delegation clause and in the
Board quorum requirement that the Board’s full power be
vested in no fewer than three members. Hence, while the
Government’s reading of the delegation clause is textually
permissible in a narrow sense, it is structurally implausi

