6

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

Ante, at 12. But there was little if any reliance on any
such practice in Nguyen. In noting that its conclusion was
a matter of “settled law,” the Court relied on the text of
the statute and a single case that itself looked directly to
the statutory text of §46(d). Nguyen, supra, at 82 (citing
United States v. Allied Stevedoring Corp., 241 F. 2d 925,
927 (CA2 1957) (L. Hand, J.)).
If the group quorum provision leaves any room for doubt
that it applies in cases of vacancy, its application is made
clearer by the vacancy clause itself. That clause states in
unequivocal terms that “[a] vacancy in the Board shall not
impair the right of the remaining members to exercise all
of the powers of the Board.” §153(b). The Court makes
much of the fact that the statute refers to a vacancy in the
“Board” rather than in a “group.” But the former category
subsumes the latter. That is, the phrase “[a] vacancy in
the Board” covers the entire universe of instances in which
there may be a vacancy in a group, because all group
members are Board members.
The Court counters that the vacancy clause “speaks to
the effect of a vacancy in the Board on the authority to
exercise the powers of the Board,” ante, at 11, as opposed
to a vacancy in a group. But the Court’s abridged re
statement of the vacancy clause suffers from a critical
imprecision. The Court’s point would be well taken if the
vacancy clause stated that “a vacancy in the Board shall
not affect the power of the Board to operate.” But the
clause instead states that “[a] vacancy in the Board shall
not impair the right of the remaining members to exercise
all of the powers of the Board.” Delegee groups consist of
members exercising the powers of the Board. This clause
thus instructs that a vacancy in the Board shall not im
pair the right of members to exercise the Board’s powers,
an authority that members of delegee groups possess. But
under the Court’s reading, vacancies in the Board will
often impair the right of the remaining members to exer

