Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

expiration of Member Kirsanow’s term. Construing §3(b)
as a whole and in light of the Board’s longstanding prac
tice, we are persuaded that they could not.
The first sentence of §3(b), which we will call the delega
tion clause, provides that the Board may delegate its
powers only to a “group of three or more members.” 61
Stat. 139. There are two different ways to interpret that
language. One interpretation, put forward by the Gov
ernment, would read the clause to require only that a
delegee group contain three members at the precise time
the Board delegates its powers, and to have no continuing
relevance after the moment of the initial delegation.
Under that reading, two members alone may exercise the
full power of the Board so long as they were part of a
delegee group that, at the time of its creation, included
three members. The other interpretation, by contrast,
would read the clause as requiring that the delegee group
maintain a membership of three in order for the delega
tion to remain valid. Three main reasons support the
latter reading.
First, and most fundamentally, reading the delegation
clause to require that the Board’s delegated power be
vested continuously in a group of three members is the
only way to harmonize and give meaningful effect to all of
the provisions in §3(b). See Duncan v. Walker, 533 U. S.
167, 174 (2001) (declining to adopt a “construction of the
statute, [that] would render [a term] insignificant”); Mar
ket Co. v. Hoffman, 101 U. S. 112, 115–116 (1879) (“[A]
statute ought, upon the whole, to be so construed that, if it
can be prevented, no clause, sentence, or word shall be . . .
insignificant” (internal quotation marks omitted)). Those
provisions are: (1) the delegation clause; (2) the vacancy
clause, which provides that “[a] vacancy in the Board shall
not impair the right of the remaining members to exercise
all of the powers of the Board”; (3) the Board quorum
requirement, which mandates that “three members of the

