Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

particular, the Government contends the group quorum
requirement and the vacancy clause together make clear
that when the Board has delegated its power to a three
member group, “any two members of that group constitute
a quorum that may continue to exercise the delegated
powers, regardless whether the third group member . . .
continues to sit on the Board” and regardless “whether a
quorum remains in the full Board.” Brief for Respondent
17; see also id., at 20–23.
Although the group quorum provision clearly authorizes
two members to act as a quorum of a “group designated
pursuant to the first sentence”—i.e., a group of at least
three members—it does not, by its plain terms, authorize
two members to constitute a valid delegee group. A quo
rum is the number of members of a larger body that must
participate for the valid transaction of business. See
Black’s Law Dictionary 1370 (9th ed. 2009) (defining
“quorum” as the “minimum number of members . . . who
must be present for a deliberative assembly to legally
transact business”); 13 Oxford English Dictionary 51 (2d
ed. 1989) (“A fixed number of members of any body . . .
whose presence is necessary for the proper or valid trans
action of business”); Webster’s New International Diction
ary 2046 (2d ed. 1954) (“Such a number of the officers or
members of any body as is, when duly assembled, legally
competent to transact business”). But the fact that there
are sufficient members participating to constitute a quo
rum does not necessarily establish that the larger body is
properly constituted or can validly exercise authority.4 In
——————
4 Nor does failure to meet a quorum requirement necessarily establish
that an entity’s power is suspended so that it can be exercised by no
delegee. The requisite membership of an organization, and the number
of members who must participate for it to take an action, are two
separate (albeit related) characteristics. Thus, although we reach the
same result, we do not adopt the District of Columbia Circuit’s equation
of a quorum requirement with a membership requirement that must be

