Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

delegation clause and each of the quorum provisions inde
pendent meaning.
Where two members act as a quorum of a group, the
statute (unlike the Court) is indifferent to the reason for
the third member’s absence, be it illness, recusal, or va
cancy. The Court would hold that two members of a group
can act as a quorum so long as the third’s absence is not
due to a vacancy; yet the vacancy clause makes it clear
that the authority of Board “members” to act shall not be
impaired by vacancies. The clause includes all members,
including those acting as part of three-member groups.
The Court in effect would rewrite the group quorum
provision to say, “two members shall constitute a quorum
of any group [unless the third member’s absence is due to
a vacancy].” Even if the statute said nothing about vacan
cies, this would be a misreading of the quorum provision.
A “quorum” is the “minimum number of members . . . who
must be present for a deliberative assembly to legally
transact business.” See Black’s Law Dictionary 1370 (9th
ed. 2009) (hereinafter Black’s). As the Court has made
clear in the past, quorum requirements are generally
indifferent to the reasons underlying any particular mem
ber’s absence. See Nguyen, 539 U. S., at 82.
For instance, the Court has previously discussed a
statute governing the delegation of power to three-member
panels of the federal courts of appeals. Ibid. That statute
provides: “A majority of the number of judges authorized
to constitute a court or panel thereof . . . shall constitute a
quorum.” 28 U. S. C. §46(d). While the statute makes no
mention of vacancies, the Court had little trouble conclud
ing that the statute “permits a quorum to proceed to
judgment when one member of the panel dies or is dis
qualified.” Nguyen, supra, at 82. The Court today offers
to distinguish Nguyen as being “informed by the long
standing practice of allowing two judges from the initial
panel to proceed to judgment in the case of a vacancy.”

