Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

signs a renewal agreement—even “under protest”—there
has been no “fail[ure] to renew,” and thus the franchisee
has no cause of action under the Act. See 15 U. S. C.
§2805(a).
The Act’s structure and purpose confirm this interpreta
tion. By requiring franchisors to renew only the “franchise
relationship,” as opposed to the same franchise agreement,
see §2802; see also §2801(2), the PMPA contemplates that
franchisors can respond to market demands by proposing
new and different terms at the expiration of a franchise
agreement. To that end, the Act authorizes franchisors to
decline to renew a franchise relationship if the franchisee
refuses to accept changes or additions that are proposed
“in good faith and in the normal course of business” and
that are not designed to convert the service station to
direct operation by the franchisor. §2802(b)(3)(A). Addi
tionally, the Act creates a procedural mechanism for re
solving disputes over the legality of proposed new terms.
If the parties cannot agree, the franchisor has the option
of either modifying the objectionable terms or pursuing
nonrenewal, in which case it must provide the franchisee
with written notice well in advance of the date when the
nonrenewal takes effect. §2804(a)(2). Once the franchisee
receives notice of nonrenewal, it can seek a preliminary
injunction under the Act’s relaxed injunctive standard,
maintaining the status quo while a court determines the
lawfulness of the proposed changes. See §2805(b)(2);
supra, at 13.12
——————
12 The

availability of preliminary injunctive relief under the Act also
explains why the dealers are wrong to suggest that our holding will
force franchisees “to choose between accepting an unlawful and coercive
contract in order to stay in business [or] rejecting it and going out of
business in order to preserve a cause of action.” Respondents’ Brief 51
(internal quotation marks omitted). A franchisee presented with
“unlawful and coercive” terms can simply reject those terms and, if the
franchisor pursues nonrenewal, seek a preliminary injunction under

