2

MAC’S SHELL SERVICE, INC. v. SHELL OIL 

PRODUCTS CO.
Syllabus 





renewal agreement.
Held:
1. A franchisee cannot recover for constructive termination under
the Act if the franchisor’s allegedly wrongful conduct did not compel
the franchisee to abandon its franchise. Pp. 6–15.
(a) The Act provides that “no franchisor . . . may . . . terminate
any franchise,” except for an enumerated reason and after giving
written notice, §2802(a)–(b), and specifies that “ ‘termination’ in
cludes cancellation,” §2801(17). Because it does not further define
those terms, they are given their ordinary meanings: “put [to] an
end” or “annul[ed] or destroy[ed].” Thus, the Act prohibits only fran
chisor conduct that has the effect of ending a franchise. The same
conclusion follows even if Congress used “terminate” and “cancel” in
their technical, rather than ordinary, senses. This conclusion is also
consistent with the general understanding of the constructive termi
nation doctrine as applied in analogous legal contexts—e.g., employ
ment law, see Pennsylvania State Police v. Suders, 542 U. S. 129,
141–143—where a termination is deemed “constructive” only because
the plaintiff, not the defendant, formally ends a particular legal rela
tionship—not because there is no end to the relationship at all. Al
lowing franchisees to obtain relief for conduct that does not force a
franchise to end would ignore the Act’s scope, which is limited to the
circumstances in which franchisors may terminate a franchise or de
cline to renew a franchise relationship and leaves undisturbed state
law regulation of other types of disputes between petroleum franchi
sors and franchisees, see §2806(a). This conclusion is also informed
by important practical considerations, namely, that any standard for
identifying those breaches of contract that should be treated as effec
tively ending a franchise, even though the franchisee continues to op
erate, would be indeterminate and unworkable. Pp. 6–12.
(b) The dealers’ claim that this interpretation of the Act fails to
provide franchisees with protection from unfair and coercive franchi
sor conduct that does not force an end to the franchise ignores the
availability of state-law remedies to address such wrongful conduct.
The Court’s reading of the Act is also faithful to the statutory inter
pretation principle that statutes should be construed “in a manner
that gives effect to all of their provisions,” United States ex rel. Eisen
stein v. City of New York, 556 U. S. ___, ___, because this interpreta
tion gives meaningful effect to the Act’s preliminary injunction provi
sions and its alternative statute-of-limitations accrual dates. Pp. 12–
14.
2. A franchisee who signs and operates under a renewal agreement
with a franchisor may not maintain a constructive nonrenewal claim
under the Act. The Act’s text leaves no room for such an interpreta

