Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

sions of the Act meaningless. Respondents’ Brief 21–22,
24–25. While we agree that we normally should construe
statutes “in a manner that gives effect to all of their provi
sions,” we believe our interpretation is faithful to this
“well-established principl[e] of statutory interpretation.”
United States ex rel. Eisenstein v. City of New York, 556
U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 5)
To begin, the dealers insist that our reading of the term
“terminate” will require franchisees to go out of business
before they can obtain preliminary relief and thus will
render useless the Act’s preliminary injunction mecha
nism. We disagree. To obtain a preliminary injunction, it
is true, a franchisee must show, among other things, that
“the franchise of which he is a party has been terminated.”
15 U. S. C. §2805(b)(2)(A)(i) (emphasis added). But that
does not necessarily mean that a franchisee must go out of
business before obtaining an injunction. For example, in
cases of actual termination, the Act requires franchisors to
provide franchisees with written notice of termination well
in advance of the date on which the termination “takes
effect.” §2804(a). A franchisee that receives notice of
termination “has been terminated” within the meaning of
§2805(b)(2)(A)(i), even though the termination “takes
effect” on a later date, just as an employee who receives
notice of discharge can be accurately described as having
been discharged, even though the employee’s last day at
work may perhaps be weeks later. Thus, franchisees that
receive notice of impending termination can invoke the
protections of the Act’s preliminary injunction mechanism
well before having to go out of business.9 Contrary to the
——————
9 The Government reads the Act to permit a dealer to seek prelimi
nary injunctive relief if a franchisor announces its “intent to engage in
conduct that would leave the franchisee no reasonable alternative but
to abandon” one (or more) of the franchise elements. Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 21. Because we do not decide whether the
PMPA permits constructive termination claims at all, see n. 4, supra,

