16

MAC’S SHELL SERVICE, INC. v. SHELL OIL 

PRODUCTS CO.
Opinion of the Court 





to renew a franchise relationship—constructively or oth
erwise—when the franchisee has in fact accepted a new
franchise agreement. As relevant here, a franchisor vio
lates the PMPA only when it “fail[s] to renew” a franchise
relationship for a reason not provided for in the Act or
after not providing the required notice. See 15 U. S. C.
§2802. The Act defines the term “fail to renew,” in turn,
as a “failure to reinstate, continue, or extend the franchise
relationship.” §2801(14). Thus, the threshold require
ment of any unlawful nonrenewal action—a requirement
the franchisee bears the burden of establishing, see
§2805(c)—is that the franchisor did not “reinstate, con
tinue, or renew” the franchise relationship once a fran
chise agreement expired. But if a franchisee signs a re
newal agreement, the franchisor clearly has “reinstate[d],
continue[d], or extend[ed]” the franchise relationship.
True, the franchisee might find some of the terms in the
new agreement objectionable. But the Act prohibits only
unlawful “fail[ures] to renew” a franchise relationship, not
renewals of a franchise relationship on terms that are less
than favorable to the franchisee. A franchisee that signs a
renewal agreement, in short, cannot carry the threshold
burden of showing a “nonrenewal of the franchise rela
tionship,” §2805(c), and thus necessarily cannot establish
that the franchisor has violated the Act.
The dealers point out that several of them signed their
renewal agreements “under protest,” and they argue that
they thereby explicitly preserved their ability to assert a
claim for unlawful nonrenewal under the PMPA. That
argument misunderstands the legal significance of signing
a renewal agreement. Signing a renewal agreement does
not constitute a waiver of a franchisee’s legal rights—
something that signing “under protest” can sometimes
help avoid. See, e.g., U. C. C. §1–207, 1 U. L. A. 318.
Instead, signing a renewal agreement negates the very
possibility of a violation of the PMPA. When a franchisee

