Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

After a 2-week trial involving eight of the dealers, the
jury found against Shell and Motiva on all claims. Both
before and after the jury’s verdict, Shell and Motiva moved
for judgment as a matter of law on the dealers’ two PMPA
claims. They argued that they could not be found liable
for constructive termination under the Act because none of
the dealers had abandoned their franchises in response to
Motiva’s elimination of the rent subsidy––something Shell
and Motiva said was a necessary element of any construc
tive termination claim. Similarly, they argued that the
dealers’ constructive nonrenewal claims necessarily failed
because seven of the eight dealers had signed and oper
ated under renewal agreements with Motiva, and the
eighth had sold his franchise prior to the expiration of his
franchise agreement. The District Court denied these
motions, and Shell and Motiva appealed.
The First Circuit affirmed in part and reversed in part.
In affirming the judgment on the dealers’ constructive
termination claims, the Court of Appeals held that a fran
chisee is not required to abandon its franchise to recover
for constructive termination under the PMPA. See 524
F. 3d, at 45–47. Instead, the court ruled, a simple breach
of contract by an assignee of a franchise agreement can
amount to constructive termination under the Act, so long
as the breach resulted in “such a material change that it
effectively ended the lease, even though the [franchisee]
continued to operate [its franchise].” Id., at 46 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Turning to the dealers’ con
structive nonrenewal claims, the First Circuit agreed with
Shell and Motiva that a franchisee cannot maintain a
claim for unlawful nonrenewal under the PMPA “where
the franchisee has signed and operates under the renewal
—————— 

agreements with the dealers. The jury found in favor of the dealers on 

this claim, and the Court of Appeals affirmed. 524 F. 3d, at 51. That

issue is not before us. 


