18

MAC’S SHELL SERVICE, INC. v. SHELL OIL 

PRODUCTS CO.
Opinion of the Court 





Allowing franchisees to pursue nonrenewal claims even
after they have signed renewal agreements would under
mine this procedural mechanism and, in the process,
would frustrate franchisors’ ability to propose new terms.
Under the dealers’ theory, franchisees have no incentive to
object to burdensome new terms and seek a preliminary
injunction if a franchisor pursues nonrenewal. Instead, a
franchisee could simply sign the new franchise agreement
and decide later whether to sue under the PMPA. Fran
chisees would then have the option of either continuing to
operate under the new agreement or, if the terms of the
agreement later proved unfavorable, bringing suit under
the PMPA alleging that the newly imposed terms are
unlawful. And because the PMPA has a 1-year statute of
limitations, see §2805(a), franchisees would retain that
option for the entire first year of a new franchise agree
ment. Accepting the dealers’ argument, therefore, would
cast a cloud of uncertainty over all renewal agreements
and could chill franchisors from proposing new terms in
response to changing market conditions and consumer
needs.
Finally, accepting the dealers’ argument would greatly
expand the PMPA’s reach. Under the balance struck by
the plain text of the statute, a franchisee faced with objec
tionable new terms must decide whether challenging those
terms is worth risking the nonrenewal of the franchise
relationship; if the franchisee rejects the terms and the
——————
the Act once the franchisee receives notice of nonrenewal. Indeed, the
PMPA substantially relaxes the normal standard for obtaining prelimi
nary-injunctive relief, §2805(b)(2)(A)(ii), thus allowing a franchisee
with anything close to a meritorious claim to obtain relief.
It is possible, of course, that a franchisor could fail to renew a fran
chise relationship without providing the statutorily required notice.
But in that circumstance, a franchisee would not only have a surefire
claim for unlawful nonrenewal, see §2802(b)(1)(A), but also presumably
could seek a preliminary injunction forcing the franchisor to resume
providing the franchise elements for the duration of the litigation.

