Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

simple breaches of contract, however, would be inconsis
tent with the Act’s limited purpose and would further
expand federal law into a domain traditionally reserved
for the States. Without a clearer indication that Congress
intended to federalize such a broad swath of the law gov
erning petroleum franchise agreements, we decline to
adopt an interpretation of the Act that would have such
sweeping consequences. See, e.g., United States v. Bass,
404 U. S. 336, 349 (1971).7
Finally, important practical considerations inform our
decision. Adopting the dealers’ reading of the PMPA
would require us to articulate a standard for identifying
those breaches of contract that should be treated as effec
tively ending a franchise, even though the franchisee in
fact continues to use the franchisor’s trademark, purchase
the franchisor’s fuel, and occupy the service-station prem
ises.8 We think any such standard would be indetermi
nate and unworkable. How is a court to determine
——————
7 Adopting such a broad reading of the PMPA also would have serious
implications for run-of-the-mill franchise disputes. The Act requires
courts to award attorney’s fees and expert-witness fees in any case in
which a plaintiff recovers more than nominal damages. See 15 U. S. C.
§2805(d)(1)(C). The Act also permits punitive damages, §2805(d)(1)(B),
a remedy ordinarily not available in breach-of-contract actions, see
Barnes v. Gorman, 536 U. S. 181, 187–188 (2002). Accepting the
dealers’ reading of the statute, therefore, would turn everyday contract
disputes into high-stakes affairs.
8 The First Circuit, for example, approved of a test that asks whether
the breach resulted in “such a material change that it effectively ended
the lease, even though the plaintiffs continued to operate [their fran
chises].” 524 F. 3d, at 46 (internal quotation marks omitted). That
standard, it seems to us, does little more than restate the relevant
question. While we do not decide whether the PMPA contemplates
claims for constructive termination, we observe that the Court of
Appeals’ unwillingness or inability to establish a more concrete stan
dard underscores the difficulties and inherent contradictions involved
in crafting a standard for finding a “termination” when no termination
has in fact occurred.

