(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MAC’S SHELL SERVICE, INC., ET AL. v. SHELL OIL 

PRODUCTS CO. LLC ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIRST CIRCUIT
No. 08–240.

Argued January 19, 2010—Decided March 2, 2010*

The Petroleum Marketing Practices Act (Act) limits the circumstances
in which franchisors may “terminate” a service-station franchise or
“fail to renew” a franchise relationship. 15 U. S. C. §§2802, 2804.
Typically, the franchisor leases the service station to the franchisee
and permits the franchisee to use the franchisor’s trademark and
purchase the franchisor’s fuel for resale. §2801(1). As relevant here,
service-station franchisees (dealers) filed suit under the Act, alleging
that a petroleum franchisor and its assignee had constructively “ter
minate[d]” their franchises and constructively “fail[ed] to renew”
their franchise relationships by substantially changing the rental
terms that the dealers had enjoyed for years, increasing costs for
many of them. The dealers asserted these claims even though they
had not been compelled to abandon their franchises, and even though
they had been offered and had accepted renewal agreements. The
jury found against the franchisor and assignee, and the District
Court denied their requests for judgment as a matter of law. The
First Circuit affirmed as to the constructive termination claims, hold
ing that the Act does not require a franchisee to abandon its fran
chise to recover for such termination, and concluding that a simple
breach of contract by an assignee of a franchise agreement can
amount to constructive termination if the breach resulted in a mate
rial change effectively ending the lease. However, the court reversed
as to the constructive nonrenewal claims, holding that such a claim
cannot be maintained once a franchisee signs and operates under a
——————
* Together with No. 08–372, Shell Oil Products Co. LLC et al. v. Mac’s
Shell Service, Inc., et al., also on certiorari to the same court.

