4

UNITED STATES v. O’BRIEN
STEVENS, J., concurring

plained that “any fact that increases the penalty for a
crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be
submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reasonable
doubt.” 530 U. S., at 490 (emphasis added). In other
words, we narrowed our holding to those facts that effec
tively raised the ceiling on the offense, but did not then
consider whether the logic of our holding applied also
to those facts necessary to set the floor of a particular
sentence.
As JUSTICE THOMAS eloquently explained in his dissent
in Harris v. United States, 536 U. S. 545, 572 (2002), the
reasoning in our decision in Apprendi applies with equal
force in the context of mandatory minimums. There is,
quite simply, no reason to distinguish between facts that
trigger punishment in excess of the statutory maximum
and facts that trigger a mandatory minimum. This case
vividly illustrates the point. It is quite plain that there is
a world of difference between the 81⁄2-year sentence and
the 7-year sentence the judge imposed on the defendants
in this case and the 30-year sentence mandated by the
machinegun finding under 18 U. S. C. §924(c)(1)(B).
Mandatory minimums may have a particularly acute
practical effect in this type of statutory scheme which
contains an implied statutory maximum of life, see ante,
at 10. There is, in this type of case, no ceiling; there is
only a floor below which a sentence cannot fall. Further
more, absent a positive finding on one of §924(c)(1)’s enu
merated factors, it is quite clear that no judge would
impose a sentence as great as the sentences commanded
by the provision at issue in this case. Indeed, it appears
that, but for those subject to the 30-year mandatory mini
mum, no defendant has ever been sentenced to a sentence
anywhere near 30 years for a §924(c) offense. See Brief for
Respondent O’Brien 46–47, and n. 15.
Apprendi should have signaled the end of McMillan,
just as it signaled the unconstitutionality of state and

