Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

offenses under §924(c). Count three charged respondents
with using a firearm in furtherance of a crime of violence,
which carries a statutory minimum of five years’ impris
onment. Count four charged respondents in more specific
terms, alleging use of a machinegun (the Cobray) in fur
therance of a crime of violence, as proscribed by
§§924(c)(1)(A) and (B)(ii). The latter provision mandates a
minimum sentence of 30 years’ imprisonment.
The Government moved to dismiss count four on the
basis that it would be unable to establish the count beyond
a reasonable doubt. (The issues in the present case do not
require the Court to consider any contention that a defen
dant who uses, carries, or possesses a firearm must be
aware of the weapon’s characteristics. This opinion ex
presses no views on the point.)
The Government then maintained that the machinegun
provision in §924(c)(1)(B)(ii) was a sentencing factor, so
that, if respondents were convicted of carrying a firearm
under count three, the court could determine at sentencing
that the particular firearm was a machinegun, thus acti
vating the 30-year mandatory minimum. The District
Court dismissed count four, as the Government requested,
but rejected the Government’s position that the machine
gun provision was a sentencing enhancement to be deter
mined by the court at sentencing once there was a convic
tion on count three. It ruled that the machinegun
provision states an element of a crime. Thus, to invoke
the 30-year minimum sentence, the Government was
required to charge in the indictment, and then prove to
the jury, that the Cobray was a machinegun.
At this point, after the District Court foreclosed the
possibility of respondents’ facing a 30-year minimum,
respondents pleaded guilty to the remaining counts, in
cluding count three. The
District
Court
sentenced
O’Brien to a 102-month term for his §924(c) conviction, to
run consecutively with his sentence on two other counts.

