10

UNITED STATES v. O’BRIEN
Opinion of the Court

accompanying a finding that a defendant carried a ma
chinegun under §924, was also unaffected by the statute’s
restructuring. A finding that a defendant carried a ma
chinegun under §924, in contrast to some less dangerous
firearm, vaults a defendant’s mandatory minimum sen
tence from 5 to 30 years, Castillo, supra, at 131, or from 7
to 30 years if, as in this case, the firearm was brandished,
§924(c)(1)(A)(ii). This is not akin to the “incremental
changes in the minimum” that one would “expect to see in
provisions meant to identify matters for the sentencing
judge’s consideration,” Harris, 536 U. S., at 554 (from 5
years to 7 years); it is a drastic, sixfold increase that
strongly suggests a separate substantive crime.
There is one substantive difference between the old and
new versions of §924 that might bear on this fourth factor.
The previous version of §924 provided mandatory sen
tences: 5 years for using or carrying a firearm and 30
years if the firearm is a machinegun, for example. See
§924(c)(1) (1988 ed., Supp. V). The current statute pro
vides only mandatory minimums: not less than 5 years for
using or possessing a firearm; not less than 7 for brandish
ing it; and not less than 30 if the firearm is a machinegun.
§§924(c)(1)(A)(i), (A)(ii), (B)(ii). The Government argues
that this difference is critical because a 30-year sentence
is conceivable under the statute even without a finding
that the particular weapon is a machinegun. Brief for
United States 25.
This is a distinction in theory, perhaps, but not in prac
tice. Neither the Government nor any party or amicus has
identified a single defendant whose conviction under §924
for possessing or brandishing a nonspecific firearm led to a
sentence approaching the 30-year sentence that is re
quired when the firearm is a machinegun. Respondents
advise, without refutation, that most courts impose the
mandatory minimum of 7 years’ imprisonment for bran
dishing a nonspecific weapon and the longest sentence

