Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

change, rather than simply reorganize and clarify, [§924]’s
treatment of firearm type.” Brief for United States, O. T.
1999, No. 99–658, p. 41. A closer review of the 1998
amendment confirms this.
There are three principal differences between the previ
ous and current versions of §924(c): two substantive
changes and a third regarding the stylistic structure of the
statute. The first difference, as discussed above, supra, at
10, is that the amendment changed what were once man
datory sentences into mandatory minimum sentences. A
person convicted of the primary offense of using or carry
ing a firearm during a crime of violence was once to “be
sentenced to imprisonment for five years,” but under the
current version he or she is to “be sentenced to a term of
imprisonment of not less than 5 years.”
The second difference is that the amended version in
cludes the word “possesses” in addition to “uses or carries”
in its principal paragraph, and then adds the substantive
provisions in §§924(c)(1)(A)(ii) and (iii), which provide
mandatory minimums for brandishing (7 years) and dis
charging (10 years) the firearm. These provisions are new
substantive additions to the text of the previous version,
which provided a bare 5-year mandatory minimum for any
offender who “use[d] or carrie[d] a firearm,” without con
cern for how the firearm was used.
The changes were a direct response to this Court’s deci
sion in Bailey v. United States, 516 U. S. 137 (1995), which
held that the word “use” in the pre-amendment version of
§924 “must connote more than mere possession of a fire
arm by a person who commits a drug offense.” Id., at 143.
The Court in Bailey went on to observe that, “[h]ad Con
gress intended possession alone to trigger liability under
§924(c)(1), it easily could have so provided” by using the
word “possess,” as it had so frequently done in other statu
tory provisions. Ibid. Three years later, Congress made
the change and added the word “possesses” to the princi

