(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STATES v. O’BRIEN ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIRST CIRCUIT
No. 08–1569. Argued February 23, 2010—Decided May 24, 2010
Respondents O’Brien and Burgess each carried a firearm during an
attempted robbery. Count three of their indictment charged them
with using a firearm in furtherance of a crime of violence, which car
ries a mandatory minimum 5-year prison term.
18 U. S. C.
§924(c)(1)(A)(i). Count four alleged use of a machinegun (here, a pis
tol that authorities believed operated as a fully automatic firearm) in
furtherance of that crime, which carries a 30-year mandatory mini
mum term. §924(c)(1)(B)(ii). The Government moved to dismiss the
fourth count on the basis that it could not establish the count beyond
a reasonable doubt, but it maintained that §924(c)(1)(B)(ii)’s ma
chinegun provision was a sentencing enhancement to be determined
by the District Court upon a conviction on count three. The court
dismissed count four and rejected the Government’s sentencing
enhancement position. Respondents then pleaded guilty to the re
maining counts. The court sentenced O’Brien to a 102-month term
and Burgess to an 84-month term for their §924(c) convictions. In af
firming the District Court’s §924(c)(1)(B)(ii) ruling, the First Circuit
looked primarily to Castillo v. United States, 530 U. S. 120, which
held that the machinegun provision in an earlier version of §924(c)
constituted an element of an offense, not a sentencing factor. The
court found that Castillo was “close to binding,” absent clearer or
more dramatic changes than those made by Congress’ 1998 amend
ment of §924(c) or a clearer legislative history.
Held: The fact that a firearm was a machinegun is an element to be
proved to the jury beyond a reasonable doubt, not a sentencing factor
to be proved to the judge at sentencing. Pp. 5–16.
(a) Generally, a fact that “increase[s] the prescribed range of penal
ties to which a criminal defendant is exposed” is an element of a

