Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

that has come to the litigants’ or the Court’s attention is
14 years. Brief for Respondent O’Brien 46, 48 (citing
United States v. Batts, 317 Fed. Appx. 329 (CA4 2009) (per
curiam)); see also Harris, supra, at 578 (THOMAS, J.,
dissenting). Indeed, in the instant case, Burgess received
the statutory minimum 7-year sentence, and O’Brien
received only 18 months more than that. Once the ma
chinegun enhancement was off the table, the Government
itself did not seek anything approaching 30-year terms,
instead requesting 12-year terms for each respondent.
The immense danger posed by machineguns, the moral
depravity in choosing the weapon, and the substantial
increase in the minimum sentence provided by the statute
support the conclusion that this prohibition is an element
of the crime, not a sentencing factor. It is not likely that
Congress intended to remove the indictment and jury trial
protections when it provided for such an extreme sentenc
ing increase. See Jones, 526 U. S., at 233 (“It is at best
questionable whether the specification of facts sufficient to
increase a penalty range by two-thirds, let alone from 15
years to life, was meant to carry none of the process safe
guards that elements of an offense bring with them for a
defendant’s benefit”). Perhaps Congress was not con
cerned with parsing the distinction between elements and
sentencing factors, a matter more often discussed by the
courts when discussing the proper allocation of functions
between judge and jury. Instead, it likely was more fo
cused on deterring the crime by creating the mandatory
minimum sentences. But the severity of the increase in
this case counsels in favor of finding that the prohibition is
an element, at least absent some clear congressional indi
cation to the contrary.
The fifth factor considered in Castillo was legislative
history, and the Court there found it to be of little help.
530 U. S., at 130 (“Insofar as this history may be relevant,
however, it does not significantly help the Government”).

