Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

the Act is not actually necessary to achieve the Government’s stated interest. The Government has not shown,
and cannot show, why counterspeech would not suffice to
achieve its interest. The facts of this case indicate that
the dynamics of free speech, of counterspeech, of refutation, can overcome the lie. Respondent lied at a public
meeting. Even before the FBI began investigating him for
his false statements “Alvarez was perceived as a phony,”
617 F. 3d, at 1211. Once the lie was made public, he was
ridiculed online, see Brief for Respondent 3, his actions
were reported in the press, see Ortega, Alvarez Again
Denies Claim, Ontario, CA, Inland Valley Daily Bulletin
(Sept. 27, 2007), and a fellow board member called for his
resignation, see, e.g., Bigham, Water District Rep Requests Alvarez Resign in Wake of False Medal Claim,
San Bernardino Cty., CA, The Sun (May 21, 2008). There
is good reason to believe that a similar fate would befall
other false claimants. See Brief for Reporters Committee
for Freedom of the Press et al. as Amici Curiae 30–33
(listing numerous examples of public exposure of false
claimants). Indeed, the outrage and contempt expressed
for respondent’s lies can serve to reawaken and reinforce
the public’s respect for the Medal, its recipients, and its
high purpose. The acclaim that recipients of the Congressional Medal of Honor receive also casts doubt on the
proposition that the public will be misled by the claims of
charlatans or become cynical of those whose heroic deeds
earned them the Medal by right. See, e.g., Well Done,
Washington Post, Feb. 5, 1943, p. 8 (reporting on President Roosevelt’s awarding the Congressional Medal of
Honor to Maj. Gen. Alexander Vandegrift); Devroy, Medal
of Honor Given to 2 Killed in Somalia, Washington Post,
May 24, 1994, p. A6 (reporting on President Clinton’s
awarding the Congressional Medal of Honor to two special
forces soldiers killed during operations in Somalia).
The remedy for speech that is false is speech that is
true. This is the ordinary course in a free society. The

