16

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

about “an endless list of subjects.” Ante, at 11. The plurality apparently fears that we will see laws making it a
crime to lie about civilian awards such as college degrees
or certificates of achievement in the arts and sports.
This concern is likely unfounded. With very good reason, military honors have traditionally been regarded as
quite different from civilian awards. Nearly a century ago,
Congress made it a crime to wear a military medal without authorization; we have no comparable tradition regarding such things as Super Bowl rings, Oscars, or Phi
Beta Kappa keys.
In any event, if the plurality’s concern is not entirely
fanciful, it falls outside the purview of the First Amendment. The problem that the plurality foresees—that
legislative bodies will enact unnecessary and overly intrusive criminal laws—applies regardless of whether the laws
in question involve speech or nonexpressive conduct. If
there is a problem with, let us say, a law making it a
criminal offense to falsely claim to have been a high school
valedictorian, the problem is not the suppression of speech
but the misuse of the criminal law, which should be reserved for conduct that inflicts or threatens truly serious
societal harm. The objection to this hypothetical law
would be the same as the objection to a law making it a
crime to eat potato chips during the graduation ceremony
at which the high school valedictorian is recognized. The
safeguard against such laws is democracy, not the First
Amendment. Not every foolish law is unconstitutional.
The Stolen Valor Act represents the judgment of the
people’s elected representatives that false statements
about military awards are very different from false statements about civilian awards. Certainly this is true with
respect to the high honor that respondent misappropriated. Respondent claimed that he was awarded the Medal of
Honor in 1987 for bravery during the Iran hostage crisis.
This singular award, however, is bestowed only on those

