Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

BREYER, J., concurring in judgment

Moreover, as the Court has often said, the threat of
criminal prosecution for making a false statement can
inhibit the speaker from making true statements, thereby
“chilling” a kind of speech that lies at the First Amendment’s heart. See, e.g., Gertz, supra, at 340–341. Hence,
the Court emphasizes mens rea requirements that provide
“breathing room” for more valuable speech by reducing an
honest speaker’s fear that he may accidentally incur liability for speaking.
Further, the pervasiveness of false statements, made
for better or for worse motives, made thoughtlessly or deliberately, made with or without accompanying harm,
provides a weapon to a government broadly empowered to
prosecute falsity without more. And those who are unpopular may fear that the government will use that
weapon selectively, say by prosecuting a pacifist who supports his cause by (falsely) claiming to have been a war
hero, while ignoring members of other political groups who
might make similar false claims.
I also must concede that many statutes and commonlaw doctrines make the utterance of certain kinds of false
statements unlawful. Those prohibitions, however, tend to
be narrower than the statute before us, in that they limit
the scope of their application, sometimes by requiring
proof of specific harm to identifiable victims; sometimes by
specifying that the lies be made in contexts in which a
tangible harm to others is especially likely to occur; and
sometimes by limiting the prohibited lies to those that are
particularly likely to produce harm.
Fraud statutes, for example, typically require proof of a
misrepresentation that is material, upon which the victim
relied, and which caused actual injury. See Restatement
(Second) of Torts §525 (1976). Defamation statutes focus
upon statements of a kind that harm the reputation of
another or deter third parties from association or dealing
with the victim. See id., §§558, 559. Torts involving the

