14

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

The link between the Government’s interest in protecting
the integrity of the military honors system and the Act’s
restriction on the false claims of liars like respondent has
not been shown. Although appearing to concede that “an
isolated misrepresentation by itself would not tarnish the
meaning of military honors,” the Government asserts it is
“common sense that false representations have the tendency to dilute the value and meaning of military awards,”
Brief for United States 49, 54. It must be acknowledged
that when a pretender claims the Medal to be his own, the
lie might harm the Government by demeaning the high
purpose of the award, diminishing the honor it confirms,
and creating the appearance that the Medal is awarded
more often than is true. Furthermore, the lie may offend
the true holders of the Medal. From one perspective it insults their bravery and high principles when falsehood
puts them in the unworthy company of a pretender.
Yet these interests do not satisfy the Government’s
heavy burden when it seeks to regulate protected speech.
See United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group, Inc.,
529 U. S. 803, 818 (2000). The Government points to no
evidence to support its claim that the public’s general
perception of military awards is diluted by false claims
such as those made by Alvarez. Cf. Entertainment Merchants Assn., supra, at ___–___ (slip op., at 12–13) (analyzing and rejecting the findings of research psychologists
demonstrating the causal link between violent video
games and harmful effects on children). As one of the
Government’s amici notes “there is nothing that charlatans such as Xavier Alvarez can do to stain [the Medal
winners’] honor.” Brief for Veterans of Foreign Wars of
the United States et al. as Amici Curiae 1. This general
proposition is sound, even if true holders of the Medal
might experience anger and frustration.
The lack of a causal link between the Government’s
stated interest and the Act is not the only way in which

