Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

almost limitless times and settings. And it does so entirely without regard to whether the lie was made for the
purpose of material gain. See San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Comm., 483 U. S. 522,
539–540 (1987) (prohibiting a nonprofit corporation from
exploiting the “commercial magnetism” of the word “Olympic” when organizing an athletic competition (internal
quotation marks omitted)).
Permitting the government to decree this speech to be
a criminal offense, whether shouted from the rooftops or
made in a barely audible whisper, would endorse government authority to compile a list of subjects about which
false statements are punishable. That governmental
power has no clear limiting principle. Our constitutional
tradition stands against the idea that we need Oceania’s
Ministry of Truth. See G. Orwell, Nineteen Eighty-Four
(1949) (Centennial ed. 2003). Were this law to be sustained, there could be an endless list of subjects the National Government or the States could single out. Where
false claims are made to effect a fraud or secure moneys
or other valuable considerations, say offers of employment,
it is well established that the Government may restrict
speech without affronting the First Amendment. See, e.g.,
Virginia Bd. of Pharmacy, 425 U. S., at 771 (noting that
fraudulent speech generally falls outside the protections of
the First Amendment). But the Stolen Valor Act is not so
limited in its reach. Were the Court to hold that the interest in truthful discourse alone is sufficient to sustain a
ban on speech, absent any evidence that the speech was
used to gain a material advantage, it would give government a broad censorial power unprecedented in this
Court’s cases or in our constitutional tradition. The mere
potential for the exercise of that power casts a chill, a chill
the First Amendment cannot permit if free speech,
thought, and discourse are to remain a foundation of our
freedom.

