2

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Syllabus
cussing defamation, fraud, or some other legally cognizable harm associated with a false statement. In those decisions the falsity of the
speech at issue was not irrelevant to the Court’s analysis, but neither
was it determinative. These prior decisions have not confronted a
measure, like the Stolen Valor Act, that targets falsity and nothing
more.
Even when considering some instances of defamation or fraud, the
Court has instructed that falsity alone may not suffice to bring the
speech outside the First Amendment; the statement must be a knowing and reckless falsehood. See New York Times v. Sullivan, 376
U. S. 254, 280. Here, the Government seeks to convert a rule that
limits liability even in defamation cases where the law permits recovery for tortious wrongs into a rule that expands liability in a different, far greater realm of discourse and expression.
The Government’s three examples of false-speech regulation that
courts generally have found permissible do not establish a principle
that all proscriptions of false statements are exempt from rigorous
First Amendment scrutiny. The criminal prohibition of a false
statement made to Government officials in communications concerning official matters, 18 U. S. C. §1001, does not lead to the broader
proposition that false statements are unprotected when made to any
person, at any time, in any context. As for perjury statutes, perjured
statements lack First Amendment protection not simply because they
are false, but because perjury undermines the function and province
of the law and threatens the integrity of judgments. Finally, there
are statutes that prohibit falsely representing that one is speaking on
behalf of the Government, or prohibit impersonating a Government
officer. These examples, to the extent that they implicate fraud or
speech integral to criminal conduct, are inapplicable here.
While there may exist “some categories of speech that have been
historically unprotected,” but that the Court has not yet specifically
identified or discussed, United States v. Stevens, 559 U. S. ___, ___,
the Government has not demonstrated that false statements should
constitute a new category. Pp. 3−10.
(b) The Act seeks to control and suppress all false statements on
this one subject in almost limitless times and settings without regard
to whether the lie was made for the purpose of material gain. Permitting the Government to decree this speech to be a criminal offense
would endorse government authority to compile a list of subjects
about which false statements are punishable. That governmental
power has no clear limiting principle. Pp. 10−11.
(c) The Court applies the “most exacting scrutiny” in assessing content-based restrictions on protected speech. Turner Broadcasting
System Inc. v. FCC, 512 U. S. 622, 642. The Act does not satisfy that

