6

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

comports with the common understanding that some false
statements are inevitable if there is to be an open and
vigorous expression of views in public and private conversation, expression the First Amendment seeks to guarantee. See Sullivan, supra, at 271 (“Th[e] erroneous
statement is inevitable in free debate”).
The Government disagrees with this proposition. It
cites language from some of this Court’s precedents to
support its contention that false statements have no value
and hence no First Amendment protection. See also Brief
for Eugene Volokh et al. as Amici Curiae 2–11. These
isolated statements in some earlier decisions do not support the Government’s submission that false statements,
as a general rule, are beyond constitutional protection.
That conclusion would take the quoted language far from
its proper context. For instance, the Court has stated
“[f]alse statements of fact are particularly valueless [because] they interfere with the truth-seeking function of
the marketplace of ideas,” Hustler Magazine, Inc. v. Falwell, 485 U. S. 46, 52 (1988), and that false statements
“are not protected by the First Amendment in the same
manner as truthful statements,” Brown v. Hartlage, 456
U. S. 45, 60–61 (1982). See also, e.g., Virginia Bd. of
Pharmacy, supra, at 771 (“Untruthful speech, commercial
or otherwise, has never been protected for its own sake”);
Herbert v. Lando, 441 U. S. 153, 171 (1979) (“Spreading
false information in and of itself carries no First Amendment credentials”); Gertz, supra, at 340 (“[T]here is no
constitutional value in false statements of fact”); Garrison
v. Louisiana, 379 U. S. 64, 75 (1964) (“[T]he knowingly
false statement and the false statement made with reckless disregard of the truth, do not enjoy constitutional
protection”).
These quotations all derive from cases discussing defamation, fraud, or some other legally cognizable harm
associated with a false statement, such as an invasion of

