Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

privacy or the costs of vexatious litigation. See Brief for
United States 18–19. In those decisions the falsity of
the speech at issue was not irrelevant to our analysis, but
neither was it determinative. The Court has never endorsed the categorical rule the Government advances: that
false statements receive no First Amendment protection.
Our prior decisions have not confronted a measure, like
the Stolen Valor Act, that targets falsity and nothing
more.
Even when considering some instances of defamation
and fraud, moreover, the Court has been careful to instruct that falsity alone may not suffice to bring the
speech outside the First Amendment. The statement must
be a knowing or reckless falsehood. See Sullivan, supra,
at 280 (prohibiting recovery of damages for a defamatory
falsehood made about a public official unless the statement was made “with knowledge that it was false or with
reckless disregard of whether it was false or not”); see
also Garrison, supra, at 73 (“[E]ven when the utterance is
false, the great principles of the Constitution which secure
freedom of expression . . . preclude attaching adverse
consequences to any except the knowing or reckless falsehood”); Illinois ex rel. Madigan v. Telemarketing Associates, Inc., 538 U. S. 600, 620 (2003) (“False statement
alone does not subject a fundraiser to fraud liability”).
The Government thus seeks to use this principle for a
new purpose. It seeks to convert a rule that limits liability
even in defamation cases where the law permits recovery
for tortious wrongs into a rule that expands liability in a
different, far greater realm of discourse and expression.
That inverts the rationale for the exception. The requirements of a knowing falsehood or reckless disregard for the
truth as the condition for recovery in certain defamation
cases exists to allow more speech, not less. A rule designed to tolerate certain speech ought not blossom to
become a rationale for a rule restricting it.

