10

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

ment, see Falwell, supra, at 56, even though that tort did
not enter our law until the late 19th century, see W. Keeton,
D. Dobbs, R. Keeton, & D. Owen, Prosser and Keeton
on Law of Torts §12, p. 60, and n. 47. (5th ed. 1984) (hereinafter Prosser and Keeton). And in Hill, supra, at 390,
the Court concluded that the free speech right allows
recovery for the even more modern tort of false-light invasion of privacy, see Prosser and Keeton §117, at 863.
In line with these holdings, it has long been assumed
that the First Amendment is not offended by prominent
criminal statutes with no close common-law analog. The
most well known of these is probably 18 U. S. C. §1001,
which makes it a crime to “knowingly and willfully” make
any “materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or
representation” in “any matter within the jurisdiction of
the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the Government of the United States.” Unlike perjury, §1001
is not limited to statements made under oath or before
an official government tribunal. Nor does it require any
showing of “pecuniary or property loss to the government.”
United States v. Gilliland, 312 U. S. 86, 93 (1941). Instead, the statute is based on the need to protect “agencies
from the perversion which might result from the deceptive
practices described.” Ibid. (emphasis added).
Still other statutes make it a crime to falsely represent
that one is speaking on behalf of, or with the approval of,
the Federal Government. See, e.g., 18 U. S. C. §912 (making it a crime to falsely impersonate a federal officer); §709
(making it a crime to knowingly use, without authorization, the names of enumerated federal agencies, such as
“Federal Bureau of Investigation,” in a manner reasonably
calculated to convey the impression that a communication
is approved or authorized by the agency). We have recognized that §912, like §1001, does not require a showing of
pecuniary or property loss and that its purpose is to
“ ‘maintain the general good repute and dignity’ ” of Gov-

