Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

BREYER, J., concurring in judgment

tially to achieve the Government’s objective in less burdensome ways. In my view, the answer to this question is
“yes.” Some potential First Amendment threats can be
alleviated by interpreting the statute to require knowledge
of falsity, etc. Supra, at 3–4. But other First Amendment
risks, primarily risks flowing from breadth of coverage,
remain. Supra, at 4–5, 7–8. As is indicated by the limitations on the scope of the many other kinds of statutes
regulating false factual speech, supra, at 5–7, it should
be possible significantly to diminish or eliminate these remaining risks by enacting a similar but more finely tailored statute. For example, not all military awards are
alike. Congress might determine that some warrant
greater protection than others. And a more finely tailored
statute might, as other kinds of statutes prohibiting false
factual statements have done, insist upon a showing that
the false statement caused specific harm or at least was
material, or focus its coverage on lies most likely to be
harmful or on contexts where such lies are most likely to
cause harm.
I recognize that in some contexts, particularly political
contexts, such a narrowing will not always be easy to
achieve. In the political arena a false statement is more
likely to make a behavioral difference (say, by leading the
listeners to vote for the speaker) but at the same time
criminal prosecution is particularly dangerous (say, by
radically changing a potential election result) and consequently can more easily result in censorship of speakers
and their ideas. Thus, the statute may have to be significantly narrowed in its applications. Some lower courts
have upheld the constitutionality of roughly comparable
but narrowly tailored statutes in political contexts. See,
e.g., United We Stand America, Inc. v. United We Stand,
America New York, Inc., 128 F. 3d 86, 93 (CA2 1997)
(upholding against First Amendment challenge application of Lanham Act to a political organization); Treasure of

