Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

ALITO, J., dissenting

Valor Decorations Database 45 (2009).13
Because a sufficiently comprehensive database is not
practicable, lies about military awards cannot be remedied
by what the plurality calls “counterspeech.” Ante, at 15.
Without the requisite database, many efforts to refute
false claims may be thwarted, and some legitimate award
recipients may be erroneously attacked. In addition, a
steady stream of stories in the media about the exposure
of imposters would tend to increase skepticism among
members of the public about the entire awards system.
This would only exacerbate the harm that the Stolen Valor
Act is meant to prevent.
The plurality and the concurrence also suggest that
Congress could protect the system of military honors by
enacting a narrower statute. The plurality recommends a
law that would apply only to lies that are intended to
“secure moneys or other valuable considerations.” Ante, at
11. In a similar vein, the concurrence comments that “a
more finely tailored statute might . . . insist upon a showing that the false statement caused specific harm.” Ante,
at 9 (opinion of BREYER, J.). But much damage is caused,
both to real award recipients and to the system of military honors, by false statements that are not linked to
any financial or other tangible reward. Unless even a
small financial loss—say, a dollar given to a homeless man
falsely claiming to be a decorated veteran—is more important in the eyes of the First Amendment than the
damage caused to the very integrity of the military awards
system, there is no basis for distinguishing between the
Stolen Valor Act and the alternative statutes that the
plurality and concurrence appear willing to sustain.
——————
13 In

addition, since the Department may not disclose the Social Security numbers or birthdates of recipients, this database would be of
limited use in ascertaining the veracity of a claim involving a person
with a common name. Office of Undersecretary of Defense, Report, at
34.

