Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

BREYER, J., concurring in judgment

customers (about the source) and thereby diluting the
value of the mark to its owner, to consumers, and to the economy. Similarly, a false claim of possession of a medal
or other honor creates confusion about who is entitled to
wear it, thus diluting its value to those who have earned
it, to their families, and to their country. But trademark
statutes are focused upon commercial and promotional
activities that are likely to dilute the value of a mark.
Indeed, they typically require a showing of likely confusion, a showing that tends to assure that the feared harm
will in fact take place. See 15 U. S. C. §1114(1)(a); KP
Permanent Make-Up, Inc. v. Lasting Impression I, Inc.,
543 U. S. 111, 117 (2004); see also San Francisco Arts &
Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Comm., 483 U. S.
522, 539–540, 548 (1987) (upholding statute giving the
United States Olympic Committee the right to prohibit
certain commercial and promotional uses of the word
“Olympic”).
While this list is not exhaustive, it is sufficient to show
that few statutes, if any, simply prohibit without limitation the telling of a lie, even a lie about one particular
matter. Instead, in virtually all these instances limitations of context, requirements of proof of injury, and the
like, narrow the statute to a subset of lies where specific
harm is more likely to occur. The limitations help to make
certain that the statute does not allow its threat of liability or criminal punishment to roam at large, discouraging
or forbidding the telling of the lie in contexts where harm
is unlikely or the need for the prohibition is small.
The statute before us lacks any such limiting features.
It may be construed to prohibit only knowing and intentional acts of deception about readily verifiable facts within the personal knowledge of the speaker, thus reducing
the risk that valuable speech is chilled. Supra, at 3–4.
But it still ranges very broadly. And that breadth means
that it creates a significant risk of First Amendment

