Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

mony under oath has the formality and gravity necessary to
remind the witness that his or her statements will be the
basis for official governmental action, action that often
affects the rights and liberties of others. Sworn testimony
is quite distinct from lies not spoken under oath and simply intended to puff up oneself.
Statutes that prohibit falsely representing that one is
speaking on behalf of the Government, or that prohibit impersonating a Government officer, also protect the integrity of Government processes, quite apart from merely
restricting false speech. Title 18 U. S. C. §912, for example, prohibits impersonating an officer or employee of
the United States. Even if that statute may not require
proving an “actual financial or property loss” resulting
from the deception, the statute is itself confined to “maintain[ing] the general good repute and dignity of . . . government . . . service itself.” United States v. Lepowitch,
318 U. S. 702, 704 (1943) (internal quotation marks omitted). The same can be said for prohibitions on the unauthorized use of the names of federal agencies such as the
Federal Bureau of Investigation in a manner calculated to
convey that the communication is approved, see §709, or
using words such as “Federal” or “United States” in the
collection of private debts in order to convey that the
communication has official authorization, see §712. These
examples, to the extent that they implicate fraud or
speech integral to criminal conduct, are inapplicable here.
As our law and tradition show, then, there are instances
in which the falsity of speech bears upon whether it is
protected. Some false speech may be prohibited even if
analogous true speech could not be. This opinion does not
imply that any of these targeted prohibitions are somehow
vulnerable. But it also rejects the notion that false speech
should be in a general category that is presumptively
unprotected.
Although the First Amendment stands against any

