14

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

bringing some false factual statements within the protection of the First Amendment, but this is justified in order
to prevent the chilling of other, valuable speech.
These examples by no means exhaust the circumstances
in which false factual statements enjoy a degree of instrumental constitutional protection. On the contrary,
there are broad areas in which any attempt by the state to
penalize purportedly false speech would present a grave
and unacceptable danger of suppressing truthful speech.
Laws restricting false statements about philosophy, religion, history, the social sciences, the arts, and other matters of public concern would present such a threat. The
point is not that there is no such thing as truth or falsity
in these areas or that the truth is always impossible to
ascertain, but rather that it is perilous to permit the state
to be the arbiter of truth.
Even where there is a wide scholarly consensus concerning a particular matter, the truth is served by allowing
that consensus to be challenged without fear of reprisal.
Today’s accepted wisdom sometimes turns out to be mistaken. And in these contexts, “[e]ven a false statement
may be deemed to make a valuable contribution to public
debate, since it brings about ‘the clearer perception and
livelier impression of truth, produced by its collision with
error.’ ” Sullivan, supra, at 279, n. 19 (quoting J. Mill, On
Liberty 15 (R. McCallum ed. 1947)).
Allowing the state to proscribe false statements in these
areas also opens the door for the state to use its power for
political ends. Statements about history illustrate this
point. If some false statements about historical events
may be banned, how certain must it be that a statement is
false before the ban may be upheld? And who should
make that calculation? While our cases prohibiting viewpoint discrimination would fetter the state’s power to some
degree, see R. A. V. v. St. Paul, 505 U. S. 377, 384390
(1992) (explaining that the First Amendment does not

