16

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

response to the unreasoned is the rational; to the uninformed, the enlightened; to the straight-out lie, the simple
truth. See Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357, 377 (1927)
(Brandeis, J., concurring) (“If there be time to expose
through discussion the falsehood and fallacies, to avert
the evil by the processes of education, the remedy to be applied is more speech, not enforced silence”). The theory of
our Constitution is “that the best test of truth is the power
of the thought to get itself accepted in the competition of
the market,” Abrams v. United States, 250 U. S. 616, 630
(1919) (Holmes, J., dissenting). The First Amendment
itself ensures the right to respond to speech we do not like,
and for good reason. Freedom of speech and thought flows
not from the beneficence of the state but from the inalienable rights of the person. And suppression of speech by
the government can make exposure of falsity more difficult, not less so. Society has the right and civic duty to
engage in open, dynamic, rational discourse. These ends
are not well served when the government seeks to orchestrate public discussion through content-based mandates.
Expressing its concern that counterspeech is insufficient, the Government responds that because “some
military records have been lost . . . some claims [are] unverifiable,” Brief for United States 50. This proves little,
however; for without verifiable records, successful criminal prosecution under the Act would be more difficult in
any event. So, in cases where public refutation will not
serve the Government’s interest, the Act will not either.
In addition, the Government claims that “many [false
claims] will remain unchallenged.” Id., at 55. The Government provides no support for the contention. And in
any event, in order to show that public refutation is not an
adequate alternative, the Government must demonstrate
that unchallenged claims undermine the public’s perception of the military and the integrity of its awards system.
This showing has not been made.

