6

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
BREYER, J., concurring in judgment

intentional infliction of emotional distress (like torts involving placing a victim in a false light) concern falsehoods
that tend to cause harm to a specific victim of an emotional-,
dignitary-, or privacy-related kind. See id., §652E.
Perjury statutes prohibit a particular set of false statements—those made under oath—while requiring a showing of materiality. See, e.g., 18 U. S. C. §1621. Statutes
forbidding lying to a government official (not under oath)
are typically limited to circumstances where a lie is likely
to work particular and specific harm by interfering with
the functioning of a government department, and those
statutes also require a showing of materiality. See, e.g.,
§1001.
Statutes prohibiting false claims of terrorist attacks, or
other lies about the commission of crimes or catastrophes,
require proof that substantial public harm be directly
foreseeable, or, if not, involve false statements that are
very likely to bring about that harm. See, e.g., 47 CFR
§73.1217 (2011) (requiring showing of foreseeability and
actual substantial harm); 18 U. S. C. §1038(a)(1) (prohibiting knowing false statements claiming that terrorist attacks have taken, are taking, or will take, place).
Statutes forbidding impersonation of a public official
typically focus on acts of impersonation, not mere speech,
and may require a showing that, for example, someone
was deceived into following a “course [of action] he would
not have pursued but for the deceitful conduct.” United
States v. Lepowitch, 318 U. S. 702, 704 (1943); see, e.g.,
§912 (liability attaches to “[w]hoever falsely assumes or
pretends to be an officer or employee acting under the
authority of the United States . . . and acts as such” (emphasis added)).
Statutes prohibiting trademark infringement present,
perhaps, the closest analogy to the present statute.
Trademarks identify the source of a good; and infringement causes harm by causing confusion among potential

