2

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

employment or financial benefits or admission to privileges
reserved for those who had earned the Medal.
Respondent was indicted under the Stolen Valor Act
for lying about the Congressional Medal of Honor at the
meeting. The United States District Court for the Central
District of California rejected his claim that the statute is
invalid under the First Amendment. Respondent pleaded
guilty to one count, reserving the right to appeal on his
First Amendment claim. The United States Court of
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in a decision by a divided
panel, found the Act invalid under the First Amendment
and reversed the conviction. Id., at 1218. With further
opinions on the issue, and over a dissent by seven judges,
rehearing en banc was denied. 638 F. 3d 666 (2011). This
Court granted certiorari. 565 U. S. ___ (2011).
After certiorari was granted, and in an unrelated case,
the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit,
also in a decision by a divided panel, found the Act constitutional. United States v. Strandlof, 667 F. 3d 1146
(2012). So there is now a conflict in the Courts of Appeals
on the question of the Act’s validity.
This is the second case in two Terms requiring the Court
to consider speech that can disparage, or attempt to steal,
honor that belongs to those who fought for this Nation in
battle. See Snyder v. Phelps, 562 U. S. ___ (2011) (hateful
protests directed at the funeral of a serviceman who died
in Iraq). Here the statement that the speaker held the
Medal was an intended, undoubted lie.
It is right and proper that Congress, over a century ago,
established an award so the Nation can hold in its highest respect and esteem those who, in the course of carrying
out the “supreme and noble duty of contributing to the
defense of the rights and honor of the nation,” Selective
Draft Law Cases, 245 U. S. 366, 390 (1918), have acted
with extraordinary honor. And it should be uncontested
that this is a legitimate Government objective, indeed a

