2

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
ALITO, J., dissenting


I

The Stolen Valor Act makes it a misdemeanor to “falsely
represen[t]” oneself as having been awarded a medal,
decoration, or badge for service in the Armed Forces of the
United States. 18 U. S. C. §704(b). Properly construed,
this statute is limited in five significant respects. First,
the Act applies to only a narrow category of false representations about objective facts that can almost always be
proved or disproved with near certainty. Second, the Act
concerns facts that are squarely within the speaker’s
personal knowledge. Third, as the Government maintains, see Brief for United States 1517, and both the
plurality, see ante, at 7, and the concurrence, see ante, at 3
(BREYER, J., concurring in judgment), seemingly accept, a
conviction under the Act requires proof beyond a reasonable doubt that the speaker actually knew that the representation was false.1 Fourth, the Act applies only to
statements that could reasonably be interpreted as communicating actual facts; it does not reach dramatic performances, satire, parody, hyperbole, or the like.2 Finally,
——————
1 Although

the Act does not use the term “knowing” or “knowingly,”
we have explained that criminal statutes must be construed “in light of
the background rules of the common law . . . in which the requirement
of some mens rea for a crime is firmly embedded.” Staples v. United
States, 511 U. S. 600, 605 (1994). The Act’s use of the phrase “falsely
represents,” moreover, connotes a knowledge requirement. See Black’s
Law Dictionary 1022 (8th ed. 2004) (defining a “misrepresentation” or
“false representation” to mean “[t]he act of making a false or misleading
assertion about something, usu. with the intent to deceive” (emphasis
added)).
2 See Black’s Law Dictionary, supra, at 1327 (defining “representation”
to mean a “presentation of fact”); see also Milkovich v. Lorain Journal
Co., 497 U. S. 1, 20 (1990) (explaining that the Court has protected
“statements that cannot ‘reasonably [be] interpreted as stating actual
facts’ about an individual” so that “public debate will not suffer for lack of
‘imaginative expression’ or the ‘rhetorical hyperbole’ which has traditionally added much to the discourse of our Nation” (quoting Hustler Magazine, Inc. v. Falwell, 485 U. S. 46, 50 (1988); alteration in original)).

