Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
scrutiny. While the Government’s interest in protecting the integrity
of the Medal of Honor is beyond question, the First Amendment requires that there be a direct causal link between the restriction imposed and the injury to be prevented. Here, that link has not been
shown. The Government points to no evidence supporting its claim
that the public’s general perception of military awards is diluted by
false claims such as those made by respondent. And it has not
shown, and cannot show, why counterspeech, such as the ridicule respondent received online and in the press, would not suffice to
achieve its interest.
In addition, when the Government seeks to regulate protected
speech, the restriction must be the “least restrictive means among
available, effective alternatives.” Ashcroft, 542 U. S., at 666. Here,
the Government could likely protect the integrity of the military
awards system by creating a database of Medal winners accessible
and searchable on the Internet, as some private individuals have already done. Pp. 12−18.
JUSTICE BREYER, joined by JUSTICE KAGAN, concluded that because
the Stolen Valor Act, as presently drafted, works disproportionate
constitutional harm, it fails intermediate scrutiny, and thus violates
the First Amendment. Pp. 1−10.
(a) In determining whether a statute violates the First Amendment, the Court has often found it appropriate to examine the fit between statutory ends and means, taking into account the seriousness
of the speech-related harm the provision will likely cause, the nature
and importance of the provision’s countervailing objectives, the extent to which the statute will tend to achieve those objectives, and
whether there are other, less restrictive alternatives. “Intermediate
scrutiny” describes this approach. Since false factual statements are
less likely than true factual statements to make a valuable contribution to the marketplace of ideas, and the government often has good
reason to prohibit such false speech, but its regulation can threaten
speech-related harm, such an approach is applied here. Pp. 1−3.
(b) The Act should be read as criminalizing only false factual
statements made with knowledge of their falsity and with intent that
they be taken as true. Although the Court has frequently said or implied that false factual statements enjoy little First Amendment protection, see, e.g., Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U. S. 323, 340, those
statements cannot be read to mean “no protection at all.” False factual statements serve useful human objectives in many contexts.
Moreover, the threat of criminal prosecution for making a false
statement can inhibit the speaker from making true statements,
thereby “chilling” a kind of speech that lies at the First Amendment’s
heart. See id., at 340−341. And the pervasiveness of false factual

