Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

It is a fair assumption that any true holders of the
Medal who had heard of Alvarez’s false claims would have
been fully vindicated by the community’s expression of
outrage, showing as it did the Nation’s high regard for the
Medal. The same can be said for the Government’s interest. The American people do not need the assistance of a
government prosecution to express their high regard for
the special place that military heroes hold in our tradition. Only a weak society needs government protection or
intervention before it pursues its resolve to preserve the
truth. Truth needs neither handcuffs nor a badge for its
vindication.
In addition, when the Government seeks to regulate
protected speech, the restriction must be the “least restrictive means among available, effective alternatives.” Ashcroft, 542 U. S., at 666. There is, however, at least one
less speech-restrictive means by which the Government
could likely protect the integrity of the military awards
system. A Government-created database could list Congressional Medal of Honor winners. Were a database
accessible through the Internet, it would be easy to verify
and expose false claims. It appears some private individuals have already created databases similar to this,
see Brief for Respondent 25, and at least one database of past winners is online and fully searchable, see
Congressional Medal of Honor Society, Full Archive,
http://www.cmohs.org/recipient-archive.php. The Solicitor
General responds that although Congress and the Department of Defense investigated the feasibility of establishing a database in 2008, the Government “concluded
that such a database would be impracticable and insufficiently comprehensive.” Brief for United States 55.
Without more explanation, it is difficult to assess the Government’s claim, especially when at least one database of
Congressional Medal of Honor winners already exists.
The Government may have responses to some of these
criticisms, but there has been no clear showing of the

