Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

means that once the Attorney General determines that
the alien is not being excluded for those two reasons, the
ground of exclusion no longer matters. At that point, the
alien is eligible for relief, and the thing the Attorney General waives is not a particular exclusion ground, but the
simple denial of entry. So the premise of the Government’s argument is wrong. And if the premise, so too the
conclusion—that is, because §212(c)’s text is not “phrased
in terms of waiving statutorily specified grounds of exclusion,” Brief for Respondent 21, it cannot counsel a search
for corresponding grounds of deportation.
More fundamentally, the comparable-grounds approach
would not follow from §212(c) even were the Government
right about the section’s phrasing. That is because §212(c)
simply has nothing to do with deportation: The provision
was not meant to interact with the statutory grounds for
deportation, any more than those grounds were designed
to interact with the provision. Rather, §212(c) refers
solely to exclusion decisions; its extension to deportation
cases arose from the agency’s extra-textual view that some
similar relief should be available in that context to avoid
unreasonable distinctions. Cf., e.g., Matter of L-, 1 I. & N.
Dec., at 5; see also supra, at 3–4.11 Accordingly, the text of
§212(c), whether or not phrased in terms of “waiving
grounds of exclusion,” cannot support the BIA’s use of the
——————
11 Congress amended §212(c), just five months before repealing it, to
include a first-time reference to deportation cases. That amendment
prohibited the Attorney General from granting discretionary relief to
aliens deportable on several specified grounds. See Antiterrorism and
Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, 110 Stat. 1277 (effective Apr. 24,
1996). The change does not affect our analysis, nor does the Government argue it should. As the Government notes, the amendment “did
not speak to the viability of the Board’s” comparable-grounds rule, but
instead made categorically ineligible for §212(c) relief “those deportable
by reason of certain crimes.” Brief for Respondent 20. Presumably,
Congress thought those crimes particularly incompatible with an
alien’s continued residence in this country.

