12

JUDULANG v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

Farm, 463 U. S., at 43 (quoting Bowman Transp., 419
U. S., at 285), which here means that the BIA’s approach
must be tied, even if loosely, to the purposes of the immigration laws or the appropriate operation of the immigration system. A method for disfavoring deportable aliens
that bears no relation to these matters—that neither
focuses on nor relates to an alien’s fitness to remain in the
country—is arbitrary and capricious. And that is true
regardless whether the BIA might have acted to limit the
class of deportable aliens eligible for §212(c) relief on
other, more rational bases.
The problem with the comparable-grounds policy is that
it does not impose such a reasonable limitation. Rather
than considering factors that might be thought germane to
the deportation decision, that policy hinges §212(c) eligibility on an irrelevant comparison between statutory
provisions. Recall that the BIA asks whether the set of
offenses in a particular deportation ground lines up with
the set in an exclusion ground. But so what if it does?
Does an alien charged with a particular deportation
ground become more worthy of relief because that ground
happens to match up with another? Or less worthy of
relief because the ground does not? The comparison in no
way changes the alien’s prior offense or his other attributes and circumstances. So it is difficult to see why that
comparison should matter.
Each of these statutory
grounds contains a slew of offenses. Whether each contains the same slew has nothing to do with whether a
deportable alien whose prior conviction falls within both
grounds merits the ability to seek a waiver.9
——————
9 The case would be different if Congress had intended for §212(c)
relief to depend on the interaction of exclusion grounds and deportation
grounds. But the Government has presented us with no evidence to
this effect, nor have we found any. See Blake, 489 F. 3d, at 102 (Congress never contemplated, in drafting the immigration laws, “that its
grounds of deportation would have any connection with the grounds of

