Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

Opinion of the Court

number of deportable aliens, which in turn would force the
Government to make additional individualized assessments of whether to actually grant relief. Id., at 47.
Once again, the Government’s rationale comes up short.
Cost is an important factor for agencies to consider in
many contexts. But cheapness alone cannot save an arbitrary agency policy. (If it could, flipping coins would be a
valid way to determine an alien’s eligibility for a waiver.)
And in any event, we suspect the Government exaggerates
the cost savings associated with the comparable-grounds
rule. Judulang’s proposed approach asks immigration
officials only to do what they have done for years in exclusion cases; that means, for one thing, that officials can
make use of substantial existing precedent governing
whether a crime falls within a ground of exclusion. And
Judulang’s proposal may not be the only alternative to the
comparable-grounds rule. See supra, at 11–12. In rejecting that rule, we do not preclude the BIA from trying to
devise another, equally economical policy respecting eligibility for §212(c) relief, so long as it comports with everything held in both this decision and St. Cyr.
III
We must reverse an agency policy when we cannot
discern a reason for it. That is the trouble in this case.
The BIA’s comparable-grounds rule is unmoored from the
purposes and concerns of the immigration laws. It allows
an irrelevant comparison between statutory provisions to
govern a matter of the utmost importance—whether lawful resident aliens with longstanding ties to this country
may stay here. And contrary to the Government’s protestations, it is not supported by text or practice or cost considerations. The BIA’s approach therefore cannot pass
muster under ordinary principles of administrative law.
The judgment of the Ninth Circuit is hereby reversed,
and the case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

