Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
to these factors. Instead, it makes §212(c) eligibility turn on an irrelevant comparison between statutory provisions. Whether the set of
offenses in a particular deportation ground lines up with the set in an
exclusion ground has nothing to do with whether a deportable alien
whose prior conviction falls within both grounds merits the ability to
stay in this country. Here, Judulang was found ineligible for §212(c)
relief because the “crime of violence” deportation ground includes a
few offenses—simple assault, minor burglary, and unauthorized use
of a vehicle—not found in the similar moral turpitude exclusion
ground. But the inclusion of simple assaults and minor burglaries in
the deportation ground is irrelevant to the merits of Judulang’s case.
The BIA’s approach has other odd features. In applying the comparable-grounds rule, the BIA has denied relief to aliens whose deportation ground fits entirely within a much broader exclusion
ground. Yet providing relief in exclusion cases to a broad class of aliens hardly justifies denying relief in deportation cases to a subset of
that group. In addition, the outcome of the comparable-grounds
analysis may itself rest on an arbitrary decision. An alien’s prior
conviction could fall within a number of deportation grounds, only
one of which corresponds to an exclusion ground. In such cases, an
alien’s eligibility for relief would hinge on an individual official’s decision as to which deportation ground to charge. An alien appearing
before one official may suffer deportation, while an identically situated alien appearing before another may gain the right to stay in this
country.
In short, the comparable-grounds approach does not rest on any
factors relevant to whether an alien should be deported. Instead, it
turns deportation decisions into a “sport of chance.” Rosenberg v.
Fleuti, 374 U. S. 449, 455. That is what the APA’s “arbitrary and capricious” standard is designed to prevent. Pp. 10–15.
(c) The Government’s arguments in defense of the comparablegrounds rule are not persuasive. First, §212(c)’s text does not support the rule. That section cannot provide a textual anchor for any
method of providing discretionary relief in deportation cases because
it addresses only exclusion. Second, the history of the comparablegrounds rule does not work in the Government’s favor. The BIA repeatedly vacillated in its method for applying §212(c) to deportable
aliens, settling on the current rule only in 2005. Third, the Government’s claim that the comparable-grounds rule saves time and money
falls short. Cost may be an important factor for agencies to consider
in many contexts, but cheapness alone cannot save an arbitrary
agency policy. In any event, it is unclear that the comparablegrounds rule saves money when compared with alternative approaches. Pp. 16–21.

