Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

This case well illustrates the point. In commencing
Judulang’s deportation proceeding, the Government
charged him with an “aggravated felony” involving a
“crime of violence” based on his prior manslaughter conviction. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 11a–12a. That made
him ineligible for §212(c) relief because the “crime of violence” deportation ground does not sufficiently overlap
with the most similar exclusion ground, for “crime[s]
involving moral turpitude.” The problem, according to the
BIA, is that the “crime of violence” ground includes a few
offenses—simple assault, minor burglary, and unauthorized use of a vehicle—that the “moral turpitude” ground
does not. See Brieva-Perez, 23 I. & N. Dec., at 772–773;
Tr. of Oral Arg. 28–29, 40–41. But this statutory difference in no way relates to Judulang—or to most other
aliens charged with committing a “crime of violence.”
Perhaps aliens like Judulang should be eligible for §212(c)
relief, or perhaps they should not. But that determination
is not sensibly made by establishing that simple assaults
and minor burglaries fall outside a ground for exclusion.
That fact is as extraneous to the merits of the case as a
coin flip would be. It makes Judulang no less deserving of
the opportunity to seek discretionary relief—just as its
converse (the inclusion of simple assaults and burglaries
in the “moral turpitude” exclusion ground) would make
him no more so.
Or consider a different headscratching oddity of the
comparable-grounds approach—that it may deny §212(c)
eligibility to aliens whose deportation ground fits entirely
inside an exclusion ground. The BIA’s Blake decision,
noted earlier, provides an example. See supra, at 6–7.
The deportation ground charged was “aggravated felony”
involving “sexual abuse of a minor”; the closest exclusion
ground was, once again, a “crime [of] moral turpitude.” 23
—————— 

exclusion” in the application of §212(c)); see also infra, at 16–17.


