Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

Opinion of the Court

it both ways: It denied §212(c) eligibility both because the
deportation ground charged did not correspond to, and
because the alien’s prior conviction did not fall within, a
waivable ground of exclusion. In short, the BIA’s cases
were all over the map.
The Government insists that the BIA imposed order in
Matter of Wadud, 19 I. & N. Dec. 182, 185–186 (1984),
when it held that a deportable alien could not seek §212(c)
relief unless the deportation ground charged had an “analogous ground of inadmissibility.” See Brief for Respondent
40–41. But the BIA’s settlement, if any, was fleeting.
Just seven years later, the BIA adopted a new policy
entirely, extending §212(c) eligibility to “aliens deportable
under any ground of deportability except those where
there is a comparable ground of exclusion which has been
specifically excepted from section 212(c).” HernandezCasillas, 20 I. & N. Dec., at 266. That new rule turned the
comparable-grounds approach inside-out, allowing aliens
to seek §212(c) relief in deportation cases except when the
ground charged corresponded to an exclusion ground that
could not be waived. To be sure, the Attorney General (on
referral of the case from the BIA), disavowed this position
in favor of the more standard version of the comparablegrounds rule. Id., at 287. But even while doing so, the
Attorney General stated that “an alien subject to deportation must have the same opportunity to seek discretionary
relief as an alien . . . subject to exclusion.” Ibid. That
assertion is exactly the one Judulang makes in this case;
it is consonant not with the comparable-grounds rule the
BIA here defends, but instead with an inquiry into whether an alien’s prior conviction falls within an exclusion
ground.
Given these mixed signals, it is perhaps not surprising
that the BIA continued to alternate between approaches in
the years that followed. Immediately after the Attorney
General’s opinion in Hernandez-Casillas, the BIA en-

