14

JUDULANG v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

I. & N. Dec., at 727. Here, the BIA’s problem was not that
the deportation ground covered too many offenses; all or
virtually all the crimes within that ground also are crimes
of moral turpitude. Rather, the BIA objected that the
deportation ground covered too few crimes—or put oppositely, that “the moral turpitude ground of exclusion addresses a . . . much broader category of offenses.” Id., at
728. But providing relief in exclusion cases to a broad
class of aliens hardly justifies denying relief in deportation
cases to a subset of that group.10 (The better argument
would surely be the reverse—that giving relief in the one
context supports doing so in the other.) Again, we do not
say today that the BIA must give all deportable aliens
meeting §212(c)’s requirements the chance to apply for a
waiver. See supra, at 11–12. The point is instead that the
BIA cannot make that opportunity turn on the meaningless matching of statutory grounds.
And underneath this layer of arbitrariness lies yet
another, because the outcome of the Board’s comparablegrounds analysis itself may rest on the happenstance of an
immigration official’s charging decision. This problem
arises because an alien’s prior conviction may fall within a
number of deportation grounds, only one of which corresponds to an exclusion ground. Consider, for example, an
alien who entered the country in 1984 and committed voluntary manslaughter in 1988. That person could
be charged (as Judulang was) with an “aggravated felony” involving a “crime of violence,” see 8 U. S. C.
§§1101(a)(43)(F), 1227(a)(2)(A)(iii). If so, the alien could
not seek a waiver because of the absence of a comparable
exclusion ground. But the alien also could be charged
——————
10 Perhaps

that is why the BIA declined to apply similar reasoning in
Meza—a case also involving an exclusion ground that sweeps more
broadly than a deportation ground (although not to the same extent as
in Blake). See supra, at 6.

