Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

involving “sexual abuse of a minor.” §§1101(a)(43)(A),
1227(a)(2)(A)(iii). May this alien seek §212(c) relief ?
According to the BIA, he may not do so—not because his
crime is too serious (that is irrelevant to the analysis), but
instead because no statutory ground of exclusion covers
substantially the same offenses. To be sure, the alien’s
own offense is a “crime involving moral turpitude,” 8
U. S. C. §1182(a)(2)(A)(i)(I), and so fits within an exclusion
ground. Indeed, that will be true of most or all offenses
included in this deportation category. See supra, at 5.
But on the BIA’s view, the “moral turpitude” exclusion
ground “addresses a distinctly different and much broader
category of offenses than the aggravated felony sexual
abuse of a minor charge.” Blake, 23 I. & N. Dec., at 728.
And the much greater sweep of the exclusion ground
prevents the alien from seeking discretionary relief from
deportation.4
Those mathematically inclined might think of the
comparable-grounds approach as employing Venn diagrams. Within one circle are all the criminal offenses composing the particular ground of deportation charged. Within
other circles are the offenses composing the various exclusion grounds. When, but only when, the “deportation
circle” sufficiently corresponds to one of the “exclusion
circles” may an alien apply for §212(c) relief.
——————
4 Careful readers may note that the example involving controlled
substances offered in the last paragraph also involves an exclusion
ground that sweeps more broadly than the deportation ground charged.
The deportation ground requires “trafficking” in a controlled substance,
whereas the exclusion ground includes all possession offenses as well.
The BIA nonetheless held in Meza that the degree of overlap between
the two grounds was sufficient to make the alien eligible for §212(c)
relief. That holding reveals the broad discretion that the BIA currently
exercises in deciding when two statutory grounds are comparable
enough.

