2

JUDULANG v. HOLDER
Syllabus
This case concerns the BIA’s method for applying §212(c) in the
deportation context. The BIA’s approach, known as the “comparablegrounds” rule, evaluates whether the charged deportation ground has
a close analogue in the statute’s list of exclusion grounds. If the deportation ground consists of a set of crimes “substantially equivalent”
to the set making up an exclusion ground, the alien can seek §212(c)
relief. But if the deportation ground covers different or more or fewer
offenses than any exclusion ground, the alien is ineligible for relief,
even if the alien’s particular offense falls within an exclusion ground.
Petitioner Judulang, who has lived continuously in the United
States as a lawful permanent resident since 1974, pleaded guilty to
voluntary manslaughter in 1988. After he pleaded guilty to another
crime in 2005, DHS commenced a deportation action, charging him
with having committed an “aggravated felony” involving “a crime of
violence” based on his manslaughter conviction. The Immigration
Judge ordered Judulang’s deportation, and the BIA affirmed, finding
Judulang ineligible for §212(c) relief because the “crime of violence”
deportation ground is not comparable to any exclusion ground. The
Ninth Circuit, having previously upheld the BIA’s comparablegrounds rule, denied Judulang’s petition for review.

Held: The BIA’s policy for applying §212(c) in deportation cases is “arbitrary and capricious” under the Administrative Procedure Act, 5
U. S. C. §706(2)(A). Pp. 9–21.
(a) While agencies have expertise and experience in administering
their statutes that no court may properly ignore, courts retain a narrow but important role in ensuring that agencies have engaged in
reasoned decisionmaking. Thus, in reviewing the BIA’s action, this
Court must assess, among other matters, “whether the decision was
based on a consideration of the relevant factors and whether there
has been a clear error of judgment.” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Assn. of
United States, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins. Co., 463 U. S.
29, 43. That task involves examining the reasons for agency decisions, or the absence of such reasons.
The comparable-grounds approach cannot survive scrutiny under
this standard. By hinging a deportable alien’s eligibility for discretionary relief on the chance correspondence between statutory categories—a matter irrelevant to the alien’s fitness to reside in this
country—the BIA has failed to exercise its discretion in a reasoned
manner. Pp. 9–10.
(b) Even if the BIA has legitimate reasons for limiting §212(c)’s
scope in deportation cases, it must do so in some rational way. In
other words, the BIA must use an approach that is tied to the purposes of the immigration laws or the appropriate operation of the
immigration system. The comparable-grounds rule has no connection

