2

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
Opinion of the Court

tionary periods and years of service.1 §7511(a)(1). The reviewable agency actions are removal, suspension for more
than 14 days, reduction in grade or pay, or furlough for 30
days or less. §7512.
When an employing agency proposes a covered action
against a covered employee, the CSRA gives the employee
the right to notice, representation by counsel, an opportunity to respond, and a written, reasoned decision from
the agency. §7513(b). If the agency takes final adverse
action against the employee, the CSRA gives the employee
the right to a hearing and to be represented by an attorney or other representative before the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB). §§7513(d), 7701(a)(1)–(2). The
MSPB is authorized to order relief to prevailing employees, including reinstatement, backpay, and attorney’s fees.
§§1204(a)(2), 7701(g).
An employee who is dissatisfied with the MSPB’s decision is entitled to judicial review in the United States
Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. That court “shall
review the record and hold unlawful and set aside any
agency action, findings, or conclusions” that are “arbitrary,
capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in
accordance with law,” “obtained without procedures re——————
1 The

CSRA divides civil service employees into three main categories. Fausto, 484 U. S., at 441, n. 1. “Senior Executive Service” employees occupy high-level positions in the Executive Branch but are not
required to be appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate.
5 U. S. C. §3131(2). “[C]ompetitive service” employees—the relevant
category for purposes of this case—are all other Executive Branch
employees whose nomination by the President and confirmation by the
Senate are not required and who are not specifically excepted from the
competitive service by statute. §2102(a)(1). The competitive service
also includes employees in other branches of the Federal Government and in the District of Columbia government who are specifically
included by statute. §§2102(a)(2)–(3). Finally, “excepted service”
employees are employees who are not in the Senior Executive Service
or in the competitive service. §2103.

