Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

Amendment). Nevertheless, petitioners seek to carve out
an exception to CSRA exclusivity for facial or as-applied
constitutional challenges to federal statutes.
The text and structure of the CSRA, however, provide
no support for such an exception. The availability of administrative and judicial review under the CSRA generally turns on the type of civil service employee and
adverse employment action at issue. See, e.g., 5 U. S. C.
§§7511(a)(1) (defining “employee”), 7512 (defining “[a]ctions covered”), 7513(d) (providing that “[a]n employee
against whom an action is taken under this section is
entitled to appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board”),
7703(a)(1) (providing that “[a]ny employee . . . adversely
affected or aggrieved by a final order or decision of the
Merit Systems Protection Board may obtain judicial review of the order or decision” in the Federal Circuit).
Nothing in the CSRA’s text suggests that its exclusive
review scheme is inapplicable simply because a covered
employee challenges a covered action on the ground that
the statute authorizing that action is unconstitutional. As
the Government correctly notes, “[t]he plain language of
[the CSRA’s] provisions applies to an employee who challenges his removal on the ground that the statute requiring it is unconstitutional no less than it applies to an
employee who challenges his removal on any other
ground.” Brief for Respondents 33–34.
In only one situation does the CSRA expressly exempt a
covered employee’s appeal of a covered action from Federal
Circuit review based on the type of claim at issue. When a
covered employee “alleges that a basis for the action was
discrimination” prohibited by enumerated federal employment laws, 5 U. S. C. §7702(a)(1)(B), the CSRA allows
the employee to obtain judicial review of an unfavorable
MSPB decision by filing a civil action as provided by the
applicable employment law. See §7703(b)(2). Each of the
cross-referenced employment laws authorizes an action

