14

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
Opinion of the Court

view in the Federal Circuit, an Article III court fully competent to adjudicate petitioners’ claims that Section 3328
and the Military Selective Service Act’s registration requirement are unconstitutional.
Petitioners insist, however, that the Federal Circuit
cannot decide their constitutional claims either. Emphasizing the Federal Circuit’s holdings that its jurisdiction
over employee appeals is coextensive with the MSPB’s
jurisdiction, petitioners argue that the Federal Circuit
likewise lacks jurisdiction to decide their challenge to
the constitutionality of a federal statute. Petitioners are
incorrect.
As we have explained, the CSRA makes MSPB jurisdiction over an appeal dependent only on the nature of the
employee and the employment action at issue. See supra,
at 1–2, 8–9; see also 5 CFR §1201.3(a) (stating that “[t]he
Board has jurisdiction over appeals from agency actions”
and enumerating covered actions); Todd v. Merit Systems
Protection Bd., 55 F. 3d 1574, 1576 (CA Fed. 1995) (explaining that the employee “has the burden of establishing
that she and the action she seeks to appeal [are] within
the [MSPB’s] jurisdiction”). Accordingly, as the cases cited
by petitioners demonstrate, the Federal Circuit has ques——————
tutional issue” was decided by this Court “ ‘not on preclusion grounds
but on the merits.’ ” Post, at 10 (opinion of ALITO, J.) (quoting 510 U. S.,
at 219 (SCALIA, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment)). To
be sure, the Thunder Basin Court did decide the merits of the petitioner’s “second constitutional challenge,” namely whether the Court’s
finding of preclusion was itself unconstitutional. See i.d., at 219–221,
and n. (same); see also id., at 216 (describing this “alternative” argument). But the petitioner’s suit also included another constitutional
claim: a due process challenge to a statute that permitted a regulatory
agency, before a hearing, to immediately fine the petitioner for noncompliance with the statute. See Brief for Petitioner in Thunder Basin
Coal Co. v. Reich, O. T. 1993, No. 92–896, p. 13. The Court expressly
found that the statutory review scheme precluded district court jurisdiction over that constitutional claim. See 510 U. S., at 214‒216.

