Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
lenges to federal statutes; this claim finds no support in the CSRA’s
text and structure. The availability of administrative and judicial
review under the CSRA generally turns on the type of civil service
employee and adverse employment action at issue. Nothing in the
CSRA’s text suggests that its exclusive review scheme is inapplicable
simply because a covered employee raises a constitutional challenge.
And §7703(b)(2)—which expressly exempts from Federal Circuit review challenges alleging that a covered action was based on discrimination prohibited by enumerated federal employment laws—
demonstrates that Congress knew how to provide alternative forums
for judicial review based on the nature of an employee’s claim. Pp. 6–
10.
(2) The CSRA’s purpose also supports the conclusion that the
statutory review scheme is exclusive, even for constitutional challenges. The CSRA’s objective of creating an integrated review
scheme to replace inconsistent decisionmaking and duplicative judicial review would be seriously undermined if a covered employee
could challenge a covered employment action first in a district court,
and then again in a court of appeals, simply by challenging the constitutionality of the statutory authorization for the action. Claimsplitting and preclusion doctrines would not necessarily eliminate the
possibility of parallel proceedings before the MSPB and the district
court, and petitioners point to nothing in the CSRA to support the notion that Congress intended to allow employees to pursue constitutional claims in district court at the expense of forgoing other, potentially meritorious claims before the MSPB. Pp. 10–12.
(c) Petitioners invoke the “presum[ption] that Congress does not intend to limit [district court] jurisdiction if ‘a finding of preclusion
could foreclose all meaningful judicial review’; if the suit is ‘wholly
collateral to a statute’s review provisions’; and if the claims are ‘outside the agency’s expertise.’ ” Free Enterprise Fund v. Public Company Accounting Oversight Bd., 561 U. S. ___, ___. But none of those
characteristics is present here. Pp. 12–20.
(1) Petitioners’ constitutional claims can receive meaningful review within the CSRA scheme even if the MSPB, as it claims, is not
authorized to decide a federal law’s constitutionality. Their claims
can be “meaningfully addressed” in the Federal Circuit, which has
held that it can determine the constitutionality of a statute upon
which an employee’s removal was based, notwithstanding the
MSPB’s professed lack of authority to decide the question. The CSRA
review scheme also fully accommodates the potential need for a factual record. Even without factfinding capabilities, the Federal Circuit may take judicial notice of facts relevant to the constitutional
question. If further development is necessary, the CSRA empowers

