Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of the Court

Petitioners nonetheless insist that the MSPB will never
reach the factfinding stage in an appeal challenging the
constitutionality of a federal statute, pointing to the ALJ’s
dismissal for lack of jurisdiction in petitioner Elgin’s case.
Again, petitioners are incorrect. When a covered employee
appeals a covered adverse action, the CSRA grants the
MSPB jurisdiction over the appeal. See supra, at 14. If
the employee attacks the adverse action on the ground
that a statute is unconstitutional, the MSPB may determine that it lacks authority to decide that particular issue;
but absent another infirmity in the adverse action, the
MSPB will affirm the employing agency’s decision rather
than dismiss the appeal. See, e.g., Briggs, supra, at 1311.
The Federal Circuit can then review the MSPB decision,
including any factual record developed by the MSPB in the
course of its decision on the merits.
Contrary to petitioners’ suggestion, Elgin’s case does not
illustrate that the MSPB will invariably dismiss an appeal
challenging the constitutionality of a federal statute before
reaching the factfinding stage. The ALJ dismissed Elgin’s
case on the threshold jurisdictional ground that he was
not an “employee” with a right to appeal to the MSPB
because his employment was absolutely barred by statute.
See App. to Pet. for Cert. 100a–101a. The Government
conceded before the First Circuit that this jurisdictional
argument was incorrect, see Brief for United States 10,
and the Court of Appeals agreed, see 641 F. 3d, at 10–11.
The parties do not raise that issue here, and we do not
address it. What matters for present purposes is that the
particular circumstances of Elgin’s case do not demonstrate that the MSPB will dismiss an appeal that is otherwise within its jurisdiction merely because it lacks the
—————— 

credit the dissent’s prediction that our holding will result in a complicated back and forth between a befuddled MSPB and the Federal

Circuit. 


