Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

of the CSRA’s text and structure on the availability of
judicial review of a federal employee’s challenge to an
employment decision. In Fausto, we considered whether
a so-called “nonpreference excepted service employe[e]”
could challenge his suspension in the United States
Claims Court, even though the CSRA did not then afford
him a right to review in the MSPB or the Federal Circuit.3
Id., at 440–441, 448. Citing “[t]he comprehensive nature
of the CSRA, the attention that it gives throughout to the
rights of nonpreference excepted service employees, and
the fact that it does not include them in provisions for
administrative and judicial review contained in Chapter
75,” the Court concluded that “the absence of provision
for these employees to obtain judicial review” was a “considered congressional judgment.” Id., at 448. The Court
thus found it “fairly discernible” that Congress intended to
preclude all judicial review of Fausto’s statutory claims.4
Id., at 452 (citing Block, supra, at 349).
Just as the CSRA’s “elaborate” framework, 484 U. S.,
at 443, demonstrates Congress’ intent to entirely foreclose
judicial review to employees to whom the CSRA denies
statutory review, it similarly indicates that extrastatutory
review is not available to those employees to whom the
CSRA grants administrative and judicial review. Indeed,
in Fausto we expressly assumed that “competitive service
employees, who are given review rights by Chapter 75,
cannot expand these rights by resort to” judicial review
outside of the CSRA scheme. See id., at 450, n. 3. As
Fausto explained, the CSRA “prescribes in great detail the
protections and remedies applicable to” adverse personnel
——————
3 Certain veterans and their close relatives are considered “preference
eligible” civil service employees. Fausto, 484 U. S., at 441, n. 1.
4 Although Fausto interpreted the CSRA to entirely foreclose judicial
review, the Court had no need to apply a heightened standard like that
applied in Webster v. Doe, 486 U. S. 592 (1988), because Fausto did not
press any constitutional claims.

