10

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
ALITO, J., dissenting

lished. The only constitutional issue was a matter of
timing: The company argued that it had a due process
right to immediate judicial review of its statutory claims,
because it would suffer irreparable harm if it were forced
to wait until after the agency initiated an enforcement
action. Ibid. The Court disagreed, holding that the statutory scheme was “consistent with due process” even
though it provided for only postenforcement review. Id.,
at 218. Thus, the Court rejected the company’s constitutional claim “not on preclusion grounds but on the merits.”
Id., at 219 (SCALIA, J., concurring in part and concurring
in judgment). The heart of the preclusion analysis was
that the company could not use a preenforcement challenge to obtain judicial review of statutory claims that
Congress had clearly intended to channel into administrative review.*
C
By requiring facial constitutional claims to be filed
before the Board, the majority’s holding sets up an odd
sequence of procedural hoops for petitioners to jump
——————
* The majority contends that the petitioner in Thunder Basin really
had two distinct constitutional claims. The primary constitutional
claim was a “due process challenge to a statute that permitted a regulatory agency, before a hearing, to immediately fine the petitioner for
noncompliance with the statute.” Ante, at 14, n. 6. On top of this,
according to the majority, the petitioner also had a separate constitutional claim, which asserted that precluding initial judicial review of
the first constitutional claim would violate due process. In the majority’s view, only the latter claim was rejected on the merits. But this
hairsplitting makes no difference. The entire thrust of the petitioner’s
constitutional argument was simply that proceeding through the statutory scheme would make meaningful judicial review impossible.
The Court rejected that argument, effectively disposing of any constitutional infirmity that the petitioner alleged. Unlike in the present case,
there was no freestanding constitutional claim attacking the validity
of the statutory framework on substantive rather than procedural
grounds.

