16

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
Opinion of the Court

challenge to a federal statute. Even without factfinding
capabilities, the Federal Circuit may take judicial notice of
facts relevant to the constitutional question. See, e.g.,
Rothe Development Corp. v. Department of Defense, 545
F. 3d 1023, 1045–1046 (CA Fed. 2008) (judicially noticing
facts relevant to equal protection challenge). And, if resolution of a constitutional claim requires the development
of facts beyond those that the Federal Circuit may judicially notice, the CSRA empowers the MSPB to take evidence and find facts for Federal Circuit review. See 5
U. S. C. §§1204(b)(1)–(2) (providing that the MSPB may
administer oaths, examine witnesses, take depositions,
issue interrogatories, subpoena testimony and documents,
and otherwise receive evidence when a covered employee
appeals a covered adverse employment action). Unlike
petitioners, we see nothing extraordinary in a statutory
scheme that vests reviewable factfinding authority in a
non-Article III entity that has jurisdiction over an action
but cannot finally decide the legal question to which the
facts pertain. Congress has authorized magistrate judges,
for example, to conduct evidentiary hearings and make
findings of fact relevant to dispositive pretrial motions,
although they are powerless to issue a final ruling on such
motions. See 28 U. S. C. §§636(b)(1)(A)–(B); United States
v. Raddatz, 447 U. S. 667, 673 (1980).9
——————
9 The dissent argues that the MSPB may struggle to determine what
facts are relevant to the constitutional question, given that it will not
decide the claim. See post, at 11. But the MSPB’s professed lack of
authority to declare a statute unconstitutional does not mean that the
MSPB cannot identify the legal principles that govern the constitutional analysis and thus the scope of necessary development of the factual record. The MSPB routinely identifies the relevant constitutional
framework from federal court decisions when deciding other constitutional claims. See supra, at 8–9 (citing First and Fourth Amendment
cases); see also, e.g., Fitzgerald v. Department of Defense, 80 MSPR 1,
14–15 (1998) (analyzing a claim under the Due Process Clauses of the
Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments). We therefore see little reason to

