2

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
Syllabus
merits. The First Circuit vacated and remanded with instructions to
dismiss for lack of jurisdiction. The First Circuit held that petitioners were employees entitled to MSPB review despite the statutory
bar to their employment. The court further concluded that challenges to a removal are not exempt from the CSRA review scheme simply
because an employee challenges the constitutionality of the statute
authorizing the removal.

Held: The CSRA precludes district court jurisdiction over petitioners’
claims because it is fairly discernible that Congress intended the
statute’s review scheme to provide the exclusive avenue to judicial
review for covered employees who challenge covered adverse employment actions, even when those employees argue that a federal
statute is unconstitutional. Pp. 5–20.
(a) Relying on Webster v. Doe, 486 U. S. 592, 603, petitioners claim
that 28 U. S. C. §1331’s general grant of federal-question jurisdiction
to district courts remains undisturbed unless Congress explicitly directs otherwise. But Webster’s “heightened showing” applies only
when a statute purports to “deny any judicial forum for a colorable
constitutional claim,” 486 U. S., at 603, not when Congress channels
judicial review of a constitutional claim to a particular court, see
Thunder Basin Coal Co. v. Reich, 510 U. S. 200. Here, where the
claims can be “meaningfully addressed in the” Federal Circuit, id., at
215, the proper inquiry is whether Congress’ intent to preclude district court jurisdiction was “ ‘fairly discernible in the statutory
scheme,’ ” id., at 207. Pp. 5–6.
(b) It is “fairly discernible” from the CSRA’s text, structure, and
purpose that Congress precluded district court jurisdiction over petitioners’ claims. Pp. 6–12.
(1) Just as the CSRA’s “elaborate” framework demonstrated
Congress’ intent to entirely foreclose judicial review to employees to
whom the CSRA denies statutory review in Fausto, 484 U. S., at 443,
the CSRA indicates that extrastatutory review is not available to
those employees to whom the CSRA grants administrative and judicial review. It “prescribes in great detail the protections and remedies applicable to” adverse personnel actions against federal employees, ibid., specifically enumerating the major adverse actions and
employee classifications to which the CSRA’s procedural protections
and review provisions apply, §§7511, 7512, setting out the procedures
due an employee prior to final agency action, §7513, and exhaustively
detailing the system of review before the MSPB and the Federal Circuit, §§7701, 7703. Petitioners and the Government do not dispute
that petitioners are removed employees to whom CSRA review is
provided, but petitioners claim that there is an exception to the
CSRA review scheme for employees who bring constitutional chal-

