4

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
Opinion of the Court

Id., at 101a.
Elgin neither petitioned for review by the full MSPB
nor appealed to the Federal Circuit. Instead, he joined the
other petitioners in filing suit in the United States District
Court for the District of Massachusetts, raising the same
constitutional challenges to Section 3328 and the Military
Selective Service Act. App. 4, 26–28, 29. Petitioners
sought equitable relief in the form of a declaratory judgment that the challenged statutes are unconstitutional, an
injunction prohibiting enforcement of Section 3328, reinstatement to their former positions, backpay, benefits, and
attorney’s fees. Id., at 29–30.
The District Court rejected respondents’ argument that
it lacked jurisdiction and denied petitioners’ constitutional
claims on the merits. See Elgin v. United States, 697
F. Supp. 2d 187 (Mass. 2010). The District Court held
that the CSRA did not preclude it from hearing petitioners’ claims, because the MSPB had no authority to determine the constitutionality of a federal statute. Id., at 193.
Hence, the District Court concluded that it retained jurisdiction under the general grant of federal-question jurisdiction in 28 U. S. C. §1331. 697 F. Supp. 2d, at 194.
The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit
vacated the judgment and remanded with instructions to
dismiss for lack of jurisdiction. See 641 F. 3d 6 (2011).
The Court of Appeals held that challenges to a removal
are not exempted from the CSRA review scheme simply
because the employee argues that the statute authorizing
the removal is unconstitutional. Id., at 11–12. According
to the Court of Appeals, the CSRA provides a forum—the
Federal Circuit—that may adjudicate the constitutionality
of a federal statute, and petitioners “were obliged to use
it.” Id., at 12–13.
We granted certiorari to decide whether the CSRA precludes district court jurisdiction over petitioners’ claims
even though they are constitutional claims for equitable

