Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

ALITO, J., dissenting

through. As the Government concedes, the Board is powerless to adjudicate facial constitutional claims, and so
these claims cannot be addressed on the merits until they
reach the Federal Circuit on appeal. As a result, the
Federal Circuit will be forced to address the claims in the
first instance, without the benefit of any relevant factfinding at the administrative level. This is a strange result,
because “statutes that provide for only a single level of
judicial review in the courts of appeals are traditionally
viewed as warranted only in circumstances where district
court factfinding would unnecessarily duplicate an adequate administrative record.” McNary, 498 U. S., at 497
(internal quotation marks omitted).
The Government admits that the absence of first-tier
factfinding might very well result in “the initial record”
being “insufficient to permit meaningful consideration of
a constitutional claim,” but suggests that the court could
always “remand the case to the [Board] for further factual
development.” Brief for Respondents 41. The majority
accepts this solution, ante, at 15, but it is hard to see how
it will work in practice. Without any authority to decide
merits issues, the Board may find it difficult to adjudicate
disputes about the relevancy of evidence sought in discovery. Nor will the Board find it easy to figure out which
facts it must find before sending the case back to the
Federal Circuit.
Even if these problems can be overcome, that will not
resolve the needless complexity of the majority’s approach.
According to the majority, petitioners should file their
claims with the Board, which must then kick the claims
up to the Federal Circuit, which must then remand the
claims back to the Board, which must then develop the
record and send the case back to the Federal Circuit,
which can only then consider the constitutional issues.
To be sure, this might be sufficient to afford “meaningful
review” of petitioners’ claims, ante, at 16–17, but that is

