Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

ALITO, J., dissenting

been wrongfully suspended from work, and that he was
entitled to backpay as a result. Id., at 440. For that type
of fact-specific personnel dispute, we determined, Congress had intended for the CSRA’s comprehensive administrative scheme to provide the exclusive avenue of relief.
Id., at 455.
Similarly, in Bush v. Lucas, 462 U. S. 367 (1983), we
declined to allow a claim under Bivens v. Six Unknown
Fed. Narcotics Agents, 403 U. S. 388 (1971), brought by an
employee seeking money damages for an alleged “retaliatory demotion or discharge because he ha[d] exercised his
First Amendment rights.” 462 U. S., at 381. Although
the claim was constitutional in nature, we noted that it
“ar[o]se out of an employment relationship that is governed by comprehensive procedural and substantive provisions” that had been enacted by Congress. Id., at 368.
The employee was pursuing an as-applied challenge that
depended on the case-specific facts of why he had been
fired. The gravamen of the employee’s claim was that he
had been “unfairly disciplined for making critical comments about [his agency].” Id., at 386. Under the statutory scheme that Congress had created, the employee could
have pursued a very similar statutory claim for wrongful
removal within the administrative process. Id., at 386–
388. Under these circumstances, we found that Congress
did not intend to allow a duplicative nonstatutory claim
for damages based on the same set of underlying facts.
Finally, the majority’s reliance on Thunder Basin is
entirely misplaced. See ante, at 13. In that case, we
found that a statutory scheme impliedly precluded a
pre-enforcement challenge brought by a mining company
seeking to enjoin an order issued by the Mine Safety and
Health Administration. 510 U. S., at 205. Importantly,
the plaintiff company was seeking review of purely statutory claims that were reviewable in the first instance by
the administrative commission that Congress had estab-

