8

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
ALITO, J., dissenting

judicial review of these claims to the procedures set forth
in [the statutory scheme].” McNary v. Haitian Refugee
Center, Inc., 498 U. S. 479, 493 (1991).
Several other cases confirm this basic principle. In Free
Enterprise Fund, for example, the plaintiffs were not
required to pursue their constitutional claims through the
Public Accounting Company Oversight Board, because
they were challenging the very existence of the Board itself. 561 U. S., at ___ – ___ (slip op., at 8–10). Likewise,
in Johnson v. Robison, 415 U. S. 361, 373–374 (1974).
Where petitioners brought claims “challenging the constitutionality of laws providing benefits,” the Court held that
these claims were not precluded by a statute creating
exclusive administrative review over how those benefits
were administered. And in Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U. S.
319, 327–332 (1976), we held that although a party challenging the denial of statutory benefits was generally
required to proceed through the statutory process of administrative review, a constitutional challenge to the administrative process itself could still be brought directly
in federal court.
The present case follows the same pattern: Petitioners
are challenging the facial validity of a law that the Board
is bound to apply to them, and so it makes little sense for
them to seek review before the Board.
The wholly collateral nature of petitioners’ claims
makes them readily distinguishable from claims that this
Court has held to be impliedly excluded from the original
jurisdiction of the federal courts. In Fausto, for example,
we held that the CSRA precluded a statutory Back Pay
Act claim involving a dispute over whether an employee
had engaged in unauthorized use of a Government vehicle.
484 U. S., at 455. The plaintiff in that case did not challenge the constitutional validity of the applicable legal
framework, but argued instead that the framework had
been improperly applied to him. He argued that he had

