12

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
ALITO, J., dissenting

not the only consideration. The question is whether it
is “fairly discernible” that Congress intended to impose
these pinball procedural requirements instead of permitting
petitioners’ claims to be decided in a regular lawsuit in
federal district court. And why would it? As already
noted, the benefits of preventing claim-splitting are considerably reduced with respect to facial constitutional
claims that are wholly collateral to an administrative
proceeding. Because collateral constitutional claims have
no overlap with the issues of law and fact that will pertain
to the administrative proceeding, allowing the constitutional claims to be adjudicated separately before a district
court does not invite wasteful or duplicative review. It
simply allows the district court to develop the factual
record and then provide a first-tier legal analysis, thereby
enhancing both the quality and efficiency of appellate
review.
To the extent that there is some need to prevent claimsplitting, that purpose is already served by ordinary principles of claim preclusion. Plaintiffs generally must bring
all claims arising out of a common set of facts in a single
lawsuit, and federal district courts have discretion to
enforce that requirement as necessary “to avoid duplicative litigation.” Colorado River Water Conservation Dist.
v. United States, 424 U. S. 800, 817 (1976); Stone v. Department of Aviation, 453 F. 3d 1271, 1278 (CA10 2006)
(“A plaintiff ’s obligation to bring all related claims together
in the same action arises under the common-law rule of
claim preclusion prohibiting the splitting of actions”). See
also 18 C. Wright et al., Federal Practice and Procedure
§4406, p. 40 (2d ed. 2002, Supp. 2011) (discussing “principles of ‘claim splitting’ that are similar to claim preclusion,
but that do not require prior judgment”). Thus, if an
aggrieved employee goes to a district court with claims
that would duplicate the factfinding or legal analysis of a
separate Board proceeding, the district court would be free

