Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

ALITO, J., dissenting

claims into a system of statutory review. For example, in
Shalala v. Illinois Council on Long Term Care, Inc., 529
U. S. 1 (2000), we considered a clause providing that “no
action . . . to recover on any claim” arising under the Medicare laws “shall be brought under section 1331 . . . of title
28,” id., at 5 (quoting 42 U. S. C. §405(h) (brackets omitted)). When dealing with an express preclusion clause like
this, we determine the scope of preclusion simply by interpreting the words Congress has chosen.
We have also recognized that preclusion can be implied.
When Congress creates an administrative process to handle certain types of claims, it impliedly removes those
claims from the ordinary jurisdiction of the federal courts.
Under these circumstances, the test is whether “the ‘statutory scheme’ displays a ‘fairly discernible’ intent to limit jurisdiction and the claims at issue ‘are of the type Congress
intended to be reviewed within th[e] statutory structure.’ ”
Free Enterprise Fund v. Public Company Accounting
Oversight Bd., 561 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 8)
(quoting Thunder Basin Coal Co. v. Reich, 510 U. S. 200,
207, 212 (1994); alteration in Free Enterprise). In making
this determination, we look to “the statute’s language,
structure, and purpose, its legislative history, and whether
the claims can be afforded meaningful review” through
the alternative administrative process that Congress
has established. Thunder Basin, supra, at 207 (citation
omitted).
We have emphasized two important factors for determining whether Congress intended an agency to have
exclusive original jurisdiction over a claim. The first is
whether the claim falls within the agency’s area of expertise, which would give the agency a comparative advantage over the courts in resolving the claim. “Generally,
when Congress creates procedures ‘designed to permit
agency expertise to be brought to bear on particular problems,’ those procedures ‘are to be exclusive.’ ” Free Enter-

