Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

diction of administrative agencies.” Thunder Basin, 510
U. S., at 215 (internal quotation marks and brackets
omitted).5
We need not, and do not, decide whether the MSPB’s
view of its power is correct, or whether the oft-stated
principle that agencies cannot declare a statute unconstitutional is truly a matter of jurisdiction. See ibid. (describing this rule as “not mandatory”). In Thunder Basin,
we held that Congress’ intent to preclude district court
jurisdiction was fairly discernible in the statutory scheme
“[e]ven if ” the administrative body could not decide the
constitutionality of a federal law. Ibid. That issue, we
reasoned, could be “meaningfully addressed in the Court
of Appeals” that Congress had authorized to conduct
judicial review. Ibid.6 Likewise, the CSRA provides re——————
5 According to petitioners, the MSPB can decide claims that an
agency violated an employee’s First or Fourth Amendment rights (and
those claims consequently must be brought within the CSRA scheme),
supra, at 8–9, because such claims allege only that an agency “acted in
an unconstitutional manner” and do not challenge the constitutionality
of a federal statute either facially or as applied. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 10,
21. That distinction is dubious at best. Agencies are created by and act
pursuant to statutes. Thus, unless an action is beyond the scope of
the agency’s statutory authority, an employee’s claim that the agency
“acted in an unconstitutional manner” will generally be a claim that the
statute authorizing the agency action was unconstitutionally applied to
him. See, e.g., Pickering v. Board of Ed. of Township High School
Dist. 205, Will Cty., 391 U. S. 563, 565 (1968) (holding that the statute
authorizing a government employee’s termination was unconstitutional
as applied under the First and Fourteenth Amendments where the
employee was fired because of his speech). In any event, the curious
line that petitioners draw only highlights the weakness of their position, for it certainly is not “fairly discernible” from the CSRA’s text,
structure, or purpose that the statutory review scheme is exclusive for
so-called “unconstitutional manner” claims but not for facial or asapplied constitutional challenges to statutes. See supra, at 7–11.
6 The dissent misreads Thunder Basin. The dissent contends that the
“heart of the preclusion analysis” in Thunder Basin involved statutory
claims reviewable by the administrative body and that the “only consti-

