18

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
Opinion of the Court

authority to decide a particular claim.10
In sum, the CSRA grants the MSPB and the Federal
Circuit jurisdiction over petitioners’ appeal because they
are covered employees challenging a covered adverse
employment action. Within the CSRA review scheme, the
Federal Circuit has authority to consider and decide petitioners’ constitutional claims. To the extent such challenges require factual development, the CSRA equips the
MSPB with tools to create the necessary record. Thus,
petitioners’ constitutional claims can receive meaningful
review within the CSRA scheme.11
B
Petitioners next contend that the CSRA does not preclude district court jurisdiction over their claims because
they are “wholly collateral” to the CSRA scheme. According to petitioners, their bill-of-attainder and sex discrimination claims “have nothing to do with the types of day-today personnel actions adjudicated by the MSPB,” Brief for
Petitioners 29, and petitioners “are not seeking the
CSRA’s ‘protections and remedies.’ ” Reply Brief for Petitioners 3. We disagree. 

—————— 

10 Before this Court, the Government again conceded the error of its
argument that Elgin is not an “employee” within the MSPB’s jurisdiction and indicated that it would support a motion by Elgin to reopen his
case before the MSPB. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 32.
11 The dissent cites McNary v. Haitian Refugee Center, Inc., 498 U. S.
479 (1991), for the “basic principle,” post, at 8, that preclusion cannot be
inferred when “ ‘the administrative appeals process does not address
the kind of . . . constitutional claims’ at issue.” See post, at 7–8 (quoting
McNary, 498 U. S., at 493). But that statement from McNary was not a
reference to an administrative body’s inability to decide a constitutional
claim. Rather, McNary was addressing a statutory review scheme that
provided no opportunity for the plaintiffs to develop a factual record
relevant to their constitutional claims before the administrative body
and then restricted judicial review to the administrative record created
in the first instance. Ibid. As we have explained, the CSRA review
process is not similarly limited. See supra, at 15.

