Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

before the MSPB and a district court. An employee could
challenge the constitutionality of the statute authorizing
an agency’s action in district court, but the MSPB would
remain the exclusive forum for other types of challenges to
the agency’s decision. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 4–7, 9, 15–16.
Petitioners counter that doctrines regarding claim splitting and preclusion would bar parallel suits before the
MSPB and the district court. But such doctrines would
not invariably eliminate the possibility of simultaneous
proceedings, for a tribunal generally has discretion to
decide whether to dismiss a suit when a similar suit is
pending elsewhere. See 18 C. Wright et al., Federal Practice and Procedure §4406 (2d ed. 2002 and Supp. 2011). In
any event, petitioners point to nothing in the CSRA to
support the odd notion that Congress intended to allow
employees to pursue constitutional claims in district court
at the cost of forgoing other, potentially meritorious claims
before the MSPB.
Finally, we note that a jurisdictional rule based on the
nature of an employee’s constitutional claim would deprive
the aggrieved employee, the MSPB, and the district court
of clear guidance about the proper forum for the employee’s claims at the outset of the case. For example, petitioners contend that facial and as-applied constitutional
challenges to statutes may be brought in district court,
while other constitutional challenges must be heard by the
MSPB. See supra, at 8–9; infra, at 13, n. 5. But, as we
explain below, that line is hazy at best and incoherent at
worst. See ibid. The dissent’s approach fares no better.
The dissent carves out for district court adjudication only
facial constitutional challenges to statutes, but we have
previously stated that “the distinction between facial and
as-applied challenges is not so well defined that it has
some automatic effect or that it must always control the
pleadings and disposition in every case involving a constitutional challenge.” Citizens United v. Federal Election

