Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

13

Per Curiam

[her] hands, arms, and feet,” id., at 839, which “plainly
evidenced a desperate struggle for life at [Belmontes’]
hands,” Belmontes, 755 P. 2d, at 354. Belmontes left
McConnell to die, but officers found her still fighting for
her life before ultimately succumbing to the injuries
caused by the blows from Belmontes. Record 3. The jury
also heard that this savage murder was committed solely
to prevent interference with a burglary that netted Bel
montes $100 he used to buy beer and drugs for the night.
McConnell suffered, and it was clearly needless.
Some of the error below may be traced to confusion
about the appropriate standard and burden of proof.
While the Court of Appeals quoted the pertinent language
from Strickland, that court elsewhere suggested it might
have applied something different. In explaining its preju
dice determination, the Ninth Circuit concluded that “[t]he
aggravating evidence, even with the addition of evidence
that Belmontes murdered Howard, is not strong enough,
in light of the mitigating evidence that could have been
adduced, to rule out a sentence of life in prison.” Belmon
tes, 529 F. 3d, at 875. But Strickland does not require the
State to “rule out” a sentence of life in prison to prevail.
Rather, Strickland places the burden on the defendant,
not the State, to show a “reasonable probability” that the
result would have been different. 466 U. S., at 694. Un
der a proper application of the Strickland standard, Bel
montes cannot carry this burden.
It is hard to imagine expert testimony and additional
facts about Belmontes’ difficult childhood outweighing the
facts of McConnell’s murder. It becomes even harder to
envision such a result when the evidence that Belmontes
had committed another murder—“the most powerful
imaginable aggravating evidence,” as Judge Levi put it,
Belmontes, S-89–0736, App. to Pet. for Cert. 183a—is
added to the mix. Schick’s mitigation strategy failed, but
the notion that the result could have been different if only

