10

WONG v. BELMONTES
Per Curiam

U. S. 168, 186 (1986) (“Any attempt to portray petitioner
as a nonviolent man would have opened the door for the
State to rebut with evidence of petitioner’s prior convic
tions. . . . Similarly, if defense counsel had attempted to
put on evidence that petitioner was a family man, they
would have been faced with his admission at trial that,
although still married, he was spending the weekend
furlough with a girlfriend”).
If, for example, an expert had testified that Belmontes
had a “ ‘high likelihood of a . . . nonviolent adjustment to a
prison setting,’ ” as Belmontes suggested an expert might,
see Brief for Appellant in No. 01–99018 (CA9), p. 34, the
question would have immediately arisen: “What was his
propensity toward violence to begin with? Does evidence
of another murder alter your view?” Expert testimony
explaining why the jury should feel sympathy, as opposed
simply to facts that might elicit that response, would have
led to a similar rejoinder: “Is such sympathy equally ap
propriate for someone who committed a second murder?”
Any of this testimony from an expert’s perspective would
have made the Howard evidence fair game.
Many of Belmontes’ other arguments fail for the same
reason. He argues that the jury should have been told
that he suffered an “extended bout with rheumatic fever,”
which led to “emotional instability, impulsivity, and im
pairment of the neurophysiological mechanisms for plan
ning and reasoning.” Amended Pet. for Writ of Habeas
Corpus 120. But the cold, calculated nature of the Howard
murder and Belmontes’ subsequent bragging about it
would have served as a powerful counterpoint.
The type of “more-evidence-is-better” approach advo
cated by Belmontes and the Court of Appeals might seem
appealing—after all, what is there to lose? But here there
was a lot to lose. A heavyhanded case to portray Belmon
tes in a positive light, with or without experts, would have
invited the strongest possible evidence in rebuttal—the

