8

WONG v. BELMONTES
Per Curiam

There are two problems with this conclusion: Some of
the evidence was merely cumulative of the humanizing
evidence Schick actually presented; adding it to what was
already there would have made little difference. Other
evidence proposed by the Ninth Circuit would have put
into play aspects of Belmontes’ character that would have
triggered admission of the powerful Howard evidence in
rebuttal. This evidence would have made a difference, but
in the wrong direction for Belmontes. In either event,
Belmontes cannot establish Strickland prejudice.
First, the cumulative evidence. In the Court of Appeals’
view, Belmontes should have presented more humanizing
evidence about Belmontes’ “difficult childhood” and high
lighted his “positive attributes.” 529 F. 3d, at 864. As for
his difficult childhood, Schick should have called witnesses
to testify that “when Belmontes was five years old, his 10
month-old sister died of a brain tumor,” that he “exhibited
symptoms of depression” after her death, that his grand
mother suffered from “alcoholism and prescription drug
addiction,” and that both his immediate and extended
family lived in a state of “constant strife.” Ibid. As for his
positive attributes, Schick should have produced testi
mony about Belmontes’ “strong character as a child in the
face of adversity.” Ibid. Schick should have illustrated
that Belmontes was “kind, responsible, and likeable”; that
he “got along well with his siblings” and was “respectful
towards his grandparents despite their disapproval of his
mixed racial background”; and that he “participated in
community activities, kept up in school and got along with
his teachers before [an] illness, and made friends easily.”
Ibid.
But as recounted above and recognized by the state
courts and, originally, this very panel, Schick did put on
substantial mitigation evidence, much of it targeting the
same “humanizing” theme the Ninth Circuit highlighted.
Compare, e.g., ibid., with Record 2317 (death of 10-month

