Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

3

Per Curiam

nell’s death, police found Jerry Howard’s body in a se
cluded area. Howard had been killed execution style, with
a bullet to the back of the head. The authorities suspected
Belmontes, but on the eve of trial the State’s witnesses
refused to cooperate (Belmontes’ mother had begged one
not to testify). The prosecution therefore believed it could
not prove Belmontes guilty of murder beyond a reasonable
doubt. What the prosecution could prove, even without
the recalcitrant witnesses, was that Belmontes possessed
the gun used to murder Howard. So the State offered, and
Belmontes accepted, a no-contest plea to accessory after
the fact to voluntary manslaughter. Record 2239–2243;
Deposition of John Schick, Exhs. 62, 63, 64.
But Belmontes had not been shy about discussing the
murder, boasting to several people that he had killed
Howard. Steven Cartwright informed the district attorney
that Belmontes had confessed to the murder. A police
informant told detectives that Belmontes “bragged” about
the murder, stating that he was “mad” at Howard because
“the night before, he had quite a [lot] of dope and wouldn’t
share it with him.” After double jeopardy protection set in
and he had been released on parole, Belmontes admitted
his responsibility for the murder to his counselor at the
California Youth Authority, Charles Sapien. During his
time in confinement, Belmontes had “always denied that
he was the [one] who shot Jerry Howard.” But because
Sapien “had been square with [Belmontes],” Belmontes
decided to level with Sapien upon his release, telling
Sapien that he had “ ‘wasted’ that guy.” Record 2240;
Deposition of John Schick, Exhs. 62, 63, 64.
Schick understood the gravity of this aggravating evi
dence, and he built his mitigation strategy around the
overriding need to exclude it. California evidentiary rules,
Schick knew, offered him an argument to exclude the
evidence, but those same rules made clear that the evi
dence would come in for rebuttal if Schick opened the door.

