Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

my personal view is the other way, but my big contributors
want this; ( ) I don’t have the slightest idea what this
legislation does, but on my way in to vote the party Whip
said vote ‘aye’ ”? There are, to be sure, instances where
action conveys a symbolic meaning—such as the burning
of a flag to convey disagreement with a country’s policies,
see Texas v. Johnson, 491 U. S. 397, 406 (1989). But the
act of voting symbolizes nothing. It discloses, to be sure,
that the legislator wishes (for whatever reason) that the
proposition on the floor be adopted, just as a physical
assault discloses that the attacker dislikes the victim. But
neither the one nor the other is an act of communication.
Cf. Rumsfeld v. Forum for Academic and Institutional
Rights, Inc., 547 U. S. 47, 66 (2006) (expressive value was
“not created by the conduct itself but by the speech that
accompanies it”).
Moreover, the fact that a nonsymbolic act is the product
of deeply held personal belief—even if the actor would like
it to convey his deeply held personal belief—does not
transform action into First Amendment speech. Nor does
the fact that action may have social consequences—such
as the unpopularity that cost John Quincy Adams his
Senate seat resulting from his vote in favor of the Em
bargo Act of 1807, see post, at 1. However unpopular
Adams’ vote may have made him, and however deeply
Adams felt that his vote was the right thing to do, the act
of voting was still nonsymbolic conduct engaged in for an
independent governmental purpose.
Even if it were true that the vote itself could “express
deeply held and highly unpopular views,” the argument
would still miss the mark. This Court has rejected the
notion that the First Amendment confers a right to use
governmental mechanics to convey a message. For exam
ple, in Timmons v. Twin Cities Area New Party, 520 U. S.
351 (1997), we upheld a State’s prohibition on multiple
party or “fusion” candidates for elected office against a

