8

NEVADA COMM’N ON ETHICS v. CARRIGAN
Opinion of the Court

not assert that the recusal laws here are viewpoint dis
criminatory, nor could he: The statute is content-neutral
and applies equally to all legislators regardless of party or
position.
IV
But how can it be that restrictions upon legislators’
voting are not restrictions upon legislators’ protected
speech? The answer is that a legislator’s vote is the com
mitment of his apportioned share of the legislature’s
power to the passage or defeat of a particular proposal.
The legislative power thus committed is not personal to
the legislator but belongs to the people; the legislator has
no personal right to it. As we said in Raines v. Byrd, 521
U. S. 811, 821 (1997), when denying Article III standing to
legislators who claimed that their voting power had been
diluted by a statute providing for a line-item veto, the
legislator casts his vote “as trustee for his constituents,
not as a prerogative of personal power.” In this respect,
voting by a legislator is different from voting by a citizen.
While “a voter’s franchise is a personal right,” “[t]he pro
cedures for voting in legislative assemblies . . . pertain to
legislators not as individuals but as political representa
tives executing the legislative process.” Coleman v. Miller,
307 U. S. 433, 469–470 (1939) (opinion of Frankfurter, J.).
Carrigan and JUSTICE ALITO say that legislators often
“ ‘us[e] their votes to express deeply held and highly un
popular views, often at great personal or political peril.’ ”
Post, at 1 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in
judgment) (quoting Brief for Respondent 23). How do they
express those deeply held views, one wonders? Do ballots
contain a check-one-of-the-boxes attachment that will be
displayed to the public, reading something like “( ) I have
a deeply held view about this; ( ) this is probably desirable;
( ) this is the least of the available evils; ( ) my personal
view is the other way, but my constituents want this; ( )

