4

NEVADA COMM’N ON ETHICS v. CARRIGAN
KENNEDY, J., concurring

inevitable burden on speech and association that preceded
the vote. The restriction may impose a significant burden
on activities protected by the First Amendment. As a
general matter, citizens voice their support and lend their
aid because they wish to confer the powers of public office
on those whose positions correspond with their own. That
dynamic, moreover, links the principles of participation
and representation at the heart of our democratic govern
ment. Just as candidates announce positions in exchange
for citizens’ votes, Brown v. Hartlage, 456 U. S. 45, 55–56
(1982), so too citizens offer endorsements, advertise their
views, and assist political campaigns based upon bonds of
common purpose. These are the mechanisms that sustain
representative democracy. See ibid.
The Court has held that due process may require
recusal in the context of certain judicial determinations,
see Caperton v. A. T. Massey Coal Co., 556 U. S. ___
(2009); but as the foregoing indicates, it is not at all clear
that a statute of this breadth can be enacted to extend
principles of judicial impartiality to a quite different con
text. The differences between the role of political bodies in
formulating and enforcing public policy, on the one hand,
and the role of courts in adjudicating individual disputes
according to law, on the other, see ante, at 6, may call for a
different understanding of the responsibilities attendant
upon holders of those respective offices and of the legiti
mate restrictions that may be imposed upon them.
For these reasons, the possibility that Carrigan was
censured because he was thought to be beholden to a
person who helped him win an election raises constitu
tional concerns of the first magnitude.
As the Court observes, however, the question whether
Nevada’s recusal statute was applied in a manner that
burdens the First Amendment freedoms discussed above is
not presented in this case. Ante, at 10.

