10

NEVADA COMM’N ON ETHICS v. CARRIGAN
Opinion of the Court

First Amendment challenge. We admitted that a State’s
ban on a person’s appearing on the ballot as the candidate
of more than one party might prevent a party from “using
the ballot to communicate to the public it supports a par
ticular candidate who is already another party’s candi
date,” id., at 362; but we nonetheless were “unpersuaded
. . . by the party’s contention that it has a right to use the
ballot itself to send a particularized message.” Id., at 362–
363; see also Burdick v. Takushi, 504 U. S. 428, 438
(1992). In like manner, a legislator has no right to use
official powers for expressive purposes.
Carrigan and JUSTICE ALITO also cite Doe v. Reed, 561
U. S. ___ (2010), as establishing “the expressive character
of voting.” Post, at 2; see also Brief for Respondent 26.
But Reed did no such thing. That case held only that a
citizen’s signing of a petition—“ ‘core political speech,’ ”
Meyer v. Grant, 486 U. S. 414, 421–422 (1988)—was not
deprived of its protected status simply because, under
state law, a petition that garnered a sufficient number of
signatures would suspend the state law to which it per
tained, pending a referendum. See Reed, 561 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 6); id., at ___ (slip op., at 3) (opinion of SCALIA,
J.). It is one thing to say that an inherently expressive act
remains so despite its having governmental effect, but it is
altogether another thing to say that a governmental act
becomes expressive simply because the governmental
actor wishes it to be so. We have never said the latter is
true.5
——————
5 JUSTICE

ALITO reasons as follows: (1) If an ordinary citizen were to
vote in a straw poll on an issue pending before a legislative body, that
vote would be speech; (2) if a member of the legislative body were to do
the same, it would be no less expressive; therefore (3) the legislator’s
actual vote must also be expressive. This conclusion does not follow. A
legislator voting on a bill is not fairly analogized to one simply discuss
ing that bill or expressing an opinion for or against it. The former is
performing a governmental act as a representative of his constituents,

