2

NEVADA COMM’N ON ETHICS v. CARRIGAN
Syllabus
See Clark v. Community for Creative Non-Violence, 468 U. S. 288,
293. Pp. 3–4.
(b) “[A] ‘universal and long-established’ tradition of prohibiting cer
tain conduct creates ‘a strong presumption’ that the prohibition is
constitutional.’ ” Republican Party of Minn. v. White, 536 U. S. 765,
785. Here, dispositive evidence is provided by “early congressional
enactments,” which offer “ ‘contemporaneous and weighty evidence of
the Constitution’s meaning,’ ” Printz v. United States, 521 U. S. 898,
905. Within 15 years of the founding, both the House and the Senate
adopted recusal rules. Federal conflict-of-interest rules applicable to
judges also date back to the founding. The notion that Nevada’s
recusal rules violate legislators’ First Amendment rights is also in
consistent with long-standing traditions in the States, most of which
have some type of recusal law. Pp. 4–8.
(c) Restrictions on legislators’ voting are not restrictions on legisla
tors’ protected speech. A legislator’s vote is the commitment of his
apportioned share of the legislature’s power to the passage or defeat
of a particular proposal. He casts his vote “as trustee for his con
stituents, not as a prerogative of personal power.” Raines v. Byrd,
521 U. S. 811, 821. Moreover, voting is not a symbolic action, and the
fact that it is the product of a deeply held or highly unpopular per
sonal belief does not transform it into First Amendment speech.
Even if the mere vote itself could express depth of belief (which it
cannot), this Court has rejected the notion that the First Amendment
confers a right to use governmental mechanics to convey a message.
See, e.g., Timmons v. Twin Cities Area New Party, 520 U. S. 351. Doe
v. Reed, 561 U. S. ___, distinguished. Pp. 8–10.
(d) The additional arguments raised in Carrigan’s brief were not
decided below or raised in his brief in opposition and are thus consid
ered waived. P. 11.

126 Nev. 28, 236 P. 3d 616, reversed and remanded.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, THOMAS, GINSBURG, BREYER, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. KENNEDY, J., filed a concurring opinion. ALITO, J.,
filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.

