Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

KENNEDY, J., concurring

to the legislator’s “commitment in a private capacity to the
interests of others.” That proposition may be a debatable
one. At least without the benefit of further submissions or
argument or explanation, it seems that one fair interpre
tation, if not the necessary one, is that the statute could
apply to a legislator whose personal life is tied to the
longstanding, close friendships he or she has forged in the
common cause now at stake.
The application of the statute’s language to the case just
supposed, and to any number of variations on the supposi
tion, is not apparent. And if the statute imposes unjusti
fied burdens on speech or association protected by the
First Amendment, or if it operates to chill or suppress the
exercise of those freedoms by reason of vague terms or
overbroad coverage, it is invalid. See United States v.
Williams, 553 U. S. 285, 292–293, 304 (2008). A statute of
this sort is an invitation to selective enforcement; and
even if enforcement is undertaken in good faith, the dan
gers of suppression of particular speech or associational
ties may well be too significant to be accepted. See Gentile
v. State Bar of Nev., 501 U. S. 1030, 1051 (1991).
The interests here at issue are at the heart of the First
Amendment. “[T]he First Amendment has its fullest and
most urgent application to speech uttered during a cam
paign for political office.” Eu v. San Francisco County
Democratic Central Comm., 489 U. S. 214, 223 (1989)
(internal quotation marks omitted). And the Court has
made it clear that “the right of citizens to band together in
promoting among the electorate candidates who espouse
their political views” is among the First Amendment’s
most pressing concerns. Clingman v. Beaver, 544 U. S.
581, 586 (2005) (internal quotation marks omitted).
The constitutionality of a law prohibiting a legislative
or executive official from voting on matters advanced by or
associated with a political supporter is therefore a most
serious matter from the standpoint of the logical and

