14

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A. v. UNITED 

STATES

Opinion of the Court 


advice to incur more debt because of bankruptcy, as pro
hibited by §526(a)(4), will generally consist of advice to
“load up” on debt with the expectation of obtaining its
discharge—i.e., conduct that is abusive per se.
The statutory context supports the conclusion that
§526(a)(4)’s prohibition primarily targets this type of
abuse. Code provisions predating the BAPCPA already
sought to prevent the practice of loading up on debt prior
to filing. Section 523(a)(2), for instance, addressed the
attendant risk of manipulation by preventing the dis
charge of debts obtained by false pretenses and making
debts for purchases of luxury goods or services presump
tively nondischargeable. See §§523(a)(2)(A) and (C) (2000
ed.). The BAPCPA increased the risk of such abuse, how
ever, by providing a new mechanism for determining a
debtor’s ability to repay. Pursuant to the “means tes[t],”
§707(b)(2)(D) (2006 ed.), a debtor’s petition for Chapter 7
relief is presumed abusive (and may therefore be dis
missed or converted to a structured repayment plan under
Chapter 13) if the debtor’s current monthly income ex
ceeds his statutorily allowed expenses, including pay
ments for secured debt, by more than a prescribed
amount. See §§707(b)(2)(A)(i)–(iv). The test promotes
debtor accountability but also enhances incentives to incur
additional debt prior to filing, as payments on secured
debts offset a debtor’s monthly income under the formula.
Other amendments effected by the BAPCPA reflect a
concern with this practice.
For instance, Congress
amended §523(a)(2) to expand the exceptions to discharge
by lowering the threshold amount of new debt a debtor
must assume to trigger the presumption of abuse under
§523(a)(2)(C), and it extended the relevant prefiling win
dow. See §310, 119 Stat. 84. In context, §526(a)(4) is best
understood to provide an additional safeguard against the
practice of loading up on debt prior to filing.
The Government’s contextual arguments provide addi

