2

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A. v. UNITED 

STATES

Syllabus 

from advising assisted persons to incur any additional debt in con
templation of bankruptcy even when the advice constitutes prudent
prebankruptcy planning.

Held:
1. Attorneys who provide bankruptcy assistance to assisted persons
are debt relief agencies under the BAPCPA. By definition, “bank
ruptcy assistance” includes several services commonly performed by
attorneys, e.g., providing “advice, counsel, [or] document prepara
tion,” §101(4A). Moreover, in enumerating specific exceptions to the
debt-relief-agency definition, Congress indicated no intent to exclude
attorneys. See §§101(12A)(A)–(E). Milavetz relies on the fact that
§101(12A) does not expressly include attorneys in advocating a nar
rower understanding. On that reading, only a bankruptcy petition
preparer would qualify—an implausibility given that a “debt relief
agency” is “any person who provides any bankruptcy assistance . . . or
who is a bankruptcy petition preparer,” ibid. Milavetz’s other argu
ments for excluding attorneys are also unpersuasive. Pp. 5–9.
2. Section 526(a)(4) prohibits a debt relief agency only from advis
ing a debtor to incur more debt because the debtor is filing for bank
ruptcy, rather than for a valid purpose. The statute’s language, to
gether with its purpose, makes a narrow reading of §526(a)(4) the
natural one. Conrad, Rubin & Lesser v. Pender, 289 U. S. 472, sup
ports this conclusion. The Court in that case read now-repealed
§96(d), which authorized reexamination of a debtor’s attorney’s fees
payment “in contemplation of the filing of a petition,” to require that
the portended bankruptcy have “induce[d]” the transfer at issue, id.,
at 477, understanding inducement to engender suspicion of abuse.
The Court identified the “controlling question” as “whether the
thought of bankruptcy was the impelling cause of the transaction,”
ibid.
Given the substantial similarities between §§96(d) and
526(a)(4), the controlling question under the latter is likewise
whether the impelling reason for “advis[ing] an assisted person . . . to
incur more debt” was the prospect of filing for bankruptcy. In prac
tice, advice impelled by the prospect of filing will generally consist of
advice to “load up” on debt with the expectation of obtaining its dis
charge.
The statutory context supports the conclusion that
§526(a)(4)’s prohibition primarily targets this type of conduct. The
Court rejects Milavetz’s arguments for a more expansive view of
§526(a)(4) and its claim that the provision, narrowly construed, is
impermissibly vague. Pp. 9–18.
3. Section 528’s disclosure requirements are valid as applied to Mi
lavetz. Consistent with Milavetz’s characterization, the Court pre
sumes that this is an as-applied challenge. Because §528 is directed
at misleading commercial speech and imposes only a disclosure re

