Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

tional support for the view that §526(a)(4) was meant to
prevent this type of conduct. The companion rules of
professional conduct in §§526(a)(1)–(3) and the remedies
for their violation in §526(c) indicate that Congress was
concerned with actions that threaten to harm debtors or
creditors. Unlike the reasonable financial advice the
Eighth Circuit’s broad reading would proscribe, advice to
incur more debt because of bankruptcy presents a sub
stantial risk of injury to both debtors and creditors. See
Hersh, 553 F. 3d, at 760–761. Specifically, the incurrence
of such debt stands to harm a debtor if his prepetition
conduct leads a court to hold his debts nondischargable,
see §523(a)(2), convert his case to another chapter, or
dismiss it altogether, see §707(b), thereby defeating his
effort to obtain bankruptcy relief. If a debt, although
manipulatively incurred, is not timely identified as abu
sive and therefore is discharged, creditors will suffer harm
as a result of the discharge and the consequent dilution of
the bankruptcy estate. By contrast, the prudent advice
that the Eighth Circuit’s view of the statute forbids would
likely benefit both debtors and creditors and at the very
least should cause no harm. See id., at 760; 541 F. 3d, at
800 (Colloton, J., concurring in part and dissenting in
part). For all of these reasons, we conclude that §526(a)(4)
prohibits a debt relief agency only from advising an as
sisted person to incur more debt when the impelling rea
son for the advice is the anticipation of bankruptcy.
That “[n]o other solution yields as sensible a” result
further persuades us of the correctness of this narrow
reading. United States v. Granderson, 511 U. S. 39, 55
(1994). It would make scant sense to prevent attorneys
and other debt relief agencies from advising individuals
thinking of filing for bankruptcy about options that would
be beneficial to both those individuals and their creditors.
That construction serves none of the purposes of the Bank
ruptcy Code or the amendments enacted through the

