8

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A. v. UNITED 

STATES

Opinion of the Court 


will obligate entire law firms to comply with §§526, 527,
and 528 based on the conduct of a single partner, while
the agents and employees of debt relief agencies not typi
cally organized as partnerships are shielded from those
requirements. Given that the partnership structure is not
unique to law firms, however, it is unclear why the exclu
sion would be revealing of Congress’ intent only with
respect to attorneys. In any event, partnerships are them
selves “person[s]” under the BAPCPA, see §101(41), and
can qualify as “debt relief agenc[ies]” when they meet the
criteria set forth in §101(12A). Moreover, a partnership’s
employees and agents are exempted from §101(12A) in the
same way as the employees and agents of other organiza
tions. To the extent that partners may be subject to the
debt-relief-agency provisions by association, that result is
consistent with the joint responsibilities that typically flow
from the partnership structure, cf. Strang v. Bradner, 114
U. S. 555, 561 (1885). Accordingly, we decline to attribute
the significance Milavetz suggests to §101(12A)(A)’s fail
ure to include partners among the exempted actors.4
All else failing, Milavetz urges that the canon of consti
tutional avoidance requires us to read “debt relief agency”
——————
4 Reviving an argument that Milavetz abandoned, amici contend that
§527(b) undermines the Government’s reading of §101(12A) because it
requires a debt relief agency to inform an assisted person of his right to
hire an attorney, and it would be nonsensical to require attorneys to
provide such notice. See Brief for National Association of Consumer
Bankruptcy Attorneys et al. as Amici Curiae 34. This argument fails
on its own terms. Even if §101(12A) excluded attorneys, as Milavetz
contends, §527(b) would still produce the result of which its amici
complain, as that provision also requires a debt relief agency to inform
assisted persons that they “ ‘can get help in some localities from a
bankruptcy petition preparer,’ ” and there is no question that bank
ruptcy petition preparers are debt relief agencies and thus subject to
that requirement. It is in any event not absurd to require debt relief
agencies—whether attorneys or bankruptcy petition preparers—to
inform prospective clients of their options for obtaining bankruptcy
assistance services.

