20

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A. v. UNITED 

STATES

Opinion of the Court 


tion fees and costs. Noting that First Amendment protec
tion for commercial speech is justified in large part by the
information’s value to consumers, the Court concluded
that an attorney’s constitutionally protected interest in not
providing the required factual information is “minimal.”
471 U. S., at 651. Unjustified or unduly burdensome
disclosure requirements offend the First Amendment by
chilling protected speech, but “an advertiser’s rights are
adequately protected as long as disclosure requirements
are reasonably related to the State’s interest in preventing
deception of consumers.” Ibid.
The challenged provisions of §528 share the essential
features of the rule at issue in Zauderer. As in that case,
§528’s required disclosures are intended to combat the
problem of inherently misleading commercial advertise
ments—specifically, the promise of debt relief without any
reference to the possibility of filing for bankruptcy, which
has inherent costs. Additionally, the disclosures entail
only an accurate statement identifying the advertiser’s
legal status and the character of the assistance provided,
and they do not prevent debt relief agencies like Milavetz
from conveying any additional information.
The same characteristics of §528 that make it analogous
to the rule in Zauderer serve to distinguish it from those
at issue in In re R. M. J., 455 U. S. 191 (1982), to which
the Court applied the intermediate scrutiny of Central
Hudson. The ethical rules addressed in R. M. J. prohib
ited attorneys from advertising their practice areas in
terms other than those prescribed by the State Supreme
Court and from announcing the courts in which they were
admitted to practice. See 455 U. S., at 197–198. Finding
that the restricted statements were not inherently mis
leading and that the State had failed to show that the
appellant’s advertisements were themselves likely to
mislead consumers, see id., at 205, the Court applied
Central Hudson’s intermediate scrutiny and invalidated

