Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

Finally, we reject Milavetz’s contention that, narrowly
construed, §526(a)(4) is impermissibly vague. Milavetz
urges that the concept of abusive prefiling conduct is too
indefinite to withstand constitutional scrutiny and that
uncertainty regarding the scope of the prohibition will
chill protected speech. We disagree.
Under our reading of the statute, of course, the prohib
ited advice is not defined in terms of abusive prefiling
conduct but rather the incurrence of additional debt when
the impelling reason is the anticipation of bankruptcy.
Even if the test depended upon the notion of abuse, how
ever, Milavetz’s claim would be fatally undermined by
other provisions of the Bankruptcy Code, to which that
concept is no stranger. As discussed above, the Code
authorizes a bankruptcy court to decline to discharge
fraudulent debts, see §523(a)(2), or to dismiss a case or
convert it to a case under another chapter if it finds that
granting relief would constitute abuse, see §707(b)(1).
Attorneys and other professionals who give debtors bank
ruptcy advice must know of these provisions and their
consequences for a debtor who in bad faith incurs addi
tional debt prior to filing. Indeed, §707(b)(4)(C) states that
an attorney’s signature on bankruptcy filings “shall consti
tute a certification that the attorney has” determined that
the filing “does not constitute an abuse under [§707(b)(1)].”
Against this backdrop, it is hard to see how a rule that
narrowly prohibits an attorney from affirmatively advising
a client to commit this type of abusive prefiling conduct
could chill attorney speech or inhibit the attorney-client
relationship. Our construction of §526(a)(4) to prevent
only advice principally motivated by the prospect of bank
—————— 

ating the significance of such dialogue, we note that §526(a)(4), as

narrowly construed, presents no impediment to “ ‘full and frank’ ” 

discussions. Ibid. (quoting Upjohn Co. v. United States, 449 U. S. 383,

389 (1981)). 


