10

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A. v. UNITED 

STATES

Opinion of the Court 


is prohibited from providing all manner of “beneficial
advice—even if the advice could help the assisted person
avoid filing for bankruptcy altogether.” Ibid.
Agreeing with the Court of Appeals, Milavetz contends
that §526(a)(4) prohibits a debt relief agency from advising
a client to incur any new debt while considering whether
to file for bankruptcy. Construing the provision more
broadly still, Milavetz contends that §526(a)(4) forbids not
only affirmative advice but also any discussion of the
advantages, disadvantages, or legality of incurring more
debt. Like the panel majority’s, Milavetz’s reading rests
primarily on its view that the ordinary meaning of the
phrase “in contemplation of” bankruptcy encompasses any
advice given to a debtor with the awareness that he might
soon file for bankruptcy, even if the advice seeks to obviate
the need to file. Milavetz also maintains that if §526(a)(4)
were construed more narrowly, as urged by the Govern
ment and the dissent below, it would be so vague as to
inevitably chill some protected speech.
The Government continues to advocate a narrower
construction of the statute, urging that Milavetz’s reading
is untenable and that its vagueness concerns are mis
placed. The Government contends that §526(a)(4)’s re
striction on advice to incur more debt “in contemplation of”
bankruptcy is most naturally read to forbid only advice to
undertake actions to abuse the bankruptcy system. Focus
ing first on the provision’s text, the Government points to
sources indicating that the phrase “in contemplation of”
bankruptcy has long been, and continues to be, associated
with abusive conduct. For instance, Black’s Law Diction
ary 336 (8th ed. 2004) (hereinafter Black’s) defines “con
templation of bankruptcy” as “[t]he thought of declaring
bankruptcy because of the inability to continue current
financial operations, often coupled with action designed to
thwart the distribution of assets in a bankruptcy proceed
ing.” Use of the phrase by Members of Congress illus

