2

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A. v. UNITED 

STATES

Opinion of the Court 


§§528(a) and (b)(2), violate the First Amendment rights of
attorneys. Concluding that the Court of Appeals con
strued §526(a)(4) too expansively, we reverse its judgment
that the provision is unconstitutionally overbroad. Like
the Court of Appeals, we uphold §528’s disclosure re
quirements as applied in these consolidated cases.
I
In order to improve bankruptcy law and practice, Con
gress enacted through the BAPCPA a number of provi
sions directed at the conduct of bankruptcy professionals.
Some of these measures apply to the broad class of bank
ruptcy professionals termed “debt relief agenc[ies].” That
category includes, with limited exceptions, “any person
who provides any bankruptcy assistance to an assisted
person in return for . . . payment . . . , or who is a bank
ruptcy petition preparer.” §101(12A).1 “Bankruptcy assis
tance” refers to goods or services “provided to an assisted
person with the express or implied purpose of providing
information, advice, counsel, document preparation, or
filing, or attendance at a creditors’ meeting or appearing
in a case or proceeding on behalf of another or providing
legal representation with respect to a case or proceeding”
in bankruptcy. §101(4A). An “assisted person” is someone
with limited nonexempt property whose debts consist
primarily of consumer debts. §101(3). The BAPCPA
subjects debt relief agencies to a number of restrictions
and requirements, as set forth in §§526, 527, and 528. As
——————
1 Congress excluded from the definition of “debt relief agency” any
“officer, director, employee, or agent of a person who provides [bank
ruptcy] assistance”; any “nonprofit organization that is exempt from
taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986”;
“a creditor of [an] assisted person” who is helping that person “to
restructure any debt owed . . . to the creditor”; “a depository institu
tion”; or “an author, publisher, distributor, or seller of works subject to
copyright protection under title 17, when acting in such capacity.”
§§101(12A)(A)–(E).

