18

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A. v. UNITED 

STATES

Opinion of the Court 


ruptcy further ensures that professionals cannot unknow
ingly run afoul of its proscription.6 Because the scope of
the prohibition is adequately defined, both on its own
terms and by reference to the Code’s other provisions, we
reject Milavetz’s vagueness claim.
As the foregoing shows, the language of the statute,
together with other evidence of its purpose, makes this
narrow reading of §526(a)(4) not merely a plausible inter
pretation but the more natural one. Accordingly, we reject
the Eighth Circuit’s conclusion and hold that a debt relief
agency violates §526(a)(4) only when the impetus of the
advice to incur more debt is the expectation of filing for
bankruptcy and obtaining the attendant relief. Because
our reading of the statute supplies a sufficient ground for
reversing the Court of Appeals’ decision, and because
Milavetz challenges the constitutionality of the statute, as
narrowed, only on vagueness grounds, we need not further
consider whether the statute so construed withstands
First Amendment scrutiny.
C
Finally, we address the validity of §528’s challenged
disclosure requirements. Our first task in resolving this
——————
6 The hypothetical questions Milavetz posits regarding the permissi
bility of advice to incur debt in certain circumstances, see Brief for
Milavetz 48–51, are easily answered by reference to whether the
expectation of filing for bankruptcy (and obtaining a discharge) im
pelled the advice. We emphasize that awareness of the possibility of
bankruptcy is insufficient to trigger §526(a)(4)’s prohibition. Instead,
that provision proscribes only advice to incur more debt that is princi
pally motivated by that likelihood. Thus, advice to refinance a mort
gage or purchase a reliable car prior to filing because doing so will
reduce the debtor’s interest rates or improve his ability to repay is not
prohibited, as the promise of enhanced financial prospects, rather than
the anticipated filing, is the impelling cause. Advice to incur additional
debt to buy groceries, pay medical bills, or make other purchases
“reasonably necessary for the support or maintenance of the debtor or a
dependent of the debtor,” §523(a)(2)(C)(ii)(II), is similarly permissible.

