Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

be understood to prefigure abuse. As used in §526(a)(4),
however, we think the phrase refers to a specific type of
misconduct designed to manipulate the protections of the
bankruptcy system. In light of our decision in Pender, and
in context of other sections of the Code, we conclude that
§526(a)(4) prohibits a debt relief agency only from advising
a debtor to incur more debt because the debtor is filing for
bankruptcy, rather than for a valid purpose.
Pender addressed the meaning of former §96(d), which
authorized reexamination of a debtor’s payment of attor
ney’s fees “in contemplation of the filing of a petition.”
Recognizing “ ‘the temptation of a failing debtor to deal too
liberally with his property in enabling counsel to protect
him,’ ” 289 U. S., at 478 (quoting In re Wood & Henderson,
210 U. S. 246, 253 (1908)), we read “in contemplation of
. . . filing” in that context to require that the portended
bankruptcy have “induce[d]” the transfer at issue, 289
U. S., at 477, understanding inducement to engender
suspicion of abuse. In so construing the statute, we identi
fied the “controlling question” as “whether the thought of
bankruptcy was the impelling cause of the transaction.”
Ibid. Given the substantial similarities between §§96(d)
and 526(a)(4), we think the controlling question under the
latter provision is likewise whether the impelling reason
for “advis[ing] an assisted person . . . to incur more debt”
was the prospect of filing for bankruptcy.
To be sure, there are relevant differences between the
provision at issue in Pender and the one now under re
view. Most notably, the inquiry in Pender was as to pay
ments made on the eve of bankruptcy, whereas §526(a)(4)
regards advice to incur additional debts. Consistent with
that difference, under §96(d) a finding that a payment was
made “in contemplation of” filing resolved only a threshold
inquiry triggering further review of the reasonableness of
the payment; the finding thus supported an inference of
abuse but did not conclusively establish it. By contrast,

