Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

which Milavetz seeks to transmit them. As a consequence,
Milavetz’s nominal “as applied” challenge appears strik
ingly similar to a facial challenge.
We generally disapprove of such challenges because
they “often rest on speculation” and require courts to
engage in “ ‘premature interpretation of statutes on the
basis of factually barebones records.’ ” Washington State
Grange v. Washington State Republican Party, 552 U. S.
442, 450 (2008) (quoting Sabri v. United States, 541 U. S.
600, 609 (2004)). Milavetz’s claim invites the same prob
lems. Milavetz alleges that §528’s disclosure require
ments are unconstitutional as applied to its advertise
ments because its advertisements are not misleading and
because the disclaimer required by §528 will create, rather
than reduce, confusion for Milavetz’s potential clients.
That may well be true. But because no record evidence of
Milavetz’s advertisements exists to guide our review, we
can only speculate about the ways in which the statute
might be applied to Milavetz’s speech.
When forced to determine the constitutionality of a
statute based solely on such conjecture, we will uphold the
law if there is any “conceivabl[e]” manner in which it can
be enforced consistent with the First Amendment. Wash
ington State Grange, supra, at 456. In this case, both
parties agree that §528’s disclosure requirements cover, at
a minimum, deceptive advertisements that promise to
“ ‘wipe out’ ” debts without mentioning bankruptcy as the
means of accomplishing this goal.2 Brief for Milavetz 82,
——————
2 At

oral argument, Milavetz’s counsel declined to describe Milavetz’s
challenge to §528 as a facial overbreadth claim, Tr. of Oral Arg. 25–26,
and Milavetz’s briefs make no such contention. But even viewing
Milavetz’s argument as a claim that §528 is facially overbroad because
it applies to nonmisleading advertisements for bankruptcy-related
services, such an argument must fail. First, as noted, Milavetz ac
knowledges that §528 can be constitutionally applied to deceptive
bankruptcy-related advertisements and, thus, at least one “set of

