(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A., ET AL. v. 

UNITED STATES

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1119. Argued December 1, 2009—Decided March 8, 2010*
The Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of
2005 (BAPCPA) amended the Bankruptcy Code to define a class of
bankruptcy professionals termed “debt relief agenc[ies].” 11 U. S. C.
§101(12A). That class includes, with limited exceptions, “any person
who provides any bankruptcy assistance to an assisted person . . . for
. . . payment . . . , or who is a bankruptcy petition preparer.” Ibid.
The BAPCPA prohibits such professionals from “advis[ing] an as
sisted person . . . to incur more debt in contemplation of [filing for
bankruptcy] . . . .” §526(a)(4). It also requires them to disclose in
their advertisements for certain services that the services are with
respect to or may involve bankruptcy relief, §§528(a)(3), (b)(2)(A), and
to identify themselves as debt relief agencies, §§528(a)(4), (b)(2)(B).
The plaintiffs in this litigation—a law firm and others (collectively
Milavetz)—filed a preenforcement suit seeking declaratory relief, ar
guing that Milavetz is not bound by the BAPCPA’s debt-relief-agency
provisions and therefore can freely advise clients to incur additional
debt and need not make the requisite disclosures in its advertise
ments. The District Court found that “debt relief agency” does not
include attorneys and that §§526 and 528 are unconstitutional as ap
plied to that class of professionals. The Eighth Circuit affirmed in
part and reversed in part, rejecting the District Court’s conclusion
that attorneys are not “debt relief agenc[ies]”; upholding application
of §528’s disclosure requirements to attorneys; and finding §526(a)(4)
unconstitutional because it broadly prohibits debt relief agencies
——————
* Together with No. 08–1225, United States v. Milavetz, Gallop & Mi
lavetz, P. A., et al., also on certiorari to the same court.

