6

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A. v. UNITED 

STATES

Opinion of the Court 


monly performed by attorneys. Indeed, some forms of
bankruptcy assistance, including the “provi[sion of] legal
representation with respect to a case or proceeding,”
§101(4A), may be provided only by attorneys.
See
§110(e)(2) (prohibiting bankruptcy petition preparers from
providing legal advice). Moreover, in enumerating specific
exceptions to the definition of debt relief agency, Congress
gave no indication that it intended to exclude attorneys.
See §§101(12A)(A)–(E). Thus, as the Government con
tends, the statutory text clearly indicates that attorneys
are debt relief agencies when they provide qualifying
services to assisted persons.3
In advocating a narrower understanding of that term,
Milavetz relies heavily on the fact that §101(12A) does not
expressly include attorneys. That omission stands in
contrast, it argues, to the provision’s explicit inclusion of
“bankruptcy petition preparer[s]”—a category of profes
sionals that excludes attorneys and their staff, see
§110(a)(1). But Milavetz does not contend, nor could it
credibly, that only professionals expressly included in the
definition are debt relief agencies. On that reading, no
professional other than a bankruptcy petition preparer
would qualify—an implausible reading given that the
statute defines “debt relief agency” as “any person who
——————
3 Although reliance on legislative history is unnecessary in light of
the statute’s unambiguous language, we note the support that record
provides for the Government’s reading. Statements in a Report of the
House Committee on the Judiciary regarding the Act’s purpose indicate
concern with abusive practices undertaken by attorneys as well as
other bankruptcy professionals. See, e.g., H. R. Rep. No. 109–31, pt. 1,
p. 5 (2005) (hereinafter H. R. Rep.). And the legislative record else
where documents misconduct by attorneys. See, e.g., Hearing on H. R.
3150 before the Subcommittee on Commercial and Administrative Law
of the House Committee on the Judiciary, 105th Cong., 2d Sess., pt. III,
p. 95 (1998) (hereinafter 1998 Hearings). (While the 1998 Hearings
preceded the BAPCPA’s enactment by several years, they form part of
the record cited by the 2005 House Report. See H. R. Rep., at 7.)

