16

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A. v. UNITED 

STATES

Opinion of the Court 


BAPCPA. Milavetz itself acknowledges that its expansive
view of §526(a)(4) would produce absurd results; that is
one of its bases for arguing that “debt relief agency” should
be construed to exclude attorneys. Because the language
and context of §526(a)(4) evidence a more targeted pur
pose, we can avoid the absurdity of which Milavetz com
plains without reaching the result it advocates.
For the same reason, we reject Milavetz’s suggestion
that §526(a)(4) broadly prohibits debt relief agencies from
discussing covered subjects instead of merely proscribing
affirmative advice to undertake a particular action. Sec
tion 526(a)(4) by its terms prevents debt relief agencies
only from “advis[ing]” assisted persons “to incur” more
debt. Covered professionals remain free to “tal[k] fully
and candidly about the incurrence of debt in contempla
tion of filing a bankruptcy case.” Brief for Milavetz 73.
Section 526(a)(4) requires professionals only to avoid
instructing or encouraging assisted persons to take on
more debt in that circumstance. Cf. ABA Model Rule of
Professional Conduct 1.2(d) (2009) (“A lawyer shall not
counsel a client to engage, or assist a client, in conduct
that the lawyer knows is criminal or fraudulent, but a
lawyer may discuss the legal consequences of any pro
posed course of conduct with a client and may counsel or
assist a client to make a good faith effort to determine the
validity, scope, meaning or application of the law”). Even
if the statute were not clear in this regard, we would reach
the same conclusion about its scope because the inhibition
of frank discussion serves no conceivable purpose within
the statutory scheme. Cf. Johnson v. United States, 529
U. S. 694, 706, n. 9 (2000).5
——————
5 If read as Milavetz advocates, §526(a)(4) would seriously undermine
the attorney-client relationship. Earlier this Term, we acknowledged
the importance of the attorney-client privilege as a means of protecting
that relationship and fostering robust discussion. See Mohawk Indus
tries, Inc. v. Carpenter, 558 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 7). Reiter

