4

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A. v. UNITED 

STATES

Opinion of THOMAS, J. 


preventing consumer deception might plausibly be at
stake. In other words, a bare assertion by the government
that a disclosure requirement is “intended” to prevent
consumer deception, standing alone, is not sufficient to
uphold the requirement as applied to all speech that falls
within its sweep. See ante, at 20.
Instead, our precedents make clear that regulations
aimed at false or misleading advertisements are permissi
ble only where “the particular advertising is inherently
likely to deceive or where the record indicates that a par
ticular form or method of advertising has in fact been
deceptive.” In re R. M. J., 455 U. S. 191, 202 (1982) (em
phasis added); see Zauderer, supra, at 651 (“recogniz[ing]
that unjustified or unduly burdensome disclosure re
quirements might offend the First Amendment”). There
fore, a disclosure requirement passes constitutional mus
ter only to the extent that it is aimed at advertisements
that, by their nature, possess these traits. See R. M. J.,
supra, at 202; Ibanez v. Florida Dept. of Business and
Professional Regulation, Bd. of Accountancy, 512 U. S.
136, 143, 146–147 (1994).
I do not read the Court’s opinion to hold otherwise. See
ante, at 20. Accordingly, and with that understanding, I
turn to the question whether Milavetz’s challenge to
§528’s disclosure requirements survives Zauderer scrutiny
on the record before us.
As the Court notes, the posture of Milavetz’s challenge
inhibits our review of its First Amendment claim. See
ante, at 19, n. 7. Milavetz challenged §528’s constitution
ality before the statute had ever been enforced against any
of the firm’s advertisements. Although Milavetz purports
to challenge §528 only “ ‘as-applied’ ” to its own advertis
ing, see ante, at 19, it did not introduce any evidence or
exhibits to substantiate its claim. Thus, no court has seen
a sampling of Milavetz’s advertisements or even a declara
tion describing their contents and the media through

