2

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A. v. UNITED 

STATES

Opinion of SCALIA, J. 


other than members of its Committee on the Judiciary
read the Report (and the further extravagant assumption
that they agreed with it), the Members of the Senate could
not possibly have read it, since it did not exist when the
Senate passed the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and
Consumer Protection Act of 2005. And the President
surely had more important things to do.
The footnote’s other source of legislative history is truly
mystifying. For the proposition that “the legislative record
elsewhere documents misconduct by attorneys” which was
presumably the concern of Congress, the Court cites a
reproduction of a tasteless advertisement that was (1) an
attachment to the written statement of a witness, (2) in a
hearing held seven years prior to this statute’s passage,
(3) before a subcommittee of the House considering a
different consumer bankruptcy reform bill that never
passed.* “Elsewhere” indeed.
The Court acknowledges that nothing can be gained by
this superfluous citation (it admits the footnote is “unnec
essary in light of the statute’s unambiguous language,”
ante, at 6, n. 3). But much can be lost. Our cases have
said that legislative history is irrelevant when the statu
tory text is clear. See, e.g., United States v. Gonzales, 520
U. S. 1, 6 (1997); Connecticut Nat. Bank v. Germain, 503
U. S. 249, 254 (1992). The footnote advises conscientious
attorneys that this is not true, and that they must spend
time and their clients’ treasure combing the annals of
legislative history in all cases: To buttress their case
——————
* The Court protests that the earlier hearing was “part of the record
cited by the 2005 House Report,” ante, at 6, n. 3. The page it cites,
however, does nothing more than note that the earlier hearing took
place, see H. R. Rep. No. 109–31, pt. 1, p. 7 (2005). Are we to believe
that this brought to the attention of the committee (much less of the
whole Congress) an attachment to the testimony of one of the witnesses
at that long-ago hearing? Of course not. That legislative history shows
what “Congress” intended is a fiction requiring no support in reality.

