12

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A. v. UNITED 

STATES

Opinion of the Court 


for a resident’s actual damages; and a court finding inten
tional abuse may impose an appropriate civil penalty.
§526(c). The Government also relies on the Fifth Circuit’s
decision in Hersh v. United States ex rel. Mukasey, 553
F. 3d 743 (2008), and Judge Colloton’s dissent below for
the observation that “Congress’s emphasis on actual dam
ages for violations of section 526(a)(4) strongly suggests
that Congress viewed that section as aimed at advice to
debtors which if followed would have a significant risk of
harming the debtor.” Id., at 760; see 541 F. 3d, at 800
(opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). By
contrast, “legal and appropriate advice that would be
protected by the First Amendment, yet prohibited by a
broad reading of §526(a)(4), should cause no damage at
all.” Ibid.; see Hersh, 541 F. 3d, at 760.
Milavetz contends that the Government’s sources actu
ally undermine its claim that the phrase “in contemplation
of” bankruptcy necessarily refers to abusive conduct.
Specifically, Milavetz argues that these authorities illus
trate that “in contemplation of” bankruptcy is a neutral
phrase that only implies abusive conduct when attached to
an additional, proscriptive term. As Black’s states, the
phrase is “often coupled with action designed to thwart the
distribution of assets” in bankruptcy, Black’s 336 (empha
sis added), but it carries no independent connotation of
abuse. In support of that conclusion, Milavetz relies on
our decision in Pender, 289 U. S. 472, contending that we
construed “in contemplation of” bankruptcy in that case to
describe “conduct with a view to a probable bankruptcy
filing and nothing more.” Brief for Milavetz 61.
After reviewing these competing claims, we are per
suaded that a narrower reading of §526(a)(4) is sounder,
although we do not adopt precisely the view the Govern
ment advocates. The Government’s sources show that the
phrase “in contemplation of” bankruptcy has so commonly
been associated with abusive conduct that it may readily

