4

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A. v. UNITED 

STATES

Opinion of the Court 


Milavetz)—filed a preenforcement suit in Federal District
Court seeking declaratory relief with respect to the Act’s
debt-relief-agency provisions. Milavetz asked the court to
hold that it is not bound by these provisions and thus may
freely advise clients to incur additional debt and need not
identify itself as a debt relief agency in its advertisements.
Milavetz first argued that attorneys are not “debt relief
agenc[ies]” as that term is used in the BAPCPA. In the
alternative, Milavetz sought a judgment that §§526(a)(4)
and 528(a)(4) and (b)(2) are unconstitutional as applied to
attorneys. The District Court agreed with Milavetz that
the term “debt relief agency” does not include attorneys,
App. to Pet. for Cert. in No. 08–1119, p. A–15, but only
after finding that §§526 and 528—provisions expressly
applicable only to debt relief agencies—are unconstitu
tional as applied to this class of professionals.
The Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit affirmed in
part and reversed in part. 541 F. 3d 785 (2008). Relying
on the Act’s plain language, the court unanimously re
jected the District Court’s conclusion that attorneys are
not “debt relief agenc[ies]” within the meaning of the Act.
The Court of Appeals also parted ways with the District
Court concerning the constitutionality of §528. Conclud
ing that the disclosures are intended to prevent consumer
deception and are “reasonably related” to that interest, the
court upheld the application of §528’s disclosure require
ments to attorneys. Id., at 796–797 (citing Zauderer v.
Office of Disciplinary Counsel of Supreme Court of Ohio,
471 U. S. 626, 651 (1985)).
A majority of the Eighth Circuit panel, however, agreed
with the District Court that §526(a)(4) is invalid. Deter
mining that §526(a)(4) “broadly prohibits a debt relief
agency from advising an assisted person . . . to incur any
additional debt when the assisted person is contemplating
bankruptcy,” even when that advice constitutes prudent
prebankruptcy planning not intended to abuse the bank

