Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of the Court

question is to determine the contours of Milavetz’s claim.
Although the nature of its challenge is not entirely clear
from the briefing or decisions below, counsel for Milavetz
insisted at oral argument that this is “not a facial chal
lenge; it’s an as-applied challenge.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 26.
We will approach the question consistent with Milavetz’s
characterization.7
We next consider the standard of scrutiny applicable to
§528’s disclosure requirements. The parties agree, as do
we, that the challenged provisions regulate only commer
cial speech. Milavetz contends that our decision in Cen
tral Hudson Gas & Elec. Corp. v. Public Serv. Comm’n of
N. Y., 447 U. S. 557 (1980), supplies the proper standard
for reviewing these requirements. The Court in that case
held that restrictions on nonmisleading commercial speech
regarding lawful activity must withstand intermediate
scrutiny—that is, they must “directly advanc[e]” a sub
stantial governmental interest and be “n[o] more extensive
than is necessary to serve that interest.” Id., at 566.
Contesting Milavetz’s premise, the Government maintains
that §528 is directed at misleading commercial speech.
For that reason, and because the challenged provisions
impose a disclosure requirement rather than an affirma
tive limitation on speech, the Government contends that
the less exacting scrutiny described in Zauderer governs
our review. We agree.
Zauderer addressed the validity of a rule of professional
conduct that required attorneys who advertised contin
gency-fee services to disclose in their advertisements that
a losing client might still be responsible for certain litiga
——————
7 In so doing, we note that our ability to evaluate §528’s validity as
applied to Milavetz is constrained by the lack of a developed record.
Because the parties have introduced no exhibits or other evidence to
ground our analysis, we are guided in this preenforcement challenge
only by Milavetz’s status—i.e., as a law firm or attorney—and its
general claims about the nature of its advertisements.

