22

MILAVETZ, GALLOP & MILAVETZ, P. A. v. UNITED
STATES
Opinion of the Court

advertisements. This statement provides interested ob
servers with pertinent information about the advertiser’s
services and client obligations.
Other information that Milavetz must or may include in
its advertisements for bankruptcy-assistance services
provides additional assurance that consumers will not
misunderstand the term. The required statement that the
advertiser “ ‘help[s] people file for bankruptcy relief’ ” gives
meaningful context to the term “debt relief agency.” And
Milavetz may further identify itself as a law firm or attor
ney. Section 528 also gives Milavetz flexibility to tailor
the disclosures to its individual circumstances, as long as
the resulting statements are “substantially similar” to the
statutory examples. §§528(a)(4) and (b)(2)(B).
Finally, we reject Milavetz’s argument that §528 is not
reasonably related to any governmental interest because it
applies equally to attorneys who represent creditors, as
Milavetz sometimes does. The required disclosures, Mi
lavetz contends, would be counterfactual and misleading
in that context. This claim is premised on an untenable
reading of the statute. We think it evident from the defi
nition of “assisted person”—which is stated in terms of the
person’s debts, see §101(3)—and from the text and struc
ture of the debt-relief-agency provisions in §§526, 527, and
528 that those provisions, including §528’s disclosure
requirements, govern only professionals who offer bank
ruptcy-related services to consumer debtors. Section 528
is itself expressly concerned with advertisements pertain
ing to “bankruptcy assistance services,” “the benefits of
bankruptcy,” “excessive debt, debt collection pressure, or
inability to pay any consumer debt,” §§528(a)(3) and (b)(2).
Moreover, like the other debt-relief-agency provisions, that
section is codified in a subchapter of the Bankruptcy Code
entitled “DEBTOR’S DUTIES AND BENEFITS.”
11
U. S. C., ch. 5, subch. II. In context, reading §528 to gov
ern advertisements aimed at creditors would be as anoma

