Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

sible for an off-OCS employee to be injured “as the result
of ” on-OCS operations. Pacific offers no basis for this
assertion, and we find none. Indeed, given that many
OCS platforms are physically connected to onshore processing facilities via oil and gas pipelines, it is not difficult
to imagine an accident occurring on an OCS platform that
could injure employees located off the OCS.
Moreover, if, as Pacific suggests, the purpose of §1333(b)
was to geographically limit the extension of LHWCA
coverage to injuries that occurred on the OCS, Congress
could easily have achieved that goal by omitting the following six words in §1333(b)’s text: “as the result of operations conducted.” Had Congress done so, the statute
would extend LHWCA coverage to the “disability or death
of an employee resulting from any injury occurring on the
outer Continental Shelf.” But that is not the text of the
statute Congress enacted.
Pacific also argues that, because all of §1333(b)’s neighboring subsections contain specific situs limitations, we
should infer that Congress intended to include a situs-ofinjury requirement in §1333(b). See, e.g., §1333(a)(2)(A)
(adopting the civil and criminal laws of the adjacent State
as federal law “for that portion of the subsoil and seabed of
the outer Continental Shelf, and artificial islands and
fixed structures erected thereon, which would be within
the area of the State if its boundaries were extended seaward to the outer margin of the outer Continental Shelf ”).2
——————
2 See also 43 U. S. C. §1333(a)(1) (extending the Constitution and
federal laws of civil and political jurisdiction “to the subsoil and seabed
of the outer Continental Shelf and to all artificial islands, and all installations and other devices permanently or temporarily attached to
the seabed, which may be erected thereon for the purpose of exploring
for, developing, or producing resources therefrom, or any such installation or other device (other than a ship or vessel) for the purpose of
transporting such resources, to the same extent as if the outer Continental Shelf were an area of exclusive Federal jurisdiction located
within a State”); §1333(c) (making the National Labor Relations Act

