Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
navigable waters above the shelf. Thus, even employees on a crew
ship immediately adjacent to an OCS platform who are injured in a
platform explosion would be excluded from §1333(b) coverage. That
view cannot be squared with §1333(b)’s language. Pp. 11–12.
(3) Pacific’s policy concerns also cannot justify an interpretation
of §1333(b) that is inconsistent with the OCSLA’s text. P. 12.
(c) Neither the Solicitor General’s status-based inquiry nor the
Third Circuit’s “but for” test are compatible with §1333(b). The Solicitor General’s inquiry has no basis in the OCSLA’s text, because
§1333(b)’s “occurring as the result of operations” language plainly
suggests causation. And when taken to its logical conclusion, the
Third Circuit’s test, though nominally based on causation, is essentially a status-based inquiry because it would extend coverage to all
employees of a business engaged in extracting natural resources from
the OCS, no matter where those employees work or what they are doing at the time of injury. Because LHWCA coverage was extended
only to injuries “occurring as the result of operations conducted on
the [OCS],” §1333(b)’s focus should be on injuries resulting from
those “operations.” Pp. 12–14.
(d) The Ninth Circuit’s “substantial-nexus” test is more faithful to
§1333(b)’s text. This Court understands that test to require the injured employee to establish a significant causal link between his injury and his employer’s on-OCS extractive operations. The test may
not be the easiest to administer, but Administrative Law Judges and
courts should be able to determine if an injured employee has established the required significant causal link. Whether an employee injured while performing an off-OCS task qualifies will depend on the
circumstances of each case. It was thus proper for the Ninth Circuit
to remand this case for the Benefits Review Board to apply the “substantial-nexus” test. P. 14.
604 F. 3d 1126, affirmed and remanded.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, GINSBURG, BREYER, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined. SCALIA, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in
the judgment, in which ALITO, J., joined.

