Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of SCALIA, J.

see no reason why the scope of 43 U. S. C. §1333(b) could
not similarly be cabined by the familiar limits of proximate causation.
To be sure, proximate cause is an imperfect legal doctrine; I have no illusions that its tenets are easy to describe or straightforward to apply. Judicial opinions do
not provide a uniform formulation of the test, and borderline cases are rarely clear. But “it is often easier to disparage the product of centuries of common law than to
devise a plausible substitute.” McBride, 564 U. S., at ___
(ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting) (slip op., at 2–3). Unlike the
substantial-nexus test, proximate cause provides a “vocabulary” for answering questions like the one raised by
the facts of this case. It may be productive, for example, to
consider whether the injury was “within the scope of the
risk” created by OCS operations, or whether some “superseding or intervening cause” exists. Id., at ___ (slip op., at
15). In addition to that vocabulary, precedents on proximate cause “furnish illustrations of situations which
judicious men upon careful consideration have adjudged to
be on one side of the line or the other.” Exxon Co., U. S. A.
v. Sofec, Inc., 517 U. S. 830, 839 (1996) (internal quotation
marks omitted).
“Substantial nexus,” by contrast, is an indeterminate
phrase that lacks all pedigree. Our case law has used it as
a term of art in only one context, first appearing in Justice
Blackmun’s opinion for the Court in Complete Auto Trans——————
unmistakable term-of-art reference to a rule found in the common law
of torts does not establish a rule “identical to that found in the common
law of torts,” but merely “elaborat[es] the general requirement that the
injury arise out of the employment.” LaTourette v. Workers’ Compensation App. Bd., 17 Cal. 4th 644, 651, n. 1, 951 P. 2d 1184, 1187, n. 1
(1998) (internal quotation marks omitted). Perhaps (who knows?) later
California Supreme Court cases will “clarify” this general requirement
by saying that it requires a “substantial nexoos” between the employment and the injury.

