4

PACIFIC OPERATORS OFFSHORE, LLP v. VALLADOLID
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

it, Inc. v. Brady, 430 U. S. 274, 279 (1977): We sustain
state taxes against Commerce Clause challenges if they
are, inter alia, “applied to an activity with a substantial
nexus with the taxing State.” Oklahoma Tax Comm’n v.
Jefferson Lines, Inc., 514 U. S. 175, 183 (1995) (emphasis
added; internal quotation marks omitted). “[S]uch a nexus
is established when the taxpayer ‘avails itself of the substantial privilege of carrying on business’ in that jurisdiction.” Polar Tankers, Inc. v. City of Valdez, 557 U. S. 1, 11
(2009). That clarification—and any further clarification in
the Commerce Clause context—will not be remotely helpful to lower courts attempting to apply the substantialnexus test in the very different legal context of workers’
compensation under §1333(b). In this latter context, I
assume the Court means by “substantial nexus” a substantial causal nexus—since §1333(b)’s “as the result of ”
language “plainly suggests causation,” ante, at 13. Like
the word “nexus” itself, the definition of “substantial
nexus” in our state-tax cases does not require any causal
relationship whatsoever. The proximate-cause test, by
comparison, represents a much more natural interpretation of a statute that turns on causation.
Does the Court mean to establish, by the novel “substantial [causal] nexus” test, a new tertium quid of causality—somewhere between but-for causality and proximate
cause? One might think so, since there is no other sensible reason to (1) reject but-for cause, (2) say nothing about
the natural alternative (proximate cause), and (3) embrace
the “substantial [causal] nexus” novelty. On the other
hand, the Court’s opinion suggests at least some connection (that is to say, in the Court’s favored lawspeak, some
“nexus”) between the proximate-cause standard and the
substantial-nexus test, since it cites one of our proximatecause cases just before concluding that “[a]ccordingly, . . .
the Ninth Circuit’s ‘substantial-nexus’ test is more faithful
to the text of §1333(b)” than the Third Circuit’s but-for

