8

PACIFIC OPERATORS OFFSHORE, LLP v. VALLADOLID
Opinion of the Court

But our usual practice is to make the opposite inference.
Russello v. United States, 464 U. S. 16, 23 (1983) (“Where
Congress includes particular language in one section of a
statute but omits it in another section of the same Act, it
is generally presumed that Congress acts intentionally
and purposely in the disparate inclusion or exclusion”
(alteration and internal quotation marks omitted)). Congress’ decision to specify, in scrupulous detail, exactly
where the other subsections of §1333 apply, but to include
no similar restriction on injuries in §1333(b), convinces us
that Congress did not intend §1333(b) to apply only to
injuries suffered on the OCS. Rather, §1333(b) extends
LHWCA workers’ compensation coverage to any employee
injury, regardless of where it happens, as long as it occurs
“as the result of operations conducted on the outer Continental Shelf.”
Pacific argues that this conclusion is foreclosed by language in Herb’s Welding, Inc. v. Gray, 470 U. S. 414
(1985), and Offshore Logistics, Inc. v. Tallentire, 477 U. S.
207 (1986); but neither of those cases held that §1333(b)
extends only to injuries that occur on the OCS. In Herb’s
Welding, this Court considered whether an oil platform
welder, who worked both within the territorial waters of
Louisiana and on the OCS, was covered under the
——————
applicable to any unfair labor act “occurring upon any artificial island,
installation, or other device referred to in subsection (a) of this section”); §1333(d)(1) (granting the Coast Guard enforcement authority
“on the artificial islands, installations, and other devices referred to in
subsection (a) of this section or on the waters adjacent thereto”);
§1333(d)(2) (granting the Coast Guard authority to mark “any artificial
island, installation, or other device referred to in subsection (a) of this
section” for the protection of navigation); §1333(e) (granting the Army
authority to prevent the obstruction of access “to the artificial islands,
installations, and other devices referred to in subsection (a) of this
section”); §1333(f) (saving clause applying “to the subsoil and seabed of
the outer Continental Shelf and the artificial islands, installations, and
other devices referred to in subsection (a) of this section”).

