Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

LHWCA after suffering an injury in the waters of Louisiana. 470 U. S., at 416–417. The Court explicitly declined
to address whether the employee was eligible for workers’
compensation benefits under §1333(b) because that question was neither passed upon by the Court of Appeals nor
fully briefed and argued before this Court. Id., at 426,
n. 12. Although the Court acknowledged that an employee
might walk in and out of workers’ compensation coverage
during his employment due to the “explicit geographic
limitation to the [OCSLA’s] incorporation of the LHWCA,”
id., at 427, the exact meaning of that statement is unclear.
We cannot ascertain whether the comment was a reference to §1333(b)’s explicit situs-of-operations requirement,
as respondents suggest, or the recognition of an implicit
situs-of-injury requirement, as Pacific argues. In any
event, the ambiguous comment was made without analysis in dicta and does not control this case.
The same is true of the Court’s opinion in Offshore
Logistics. In that case, the Court considered whether the
widows of oil platform workers who were killed when their
helicopter crashed into the high seas could file wrongfuldeath suits under Louisiana law. In the Court’s analysis
of §1333, it stated, “Congress determined that the general
scope of OCSLA’s coverage . . . would be determined principally by locale, not by the status of the individual injured
or killed.” 477 U. S., at 219–220 (citing the situs requirement in §1333(a)(2)(A)). In a footnote, the Court commented: “Only one provision of OCSLA superimposes a
status requirement on the otherwise determinative
OCSLA situs requirement; §1333(b) makes compensation
for the death or injury of an ‘employee’ resulting from
certain operations on the Outer Continental Shelf payable
under the [LHWCA].” Ibid., n. 2. These comments about
the scope of the OCSLA’s coverage and its determinative
“situs requirement” do not provide definitive evidence that
§1333(b) applies only to injuries that occur on the OCS.

