Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

criteria by which an employee qualifies as a “seaman”
under the Jones Act), and might well have merit as legislation. But it has no basis in the text of the OCSLA as
presently enacted. The “occurring as the result of operations” language in §1333(b) plainly suggests causation.
Although the Government asserts that a status-based test
would be preferable to a causation-based test, we cannot
ignore the language enacted by Congress.
The Third Circuit’s “but for” test is nominally based on
causation, but it is also incompatible with §1333(b). Taken to its logical conclusion, the “but for” test would extend
workers’ compensation coverage to all employees of a
business engaged in the extraction of natural resources
from the OCS, no matter where those employees work or
what they are doing when they are injured. This test
could reasonably be interpreted to cover land-based office
employees whose jobs have virtually nothing to do with
extractive operations on the OCS. Because Congress extended LHWCA coverage only to injuries “occurring as
the result of operations conducted on the outer Continental Shelf,” we think that §1333(b) should be interpreted in
a manner that focuses on injuries that result from those
“operations.” This view is consistent with our past treatment of similar language in other contexts. In Holmes v.
Securities Investor Protection Corporation, 503 U. S. 258
(1992), we considered a provision of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act that provided a
cause of action to “[a]ny person injured in his business
or property by reason of a violation of section 1962.” 18
U. S. C. §1964(c) (emphasis added). We rejected a “but
for” interpretation, stating that such a construction was
“hardly compelled” and that it was highly unlikely that
Congress intended to allow all factually injured plaintiffs
to recover. 503 U. S., at 265–266. Instead, we adopted a
proximate-cause standard consistent with our prior interpretation of the same language in the Sherman and Clay-

