4

PACIFIC OPERATORS OFFSHORE, LLP v. VALLADOLID
Opinion of the Court

civil and political jurisdiction “to the subsoil and seabed of
the outer Continental Shelf and to all artificial islands,
and all installations and other devices permanently or
temporarily attached to the seabed,” for the purpose of
extracting its natural resources. Section 1333(a)(2)(A)
makes the civil and criminal laws of each adjacent State
applicable to “that portion of the subsoil and seabed of the
outer Continental Shelf, and artificial islands and fixed
structures erected thereon, which would be within the
area of the State if its boundaries were extended seaward
to the outer margin of the outer Continental Shelf.” Section 1333(b), the provision involved in this case, makes
LHWCA workers’ compensation benefits available for the
“disability or death of an employee resulting from any
injury occurring as the result of operations conducted on
the outer Continental Shelf ” for the purpose of extracting
its natural resources.
The question before us is the scope of coverage under
§1333(b). The parties agree that §1333(b) covers employees, such as oil rig and drilling platform workers, who
are injured while working directly on the OCS to extract
its natural resources. They disagree, however, whether
employees who are involved in extraction operations but
who are injured beyond the OCS are also covered under
the OCSLA. This dispute focuses on the meaning of the
phrase “any injury occurring as the result of operations
conducted on the outer Continental Shelf” in §1333(b).
The Courts of Appeals have offered competing interpretations. In Curtis v. Schlumberger Offshore Service, Inc.,
849 F. 2d, at 811, the Third Circuit held that, because
Congress intended LHWCA coverage to be expansive,
§1333(b) extends to all injuries that would not have occurred “but for” operations on the OCS. The Third Circuit
thus concluded that an employee who worked on a semisubmersible drill rig, but who was killed in a car accident
on the way to the helicopter that was to fly him to that rig,

