2

PACIFIC OPERATORS OFFSHORE, LLP v. VALLADOLID
Syllabus
but who died in a car accident on his way to board a helicopter to be
flown to the rig, was eligible for benefits because he would not have
been injured but for his traveling to the rig. In contrast, the Fifth
Circuit has concluded that Congress intended to establish “a brightline geographic boundary,” extending §1333(b) coverage only to employees whose injuries or death occurred on an OCS platform or the
waters above the OCS. Under its “situs-of-injury” test, a welder injured on land while constructing an offshore oil platform was ineligible for §1333(b) benefits. In the decision below, the Ninth Circuit
held that §1333(b) extends coverage to injured workers who can establish a “substantial nexus” between their injury and extractive operations on the OCS. The Solicitor General offers a fourth interpretation, which would provide coverage for off-OCS injuries only to
those employees whose duties contribute to operations on the OCS
and who perform work on the OCS itself that is substantial in both
duration and nature. Pp. 3–6.
(b) Contrary to Pacific’s position, the Fifth Circuit’s “situs-of-injury”
test is not the best interpretation of §1333(b). Pp. 6–12.
(1) Nothing in the text of §1333(b) suggests that an injury must
occur on the OCS. The provision has only two requirements: The extractive operations must be “conducted on the [OCS],” and the employee’s injury must occur “as the result of” those operations. If, as
Pacific suggests, the purpose of §1333(b) was to geographically limit
the scope of OCSLA coverage to injuries that occur on the OCS, Congress could easily have achieved that goal by omitting from §1333(b)
the words “as the result of operations conducted.” Moreover, Congress’ decision to specify situs limitations in other subsections, but
not in §1333(b), indicates that it did not intend to so limit §1333(b).
This conclusion is not foreclosed by Herb’s Welding, Inc. v. Gray, 470
U. S. 414, or Offshore Logistics, Inc. v. Tallentire, 477 U. S. 207, neither of which held that §1333(b) coverage was limited to on-OCS injuries. Section 1333(b)’s text also gives no indication that Congress
intended to exclude OCS workers who are eligible for state benefits
from LHWCA coverage. To the contrary, the LHWCA scheme incorporated by the OCSLA explicitly anticipates that injured employees
might be eligible for both state and federal benefits. Pp. 6–10.
(2) Also unpersuasive is Pacific’s alternative argument that
§1333(b) imports the LHWCA’s strict situs-of-injury requirement,
which provides benefits only for injuries occurring “upon the navigable waters” of the United States, 33 U. S. C. §903(a). It is unlikely
that Congress intended to restrict the scope of the OCSLA workers’
compensation scheme through a nonintuitive and convoluted combination of two separate legislative Acts. In addition, under Pacific’s
alternative theory, LHWCA coverage would not be extended to the

