4

DERBY v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., dissenting

lent confrontation” similar to the risk of violent
confrontation during burglaries. 596 F. 3d, at 232.
How we would resolve these cases if we granted certio
rari would be a fine subject for a law-office betting pool.
No one knows for sure. Certainly our most recent decision
interpreting ACCA’s residual clause, Sykes v. United
States, ante, p. 1, would be of no help. The “rule” we an
nounced there, as far as I can tell, is as follows: A court
must compare the degree of risk of the crime in question
with the degree of risk of ACCA’s enumerated offenses
(burglary, extortion, arson, and crimes involving the use of
explosives) as a “beginning point,” ante, at 6–7; look at
the statistical record, which is not “dispositive” but some
times confirms “commonsense conclusion[s],” ante, at 8; and
check whether the crime is “purposeful, violent, and ag
gressive,” unless of course the crime is among the unspeci
fied “many cases” in which that test is “redundant with
the inquiry into risk,” ante, at 11. And of course given our
track record of adding a new animal to our bestiary of
ACCA residual-clause standards in each of the four suc
cessive cases we have thus far decided, see ante, at 2–4
(SCALIA, J., dissenting), who knows what new beasties our
fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth tries would produce?
Surely a perfectly fair wager.
If it is uncertain how this Court will apply Sykes and the
rest of our ACCA cases going forward, it is even more
uncertain how our lower-court colleagues will deal with
them. Conceivably, they will simply throw the opinions
into the air in frustration, and give free rein to their own
feelings as to what offenses should be considered crimes
of violence—which, to tell the truth, seems to be what we
have done. (Before throwing the opinions into the air, how
ever, they should check whether littering—or littering
in a purposeful, violent, and aggressive fashion—is a fel
ony in their jurisdiction. If so, it may be a violent felony
under ACCA; or perhaps not.)

