Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

3

Per Curiam

zona, 437 U. S. 385, 393–394 (1978).
Brigham City identified one such exigency: “the need to
assist persons who are seriously injured or threatened
with such injury.” 547 U. S., at 403. Thus, law enforce
ment officers “may enter a home without a warrant to
render emergency assistance to an injured occupant or to
protect an occupant from imminent injury.” Ibid. This
“emergency aid exception” does not depend on the officers’
subjective intent or the seriousness of any crime they are
investigating when the emergency arises. Id., at 404–405.
It requires only “an objectively reasonable basis for believ
ing,” id., at 406, that “a person within [the house] is in
need of immediate aid,” Mincey, supra, at 392.
Brigham City illustrates the application of this stan
dard. There, police officers responded to a noise complaint
in the early hours of the morning. “As they approached
the house, they could hear from within an altercation
occurring, some kind of fight.” 547 U. S., at 406 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Following the tumult to the
back of the house whence it came, the officers saw juve
niles drinking beer in the backyard and a fight unfolding
in the kitchen. They watched through the window as a
juvenile broke free from the adults restraining him and
punched another adult in the face, who recoiled to the
sink, spitting blood. Ibid. Under these circumstances, we
found it “plainly reasonable” for the officers to enter the
house and quell the violence, for they had “an objectively
reasonable basis for believing both that the injured adult
might need help and that the violence in the kitchen was
just beginning.” Ibid.
A straightforward application of the emergency aid
exception, as in Brigham City, dictates that the officer’s
entry was reasonable. Just as in Brigham City, the police
officers here were responding to a report of a disturbance.
Just as in Brigham City, when they arrived on the scene
they encountered a tumultuous situation in the house—

