4

MICHIGAN v. FISHER
Per Curiam

and here they also found signs of a recent injury, perhaps
from a car accident, outside. And just as in Brigham City,
the officers could see violent behavior inside. Although
Officer Goolsby and his partner did not see punches
thrown, as did the officers in Brigham City, they did see
Fisher screaming and throwing things. It would be objec
tively reasonable to believe that Fisher’s projectiles might
have a human target (perhaps a spouse or a child), or that
Fisher would hurt himself in the course of his rage. In
short, we find it as plain here as we did in Brigham City
that the officer’s entry was reasonable under the Fourth
Amendment.
The Michigan Court of Appeals, however, thought the
situation “did not rise to a level of emergency justifying
the warrantless intrusion into a residence.” 2008 WL
786515, at *2. Although the Court of Appeals conceded
that “there was evidence an injured person was on the
premises,” it found it significant that “the mere drops of
blood did not signal a likely serious, life-threatening in
jury.” Ibid. The court added that the cut Officer Goolsby
observed on Fisher’s hand “likely explained the trail of
blood” and that Fisher “was very much on his feet and
apparently able to see to his own needs.” Ibid.
Even a casual review of Brigham City reveals the flaw
in this reasoning. Officers do not need ironclad proof of “a
likely serious, life-threatening” injury to invoke the emer
gency aid exception. The only injury police could confirm
in Brigham City was the bloody lip they saw the juvenile
inflict upon the adult. Fisher argues that the officers here
could not have been motivated by a perceived need to
provide medical assistance, since they never summoned
emergency medical personnel. This would have no bear
ing, of course, upon their need to assure that Fisher was
not endangering someone else in the house. Moreover,
even if the failure to summon medical personnel conclu
sively established that Goolsby did not subjectively be

