Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash­
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–10876
_________________

DONALD BULLCOMING, PETITIONER v. NEW 

MEXICO 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF

NEW MEXICO

[June 23, 2011] 


JUSTICE GINSBURG delivered the opinion of the Court,
except as to Part IV and footnote 6.*
In Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts, 557 U. S. ___ (2009),
this Court held that a forensic laboratory report stating
that a suspect substance was cocaine ranked as testimo­
nial for purposes of the Sixth Amendment’s Confrontation
Clause. The report had been created specifically to serve
as evidence in a criminal proceeding. Absent stipulation,
the Court ruled, the prosecution may not introduce such a
report without offering a live witness competent to testify
to the truth of the statements made in the report.
In the case before us, petitioner Donald Bullcoming
was arrested on charges of driving while intoxicated
(DWI). Principal evidence against Bullcoming was a foren­
sic laboratory report certifying that Bullcoming’s blood­
alcohol concentration was well above the threshold for
aggravated DWI. At trial, the prosecution did not call as a
witness the analyst who signed the certification. Instead,
the State called another analyst who was familiar with the
——————
* JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR and JUSTICE KAGAN join all but Part IV of this
opinion. JUSTICE THOMAS joins all but Part IV and footnote 6.


2

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Opinion of the Court

laboratory’s testing procedures, but had neither partici­
pated in nor observed the test on Bullcoming’s blood sam­
ple. The New Mexico Supreme Court determined that,
although the blood-alcohol analysis was “testimonial,” the
Confrontation Clause did not require the certifying ana­
lyst’s in-court testimony. Instead, New Mexico’s high
court held, live testimony of another analyst satisfied the
constitutional requirements.
The question presented is whether the Confrontation
Clause permits the prosecution to introduce a forensic
laboratory report containing a testimonial certification—
made for the purpose of proving a particular fact—through
the in-court testimony of a scientist who did not sign the
certification or perform or observe the test reported in the
certification. We hold that surrogate testimony of that
order does not meet the constitutional requirement. The
accused’s right is to be confronted with the analyst who
made the certification, unless that analyst is unavailable
at trial, and the accused had an opportunity, pretrial, to
cross-examine that particular scientist.
I

A

In August 2005, a vehicle driven by petitioner Donald
Bullcoming rear-ended a pick-up truck at an intersection
in Farmington, New Mexico. When the truckdriver exited
his vehicle and approached Bullcoming to exchange insur­
ance information, he noticed that Bullcoming’s eyes were
bloodshot. Smelling alcohol on Bullcoming’s breath, the
truckdriver told his wife to call the police. Bullcoming left
the scene before the police arrived, but was soon appre­
hended by an officer who observed his performance of field
sobriety tests. Upon failing the tests, Bullcoming was
arrested for driving a vehicle while “under the influence of
intoxicating liquor” (DWI), in violation of N. M. Stat. Ann.
§66–8–102 (2004).


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

Because Bullcoming refused to take a breath test, the
police obtained a warrant authorizing a blood-alcohol analy­
sis. Pursuant to the warrant, a sample of Bullcoming’s
blood was drawn at a local hospital. To determine Bull­
coming’s blood-alcohol concentration (BAC), the police
sent the sample to the New Mexico Department of Health,
Scientific Laboratory Division (SLD). In a standard SLD
form titled “Report of Blood Alcohol Analysis,” partici­
pants in the testing were identified, and the forensic ana­
lyst certified his finding. App. 62.
SLD’s report contained in the top block “information . . .
filled in by [the] arresting officer.” Ibid. (capitalization
omitted). This information included the “reason [the]
suspect [was] stopped” (the officer checked “Accident”),
and the date (“8.14.05”) and time (“18:25 PM”) the blood
sample was drawn. Ibid. (capitalization omitted). The
arresting officer also affirmed that he had arrested Bull­
coming and witnessed the blood draw. Ibid. The next two
blocks contained certifications by the nurse who drew
Bullcoming’s blood and the SLD intake employee who
received the blood sample sent to the laboratory. Ibid.
Following these segments, the report presented the
“certificate of analyst,” ibid. (capitalization omitted), com­
pleted and signed by Curtis Caylor, the SLD forensic
analyst assigned to test Bullcoming’s blood sample. Id., at
62, 64–65. Caylor recorded that the BAC in Bullcoming’s
sample was 0.21 grams per hundred milliliters, an inordi­
nately high level. Id., at 62. Caylor also affirmed that
“[t]he seal of th[e] sample was received intact and broken
in the laboratory,” that “the statements in [the analyst’s
block of the report] are correct,” and that he had “followed
the procedures set out on the reverse of th[e] report.” Ibid.
Those “procedures” instructed analysts, inter alia, to “re­
tai[n] the sample container and the raw data from the
analysis,” and to “not[e] any circumstance or condition
which might affect the integrity of the sample or otherwise


4

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Opinion of the Court

affect the validity of the analysis.” Id., at 65. Finally, in a
block headed “certificate of reviewer,” the SLD examiner
who reviewed Caylor’s analysis certified that Caylor was
qualified to conduct the BAC test, and that the “estab­
lished procedure” for handling and analyzing Bullcoming’s
sample “ha[d] been followed.” Id., at 62 (capitalization
omitted).
SLD analysts use gas chromatograph machines to de­
termine BAC levels. Operation of the machines requires
specialized knowledge and training. Several steps are
involved in the gas chromatograph process, and human
error can occur at each step.1
——————
1 Gas

chromatography is a widely used scientific method of quan­
titatively analyzing the constituents of a mixture. See generally H.
McNair & J. Miller, Basic Gas Chromatography (2d ed. 2009) (hereinaf­
ter McNair). Under SLD’s standard testing protocol, the analyst ex­
tracts two blood samples and inserts them into vials containing an
“internal standard”—a chemical additive. App. 53. See McNair 141–
142. The analyst then “cap[s] the [two] sample[s],” “crimp[s] them with
an aluminum top,” and places the vials into the gas chromatograph
machine. App. 53–54. Within a few hours, this device produces a
printed graph—a chromatogram—along with calculations representing
a software-generated interpretation of the data. See Brief for State of
New Mexico Dept. of Health, SLD as Amicus Curiae 16–17.
Although the State presented testimony that obtaining an accurate
BAC measurement merely entails “look[ing] at the [gas chromatograph]
machine and record[ing] the results,” App. 54, authoritative sources re­
veal that the matter is not so simple or certain. “In order to perform
quantitative analyses satisfactorily and . . . support the results under
rigorous examination in court, the analyst must be aware of, and
adhere to, good analytical practices and understand what is being done
and why.” Stafford, Chromatography, in Principles of Forensic Toxicol­
ogy 92, 114 (B. Levine 2d ed. 2006). See also McNair 137 (“Errors that
occur in any step can invalidate the best chromatographic analysis, so
attention must be paid to all steps.”); D. Bartell, M. McMurray, &
A. ImObersteg, Attacking and Defending Drunk Driving Tests §16:80
(2d revision 2010) (stating that 93% of errors in laboratory tests for
BAC levels are human errors that occur either before or after machines
analyze samples). Even after the machine has produced its printed
result, a review of the chromatogram may indicate that the test was not


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

Caylor’s report that Bullcoming’s BAC was 0.21 sup­
ported a prosecution for aggravated DWI, the threshold for
which is a BAC of 0.16 grams per hundred milliliters, §66–
8–102(D)(1). The State accordingly charged Bullcoming
with this more serious crime.
B
The case was tried to a jury in November 2005, after our
decision in Crawford v. Washington, 541 U. S. 36 (2004),
but before Melendez-Diaz. On the day of trial, the State
announced that it would not be calling SLD analyst Curtis
Caylor as a witness because he had “very recently [been]
put on unpaid leave” for a reason not revealed. 2010–
NMSC–007, ¶8, 226 P. 3d 1, 6 (internal quotation marks
omitted); App. 58. A startled defense counsel objected.
The prosecution, she complained, had never disclosed,
until trial commenced, that the witness “out there . . .
[was] not the analyst [of Bullcoming’s sample].” Id., at 46.
Counsel stated that, “had [she] known that the analyst
[who tested Bullcoming’s blood] was not available,” her
opening, indeed, her entire defense “may very well have
been dramatically different.” Id., at 47. The State, how­
ever, proposed to introduce Caylor’s finding as a “business
——————
valid. See McNair 207–214.
Nor is the risk of human error so remote as to be negligible. Amici
inform us, for example, that in neighboring Colorado, a single forensic
laboratory produced at least 206 flawed blood-alcohol readings over a
three-year span, prompting the dismissal of several criminal prosecu­
tions. See Brief for National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers
et al. as Amici Curiae 32–33. An analyst had used improper amounts
of the internal standard, causing the chromatograph machine system­
atically to inflate BAC measurements. The analyst’s error, a supervi­
sor said, was “fairly complex.” Ensslin, Final Tally on Flawed DUI:
206 Errors, 9 Tossed or Reduced, Colorado Springs Gazette, Apr. 19,
2010, p. 1 (internal quotation marks omitted), available at http://
www.gazette.com/articles/report-97354-police-discuss.html. (All Inter­
net materials as visited June 21, 2011, and included in Clerk of Court’s
case file).


6

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Opinion of the Court

record” during the testimony of Gerasimos Razatos, an
SLD scientist who had neither observed nor reviewed
Caylor’s analysis. Id., at 44.
Bullcoming’s counsel opposed the State’s proposal. Id.,
at 44–45. Without Caylor’s testimony, defense counsel
maintained, introduction of the analyst’s finding would
violate Bullcoming’s Sixth Amendment right “to be con­
fronted with the witnesses against him.” Ibid.2 The trial
court overruled the objection, id., at 46–47, and admitted
the SLD report as a business record, id., at 44–46, 57.3
The jury convicted Bullcoming of aggravated DWI, and the
New Mexico Court of Appeals upheld the conviction, con­
cluding that “the blood alcohol report in the present case
was non-testimonial and prepared routinely with guaran­
tees of trustworthiness.” 2008–NMCA–097, §17, 189 P. 3d
679, 685.
C
While Bullcoming’s appeal was pending before the New
Mexico Supreme Court, this Court decided Melendez-Diaz.
In that case, “[t]he Massachusetts courts [had] admitted
into evidence affidavits reporting the results of forensic
analysis which showed that material seized by the police
and connected to the defendant was cocaine.” 557 U. S., at
___ (slip op., at 1). Those affidavits, the Court held, were
“ ‘testimonial,’ rendering the affiants ‘witnesses’ subject to
——————
2 The

State called as witnesses the arresting officer and the nurse
who drew Bullcoming’s blood. Bullcoming did not object to the State’s
failure to call the SLD intake employee or the reviewing analyst. “It
is up to the prosecution,” the Court observed in Melendez-Diaz v. Massa
chusetts, 557 U. S. ___, ___, n. 1 (2009) (slip op., at 5, n. 1), “to decide
what steps in the chain of custody are so crucial as to require evidence;
but what testimony is introduced must (if the defendant objects) be
introduced live.”
3 The trial judge noted that, when he started out in law practice,
“there were no breath tests or blood tests. They just brought in the cop,
and the cop said, ‘Yeah, he was drunk.’ ” App. 47.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

the defendant’s right of confrontation under the Sixth
Amendment.” Ibid.
In light of Melendez-Diaz, the New Mexico Supreme
Court acknowledged that the blood-alcohol report intro­
duced at Bullcoming’s trial qualified as testimonial evi­
dence. Like the affidavits in Melendez-Diaz, the court
observed, the report was “functionally identical to live, in­
court testimony, doing precisely what a witness does on
direct examination.” 226 P. 3d, at 8 (quoting MelendezDiaz, 557 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 4)).4 Nevertheless, for
two reasons, the court held that admission of the report
did not violate the Confrontation Clause.
First, the court said certifying analyst Caylor “was a
mere scrivener,” who “simply transcribed the results gen­
erated by the gas chromatograph machine.” 226 P. 3d,
at 8–9. Second, SLD analyst Razatos, although he did not
participate in testing Bullcoming’s blood, “qualified as
an expert witness with respect to the gas chromatograph
machine.” Id., at 9. “Razatos provided live, in-court tes­
timony,” the court stated, “and, thus, was available for
cross-examination regarding the operation of the . . . ma­
chine, the results of [Bullcoming’s] BAC test, and the
SLD’s established laboratory procedures.” Ibid. Razatos’
testimony was crucial, the court explained, because Bull­
coming could not cross-examine the machine or the writ­
ten report. Id., at 10. But “[Bullcoming’s] right of con­
frontation was preserved,” the court concluded, because
Razatos was a qualified analyst, able to serve as a surro­
gate for Caylor. Ibid.
We granted certiorari to address this question: Does the
Confrontation Clause permit the prosecution to introduce
——————
4 In

so ruling, the New Mexico Supreme Court explicitly overruled
State v. Dedman, 2004–NMSC–037, 102 P. 3d 628 (2004), which had
classified blood-alcohol reports as public records neither “investigative
nor prosecutorial” in nature. 226 P. 3d, at 7–8.


8

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Opinion of the Court

a forensic laboratory report containing a testimonial certi­
fication, made in order to prove a fact at a criminal trial,
through the in-court testimony of an analyst who did not
sign the certification or personally perform or observe the
performance of the test reported in the certification. 561
U. S. ___ (2010). Our answer is in line with controlling
precedent: As a rule, if an out-of-court statement is testi­
monial in nature, it may not be introduced against the
accused at trial unless the witness who made the state­
ment is unavailable and the accused has had a prior op­
portunity to confront that witness. Because the New
Mexico Supreme Court permitted the testimonial state­
ment of one witness, i.e., Caylor, to enter into evidence
through the in-court testimony of a second person, i.e.,
Razatos, we reverse that court’s judgment.
II
The Sixth Amendment’s Confrontation Clause confers
upon the accused “[i]n all criminal prosecutions, . . . the
right . . . to be confronted with the witnesses against him.”
In a pathmarking 2004 decision, Crawford v. Washington,
we overruled Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U. S. 56 (1980), which
had interpreted the Confrontation Clause to allow admis­
sion of absent witnesses’ testimonial statements based on
a judicial determination of reliability. See Roberts, 448
U. S., at 66. Rejecting Roberts’ “amorphous notions of ‘re­
liability,’ ” Crawford, 541 U. S., at 61, Crawford held
that fidelity to the Confrontation Clause permitted admis­
sion of “[t]estimonial statements of witnesses absent from
trial . . . only where the declarant is unavailable, and only
where the defendant has had a prior opportunity to cross­
examine,” id., at 59. See Michigan v. Bryant, 562 U. S.
___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 7) (“[F]or testimonial evidence
to be admissible, the Sixth Amendment ‘demands what
the common law required: unavailability [of the witness]
and a prior opportunity for cross-examination.’ ” (quoting


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

Crawford, 541 U. S., at 68)). Melendez-Diaz, relying on
Crawford’s rationale, refused to create a “forensic evi­
dence” exception to this rule. 557 U. S., at ___–___ (slip
op., at 11–15).5 An analyst’s certification prepared in
connection with a criminal investigation or prosecution,
the Court held, is “testimonial,” and therefore within the
compass of the Confrontation Clause. Id., at ___–___ (slip
op., at 15–18).6
The State in the instant case never asserted that the
analyst who signed the certification, Curtis Caylor, was
unavailable. The record showed only that Caylor was
placed on unpaid leave for an undisclosed reason. See
supra, at 5. Nor did Bullcoming have an opportunity
to cross-examine Caylor. Crawford and Melendez-Diaz,
therefore, weigh heavily in Bullcoming’s favor. The New
Mexico Supreme Court, however, although recognizing
that the SLD report was testimonial for purposes of the
Confrontation Clause, considered SLD analyst Razatos an
adequate substitute for Caylor. We explain first why
Razatos’ appearance did not meet the Confrontation
Clause requirement. We next address the State’s argu­
ment that the SLD report ranks as “nontestimonial,” and
——————
5 The dissent makes plain that its objection is less to the application
of the Court’s decisions in Crawford and Melendez-Diaz to this case
than to those pathmarking decisions themselves. See post, at 5 (criti­
cizing the “Crawford line of cases” for rejecting “reliable evidence”);
post, at 8–9, 11 (deploring “Crawford’s rejection of the [reliability­
centered] regime of Ohio v. Roberts”).
6 To rank as “testimonial,” a statement must have a “primary pur­
pose” of “establish[ing] or prov[ing] past events potentially relevant to
later criminal prosecution.” Davis v. Washington, 547 U. S. 813, 822
(2006). See also Bryant, 562 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 11). Elaborating
on the purpose for which a “testimonial report” is created, we observed
in Melendez-Diaz that business and public records “are generally
admissible absent confrontation . . . because—having been created for
the administration of an entity’s affairs and not for the purpose of
establishing or proving some fact at trial—they are not testimonial.”
557 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 18).


10

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Opinion of the Court

therefore “[was] not subject to the Confrontation Clause”
in the first place. Brief for Respondent 7 (capitalization
omitted).
A
The New Mexico Supreme Court held surrogate testi­
mony adequate to satisfy the Confrontation Clause in
this case because analyst Caylor “simply transcribed the
resul[t] generated by the gas chromatograph machine,”
presenting no interpretation and exercising no independ­
ent judgment. 226 P. 3d, at 8. Bullcoming’s “true ‘ac­
cuser,’ ” the court said, was the machine, while testing
analyst Caylor’s role was that of “mere scrivener.” Id., at
9. Caylor’s certification, however, reported more than a
machine-generated number. See supra, at 3–4.
Caylor certified that he received Bullcoming’s blood
sample intact with the seal unbroken, that he checked to
make sure that the forensic report number and the sample
number “correspond[ed],” and that he performed on Bull­
coming’s sample a particular test, adhering to a precise
protocol. App. 62–65. He further represented, by leaving
the “[r]emarks” section of the report blank, that no “cir­
cumstance or condition . . . affect[ed] the integrity of the
sample or . . . the validity of the analysis.” Id., at 62, 65.
These representations, relating to past events and human
actions not revealed in raw, machine-produced data, are
meet for cross-examination.
The potential ramifications of the New Mexico Supreme
Court’s reasoning, furthermore, raise red flags. Most wit­
nesses, after all, testify to their observations of factual
conditions or events, e.g., “the light was green,” “the hour
was noon.” Such witnesses may record, on the spot, what
they observed. Suppose a police report recorded an objec­
tive fact—Bullcoming’s counsel posited the address above
the front door of a house or the read-out of a radar gun.
See Brief for Petitioner 35. Could an officer other than the


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

one who saw the number on the house or gun present the
information in court—so long as that officer was equipped
to testify about any technology the observing officer de­
ployed and the police department’s standard operating
procedures? As our precedent makes plain, the answer is
emphatically “No.” See Davis v. Washington, 547 U. S.
813, 826 (2006) (Confrontation Clause may not be “evaded
by having a note-taking police[ officer] recite the . . . tes­
timony of the declarant” (emphasis deleted)); MelendezDiaz, 557 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 6) (KENNEDY, J., dis­
senting) (“The Court made clear in Davis that it will not
permit the testimonial statement of one witness to enter
into evidence through the in-court testimony of a second.”).
The New Mexico Supreme Court stated that the number
registered by the gas chromatograph machine called for
no interpretation or exercise of independent judgment on
Caylor’s part. 226 P. 3d, at 8–9. We have already ex­
plained that Caylor certified to more than a machine­
generated number. See supra, at 3–4. In any event, the
comparative reliability of an analyst’s testimonial report
drawn from machine-produced data does not overcome the
Sixth Amendment bar. This Court settled in Crawford
that the “obviou[s] reliab[ility]” of a testimonial statement
does not dispense with the Confrontation Clause. 541
U. S., at 62; see id., at 61 (Clause “commands, not that
evidence be reliable, but that reliability be assessed in a
particular manner: by testing [the evidence] in the cruci­
ble of cross-examination”). Accordingly, the analysts who
write reports that the prosecution introduces must be
made available for confrontation even if they possess “the
scientific acumen of Mme. Curie and the veracity of
Mother Teresa.” Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S., at ___, n. 6
(slip op., at 14, n. 6).
B
Recognizing that admission of the blood-alcohol analysis


12

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Opinion of the Court

depended on “live, in-court testimony [by] a qualified ana­
lyst,” 226 P. 3d, at 10, the New Mexico Supreme Court
believed that Razatos could substitute for Caylor because
Razatos “qualified as an expert witness with respect to the
gas chromatograph machine and the SLD’s labora­
tory procedures,” id., at 9. But surrogate testimony of the
kind Razatos was equipped to give could not convey what
Caylor knew or observed about the events his certification
concerned, i.e., the particular test and testing process he
employed.7 Nor could such surrogate testimony expose
any lapses or lies on the certifying analyst’s part.8 Signifi­
cant here, Razatos had no knowledge of the reason why
Caylor had been placed on unpaid leave. With Caylor on
the stand, Bullcoming’s counsel could have asked ques­
tions designed to reveal whether incompetence, evasive­
ness, or dishonesty accounted for Caylor’s removal from
his work station. Notable in this regard, the State never
asserted that Caylor was “unavailable”; the prosecution
conveyed only that Caylor was on uncompensated leave.
Nor did the State assert that Razatos had any “independ­
ent opinion” concerning Bullcoming’s BAC. See Brief for
Respondent 58, n. 15. In this light, Caylor’s live testimony
could hardly be typed “a hollow formality,” post, at 4.
More fundamentally, as this Court stressed in Craw
ford, “[t]he text of the Sixth Amendment does not sug­
——————
7 We do not question that analyst Caylor, in common with other ana­
lysts employed by SLD, likely would not recall a particular test, given
the number of tests each analyst conducts and the standard procedure
followed in testing. Even so, Caylor’s testimony under oath would have
enabled Bullcoming’s counsel to raise before a jury questions concern­
ing Caylor’s proficiency, the care he took in performing his work, and
his veracity. In particular, Bullcoming’s counsel likely would have
inquired on cross-examination why Caylor had been placed on unpaid
leave.
8 At Bullcoming’s trial, Razatos acknowledged that “you don’t know
unless you actually observe the analysis that someone else conducts,
whether they followed th[e] protocol in every instance.” App. 59.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

gest any open-ended exceptions from the confrontation re­
quirement to be developed by the courts.” 541 U. S., at 54.
Nor is it “the role of courts to extrapolate from the words
of the [Confrontation Clause] to the values behind it, and
then to enforce its guarantees only to the extent they serve
(in the courts’ views) those underlying values.” Giles v.
California, 554 U. S. 353, 375 (2008). Accordingly, the
Clause does not tolerate dispensing with confrontation
simply because the court believes that questioning one
witness about another’s testimonial statements provides a
fair enough opportunity for cross-examination.
A recent decision involving another Sixth Amendment
right—the right to counsel—is instructive. In United
States v. Gonzalez-Lopez, 548 U. S. 140 (2006), the Gov­
ernment argued that illegitimately denying a defendant
his counsel of choice did not violate the Sixth Amendment where “substitute counsel’s performance” did not
demonstrably prejudice the defendant. Id., at 144–145.
This Court rejected the Government’s argument. “[T]rue
enough,” the Court explained, “the purpose of the rights
set forth in [the Sixth] Amendment is to ensure a fair
trial; but it does not follow that the rights can be disre­
garded so long as the trial is, on the whole, fair.” Id., at
145. If a “particular guarantee” of the Sixth Amendment
is violated, no substitute procedure can cure the violation,
and “[n]o additional showing of prejudice is required to
make the violation ‘complete.’ ” Id., at 146. If repre­
sentation by substitute counsel does not satisfy the Sixth
Amendment, neither does the opportunity to confront a
substitute witness.
In short, when the State elected to introduce Caylor’s
certification, Caylor became a witness Bullcoming had the
right to confront. Our precedent cannot sensibly be read
any other way. See Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S., at ___ (slip
op., at 6) (KENNEDY, J., dissenting) (Court’s holding means
“the . . . analyst who must testify is the person who signed


14

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Opinion of the Court

the certificate”).
III
We turn, finally, to the State’s contention that the SLD’s
blood-alcohol analysis reports are nontestimonial in char­
acter, therefore no Confrontation Clause question even
arises in this case. Melendez-Diaz left no room for that
argument, the New Mexico Supreme Court concluded,
see 226 P. 3d, at 7–8; supra, at 7, a conclusion we find
inescapable.
In Melendez-Diaz, a state forensic laboratory, on police
request, analyzed seized evidence (plastic bags) and re­
ported the laboratory’s analysis to the police (the sub­
stance found in the bags contained cocaine). 557 U. S., at
___ (slip op., at 2). The “certificates of analysis” prepared
by the analysts who tested the evidence in Melendez-Diaz,
this Court held, were “incontrovertibly . . . affirmation[s]
made for the purpose of establishing or proving some fact”
in a criminal proceeding. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 4) (inter­
nal quotation marks omitted). The same purpose was
served by the certificate in question here.
The State maintains that the affirmations made by
analyst Caylor were not “adversarial” or “inquisitorial,”
Brief for Respondent 27–33; instead, they were simply
observations of an “independent scientis[t]” made “accord­
ing to a non-adversarial public duty,” id., at 32–33. That
argument fares no better here than it did in MelendezDiaz. A document created solely for an “evidentiary pur­
pose,” Melendez-Diaz clarified, made in aid of a police
investigation, ranks as testimonial. 557 U. S., at ___ (slip
op., at 5) (forensic reports available for use at trial are
“testimonial statements” and certifying analyst is a
“ ‘witness’ for purposes of the Sixth Amendment”).
Distinguishing Bullcoming’s case from Melendez-Diaz,
where the analysts’ findings were contained in certificates
“sworn to before a notary public,” id., at ___ (slip op., at 2),


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

the State emphasizes that the SLD report of Bullcoming’s
BAC was “unsworn.” Brief for Respondent 13; post, at 2
(“only sworn statement” here was that of Razatos, “who
was present and [did] testif[y]”). As the New Mexico
Supreme Court recognized, “ ‘the absence of [an] oath [i]s
not dispositive’ in determining if a statement is testimo­
nial.” 226 P. 3d, at 8 (quoting Crawford, 541 U. S., at 52).
Indeed, in Crawford, this Court rejected as untenable any
construction of the Confrontation Clause that would ren­
der inadmissible only sworn ex parte affidavits, while
leaving admission of formal, but unsworn statements
“perfectly OK.” Id., at 52–53, n. 3. Reading the Clause in
this “implausible” manner, ibid., the Court noted, would
make the right to confrontation easily erasable. See
Davis, 547 U. S., at 830–831, n. 5; id., at 838 (THOMAS, J.,
concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part).
In all material respects, the laboratory report in this
case resembles those in Melendez-Diaz. Here, as in
Melendez-Diaz, a law-enforcement officer provided seized
evidence to a state laboratory required by law to assist in
police investigations, N. M. Stat. Ann. §29–3–4 (2004).
Like the analysts in Melendez-Diaz, analyst Caylor tested
the evidence and prepared a certificate concerning the
result of his analysis. App. 62. Like the Melendez-Diaz
certificates, Caylor’s certificate is “formalized” in a signed
document, Davis, 547 U. S., at 837, n. 2 (opinion of
THOMAS, J.), headed a “report,” App. 62. Noteworthy as
well, the SLD report form contains a legend referring to
municipal and magistrate courts’ rules that provide for the
admission of certified blood-alcohol analyses.
In sum, the formalities attending the “report of blood
alcohol analysis” are more than adequate to qualify Cay­
lor’s assertions as testimonial. The absence of notariza­
tion does not remove his certification from Confrontation
Clause governance. The New Mexico Supreme Court,
guided by Melendez-Diaz, correctly recognized that Cay­


16

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Opinion GINSBURG,
Opinion ofof the CourtJ.

lor’s report “fell within the core class of testimonial state­
ments” 226 P. 3d, at 7, described in this Court’s leading
Confrontation Clause decisions: Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 4); Davis, 547 U. S., at 830; Crawford,
541 U. S., at 51–52.
IV
The State and its amici urge that unbending applica­
tion of the Confrontation Clause to forensic evidence would
impose an undue burden on the prosecution. This argu­
ment, also advanced in the dissent, post, at 10–11, largely
repeats a refrain rehearsed and rejected in Melendez-Diaz.
See 557 U. S., at ___–___ (slip op., at 19–23). The con­
stitutional requirement, we reiterate, “may not [be] disre­
gard[ed] . . . at our convenience,” id., at ___ (slip op., at
19), and the predictions of dire consequences, we again
observe, are dubious, see id., at ___ (slip op., at 19–20).
New Mexico law, it bears emphasis, requires the lab­
oratory to preserve samples, which can be retested by
other analysts, see N. M. Admin. Code §7.33.2.15(A)(4)–(6)
(2010), available at http://www.nmcpr.state.nm.us/nmac/
_title07/T07C033.htm, and neither party questions SLD’s
compliance with that requirement. Retesting “is almost
always an option . . . in [DWI] cases,” Brief for Public
Defender Service for District of Columbia et al. as Amici
Curiae 25 (hereinafter PDS Brief), and the State had that
option here: New Mexico could have avoided any Confron­
tation Clause problem by asking Razatos to retest the
sample, and then testify to the results of his retest rather
than to the results of a test he did not conduct or observe.
Notably, New Mexico advocates retesting as an effective
means to preserve a defendant’s confrontation right “when
the [out-of-court] statement is raw data or a mere tran­
scription of raw data onto a public record.” Brief for Re­
spondent 53–54. But the State would require the defen­
dant to initiate retesting. Id., at 55; post, at 4 (defense


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion GINSBURG,
Opinion ofof the CourtJ.

“remains free to . . . . call and examine the technician who
performed a test”), post, at 8 (“free retesting” is available
to defendants). The prosecution, however, bears the bur­
den of proof. Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
19) (“[T]he Confrontation Clause imposes a burden on the
prosecution to present its witnesses, not on the defendant
to bring those adverse witnesses into court.”). Hence the
obligation to propel retesting when the original analyst is
unavailable is the State’s, not the defendant’s. See Taylor
v. Illinois, 484 U. S. 400, 410, n. 14 (1988) (Confrontation
Clause’s requirements apply “in every case, whether or not
the defendant seeks to rebut the case against him or to
present a case of his own”).
Furthermore, notice-and-demand procedures, long in ef­
fect in many jurisdictions, can reduce burdens on forensic laboratories. Statutes governing these procedures
typically “render . . . otherwise hearsay forensic reports
admissible[,] while specifically preserving a defendant’s
right to demand that the prosecution call the author/
analyst of [the] report.” PDS Brief 9; see MelendezDiaz, 557 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 20) (observing that
notice-and-demand statutes “permit the defendant to
assert (or forfeit by silence) his Confrontation Clause right
after receiving notice of the prosecution’s intent to use a
forensic analyst’s report”).
Even before this Court’s decision in Crawford, moreover,
it was common prosecutorial practice to call the forensic
analyst to testify. Prosecutors did so “to bolster the per­
suasive power of [the State’s] case[,] . . . [even] when the
defense would have preferred that the analyst did not
testify.” PDS Brief 8.
We note also the “small fraction of . . . cases” that “actu­
ally proceed to trial.” Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 20) (citing estimate that “nearly 95% of convic­
tions in state and federal courts are obtained via guilty
plea”). And, “when cases in which forensic analysis has


18

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Opinion GINSBURG,
Opinion ofof the CourtJ.

been conducted [do] go to trial,” defendants “regularly . . .
[stipulate] to the admission of [the] analysis.” PDS Brief
20. “[A]s a result, analysts testify in only a very small
percentage of cases,” id., at 21, for “[i]t is unlikely that
defense counsel will insist on live testimony whose effect
will be merely to highlight rather than cast doubt upon
the forensic analysis.” Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 22).9
Tellingly, in jurisdictions in which “it is the [acknowl­
edged] job of . . . analysts to testify in court . . . about their
test results,” the sky has not fallen. PDS Brief 23. State
and municipal laboratories “make operational and staffing
decisions” to facilitate analysts’ appearance at trial. Ibid.
Prosecutors schedule trial dates to accommodate analysts’
availability, and trial courts liberally grant continuances
when unexpected conflicts arise. Id., at 24–25. In rare
cases in which the analyst is no longer employed by the
laboratory at the time of trial, “the prosecution makes the
effort to bring that analyst . . . to court.” Id., at 25. And,
as is the practice in New Mexico, see supra, at 16, labora­
tories ordinarily retain additional samples, enabling them
to run tests again when necessary.10
——————
9 The dissent argues otherwise, reporting a 71% increase, from 2008
to 2010, in the number of subpoenas for New Mexico analysts’ testi­
mony in impaired-driving cases. Post, at 11. The dissent is silent,
however, on the number of instances in which subpoenaed analysts in
fact testify, i.e., the figure that would reveal the actual burden of
courtroom testimony. Moreover, New Mexico’s Department of Health,
Scientific Laboratory Division, has attributed the “chaotic” conditions
noted by the dissent, ibid., to several favors, among them, staff attri­
tion, a state hiring freeze, a 15% increase in the number of blood
samples received for testing, and “wildly” divergent responses by New
Mexico District Attorneys to Melendez-Diaz. Brief for State of New
Mexico Dept. of Health, SLD as Amicus Curiae 2–5. Some New Mexico
District Attorneys’ offices, we are informed, “subpoen[a] every analyst
with any connection to a blood sample,” id., at 5, an exorbitant practice
that undoubtedly inflates the number of subpoenas issued.
10 The dissent refers, selectively, to experience in Los Angeles, post, at


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

Opinion of the Court

*
*
*
For the reasons stated, the judgment of the New Mexico
Supreme Court is reversed, and the case is remanded for
further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.11
It is so ordered.

——————
10, but overlooks experience documented in Michigan. In that State,
post-Melendez-Diaz, the increase in in-court analyst testimony has been
slight. Compare PDS Brief 21 (in 2006, analysts provided testimony for
only 0.7% of all tests), with Michigan State Police, Forensic Science
Division, available at http://www.michigan.gov/msp/0,1607,7-123­
1593_3800-15901--,00.html (in 2010, analysts provided testimony for
approximately 1% of all tests).
11 As in Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S., at ___, and n. 14 (slip op., at 23,
and n. 14), we express no view on whether the Confrontation Clause
error in this case was harmless. The New Mexico Supreme Court did
not reach that question, see Brief for Respondent 59–60, and nothing in
this opinion impedes a harmless-error inquiry on remand.

