10

LAFLER v. COOPER
Opinion of the Court

U. S. 387; see also Douglas v. California, 372 U. S. 353
(1963). As in those cases, “[w]hen a State opts to act in a
field where its action has significant discretionary ele­
ments, it must nonetheless act in accord with the dictates
of the Constitution.” Evitts, supra, at 401.
Third, petitioner seeks to preserve the conviction ob­
tained by the State by arguing that the purpose of the
Sixth Amendment is to ensure “the reliability of [a] convic­
tion following trial.” Brief for Petitioner 13. This argu­
ment, too, fails to comprehend the full scope of the Sixth
Amendment’s protections; and it is refuted by precedent.
Strickland recognized “[t]he benchmark for judging any
claim of ineffectiveness must be whether counsel’s conduct
so undermined the proper functioning of the adversarial
process that the trial cannot be relied on as having pro­
duced a just result.” 466 U. S., at 686. The goal of a just
result is not divorced from the reliability of a conviction,
see United States v. Cronic, 466 U. S. 648, 658 (1984); but
here the question is not the fairness or reliability of the
trial but the fairness and regularity of the processes that
preceded it, which caused the defendant to lose benefits he
would have received in the ordinary course but for coun­
sel’s ineffective assistance.
There are instances, furthermore, where a reliable trial
does not foreclose relief when counsel has failed to assert
rights that may have altered the outcome. In Kimmelman
v. Morrison, 477 U. S. 365 (1986), the Court held that an
attorney’s failure to timely move to suppress evidence
during trial could be grounds for federal habeas relief.
The Court rejected the suggestion that the “failure to
make a timely request for the exclusion of illegally seized
evidence” could not be the basis for a Sixth Amendment
violation because the evidence “is ‘typically reliable and
often the most probative information bearing on the guilt
or innocence of the defendant.’ ” Id., at 379 (quoting Stone
v. Powell, 428 U. S. 465, 490 (1976)). “The constitutional

