(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

LAFLER v. COOPER
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–209.

Argued October 31, 2011—Decided March 21, 2012

Respondent was charged under Michigan law with assault with intent
to murder and three other offenses. The prosecution offered to dis­
miss two of the charges and to recommend a 51-to-85-month sentence
on the other two, in exchange for a guilty plea. In a communication
with the court, respondent admitted his guilt and expressed a will­
ingness to accept the offer. But he rejected the offer, allegedly after
his attorney convinced him that the prosecution would be unable to
establish intent to murder because the victim had been shot below
the waist. At trial, respondent was convicted on all counts and re­
ceived a mandatory minimum 185-to-360-month sentence. In a sub­
sequent hearing, the state trial court rejected respondent’s claim that
his attorney’s advice to reject the plea constituted ineffective assis­
tance. The Michigan Court of Appeals affirmed, rejecting the ineffec­
tive-assistance claim on the ground that respondent knowingly and
intelligently turned down the plea offer and chose to go to trial. Re­
spondent renewed his claim in federal habeas. Finding that the state
appellate court had unreasonably applied the constitutional effective­
assistance standards laid out in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S.
668, and Hill v. Lockhart, 474 U. S. 52, the District Court granted a
conditional writ and ordered specific performance of the original plea
offer. The Sixth Circuit affirmed. Applying Strickland, it found that
counsel had provided deficient performance by advising respondent of
an incorrect legal rule, and that respondent suffered prejudice be­
cause he lost the opportunity to take the more favorable sentence of­
fered in the plea.
Held:
1. Where counsel’s ineffective advice led to an offer’s rejection, and
where the prejudice alleged is having to stand trial, a defendant must

