2

LAFLER v. COOPER
Opinion of the Court

ord, it is unclear why respondent did this, and at trial it
was suggested that he might have acted either in self­
defense or in defense of another person. In any event the
shot missed and Mundy fled. Respondent followed in pursuit, firing repeatedly. Mundy was shot in her buttock,
hip, and abdomen but survived the assault.
Respondent was charged under Michigan law with assault with intent to murder, possession of a firearm by a
felon, possession of a firearm in the commission of a felony, misdemeanor possession of marijuana, and for being a
habitual offender. On two occasions, the prosecution
offered to dismiss two of the charges and to recommend a
sentence of 51 to 85 months for the other two, in exchange
for a guilty plea. In a communication with the court re­
spondent admitted guilt and expressed a willingness to
accept the offer. Respondent, however, later rejected the
offer on both occasions, allegedly after his attorney con­
vinced him that the prosecution would be unable to estab­
lish his intent to murder Mundy because she had been
shot below the waist. On the first day of trial the prosecu­
tion offered a significantly less favorable plea deal, which
respondent again rejected. After trial, respondent was
convicted on all counts and received a mandatory mini­
mum sentence of 185 to 360 months’ imprisonment.
In a so-called Ginther hearing before the state trial
court, see People v. Ginther, 390 Mich. 436, 212 N. W. 2d
922 (1973), respondent argued his attorney’s advice to
reject the plea constituted ineffective assistance. The trial
judge rejected the claim, and the Michigan Court of Ap­
peals affirmed. People v. Cooper, No. 250583, 2005 WL
599740 (Mar. 15, 2005) (per curiam), App. to Pet. for Cert.
44a. The Michigan Court of Appeals rejected the claim
of ineffective assistance of counsel on the ground that respondent knowingly and intelligently rejected two plea
offers and chose to go to trial. The Michigan Supreme
Court denied respondent’s application for leave to file an

