2

LAFLER v. COOPER
SCALIA, J., dissenting

Friendly, The Bill of Rights as a Code of Criminal Proce­
dure, 53 Cal. L. Rev. 929 (1965). The Court now moves to
bring perfection to the alternative in which prosecutors
and defendants have sought relief. Today’s opinions deal
with only two aspects of counsel’s plea-bargaining in­
adequacy, and leave other aspects (who knows what they
might be?) to be worked out in further constitutional
litigation that will burden the criminal process. And it
would be foolish to think that “constitutional” rules gov­
erning counsel’s behavior will not be followed by rules
governing the prosecution’s behavior in the plea­
bargaining process that the Court today announces “ ‘is the
criminal justice system,’ ” Frye, ante, at 7 (quoting approv­
ingly from Scott & Stuntz, Plea Bargaining as Contract,
101 Yale L. J. 1909, 1912 (1992) (hereinafter Scott)). Is it
constitutional, for example, for the prosecution to with­
draw a plea offer that has already been accepted? Or to
withdraw an offer before the defense has had adequate
time to consider and accept it? Or to make no plea offer at
all, even though its case is weak—thereby excluding the
defendant from “the criminal justice system”?
Anthony Cooper received a full and fair trial, was found
guilty of all charges by a unanimous jury, and was given
the sentence that the law prescribed. The Court nonethe­
less concludes that Cooper is entitled to some sort of ha­
beas corpus relief (perhaps) because his attorney’s allegedly
incompetent advice regarding a plea offer caused him to
receive a full and fair trial. That conclusion is foreclosed
by our precedents. Even if it were not foreclosed, the
constitutional right to effective plea-bargainers that it
establishes is at least a new rule of law, which does not
undermine the Michigan Court of Appeals’ decision and
therefore cannot serve as the basis for habeas relief. And
the remedy the Court announces—namely, whatever the
state trial court in its discretion prescribes, down to and
including no remedy at all—is unheard-of and quite ab­

