Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

SCALIA, J., dissenting

Those precedents leave no doubt about the answer to
the question presented here. As the Court itself observes,
a criminal defendant has no right to a plea bargain. Ante,
at 9. “[T]here is no constitutional right to plea bargain;
the prosecutor need not do so if he prefers to go to trial.”
Weatherford v. Bursey, 429 U. S. 545, 561 (1977). Coun­
sel’s mistakes in this case thus did not “deprive the de­
fendant of a substantive or procedural right to which the
law entitles him,” Williams, supra, at 393. Far from being “beside the point,” ante, at 9, that is critical to correct
application of our precedents. Like Fretwell, this case
“concerns the unusual circumstance where the defendant
attempts to demonstrate prejudice based on considerations
that, as a matter of law, ought not inform the inquiry,”
506 U. S., at 373 (O’Connor, J., concurring); he claims
“that he might have been denied ‘a right the law simply
does not recognize,’ ” id., at 375 (same). Strickland,
Fretwell, and Williams all instruct that the pure outcome­
based test on which the Court relies is an erroneous
measure of cognizable prejudice. In ignoring Strickland’s
“ultimate focus . . . on the fundamental fairness of the
proceeding whose result is being challenged,” 466 U. S., at
696, the Court has lost the forest for the trees, leading it to
accept what we have previously rejected, the “novel argu­
ment that constitutional rights are infringed by trying the
defendant rather than accepting his plea of guilty.”
Weatherford, supra, at 561.
——————
the Court therefore did not address it. Id., at 391 (Powell, J., concur­
ring in judgment); see also id., at 380. Kimmelman made clear, how­
ever, how the answer to that question is to be determined: “The essence
of an ineffective-assistance claim is that counsel’s unprofessional errors
so upset the adversarial balance between defense and prosecution that
the trial was rendered unfair and the verdict rendered suspect,” id., at 374
(emphasis added). “Only those habeas petitioners who can prove under
Strickland that they have been denied a fair trial . . . will be granted the
writ,” id., at 382 (emphasis added). In short, Kimmelman’s only rele­
vance is to prove the Court’s opinion wrong.

