12

LAFLER v. COOPER
Opinion of the Court

tional violation, id., at 365, while at the same time not
grant a windfall to the defendant or needlessly squander
the considerable resources the State properly invested in
the criminal prosecution. See Mechanik, 475 U. S., at 72
(“The reversal of a conviction entails substantial social
costs: it forces jurors, witnesses, courts, the prosecution,
and the defendants to expend further time, energy, and
other resources to repeat a trial that has already once
taken place; victims may be asked to relive their disturb­
ing experiences”).
The specific injury suffered by defendants who decline a
plea offer as a result of ineffective assistance of counsel
and then receive a greater sentence as a result of trial can
come in at least one of two forms. In some cases, the sole
advantage a defendant would have received under the plea
is a lesser sentence. This is typically the case when the
charges that would have been admitted as part of the plea
bargain are the same as the charges the defendant was
convicted of after trial. In this situation the court may
conduct an evidentiary hearing to determine whether the
defendant has shown a reasonable probability that but for
counsel’s errors he would have accepted the plea. If the
showing is made, the court may exercise discretion in
determining whether the defendant should receive the
term of imprisonment the government offered in the plea,
the sentence he received at trial, or something in between.
In some situations it may be that resentencing alone
will not be full redress for the constitutional injury. If, for
example, an offer was for a guilty plea to a count or counts
less serious than the ones for which a defendant was
convicted after trial, or if a mandatory sentence confines a
judge’s sentencing discretion after trial, a resentencing
based on the conviction at trial may not suffice. See, e.g.,
Williams, 571 F. 3d, at 1088; Riggs v. Fairman, 399 F. 3d
1179, 1181 (CA9 2005). In these circumstances, the
proper exercise of discretion to remedy the constitutional

