8

LAFLER v. COOPER
Opinion of the Court

procedural right. Brief for Petitioner 12–13. The Court
has rejected the argument that Fretwell modified Strickland before and does so again now. See Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362, 391 (2000) (“The Virginia Supreme
Court erred in holding that our decision in Lockhart v.
Fretwell, 506 U. S. 364 (1993), modified or in some way
supplanted the rule set down in Strickland”); see also
Glover, supra, at 203 (“The Court explained last Term [in
Williams] that our holding in Lockhart does not supplant
the Strickland analysis”).
Fretwell could not show Strickland prejudice resulting
from his attorney’s failure to object to the use of a sentenc­
ing factor the Eighth Circuit had erroneously (and tempo­
rarily) found to be impermissible. Fretwell, 506 U. S., at
373. Because the objection upon which his ineffective­
assistance-of-counsel claim was premised was meritless,
Fretwell could not demonstrate an error entitling him to
relief. The case presented the “unusual circumstance
where the defendant attempts to demonstrate prejudice
based on considerations that, as a matter of law, ought not
inform the inquiry.” Ibid. (O’Connor, J., concurring). See
also ibid. (recognizing “[t]he determinative question—
whether there is a reasonable probability that, but for
counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceed­
ing would have been different—remains unchanged” (in­
ternal quotation marks and citation omitted)). It is for
this same reason a defendant cannot show prejudice based
on counsel’s refusal to present perjured testimony, even if
such testimony might have affected the outcome of the
case. See Nix v. Whiteside, 475 U. S. 157, 175 (1986)
(holding first that counsel’s refusal to present perjured
testimony breached no professional duty and second that
it cannot establish prejudice under Strickland).
Both Fretwell and Nix are instructive in that they
demonstrate “there are also situations in which it would
be unjust to characterize the likelihood of a different

