2

LAFLER v. COOPER
Syllabus
show that but for the ineffective advice, there is a reasonable proba­
bility that the plea offer would have been presented to the court, that
the court would have accepted its terms, and that the conviction or
sentence, or both, under the offer’s terms would have been less severe
than under the actual judgment and sentence imposed. Pp. 3–11.
(a) Because the parties agree that counsel’s performance was de­
ficient, the only question is how to apply Strickland’s prejudice test
where ineffective assistance results in a rejection of the plea offer and
the defendant is convicted at the ensuing trial. Pp. 3–4.
(b) In that context, the Strickland prejudice test requires a de­
fendant to show a reasonable possibility that the outcome of the plea
process would have been different with competent advice. The Sixth
Circuit and other federal appellate courts have agreed with the
Strickland prejudice test for rejected pleas adopted here by this
Court. Petitioner and the Solicitor General propose a narrow view—
that Strickland prejudice cannot arise from plea bargaining if the de­
fendant is later convicted at a fair trial—but their reasoning is un­
persuasive. First, they claim that the Sixth Amendment’s sole pur­
pose is to protect the right to a fair trial, but the Amendment actually
requires effective assistance at critical stages of a criminal proceed­
ing, including pretrial stages. This is consistent with the right to ef­
fective assistance on appeal, see, e.g., Halbert v. Michigan, 545 U. S.
605, and the right to counsel during sentencing, see, e.g., Glover v.
United States, 531 U. S. 198, 203–204. This Court has not followed a
rigid rule that an otherwise fair trial remedies errors not occurring at
trial, but has instead inquired whether the trial cured the particular
error at issue. See, e.g., Vasquez v. Hillery, 474 U. S. 254, 263. Se­
cond, this Court has previously rejected petitioner’s argument that
Lockhart v. Fretwell, 506 U. S. 364, modified Strickland and does so
again here. Fretwell and Nix v. Whiteside, 475 U. S. 157, demon­
strate that “it would be unjust to characterize the likelihood of a dif­
ferent outcome as legitimate ‘prejudice,’ ” Williams v. Taylor, 529
U. S. 362, 391–392, where defendants would receive a windfall as a
result of the application of an incorrect legal principle or a defense
strategy outside the law. Here, however, respondent seeks relief
from counsel’s failure to meet a valid legal standard. Third, petition­
er seeks to preserve the conviction by arguing that the Sixth
Amendment’s purpose is to ensure a conviction’s reliability, but this
argument fails to comprehend the full scope of the Sixth Amendment
and is refuted by precedent. Here, the question is the fairness or re­
liability not of the trial but of the processes that preceded it, which
caused respondent to lose benefits he would have received but for
counsel’s ineffective assistance. Furthermore, a reliable trial may not
foreclose relief when counsel has failed to assert rights that may have

