4

LAFLER v. COOPER
SCALIA, J., dissenting

plea bargain and stands on his constitutional right to a
fair trial. The latter is a vast departure from our past
cases, protecting not just the constitutionally prescribed
right to a fair adjudication of guilt and punishment, but a
judicially invented right to effective plea bargaining.
It is also apparent from Strickland that bad plea bar­
gaining has nothing to do with ineffective assistance of
counsel in the constitutional sense. Strickland explained
that “[i]n giving meaning to the requirement [of effective
assistance], . . . we must take its purpose—to ensure a fair
trial—as the guide.” 466 U. S., at 686. Since “the right to
the effective assistance of counsel is recognized not for its
own sake, but because of the effect it has on the ability of
the accused to receive a fair trial,” United States v. Cronic,
466 U. S. 648, 658 (1984), the “benchmark” inquiry in
evaluating any claim of ineffective assistance is whether
counsel’s performance “so undermined the proper func­
tioning of the adversarial process” that it failed to produce
a reliably “just result.” Strickland, 466 U. S., at 686.
That is what Strickland’s requirement of “prejudice” con­
sists of: Because the right to effective assistance has as its
purpose the assurance of a fair trial, the right is not in­
fringed unless counsel’s mistakes call into question the
basic justice of a defendant’s conviction or sentence. That
has been, until today, entirely clear. A defendant must
show “that counsel’s errors were so serious as to deprive
the defendant of a fair trial, a trial whose result is relia­
ble.” Id., at 687. See also Gonzalez-Lopez, supra, at 147.
Impairment of fair trial is how we distinguish between
unfortunate attorney error and error of constitutional
significance.1
——————
1 Rather than addressing the constitutional origins of the right to
effective counsel, the Court responds to the broader claim (raised by no
one) that “the sole purpose of the Sixth Amendment is to protect the
right to a fair trial.” Ante, at 6 (emphasis added). Cf. Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 10–12 (arguing that the “purpose of the Sixth

