Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
altered the outcome. See Kimmelman v. Morrison, 477 U. S. 365,
379. Petitioner’s position that a fair trial wipes clean ineffective as­
sistance during plea bargaining also ignores the reality that criminal
justice today is for the most part a system of pleas, not a system of
trials. See Missouri v. Frye, ante, at ___. Pp. 4–11.
2. Where a defendant shows ineffective assistance has caused the
rejection of a plea leading to a more severe sentence at trial, the rem­
edy must “neutralize the taint” of a constitutional violation, United
States v. Morrison, 449 U. S. 361, 365, but must not grant a windfall
to the defendant or needlessly squander the resources the State
properly invested in the criminal prosecution, see United States v.
Mechanik, 475 U. S. 66, 72. If the sole advantage is that the defend­
ant would have received a lesser sentence under the plea, the court
should have an evidentiary hearing to determine whether the de­
fendant would have accepted the plea. If so, the court may exercise
discretion in determining whether the defendant should receive the
term offered in the plea, the sentence received at trial, or something
in between. However, resentencing based on the conviction at trial
may not suffice, e.g., where the offered guilty plea was for less serious
counts than the ones for which a defendant was convicted after trial,
or where a mandatory sentence confines a judge’s sentencing discre­
tion. In these circumstances, the proper remedy may be to require
the prosecution to reoffer the plea. The judge can then exercise dis­
cretion in deciding whether to vacate the conviction from trial and
accept the plea, or leave the conviction undisturbed. In either situa­
tion, a court must weigh various factors. Here, it suffices to give two
relevant considerations. First, a court may take account of a defend­
ant’s earlier expressed willingness, or unwillingness, to accept re­
sponsibility for his or her actions. Second, it is not necessary here to
decide as a constitutional rule that a judge is required to disregard
any information concerning the crime discovered after the plea offer
was made. Petitioner argues that implementing a remedy will open
the floodgates to litigation by defendants seeking to unsettle their
convictions, but in the 30 years that courts have recognized such
claims, there has been no indication that the system is overwhelmed
or that defendants are receiving windfalls as a result of strategically
timed Strickland claims. In addition, the prosecution and trial courts
may adopt measures to help ensure against meritless claims. See
Frye, ante, at ___. Pp. 11–14.
3. This case arises under the Antiterrorism and Effective Death
Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), but because the Michigan Court of Ap­
peals’ analysis of respondent’s ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claim
was contrary to clearly established federal law, AEDPA presents no
bar to relief. Respondent has satisfied Strickland’s two-part test.

