Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

To be sure, Strickland stated a rule of thumb for meas­
uring prejudice which, applied blindly and out of context,
could support the Court’s holding today: “The defendant
must show that there is a reasonable probability that, but
for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the pro­
ceeding would have been different.” 466 U. S., at 694.
Strickland itself cautioned, however, that its test was not
to be applied in a mechanical fashion, and that courts
were not to divert their “ultimate focus” from “the funda­
mental fairness of the proceeding whose result is being
challenged.” Id., at 696. And until today we have followed
that course.
In Lockhart v. Fretwell, 506 U. S. 364 (1993), the defi­
cient performance at issue was the failure of counsel for a
defendant who had been sentenced to death to make an
objection that would have produced a sentence of life
——————
Amendment right to counsel is to secure a fair trial” (emphasis added));
Brief for Petitioner 12–21 (same). To destroy that straw man, the
Court cites cases in which violations of rights other than the right to
effective counsel—and, perplexingly, even rights found outside the
Sixth Amendment and the Constitution entirely—were not cured by a
subsequent trial. Vasquez v. Hillery, 474 U. S. 254 (1986) (violation of
equal protection in grand jury selection); Ballard v. United States, 329
U. S. 187 (1946) (violation of statutory scheme providing that women
serve on juries); Stirone v. United States, 361 U. S. 212 (1960) (violation
of Fifth Amendment right to indictment by grand jury). Unlike the
right to effective counsel, no showing of prejudice is required to make
violations of the rights at issue in Vasquez, Ballard, and Stirone com­
plete. See Vasquez, supra, at 263–264 (“[D]iscrimination in the grand
jury undermines the structural integrity of the criminal tribunal itself,
and is not amenable to harmless-error review”); Ballard, supra, at 195
(“[R]eversible error does not depend on a showing of prejudice in an
individual case”); Stirone, supra, at 217 (“Deprivation of such a basic
right is far too serious to be treated as nothing more than a variance
and then dismissed as harmless error”). Those cases are thus irrele­
vant to the question presented here, which is whether a defendant can
establish prejudice under Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668
(1984), while conceding the fairness of his conviction, sentence, and
appeal.

