Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

outcome as legitimate ‘prejudice,’ ” Williams, supra, at
391–392, because defendants would receive a windfall as a
result of the application of an incorrect legal principle or
a defense strategy outside the law. Here, however, the
injured client seeks relief from counsel’s failure to meet a
valid legal standard, not from counsel’s refusal to violate
it. He maintains that, absent ineffective counsel, he would
have accepted a plea offer for a sentence the prosecution
evidently deemed consistent with the sound administra­
tion of criminal justice. The favorable sentence that elud­
ed the defendant in the criminal proceeding appears to be
the sentence he or others in his position would have re­
ceived in the ordinary course, absent the failings of coun­
sel. See Bibas, Regulating the Plea-Bargaining Market:
From Caveat Emptor to Consumer Protection, 99 Cal. L.
Rev. 1117, 1138 (2011) (“The expected post-trial sentence
is imposed in only a few percent of cases. It is like the
sticker price for cars: only an ignorant, ill-advised con­
sumer would view full price as the norm and anything less
a bargain”); see also Frye, ante, at 7–8. If a plea bargain
has been offered, a defendant has the right to effective
assistance of counsel in considering whether to accept it.
If that right is denied, prejudice can be shown if loss of the
plea opportunity led to a trial resulting in a conviction on
more serious charges or the imposition of a more severe
sentence.
It is, of course, true that defendants have “no right to be
offered a plea . . . nor a federal right that the judge accept
it.” Frye, ante, at 12. In the circumstances here, that is
beside the point. If no plea offer is made, or a plea deal
is accepted by the defendant but rejected by the judge, the
issue raised here simply does not arise. Much the same
reasoning guides cases that find criminal defendants have
a right to effective assistance of counsel in direct appeals
even though the Constitution does not require States to
provide a system of appellate review at all. See Evitts, 469

