12

LAFLER v. COOPER
SCALIA, J., dissenting

for the purpose of sparing the expense of trial. See, e.g.,
World Plea Bargaining 344, 363–366 (S. Thaman ed.
2010). In Europe, many countries adhere to what they
aptly call the “legality principle” by requiring prosecutors
to charge all prosecutable offenses, which is typically
incompatible with the practice of charge-bargaining. See,
e.g., id., at xxii; Langbein, Land Without Plea Bargaining:
How the Germans Do It, 78 Mich. L. Rev. 204, 210–211
(1979) (describing the “Legalitätsprinzip,” or rule of com­
pulsory prosecution, in Germany). Such a system reflects
an admirable belief that the law is the law, and those who
break it should pay the penalty provided.
In the United States, we have plea bargaining a-plenty,
but until today it has been regarded as a necessary evil. It
presents grave risks of prosecutorial overcharging that
effectively compels an innocent defendant to avoid massive
risk by pleading guilty to a lesser offense; and for guilty
defendants it often—perhaps usually—results in a sen­
tence well below what the law prescribes for the actual
crime. But even so, we accept plea bargaining because
many believe that without it our long and expensive pro­
cess of criminal trial could not sustain the burden imposed
on it, and our system of criminal justice would grind to a
halt. See, e.g., Alschuler, Plea Bargaining and its History,
79 Colum. L. Rev. 1, 38 (1979).
Today, however, the Supreme Court of the United
States elevates plea bargaining from a necessary evil to
a constitutional entitlement. It is no longer a somewhat
embarrassing adjunct to our criminal justice system;
rather, as the Court announces in the companion case to
this one, “ ‘it is the criminal justice system.’ ” Frye, ante, at
7 (quoting approvingly from Scott 1912). Thus, even
though there is no doubt that the respondent here is guilty
of the offense with which he was charged; even though he
has received the exorbitant gold standard of American
justice—a full-dress criminal trial with its innumerable

