Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

at 203.
The Court, moreover, has not followed a rigid rule that
an otherwise fair trial remedies errors not occurring at the
trial itself. It has inquired instead whether the trial cured
the particular error at issue. Thus, in Vasquez v. Hillery,
474 U. S. 254 (1986), the deliberate exclusion of all
African-Americans from a grand jury was prejudicial because a defendant may have been tried on charges that
would not have been brought at all by a properly constituted
grand jury. Id., at 263; see Ballard v. United States, 329
U. S. 187, 195 (1946) (dismissing an indictment returned
by a grand jury from which women were excluded); see
also Stirone v. United States, 361 U. S. 212, 218–219
(1960) (reversing a defendant’s conviction because the jury
may have based its verdict on acts not charged in the
indictment). By contrast, in United States v. Mechanik,
475 U. S. 66 (1986), the complained-of error was a viola­
tion of a grand jury rule meant to ensure probable cause
existed to believe a defendant was guilty. A subsequent
trial, resulting in a verdict of guilt, cured this error. See
id., at 72–73.
In the instant case respondent went to trial rather than
accept a plea deal, and it is conceded this was the result of
ineffective assistance during the plea negotiation process.
Respondent received a more severe sentence at trial, one
3½ times more severe than he likely would have received
by pleading guilty. Far from curing the error, the trial
caused the injury from the error. Even if the trial itself is
free from constitutional flaw, the defendant who goes to
trial instead of taking a more favorable plea may be preju­
diced from either a conviction on more serious counts or
the imposition of a more severe sentence.
Second, petitioner claims this Court refined Strickland’s
prejudice analysis in Fretwell to add an additional re­
quirement that the defendant show that ineffective assis­
tance of counsel led to his being denied a substantive or

