6

LAFLER v. COOPER
SCALIA, J., dissenting

imprisonment instead. The objection was fully supported
by then-extant Circuit law, so that the sentencing court
would have been compelled to sustain it, producing a life
sentence that principles of double jeopardy would likely
make final. See id., at 383–385 (Stevens, J., dissenting);
Bullington v. Missouri, 451 U. S. 430 (1981). By the time
Fretwell’s claim came before us, however, the Circuit law
had been overruled in light of one of our cases. We deter­
mined that a prejudice analysis “focusing solely on mere
outcome determination, without attention to whether the
result of the proceeding was fundamentally unfair or
unreliable,” would be defective. Fretwell, 506 U. S., at
369. Because counsel’s error did not “deprive the defend­
ant of any substantive or procedural right to which the
law entitles him,” the defendant’s sentencing proceeding
was fair and its result was reliable, even though counsel’s
error may have affected its outcome. Id., at 372. In Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362, 391–393 (2000), we ex­
plained that even though Fretwell did not mechanically
apply an outcome-based test for prejudice, its reasoning
was perfectly consistent with Strickland. “Fretwell’s
counsel had not deprived him of any substantive or pro­
cedural right to which the law entitled him.” 529 U. S.
at 392.2
——————
2 Kimmelman v. Morrison, 477 U. S. 365 (1986), cited by the Court,
ante, at 10–11, does not contradict this principle. That case, which
predated Fretwell and Williams, considered whether our holding that
Fourth Amendment claims fully litigated in state court cannot be
raised in federal habeas “should be extended to Sixth Amendment
claims of ineffective assistance of counsel where the principal allegation
and manifestation of inadequate representation is counsel’s failure to
file a timely motion to suppress evidence allegedly obtained in violation
of the Fourth Amendment.” 477 U. S., at 368. Our negative answer to
that question had nothing to do with the issue here. The parties in
Kimmelman had not raised the question “whether the admission of
illegally seized but reliable evidence can ever constitute ‘prejudice’
under Strickland”—a question similar to the one presented here—and

