Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

injury may be to require the prosecution to reoffer the plea
proposal. Once this has occurred, the judge can then
exercise discretion in deciding whether to vacate the con­
viction from trial and accept the plea or leave the convic­
tion undisturbed.
In implementing a remedy in both of these situations,
the trial court must weigh various factors; and the bound­
aries of proper discretion need not be defined here. Prin­
ciples elaborated over time in decisions of state and feder­
al courts, and in statutes and rules, will serve to give more
complete guidance as to the factors that should bear upon
the exercise of the judge’s discretion. At this point, how­
ever, it suffices to note two considerations that are of
relevance.
First, a court may take account of a defendant’s earlier
expressed willingness, or unwillingness, to accept respon­
sibility for his or her actions. Second, it is not necessary
here to decide as a constitutional rule that a judge is required to prescind (that is to say disregard) any infor­
mation concerning the crime that was discovered after the
plea offer was made. The time continuum makes it diffi­
cult to restore the defendant and the prosecution to the
precise positions they occupied prior to the rejection of the
plea offer, but that baseline can be consulted in finding a
remedy that does not require the prosecution to incur the
expense of conducting a new trial.
Petitioner argues that implementing a remedy here will
open the floodgates to litigation by defendants seeking to
unsettle their convictions. See Brief for Petitioner 20.
Petitioner’s concern is misplaced. Courts have recognized
claims of this sort for over 30 years, see supra, at 5, and
yet there is no indication that the system is overwhelmed
by these types of suits or that defendants are receiving
windfalls as a result of strategically timed Strickland
claims. See also Padilla, 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 14)
(“We confronted a similar ‘floodgates’ concern in Hill,” but

