Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

Strickland, the state court simply found that respondent’s
rejection of the plea was knowing and voluntary. Cooper,
2005 WL 599740, *1, App. to Pet. for Cert. 45a. An in­
quiry into whether the rejection of a plea is knowing and
voluntary, however, is not the correct means by which to
address a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel. See
Hill, 474 U. S., at 370 (applying Strickland to assess a
claim of ineffective assistance of counsel arising out of
the plea negotiation process). After stating the incorrect
standard, moreover, the state court then made an irrele­
vant observation about counsel’s performance at trial and
mischaracterized respondent’s claim as a complaint that
his attorney did not obtain a more favorable plea bargain.
By failing to apply Strickland to assess the ineffective­
assistance-of-counsel claim respondent raised, the state
court’s adjudication was contrary to clearly established
federal law. And in that circumstance the federal courts
in this habeas action can determine the principles neces­
sary to grant relief. See Panetti v. Quarterman, 551 U. S.
930, 948 (2007).
Respondent has satisfied Strickland’s two-part test.
Regarding performance, perhaps it could be accepted that
it is unclear whether respondent’s counsel believed re­
spondent could not be convicted for assault with intent to
murder as a matter of law because the shots hit Mundy
below the waist, or whether he simply thought this would
be a persuasive argument to make to the jury to show lack
of specific intent. And, as the Court of Appeals for the
Sixth Circuit suggested, an erroneous strategic prediction
about the outcome of a trial is not necessarily deficient
performance. Here, however, the fact of deficient perfor­
mance has been conceded by all parties. The case comes to
us on that assumption, so there is no need to address this
question.
As to prejudice, respondent has shown that but for
counsel’s deficient performance there is a reasonable

