Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

SCALIA, J., dissenting

ures led him to reject a plea offer that he now wishes
to accept. However, the record shows that defendant
knowingly and intelligently rejected two plea offers
and chose to go to trial. The record fails to support de­
fendant’s contentions that defense counsel’s represen­
tation was ineffective because he rejected a defense
based on [a] claim of self-defense and because he did
not obtain a more favorable plea bargain for defend­
ant.” People v. Cooper, No. 250583 (Mar. 15, 2005),
App. to Pet. for Cert. 45a, 2005 WL 599740, *1
(per curiam) (footnote and citations omitted).
The first paragraph above, far from ignoring Strickland,
recites its standard with a good deal more accuracy than
the Court’s opinion. The second paragraph, which is
presumably an application of the standard recited in the
first, says that “defendant knowingly and intelligently
rejected two plea offers and chose to go to trial.” This can
be regarded as a denial that there was anything “funda­
mentally unfair” about Cooper’s conviction and sentence,
so that no Strickland prejudice had been shown. On the
other hand, the entire second paragraph can be regarded
as a contention that Cooper’s claims of inadequate repre­
sentation were unsupported by the record. The state
court’s analysis was admittedly not a model of clarity, but
federal habeas corpus is a “guard against extreme mal­
functions in the state criminal justice systems,” not a
license to penalize a state court for its opinion-writing
technique. Harrington v. Richter, 562 U. S. ___, ___ (2011)
(slip op., at 13) (internal quotation marks omitted). The
Court’s readiness to find error in the Michigan court’s
opinion is “inconsistent with the presumption that state
courts know and follow the law,” Woodford v. Visciotti, 537
U. S. 19, 24 (2002) (per curiam), a presumption borne out
here by the state court’s recitation of the correct legal
standard.
Since it is ambiguous whether the state court’s holding

