No. 08–538 [June 17, 2010]  JUSTICE GINSBURG, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and JUSTICE BREYER join, dissenting. In Chapter 7 bankruptcies, debtors must surrender to the trustee-in-bankruptcy all their assets, 11 U. S. C. §541, but may reclaim for themselves exempt property, §522. Within 30 days after the meeting of creditors, the trustee or a creditor may file an objection to the debtor’s designation of property as exempt. Fed. Rule Bkrtcy. Proc. 4003(b). Absent timely objection, “property claimed [by the debtor] as exempt . . . is exempt.” §522(l). The trustee in this case, petitioner William G. Schwab, maintains that the obligation promptly to object to exemp­ tion claims extends only to the qualification of an asset as exemptible, not to the debtor’s valuation of the asset. Respondent Nadejda Reilly, the debtor-in-bankruptcy, urges that the timely objection requirement applies not only to the debtor’s designation of an asset as exempt; the requirement applies as well, she asserts, to her estimate of the asset’s market value. That is so, she reasons, because the asset’s current dollar value is critical to the determi­ nation whether she may keep the property intact and outside bankruptcy, or whether the trustee, at any time during the course of the proceedings, may sell it. The Court holds that challenges to the debtor’s valua­ tion of exemptible assets need not be made within the 30­
day period allowed for “objection[s] to the list of property claimed as exempt.” Rule 4003(b). Instead, according to the Court, no time limit constrains the trustee’s (or a creditor’s) prerogative to place at issue the debtor’s evaluation of the property as fully exempt. The Court’s decision drastically reduces Rule 4003’s governance, for challenges to valuation have been, until today, the most common type of objection leveled against exemption claims. See 9 Collier on Bankruptcy ¶4003.04, mally, objections to exemptions will focus primarily on issues of valuation.”). In addition to departing from the prevailing understanding and practice, the Court’s deci­ sion exposes debtors to protracted uncertainty concerning their right to retain exempt property, thereby impeding the “fresh start” exemptions are designed to foster. In accord with the courts below, I would hold that a debtor’s valuation of exempt property counts and becomes conclu­ sive absent a timely objection. Nadejda Reilly is a cook who operated a one-person catering business. Unable to cover her debts, she filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition appending all required schedules and statements. Relevant here, her filings included a form captioned “Schedule B - Personal Prop­ erty,” which called for enumeration of “all personal prop­ erty of the debtor of whatever kind.” App. 40a. On that all-encompassing schedule, Reilly listed “business equip­ ment,” i.e., her kitchen equipment, with a current market value of $10,718. Id., at 49a. Reilly also filed the more particular form captioned “Schedule C - Property Claimed as Exempt.” Id., at 56a. Schedule C contained four columns, the first headed “De­ scription of Property”; the second, “Specify Law Providing Each Exemption”; the third, “Value of Claimed Exemp­
tion”; and the fourth, “Current Market Value of Property Without Deducting Exemptions.” Id., at 57a. In the first column of Schedule C, Reilly wrote, as she did in Schedule B’s description-of-property column: “See attached list of business equipment.” Id., at 58a. On the list appended to Schedules B and C, Reilly set out by hand a 31-item inven­ tory of her restaurant-plus-catering-venture equipment. Next to each item, e.g., “Dough Mixer,” “Gas stove,” “Hood,” she specified, first, the purchase price and, next, “Today’s Market Value,” which added up to $10,718 for the entire inventory. Id., at 51a–55a.1 As the laws securing exemption of her kitchen equip­ ment, Reilly specified in the second Schedule C column, §552(d)(6), the exemption covering trade tools, and §552(d)(5), the “wildcard” exemption. Id., at 58a.2 In the value-of-claimed-exemption column, she listed $1,850, then the maximum trade-tools exemption, and $8,868, drawn from her wildcard exemption, amounts adding up to $10,718. Ibid. And in the fourth, current-market­ value, column, she recorded $10,718, corresponding to the total market value she had set out in her inventory and reported in Schedule B. Ibid. Before the 30-day clock on filing objections had begun to run, an appraiser told Schwab that Reilly’s equipment was worth at least $17,000. Brief for Petitioner 15; App. 164a. Nevertheless, Schwab did not object to the $10,718 market value Reilly attributed to her business equipment in
Schedule C and the attached inventory. Instead, he al­ lowed the limitations period to lapse and then moved, unsuccessfully, for permission to sell the equipment at auction. Id., at 141a–143a.3 From Reilly’s filings, the Bankruptcy Judge found it evident that Reilly had claimed the property itself, not its dollar value, as exempt. Id., at 168a–169a (“I know there’s an argument . . . that . . . the property identified as exempt is really the [valuation] column, [i.e., $10,718,] but that’s not what the forms say. The forms say property declared as exempt and to see attached list. So, they’re exempting all the property. . . . If the Trustee believes that . . . all the property cannot be exempt, [he] should object to it.”). The District Court and Court of Appeals similarly con­ cluded that, by listing the identical amount, $10,718, as the property’s market value and the value of the claimed exemptions, Reilly had signaled her intention to safeguard all of her kitchen equipment from inclusion in the bank­ ruptcy estate. In re Reilly, 403 B. R. 336, 338–339 (MD Pa. 2006); In re Reilly, 534 F. 3d 173, 178 (CA3 2008). Both courts looked to §522(l) and Federal Rule of Bank­ ruptcy Procedure 4003(b), which state, respectively: “The debtor shall file a list of property that the debtor claims as exempt . . . . Unless a party in inter­ est objects, the property claimed as exempt on such list is exempt.” §522(l).
“A party in interest may file an objection to the list of property claimed as exempt only within 30 days after the meeting of creditors held under §341(a) is con­ cluded . . . . The court may, for cause, extend the time for filing objections if, before the time to object ex­ pires, a party in interest files a request for an exten­ sion.” Rule 4003(b).4 Schwab having filed no objection within the allowable 30 days, each of the tribunals below ruled that the entire inventory of Reilly’s business equipment qualified as exempt in full. App. 168a; 403 B. R., at 339; 534 F. 3d, at 178. The leading treatise on bankruptcy, the Court of Appeals noted, id., at 180, n. 4, is in accord: “Normally, if the debtor lists property as exempt, that listing is interpreted as a claim for exemption of the debtor’s entire interest in the property, and the debtor’s valuation of that interest is treated as the amount of the exemption claimed. Were it other­ wise—that is, if the listing were construed to claim as exempt only that portion of the property having the value stated—the provisions finalizing exemptions if no objections are filed would be rendered meaningless. The trustee or creditors could [anytime] claim that the debtor’s interest in the property was greater than the value claimed as exempt and [then] object to the debtor exempting his or her entire interest in the property after the deadline for objections had passed.” 9 Collier ¶4003.02[1], pp. 4003–4 to 4003–5. Agreeing with the courts below, I would hold that Reilly, by her precise identification of the exempt property, and her specification of $10,718 as both the current market value of her kitchen equipment and the value of the
claimed exemptions, had made her position plain: She claimed as exempt the listed property itself—not the dollar amount, up to $10,718, that sale of the property by Schwab might yield. Because neither Schwab nor any creditor lodged a timely objection, the listed property became exempt, reclaimed as property of the debtor, and therefore outside the bankruptcy estate the trustee is charged to administer. Pursuant to §522(l), Reilly filed a list of property she claimed as exempt from the estate-in-bankruptcy. Her filing left no doubt that her exemption claim encompassed her entire inventory of kitchen equipment. Schwab, in fact, was fully aware of the nature of the claim Reilly asserted. At the meeting of creditors, Reilly reiterated that she sought to keep the equipment in her possession; she would rather discontinue the bankruptcy proceeding, she made plain, than lose her equipment. See supra, at 4, n. 3. Bankruptcy Rule 4003(b) requires the trustee, if he contests the debtor’s exemption claim in whole or part, to file an objection within 30 days after the meeting of credi­ tors. Absent a timely objection, “the property claimed as exempt . . . is exempt.” §522(l); Rule 4003. That prescrip­ tion should be dispositive of this case. The Court holds, however, that Schwab was not obliged to file a timely objection to the exemption Reilly claimed, and indeed could auction off her cooking equipment any­ time prior to her discharge. In so holding, the Court de­ crees that no objection need be made to a debtor’s valua­ tion of her property. To support the conclusion that Rule 4003’s timely objec­ tion requirement does not encompass the debtor’s estima­ tion of her property’s market value, the Court homes in on the language of exemption prescriptions that are subject to
a monetary cap.5 Those prescriptions, the Court points out, “define the ‘property’ a debtor may ‘clai[m] as exempt’ as the debtor’s ‘interest’—up to a specified dollar amount—in the assets described in the category, not as the assets themselves.” Ante, at 10. So long as a debtor values her claimed exemption at a dollar amount below the statutory cap, the Court reasons, the claim is on-its­ face permissible no matter the market value she ascribes to the asset. To evaluate the propriety of Reilly’s declared “interest” in her kitchen equipment, the Court concludes, Schwab was obliged promptly to inspect “three, and only three, entries on Reilly’s Schedule C: the description of the business equipment . . . ; the Code provisions governing the claimed exemptions; and the amounts Reilly listed in the column titled ‘value of claimed exemption.’ ” Ante, at 12–13.6
The Court’s account, however, shuts from sight the vital part played by the fourth entry on Schedule C—current market value—when a capped exemption is claimed. A debtor who estimates a market value below the cap, and lists an identical amount as the value of her claimed ex­ emption, thereby signals that her aim is to keep the listed property in her possession, outside the estate-in­ bankruptcy. In contrast, a debtor who estimates a market value above the cap, and above the value of her claimed exemption, thereby recognizes that she cannot shelter the property itself and that the trustee may seek to sell it for whatever it is worth.7 Schedule C’s final column, in other words, alerts the trustee whether the debtor is claiming a right to retain the listed property itself as her own, a right secured to her if the trustee files no timely objection.8 Because an asset’s market value is key to determining
the character of the interest the debtor is asserting in that asset, Rule 4003(b) is properly read to require objections to valuation within 30 days, just as the Rule requires timely objections to the debtor’s description of the property, the asserted legal basis for the exemption, and the claimed value of the exemption. See 4 Collier ¶522.05[1], p. 522– debtor’s claim of exemption,” trustees need the informa­ tion in all four columns of Schedule C; “[market] value” is “essential” to judging whether the claim is proper because “[e]xemption provisions often are limited according to . . . [the property’s] value.”). 9 Requiring objections to market valuation notably facili­ tates the debtor’s fresh start, and thus best fulfills the prime purpose of the exemption prescriptions. See, e.g., ruptcy provisions “must be construed” in light of policy “to
rity Industrial Bank, 459 U. S. 70, 72, n. 1 (1982); ante, at 19. The 30-day deadline for objections, this Court has recognized, “prompt[s] parties to act and . . . produce[s] (1992). As “there can be no possibility of further objection to the exemptions” after this period elapses, the principal bankruptcy treatise observes, “if the debtor is not yet in possession of the property claimed as exempt, it should be turned over to [her] at this time to effectuate fully the fresh start purpose of the exemptions.” 9 Collier ¶4003.03[3], p. 4003–13. With the benefit of closure, and the certainty it brings, the debtor may, at the end of the 30 days, plan for her future secure in the knowledge that the possessions she has exempted in their entirety are hers to keep. See 534 F. 3d, at 180. If she has reclaimed her car from the estate, for example, she may accept a job not within walking distance. See Brief for National Association of Consumer Bankruptcy Attorneys et al. as Amici Curiae 2–3 (herein­ after NACBA Brief). Or if she has exempted her kitchen equipment, she may launch a new catering venture. See App. 138a (Reilly “wishe[d] to continue in restaurant and catering as her occupation” postbankruptcy.). By permitting trustees to challenge a debtor’s valuation of exempted property anytime before discharge, the Court casts a cloud of uncertainty over the debtor’s use of assets reclaimed in full. If the trustee gains a different opinion of an item’s value months, even years, after the debtor has filed her bankruptcy petition,10 he may seek to repossess the asset, auction it off, and hand the debtor a check for
the dollar amount of her claimed exemption.11 With this threat looming until discharge, “[h]ow can debtors rea­ sonably be expected to restructure their affairs”? NACBA Brief 25. See In re Polis, 217 F. 3d 899, 903 (CA7 2000) (Posner, J.) (“If the assets sought to be exempted by the debtor were not valued at a date early in the bankruptcy proceeding, neither the debtor nor the creditors would know who had the right to them.”). The Court and Schwab raise three concerns about read­ ing Rule 4003 to require timely objection to the debtor’s estimate of an exempt asset’s market value: Would trus­ tees face an untoward administrative burden? Would trustees lack fair notice of the need to object? And would debtors be tempted to undervalue their property in an effort to avoid the monetary cap on exemptions? In my judgment, all three questions should be answered no. The Court suggests that requiring timely objections to a debtor’s valuation of exempt property would saddle trus­ tees with an unmanageable load. See ante, at 18 (declin­ ing to “expand . . . the universe of information an inter­ ested party must consider in evaluating the validity of a claimed exemption”). See also Brief for Petitioner 32–33; Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 24.12 But trus­
tees, sooner or later, must attempt to ascertain the market value of exempted assets. They must do so to determine whether sale of the items would likely produce surplus proceeds for the estate above the value of the claimed exemption, see §704(a)(1); the only question, then, is when this market valuation must occur—(1) within 30 days or (2) at any time before discharge? Removing valuation from Rule 4003’s governance thus does little to reduce the labors trustees must undertake. The 30-day objection period, I note, does not impose on trustees any additional duty, but rather guides the exer­ cise of existing responsibilities; under Rule 4003(b), a trustee must rank evaluation of the debtor’s exemptions as a priority item in his superintendence of the estate.13 And if the trustee entertains any doubt about the accuracy of a debtor’s estimation of market value, the procedure for interposing objections is hardly arduous. The trustee need only file with the court a simple declaration stating that an item’s value exceeds the amount listed by the debtor.14
If the trustee needs more than 30 days to assess market value, moreover, the time period is eminently extendable. Rule 4003(b) prescribes that a trustee may, for cause, ask the court for an extension of the objection period. Alterna­ tively, the trustee can postpone the conclusion of the meeting of creditors, from which the 30-day clock runs, simply by adjourning the meeting to a future date. Rule 2003(e). A trustee also may examine the debtor under oath at the creditors’ meeting, Rule 2003(b)(1); if he gath­ ers information impugning her exemption claims, he may ask the bankruptcy court to hold a hearing to determine valuation issues, Rule 4003(c). See Taylor, 503 U. S., at 644 (“If [the trustee] did not know the value of [a claimed exemption], he could have sought a hearing on the issue . . . or . . . asked the Bankruptcy Court for an extension of time to object.”). See also NACBA Brief 19, 21–23 (listing ways trustees may enlarge the limitations period for objections). Trustees, in sum, have ample mechanisms at their disposal to gain the time and information they need to lodge objections to valuation. On affording trustees fair notice of the need to object, the Court emphasizes that a debtor must list her claimed exemptions “in a manner that makes the scope of the exemption clear.” Ante, at 20. If a debtor wishes to ex­ empt property in its entirety, for example, the Court coun­ sels her to write “full fair market value (FMV)” or “100% of FMV” in Schedule C’s value-of-claimed-exemption column.
Ante, at 20–21 (internal quotation marks omitted). See also Tr. of Oral Arg. 6–7, 26–29; In re Hyman, 967 F. 2d 1316, 1319–1320, n. 6 (CA9 1992) (Trustees must be able to assess the validity of an exemption from the face of a Kronz, the Court notes, is instructive. In Taylor, the debtor recorded the term “$ unknown” as the value of a claimed exemption, which, the Court observes, raised a “warning fla[g]” because the value “was not plainly within the limits the Code allows.” Ante, at 17. True, a debtor’s schedules must give notice sufficient to cue the trustee that an objection may be in order. But a “warning flag” is in the eye of the beholder: If a debtor lists identical amounts as the market value of exempted property and the value of her claimed exemption, she has, on the face of her schedules, reclaimed the entire asset just as surely as if she had recorded “100% of FMV” in Sched­ ule C’s value-of-claimed-exemption column. See Brief for Respondent 36. See also 9 Collier ¶4003.03[3], p. 4003–14 (“Only when a debtor’s schedules specifically value the debtor’s interest in the property at an amount higher than the amount claimed as exempt can it be argued that a part of the debtor’s interest in property has not been ex­ empted.” (emphasis added)). In this case, by specifying $10,718 as both the current market value of her kitchen equipment and the value of her claimed exemptions, Reilly gave notice that she had reclaimed the listed property in full. See supra, at 2–6. To borrow the Court’s terminology, Reilly waved a “warn­ ing flag” that should have prompted Schwab to object if he believed the equipment could not be reclaimed in its en­ tirety because its value exceeded the statutory cap. 534 F. 3d, at 179. See 4 Collier ¶522.05[2][b], p. 522–33 (“Nor­ mally, if a debtor lists an asset as having a particular value in the schedules and then exempts that value, the schedules should be read as a claim of exemption for the
entire asset, to which the trustee should object if the trustee believes the asset has been undervalued.”). Training its attention on trustees’ needs, moreover, the Court overlooks the debtor’s plight. As just noted, the Court counsels debtors wishing to exempt an asset in full to write “100% of FMV” or “full FMV” in the value-of­ claimed-exemption column. But a debtor following the instructions that accompany Schedule C would consider such a response nonsensical, for those instructions direct her to “state the dollar value of the claimed exemption in the space provided.” Fed. Rule Bkrtcy. Proc. Official Form 6, Schedule C, Instruction 5 (1991) (emphasis added). Chapter 7 debtors are often unrepresented. How are they to know they must ignore Schedule C’s instructions and employ the “warning flag” described today by the Court, if they wish to trigger the trustee’s obligation to object to their market valuation in a timely fashion? See In re Anderson, 377 B. R. 865, 875 (Bkrtcy. App. Panel CA6 2007).15 Schwab finally urges that requiring timely objections to a debtor’s market-value estimations “would give debtors a perverse incentive to game the system by undervaluing their assets.” Brief for Petitioner 35; see Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 27. The Court rejected an argu­ ment along these lines in Taylor, and should follow suit here. Multiple measures, Taylor explained, discourage undervaluation of property claimed as exempt. 503 U. S.,
at 644. Among those measures: The debtor files her exemption claim under penalty of perjury. See Rule 1008. She risks judicial sanction for signing documents not well grounded in fact. Rule 9011. And proof of fraud subjects her to criminal prosecution, 18 U. S. C. §152; extends the limitations period for filing objections to Schedule C, Rule 4003(b); and authorizes denial of dis­ charge, 11 U. S. C. §727(a)(4)(B). See also NACBA Brief 29–33 (detailing additional checks against inadequate or inaccurate filings). Furthermore, the objection procedure is itself a safe­ guard against debtor undervaluation. If a trustee sus­ pects that the market value of property claimed as exempt may exceed a debtor’s estimate, he should do just what Rule 4003(b) prescribes: “[F]ile an objection . . . within 30 days after the meeting of creditors.” * * * For the reasons stated, I would affirm the Third Cir­ cuit’s judgment.
GINSBURG, J., of GINSBURG Appendix to opiniondissenting , J. 
GINSBURG, J., of GINSBURG Appendix to opiniondissenting , J.
GINSBURG, J., of GINSBURG Appendix to opiniondissenting , J.
GINSBURG, J., of GINSBURG Appendix to opiniondissenting , J.
GINSBURG, J., of GINSBURG Appendix to opiniondissenting , J.
GINSBURG, J., of GINSBURG Appendix to opiniondissenting , J.
——————
1 Reilly’s Schedules B and C, and the inventory she attached to the
forms, are reproduced in an Appendix to this opinion.
2 Unlike exemptions that describe the specific property debtors may
preserve, e.g., 11 U. S. C. §522(d)(6) (debtor may exempt her “aggregate
interest, not to exceed [$1,850] in value, in any implements, profes­
sional books, or tool[s] of [her] trade”), the “wildcard” exemption per­
mits a debtor to shield her “aggregate interest in any property” she
chooses, up to a stated dollar limit, §522(d)(5); In re Smith, 640 F. 2d
888, 891 (CA7 1981).


——————
3 Schwab informed Reilly at the meeting of creditors that he planned
to sell all of her business equipment. App. 137a. She promptly moved
to dismiss her bankruptcy petition, stating that her “business equip­
ment . . . is necessary to her livelihood and art, and was a gift to her
from her parents.” Id., at 138a. She “d[id] not desire to continue with
the bankruptcy,” she added, because “she wishe[d] to continue in
restaurant and catering as her occupation.” Ibid. The Bankruptcy
Court denied Reilly’s dismissal motion simultaneously with Schwab’s
motion to sell Reilly’s equipment. Id., at 149a–170a.


——————
4 In 2008, this prescription was recodified without material change
and designated Rule 4003(b)(1).


——————
5 Section 522(d) catalogs exemptions of two types. Most exemptions—
and all of those Reilly invoked—place a monetary limit on the value of
the property the debtor may reclaim. See, e.g., §522(d)(2) (“motor
vehicle”); §522(d)(3) (“household furnishings, household goods, wearing
apparel, appliances, books, animals, crops, or musical instruments”);
§522(d)(4) (“jewelry”). For certain exemptions not at issue here, the
Bankruptcy Code authorizes reclamation of the property in full without
any cap on value. See, e.g., §522(d)(7) (“unmatured life insurance
contract”); §522(d)(9) (“[p]rofessionally prescribed health aids”);
§522(d)(11)(A) (“award under a crime victim’s reparation law”).
6 In support of its view that market value is not relevant to determin­
ing the “property claimed as exempt” for purposes of Rule 4003(b)’s
timely objection mandate, the Court observes that Schedule C did not
require the debtor to list this information until 1991. Ante, at 14–15.
Prior to 1991, however, debtors recorded market value on a different
schedule. See Interim Fed. Rule Bkrtcy. Proc. Official Form 6, Sched­
ule B–2 (1979) (requiring debtor to list the “[m]arket value of [her]
interest [in personal property] without deduction for . . . exemptions
claimed”). Trustees assessing the “property claimed as exempt,”
therefore, have always been able, from the face of the debtor’s filings, to
compare the value of the claimed exemption to the property’s declared
market value. See Brief for National Association of Consumer Bank­
ruptcy Attorneys et al. as Amici Curiae 34.


——————
7 By authorizing exemption of assets that a debtor would want to
keep in kind, such as her jewelry and car, but limiting the exemptible
value of this property, Congress struck a balance between debtors’
and creditors’ interests: Debtors can reclaim items helpful to their
fresh start after bankruptcy, but only if those items are of modest
value. Assets of larger worth, however, are subject to liquidation so
that creditors may obtain a portion of the item’s value. Cf. In re Price,
370 F. 3d 362, 378 (CA3 2004) (“[B]ankruptcy law is bilateral, replete
with protections and policy considerations favoring both debtors and
creditors.”).
8 The significance of market value is what differentiates capped ex­
emptions from uncapped ones that permit debtors to exempt certain
property in kind regardless of its worth. See supra, at 7, n. 5. For
uncapped exemptions, the nature of the property the debtor has re­
claimed is clear: If the exemption is valid, the debtor gets the asset in
full every time. For capped exemptions, however, market value is a
crucial component in determining whether the debtor gets the item
itself or a sum of money representing a share of the item’s liquidation
value. Reading Bankruptcy Rule 4003(b) to require objections to
valuation thus does not, as the Court contends, “elid[e] the distinction”
between capped and uncapped exemptions, ante, at 12 (emphasis
added), but instead accounts for that distinction.


——————
9 Suggesting

that this interpretation of Rule 4003(b) “lacks statutory
support,” ante, at 13, n. 11, the Court repeatedly emphasizes that the
Bankruptcy Code defines the “property claimed as exempt,” to which a
trustee must object, as “the debtor’s ‘interest’—up to a specified dollar
amount—in the assets described in [capped exemption] categor[ies],”
ante, at 10; see, e.g., ante, at 11; ibid., n. 9; ante, at 21, n. 19. But the
commonly understood definition of a property “interest” is “[a] legal
share in something; all or part of a legal or equitable claim to or right
in property. . . . Collectively, the word includes any aggregation of
[such] rights.” Black’s Law Dictionary 828 (8th ed. 2004). Schwab,
therefore, could not comprehend whether Reilly claimed a monetary or
an in-kind “interest” in her kitchen equipment without comparing her
market valuation of the equipment to the value of her claimed exemp­
tion. See supra, at 8–9. In line with the statutory text, a debtor’s
market valuation is an essential factor in determining the nature of the
“interest” a debtor lists as exempt. Bankruptcy “forms, rules, treatise
excerpts, and policy considerations,” ante, at 7, n. 5, corroborate, rather
than conflict with, this reading of the Code.


——————
10 Schwab

states that “[c]ases in which there are assets to administer
. . . can take ‘one to four years’ to complete.” Brief for Petitioner 32
(quoting Dept. of Justice, U. S. Trustee Program, Preliminary Report on
Chapter 7 Asset Cases 1994 to 2000, p. 7 (June 2001)).


——————
11 Money generated by liquidation of an asset will often be of less
utility to a debtor, who will have to pay more to replace the item. See
H. R. Rep. No. 95–595, p. 127 (1977) (noting that “household goods have
little resale value” but “replacement costs of the goods are generally
high”).
12 This concern is questionable in light of the prevailing practice, for,
as earlier noted, valuation objections are the most common Rule
4003(b) challenge. See supra, at 2. By lopping off valuation disagree­
ments from the timely objection requirement, see, e.g., ante, at 10–11,
n. 8, the Court so severely shrinks the Rule’s realm that this question


——————
arises: Why are trustees granted a full 30 days to lodge objections?
Under the Court’s reading of the Rule, trustees need only compare a
debtor’s Schedule C to the text of the exemption prescriptions to assess
an exemption claim’s facial validity, with no further investigation
necessary. That comparison should take no more than minutes, surely
not a month.
13 Trustees, it bears noting, historically had valuation duties far more
onerous than they have today. Rule 4003’s predecessor required
trustees in the first instance, rather than debtors, to estimate the
market value of property claimed as exempt. See Rule 403(b) (1975).
Trustees had to provide this valuation to the court within 15 days of
their appointment. See ibid.
14 The leading bankruptcy treatise supplies an illustrative valuation
objection:
“[Name of Trustee], the duly qualified and acting trustee of the estate
of the debtor, would show the court the following:
“1. The debtor is not entitled under [the automobile exemption] to an
interest of more than $3,225 in an automobile. The automobile claimed
by debtor as exempt . . . has a value substantially greater than $3,225.


——————

.

.

.

.

.

“WHEREFORE Trustee prays that the court determine that debtor is
not entitled to . . . the exemptio[n] claimed by him, that the [property
claimed as exempt] which [is] disallowed be turned over to the trustee
herein as property of the estate, and that he have such other and
further relief as is just.” 13A Collier §CS17.14, p. CS 17–22 (rev. 15th
ed. 2009). See also Rules 9013–9014.


——————
15 Trustees,

in contrast, are repeat players in bankruptcy court; if this
Court required timely objections to market valuation, trustees would,
no doubt, modify their practices in response.
See 1 Collier
¶8.06[1][c][ii], p. 8–75 (rev. 15th ed. 2009) (“Since Taylor [v. Freeland &
Kronz, 503 U. S. 638 (1992)], trustees rarely fail to closely scrutinize
vague exemption claims.”). Moreover, because valuation objections are
already the norm, see supra, at 2, and 11, n. 12, few trustees would
have to adjust their behavior.

