(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SCHWAB v. REILLY
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 08–538.

Argued November 3, 2009—Decided June 17, 2010

Respondent Reilly filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy when her catering
business failed. She supported her petition with, inter alia, Schedule
B, on which debtors must list their assets, and Schedule C, on which
they must list the property they wish to reclaim as exempt. Her
Schedule B assets included cooking and other kitchen equipment, to
which she assigned an estimated market value of $10,718. On
Schedule C, she claimed two exempt interests in this “business
equipment”: a “tool[s] of the trade” exemption for the statutory
maximum “$1,850 in value,” 11 U. S. C. §522(d)(6); and $8,868 under
the statutory provisions allowing miscellaneous, or “wildcard,” ex
emptions up to $10,225 in value. The claimed exemptions’ total value
($10,718) equaled Reilly’s estimate of the equipment’s market value.
Property claimed as exempt will be excluded from the bankruptcy es
tate “[u]nless a party in interest” objects, §522(l), within a certain 30
day period, see Fed. Rule Bkrtcy. Proc. 4003(b). Absent an objection,
the property will be excluded from the estate even if the exemption’s
value exceeds what the Code permits. See, e.g., §522(l); Taylor v.
Freeland & Kronz, 503 U. S. 638, 642–643.
Although an appraisal revealed that the equipment’s total market
value could be as much as $17,200, petitioner Schwab, the bank
ruptcy estate’s trustee, did not object to the claimed exemptions be
cause the dollar value Reilly assigned to each fell within the limits of
§§522(d)(5) and (6). Schwab moved the Bankruptcy Court for per
mission to auction the equipment so Reilly could receive the $10,718
she claimed exempt and the estate could distribute the remaining
value to her creditors. Reilly countered that by equating on Schedule
C the total value of her claimed exemptions in the equipment with
the equipment’s estimated market value, she had put Schwab and


2

SCHWAB v. REILLY
Syllabus
her creditors on notice that she intended to exempt the equipment’s
full value, even if it turned out to be more than the amounts she de
clared and that the Code allowed. She asserted that the estate had
forfeited its claim to any portion of that value because Schwab had
not objected within the Rule 4003(b) period, and that she would dis
miss her petition rather than sell her equipment.
The Bankruptcy Court denied Schwab’s motion and Reilly’s condi
tional motion to dismiss. The District Court denied Schwab relief, re
jecting his argument that neither the Code nor Rule 4003(b) requires
a trustee to object to a claimed exemption where the amount the
debtor declares as the exemption’s value is within the limits the Code
prescribes. Affirming, the Third Circuit agreed that Reilly’s Schedule
C entries indicated her intent to exempt the equipment’s full value.
Relying on Taylor, it held that Schwab’s failure to object entitled
Reilly to exempt the full value of her equipment, even though that
value exceeded the amounts that Reilly declared and the Code per
mitted.

Held: Because Reilly gave “the value of [her] claimed exemption[s]” on
Schedule C dollar amounts within the range the Code allows for what
it defines as the “property claimed as exempt,” Schwab was not re
quired to object to the exemptions in order to preserve the estate’s
right to retain any value in the equipment beyond the value of the
exempt interest. Pp. 6–23.
(a) Reilly’s complicated view of the trustee’s statutory obligation,
and her reading of Schedule C, does not accord with the Code. Pp. 6–
15.
(1) The parties agree that this case is governed by §522(l), which
states that a Chapter 7 debtor must “file a list of property that the
debtor claims as exempt under subsection (b) of this section,” and
that “[u]nless a party in interest objects, the property claimed as ex
empt on such list is exempt.” Reilly asserts that the “property
claimed as exempt” refers to all of the information on Schedule C, in
cluding the estimated market value of each asset. Schwab and
amicus United States counter that because the Code defines such
property as an interest, not to exceed a certain dollar amount, in a
particular asset, not as the asset itself, the value of the property
claimed exempt should be judged on the dollar value the debtor as
signs the interest, not on the value the debtor assigns the asset.
Pp. 6–9.
(2) Schwab and the United States are correct. The portion of
§522(l) that resolves this case is not, as Reilly asserts, the provision
stating that the “property claimed as exempt on [Schedule C] is ex
empt” unless an interested party objects. Rather, it is the portion
that defines the objection’s target, namely, the “list of property that


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
the debtor claims as exempt under subsection (b).” Section 522(b)
does not define the “property claimed as exempt” by reference to the
estimated market value. It refers only to property defined in §522(d),
which in turn lists 12 categories of property that a debtor may claim
as exempt. Most of these categories and all the ones applicable here
define “property” as the debtor’s “interest”—up to a specified dollar
amount—in the assets described in the category, not as the assets
themselves. Schwab had no duty to object to the property Reilly
claimed as exempt because its stated value was within the limits the
Code allows. Reilly’s contrary view does not withstand scrutiny be
cause it defines the target of a trustee’s objection based on Schedule
C’s language and dictionary definitions of “property” at odds with the
Code’s definition. The Third Circuit failed to account for the Code’s
definition and for provisions that permit debtors to exempt certain
property in kind or in full regardless of value. See, e.g., §522(d)(9).
Schwab was entitled to evaluate the claimed exemptions’ propriety
based on three Schedule C entries: the description of the business
equipment in which Reilly claimed the exempt interests; the Code
provisions governing the claimed exemptions; and the amounts Reilly
listed in the column titled “value of claimed exemption.” This conclu
sion does not render Reilly’s market value estimate superfluous. It
simply confines that estimate to its proper role: aiding the trustee in
administering the estate by helping him identify assets that may
have value beyond the amount the debtor claims as exempt, or whose
full value may not be available for exemption. This interpretation is
consistent with the historical treatment of bankruptcy exemptions.
Pp. 9–15.
(b) Taylor does not dictate a contrary conclusion. While both Tay
lor and this case concern the consequences of a trustee’s failure to ob
ject to a claimed exemption within Rule 4003’s time period, Taylor es
tablishes and applies the straightforward proposition that an
interested party must object to a claimed exemption if the amount
the debtor lists as the “value claimed exempt” is not within statutory
limits. In Taylor, the value listed in Schedule C (“$ unknown”) was
not plainly within those limits, but here, the values ($8,868 and
$1,850) are within Code limits and thus do not raise the warning flag
present in Taylor. Departing from Taylor would not only ignore the
presumption that parties act lawfully and with knowledge of the law;
it would also require the Court to expand the statutory definition of
“property claimed as exempt” and the universe of information an in
terested party must consider in evaluating an exemption’s validity.
Even if the Code allowed such expansions, they would be ill advised.
Basing the definition of “property claimed exempt,” and thus an in
terested party’s obligation to object under §522(l), on inferences that


4

SCHWAB v. REILLY
Syllabus
party must draw from preprinted bankruptcy schedules that evolve
over time, rather than on the facial validity of the value the debtor
assigns the “property claimed as exempt” as defined by the Code,
would undermine the predictability the statute is designed to pro
vide. Pp. 16–18.
(c) Reilly’s argument threatens to convert the Code’s goal of giving
debtors a fresh start into a free pass. By permitting a debtor “to
withdraw from the estate certain interests in property, . . . up to cer
tain values,” Rousey v. Jacoway, 544 U. S. 320, 325, Congress bal
anced the difficult choices that exemption limits impose on debtors
with the economic harm that exemptions visit on creditors. This
Court should not alter that balance by requiring trustees to object to
claimed exemptions based on form entries beyond those governing an
exemption’s validity under the Code. In rejecting Reilly’s approach,
the Court does not create incentives for trustees and creditors to
sleep on their rights. The decision reached here encourages a debtor
wishing to exempt an asset’s full market value or the asset itself to
declare the value of the claimed exemption in a way that makes its
scope clear. Such declarations will encourage the trustee to object
promptly and preserve for the estate any value in the asset beyond
relevant statutory limits. If the trustee fails to object, or his objection
is overruled, the debtor will be entitled to exclude the asset’s full
value. If the objection is sustained, the debtor will be required either
to forfeit the portion of the exemption exceeding the statutory allow
ance or to revise other exemptions or arrangements with creditors to
permit the exemption. See Rule 1009(a). Either result will facilitate
the expeditious and final disposition of assets, and thus enable the
debtor and creditors to achieve a fresh start free of Reilly’s finality
and clouded-title concerns. Pp. 19–22.

534 F. 3d 173, reversed and remanded.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which STEVENS,
SCALIA, KENNEDY, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. GINSBURG, J.,
filed a dissenting opinion, in which ROBERTS, C. J., and BREYER, J.,
joined.

