Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

information to the public.” In re Primus, 436 U. S. 412,
431 (1978). Litigation on matters of public concern may
facilitate the informed public participation that is a cor­
nerstone of democratic society. It also allows individuals
to pursue desired ends by direct appeal to government
officials charged with applying the law.
The government may not misuse its role as employer
unduly to distort this deliberative process. See Garcetti,
547 U. S., at 419. Public employees are “the members of a
community most likely to have informed and definite
opinions” about a wide range of matters related, directly
or indirectly, to their employment. Pickering, 391 U. S., at
572. Just as the public has a right to hear the views of
public employees, the public has a right to the benefit
of those employees’ participation in petitioning activity.
Petitions may “allow the public airing of disputed facts”
and “promote the evolution of the law by supporting the
development of legal theories,” NLRB, 536 U. S., at 532
(internal quotation marks omitted), and these and other
benefits may not accrue if one class of knowledgeable and
motivated citizens is prevented from engaging in petition­
ing activity. When a public employee seeks to participate,
as a citizen, in the process of deliberative democracy,
either through speech or petition, “it is necessary to regard
the [employee] as the member of the general public he
seeks to be.” Pickering, supra, at 574.
The framework used to govern Speech Clause claims by
public employees, when applied to the Petition Clause,
will protect both the interests of the government and the
First Amendment right. If a public employee petitions as
an employee on a matter of purely private concern, the
employee’s First Amendment interest must give way, as it
does in speech cases. Roe, 543 U. S., at 82–83. When a
public employee petitions as a citizen on a matter of public
concern, the employee’s First Amendment interest must
be balanced against the countervailing interest of the

