6

BOROUGH OF DURYEA v. GUARNIERI
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

at the founding—a proportion that is infinitely higher if
lawsuits are considered to be petitions—it is ahistorical to
say that petitions on matters of public concern constitute
“core petitioning activity.” In the Court’s view, if Guar
nieri had submitted a letter to one of the borough of
Duryea’s council members protesting a tax assessment
that he claimed was mistaken; and if the borough had
fired him in retaliation for that petition; Guarnieri would
have no claim for a Petition Clause violation. That has to
be wrong. It takes no account of, and thus frustrates, the
principal purpose of the Petition Clause.
The Court responds that “[t]he proper scope and appli
cation of the Petition Clause . . . cannot be determined
merely by tallying up petitions to the colonial legisla
tures,” ante, at 14, but that misses the point. The text of
the Petition Clause does not distinguish petitions of public
concern from petitions of private concern. Accordingly,
there should be no doctrinal distinction between them
unless the history or tradition of the Petition Clause justi
fies it. The mere fact that the Court can enumerate sev
eral historical petitions of public importance, ante, at 14–
16, does not establish such a tradition, given that peti
tions for redress of private grievances vastly outnumbered
them. Indeed, the Court’s holding is contrary to this
Court’s historical treatment of the Petition Clause, assum
ing (as the Court believes) that the Clause embraces liti
gation: We have decided innumerable cases establishing
constitutional rights with respect to litigation, and until
today not a one of them has so much as hinted that litiga
tion of public concern enjoys more of those rights than
litigation of private concern. The Court’s belief in the
social importance of public petitions, and its reminiscences
of some of the public-petition greats of yesteryear, ibid., do
not justify the proclamation of special constitutional rights
for public petitions. It is the Constitution that establishes
constitutional rights, not the Justices’ notions of what is

