2

BOROUGH OF DURYEA v. GUARNIERI
Syllabus
ment’s Speech Clause must show that he spoke as a citizen on a mat
ter of public concern. Connick v. Myers, 461 U. S. 138, 147. Even
where the employee makes that showing, however, courts balance his
employee’s right to engage in speech against the government’s inter
est in promoting the efficiency and effectiveness of the public services
it performs through its employees. Pickering v. Board of Ed. of
Township High School Dist. 205, Will Cty., 391 U. S. 563, 568. Al
though cases might arise in which special Petition Clause concerns
would require a distinct analysis, public employees’ retaliation claims
do not call for this divergence. The close connection between the
rights of speech and petition has led Courts of Appeals other than the
Third Circuit to apply the public concern test to public employees’ Pe
tition Clause claims. This approach is justified by the substantial
common ground in the definition and delineation of these rights. Pp.
4–8.
(b) The substantial government interests that justify a cautious
and restrained approach to protecting public employees’ speech are
just as relevant in Petition Clause cases. A petition, no less than
speech, can interfere with government’s efficient and effective opera
tion by, e.g., seeking results that “contravene governmental policies
or impair the proper performance of governmental functions,” Gar
cetti v. Ceballos, 547 U. S. 410, 419. A petition taking the form of a
lawsuit against the government employer may be particularly disrup
tive, consuming public officials’ time and attention, burdening their
exercise of legitimate authority, and blurring the lines of accountabil
ity between them and the public. Here, for example, Guarnieri’s at
torney invited the jury to review myriad details of government deci
sionmaking. It is precisely to avoid this sort of intrusion into internal
governmental affairs that this Court has held that, “while the First
Amendment invests public employees with certain rights, it does not
empower them to ‘constitutionalize the employee grievance.’ ” Id., at
420. Interpreting the Petition Clause to apply even where matters of
public concern are not involved would be unnecessary, or even dis
ruptive, when there is already protection for the public employees’
rights to file grievances and litigate. Adopting a different rule for Pe
tition Clause claims would provide a ready means for public employ
ees to circumvent the public concern test’s protections and aggravate
potential harm to the government’s interests by compounding the
costs of complying with the Constitution. Pp. 8–13.
(c) Guarnieri’s claim that applying the public concern test to the
Petition Clause would be inappropriate in light of the private nature
of many petitions for redress lacks merit. Although the Clause un
doubtedly has force and application in the context of a personal
grievance addressed to the government, petitions to the government

