10

BOROUGH OF DURYEA v. GUARNIERI
Opinion of the Court

has a significant interest in disciplining public employees
who abuse the judicial process.
Unrestrained application of the Petition Clause in the context of government employment would subject a wide
range of government operations to invasive judicial super­
intendence. Employees may file grievances on a variety of
employment matters, including working conditions, pay,
discipline, promotions, leave, vacations, and terminations.
See Brief for National School Boards Association as
Amicus Curiae 5. Every government action in response
could present a potential federal constitutional issue.
Judges and juries, asked to determine whether the gov­
ernment’s actions were in fact retaliatory, would be re­
quired to give scrutiny to both the government’s response
to the grievance and the government’s justification for its
actions. This would occasion review of a host of collateral
matters typically left to the discretion of public officials.
Budget priorities, personnel decisions, and substantive
policies might all be laid before the jury. This would raise
serious federalism and separation-of-powers concerns. It
would also consume the time and attention of public offi­
cials, burden the exercise of legitimate authority, and blur
the lines of accountability between officials and the public.
This case illustrates these risks and costs. Guarnieri’s
attorney invited the jury to review myriad details of gov­
ernment decisionmaking. She questioned the council’s
decision to issue directives in writing, rather than orally,
Tr. 66 (Apr. 14, 2008); the council’s failure to consult the
mayor before issuing the directives, id., at 105 (Apr. 15,
2008); the amount of money spent to employ “Philadelphia
lawyers” to defend Guarnieri’s legal challenges, id., at
191–193:7–10 (Apr. 14, 2008); 152–153 (Apr. 16, 2008);
and the wisdom of the council’s decision to spend money to
install Global Positioning System devices on police cars,
id., at 161–162 (same). Finally, the attorney invited the
jury to evaluate the council’s decisions in light of an emo­

