2

BOROUGH OF DURYEA v. GUARNIERI
THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

a petition was addressed to the government as sovereign.
Recognizing “the realities of the employment context,” we
have held that “government has significantly greater lee
way in its dealings with citizen employees than it does
when it brings its sovereign power to bear on citizens at
large.” Engquist v. Oregon Dept. of Agriculture, 553 U. S.
591, 600, 599 (2008). Even where a public employee peti
tions the government in its capacity as sovereign, I would
balance the employee’s right to petition the sovereign
against the government’s interest as an employer in the effective and efficient management of its internal affairs.
Cf. Garcetti v. Ceballos, 547 U. S. 410, 419 (2006) (noting
that employees “speaking as citizens about matters of pub
lic concern” still must “face . . . speech restrictions that
are necessary for their employers to operate efficiently and
effectively”); United States v. Treasury Employees, 513
U. S. 454, 492 (1995) (Rehnquist, C. J., dissenting) (“In
conducting this balance [in the Speech Clause context],
we consistently have given substantial weight to govern
ment employers’ reasonable predictions of disruption, even
when the speech involved was on a matter of public con
cern”); O’Connor v. Ortega, 480 U. S. 709, 721–722 (1987)
(plurality opinion) (balancing the “the realities of the
workplace” against the “legitimate privacy interests of
public employees” to conclude that a warrant requirement
would “seriously disrupt the routine conduct of business”
and “be unduly burdensome”). In assessing a retaliation
claim under the Petition Clause, courts should be able to
conclude that, in instances when the petition is especially
disruptive, as some lawsuits might be, the balance of
interests may weigh in favor of the government employer.
Applying this framework, I would vacate the judgment
and remand. The Court of Appeals erred with respect to
both Guarnieri’s union grievance and his 42 U. S. C. §1983
suit. First, even assuming the grievance was a petition, it
was addressed to the local government in its capacity as

