Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of SCALIA, J.

engage in pernicious “circumvention” of our Speech
Clause precedents when he brings a claim premised on a
separate enumerated right to which those precedents are
inapplicable.
As to the latter: Perhaps petitions on matters of public
concern do in some sense involve an “added dimension,”
but that “added dimension” does not obliterate what has
traditionally been the principal dimension of the Petition
Clause. The public-concern limitation makes sense in the
context of the Speech Clause, because it is speech on mat
ters of public concern that lies “within the core of First
Amendment protection.” Engquist v. Oregon Dept. of Agri
culture, 553 U. S. 591, 600 (2008). The Speech Clause
“has its fullest and most urgent application to speech
uttered during a campaign for political office.” Citizens
United v. Federal Election Comm’n, 558 U. S. ___, ___
(2010) (slip op., at 23) (internal quotation marks omitted).
The unique protection granted to political speech is
grounded in the history of the Speech Clause, which “was
fashioned to assure unfettered interchange of ideas for the
bringing about of political and social changes desired by
the people.” Connick, supra, at 145 (internal quotation
marks omitted).
But the mere fact that we have a longstanding tradition
of granting heightened protection to speech of public con
cern does not suggest that a “public concern” requirement
should be written into other constitutional provisions. We
would not say that religious proselytizing is entitled to
more protection under the Free Exercise Clause than
private religious worship because public proclamations are
“core free exercise activity.” Nor would we say that the
due process right to a neutral adjudicator is heightened in
the context of litigation of national importance because
such litigation is somehow at the “core of the due process
guarantee.” Likewise, given that petitions to redress
private grievances were such a high proportion of petitions

