8

BOROUGH OF DURYEA v. GUARNIERI
Opinion of the Court

of its author to the government and, in its usual form, re­
quests action by the government to address those con­
cerns. See Sure-Tan Inc., supra, at 896–897.
This Court’s opinion in McDonald v. Smith, 472 U. S.
479 (1985), has sometimes been interpreted to mean that
the right to petition can extend no further than the right
to speak; but McDonald held only that speech contained
within a petition is subject to the same standards for
defamation and libel as speech outside a petition. In those
circumstances the Court found “no sound basis for grant­
ing greater constitutional protection to statements made
in a petition . . . than other First Amendment expres­
sions.” Id., at 485. There may arise cases where the
special concerns of the Petition Clause would provide a
sound basis for a distinct analysis; and if that is so, the
rules and principles that define the two rights might differ
in emphasis and formulation.
As other Courts of Appeals have recognized, however,
claims of retaliation by public employees do not call for
this divergence. See supra, at 4. The close connection
between these rights has led Courts of Appeals other than
the Third Circuit to apply the public concern test devel­
oped in Speech Clause cases to Petition Clause claims by
public employees. As will be explained further, this ap­
proach is justified by the extensive common ground in the
definition and delineation of these rights. The considera­
tions that shape the application of the Speech Clause to
public employees apply with equal force to claims by those
employees under the Petition Clause.
The substantial government interests that justify a
cautious and restrained approach to the protection of
speech by public employees are just as relevant when
public employees proceed under the Petition Clause.
Petitions, no less than speech, can interfere with the
efficient and effective operation of government. A petition
may seek to achieve results that “contravene governmen­

