Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

tional appeal on behalf of Guarnieri’s “little dog Hercules,
little white fluffy dog and half Shitsu.” Id., at 49:13–14
(Apr. 14, 2008). It is precisely to avoid this intrusion into
internal governmental affairs that this Court has held
that, “while the First Amendment invests public employ­
ees with certain rights, it does not empower them to ‘con­
stitutionalize the employee grievance.’ ” Garcetti, supra, at
420 (quoting Connick, 461 U. S., at 154).
If the Petition Clause were to apply even where matters
of public concern are not involved, that would be unneces­
sary, or even disruptive, when there is already protection
for the rights of public employees to file grievances and to
litigate. The government can and often does adopt statu­
tory and regulatory mechanisms to protect the rights of
employees against improper retaliation or discipline, while
preserving important government interests. Cf. Garcetti,
supra, at 425 (noting a “powerful network of legislative
enactments”). Employees who sue under federal and state
employment laws often benefit from generous and quite
detailed antiretaliation provisions. See, e.g., Pa. Stat.
Ann., Tit. 43, §1101.1201(a)(4) (Purdon 2009); §1101.1302.
These statutory protections are subject to legislative revi­
sion and can be designed for the unique needs of State,
local, or Federal Governments, as well as the special
circumstances of particular governmental offices and
agencies. The Petition Clause is not an instrument for
public employees to circumvent these legislative enact­
ments when pursuing claims based on ordinary workplace
grievances.
In light of the government’s interests in the public
employment context, it would be surprising if Petition
Clause claims by public employees were not limited as
necessary to protect the employer’s functions and respon­
sibilities. Even beyond the Speech Clause, this Court has
explained that “government has significantly greater
leeway in its dealings with citizen employees than it does

