Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

the Petition Clause even if the same conduct would not
give rise to liability under the Speech Clause. The ques­
tion presented by this case is whether the history and
purpose of the Petition Clause justify the imposition of
broader liability when an employee invokes its protection
instead of the protection afforded by the Speech Clause.
It is not necessary to say that the two Clauses are iden­
tical in their mandate or their purpose and effect to ac­
knowledge that the rights of speech and petition share
substantial common ground. This Court has said that the
right to speak and the right to petition are “cognate
rights.” Thomas v. Collins, 323 U. S. 516, 530 (1945); see
also Wayte v. United States, 470 U. S. 598, 610, n. 11
(1985). “It was not by accident or coincidence that the
rights to freedom in speech and press were coupled in a
single guaranty with the rights of the people peaceably to
assemble and to petition for redress of grievances.” Tho
mas, 323 U. S., at 530. Both speech and petition are
integral to the democratic process, although not necessar­
ily in the same way. The right to petition allows citizens
to express their ideas, hopes, and concerns to their gov­
ernment and their elected representatives, whereas the
right to speak fosters the public exchange of ideas that is
integral to deliberative democracy as well as to the whole
realm of ideas and human affairs. Beyond the political
sphere, both speech and petition advance personal expres­
sion, although the right to petition is generally concerned
with expression directed to the government seeking re­
dress of a grievance.
Courts should not presume there is always an essential
equivalence in the two Clauses or that Speech Clause
precedents necessarily and in every case resolve Petition
Clause claims. See ibid. (rights of speech and petition are
“not identical”). Interpretation of the Petition Clause
must be guided by the objectives and aspirations that
underlie the right. A petition conveys the special concerns

