14

BOROUGH OF DURYEA v. GUARNIERI
Opinion of the Court

cases under the Speech Clause, this Court has noted the
“Constitution’s special concern with threats to the right of
citizens to participate in political affairs,” Connick, supra,
at 145, even though it is likely that, in this and any other
age, most speech concerns purely private matters. The
proper scope and application of the Petition Clause like­
wise cannot be determined merely by tallying up petitions
to the colonial legislatures. Some effort must be made to
identify the historic and fundamental principles that led
to the enumeration of the right to petition in the First
Amendment, among other rights fundamental to liberty.
Petitions to the government assume an added dimension
when they seek to advance political, social, or other ideas
of interest to the community as a whole. Petition, as a
word, a concept, and an essential safeguard of freedom, is
of ancient significance in the English law and the AngloAmerican legal tradition. See, e.g., 1 W. Blackstone,
Commentaries *143. The right to petition applied to peti­
tions from nobles to the King, from Parliament to the
King, and from the people to the Parliament, and it con­
cerned both discrete, personal injuries and great matters
of state.
The right to petition traces its origins to Magna Carta,
which confirmed the right of barons to petition the King.
W. McKechnie, Magna Carta: A Commentary on the Great
Charter of King John 467 (rev. 2d ed. 1958). The Magna
Carta itself was King John’s answer to a petition from the
barons. Id., at 30–38. Later, the Petition of Right of 1628
drew upon centuries of tradition and Magna Carta as a
model for the Parliament to issue a plea, or even a de­
mand, that the Crown refrain from certain actions. 3 Car.
1, ch. 1 (1627). The Petition of Right stated four principal
grievances: taxation without consent of Parliament; arbi­
trary imprisonment; quartering or billeting of soldiers;
and the imposition of martial law. After its passage by
both Houses of Parliament, the Petition received the

