Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
assume an added dimension when they seek to advance political, so
cial, or other ideas of interest to the community as a whole. The
Clause’s history reveals the frequent use of petitions to address a
wide range of political, social, and other matters of great public im
port and interest. Pp. 13–17.
(d) The framework used to govern public employees’ Speech Clause
claims, when applied to the Petition Clause, will protect both the
government’s interests and the employee’s First Amendment right. If
a public employee petitions as an employee on a matter of purely pri
vate concern, his First Amendment interest must give way, as it does
in speech cases. San Diego v. Roe, 543 U. S. 77, 82–83. If he peti
tions as a citizen on a matter of public concern, his First Amendment
interest must be balanced against the government’s countervailing
interest in the effective and efficient management of its internal af
fairs. Pickering, supra, at 568. If that balance favors the public em
ployee, the First Amendment claim will be sustained. If the balance
favors the employer, the employee’s First Amendment claim will fail
even though the petition is on a matter of public concern. As under
the Speech Clause, whether a petition relates to a matter of public
concern will depend on its “content, form, and context . . . , as re
vealed by the whole record.” Connick, supra, at 147–148, n. 7. The
forum in which a petition is lodged will also be relevant. See Snyder
v. Phelps, 562 U. S. ___, ___. A petition filed with a government em
ployer using an internal grievance procedure in many cases will not
seek to communicate to the public or to advance a political or social
point of view beyond the employment context. Pp. 17–18.
(e) Absent full briefs by the parties, the Court need not consider
how the foregoing framework would apply to this case. P. 19.
364 Fed. Appx. 749, vacated and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined. THOMAS, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment.
SCALIA, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment in part and dis
senting in part.

