4

BOROUGH OF DURYEA v. GUARNIERI
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

framework of Connick v. Myers, 461 U. S. 138 (1983), to
retaliation claims brought under the Petition Clause. The
Court correctly holds that the Speech Clause and Petition
Clause are not co-extensive, ante, at 7–8. It acknowledges,
moreover, that the Petition Clause protects personal
grievances addressed to the government, ante, at 13. But
that is an understatement—rather like acknowledging
that the Speech Clause protects verbal expression. “[T]he
primary responsibility of colonial assemblies was the
settlement of private disputes raised by petitions.” Hig
ginson, A Short History of the Right to Petition Govern
ment for the Redress of Grievances, 96 Yale L. J. 142, 145
(1986). “[T]he overwhelming majority of First Congress
petitions presented private claims.” 8 Documentary His
tory of the First Federal Congress 1789–1791, p. xviii (K.
Bowling, W. DiGiacomantonio, & C. Bickford eds. 1998).
The Court nonetheless holds that, at least in public em
ployment cases, the Petition Clause and Speech Clause
should be treated identically, so that since the Speech
Clause does not prohibit retaliation against public em
ployees for speaking on matters of private concern, neither
does the Petition Clause. The Court gives two reasons for
this: First, “[a] different rule for each First Amendment
claim would . . . add to the complexity and expense of
compliance with the Constitution” and “would provide a
ready means for public employees to circumvent the test’s
protections,” and second, “[p]etitions to the government
. . . assume an added dimension when they seek to ad
vance political, social, or other ideas of interest to the
community as a whole.” Ante, at 12–14.
Neither reason is persuasive. As to the former: The
complexity of treating the Petition Clause and Speech
Clause separately is attributable to the inconsiderate
disregard for judicial convenience displayed by those who
ratified a First Amendment that included both provisions
as separate constitutional rights. A plaintiff does not

