12

BOROUGH OF DURYEA v. GUARNIERI
Opinion of the Court

when it brings its sovereign power to bear on citizens at
large.” Engquist v. Oregon Dept. of Agriculture, 553 U. S.
591, 599 (2008); see also NASA v. Nelson, 562 U. S. ___ ,
___ (2011) (slip op., at 12). The government’s interest in
managing its internal affairs requires proper restraints on
the invocation of rights by employees when the workplace
or the government employer’s responsibilities may be af­
fected. There is no reason to think the Petition Clause
should be an exception.
The public concern test was developed to protect these
substantial government interests. Adoption of a different
rule for Petition Clause claims would provide a ready
means for public employees to circumvent the test’s pro­
tections. Consider Sheila Myers, who was the original
plaintiff in Connick. She circulated “a questionnaire
soliciting the views of her fellow staff members” on various
office matters. 461 U. S., at 141. The Court held that
Myers’ claim for retaliation failed the public concern test
because the questionnaire was “most accurately character­
ized as an employee grievance concerning internal office
policy.” Id., at 154. It would undermine that principle if a
different result would have obtained had Myers raised
those same claims using a formal grievance procedure.
Myers’ employer “reasonably believed [Myers’ complaints]
would disrupt the office, undermine his authority, and
destroy close working relationships.” Ibid. These con­
cerns would be no less significant in the context of a for­
mal grievance. Employees should not be able to evade the
rule articulated in the Connick case by wrapping their
speech in the mantle of the Petition Clause.
Articulation of a separate test for the Petition Clause
would aggravate potential harm to the government’s
interests by compounding the costs of compliance with the
Constitution. A different rule for each First Amendment
claim would require employers to separate petitions from
other speech in order to afford them different treatment;

