Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

tal policies or impair the proper performance of govern­
mental functions.” Garcetti, 547 U. S., at 419. Govern­
ment must have authority, in appropriate circumstances,
to restrain employees who use petitions to frustrate pro­
gress towards the ends they have been hired to achieve. A
petition, like other forms of speech, can bring the “mission
of the employer and the professionalism of its officers into
serious disrepute.” Roe, 543 U. S., at 81. A public em­
ployee might, for instance, use the courts to pursue per­
sonal vendettas or to harass members of the general
public. That behavior could cause a serious breakdown in
public confidence in the government and its employees.
And if speech or petition were directed at or concerned
other public employees, it could have a serious and detri­
mental effect on morale.
When a petition takes the form of a lawsuit against the
government employer, it may be particularly disruptive.
Unlike speech of other sorts, a lawsuit demands a re­
sponse. Mounting a defense to even frivolous claims may
consume the time and resources of the government em­
ployer. Outside the context of public employment, this
Court has recognized that the Petition Clause does not
protect “objectively baseless” litigation that seeks to “ ‘in­
terfere directly with the business relationships of a
competitor.’ ” Professional Real Estate Investors, Inc. v.
Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc., 508 U. S. 49, 60–61
(1993) (quoting Eastern Railroad Presidents Conference v.
Noerr Motor Freight, Inc., 365 U. S. 127, 144 (1961)). In
recognition of the substantial costs imposed by litigation,
Congress has also required civil rights plaintiffs whose
suits are “frivolous, unreasonable, or without foundation”
to pay attorney’s fees incurred by defendants. Christians
burg Garment Co. v. EEOC, 434 U. S. 412, 421 (1978); see
also Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 11 (providing sanctions for claims
that are “presented for [an] improper purpose,” frivolous,
or lacking evidentiary support). The government likewise

