Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

and that, in turn, would add to the complexity and ex­
pense of compliance with the Constitution. Identifying peti­
tions might be easy when employees employ formal griev­
ance procedures, but the right to petition is not limited
to petitions lodged under formal procedures. See, e.g.,
Brown v. Louisiana, 383 U. S. 131 (1966). Indeed, the
employee in Connick could have made a colorable argu­
ment that her questionnaire ought to be viewed as a peti­
tion for redress of grievances.
Guarnieri claims application of the public concern test
to the Petition Clause would be inappropriate in light of
the private nature of many petitions for redress of griev­
ances. The Petition Clause undoubtedly does have force
and application in the context of a personal grievance
addressed to the government. See, e.g., Trainmen v. Vir
ginia ex rel. Virginia State Bar, 377 U. S. 1 (1964); Tho
mas, 323 U. S., at 530–531. At the founding, citizens
petitioned on a wide range of subjects, including matters
of both private and public concern. Petitions to the colo­
nial legislatures concerned topics as diverse as debt ac­
tions, estate distributions, divorce proceedings, and re­
quests for modification of a criminal sentence. Higginson,
A Short History of the Right to Petition Government for
the Redress of Grievances, 96 Yale L. J. 142, 146 (1986).
Although some claims will be of interest only to the indi­
vidual making the appeal, for that individual the need for
a legal remedy may be a vital imperative. See, e.g.,
M. L. B. v. S. L. J., 519 U. S. 102 (1996); Boddie v. Con
necticut, 401 U. S. 371 (1971). Outside the public em­
ployment context, constitutional protection for petitions
does not necessarily turn on whether those petitions relate
to a matter of public concern.
There is, however, no merit to the suggestion that the
public concern test cannot apply under the Petition Clause
because the majority of petitions to colonial legislatures
addressed matters of purely private concern. In analogous

