(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BOROUGH OF DURYEA, PENNSYLVANIA, ET AL. v. 

GUARNIERI 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 09–1476. Argued March 22, 2011—Decided June 20, 2011
After petitioner borough fired respondent Guarnieri as its police chief,
he filed a union grievance that led to his reinstatement. When the
borough council later issued directives instructing Guarnieri how to
perform his duties, he filed a second grievance, and an arbitrator or
dered that some of the directives be modified or withdrawn. Guarni
eri then filed this suit under 42 U. S. C. §1983, alleging that the di
rectives were issued in retaliation for the filing of his first grievance,
thereby violating his First Amendment “right . . . to petition the Gov
ernment for a redress of grievances”; he later amended his complaint
to allege that the council also violated the Petition Clause by denying
his request for overtime pay in retaliation for his having filed the
§1983 suit. The District Court instructed the jury, inter alia, that the
suit and the grievances were constitutionally protected activity, and
the jury found for Guarnieri. Affirming the compensatory damages
award, the Third Circuit held that a public employee who has peti
tioned the government through a formal mechanism such as the fil
ing of a lawsuit or grievance is protected under the Petition Clause
from retaliation for that activity, even if the petition concerns a mat
ter of solely private concern. In so ruling, the court rejected the view
of every other Circuit to have considered the issue that, to be pro
tected, the petition must address a matter of public concern.
Held: A government employer’s allegedly retaliatory actions against an
employee do not give rise to liability under the Petition Clause unless
the employee’s petition relates to a matter of public concern. The
Third Circuit’s conclusion that the public concern test does not limit
public employees’ Petition Clause claims is incorrect. Pp. 4–19.
(a) A public employee suing his employer under the First Amend

