12

FILARSKY v. DELIA
Opinion of the Court

also to others acting on behalf of the government similarly
serves to “ ‘ensure that talented candidates [are] not deterred by the threat of damages suits from entering public
service.’ ” Richardson, supra, at 408 (quoting Wyatt, supra, at 167). The government’s need to attract talented
individuals is not limited to full-time public employees.
Indeed, it is often when there is a particular need for
specialized knowledge or expertise that the government
must look outside its permanent work force to secure the
services of private individuals. This case is a good example: Filarsky had 29 years of specialized experience as an
attorney in labor, employment, and personnel matters,
with particular expertise in conducting internal affairs
investigations. App. to Pet. for Cert. 59, 89; App. 156.
The City of Rialto certainly had no permanent employee
with anything approaching those qualifications. To the
extent such private individuals do not depend on the
government for their livelihood, they have freedom to
select other work—work that will not expose them to
liability for government actions. This makes it more likely
that the most talented candidates will decline public engagements if they do not receive the same immunity enjoyed by their public employee counterparts.
Sometimes, as in this case, private individuals will
work in close coordination with public employees, and face
threatened legal action for the same conduct. See App.
134 (Delia’s lawyer: “everybody is going to get named” in
threatened suit). Because government employees will
often be protected from suit by some form of immunity,
those working alongside them could be left holding the
bag—facing full liability for actions taken in conjunction
with government employees who enjoy immunity for the
same activity. Under such circumstances, any private
individual with a choice might think twice before accepting a government assignment.
The public interest in ensuring performance of govern-

