Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

GINSBURG, J., concurring

tary and occurred as a result of the direct threat of
sanctions[.]”).
In further proceedings upon return of this case to the
Court of Appeals, these questions bear attention. First, if
it is “clearly established,” as the Ninth Circuit thought it
was, that “the warrantless search of a home is presumptively unreasonable,” id., at 1075, and that a well-trained
investigating officer would so comprehend,1 may an official
circumvent the warrant requirement by ordering the person under investigation to cart his personal property out
of the house for inspection?2 And if it is “clearly established” that an employee may not be fired for exercising a
constitutional right, see id., at 1079,3 is it not equally
plain that discipline or discharge may not be threatened to
induce surrender of such a right?
In short, the Court has responded appropriately to the
question tendered for our review, but the Circuit’s law will
remain muddled absent the Court of Appeals’ focused
attention to the question whether Filarsky’s conduct
violated “clearly established” law.
——————
1 Delia also suggests that Filarsky’s conduct should be measured
against a “reasonable attorney” standard: whether an attorney providing advice in a public-employee investigation should have known that
the search of Delia’s personal property, stored in his home, would be
lawless. See Brief for Respondent 45–46.
2 An additional inquiry may be appropriate: Although conceived as a
substitute for a warrantless entry, should the inspection order Filarsky
counseled pass muster as a permissible discovery device? Cf. Oklahoma Press Publishing Co. v. Walling, 327 U. S. 186, 195, 208–211 (1946)
(subpoena duces tecum for a corporation’s business records, authorized
by §9 of the Fair Labor Standards Act, encountered no Fourth Amendment shoal).
3 The Ninth Circuit referred to cases holding that public employees’
job retention cannot be conditioned on relinquishing the Fifth Amendment’s safeguard against self-incrimination: Uniformed Sanitation Men
Assn., Inc. v. Commissioner of Sanitation of City of New York, 392 U. S.
280 (1968), and Gardner v. Broderick, 392 U. S. 273 (1968).

