2

FILARSKY v. DELIA
Syllabus
(a) In determining whether the Court of Appeals made a valid distinction between City employees and Filarsky for qualified immunity
purposes, this Court looks to the general principles of tort immunities
and defenses applicable at common law, and the reasons the Court
has afforded protection from suit under §1983. See Imbler v. Pachtman, 424 U. S. 409, 418. The common law as it existed in 1871, when
Congress enacted §1983, did not draw a distinction between full-time
public servants and private individuals engaged in public service in
according protection to those carrying out government responsibilities. Government at that time was smaller in both size and reach,
had fewer responsibilities, and operated primarily at the local level.
Government work was carried out to a significant extent by individuals who did not devote all their time to public duties, but instead pursued private callings as well. In according protection from suit to individuals doing the government’s work, the common law did not draw
distinctions based on the nature of a worker’s engagement with the
government. Indeed, examples of individuals receiving immunity for
actions taken while engaged in public service on a temporary or occasional basis are as varied as the reach of government itself. Common
law principles of immunity were incorporated into §1983 and should
not be abrogated absent clear legislative intent. See Pulliam v. Allen, 466 U. S. 522, 529. Immunity under §1983 therefore should not
vary depending on whether an individual working for the government
does so as a permanent or full-time employee, or on some other basis.
Pp. 4–11.
(b) Nothing about the reasons this Court has given for recognizing
immunity under §1983 counsels against carrying forward the common law rule. First, the government interest in avoiding “unwarranted
timidity” on the part of those engaged in the public’s business—
which has been called “the most important special government immunity-producing concern,” Richardson v. McKnight, 521 U. S. 399,
409—is equally implicated regardless of whether the individual sued
as a state actor works for the government full-time or on some other
basis. Second, affording immunity to those acting on the government’s behalf serves to “ ‘ensure that talented candidates [are] not deterred by the threat of damages suits from entering public service.’ ”
Id., at 408. The government, in need of specialized knowledge or expertise, may look outside its permanent workforce to secure the services of private individuals. But because those individuals are free to
choose other work that would not expose them to liability for government actions, the most talented candidates might decline public
engagements if they did not receive the same immunity enjoyed by
their public employee counterparts. Third, the public interest in ensuring performance of government duties free from the distractions

