(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FILARSKY v. DELIA
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–1018. Argued January 17, 2012—Decided April 17, 2012
Respondent Delia, a firefighter employed by the City of Rialto, California, missed work after becoming ill on the job. Suspicious of Delia’s
extended absence, the City hired a private investigation firm to conduct surveillance on him. When Delia was seen buying fiberglass insulation and other building supplies, the City initiated an internal affairs investigation. It hired petitioner Filarsky, a private attorney, to
interview Delia. At the interview, which Delia’s attorney and two
fire department officials also attended, Delia acknowledged buying
the supplies, but denied having done any work on his home. To verify Delia’s claim, Filarsky asked Delia to allow a fire department official to enter his home and view the unused materials. When Delia
refused, Filarsky ordered him to bring the materials out of his home
for the official to see. This prompted Delia’s attorney to threaten a
civil rights action against the City and Filarsky. Nonetheless, after
the interview concluded, officials followed Delia to his home, where
he produced the materials.
Delia brought an action under 42 U. S. C. §1983 against the City,
the Fire Department, Filarsky, and other individuals, alleging that
the order to produce the building materials violated his Fourth and
Fourteenth Amendment rights. The District Court granted summary
judgment to the individual defendants on the basis of qualified immunity. The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed with respect to all individual defendants except Filarsky, concluding that he
was not entitled to seek qualified immunity because he was a private
attorney, not a City employee.
Held: A private individual temporarily retained by the government to
carry out its work is entitled to seek qualified immunity from suit
under §1983. Pp. 4−16.

