6

FILARSKY v. DELIA
Opinion of the Court

budget constraints, and generally had neither the need
nor the ability to maintain an established bureaucracy
staffed by professionals. See B. Campbell, The Growth of
American Government: Governance From the Cleveland
Era to the Present 14–16, 20–21 (1995); id., at 20 (noting
that in the 1880s “[t]he governor’s office staff in Wisconsin
. . . totaled five workers if we count the lieutenant governor and the janitor”).
As one commentator has observed, there was at that
time “no very clear conception of a professional office, that
is, an office the incumbent of which devotes his entire time
to the discharge of public functions, who has no other
occupation, and who receives a sufficiently large compensation to enable him to live without resorting to other
means.” F. Goodnow, Principles of the Administrative
Law of the United States 227 (1905). Instead, to a significant extent, government was “administered by members of
society who temporarily or occasionally discharge[d] public
functions.” Id., at 228. Whether government relied primarily upon professionals or occasional workers obviously
varied across the country and across different government
functions. But even at the turn of the twentieth century,
a public servant was often one who “does not devote his
entire time to his public duties, but is, at the same time
that he is holding public office, permitted to carry on some
other regular business, and as a matter of fact finds his
main means of support in such business or in his private
means since he receives from his office a compensation
insufficient to support him.” Id., at 227.
Private citizens were actively involved in government
work, especially where the work most directly touched the
lives of the people. It was not unusual, for example, to see
the owner of the local general store step behind a window
in his shop to don his postman’s hat. See, e.g., Stole
Stamps, Maysville, KY, The Evening Bulletin, p. 1, Sept.
25, 1895 (reporting that “[t]he post office and general store

