Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

SCALIA, J., concurring

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–205
_________________

CITIZENS UNITED, APPELLANT v. FEDERAL 

ELECTION COMMISSION 

ON APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
[January 21, 2010]

JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom JUSTICE ALITO joins, and
with whom JUSTICE THOMAS joins in part, concurring.
I join the opinion of the Court.1
I write separately to address JUSTICE STEVENS’ discus
sion of “Original Understandings,” post, at 34 (opinion
concurring in part and dissenting in part) (hereinafter
referred to as the dissent). This section of the dissent
purports to show that today’s decision is not supported by
the original understanding of the First Amendment. The
dissent attempts this demonstration, however, in splendid
isolation from the text of the First Amendment. It never
shows why “the freedom of speech” that was the right of
Englishmen did not include the freedom to speak in asso
ciation with other individuals, including association in the
corporate form. To be sure, in 1791 (as now) corporations
could pursue only the objectives set forth in their charters;
but the dissent provides no evidence that their speech in
the pursuit of those objectives could be censored.
Instead of taking this straightforward approach to
determining the Amendment’s meaning, the dissent em
barks on a detailed exploration of the Framers’ views
about the “role of corporations in society.” Post, at 35.
The Framers didn’t like corporations, the dissent con
——————
1 JUSTICE

THOMAS does not join Part IV of the Court’s opinion.


2

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
SCALIA, J., concurring

cludes, and therefore it follows (as night the day) that
corporations had no rights of free speech. Of course the
Framers’ personal affection or disaffection for corporations
is relevant only insofar as it can be thought to be reflected
in the understood meaning of the text they enacted—not,
as the dissent suggests, as a freestanding substitute for
that text. But the dissent’s distortion of proper analysis is
even worse than that. Though faced with a constitutional
text that makes no distinction between types of speakers,
the dissent feels no necessity to provide even an isolated
statement from the founding era to the effect that corpora
tions are not covered, but places the burden on petitioners
to bring forward statements showing that they are (“there
is not a scintilla of evidence to support the notion that
anyone believed [the First Amendment] would preclude
regulatory distinctions based on the corporate form,” post,
at 34–35).
Despite the corporation-hating quotations the dissent
has dredged up, it is far from clear that by the end of the
18th century corporations were despised. If so, how came
there to be so many of them? The dissent’s statement that
there were few business corporations during the eight
eenth century—“only a few hundred during all of the 18th
century”—is misleading. Post, at 35, n. 53. There were
approximately 335 charters issued to business corpora
tions in the United States by the end of the 18th century.2
See 2 J. Davis, Essays in the Earlier History of American
Corporations 24 (1917) (reprint 2006) (hereinafter Davis).
This was a “considerable extension of corporate enterprise
——————
2 The dissent protests that 1791 rather than 1800 should be the rele
vant date, and that “[m]ore than half of the century’s total business
charters were issued between 1796 and 1800.” Post, at 35, n. 53. I used
1800 only because the dissent did. But in any case, it is surely fanciful
to think that a consensus of hostility towards corporations was trans
formed into general favor at some magical moment between 1791 and
1796.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

SCALIA, J., concurring

in the field of business,” Davis 8, and represented “un
precedented growth,” id., at 309. Moreover, what seems
like a small number by today’s standards surely does not
indicate the relative importance of corporations when the
Nation was considerably smaller. As I have previously
noted, “[b]y the end of the eighteenth century the corpora
tion was a familiar figure in American economic life.”
McConnell v. Federal Election Comm’n, 540 U. S. 93, 256
(2003) (SCALIA, J., concurring in part, concurring in judg
ment in part, and dissenting in part) (quoting C. Cooke,
Corporation Trust and Company 92 (1951) (hereinafter
Cooke)).
Even if we thought it proper to apply the dissent’s ap
proach of excluding from First Amendment coverage what
the Founders disliked, and even if we agreed that the
Founders disliked founding-era corporations; modern
corporations might not qualify for exclusion. Most of the
Founders’ resentment towards corporations was directed
at the state-granted monopoly privileges that individually
chartered corporations enjoyed.3 Modern corporations do
not have such privileges, and would probably have been
favored by most of our enterprising Founders—excluding,
perhaps, Thomas Jefferson and others favoring perpetua
tion of an agrarian society. Moreover, if the Founders’
specific intent with respect to corporations is what mat
ters, why does the dissent ignore the Founders’ views
about other legal entities that have more in common with
modern business corporations than the founding-era cor
——————
3 “[P]eople

in 1800 identified corporations with franchised monopo
lies.” L. Friedman, A History of American Law 194 (2d ed. 1985)
(hereinafter Friedman). “The chief cause for the changed popular
attitude towards business corporations that marked the opening of the
nineteenth century was the elimination of their inherent monopolistic
character. This was accomplished primarily by an extension of the
principle of free incorporation under general laws.” 1 W. Fletcher,
Cyclopedia of the Law of Corporations §2, p. 8 (rev. ed. 2006).


4

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
SCALIA, J., concurring

porations? At the time of the founding, religious, educa
tional, and literary corporations were incorporated under
general incorporation statutes, much as business corpora
tions are today.4 See Davis 16–17; R. Seavoy, Origins of
the American Business Corporation, 1784–1855, p. 5
(1982); Cooke 94. There were also small unincorporated
business associations, which some have argued were the
“ ‘true progenitors’ ” of today’s business corporations.
Friedman 200 (quoting S. Livermore, Early American
Land Companies: Their Influence on Corporate Develop
ment 216 (1939)); see also Davis 33. Were all of these
silently excluded from the protections of the First
Amendment?
The lack of a textual exception for speech by corpora
tions cannot be explained on the ground that such organi
zations did not exist or did not speak. To the contrary,
colleges, towns and cities, religious institutions, and guilds
had long been organized as corporations at common law
and under the King’s charter, see 1 W. Blackstone, Com
mentaries on the Laws of England 455–473 (1765); 1 S.
Kyd, A Treatise on the Law of Corporations 1–32, 63
(1793) (reprinted 2006), and as I have discussed, the prac
tice of incorporation only expanded in the United States.
Both corporations and voluntary associations actively
petitioned the Government and expressed their views in
newspapers and pamphlets. For example: An antislavery
Quaker corporation petitioned the First Congress, distrib
uted pamphlets, and communicated through the press in
1790. W. diGiacomantonio, “For the Gratification of a
Volunteering Society”: Antislavery and Pressure Group
——————
4 At times (though not always) the dissent seems to exclude such non
“business corporations” from its denial of free speech rights. See post,
at 37. Finding in a seemingly categorical text a distinction between the
rights of business corporations and the rights of non-business corpora
tions is even more imaginative than finding a distinction between the
rights of all corporations and the rights of other associations.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

SCALIA, J., concurring

Politics in the First Federal Congress, 15 J. Early Repub
lic 169 (1995). The New York Sons of Liberty sent a circu
lar to colonies farther south in 1766. P. Maier, From
Resistance to Revolution 79–80 (1972). And the Society
for the Relief and Instruction of Poor Germans circulated a
biweekly paper from 1755 to 1757. Adams, The Colonial
German-language Press and the American Revolution, in
The Press & the American Revolution 151, 161–162 (B.
Bailyn & J. Hench eds. 1980). The dissent offers no evi
dence—none whatever—that the First Amendment’s
unqualified text was originally understood to exclude such
associational speech from its protection.5
——————
5 The

best the dissent can come up with is that “[p]ostratification
practice” supports its reading of the First Amendment. Post, at 40,
n. 56. For this proposition, the dissent cites Justice White’s statement
(in dissent) that “[t]he common law was generally interpreted as
prohibiting corporate political participation,” First Nat. Bank of Boston
v. Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765, 819 (1978). The sole authority Justice White
cited for this proposition, id., at 819, n. 14, was a law-review note that
made no such claim. To the contrary, it stated that the cases dealing
with the propriety of corporate political expenditures were “few.” Note,
Corporate Political Affairs Programs, 70 Yale L. J. 821, 852 (1961).
More specifically, the note cites only two holdings to that effect, one by
a Federal District Court, and one by the Supreme Court of Montana.
Id., at 852, n. 197. Of course even if the common law was “generally
interpreted” to prohibit corporate political expenditures as ultra vires,
that would have nothing to do with whether political expenditures that
were authorized by a corporation’s charter could constitutionally be
suppressed.
As additional “[p]ostratification practice,” the dissent notes that the
Court “did not recognize any First Amendment protections for corpora
tions until the middle part of the 20th century.” Post, at 40, n. 56. But
it did that in Grosjean v. American Press Co., 297 U. S. 233 (1936), a
case involving freedom of the press—which the dissent acknowledges
did cover corporations from the outset. The relative recency of that
first case is unsurprising. All of our First Amendment jurisprudence
was slow to develop. We did not consider application of the First
Amendment to speech restrictions other than prior restraints until
1919, see Schenck v. United States, 249 U. S. 47 (1919); we did not
invalidate a state law on First Amendment grounds until 1931, see


6

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
SCALIA, J., concurring

Historical evidence relating to the textually similar
clause “the freedom of . . . the press” also provides no
support for the proposition that the First Amendment
excludes conduct of artificial legal entities from the scope
of its protection. The freedom of “the press” was widely
understood to protect the publishing activities of individ
ual editors and printers. See McIntyre v. Ohio Elections
Comm’n, 514 U. S. 334, 360 (1995) (THOMAS, J., concur
ring in judgment); see also McConnell, 540 U. S., at 252–
253 (opinion of SCALIA, J.). But these individuals often
acted through newspapers, which (much like corporations)
had their own names, outlived the individuals who had
founded them, could be bought and sold, were sometimes
owned by more than one person, and were operated for
profit. See generally F. Mott, American Journalism: A
History of Newspapers in the United States Through 250
Years 3–164 (1941); J. Smith, Freedom’s Fetters (1956).
Their activities were not stripped of First Amendment
protection simply because they were carried out under the
banner of an artificial legal entity. And the notion which
follows from the dissent’s view, that modern newspapers,
since they are incorporated, have free-speech rights only
at the sufferance of Congress, boggles the mind.6
——————
Stromberg v. California, 283 U. S. 359 (1931), and a federal law until
1965, see Lamont v. Postmaster General, 381 U. S. 301 (1965).
6 The dissent seeks to avoid this conclusion (and to turn a liability
into an asset) by interpreting the Freedom of the Press Clause to refer
to the institutional press (thus demonstrating, according to the dissent,
that the Founders “did draw distinctions—explicit distinctions—
between types of ‘speakers,’ or speech outlets or forms ”). Post, at 40
and n. 57. It is passing strange to interpret the phrase “the freedom of
speech, or of the press” to mean, not everyone’s right to speak or pub
lish, but rather everyone’s right to speak or the institutional press’s
right to publish. No one thought that is what it meant. Patriot Noah
Webster’s 1828 dictionary contains, under the word “press,” the follow
ing entry:
“Liberty of the press, in civil policy, is the free right of publishing


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

SCALIA, J., concurring

In passing, the dissent also claims that the Court’s
conception of corruption is unhistorical. The Framers
“would have been appalled,” it says, by the evidence of
corruption in the congressional findings supporting the
Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002. Post, at 61.
For this proposition, the dissent cites a law review article
arguing that “corruption” was originally understood to
include “moral decay” and even actions taken by citizens
in pursuit of private rather than public ends. Teachout,
The Anti-Corruption Principle, 94 Cornell L. Rev. 341,
373, 378 (2009). It is hard to see how this has anything to
do with what sort of corruption can be combated by re
strictions on political speech. Moreover, if speech can be
prohibited because, in the view of the Government, it leads
to “moral decay” or does not serve “public ends,” then
there is no limit to the Government’s censorship power.
The dissent says that when the Framers “constitutional
ized the right to free speech in the First Amendment, it
was the free speech of individual Americans that they had
in mind.” Post, at 37. That is no doubt true. All the
provisions of the Bill of Rights set forth the rights of indi
vidual men and women—not, for example, of trees or polar
bears. But the individual person’s right to speak includes
the right to speak in association with other individual
persons. Surely the dissent does not believe that speech
——————
books, pamphlets, or papers without previous restraint; or the unre
strained right which every citizen enjoys of publishing his thoughts and
opinions, subject only to punishment for publishing what is pernicious
to morals or to the peace of the state.” 2 American Dictionary of the
English Language (1828) (reprinted 1970).
As the Court’s opinion describes, ante, at 36, our jurisprudence
agrees with Noah Webster and contradicts the dissent.
“The liberty of the press is not confined to newspapers and periodi
cals. It necessarily embraces pamphlets and leaflets. . . . The press in
its historical connotation comprehends every sort of publication which
affords a vehicle of information and opinion.” Lovell v. City of Griffin,
303 U. S. 444, 452 (1938).


8

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
SCALIA, J., concurring

by the Republican Party or the Democratic Party can be
censored because it is not the speech of “an individual
American.” It is the speech of many individual Americans,
who have associated in a common cause, giving the leader
ship of the party the right to speak on their behalf. The
association of individuals in a business corporation is no
different—or at least it cannot be denied the right to speak
on the simplistic ground that it is not “an individual
American.”7
But to return to, and summarize, my principal point,
which is the conformity of today’s opinion with the original
meaning of the First Amendment. The Amendment is
written in terms of “speech,” not speakers. Its text offers
no foothold for excluding any category of speaker, from
——————
7 The

dissent says that “ ‘speech’ ” refers to oral communications of
human beings, and since corporations are not human beings they
cannot speak. Post, at 37, n. 55. This is sophistry. The authorized
spokesman of a corporation is a human being, who speaks on behalf of
the human beings who have formed that association—just as the
spokesman of an unincorporated association speaks on behalf of its
members. The power to publish thoughts, no less than the power to
speak thoughts, belongs only to human beings, but the dissent sees no
problem with a corporation’s enjoying the freedom of the press.
The same footnote asserts that “it has been ‘claimed that the notion
of institutional speech . . . did not exist in post-revolutionary America.’ ”
This is quoted from a law-review article by a Bigelow Fellow at the
University of Chicago (Fagundes, State Actors as First Amendment
Speakers, 100 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1637, 1654 (2006)), which offers as the
sole support for its statement a treatise dealing with government
speech, M. Yudof, When Government Speaks 42–50 (1983). The cited
pages of that treatise provide no support whatever for the statement—
unless, as seems overwhelmingly likely, the “institutional speech”
referred to was speech by the subject of the law-review article, govern
mental institutions.
The other authority cited in the footnote, a law-review article by a
professor at Washington and Lee Law School, Bezanson, Institutional
Speech, 80 Iowa L. Rev. 735, 775 (1995), in fact contradicts the dissent,
in that it would accord free-speech protection to associations.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

SCALIA, J., concurring

single individuals to partnerships of individuals, to unin
corporated associations of individuals, to incorporated
associations of individuals—and the dissent offers no
evidence about the original meaning of the text to support
any such exclusion. We are therefore simply left with the
question whether the speech at issue in this case is
“speech” covered by the First Amendment. No one says
otherwise. A documentary film critical of a potential
Presidential candidate is core political speech, and its
nature as such does not change simply because it was
funded by a corporation. Nor does the character of that
funding produce any reduction whatever in the “inherent
worth of the speech” and “its capacity for informing the
public,” First Nat. Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U. S.
765, 777 (1978). Indeed, to exclude or impede corporate
speech is to muzzle the principal agents of the modern free
economy. We should celebrate rather than condemn the
addition of this speech to the public debate.

