Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–205
_________________

CITIZENS UNITED, APPELLANT v. FEDERAL 

ELECTION COMMISSION 

ON APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
[January 21, 2010]

JUSTICE STEVENS, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG,
JUSTICE BREYER, and JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR join, concur­
ring in part and dissenting in part.
The real issue in this case concerns how, not if, the
appellant may finance its electioneering. Citizens United
is a wealthy nonprofit corporation that runs a political
action committee (PAC) with millions of dollars in assets.
Under the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002
(BCRA), it could have used those assets to televise and
promote Hillary: The Movie wherever and whenever it
wanted to. It also could have spent unrestricted sums to
broadcast Hillary at any time other than the 30 days
before the last primary election. Neither Citizens United’s
nor any other corporation’s speech has been “banned,”
ante, at 1. All that the parties dispute is whether Citizens
United had a right to use the funds in its general treasury
to pay for broadcasts during the 30-day period. The notion
that the First Amendment dictates an affirmative answer
to that question is, in my judgment, profoundly misguided.
Even more misguided is the notion that the Court must
rewrite the law relating to campaign expenditures by for
profit corporations and unions to decide this case.
The basic premise underlying the Court’s ruling is its
iteration, and constant reiteration, of the proposition that
the First Amendment bars regulatory distinctions based


2

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

on a speaker’s identity, including its “identity” as a corpo­
ration. While that glittering generality has rhetorical
appeal, it is not a correct statement of the law. Nor does it
tell us when a corporation may engage in electioneering
that some of its shareholders oppose. It does not even
resolve the specific question whether Citizens United may
be required to finance some of its messages with the
money in its PAC. The conceit that corporations must be
treated identically to natural persons in the political
sphere is not only inaccurate but also inadequate to justify
the Court’s disposition of this case.
In the context of election to public office, the distinction
between corporate and human speakers is significant.
Although they make enormous contributions to our soci­
ety, corporations are not actually members of it. They
cannot vote or run for office. Because they may be man­
aged and controlled by nonresidents, their interests may
conflict in fundamental respects with the interests of
eligible voters. The financial resources, legal structure,
and instrumental orientation of corporations raise legiti­
mate concerns about their role in the electoral process.
Our lawmakers have a compelling constitutional basis, if
not also a democratic duty, to take measures designed to
guard against the potentially deleterious effects of corpo­
rate spending in local and national races.
The majority’s approach to corporate electioneering
marks a dramatic break from our past. Congress has
placed special limitations on campaign spending by corpo­
rations ever since the passage of the Tillman Act in 1907,
ch. 420, 34 Stat. 864. We have unanimously concluded
that this “reflects a permissible assessment of the dangers
posed by those entities to the electoral process,” FEC v.
National Right to Work Comm., 459 U. S. 197, 209 (1982)
(NRWC), and have accepted the “legislative judgment that
the special characteristics of the corporate structure re­
quire particularly careful regulation,” id., at 209–210. The


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

Court today rejects a century of history when it treats the
distinction between corporate and individual campaign
spending as an invidious novelty born of Austin v. Michi
gan Chamber of Commerce, 494 U. S. 652 (1990). Relying
largely on individual dissenting opinions, the majority
blazes through our precedents, overruling or disavowing a
body of case law including FEC v. Wisconsin Right to Life,
Inc., 551 U. S. 449 (2007) (WRTL), McConnell v. FEC, 540
U. S. 93 (2003), FEC v. Beaumont, 539 U. S. 146 (2003),
FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life, Inc., 479 U. S. 238
(1986) (MCFL), NRWC, 459 U. S. 197, and California
Medical Assn. v. FEC, 453 U. S. 182 (1981).
In his landmark concurrence in Ashwander v. TVA, 297
U. S. 288, 346 (1936), Justice Brandeis stressed the impor­
tance of adhering to rules the Court has “developed . . . for
its own governance” when deciding constitutional ques­
tions. Because departures from those rules always en­
hance the risk of error, I shall review the background of
this case in some detail before explaining why the Court’s
analysis rests on a faulty understanding of Austin and
McConnell and of our campaign finance jurisprudence
more generally .1 I regret the length of what follows, but
the importance and novelty of the Court’s opinion require
a full response. Although I concur in the Court’s decision
to sustain BCRA’s disclosure provisions and join Part IV
of its opinion, I emphatically dissent from its principal
holding.
——————
1 Specifically, Part I, infra, at 4–17, addresses the procedural history
of the case and the narrower grounds of decision the majority has
bypassed. Part II, infra, at 17–23, addresses stare decisis. Part III,
infra, at 23–56, addresses the Court’s assumptions that BCRA “bans”
corporate speech, that identity-based distinctions may not be drawn in
the political realm, and that Austin and McConnell were outliers in our
First Amendment tradition. Part IV, infra, at 56–89, addresses the
Court’s treatment of the anticorruption, antidistortion, and shareholder
protection rationales for regulating corporate electioneering.


4

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

I
The Court’s ruling threatens to undermine the integrity
of elected institutions across the Nation. The path it has
taken to reach its outcome will, I fear, do damage to this
institution. Before turning to the question whether to
overrule Austin and part of McConnell, it is important
to explain why the Court should not be deciding that
question.
Scope of the Case
The first reason is that the question was not properly
brought before us. In declaring §203 of BCRA facially
unconstitutional on the ground that corporations’ electoral
expenditures may not be regulated any more stringently
than those of individuals, the majority decides this case on
a basis relinquished below, not included in the questions
presented to us by the litigants, and argued here only in
response to the Court’s invitation. This procedure is
unusual and inadvisable for a court.2 Our colleagues’
suggestion that “we are asked to reconsider Austin and, in
effect, McConnell,” ante, at 1, would be more accurate if
rephrased to state that “we have asked ourselves” to re­
consider those cases.
In the District Court, Citizens United initially raised a
facial challenge to the constitutionality of §203. App. 23a–
24a. In its motion for summary judgment, however, Citi­
——————
2 See

Yee v. Escondido, 503 U. S. 519, 535 (1992) (“[U]nder this
Court’s Rule 14.1(a), only questions set forth in the petition, or fairly
included therein, will be considered by the Court” (internal quotation
marks and alteration omitted)); Wood v. Allen, ante, at __ (slip op., at
13) (“[T]he fact that petitioner discussed [an] issue in the text of his
petition for certiorari does not bring it before us. Rule 14.1(a) requires
that a subsidiary question be fairly included in the question presented
for our review” (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted));
Cooper Industries, Inc. v. Aviall Services, Inc., 543 U. S. 157, 168–169
(2004) (“We ordinarily do not decide in the first instance issues not
decided below” (internal quotation marks omitted)).


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

zens United expressly abandoned its facial challenge,
1:07–cv–2240–RCL–RWR, Docket Entry No. 52, pp. 1–2
(May 16, 2008), and the parties stipulated to the dismissal
of that claim, id., Nos. 53 (May 22, 2008), 54 (May 23,
2008), App. 6a. The District Court therefore resolved the
case on alternative grounds,3 and in its jurisdictional
statement to this Court, Citizens United properly advised
us that it was raising only “an as-applied challenge to the
constitutionality of . . . BCRA §203.” Juris. Statement 5.
The jurisdictional statement never so much as cited Aus
tin, the key case the majority today overrules. And not
one of the questions presented suggested that Citizens
United was surreptitiously raising the facial challenge to
§203 that it previously agreed to dismiss. In fact, not one
of those questions raised an issue based on Citizens
United’s corporate status. Juris. Statement (i). Moreover,
even in its merits briefing, when Citizens United injected
its request to overrule Austin, it never sought a declara­
tion that §203 was facially unconstitutional as to all corpo­
rations and unions; instead it argued only that the statute
could not be applied to it because it was “funded over­
whelmingly by individuals.” Brief for Appellant 29; see
also id., at 10, 12, 16, 28 (affirming “as applied” character
——————
3 The

majority states that, in denying Citizens United’s motion for a
preliminary injunction, the District Court “addressed” the facial valid­
ity of BCRA §203. Ante, at 13. That is true, in the narrow sense that
the court observed the issue was foreclosed by McConnell v. FEC, 540
U. S. 93 (2003). See 530 F. Supp. 2d 274, 278 (DC 2008) (per curiam).
Yet as explained above, Citizens United subsequently dismissed its
facial challenge, so that by the time the District Court granted the
Federal Election Commission’s (FEC) motion for summary judgment,
App. 261a–262a, any question about statutory validity had dropped out
of the case. That latter ruling by the District Court was the “final
decision” from which Citizens United appealed to this Court under
BCRA §403(a)(3). As regards the lower court decision that has come
before us, the claim that §203 is facially unconstitutional was neither
pressed nor passed upon in any form.


6

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

of challenge to §203); Tr. of Oral Arg. 4–9 (Mar. 24, 2009)
(counsel for Citizens United conceding that §203 could be
applied to General Motors); id., at 55 (counsel for Citizens
United stating that “we accept the Court’s decision in
Wisconsin Right to Life”).
“ ‘It is only in exceptional cases coming here from the
federal courts that questions not pressed or passed upon
below are reviewed,’ ” Youakim v. Miller, 425 U. S. 231,
234 (1976) (per curiam) (quoting Duignan v. United States,
274 U. S. 195, 200 (1927)), and it is “only in the most
exceptional cases” that we will consider issues outside the
questions presented, Stone v. Powell, 428 U. S. 465, 481, n.
15 (1976). The appellant in this case did not so much as
assert an exceptional circumstance, and one searches the
majority opinion in vain for the mention of any. That is
unsurprising, for none exists.
Setting the case for reargument was a constructive step,
but it did not cure this fundamental problem. Essentially,
five Justices were unhappy with the limited nature of the
case before us, so they changed the case to give themselves
an opportunity to change the law.
As-Applied and Facial Challenges
This Court has repeatedly emphasized in recent years
that “[f]acial challenges are disfavored.” Washington State
Grange v. Washington State Republican Party, 552 U. S.
442, 450 (2008); see also Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of
Northern New Eng., 546 U. S. 320, 329 (2006) (“[T]he
‘normal rule’ is that ‘partial, rather than facial, invalida­
tion is the required course,’ such that a ‘statute may . . . be
declared invalid to the extent that it reaches too far, but
otherwise left intact’ ” (quoting Brockett v. Spokane Ar
cades, Inc., 472 U. S. 491, 504 (1985); alteration in origi­
nal)). By declaring §203 facially unconstitutional, our
colleagues have turned an as-applied challenge into a
facial challenge, in defiance of this principle.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

This is not merely a technical defect in the Court’s
decision. The unnecessary resort to a facial inquiry
“run[s] contrary to the fundamental principle of judicial
restraint that courts should neither anticipate a question
of constitutional law in advance of the necessity of decid­
ing it nor formulate a rule of constitutional law broader
than is required by the precise facts to which it is to be
applied.” Washington State Grange, 552 U. S., at 450
(internal quotation marks omitted). Scanting that princi­
ple “threaten[s] to short circuit the democratic process by
preventing laws embodying the will of the people from
being implemented in a manner consistent with the Con­
stitution.” Id., at 451. These concerns are heightened
when judges overrule settled doctrine upon which the
legislature has relied. The Court operates with a sledge
hammer rather than a scalpel when it strikes down one of
Congress’ most significant efforts to regulate the role that
corporations and unions play in electoral politics. It com­
pounds the offense by implicitly striking down a great
many state laws as well.
The problem goes still deeper, for the Court does all of
this on the basis of pure speculation. Had Citizens United
maintained a facial challenge, and thus argued that there
are virtually no circumstances in which BCRA §203 can be
applied constitutionally, the parties could have developed,
through the normal process of litigation, a record about
the actual effects of §203, its actual burdens and its actual
benefits, on all manner of corporations and unions.4
——————
4 Shortly

before Citizens United mooted the issue by abandoning its
facial challenge, the Government advised the District Court that it
“require[d] time to develop a factual record regarding [the] facial
challenge.” 1:07–cv–2240–RCL–RWR, Docket Entry No. 47, p. 4 (Mar.
26, 2008). By reinstating a claim that Citizens United abandoned, the
Court gives it a perverse litigating advantage over its adversary, which
was deprived of the opportunity to gather and present information
necessary to its rebuttal.


8

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

“Claims of facial invalidity often rest on speculation,” and
consequently “raise the risk of premature interpretation of
statutes on the basis of factually barebones records.” Id.,
at 450 (internal quotation marks omitted). In this case,
the record is not simply incomplete or unsatisfactory; it is
nonexistent. Congress crafted BCRA in response to a
virtual mountain of research on the corruption that previ­
ous legislation had failed to avert. The Court now negates
Congress’ efforts without a shred of evidence on how §203
or its state-law counterparts have been affecting any
entity other than Citizens United.5
Faced with this gaping empirical hole, the majority
throws up its hands. Were we to confine our inquiry to
Citizens United’s as-applied challenge, it protests, we
would commence an “extended” process of “draw[ing], and
then redraw[ing], constitutional lines based on the par­
ticular media or technology used to disseminate political
speech from a particular speaker.” Ante, at 9. While
tacitly acknowledging that some applications of §203
might be found constitutional, the majority thus posits a
future in which novel First Amendment standards must
——————
5 In fact, we do not even have a good evidentiary record of how §203
has been affecting Citizens United, which never submitted to the
District Court the details of Hillary’s funding or its own finances. We
likewise have no evidence of how §203 and comparable state laws were
expected to affect corporations and unions in the future.
It is true, as the majority points out, that the McConnell Court
evaluated the facial validity of §203 in light of an extensive record. See
ante, at 15. But that record is not before us in this case. And in any
event, the majority’s argument for striking down §203 depends on its
contention that the statute has proved too “chilling” in practice—and in
particular on the contention that the controlling opinion in WRTL, 551
U. S. 449 (2007), failed to bring sufficient clarity and “breathing space”
to this area of law. See ante, at 12, 16–20. We have no record with
which to assess that claim. The Court complains at length about the
burdens of complying with §203, but we have no meaningful evidence to
show how regulated corporations and unions have experienced its
restrictions.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

be devised on an ad hoc basis, and then leaps from this
unfounded prediction to the unfounded conclusion that
such complexity counsels the abandonment of all normal
restraint. Yet it is a pervasive feature of regulatory sys­
tems that unanticipated events, such as new technologies,
may raise some unanticipated difficulties at the margins.
The fluid nature of electioneering communications does
not make this case special. The fact that a Court can
hypothesize situations in which a statute might, at some
point down the line, pose some unforeseen as-applied
problems, does not come close to meeting the standard for
a facial challenge.6
The majority proposes several other justifications for the
sweep of its ruling. It suggests that a facial ruling is
necessary because, if the Court were to continue on its
normal course of resolving as-applied challenges as they
present themselves, that process would itself run afoul of
the First Amendment. See, e.g., ante, at 9 (as-applied
review process “would raise questions as to the courts’ own
lawful authority”); ibid. (“Courts, too, are bound by the
First Amendment”). This suggestion is perplexing. Our
colleagues elsewhere trumpet “our duty ‘to say what the
law is,’ ” even when our predecessors on the bench and our
counterparts in Congress have interpreted the law differ­
——————
6 Our cases recognize a “type of facial challenge in the First Amend­
ment context under which a law may be overturned as impermissibly
overbroad because a substantial number of its applications are uncon­
stitutional.” Washington State Grange v. Washington State Republican
Party, 552 U. S. 442, 449, n. 6 (2008) (internal quotation marks omit­
ted). Citizens United has not made an overbreadth argument, and
“[w]e generally do not apply the strong medicine of overbreadth analy­
sis where the parties fail to describe the instances of arguable over­
breadth of the contested law,” ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted).
If our colleagues nonetheless concluded that §203’s fatal flaw is that it
affects too much protected speech, they should have invalidated it for
overbreadth and given guidance as to which applications are permissi­
ble, so that Congress could go about repairing the error.


10

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

ently. Ante, at 49 (quoting Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch
137, 177 (1803)). We do not typically say what the law is
not as a hedge against future judicial error. The possibil­
ity that later courts will misapply a constitutional provi­
sion does not give us a basis for pretermitting litigation
relating to that provision.7
The majority suggests that a facial ruling is necessary
because anything less would chill too much protected
speech. See ante, at 9–10, 12, 16–20. In addition to beg­
ging the question what types of corporate spending are
constitutionally protected and to what extent, this claim
rests on the assertion that some significant number of
corporations have been cowed into quiescence by FEC
“ ‘censor[ship].’ ” Ante, at 18–19. That assertion is unsub­
stantiated, and it is hard to square with practical experi­
ence. It is particularly hard to square with the legal land­
scape following WRTL, which held that a corporate
communication could be regulated under §203 only if it
was “susceptible of no reasonable interpretation other
than as an appeal to vote for or against a specific candi­
date.” 551 U. S., at 470 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.) (em­
phasis added). The whole point of this test was to make
§203 as simple and speech-protective as possible. The
Court does not explain how, in the span of a single election
cycle, it has determined THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s project to be
——————
7 Also perplexing is the majority’s attempt to pass blame to the Gov­
ernment for its litigating position. By “hold[ing] out the possibility of
ruling for Citizens United on a narrow ground yet refrain[ing] from
adopting that position,” the majority says, the Government has caused
“added uncertainty [that] demonstrates the necessity to address the
question of statutory validity.” Ante, at 17. Our colleagues have
apparently never heard of an alternative argument. Like every liti­
gant, the Government would prefer to win its case outright; failing that,
it would prefer to lose on a narrow ground. The fact that there are
numerous different ways this case could be decided, and that the
Government acknowledges as much, does not demonstrate anything
about the propriety of a facial ruling.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

a failure. In this respect, too, the majority’s critique of
line-drawing collapses into a critique of the as-applied
review method generally.8
The majority suggests that, even though it expressly
dismissed its facial challenge, Citizens United neverthe­
less preserved it—not as a freestanding “claim,” but as a
potential argument in support of “a claim that the FEC
has violated its First Amendment right to free speech.”
Ante, at 13; see also ante, at 4 (ROBERTS, C. J., concurring)
(describing Citizens United’s claim as: “[T]he Act violates
the First Amendment”). By this novel logic, virtually any
submission could be reconceptualized as “a claim that the
Government has violated my rights,” and it would then be
available to the Court to entertain any conceivable issue
that might be relevant to that claim’s disposition. Not
only the as-applied/facial distinction, but the basic rela­
tionship between litigants and courts, would be upended if
the latter had free rein to construe the former’s claims at
such high levels of generality. There would be no need for
plaintiffs to argue their case; they could just cite the con­
stitutional provisions they think relevant, and leave the
rest to us.9
——————
8 The majority’s “chilling” argument is particularly inapposite with
respect to 2 U. S. C. §441b’s longstanding restriction on the use of
corporate general treasury funds for express advocacy. If there was
ever any significant uncertainty about what counts as the functional
equivalent of express advocacy, there has been little doubt about what
counts as express advocacy since the “magic words” test of Buckley v.
Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 44, n. 52 (1976) (per curiam). Yet even though
Citizens United’s briefs never once mention §441b’s restriction on
express advocacy; even though this restriction does not generate
chilling concerns; and even though no one has suggested that Hillary
counts as express advocacy; the majority nonetheless reaches out to
opine that this statutory provision is “invalid” as well. Ante, at 50.
9 The majority adds that the distinction between facial and as-applied
challenges does not have “some automatic effect” that mechanically
controls the judicial task. Ante, at 14. I agree, but it does not follow
that in any given case we should ignore the distinction, much less


12

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

Finally, the majority suggests that though the scope of
Citizens United’s claim may be narrow, a facial ruling is
necessary as a matter of remedy. Relying on a law review
article, it asserts that Citizens United’s dismissal of the
facial challenge does not prevent us “ ‘from making
broader pronouncements of invalidity in properly “as­
applied” cases.’ ” Ante, at 14 (quoting Fallon, As-Applied
and Facial Challenges and Third-Party Standing, 113
Harv. L. Rev. 1321, 1339 (2000) (hereinafter Fallon));
accord, ante, at 5 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.) (“Regardless
whether we label Citizens United’s claim a ‘facial’ or ‘as­
applied’ challenge, the consequences of the Court’s deci­
sion are the same”). The majority is on firmer conceptual
ground here. Yet even if one accepts this part of Professor
Fallon’s thesis, one must proceed to ask which as-applied
challenges, if successful, will “properly” invite or entail
invalidation of the underlying statute.10 The paradigmatic
case is a judicial determination that the legislature acted
with an impermissible purpose in enacting a provision, as
this carries the necessary implication that all future as­
applied challenges to the provision must prevail. See
Fallon 1339–1340.
Citizens United’s as-applied challenge was not of this
sort. Until this Court ordered reargument, its contention
was that BCRA §203 could not lawfully be applied to a
——————
invert it.
10 Professor Fallon proposes an intricate answer to this question that
the majority ignores. Fallon 1327–1359. It bears mention that our
colleagues have previously cited Professor Fallon’s article for the exact
opposite point from the one they wish to make today. In Gonzales v.
Carhart, 550 U. S. 124 (2007), the Court explained that “[i]t is neither
our obligation nor within our traditional institutional role to resolve
questions of constitutionality with respect to each potential situation
that might develop,” and “[f]or this reason, ‘[a]s-applied challenges are
the basic building blocks of constitutional adjudication.’ ” Id., at 168
(opinion for the Court by KENNEDY, J.) (quoting Fallon 1328 (second
alteration in original)).


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

feature-length video-on-demand film (such as Hillary) or
to a nonprofit corporation exempt from taxation under 26
U. S. C. §501(c)(4)11 and funded overwhelmingly by indi­
viduals (such as itself). See Brief for Appellant 16–41.
Success on either of these claims would not necessarily
carry any implications for the validity of §203 as applied to
other types of broadcasts, other types of corporations, or
unions. It certainly would not invalidate the statute as
applied to a large for-profit corporation. See Tr. of Oral
Arg. 8, 4 (Mar. 24, 2009) (counsel for Citizens United
emphasizing that appellant is “a small, nonprofit organi­
zation, which is very much like [an MCFL corporation],”
and affirming that its argument “definitely would not be
the same” if Hillary were distributed by General Motors).12
There is no legitimate basis for resurrecting a facial chal­
——————
11 Internal

Revenue Code section 501(c)(4) applies, inter alia, to non­
profit organizations “operated exclusively for the promotion of social
welfare, . . . the net earnings of which are devoted exclusively to chari­
table, educational, or recreational purposes.”
12 THE CHIEF JUSTICE is therefore much too quick when he suggests
that, “[e]ven if considered in as-applied terms, a holding in this case
that the Act may not be applied to Citizens United—because corpora­
tions as well as individuals enjoy the pertinent First Amendment
rights—would mean that any other corporation raising the same
challenge would also win.” Ante, at 4 (concurring opinion). That
conclusion would only follow if the Court were to ignore Citizens
United’s plausible as-applied arguments and instead take the implau­
sible position that all corporations and all types of expenditures enjoy
the same First Amendment protections, which always trump the
interests in regulation. At times, the majority appears to endorse this
extreme view. At other times, however, it appears to suggest that
nonprofit corporations have a better claim to First Amendment protec­
tion than for-profit corporations, see ante, at 20, 39, “advocacy” organi­
zations have a better claim than other nonprofits, ante, at 20, domestic
corporations have a better claim than foreign corporations, ante, at 46–
47, small corporations have a better claim than large corporations,
ante, at 38–40, and printed matter has a better claim than broadcast
communications, ante, at 33. The majority never uses a multinational
business corporation in its hypotheticals.


14

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

lenge that dropped out of this case 20 months ago.
Narrower Grounds
It is all the more distressing that our colleagues have
manufactured a facial challenge, because the parties have
advanced numerous ways to resolve the case that would
facilitate electioneering by nonprofit advocacy corpora­
tions such as Citizens United, without toppling statutes
and precedents. Which is to say, the majority has trans­
gressed yet another “cardinal” principle of the judicial
process: “[I]f it is not necessary to decide more, it is neces­
sary not to decide more,” PDK Labs., Inc. v. Drug En
forcement Admin., 362 F. 3d 786, 799 (CADC 2004) (Rob­
erts, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment).
Consider just three of the narrower grounds of decision
that the majority has bypassed. First, the Court could
have ruled, on statutory grounds, that a feature-length
film distributed through video-on-demand does not qualify
as an “electioneering communication” under §203 of
BCRA, 2 U. S. C. §441b. BCRA defines that term to en­
compass certain communications transmitted by “broad­
cast, cable, or satellite.” §434(f)(3)(A). When Congress
was developing BCRA, the video-on-demand medium was
still in its infancy, and legislators were focused on a very
different sort of programming: short advertisements run
on television or radio. See McConnell, 540 U. S., at 207.
The sponsors of BCRA acknowledge that the FEC’s im­
plementing regulations do not clearly apply to video-on­
demand transmissions.
See Brief for Senator John
McCain et al. as Amici Curiae 17–19. In light of this
ambiguity, the distinctive characteristics of video-on­
demand, and “[t]he elementary rule . . . that every reason­
able construction must be resorted to, in order to save a
statute from unconstitutionality,” Hooper v. California,
155 U. S. 648, 657 (1895), the Court could have reasonably


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

ruled that §203 does not apply to Hillary.13
Second, the Court could have expanded the MCFL ex­
emption to cover §501(c)(4) nonprofits that accept only a
de minimis amount of money from for-profit corporations.
Citizens United professes to be such a group: Its brief says
it “is funded predominantly by donations from individuals
who support [its] ideological message.” Brief for Appellant
5. Numerous Courts of Appeal have held that de minimis
business support does not, in itself, remove an otherwise
qualifying organization from the ambit of MCFL.14 This
Court could have simply followed their lead.15
Finally, let us not forget Citizens United’s as-applied
constitutional challenge.
Precisely because Citizens
——————
13 The Court entirely ignores this statutory argument. It concludes
that §203 applies to Hillary on the basis of the film’s content, ante, at
7–8, without considering the possibility that §203 does not apply to
video-on-demand transmissions generally.
14 See Colorado Right to Life Comm., Inc. v. Coffman, 498 F. 3d 1137,
1148 (CA10 2007) (adopting this rule and noting that “every other
circuit to have addressed this issue” has done likewise); Brief for
Independent Sector as Amicus Curiae 10–11 (collecting cases). The
Court rejects this solution in part because the Government “merely
suggest[s] it” and “does not say that it agrees with the interpretation.”
Ante, at 11. Our colleagues would thus punish a defendant for showing
insufficient excitement about a ground it has advanced, at the same
time that they decide the case on a ground the plaintiff expressly
abandoned. The Court also protests that a de minimis standard would
“requir[e] intricate case-by-case determinations.” Ante, at 12. But de
minimis tests need not be intricate at all. A test that granted MCFL
status to §501(c)(4) organizations if they received less than a fixed
dollar amount of business donations in the previous year, or if such
donations represent less than a fixed percentage of their total assets,
would be perfectly easy to understand and administer.
15 Another bypassed ground, not briefed by the parties, would have
been to revive the Snowe-Jeffords Amendment in BCRA §203(c),
allowing certain nonprofit corporations to pay for electioneering com­
munications with general treasury funds, to the extent they can trace
the payments to individual contributions. See Brief for National Rifle
Association as Amicus Curiae 5–15 (arguing forcefully that Congress
intended this result).


16

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

United looks so much like the MCFL organizations we
have exempted from regulation, while a feature-length
video-on-demand film looks so unlike the types of electoral
advocacy Congress has found deserving of regulation, this
challenge is a substantial one. As the appellant’s own
arguments show, the Court could have easily limited the
breadth of its constitutional holding had it declined to
adopt the novel notion that speakers and speech acts must
always be treated identically—and always spared expendi­
tures restrictions—in the political realm. Yet the Court
nonetheless turns its back on the as-applied review proc­
ess that has been a staple of campaign finance litigation
since Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1 (1976) (per curiam), and
that was affirmed and expanded just two Terms ago in
WRTL, 551 U. S. 449.
This brief tour of alternative grounds on which the case
could have been decided is not meant to show that any of
these grounds is ideal, though each is perfectly “valid,”
ante, at 12 (majority opinion).16 It is meant to show that
there were principled, narrower paths that a Court that
was serious about judicial restraint could have taken.
There was also the straightforward path: applying Austin
and McConnell, just as the District Court did in holding
——————
16 THE

CHIEF JUSTICE finds our discussion of these narrower solutions
“quite perplexing” because we suggest that the Court should “latch on
to one of them in order to avoid reaching the broader constitutional
question,” without doing the same ourselves. Ante, at 3. There is
nothing perplexing about the matter, because we are not similarly
situated to our colleagues in the majority. We do not share their view
of the First Amendment. Our reading of the Constitution would not
lead us to strike down any statutes or overturn any precedents in this
case, and we therefore have no occasion to practice constitutional
avoidance or to vindicate Citizens United’s as-applied challenge. Each
of the arguments made above is surely at least as strong as the statu­
tory argument the Court accepted in last year’s Voting Rights Act case,
Northwest Austin Municipal Util. Dist. No. One v. Holder, 557 U. S. __
(2009).


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

that the funding of Citizens United’s film can be regulated
under them. The only thing preventing the majority from
affirming the District Court, or adopting a narrower
ground that would retain Austin, is its disdain for Austin.
II
The final principle of judicial process that the majority
violates is the most transparent: stare decisis. I am not an
absolutist when it comes to stare decisis, in the campaign
finance area or in any other. No one is. But if this princi­
ple is to do any meaningful work in supporting the rule of
law, it must at least demand a significant justification,
beyond the preferences of five Justices, for overturning
settled doctrine. “[A] decision to overrule should rest on
some special reason over and above the belief that a prior
case was wrongly decided.” Planned Parenthood of South
eastern Pa. v. Casey, 505 U. S. 833, 864 (1992). No such
justification exists in this case, and to the contrary there
are powerful prudential reasons to keep faith with our
precedents.17
The Court’s central argument for why stare decisis
ought to be trumped is that it does not like Austin. The
opinion “was not well reasoned,” our colleagues assert, and
it conflicts with First Amendment principles. Ante, at 47–
48. This, of course, is the Court’s merits argument, the
many defects in which we will soon consider. I am per­
fectly willing to concede that if one of our precedents were
dead wrong in its reasoning or irreconcilable with the rest
of our doctrine, there would be a compelling basis for
revisiting it. But neither is true of Austin, as I explain at
length in Parts III and IV, infra, at 23–89, and restating a
merits argument with additional vigor does not give it
——————
17 I

will have more to say shortly about the merits—about why Austin
and McConnell are not doctrinal outliers, as the Court contends, and
why their logic is not only defensible but also compelling. For present
purposes, I limit the discussion to stare-decisis-specific considerations.


18

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

extra weight in the stare decisis calculus.
Perhaps in recognition of this point, the Court supple­
ments its merits case with a smattering of assertions. The
Court proclaims that “Austin is undermined by experience
since its announcement.” Ante, at 48. This is a curious
claim to make in a case that lacks a developed record. The
majority has no empirical evidence with which to substan­
tiate the claim; we just have its ipse dixit that the real
world has not been kind to Austin. Nor does the majority
bother to specify in what sense Austin has been “under­
mined.” Instead it treats the reader to a string of non
sequiturs: “Our Nation’s speech dynamic is changing,”
ante, at 48; “[s]peakers have become adept at presenting
citizens with sound bites, talking points, and scripted
messages,” ibid.; “[c]orporations . . . do not have monolithic
views,” ibid. How any of these ruminations weakens the
force of stare decisis, escapes my comprehension.18
The majority also contends that the Government’s hesi­
tation to rely on Austin’s antidistortion rationale “dimin­
ishe[s]” “the principle of adhering to that precedent.”
Ante, at 48; see also ante, at 11 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.)
(Government’s litigating position is “most importan[t]”
——————
18 THE CHIEF JUSTICE suggests that Austin has been undermined by
subsequent dissenting opinions. Ante, at 9. Under this view, it appears
that the more times the Court stands by a precedent in the face of
requests to overrule it, the weaker that precedent becomes. THE CHIEF
JUSTICE further suggests that Austin “is uniquely destabilizing because
it threatens to subvert our Court’s decisions even outside” its particular
facts, as when we applied its reasoning in McConnell. Ante, at 9. Once
again, the theory seems to be that the more we utilize a precedent, the
more we call it into question. For those who believe Austin was cor­
rectly decided—as the Federal Government and the States have long
believed, as the majority of Justices to have served on the Court since
Austin have believed, and as we continue to believe—there is nothing
“destabilizing” about the prospect of its continued application. It is
gutting campaign finance laws across the country, as the Court does
today, that will be destabilizing.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

factor undermining Austin). Why it diminishes the value
of stare decisis is left unexplained. We have never thought
fit to overrule a precedent because a litigant has taken
any particular tack. Nor should we. Our decisions can
often be defended on multiple grounds, and a litigant may
have strategic or case-specific reasons for emphasizing
only a subset of them. Members of the public, moreover,
often rely on our bottom-line holdings far more than our
precise legal arguments; surely this is true for the legisla­
tures that have been regulating corporate electioneering
since Austin. The task of evaluating the continued viabil­
ity of precedents falls to this Court, not to the parties.19
Although the majority opinion spends several pages
making these surprising arguments, it says almost noth­
ing about the standard considerations we have used to
determine stare decisis value, such as the antiquity of the
precedent, the workability of its legal rule, and the reli­
ance interests at stake. It is also conspicuously silent
about McConnell, even though the McConnell Court’s
decision to uphold BCRA §203 relied not only on the anti­
distortion logic of Austin but also on the statute’s histori­
cal pedigree, see, e.g., 540 U. S., at 115–132, 223–224, and
the need to preserve the integrity of federal campaigns,
see id., at 126–129, 205–208, and n. 88.
We have recognized that “[s]tare decisis has special force
when legislators or citizens ‘have acted in reliance on a
previous decision, for in this instance overruling the deci­
——————
19 Additionally, the majority cites some recent scholarship challenging
the historical account of campaign finance law given in United States v.
Automobile Workers, 352 U. S. 567 (1957). Ante, at 48. Austin did not
so much as allude to this historical account, much less rely on it. Even
if the scholarship cited by the majority is correct that certain campaign
finance reforms were less deliberate or less benignly motivated than
Automobile Workers suggested, the point remains that this body of law
has played a significant and broadly accepted role in American political
life for decades upon decades.


20

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

sion would dislodge settled rights and expectations or
require an extensive legislative response.’ ” Hubbard v.
United States, 514 U. S. 695, 714 (1995) (quoting Hilton v.
South Carolina Public Railways Comm’n, 502 U. S. 197,
202 (1991)). Stare decisis protects not only personal rights
involving property or contract but also the ability of the
elected branches to shape their laws in an effective and
coherent fashion. Today’s decision takes away a power
that we have long permitted these branches to exercise.
State legislatures have relied on their authority to regu­
late corporate electioneering, confirmed in Austin, for
more than a century.20 The Federal Congress has relied
on this authority for a comparable stretch of time, and it
specifically relied on Austin throughout the years it spent
developing and debating BCRA. The total record it com­
piled was 100,000 pages long.21 Pulling out the rug be­
neath Congress after affirming the constitutionality of
§203 six years ago shows great disrespect for a coequal
branch.
By removing one of its central components, today’s
ruling makes a hash out of BCRA’s “delicate and intercon­
nected regulatory scheme.” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 172.
Consider just one example of the distortions that will
follow: Political parties are barred under BCRA from
soliciting or spending “soft money,” funds that are not
subject to the statute’s disclosure requirements or its
source and amount limitations. 2 U. S. C. §441i; McCon
nell, 540 U. S., at 122–126. Going forward, corporations
and unions will be free to spend as much general treasury
money as they wish on ads that support or attack specific
——————
20 See Brief for State of Montana et al. as Amici Curiae 5–13; see also
Supp. Brief for Senator John McCain et al. as Amici Curiae 1a–8a
(listing 24 States that presently limit or prohibit independent election­
eering expenditures from corporate general treasuries).
21 Magleby, The Importance of the Record in McConnell v. FEC, 3
Election L. J. 285 (2004).


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

candidates, whereas national parties will not be able to
spend a dime of soft money on ads of any kind. The
Court’s ruling thus dramatically enhances the role of
corporations and unions—and the narrow interests they
represent—vis-à-vis the role of political parties—and the
broad coalitions they represent—in determining who will
hold public office.22
Beyond the reliance interests at stake, the other stare
decisis factors also cut against the Court. Considerations
of antiquity are significant for similar reasons. McConnell
is only six years old, but Austin has been on the books for
two decades, and many of the statutes called into question
by today’s opinion have been on the books for a half­
century or more. The Court points to no intervening
change in circumstances that warrants revisiting Austin.
Certainly nothing relevant has changed since we decided
WRTL two Terms ago. And the Court gives no reason to
think that Austin and McConnell are unworkable.
In fact, no one has argued to us that Austin’s rule has
proved impracticable, and not a single for-profit corpora­
tion, union, or State has asked us to overrule it. Quite to
the contrary, leading groups representing the business
community,23 organized labor,24 and the nonprofit sector,25
together with more than half of the States,26 urge that we
——————
22 To be sure, the majority may respond that Congress can correct the
imbalance by removing BCRA’s soft-money limits. Cf. Tr. of Oral Arg.
24 (Sept. 9, 2009) (query of KENNEDY, J.). But this is no response to any
legislature that takes campaign finance regulation seriously. It merely
illustrates the breadth of the majority’s deregulatory vision.
23 See Brief for Committee for Economic Development as Amicus Cu
riae; Brief for American Independent Business Alliance as Amicus
Curiae. But see Supp. Brief for Chamber of Commerce of the United
States of America as Amicus Curiae.
24 See Brief for American Federation of Labor and Congress of Indus­
trial Organizations as Amicus Curiae 3, 9.
25 See Brief for Independent Sector as Amicus Curiae 16–20.
26 See Brief for State of Montana et al. as Amici Curiae.


22

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

preserve Austin. As for McConnell, the portions of BCRA
it upheld may be prolix, but all three branches of Govern­
ment have worked to make §203 as user-friendly as possi­
ble. For instance, Congress established a special mecha­
nism for expedited review of constitutional challenges, see
note following 2 U. S. C. §437h; the FEC has established a
standardized process, with clearly defined safe harbors,
for corporations to claim that a particular electioneering
communication is permissible under WRTL, see 11 CFR
§114.15 (2009);27 and, as noted above, THE CHIEF JUSTICE
crafted his controlling opinion in WRTL with the express
goal of maximizing clarity and administrability, 551 U. S.,
at 469–470, 473–474. The case for stare decisis may be
bolstered, we have said, when subsequent rulings “have
reduced the impact” of a precedent “while reaffirming the
decision’s core ruling.” Dickerson v. United States, 530
U. S. 428, 443 (2000).28
In the end, the Court’s rejection of Austin and McCon
——————
27 The

FEC established this process following the Court’s June 2007
decision in that case, 551 U. S. 449. In the brief interval between the
establishment of this process and the 2008 election, corporations and
unions used it to make $108.5 million in electioneering communications.
Supp. Brief for Appellee 22–23; FEC, Electioneering Communication
Summary, online at http://fec.gov/finance/disclosure/ECSummary.shtml
(all Internet materials as visited Jan. 18, 2010, and available in Clerk
of Court’s case file).
28 Concedely, Austin and McConnell were constitutional decisions,
and we have often said that “claims of stare decisis are at the weakest
in that field, where our mistakes cannot be corrected by Congress.”
Vieth v. Jubelirer, 541 U. S. 267, 305 (2004) (plurality opinion). As a
general matter, this principle is a sound one. But the principle only
takes on real force when an earlier ruling has obstructed the normal
democratic process; it is the fear of making “mistakes [that] cannot be
corrected by Congress,” ibid., that motivates us to review constitutional
precedents with a more critical eye. Austin and McConnell did not
obstruct state or congressional legislative power in any way. Although
it is unclear how high a bar today’s decision will pose to future at­
tempts to regulate corporate electioneering, it will clearly restrain
much legislative action.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

nell comes down to nothing more than its disagreement
with their results. Virtually every one of its arguments
was made and rejected in those cases, and the majority
opinion is essentially an amalgamation of resuscitated
dissents. The only relevant thing that has changed since
Austin and McConnell is the composition of this Court.
Today’s ruling thus strikes at the vitals of stare decisis,
“the means by which we ensure that the law will not
merely change erratically, but will develop in a principled
and intelligible fashion” that “permits society to presume
that bedrock principles are founded in the law rather than
in the proclivities of individuals.” Vasquez v. Hillery, 474
U. S. 254, 265 (1986).
III
The novelty of the Court’s procedural dereliction and its
approach to stare decisis is matched by the novelty of its
ruling on the merits. The ruling rests on several premises.
First, the Court claims that Austin and McConnell have
“banned” corporate speech. Second, it claims that the
First Amendment precludes regulatory distinctions based
on speaker identity, including the speaker’s identity as a
corporation. Third, it claims that Austin and McConnell
were radical outliers in our First Amendment tradition
and our campaign finance jurisprudence. Each of these
claims is wrong.
The So-Called “Ban”
Pervading the Court’s analysis is the ominous image of
a “categorical ba[n]” on corporate speech. Ante, at 45.
Indeed, the majority invokes the specter of a “ban” on
nearly every page of its opinion. Ante, at 1, 4, 7, 10, 11,
12, 13, 16, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 35, 38,
40, 42, 45, 46, 47, 49, 54, 56. This characterization is
highly misleading, and needs to be corrected.
In fact it already has been. Our cases have repeatedly


24

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

pointed out that, “[c]ontrary to the [majority’s] critical
assumptions,” the statutes upheld in Austin and McCon
nell do “not impose an absolute ban on all forms of corpo­
rate political spending.” Austin, 494 U. S., at 660; see also
McConnell, 540 U. S., at 203–204; Beaumont, 539 U. S., at
162–163. For starters, both statutes provide exemptions
for PACs, separate segregated funds established by a
corporation for political purposes.
See 2 U. S. C.
§441b(b)(2)(C); Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. §169.255 (West
2005). “The ability to form and administer separate seg­
regated funds,” we observed in McConnell, “has provided
corporations and unions with a constitutionally sufficient
opportunity to engage in express advocacy. That has been
this Court’s unanimous view.” 540 U. S., at 203.
Under BCRA, any corporation’s “stockholders and their
families and its executive or administrative personnel and
their families” can pool their resources to finance election­
eering communications. 2 U. S. C. §441b(b)(4)(A)(i). A
significant and growing number of corporations avail
themselves of this option;29 during the most recent election
cycle, corporate and union PACs raised nearly a billion
dollars.30 Administering a PAC entails some administra­
tive burden, but so does complying with the disclaimer,
disclosure, and reporting requirements that the Court
today upholds, see ante, at 51, and no one has suggested
that the burden is severe for a sophisticated for-profit
corporation. To the extent the majority is worried about
——————
29 See FEC, Number of Federal PAC’s Increases, http://fec.gov/press/
press2008/20080812paccount.shtml.
30 See Supp. Brief for Appellee 16 (citing FEC statistics placing this
figure at $840 million). The majority finds the PAC option inadequate
in part because “[a] PAC is a separate association from the corpora­
tion.” Ante, at 21. The formal “separateness” of PACs from their host
corporations—which administer and control the PACs but which cannot
funnel general treasury funds into them or force members to support
them—is, of course, the whole point of the PAC mechanism.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

this issue, it is important to keep in mind that we have no
record to show how substantial the burden really is, just
the majority’s own unsupported factfinding, see ante, at
21–22. Like all other natural persons, every shareholder
of every corporation remains entirely free under Austin
and McConnell to do however much electioneering she
pleases outside of the corporate form. The owners of a
“mom & pop” store can simply place ads in their own
names, rather than the store’s. If ideologically aligned
individuals wish to make unlimited expenditures through
the corporate form, they may utilize an MCFL organiza­
tion that has policies in place to avoid becoming a conduit
for business or union interests. See MCFL, 479 U. S., at
263–264.
The laws upheld in Austin and McConnell leave open
many additional avenues for corporations’ political speech.
Consider the statutory provision we are ostensibly evalu­
ating in this case, BCRA §203. It has no application to
genuine issue advertising—a category of corporate speech
Congress found to be far more substantial than election­
related advertising, see McConnell, 540 U. S., at 207—or
to Internet, telephone, and print advocacy.31 Like numer­
——————
31 Roaming far afield from the case at hand, the majority worries that
the Government will use §203 to ban books, pamphlets, and blogs.
Ante, at 20, 33, 49. Yet by its plain terms, §203 does not apply to
printed material. See 2 U. S. C. §434(f)(3)(A)(i); see also 11 CFR
§100.29(c)(1) (“[E]lectioneering communication does not include com­
munications appearing in print media”). And in light of the ordinary
understanding of the terms “broadcast, cable, [and] satellite,”
§434(f)(3)(A)(i), coupled with Congress’ clear aim of targeting “a virtual
torrent of televised election-related ads,” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 207,
we highly doubt that §203 could be interpreted to apply to a Web site or
book that happens to be transmitted at some stage over airwaves or
cable lines, or that the FEC would ever try to do so. See 11 CFR
§100.26 (exempting most Internet communications from regulation as
advertising); §100.155 (exempting uncompensated Internet activity
from regulation as an expenditure); Supp. Brief for Center for Inde­
pendent Media et al. as Amici Curiae 14 (explaining that “the FEC has


26

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

ous statutes, it exempts media companies’ news stories,
commentaries, and editorials from its electioneering re­
strictions, in recognition of the unique role played by the
institutional press in sustaining public debate.32 See 2
U. S. C. §434(f)(3)(B)(i); McConnell, 540 U. S., at 208–209;
see also Austin, 494 U. S., at 666–668. It also allows
corporations to spend unlimited sums on political commu­
nications with their executives and shareholders,
§441b(b)(2)(A); 11 CFR §114.3(a)(1), to fund additional
PAC activity through trade associations, 2 U. S. C.
§441b(b)(4)(D), to distribute voting guides and voting
records, 11 CFR §§114.4(c)(4)–(5), to underwrite voter
registration and voter turnout activities, §114.3(c)(4);
§114.4(c)(2), to host fundraising events for candidates
within certain limits, §114.4(c); §114.2(f)(2), and to pub­
licly endorse candidates through a press release and press
conference, §114.4(c)(6).
At the time Citizens United brought this lawsuit, the
only types of speech that could be regulated under §203
were: (1) broadcast, cable, or satellite communications;33
(2) capable of reaching at least 50,000 persons in the
relevant electorate;34 (3) made within 30 days of a primary
or 60 days of a general federal election;35 (4) by a labor
union or a non-MCFL, nonmedia corporation;36 (5) paid for
——————
consistently construed [BCRA’s] media exemption to apply to a variety
of non-traditional media”). If it should, the Government acknowledges
“there would be quite [a] good as-applied challenge.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 65
(Sept. 9, 2009).
32 As the Government points out, with a media corporation there is
also a lesser risk that investors will not understand, learn about, or
support the advocacy messages that the corporation disseminates.
Supp. Reply Brief for Appellee 10. Everyone knows and expects that
media outlets may seek to influence elections in this way.
33 2 U. S. C. §434(f)(3)(A)(i).
34 §434(f)(3)(C).
35 §434(f)(3)(A)(i)(II).
36 §441b(b); McConnell, 540 U. S., at 211.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

27

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

with general treasury funds;37 and (6) “susceptible of no
reasonable interpretation other than as an appeal to vote
for or against a specific candidate.”38 The category of
communications meeting all of these criteria is not trivial,
but the notion that corporate political speech has been
“suppress[ed] . . . altogether,” ante, at 2, that corporations
have been “exclu[ded] . . . from the general public dia­
logue,” ante, at 25, or that a work of fiction such as Mr.
Smith Goes to Washington might be covered, ante, at 56–
57, is nonsense.39 Even the plaintiffs in McConnell, who
had every incentive to depict BCRA as negatively as pos­
sible, declined to argue that §203’s prohibition on certain
uses of general treasury funds amounts to a complete ban.
See 540 U. S., at 204.
In many ways, then, §203 functions as a source restric­
tion or a time, place, and manner restriction. It applies in
a viewpoint-neutral fashion to a narrow subset of advocacy
messages about clearly identified candidates for federal
office, made during discrete time periods through discrete
channels. In the case at hand, all Citizens United needed
to do to broadcast Hillary right before the primary was to
abjure business contributions or use the funds in its PAC,
which by its own account is “one of the most active conser­
vative PACs in America,” Citizens United Political Victory
——————
37 §441b(b)(2)(C).
38 WRTL,

551 U. S. 449, 470 (2007) (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.).
is likewise nonsense to suggest that the FEC’s “ ‘business is to
censor.’ ” Ante, at 18 (quoting Freedman v. Maryland, 380 U. S. 51, 57
(1965)). The FEC’s business is to administer and enforce the campaign
finance laws. The regulatory body at issue in Freedman was a state
Board of Censors that had virtually unfettered discretion to bar distri­
bution of motion picture films it deemed not to be “moral and proper.”
See id., at 52–53, and n. 2. No movie could be shown in the State of
Maryland that was not first approved and licensed by the Board of
Censors. Id., at 52, n. 1. It is an understatement to say that Freedman
is not on point, and the majority’s characterization of the FEC is deeply
disconcerting.
39 It


28

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

Fund, http://www.cupvf.org/.40
So let us be clear: Neither Austin nor McConnell held or
implied that corporations may be silenced; the FEC is not
a “censor”; and in the years since these cases were decided,
corporations have continued to play a major role in the
national dialogue. Laws such as §203 target a class of
communications that is especially likely to corrupt the
political process, that is at least one degree removed from
the views of individual citizens, and that may not even
reflect the views of those who pay for it. Such laws burden
political speech, and that is always a serious matter,
demanding careful scrutiny. But the majority’s incessant
talk of a “ban” aims at a straw man.
Identity-Based Distinctions
The second pillar of the Court’s opinion is its assertion
that “the Government cannot restrict political speech
based on the speaker’s . . . identity.” Ante, at 30; accord,
ante, at 1, 24, 26, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 49, 50. The case on
which it relies for this proposition is First Nat. Bank of
Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765 (1978). As I shall explain,
infra, at 52–55, the holding in that case was far narrower
than the Court implies. Like its paeans to unfettered
discourse, the Court’s denunciation of identity-based
distinctions may have rhetorical appeal but it obscures
reality.
“Our jurisprudence over the past 216 years has rejected
an absolutist interpretation” of the First Amendment.
WRTL, 551 U. S., at 482 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.). The
——————
40 Citizens United has administered this PAC for over a decade. See
Defendant FEC’s Memorandum in Opposition to Plaintiff’s Second
Motion for Preliminary Injunction in No. 07–2240 (ARR, RCL, RWR)
(DC), p. 20. Citizens United also operates multiple “527” organizations
that engage in partisan political activity. See Defendant FEC’s State­
ment of Material Facts as to Which There Is No Genuine Dispute in No.
07–2240 (DC), ¶¶ 22–24.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

29

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

First Amendment provides that “Congress shall make no
law . . . abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press.”
Apart perhaps from measures designed to protect the
press, that text might seem to permit no distinctions of
any kind. Yet in a variety of contexts, we have held that
speech can be regulated differentially on account of the
speaker’s identity, when identity is understood in cate­
gorical or institutional terms. The Government routinely
places special restrictions on the speech rights of stu­
dents,41 prisoners,42 members of the Armed Forces,43 for­
eigners,44 and its own employees.45 When such restric­
tions are justified by a legitimate governmental interest,
they do not necessarily raise constitutional problems.46 In
——————
41 See, e.g., Bethel School Dist. No. 403 v. Fraser, 478 U. S. 675, 682
(1986) (“[T]he constitutional rights of students in public school are not
automatically coextensive with the rights of adults in other settings”).
42 See, e.g., Jones v. North Carolina Prisoners’ Labor Union, Inc., 433
U. S. 119, 129 (1977) (“In a prison context, an inmate does not retain
those First Amendment rights that are inconsistent with his status as a
prisoner or with the legitimate penological objectives of the corrections
system” (internal quotation marks omitted)).
43 See, e.g., Parker v. Levy, 417 U. S. 733, 758 (1974) (“While the
members of the military are not excluded from the protection granted
by the First Amendment, the different character of the military com­
munity and of the military mission requires a different application of
those protections”).
44 See, e.g., 2 U. S. C. §441e(a)(1) (foreign nationals may not directly
or indirectly make contributions or independent expenditures in con­
nection with a U. S. election).
45 See, e.g., Civil Service Comm’n v. Letter Carriers, 413 U. S. 548
(1973) (upholding statute prohibiting Executive Branch employees from
taking “any active part in political management or in political cam­
paigns” (internal quotation marks omitted)); Public Workers v. Mitchell,
330 U. S. 75 (1947) (same); United States v. Wurzbach, 280 U. S. 396
(1930) (upholding statute prohibiting federal employees from making
contributions to Members of Congress for “any political purpose what­
ever” (internal quotation marks omitted)); Ex parte Curtis, 106 U. S.
371 (1882) (upholding statute prohibiting certain federal employees
from giving money to other employees for political purposes).
46 The majority states that the cases just cited are “inapposite” be­


30

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

contrast to the blanket rule that the majority espouses,
our cases recognize that the Government’s interests may
be more or less compelling with respect to different classes
of speakers,47 cf. Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co. v. Min
nesota Comm’r of Revenue, 460 U. S. 575, 585 (1983)
(“[D]ifferential treatment” is constitutionally suspect
“unless justified by some special characteristic” of the
regulated class of speakers (emphasis added)), and that
the constitutional rights of certain categories of speakers,
in certain contexts, “ ‘are not automatically coextensive
with the rights’ ” that are normally accorded to members of
our society, Morse v. Frederick, 551 U. S. 393, 396–397,
404 (2007) (quoting Bethel School Dist. No. 403 v. Fraser,
478 U. S. 675, 682 (1986)).
The free speech guarantee thus does not render every
other public interest an illegitimate basis for qualifying a
speaker’s autonomy; society could scarcely function if it
did. It is fair to say that our First Amendment doctrine
has “frowned on” certain identity-based distinctions, Los
Angeles Police Dept. v. United Reporting Publishing Corp.,
——————
cause they “stand only for the proposition that there are certain gov­
ernmental functions that cannot operate without some restrictions on
particular kinds of speech.” Ante, at 25. The majority’s creative sug­
gestion that these cases stand only for that one proposition is quite
implausible. In any event, the proposition lies at the heart of this case,
as Congress and half the state legislatures have concluded, over many
decades, that their core functions of administering elections and pass­
ing legislation cannot operate effectively without some narrow restric­
tions on corporate electioneering paid for by general treasury funds.
47 Outside of the law, of course, it is a commonplace that the identity
and incentives of the speaker might be relevant to an assessment of his
speech. See Aristotle, Poetics 43–44 (M. Heath transl. 1996) (“In
evaluating any utterance or action, one must take into account not just
the moral qualities of what is actually done or said, but also the iden­
tity of the agent or speaker, the addressee, the occasion, the means, and
the motive”). The insight that the identity of speakers is a proper
subject of regulatory concern, it bears noting, motivates the disclaimer
and disclosure provisions that the Court today upholds.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

31

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

528 U. S. 32, 47, n. 4 (1999) (STEVENS, J., dissenting),
particularly those that may reflect invidious discrimina­
tion or preferential treatment of a politically powerful
group. But it is simply incorrect to suggest that we have
prohibited all legislative distinctions based on identity or
content. Not even close.
The election context is distinctive in many ways, and the
Court, of course, is right that the First Amendment closely
guards political speech. But in this context, too, the au­
thority of legislatures to enact viewpoint-neutral regula­
tions based on content and identity is well settled. We
have, for example, allowed state-run broadcasters to ex­
clude independent candidates from televised debates.
Arkansas Ed. Television Comm’n v. Forbes, 523 U. S. 666
(1998).48 We have upheld statutes that prohibit the distri­
bution or display of campaign materials near a polling
place. Burson v. Freeman, 504 U. S. 191 (1992).49 Al­
though we have not reviewed them directly, we have never
cast doubt on laws that place special restrictions on cam­
paign spending by foreign nationals. See, e.g., 2 U. S. C.
§441e(a)(1). And we have consistently approved laws that
bar Government employees, but not others, from contrib­
——————
48 I dissented in Forbes because the broadcaster’s decision to exclude
the respondent from its debate was done “on the basis of entirely
subjective, ad hoc judgments,” 523 U. S., at 690, that suggested anti­
competitive viewpoint discrimination, id., at 693–694, and lacked a
compelling justification. Needless to say, my concerns do not apply to
the instant case.
49 The law at issue in Burson was far from unusual. “[A]ll 50 States,”
the Court observed, “limit access to the areas in or around polling
places.” 504 U. S., at 206; see also Note, 91 Ky. L. J. 715, 729, n. 89,
747–769 (2003) (collecting statutes). I dissented in Burson because the
evidence adduced to justify Tennessee’s law was “exceptionally thin,”
504 U. S., at 219, and “the reason for [the] restriction [had] disap­
pear[ed]” over time, id., at 223. “In short,” I concluded, “Tennessee
ha[d] failed to point to any legitimate interest that would justify its
selective regulation of campaign-related expression.” Id., at 225. These
criticisms are inapplicable to the case before us.


32

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

uting to or participating in political activities. See n. 45,
supra. These statutes burden the political expression of
one class of speakers, namely, civil servants. Yet we have
sustained them on the basis of longstanding practice and
Congress’ reasoned judgment that certain regulations
which leave “untouched full participation . . . in political
decisions at the ballot box,” Civil Service Comm’n v. Letter
Carriers, 413 U. S. 548, 556 (1973) (internal quotation
marks omitted), help ensure that public officials are “suffi­
ciently free from improper influences,” id., at 564, and
that “confidence in the system of representative Govern­
ment is not . . . eroded to a disastrous extent,” id., at 565.
The same logic applies to this case with additional force
because it is the identity of corporations, rather than
individuals, that the Legislature has taken into account.
As we have unanimously observed, legislatures are enti­
tled to decide “that the special characteristics of the corpo­
rate structure require particularly careful regulation” in
an electoral context. NRWC, 459 U. S., at 209–210.50 Not
only has the distinctive potential of corporations to corrupt
the electoral process long been recognized, but within the
area of campaign finance, corporate spending is also “fur­
thest from the core of political expression, since corpora­
tions’ First Amendment speech and association interests
are derived largely from those of their members and of the
public in receiving information,” Beaumont, 539 U. S., at
161, n. 8 (citation omitted). Campaign finance distinctions
based on corporate identity tend to be less worrisome, in
other words, because the “speakers” are not natural per­
sons, much less members of our political community, and
——————
50 They are likewise entitled to regulate media corporations differ­
ently from other corporations “to ensure that the law ‘does not hinder or
prevent the institutional press from reporting on, and publishing
editorials about, newsworthy events.’ ” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 208
(quoting Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce, 494 U. S. 652, 668
(1990)).


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

33

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

the governmental interests are of the highest order. Fur­
thermore, when corporations, as a class, are distinguished
from noncorporations, as a class, there is a lesser risk that
regulatory distinctions will reflect invidious discrimina­
tion or political favoritism.
If taken seriously, our colleagues’ assumption that the
identity of a speaker has no relevance to the Government’s
ability to regulate political speech would lead to some
remarkable conclusions. Such an assumption would have
accorded the propaganda broadcasts to our troops by
“Tokyo Rose” during World War II the same protection as
speech by Allied commanders. More pertinently, it would
appear to afford the same protection to multinational
corporations controlled by foreigners as to individual
Americans: To do otherwise, after all, could “ ‘enhance the
relative voice’ ” of some (i.e., humans) over others (i.e.,
nonhumans). Ante, at 33 (quoting Buckley, 424 U. S., at
49).51 Under the majority’s view, I suppose it may be a
First Amendment problem that corporations are not per­
mitted to vote, given that voting is, among other things, a
——————
51 The

Court all but confesses that a categorical approach to speaker
identity is untenable when it acknowledges that Congress might be
allowed to take measures aimed at “preventing foreign individuals or
associations from influencing our Nation’s political process.” Ante, at
46–47. Such measures have been a part of U. S. campaign finance law
for many years. The notion that Congress might lack the authority to
distinguish foreigners from citizens in the regulation of electioneering
would certainly have surprised the Framers, whose “obsession with
foreign influence derived from a fear that foreign powers and individu­
als had no basic investment in the well-being of the country.”
Teachout, The Anti-Corruption Principle, 94 Cornell L. Rev. 341, 393,
n. 245 (2009) (hereinafter Teachout); see also U. S. Const., Art. I, §9, cl.
8 (“[N]o Person holding any Office of Profit or Trust . . . shall, without
the Consent of the Congress, accept of any present, Emolument, Office,
or Title, of any kind whatever, from any King, Prince, or foreign State”).
Professor Teachout observes that a corporation might be analogized to
a foreign power in this respect, “inasmuch as its legal loyalties neces­
sarily exclude patriotism.” Teachout 393, n. 245.


34

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

form of speech.52
In short, the Court dramatically overstates its critique
of identity-based distinctions, without ever explaining why
corporate identity demands the same treatment as indi­
vidual identity. Only the most wooden approach to the
First Amendment could justify the unprecedented line it
seeks to draw.
Our First Amendment Tradition
A third fulcrum of the Court’s opinion is the idea that
Austin and McConnell are radical outliers, “aberration[s],”
in our First Amendment tradition. Ante, at 39; see also
ante, at 45, 56 (professing fidelity to “our law and our
tradition”). The Court has it exactly backwards. It is
today’s holding that is the radical departure from what
had been settled First Amendment law. To see why, it is
useful to take a long view.
1. Original Understandings
Let us start from the beginning. The Court invokes
“ancient First Amendment principles,” ante, at 1 (internal
quotation marks omitted), and original understandings,
ante, at 37–38, to defend today’s ruling, yet it makes only
a perfunctory attempt to ground its analysis in the princi­
ples or understandings of those who drafted and ratified
the Amendment. Perhaps this is because there is not a
scintilla of evidence to support the notion that anyone
——————
52 See A. Bickel, The Supreme Court and the Idea of Progress 59–60
(1978); A. Meiklejohn, Political Freedom: The Constitutional Powers of
the People 39–40 (1965); Tokaji, First Amendment Equal Protection:
On Discretion, Inequality, and Participation, 101 Mich. L. Rev. 2409,
2508–2509 (2003). Of course, voting is not speech in a pure or formal
sense, but then again neither is a campaign expenditure; both are
nevertheless communicative acts aimed at influencing electoral out­
comes. Cf. Strauss, Corruption, Equality, and Campaign Finance
Reform, 94 Colum. L. Rev. 1369, 1383–1384 (1994) (hereinafter
Strauss).


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

35

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

believed it would preclude regulatory distinctions based on
the corporate form. To the extent that the Framers’ views
are discernible and relevant to the disposition of this case,
they would appear to cut strongly against the majority’s
position.
This is not only because the Framers and their contem­
poraries conceived of speech more narrowly than we now
think of it, see Bork, Neutral Principles and Some First
Amendment Problems, 47 Ind. L. J. 1, 22 (1971), but also
because they held very different views about the nature of
the First Amendment right and the role of corporations in
society. Those few corporations that existed at the found­
ing were authorized by grant of a special legislative char­
ter.53 Corporate sponsors would petition the legislature,
and the legislature, if amenable, would issue a charter
that specified the corporation’s powers and purposes and
“authoritatively fixed the scope and content of corporate
organization,” including “the internal structure of the
——————
53 Scholars

have found that only a handful of business corporations
were issued charters during the colonial period, and only a few hundred
during all of the 18th century. See E. Dodd, American Business Corpo­
rations Until 1860, p. 197 (1954); L. Friedman, A History of American
Law 188–189 (2d ed. 1985); Baldwin, American Business Corporations
Before 1789, 8 Am. Hist. Rev. 449, 450–459 (1903). JUSTICE SCALIA
quibbles with these figures; whereas we say that “a few hundred”
charters were issued to business corporations during the 18th century,
he says that the number is “approximately 335.” Ante, at 2 (concurring
opinion). JUSTICE SCALIA also raises the more serious point that it is
improper to assess these figures by today’s standards, ante, at 3,
though I believe he fails to substantiate his claim that “the corporation
was a familiar figure in American economic life” by the century’s end,
ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted). His formulation of that claim
is also misleading, because the relevant reference point is not 1800 but
the date of the First Amendment’s ratification, in 1791. And at that
time, the number of business charters must have been significantly
smaller than 335, because the pace of chartering only began to pick up
steam in the last decade of the 18th century. More than half of the
century’s total business charters were issued between 1796 and 1800.
Friedman, History of American Law, at 189.


36

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

corporation.” J. Hurst, The Legitimacy of the Business
Corporation in the Law of the United States 1780–1970,
pp. 15–16 (1970) (reprint 2004). Corporations were cre­
ated, supervised, and conceptualized as quasi-public enti­
ties, “designed to serve a social function for the state.”
Handlin & Handlin, Origin of the American Business
Corporation, 5 J. Econ. Hist. 1, 22 (1945). It was “as­
sumed that [they] were legally privileged organizations
that had to be closely scrutinized by the legislature be­
cause their purposes had to be made consistent with pub­
lic welfare.” R. Seavoy, Origins of the American Business
Corporation, 1784–1855, p. 5 (1982).
The individualized charter mode of incorporation re­
flected the “cloud of disfavor under which corporations
labored” in the early years of this Nation. 1 W. Fletcher,
Cyclopedia of the Law of Corporations §2, p. 8 (rev. ed.
2006); see also Louis K. Liggett Co. v. Lee, 288 U. S. 517,
548–549 (1933) (Brandeis, J., dissenting) (discussing fears
of the “evils” of business corporations); L. Friedman, A
History of American Law 194 (2d ed. 1985) (“The word
‘soulless’ constantly recurs in debates over corpora­
tions. . . . Corporations, it was feared, could concentrate
the worst urges of whole groups of men”). Thomas Jeffer­
son famously fretted that corporations would subvert the
Republic.54 General incorporation statutes, and wide­
spread acceptance of business corporations as socially
useful actors, did not emerge until the 1800’s. See Hans­
mann & Kraakman, The End of History for Corporate
Law, 89 Geo. L. J. 439, 440 (2001) (hereinafter Hansmann
& Kraakman) (“[A]ll general business corporation statutes
appear to date from well after 1800”).
——————
54 See Letter from Thomas Jefferson to Tom Logan (Nov. 12, 1816), in
12 The Works of Thomas Jefferson 42, 44 (P. Ford ed. 1905) (“I hope we
shall . . . crush in [its] birth the aristocracy of our monied corporations
which dare already to challenge our government to a trial of strength
and bid defiance to the laws of our country”).


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

37

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

The Framers thus took it as a given that corporations
could be comprehensively regulated in the service of the
public welfare. Unlike our colleagues, they had little
trouble distinguishing corporations from human beings,
and when they constitutionalized the right to free speech
in the First Amendment, it was the free speech of individ­
ual Americans that they had in mind.55 While individuals
might join together to exercise their speech rights, busi­
ness corporations, at least, were plainly not seen as facili­
tating such associational or expressive ends. Even “the
notion that business corporations could invoke the First
Amendment would probably have been quite a novelty,”
given that “at the time, the legitimacy of every corporate
activity was thought to rest entirely in a concession of the
sovereign.” Shelledy, Autonomy, Debate, and Corporate
Speech, 18 Hastings Const. L. Q. 541, 578 (1991); cf. Trus
tees of Dartmouth College v. Woodward, 4 Wheat. 518, 636
——————
55 In normal usage then, as now, the term “speech” referred to oral
communications by individuals. See, e.g., 2 S. Johnson, Dictionary of
the English Language 1853–1854 (4th ed. 1773) (reprinted 1978)
(listing as primary definition of “speech”: “The power of articulate
utterance; the power of expressing thoughts by vocal words”); 2 N.
Webster, American Dictionary of the English Language (1828) (re­
printed 1970) (listing as primary definition of “speech”: “The faculty of
uttering articulate sounds or words, as in human beings; the faculty of
expressing thoughts by words or articulate sounds. Speech was given
to man by his Creator for the noblest purposes”). Indeed, it has been
“claimed that the notion of institutional speech . . . did not exist in post­
revolutionary America.” Fagundes, State Actors as First Amendment
Speakers, 100 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1637, 1654 (2006); see also Bezanson,
Institutional Speech, 80 Iowa L. Rev. 735, 775 (1995) (“In the intellec­
tual heritage of the eighteenth century, the idea that free speech was
individual and personal was deeply rooted and clearly manifest in the
writings of Locke, Milton, and others on whom the framers of the
Constitution and the Bill of Rights drew”). Given that corporations
were conceived of as artificial entities and do not have the technical
capacity to “speak,” the burden of establishing that the Framers and
ratifiers understood “the freedom of speech” to encompass corporate
speech is, I believe, far heavier than the majority acknowledges.


38

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

(1819) (Marshall, C. J.) (“A corporation is an artificial
being, invisible, intangible, and existing only in contem­
plation of law. Being the mere creature of law, it pos­
sesses only those properties which the charter of its crea­
tion confers upon it”); Eule, Promoting Speaker Diversity:
Austin and Metro Broadcasting, 1990 S. Ct. Rev. 105, 129
(“The framers of the First Amendment could scarcely have
anticipated its application to the corporation form. That,
of course, ought not to be dispositive. What is compelling,
however, is an understanding of who was supposed to be
the beneficiary of the free speech guaranty—the individ­
ual”). In light of these background practices and under­
standings, it seems to me implausible that the Framers
believed “the freedom of speech” would extend equally to
all corporate speakers, much less that it would preclude
legislatures from taking limited measures to guard
against corporate capture of elections.
The Court observes that the Framers drew on diverse
intellectual sources, communicated through newspapers,
and aimed to provide greater freedom of speech than had
existed in England. Ante, at 37. From these (accurate)
observations, the Court concludes that “[t]he First
Amendment was certainly not understood to condone the
suppression of political speech in society’s most salient
media.” Ibid. This conclusion is far from certain, given
that many historians believe the Framers were focused on
prior restraints on publication and did not understand the
First Amendment to “prevent the subsequent punishment
of such [publications] as may be deemed contrary to the
public welfare.” Near v. Minnesota ex rel. Olson, 283 U. S.
697, 714 (1931). Yet, even if the majority’s conclusion
were correct, it would tell us only that the First Amend­
ment was understood to protect political speech in certain
media. It would tell us little about whether the Amend­
ment was understood to protect general treasury election­
eering expenditures by corporations, and to what extent.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

39

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

As a matter of original expectations, then, it seems
absurd to think that the First Amendment prohibits legis­
latures from taking into account the corporate identity of a
sponsor of electoral advocacy. As a matter of original
meaning, it likewise seems baseless—unless one evaluates
the First Amendment’s “principles,” ante, at 1, 48, or its
“purpose,” ante, at 5 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.), at such a
high level of generality that the historical understandings
of the Amendment cease to be a meaningful constraint on
the judicial task. This case sheds a revelatory light on the
assumption of some that an impartial judge’s application
of an originalist methodology is likely to yield more deter­
minate answers, or to play a more decisive role in the
decisional process, than his or her views about sound
policy.
JUSTICE SCALIA criticizes the foregoing discussion for
failing to adduce statements from the founding era show­
ing that corporations were understood to be excluded from
the First Amendment’s free speech guarantee. Ante, at 1–
2, 9. Of course, JUSTICE SCALIA adduces no statements to
suggest the contrary proposition, or even to suggest that
the contrary proposition better reflects the kind of right
that the drafters and ratifiers of the Free Speech Clause
thought they were enshrining. Although JUSTICE SCALIA
makes a perfectly sensible argument that an individual’s
right to speak entails a right to speak with others for a
common cause, cf. MCFL, 479 U. S. 238, he does not ex­
plain why those two rights must be precisely identical, or
why that principle applies to electioneering by corpora­
tions that serve no “common cause.” Ante, at 8. Nothing
in his account dislodges my basic point that members of
the founding generation held a cautious view of corporate
power and a narrow view of corporate rights (not that they
“despised” corporations, ante, at 2), and that they concep­
tualized speech in individualistic terms. If no prominent
Framer bothered to articulate that corporate speech would


40

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

have lesser status than individual speech, that may well
be because the contrary proposition—if not also the very
notion of “corporate speech”—was inconceivable.56
JUSTICE SCALIA also emphasizes the unqualified nature
of the First Amendment text. Ante, at 2, 8. Yet he would
seemingly read out the Free Press Clause: How else could
he claim that my purported views on newspapers must
track my views on corporations generally? Ante, at 6.57
Like virtually all modern lawyers, JUSTICE SCALIA pre­
sumably believes that the First Amendment restricts the
Executive, even though its language refers to Congress
alone. In any event, the text only leads us back to the
questions who or what is guaranteed “the freedom of
speech,” and, just as critically, what that freedom consists
of and under what circumstances it may be limited.
JUSTICE SCALIA appears to believe that because corpora­
tions are created and utilized by individuals, it follows (as
——————
56 Postratification practice bolsters the conclusion that the First
Amendment, “as originally understood,” ante, at 37, did not give corpo­
rations political speech rights on a par with the rights of individuals.
Well into the modern era of general incorporation statutes, “[t]he
common law was generally interpreted as prohibiting corporate politi­
cal participation,” First Nat. Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765,
819 (1978) (White, J., dissenting), and this Court did not recognize any
First Amendment protections for corporations until the middle part of
the 20th century, see ante, at 25–26 (listing cases).
57 In fact, the Free Press Clause might be turned against JUSTICE
SCALIA, for two reasons. First, we learn from it that the drafters of the
First Amendment did draw distinctions—explicit distinctions—between
types of “speakers,” or speech outlets or forms. Second, the Court’s
strongest historical evidence all relates to the Framers’ views on the
press, see ante, at 37–38; ante, at 4–6 (SCALIA, J., concurring), yet while
the Court tries to sweep this evidence into the Free Speech Clause, the
Free Press Clause provides a more natural textual home. The text and
history highlighted by our colleagues suggests why one type of corpora­
tion, those that are part of the press, might be able to claim special
First Amendment status, and therefore why some kinds of “identity”­
based distinctions might be permissible after all. Once one accepts that
much, the intellectual edifice of the majority opinion crumbles.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

41

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

night the day) that their electioneering must be equally
protected by the First Amendment and equally immunized
from expenditure limits. See ante, at 7–8. That conclu­
sion certainly does not follow as a logical matter, and
JUSTICE SCALIA fails to explain why the original public
meaning leads it to follow as a matter of interpretation.
The truth is we cannot be certain how a law such as
BCRA §203 meshes with the original meaning of the First
Amendment.58 I have given several reasons why I believe
the Constitution would have been understood then, and
ought to be understood now, to permit reasonable restric­
tions on corporate electioneering, and I will give many
more reasons in the pages to come. The Court enlists the
Framers in its defense without seriously grappling with
their understandings of corporations or the free speech
right, or with the republican principles that underlay
those understandings.
In fairness, our campaign finance jurisprudence has
never attended very closely to the views of the Framers,
see Randall v. Sorrell, 548 U. S. 230, 280 (2006) (STEVENS,
J., dissenting), whose political universe differed pro­
foundly from that of today. We have long since held that
corporations are covered by the First Amendment, and
many legal scholars have long since rejected the conces­
sion theory of the corporation. But “historical context is
usually relevant,” ibid. (internal quotation marks omit­
ted), and in light of the Court’s effort to cast itself as
guardian of ancient values, it pays to remember that
nothing in our constitutional history dictates today’s
outcome. To the contrary, this history helps illuminate
just how extraordinarily dissonant the decision is.
——————
58 Cf.

L. Levy, Legacy of Suppression: Freedom of Speech and Press in
Early American History 4 (1960) (“The meaning of no other clause of
the Bill of Rights at the time of its framing and ratification has been so
obscure to us” as the Free Speech and Press Clause).


42

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

2. Legislative and Judicial Interpretation
A century of more recent history puts to rest any notion
that today’s ruling is faithful to our First Amendment
tradition. At the federal level, the express distinction
between corporate and individual political spending on
elections stretches back to 1907, when Congress passed
the Tillman Act, ch. 420, 34 Stat. 864, banning all corpo­
rate contributions to candidates. The Senate Report on
the legislation observed that “[t]he evils of the use of
[corporate] money in connection with political elections are
so generally recognized that the committee deems it un­
necessary to make any argument in favor of the general
purpose of this measure. It is in the interest of good gov­
ernment and calculated to promote purity in the selection
of public officials.” S. Rep. No. 3056, 59th Cong., 1st Sess.,
2 (1906). President Roosevelt, in his 1905 annual message
to Congress, declared:
“ ‘All contributions by corporations to any political
committee or for any political purpose should be for­
bidden by law; directors should not be permitted to
use stockholders’ money for such purposes; and, more­
over, a prohibition of this kind would be, as far as it
went, an effective method of stopping the evils aimed
at in corrupt practices acts.’ ” United States v. Auto
mobile Workers, 352 U. S. 567, 572 (1957) (quoting 40
Cong. Rec. 96).
The Court has surveyed the history leading up to the
Tillman Act several times, see WRTL, 551 U. S., at 508–
510 (Souter, J., dissenting); McConnell, 540 U. S., at 115;
Automobile Workers, 352 U. S., at 570–575, and I will
refrain from doing so again. It is enough to say that the
Act was primarily driven by two pressing concerns: first,
the enormous power corporations had come to wield in
federal elections, with the accompanying threat of both
actual corruption and a public perception of corruption;


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

43

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

and second, a respect for the interest of shareholders and
members in preventing the use of their money to support
candidates they opposed. See ibid.; United States v. CIO,
335 U. S. 106, 113 (1948); Winkler, “Other People’s
Money”: Corporations, Agency Costs, and Campaign Fi­
nance Law, 92 Geo. L. J. 871 (2004).
Over the years, the limitations on corporate political
spending have been modified in a number of ways, as
Congress responded to changes in the American economy
and political practices that threatened to displace the
commonweal. Justice Souter recently traced these devel­
opments at length.59 WRTL, 551 U. S., at 507–519 (dis­
senting opinion); see also McConnell, 540 U. S., at 115–
133; McConnell, 251 F. Supp. 2d, at 188–205. The TaftHartley Act of 1947 is of special significance for this case.
In that Act passed more than 60 years ago, Congress
extended the prohibition on corporate support of candi­
dates to cover not only direct contributions, but independ­
ent expenditures as well. Labor Management Relations
Act, 1947, §304, 61 Stat. 159. The bar on contributions
“was being so narrowly construed” that corporations were
easily able to defeat the purposes of the Act by supporting
candidates through other means. WRTL, 551 U. S., at 511
(Souter, J., dissenting) (citing S. Rep. No. 1, 80th Cong.,
1st Sess., 38–39 (1947)).
Our colleagues emphasize that in two cases from the
middle of the 20th century, several Justices wrote sepa­
——————
59 As the majority notes, there is some academic debate about the
precise origins of these developments. Ante, at 48; see also n. 19, supra.
There is always some academic debate about such developments; the
motives of legislatures are never entirely clear or unitary. Yet the basic
shape and trajectory of 20th-century campaign finance reform are clear,
and one need not take a naïve or triumphalist view of this history to
find it highly relevant. The Court’s skepticism does nothing to mitigate
the absurdity of its claim that Austin and McConnell were outliers. Nor
does it alter the fact that five Justices today destroy a longstanding
American practice.


44

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

rately to criticize the expenditure restriction as applied to
unions, even though the Court declined to pass on its
constitutionality. Ante, at 27–28. Two features of these
cases are of far greater relevance. First, those Justices
were writing separately; which is to say, their position
failed to command a majority. Prior to today, this was a
fact we found significant in evaluating precedents. Sec­
ond, each case in this line expressed support for the prin­
ciple that corporate and union political speech financed
with PAC funds, collected voluntarily from the organiza­
tion’s stockholders or members, receives greater protection
than speech financed with general treasury funds.60
——————
60 See

Pipefitters v. United States, 407 U. S. 385, 409, 414–415 (1972)
(reading the statutory bar on corporate and union campaign spending
not to apply to “the voluntary donations of employees,” when main­
tained in a separate account, because “[t]he dominant [legislative]
concern in requiring that contributions be voluntary was, after all, to
protect the dissenting stockholder or union member”); Automobile
Workers, 352 U. S., at 592 (advising the District Court to consider on
remand whether the broadcast in question was “paid for out of the
general dues of the union membership or [whether] the funds [could] be
fairly said to have obtained on a voluntary basis”); United States v.
CIO, 335 U. S. 106, 123 (1948) (observing that “funds voluntarily
contributed [by union members or corporate stockholders] for election
purposes” might not be covered by the expenditure bar). Both the
Pipefitters and the Automobile Workers Court approvingly referenced
Congress’ goal of reducing “the effect of aggregated wealth on federal
elections,” understood as wealth drawn from a corporate or union
general treasury without the stockholders’ or members’ “free and
knowing choice.” Pipefitters, 407 U. S., at 416; see Automobile Workers,
352 U. S., at 582.
The two dissenters in Pipefitters would not have read the statutory
provision in question, a successor to §304 of the Taft-Hartley Act, to
allow such robust use of corporate and union funds to finance otherwise
prohibited electioneering. “This opening of the door to extensive
corporate and union influence on the elective and legislative processes,”
Justice Powell wrote, “must be viewed with genuine concern. This
seems to me to be a regressive step as contrasted with the numerous
legislative and judicial actions in recent years designed to assure that
elections are indeed free and representative.” 407 U. S., at 450 (opinion


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

45

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

This principle was carried forward when Congress
enacted comprehensive campaign finance reform in the
Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA), 86 Stat. 3,
which retained the restriction on using general treasury
funds for contributions and expenditures, 2 U. S. C.
§441b(a). FECA codified the option for corporations and
unions to create PACs to finance contributions and expen­
ditures forbidden to the corporation or union itself.
§441b(b).
By the time Congress passed FECA in 1971, the bar on
corporate contributions and expenditures had become such
an accepted part of federal campaign finance regulation
that when a large number of plaintiffs, including several
nonprofit corporations, challenged virtually every aspect of
the Act in Buckley, 424 U. S. 1, no one even bothered to
argue that the bar as such was unconstitutional. Buckley
famously (or infamously) distinguished direct contribu­
tions from independent expenditures, id., at 58–59, but its
silence on corporations only reinforced the understanding
that corporate expenditures could be treated differently
from individual expenditures. “Since our decision in Buck
ley, Congress’ power to prohibit corporations and unions
from using funds in their treasuries to finance advertise­
ments expressly advocating the election or defeat of candi­
dates in federal elections has been firmly embedded in our
law.” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 203.
Thus, it was unremarkable, in a 1982 case holding that
Congress could bar nonprofit corporations from soliciting
nonmembers for PAC funds, that then-Justice Rehnquist
wrote for a unanimous Court that Congress’ “careful legis­
lative adjustment of the federal electoral laws, in a cau­
tious advance, step by step, to account for the particular
legal and economic attributes of corporations . . . warrants
considerable deference,” and “reflects a permissible as­
—————— 

of Powell, J., joined by Burger, C. J.).



46

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

sessment of the dangers posed by those entities to the
electoral process.” NRWC, 459 U. S., at 209 (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted). “The governmen­
tal interest in preventing both actual corruption and the
appearance of corruption of elected representatives has
long been recognized,” the unanimous Court observed,
“and there is no reason why it may not . . . be accom­
plished by treating . . . corporations . . . differently from
individuals.” Id., at 210–211.
The corporate/individual distinction was not questioned
by the Court’s disposition, in 1986, of a challenge to the
expenditure restriction as applied to a distinctive type of
nonprofit corporation. In MCFL, 479 U. S. 238, we stated
again “that ‘the special characteristics of the corporate
structure require particularly careful regulation,’ ” id., at
256 (quoting NRWC, 459 U. S., at 209–210), and again we
acknowledged that the Government has a legitimate
interest in “regulat[ing] the substantial aggregations of
wealth amassed by the special advantages which go with
the corporate form,” 479 U. S., at 257 (internal quotation
marks omitted). Those aggregations can distort the “free
trade in ideas” crucial to candidate elections, ibid., at the
expense of members or shareholders who may disagree
with the object of the expenditures, id., at 260 (internal
quotation marks omitted). What the Court held by a 5-to­
4 vote was that a limited class of corporations must be
allowed to use their general treasury funds for independ­
ent expenditures, because Congress’ interests in protect­
ing shareholders and “restrict[ing] ‘the influence of politi­
cal war chests funneled through the corporate form,’ ” id.,
at 257 (quoting FEC v. National Conservative Political
Action Comm., 470 U. S. 480, 501 (1985) (NCPAC)), did
not apply to corporations that were structurally insulated
from those concerns.61
——————
61 Specifically,

these corporations had to meet three conditions. First,


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

47

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

It is worth remembering for present purposes that the
four MCFL dissenters, led by Chief Justice Rehnquist,
thought the Court was carrying the First Amendment too
far. They would have recognized congressional authority
to bar general treasury electioneering expenditures even
by this class of nonprofits; they acknowledged that “the
threat from corporate political activity will vary depending
on the particular characteristics of a given corporation,”
but believed these “distinctions among corporations” were
“distinctions in degree,” not “in kind,” and thus “more
properly drawn by the Legislature than by the Judiciary.”
479 U. S., at 268 (opinion of Rehnquist, C. J.) (internal
quotation marks omitted). Not a single Justice suggested
that regulation of corporate political speech could be no
more stringent than of speech by an individual.
Four years later, in Austin, 494 U. S. 652, we considered
whether corporations falling outside the MCFL exception
could be barred from using general treasury funds to make
independent expenditures in support of, or in opposition
to, candidates. We held they could be. Once again recog­
nizing the importance of “the integrity of the marketplace
of political ideas” in candidate elections, MCFL, 479 U. S.,
at 257, we noted that corporations have “special advan­
tages—such as limited liability, perpetual life, and favor­
able treatment of the accumulation and distribution of
assets,” 494 U. S., at 658–659—that allow them to spend
prodigious general treasury sums on campaign messages
——————
they had to be formed “for the express purpose of promoting political
ideas,” so that their resources reflected political support rather than
commercial success. MCFL, 479 U. S., at 264. Next, they had to have
no shareholders, so that “persons connected with the organization will
have no economic disincentive for disassociating with it if they disagree
with its political activity.” Ibid. Finally, they could not be “established
by a business corporation or a labor union,” nor “accept contributions
from such entities,” lest they “serv[e] as conduits for the type of direct
spending that creates a threat to the political marketplace.” Ibid.


48

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

that have “little or no correlation” with the beliefs held by
actual persons, id., at 660. In light of the corrupting
effects such spending might have on the political process,
ibid., we permitted the State of Michigan to limit corpo­
rate expenditures on candidate elections to corporations’
PACs, which rely on voluntary contributions and thus
“reflect actual public support for the political ideals es­
poused by corporations,” ibid. Notwithstanding our col­
leagues’ insinuations that Austin deprived the public of
general “ideas,” “facts,” and “knowledge,” ante, at 38–39,
the decision addressed only candidate-focused expendi­
tures and gave the State no license to regulate corporate
spending on other matters.
In the 20 years since Austin, we have reaffirmed its
holding and rationale a number of times, see, e.g., Beau
mont, 539 U. S., at 153–156, most importantly in McCon
nell, 540 U. S. 93, where we upheld the provision chal­
lenged here, §203 of BCRA.62 Congress crafted §203 in
response to a problem created by Buckley. The Buckley
——————
62 According to THE CHIEF JUSTICE, we are “erroneou[s]” in claiming
that McConnell and Beaumont “ ‘reaffirmed’ ” Austin. Ante, at 5. In
both cases, the Court explicitly relied on Austin and quoted from it at
length. See 540 U. S., at 204–205; 539 U. S., at 153–155, 158, 160, 163;
see also ante, at 15 (“The holding and validity of Austin were essential
to the reasoning of the McConnell majority opinion”); Brief for Appel­
lants National Rifle Association et al., O. T. 2003, No. 02–1675, p. 21
(“Beaumont reaffirmed . . . the Austin rationale for restricting expendi­
tures”). The McConnell Court did so in the teeth of vigorous protests by
Justices in today’s majority that Austin should be overruled. See ante,
at 15 (citing relevant passages); see also Beaumont, 539 U. S., at 163–
164 (KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment). Both Courts also heard
criticisms of Austin from parties or amici. See Brief for Appellants
Chamber of Commerce of the United States et al., O. T. 2003, No. 02–
1756, p. 35, n. 22; Reply Brief for Appellants/Cross-Appellees Senator
Mitch McConnell et al., O. T. 2003, No. 02–1674, pp. 13–14; Brief for
Pacific Legal Foundation as Amicus Curiae in FEC v. Beaumont, O. T.
2002, No. 02–403, passim. If this does not qualify as reaffirmation of a
precedent, then I do not know what would.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

49

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

Court had construed FECA’s definition of prohibited “ex­
penditures” narrowly to avoid any problems of constitu­
tional vagueness, holding it applicable only to “communi­
cations that expressly advocate the election or defeat of a
clearly identified candidate,” 424 U. S., at 80, i.e., state­
ments containing so-called “magic words” like “ ‘vote for,’
‘elect,’ ‘support,’ ‘cast your ballot for,’ ‘Smith for Congress,’
‘vote against,’ ‘defeat,’ [or] ‘reject,’ ” id., at 43–44, and n.
52. After Buckley, corporations and unions figured out
how to circumvent the limits on express advocacy by using
sham “issue ads” that “eschewed the use of magic words”
but nonetheless “advocate[d] the election or defeat of
clearly identified federal candidates.” McConnell, 540
U. S., at 126. “Corporations and unions spent hundreds of
millions of dollars of their general funds to pay for these
ads.” Id., at 127. Congress passed §203 to address this
circumvention, prohibiting corporations and unions from
using general treasury funds for electioneering communi­
cations that “refe[r] to a clearly identified candidate,”
whether or not those communications use the magic words.
2 U. S. C. §434(f)(3)(A)(i)(I).
When we asked in McConnell “whether a compelling
governmental interest justifie[d]” §203, we found the
question “easily answered”: “We have repeatedly sustained
legislation aimed at ‘the corrosive and distorting effects of
immense aggregations of wealth that are accumulated
with the help of the corporate form and that have little or
no correlation to the public’s support for the corporation’s
political ideas.’ ” 540 U. S., at 205 (quoting Austin, 494
U. S., at 660). These precedents “represent respect for the
legislative judgment that the special characteristics of the
corporate structure require particularly careful regula­
tion.” 540 U. S., at 205 (internal quotation marks omit­
ted). “Moreover, recent cases have recognized that certain
restrictions on corporate electoral involvement permissibly
hedge against ‘ “circumvention of [valid] contribution


50

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

limits.” ’ ” Ibid. (quoting Beaumont, 539 U. S., at 155, in
turn quoting FEC v. Colorado Republican Federal Cam
paign Comm., 533 U. S. 431, 456, and n. 18 (2001) (Colo
rado II); alteration in original). BCRA, we found, is faith­
ful to the compelling governmental interests in
“ ‘preserving the integrity of the electoral process, prevent­
ing corruption, . . . sustaining the active, alert responsibil­
ity of the individual citizen in a democracy for the wise
conduct of the government,’ ” and maintaining “ ‘the indi­
vidual citizen’s confidence in government.’ ” 540 U. S., at
206–207, n. 88 (quoting Bellotti, 435 U. S., at 788–789;
some internal quotation marks and brackets omitted).
What made the answer even easier than it might have
been otherwise was the option to form PACs, which give
corporations, at the least, “a constitutionally sufficient
opportunity to engage in” independent expenditures. 540
U. S., at 203.
3. Buckley and Bellotti
Against this extensive background of congressional
regulation of corporate campaign spending, and our re­
peated affirmation of this regulation as constitutionally
sound, the majority dismisses Austin as “a significant
departure from ancient First Amendment principles,”
ante, at 1 (internal quotation marks omitted). How does
the majority attempt to justify this claim? Selected pas­
sages from two cases, Buckley, 424 U. S. 1, and Bellotti,
435 U. S. 765, do all of the work. In the Court’s view,
Buckley and Bellotti decisively rejected the possibility of
distinguishing corporations from natural persons in the
1970’s; it just so happens that in every single case in
which the Court has reviewed campaign finance legisla­
tion in the decades since, the majority failed to grasp this
truth. The Federal Congress and dozens of state legisla­
tures, we now know, have been similarly deluded.
The majority emphasizes Buckley’s statement that


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

51

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

“ ‘[t]he concept that government may restrict the speech of
some elements of our society in order to enhance the rela­
tive voice of others is wholly foreign to the First Amend­
ment.’ ” Ante, at 33 (quoting 424 U. S., at 48–49); ante, at
8 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.). But this elegant phrase
cannot bear the weight that our colleagues have placed on
it. For one thing, the Constitution does, in fact, permit
numerous “restrictions on the speech of some in order to
prevent a few from drowning out the many”: for example,
restrictions on ballot access and on legislators’ floor time.
Nixon v. Shrink Missouri Government PAC, 528 U. S. 377,
402 (2000) (BREYER, J., concurring). For another, the
Buckley Court used this line in evaluating “the ancillary
governmental interest in equalizing the relative ability of
individuals and groups to influence the outcome of elec­
tions.” 424 U. S., at 48. It is not apparent why this is
relevant to the case before us. The majority suggests that
Austin rests on the foreign concept of speech equalization,
ante, at 34; ante, at 8–10 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.), but
we made it clear in Austin (as in several cases before and
since) that a restriction on the way corporations spend
their money is no mere exercise in disfavoring the voice of
some elements of our society in preference to others.
Indeed, we expressly ruled that the compelling interest
supporting Michigan’s statute was not one of “ ‘equaliz[ing]
the relative influence of speakers on elections,’ ” Austin,
494 U. S., at 660 (quoting id., at 705 (KENNEDY, J., dis­
senting)), but rather the need to confront the distinctive
corrupting potential of corporate electoral advocacy fi­
nanced by general treasury dollars, id., at 659–660.
For that matter, it should go without saying that when
we made this statement in Buckley, we could not have
been casting doubt on the restriction on corporate expendi­
tures in candidate elections, which had not been chal­
lenged as “foreign to the First Amendment,” ante, at 33
(quoting Buckley, 424 U. S., at 49), or for any other reason.


52

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

Buckley’s independent expenditure analysis was focused
on a very different statutory provision, 18 U. S. C.
§608(e)(1) (1970 ed., Supp. V). It is implausible to think,
as the majority suggests, ante, at 29–30, that Buckley
covertly invalidated FECA’s separate corporate and union
campaign expenditure restriction, §610 (now codified at 2
U. S. C. §441b), even though that restriction had been on
the books for decades before Buckley and would remain on
the books, undisturbed, for decades after.
The case on which the majority places even greater
weight than Buckley, however, is Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765,
claiming it “could not have been clearer” that Bellotti’s
holding forbade distinctions between corporate and indi­
vidual expenditures like the one at issue here, ante, at 30.
The Court’s reliance is odd. The only thing about Bellotti
that could not be clearer is that it declined to adopt the
majority’s position. Bellotti ruled, in an explicit limitation
on the scope of its holding, that “our consideration of a
corporation’s right to speak on issues of general public
interest implies no comparable right in the quite different
context of participation in a political campaign for election
to public office.” 435 U. S., at 788, n. 26; see also id., at
787–788 (acknowledging that the interests in preserving
public confidence in Government and protecting dissenting
shareholders may be “weighty . . . in the context of parti­
san candidate elections”). Bellotti, in other words, did not
touch the question presented in Austin and McConnell,
and the opinion squarely disavowed the proposition for
which the majority cites it.
The majority attempts to explain away the distinction
Bellotti drew—between general corporate speech and
campaign speech intended to promote or prevent the
election of specific candidates for office—as inconsistent
with the rest of the opinion and with Buckley. Ante, at 31,
42–44. Yet the basis for this distinction is perfectly coher­
ent: The anticorruption interests that animate regulations


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

53

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

of corporate participation in candidate elections, the “im­
portance” of which “has never been doubted,” 435 U. S., at
788, n. 26, do not apply equally to regulations of corporate
participation in referenda. A referendum cannot owe a
political debt to a corporation, seek to curry favor with a
corporation, or fear the corporation’s retaliation. Cf. Aus
tin, 494 U. S., at 678 (STEVENS, J., concurring); Citizens
Against Rent Control/Coalition for Fair Housing v. Berke
ley, 454 U. S. 290, 299 (1981). The majority likewise
overlooks the fact that, over the past 30 years, our cases
have repeatedly recognized the candidate/issue distinc­
tion. See, e.g., Austin, 494 U. S., at 659; NCPAC, 470
U. S., at 495–496; FCC v. League of Women Voters of Cal.,
468 U. S. 364, 371, n. 9 (1984); NRWC, 459 U. S., at 210,
n. 7. The Court’s critique of Bellotti’s footnote 26 puts it in
the strange position of trying to elevate Bellotti to canoni­
cal status, while simultaneously disparaging a critical
piece of its analysis as unsupported and irreconcilable
with Buckley. Bellotti, apparently, is both the font of all
wisdom and internally incoherent.
The Bellotti Court confronted a dramatically different
factual situation from the one that confronts us in this
case: a state statute that barred business corporations’
expenditures on some referenda but not others. Specifi­
cally, the statute barred a business corporation “from
making contributions or expenditures ‘for the purpose of
. . . influencing or affecting the vote on any question sub­
mitted to the voters, other than one materially affecting
any of the property, business or assets of the corporation,’ ”
435 U. S., at 768 (quoting Mass. Gen. Laws Ann., ch. 55,
§8 (West Supp. 1977); alteration in original), and it went
so far as to provide that referenda related to income taxa­
tion would not “ ‘be deemed materially to affect the prop­
erty, business or assets of the corporation,’ ” 435 U. S., at
768. As might be guessed, the legislature had enacted this
statute in order to limit corporate speech on a proposed


54

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

state constitutional amendment to authorize a graduated
income tax. The statute was a transparent attempt to
prevent corporations from spending money to defeat this
amendment, which was favored by a majority of legislators
but had been repeatedly rejected by the voters. See id., at
769–770, and n. 3. We said that “where, as here, the
legislature’s suppression of speech suggests an attempt to
give one side of a debatable public question an advantage
in expressing its views to the people, the First Amendment
is plainly offended.” Id., at 785–786 (footnote omitted).
Bellotti thus involved a viewpoint-discriminatory stat­
ute, created to effect a particular policy outcome. Even
Justice Rehnquist, in dissent, had to acknowledge that “a
very persuasive argument could be made that the [Massa­
chusetts Legislature], desiring to impose a personal in­
come tax but more than once defeated in that desire by the
combination of the Commonwealth’s referendum provision
and corporate expenditures in opposition to such a tax,
simply decided to muzzle corporations on this sort of issue
so that it could succeed in its desire.” Id., at 827, n. 6. To
make matters worse, the law at issue did not make any
allowance for corporations to spend money through PACs.
Id., at 768, n. 2 (opinion of the Court). This really was a
complete ban on a specific, preidentified subject. See
MCFL, 479 U. S., at 259, n. 12 (stating that 2 U. S. C.
§441b’s expenditure restriction “is of course distinguish
able from the complete foreclosure of any opportunity for
political speech that we invalidated in the state referen­
dum context in . . . Bellotti” (emphasis added)).
The majority grasps a quotational straw from Bellotti,
that speech does not fall entirely outside the protection of
the First Amendment merely because it comes from a
corporation. Ante, at 30–31. Of course not, but no one
suggests the contrary and neither Austin nor McConnell
held otherwise. They held that even though the expendi­
tures at issue were subject to First Amendment scrutiny,


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

55

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

the restrictions on those expenditures were justified by a
compelling state interest. See McConnell, 540 U. S., at
205; Austin, 494 U. S., at 658, 660. We acknowledged in
Bellotti that numerous “interests of the highest impor­
tance” can justify campaign finance regulation. 435 U. S.,
at 788–789. But we found no evidence that these interests
were served by the Massachusetts law. Id., at 789. We
left open the possibility that our decision might have been
different if there had been “record or legislative findings
that corporate advocacy threatened imminently to under­
mine democratic processes, thereby denigrating rather
than serving First Amendment interests.” Ibid.
Austin and McConnell, then, sit perfectly well with
Bellotti. Indeed, all six Members of the Austin majority
had been on the Court at the time of Bellotti, and none so
much as hinted in Austin that they saw any tension be­
tween the decisions. The difference between the cases is
not that Austin and McConnell rejected First Amendment
protection for corporations whereas Bellotti accepted it.
The difference is that the statute at issue in Bellotti
smacked of viewpoint discrimination, targeted one class of
corporations, and provided no PAC option; and the State
has a greater interest in regulating independent corporate
expenditures on candidate elections than on referenda,
because in a functioning democracy the public must have
faith that its representatives owe their positions to the
people, not to the corporations with the deepest pockets.
*
*
*
In sum, over the course of the past century Congress has
demonstrated a recurrent need to regulate corporate
participation in candidate elections to “ ‘[p]reserv[e] the
integrity of the electoral process, preven[t] corruption, . . .
sustai[n] the active, alert responsibility of the individual
citizen,’ ” protect the expressive interests of shareholders,
and “ ‘[p]reserv[e] . . . the individual citizen’s confidence in


56

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

government.’ ” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 206–207, n. 88
(quoting Bellotti, 435 U. S., at 788–789; first alteration in
original). These understandings provided the combined
impetus behind the Tillman Act in 1907, see Automobile
Workers, 352 U. S., at 570–575, the Taft-Hartley Act in
1947, see WRTL, 551 U. S., at 511 (Souter, J., dissenting),
FECA in 1971, see NRWC, 459 U. S., at 209–210, and
BCRA in 2002, see McConnell, 540 U. S., at 126–132.
Continuously for over 100 years, this line of “[c]ampaign
finance reform has been a series of reactions to docu­
mented threats to electoral integrity obvious to any voter,
posed by large sums of money from corporate or union
treasuries.” WRTL, 551 U. S., at 522 (Souter, J., dissent­
ing). Time and again, we have recognized these realities
in approving measures that Congress and the States have
taken. None of the cases the majority cites is to the con­
trary. The only thing new about Austin was the dissent,
with its stunning failure to appreciate the legitimacy of
interests recognized in the name of democratic integrity
since the days of the Progressives.
IV
Having explained why this is not an appropriate case in
which to revisit Austin and McConnell and why these
decisions sit perfectly well with “First Amendment princi­
ples,” ante, at 1, 48, I come at last to the interests that are
at stake.
The majority recognizes that Austin and
McConnell may be defended on anticorruption, antidistor­
tion, and shareholder protection rationales. Ante, at 32–
46. It badly errs both in explaining the nature of these
rationales, which overlap and complement each other, and
in applying them to the case at hand.
The Anticorruption Interest
Undergirding the majority’s approach to the merits is
the claim that the only “sufficiently important governmen­


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

57

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

tal interest in preventing corruption or the appearance of
corruption” is one that is “limited to quid pro quo corrup­
tion.” Ante, at 43. This is the same “crabbed view of
corruption” that was espoused by JUSTICE KENNEDY in
McConnell and squarely rejected by the Court in that case.
540 U. S., at 152. While it is true that we have not always
spoken about corruption in a clear or consistent voice, the
approach taken by the majority cannot be right, in my
judgment. It disregards our constitutional history and the
fundamental demands of a democratic society.
On numerous occasions we have recognized Congress’
legitimate interest in preventing the money that is spent
on elections from exerting an “ ‘undue influence on an
officeholder’s judgment’ ” and from creating “ ‘the appear­
ance of such influence,’ ” beyond the sphere of quid pro quo
relationships. Id., at 150; see also, e.g., id., at 143–144,
152–154; Colorado II, 533 U. S., at 441; Shrink Missouri,
528 U. S., at 389. Corruption can take many forms. Brib­
ery may be the paradigm case. But the difference between
selling a vote and selling access is a matter of degree, not
kind. And selling access is not qualitatively different from
giving special preference to those who spent money on
one’s behalf. Corruption operates along a spectrum, and
the majority’s apparent belief that quid pro quo arrange­
ments can be neatly demarcated from other improper
influences does not accord with the theory or reality of
politics. It certainly does not accord with the record Con­
gress developed in passing BCRA, a record that stands as
a remarkable testament to the energy and ingenuity with
which corporations, unions, lobbyists, and politicians may
go about scratching each other’s backs—and which amply
supported Congress’ determination to target a limited set
of especially destructive practices.
The District Court that adjudicated the initial challenge
to BCRA pored over this record. In a careful analysis,
Judge Kollar-Kotelly made numerous findings about the


58

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

corrupting consequences of corporate and union independ­
ent expenditures in the years preceding BCRA’s passage.
See McConnell, 251 F. Supp. 2d, at 555–560, 622–625; see
also id., at 804–805, 813, n. 143 (Leon, J.) (indicating
agreement). As summarized in her own words:
“The factual findings of the Court illustrate that
corporations and labor unions routinely notify Mem­
bers of Congress as soon as they air electioneering
communications relevant to the Members’ elections.
The record also indicates that Members express ap­
preciation to organizations for the airing of these elec­
tion-related advertisements.
Indeed, Members of
Congress are particularly grateful when negative is­
sue advertisements are run by these organizations,
leaving the candidates free to run positive advertise­
ments and be seen as ‘above the fray.’ Political con­
sultants testify that campaigns are quite aware of
who is running advertisements on the candidate’s be­
half, when they are being run, and where they are be­
ing run. Likewise, a prominent lobbyist testifies that
these organizations use issue advocacy as a means to
influence various Members of Congress.
“The Findings also demonstrate that Members of
Congress seek to have corporations and unions run
these advertisements on their behalf. The Findings
show that Members suggest that corporations or indi­
viduals make donations to interest groups with the
understanding that the money contributed to these
groups will assist the Member in a campaign. After
the election, these organizations often seek credit for
their support. . . . Finally, a large majority of Ameri­
cans (80%) are of the view that corporations and other
organizations that engage in electioneering communi­
cations, which benefit specific elected officials, receive
special consideration from those officials when matters


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

59

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

arise that affect these corporations and organizations.”
Id., at 623–624 (citations and footnote omitted).
Many of the relationships of dependency found by Judge
Kollar-Kotelly seemed to have a quid pro quo basis, but
other arrangements were more subtle. Her analysis
shows the great difficulty in delimiting the precise scope of
the quid pro quo category, as well as the adverse conse­
quences that all such arrangements may have. There are
threats of corruption that are far more destructive to a
democratic society than the odd bribe. Yet the majority’s
understanding of corruption would leave lawmakers impo­
tent to address all but the most discrete abuses.
Our “undue influence” cases have allowed the American
people to cast a wider net through legislative experiments
designed to ensure, to some minimal extent, “that office­
holders will decide issues . . . on the merits or the desires
of their constituencies,” and not “according to the wishes of
those who have made large financial contributions”—or
expenditures—“valued by the officeholder.” McConnell,
540 U. S., at 153.63 When private interests are seen to
exert outsized control over officeholders solely on account
of the money spent on (or withheld from) their campaigns,
the result can depart so thoroughly “from what is pure or
——————
63 Cf.

Nixon v. Shrink Missouri Government PAC, 528 U. S. 377, 389
(2000) (recognizing “the broader threat from politicians too compliant
with the wishes of large contributors”). Though discrete in scope, these
experiments must impose some meaningful limits if they are to have a
chance at functioning effectively and preserving the public’s trust.
“Even if it occurs only occasionally, the potential for such undue influ­
ence is manifest. And unlike straight cash-for-votes transactions, such
corruption is neither easily detected nor practical to criminalize.”
McConnell, 540 U. S., at 153. There should be nothing controversial
about the proposition that the influence being targeted is “undue.” In a
democracy, officeholders should not make public decisions with the aim
of placating a financial benefactor, except to the extent that the bene­
factor is seen as representative of a larger constituency or its argu­
ments are seen as especially persuasive.


60

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

correct” in the conduct of Government, Webster’s Third
New International Dictionary 512 (1966) (defining “cor­
ruption”), that it amounts to a “subversion . . . of the elec­
toral process,” Automobile Workers, 352 U. S., at 575. At
stake in the legislative efforts to address this threat is
therefore not only the legitimacy and quality of Govern­
ment but also the public’s faith therein, not only “the
capacity of this democracy to represent its constituents
[but also] the confidence of its citizens in their capacity to
govern themselves,” WRTL, 551 U. S., at 507 (Souter, J.,
dissenting). “Take away Congress’ authority to regulate
the appearance of undue influence and ‘the cynical as­
sumption that large donors call the tune could jeopardize
the willingness of voters to take part in democratic gov­
ernance.’ ” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 144 (quoting Shrink
Missouri, 528 U. S., at 390).64
The cluster of interrelated interests threatened by such
undue influence and its appearance has been well cap­
tured under the rubric of “democratic integrity.” WRTL,
551 U. S., at 522 (Souter, J., dissenting). This value has
underlined a century of state and federal efforts to regu­
late the role of corporations in the electoral process.65
——————
64 The majority declares by fiat that the appearance of undue influ­
ence by high-spending corporations “will not cause the electorate to lose
faith in our democracy.” Ante, at 44. The electorate itself has consis­
tently indicated otherwise, both in opinion polls, see McConnell v. FEC,
251 F. Supp. 2d 176, 557–558, 623–624 (DC 2003) (opinion of KollarKotelly, J.), and in the laws its representatives have passed, and our
colleagues have no basis for elevating their own optimism into a tenet
of constitutional law.
65 Quite distinct from the interest in preventing improper influences
on the electoral process, I have long believed that “a number of [other]
purposes, both legitimate and substantial, may justify the imposition of
reasonable limitations on the expenditures permitted during the course
of any single campaign.” Davis v. FEC, 554 U. S. ___, ___ (2008) (slip
op., at 3) (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). In my
judgment, such limitations may be justified to the extent they are
tailored to “improving the quality of the exposition of ideas” that voters


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

61

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

Unlike the majority’s myopic focus on quid pro quo
scenarios and the free-floating “First Amendment princi­
ples” on which it rests so much weight, ante, at 1, 48, this
broader understanding of corruption has deep roots in the
Nation’s history. “During debates on the earliest [cam­
paign finance] reform acts, the terms ‘corruption’ and
‘undue influence’ were used nearly interchangeably.”
Pasquale, Reclaiming Egalitarianism in the Political
Theory of Campaign Finance Reform, 2008 U. Ill. L. Rev.
599, 601. Long before Buckley, we appreciated that “[t]o
say that Congress is without power to pass appropriate
legislation to safeguard . . . an election from the improper
use of money to influence the result is to deny to the na­
tion in a vital particular the power of self protection.”
Burroughs v. United States, 290 U. S. 534, 545 (1934).
And whereas we have no evidence to support the notion
that the Framers would have wanted corporations to have
the same rights as natural persons in the electoral con­
text, we have ample evidence to suggest that they would
have been appalled by the evidence of corruption that
Congress unearthed in developing BCRA and that the
Court today discounts to irrelevance. It is fair to say that
“[t]he Framers were obsessed with corruption,” Teachout
348, which they understood to encompass the dependency
of public officeholders on private interests, see id., at 373–
374; see also Randall, 548 U. S., at 280 (STEVENS, J.,
dissenting). They discussed corruption “more often in the
Constitutional Convention than factions, violence, or
instability.” Teachout 352. When they brought our consti­
—————— 

receive, ibid., “free[ing] candidates and their staffs from the intermina

­
ble burden of fundraising,” ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted), 

and “protect[ing] equal access to the political arena,” Randall v. Sorrell, 

548 U. S. 230, 278 (2006) (STEVENS, J., dissenting) (internal quotation

marks omitted). I continue to adhere to these beliefs, but they have not

been briefed by the parties or amici in this case, and their soundness is

immaterial to its proper disposition. 



62

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

tutional order into being, the Framers had their minds
trained on a threat to republican self-government that this
Court has lost sight of.
Quid Pro Quo Corruption
There is no need to take my side in the debate over the
scope of the anticorruption interest to see that the Court’s
merits holding is wrong. Even under the majority’s
“crabbed view of corruption,” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 152,
the Government should not lose this case.
“The importance of the governmental interest in pre­
venting [corruption through the creation of political debts]
has never been doubted.” Bellotti, 435 U. S., at 788, n. 26.
Even in the cases that have construed the anticorruption
interest most narrowly, we have never suggested that
such quid pro quo debts must take the form of outright
vote buying or bribes, which have long been distinct
crimes. Rather, they encompass the myriad ways in which
outside parties may induce an officeholder to confer a
legislative benefit in direct response to, or anticipation of,
some outlay of money the parties have made or will make
on behalf of the officeholder. See McConnell, 540 U. S., at
143 (“We have not limited [the anticorruption] interest to
the elimination of cash-for-votes exchanges. In Buckley,
we expressly rejected the argument that antibribery laws
provided a less restrictive alternative to FECA’s contribu­
tion limits, noting that such laws ‘deal[t] with only the
most blatant and specific attempts of those with money to
influence governmental action’ ” (quoting 424 U. S., at 28;
alteration in original)). It has likewise never been doubted
that “[o]f almost equal concern as the danger of actual
quid pro quo arrangements is the impact of the appear­
ance of corruption.” Id., at 27. Congress may “legiti­
mately conclude that the avoidance of the appearance of
improper influence is also critical . . . if confidence in the
system of representative Government is not to be eroded


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

63

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

to a disastrous extent.” Ibid. (internal quotation marks
omitted; alteration in original). A democracy cannot func­
tion effectively when its constituent members believe laws
are being bought and sold.
In theory, our colleagues accept this much. As applied
to BCRA §203, however, they conclude “[t]he anticorrup­
tion interest is not sufficient to displace the speech here in
question.” Ante, at 41.
Although the Court suggests that Buckley compels its
conclusion, ante, at 40–44, Buckley cannot sustain this
reading. It is true that, in evaluating FECA’s ceiling on
independent expenditures by all persons, the Buckley
Court found the governmental interest in preventing
corruption “inadequate.” 424 U. S., at 45. But Buckley did
not evaluate corporate expenditures specifically, nor did it
rule out the possibility that a future Court might find
otherwise. The opinion reasoned that an expenditure
limitation covering only express advocacy (i.e., magic
words) would likely be ineffectual, ibid., a problem that
Congress tackled in BCRA, and it concluded that “the
independent advocacy restricted by [FECA §608(e)(1)] does
not presently appear to pose dangers of real or apparent
corruption comparable to those identified with large cam­
paign contributions,” id., at 46 (emphasis added). Buckley
expressly contemplated that an anticorruption rationale
might justify restrictions on independent expenditures at
a later date, “because it may be that, in some circum­
stances, ‘large independent expenditures pose the same
dangers of actual or apparent quid pro quo arrangements
as do large contributions.’ ” WRTL, 551 U. S., at 478
(opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.) (quoting Buckley, 424 U. S., at
45). Certainly Buckley did not foreclose this possibility
with respect to electioneering communications made with
corporate general treasury funds, an issue the Court had
no occasion to consider.
The Austin Court did not rest its holding on quid pro


64

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

quo corruption, as it found the broader corruption impli­
cated by the antidistortion and shareholder protection
rationales a sufficient basis for Michigan’s restriction on
corporate electioneering. 494 U. S., at 658–660. Concur­
ring in that opinion, I took the position that “the danger of
either the fact, or the appearance, of quid pro quo rela­
tionships [also] provides an adequate justification for state
regulation” of these independent expenditures. Id., at 678.
I did not see this position as inconsistent with Buckley’s
analysis of individual expenditures. Corporations, as a
class, tend to be more attuned to the complexities of the
legislative process and more directly affected by tax and
appropriations measures that receive little public scrutiny;
they also have vastly more money with which to try to buy
access and votes. See Supp. Brief for Appellee 17 (stating
that the Fortune 100 companies earned revenues of $13.1
trillion during the last election cycle). Business corpora­
tions must engage the political process in instrumental
terms if they are to maximize shareholder value. The
unparalleled resources, professional lobbyists, and single­
minded focus they bring to this effort, I believed, make
quid pro quo corruption and its appearance inherently
more likely when they (or their conduits or trade groups)
spend unrestricted sums on elections.
It is with regret rather than satisfaction that I can now
say that time has borne out my concerns. The legislative
and judicial proceedings relating to BCRA generated a
substantial body of evidence suggesting that, as corpora­
tions grew more and more adept at crafting “issue ads” to
help or harm a particular candidate, these nominally
independent expenditures began to corrupt the political
process in a very direct sense. The sponsors of these ads
were routinely granted special access after the campaign
was over; “candidates and officials knew who their friends
were,” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 129. Many corporate
independent expenditures, it seemed, had become essen­


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

65

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

tially interchangeable with direct contributions in their
capacity to generate quid pro quo arrangements. In an
age in which money and television ads are the coin of the
campaign realm, it is hardly surprising that corporations
deployed these ads to curry favor with, and to gain influ­
ence over, public officials.
The majority appears to think it decisive that the BCRA
record does not contain “direct examples of votes being
exchanged for . . . expenditures.” Ante, at 45 (internal
quotation marks omitted). It would have been quite re­
markable if Congress had created a record detailing such
behavior by its own Members. Proving that a specific vote
was exchanged for a specific expenditure has always been
next to impossible: Elected officials have diverse motiva­
tions, and no one will acknowledge that he sold a vote.
Yet, even if “[i]ngratiation and access . . . are not corrup­
tion” themselves, ibid., they are necessary prerequisites to
it; they can create both the opportunity for, and the ap­
pearance of, quid pro quo arrangements. The influx of
unlimited corporate money into the electoral realm also
creates new opportunities for the mirror image of quid pro
quo deals: threats, both explicit and implicit. Starting
today, corporations with large war chests to deploy on
electioneering may find democratically elected bodies
becoming much more attuned to their interests. The
majority both misreads the facts and draws the wrong
conclusions when it suggests that the BCRA record pro­
vides “only scant evidence that independent expenditures
. . . ingratiate,” and that, “in any event,” none of it mat­
ters. Ibid.
In her analysis of the record, Judge Kollar-Kotelly
documented the pervasiveness of this ingratiation and
explained its significance under the majority’s own touch­
stone for defining the scope of the anticorruption ration­
ale, Buckley. See McConnell, 251 F. Supp. 2d, at 555–560,
622–625. Witnesses explained how political parties and


66

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

candidates used corporate independent expenditures to
circumvent FECA’s “hard-money” limitations. See, e.g.,
id., at 478–479. One former Senator candidly admitted to
the District Court that “ ‘[c]andidates whose campaigns
benefit from [phony “issue ads”] greatly appreciate the
help of these groups. In fact, Members will also be favora­
bly disposed to those who finance these groups when they
later seek access to discuss pending legislation.’ ” Id., at
556 (quoting declaration of Sen. Dale Bumpers). One
prominent lobbyist went so far as to state, in uncontro­
verted testimony, that “ ‘unregulated expenditures—
whether soft money donations to the parties or issue ad
campaigns—can sometimes generate far more influence
than direct campaign contributions.’ ” Ibid. (quoting decla­
ration of Wright Andrews; emphasis added). In sum,
Judge Kollar-Kotelly found, “[t]he record powerfully dem­
onstrates that electioneering communications paid for with
the general treasury funds of labor unions and corpora­
tions endears those entities to elected officials in a way
that could be perceived by the public as corrupting.” Id., at
622–623. She concluded that the Government’s interest in
preventing the appearance of corruption, as that concept
was defined in Buckley, was itself sufficient to uphold
BCRA §203. 251 F. Supp. 2d, at 622–625. Judge Leon
agreed. See id., at 804–805 (dissenting only with respect to the Wellstone Amendment’s coverage of MCFL
corporations).
When the McConnell Court affirmed the judgment of the
District Court regarding §203, we did not rest our holding
on a narrow notion of quid pro quo corruption. Instead we
relied on the governmental interest in combating the
unique forms of corruption threatened by corporations, as
recognized in Austin’s antidistortion and shareholder
protection rationales, 540 U. S., at 205 (citing Austin, 494
U. S., at 660), as well as the interest in preventing cir­
cumvention of contribution limits, 540 U. S., at 128–129,


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

67

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

205, 206, n. 88. Had we felt constrained by the view of
today’s Court that quid pro quo corruption and its appear­
ance are the only interests that count in this field, ante, at
32–46, we of course would have looked closely at that
issue. And as the analysis by Judge Kollar-Kotelly re­
flects, it is a very real possibility that we would have found
one or both of those interests satisfied and §203 appropri­
ately tailored to them.
The majority’s rejection of the Buckley anticorruption
rationale on the ground that independent corporate ex­
penditures “do not give rise to [quid pro quo] corruption or
the appearance of corruption,” ante, at 42, is thus unfair
as well as unreasonable. Congress and outside experts
have generated significant evidence corroborating this
rationale, and the only reason we do not have any of the
relevant materials before us is that the Government had
no reason to develop a record at trial for a facial challenge
the plaintiff had abandoned. The Court cannot both
sua sponte choose to relitigate McConnell on appeal and
then complain that the Government has failed to substan­
tiate its case. If our colleagues were really serious about
the interest in preventing quid pro quo corruption, they
would remand to the District Court with instructions to
commence evidentiary proceedings.66
The insight that even technically independent expendi­
——————
66 In fact, the notion that the “electioneering communications” covered
by §203 can breed quid pro quo corruption or the appearance of such
corruption has only become more plausible since we decided McConnell.
Recall that THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s controlling opinion in WRTL subse­
quently limited BCRA’s definition of “electioneering communications”
to those that are “susceptible of no reasonable interpretation other than
as an appeal to vote for or against a specific candidate.” 551 U. S., at
470. The upshot was that after WRTL, a corporate or union expendi­
ture could be regulated under §203 only if everyone would understand
it as an endorsement of or attack on a particular candidate for office. It
does not take much imagination to perceive why this type of advocacy
might be especially apt to look like or amount to a deal or a threat.


68

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

tures can be corrupting in much the same way as direct
contributions is bolstered by our decision last year in
Caperton v. A. T. Massey Coal Co., 556 U. S. ___ (2009). In
that case, Don Blankenship, the chief executive officer of a
corporation with a lawsuit pending before the West Vir­
ginia high court, spent large sums on behalf of a particular
candidate, Brent Benjamin, running for a seat on that
court. “In addition to contributing the $1,000 statutory
maximum
to
Benjamin’s
campaign
committee,
Blankenship donated almost $2.5 million to ‘And For The
Sake Of The Kids,’ ” a §527 corporation that ran ads tar­
geting Benjamin’s opponent. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 2).
“This was not all. Blankenship spent, in addition, just
over $500,000 on independent expenditures . . . ‘ “to sup­
port . . . Brent Benjamin.” ’ ” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 2–3)
(second alteration in original). Applying its common
sense, this Court accepted petitioners’ argument that
Blankenship’s “pivotal role in getting Justice Benjamin
elected created a constitutionally intolerable probability of
actual bias” when Benjamin later declined to recuse him­
self from the appeal by Blankenship’s corporation. Id., at
___ (slip op., at 11). “Though n[o] . . . bribe or criminal
influence” was involved, we recognized that “Justice Ben­
jamin would nevertheless feel a debt of gratitude to
Blankenship for his extraordinary efforts to get him
elected.” Ibid. “The difficulties of inquiring into actual
bias,” we further noted, “simply underscore the need for
objective rules,” id., at ___ (slip op., at 13)—rules which
will perforce turn on the appearance of bias rather than its
actual existence.
In Caperton, then, we accepted the premise that, at
least in some circumstances, independent expenditures on
candidate elections will raise an intolerable specter of quid
pro quo corruption. Indeed, this premise struck the Court
as so intuitive that it repeatedly referred to Blankenship’s
spending on behalf of Benjamin—spending that consisted


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

69

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

of 99.97% independent expenditures ($3 million) and
0.03% direct contributions ($1,000)—as a “contribution.”
See, e.g., id., at ___ (slip op., at 1) (“The basis for the
[recusal] motion was that the justice had received cam­
paign contributions in an extraordinary amount from”
Blankenship); id., at ___ (slip op., at 3) (referencing
“Blankenship’s $3 million in contributions”); id., at ___
(slip op., at 14) (“Blankenship contributed some $3 million
to unseat the incumbent and replace him with Benjamin”);
id., at ___ (slip op., at 15) (“Blankenship’s campaign con­
tributions . . . had a significant and disproportionate
influence on the electoral outcome”). The reason the Court
so thoroughly conflated expenditures and contributions,
one assumes, is that it realized that some expenditures
may be functionally equivalent to contributions in the way
they influence the outcome of a race, the way they are
interpreted by the candidates and the public, and the way
they taint the decisions that the officeholder thereafter
takes.
Caperton is illuminating in several additional respects.
It underscores the old insight that, on account of the ex­
treme difficulty of proving corruption, “prophylactic meas­
ures, reaching some [campaign spending] not corrupt in
purpose or effect, [may be] nonetheless required to guard
against corruption.” Buckley, 424 U. S., at 30; see also
Shrink Missouri, 528 U. S., at 392, n. 5. It underscores
that “certain restrictions on corporate electoral involve­
ment” may likewise be needed to “hedge against circum­
vention of valid contribution limits.” McConnell, 540
U. S., at 205 (internal quotation marks and brackets
omitted); see also Colorado II, 533 U. S., at 456 (“[A]ll
Members of the Court agree that circumvention is a valid
theory of corruption”). It underscores that for-profit cor­
porations associated with electioneering communications
will often prefer to use nonprofit conduits with “mislead­
ing names,” such as And For The Sake Of The Kids, “to


70

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

conceal their identity” as the sponsor of those communica­
tions, thereby frustrating the utility of disclosure laws.
McConnell, 540 U. S., at 128; see also id., at 196–197.
And it underscores that the consequences of today’s
holding will not be limited to the legislative or executive
context. The majority of the States select their judges
through popular elections. At a time when concerns about
the conduct of judicial elections have reached a fever pitch,
see, e.g., O’Connor, Justice for Sale, Wall St. Journal, Nov.
15, 2007, p. A25; Brief for Justice at Stake et al. as Amici
Curiae 2, the Court today unleashes the floodgates of
corporate and union general treasury spending in these
races. Perhaps “Caperton motions” will catch some of the
worst abuses. This will be small comfort to those States
that, after today, may no longer have the ability to place
modest limits on corporate electioneering even if they
believe such limits to be critical to maintaining the integ­
rity of their judicial systems.
Deference and Incumbent Self-Protection
Rather than show any deference to a coordinate branch
of Government, the majority thus rejects the anticorrup­
tion rationale without serious analysis.67 Today’s opinion
provides no clear rationale for being so dismissive of Con­
gress, but the prior individual opinions on which it relies
have offered one: the incentives of the legislators who
passed BCRA. Section 203, our colleagues have suggested,
may be little more than “an incumbency protection plan,”
McConnell, 540 U. S., at 306 (KENNEDY, J., concurring in
judgment in part and dissenting in part); see also id., at
249–250, 260–263 (SCALIA, J., concurring in part, concur­
ring in judgment in part, and dissenting in part), a dis­
——————
67 “We

must give weight” and “due deference” to Congress’ efforts to
dispel corruption, the Court states at one point. Ante, at 45. It is
unclear to me what these maxims mean, but as applied by the Court
they clearly do not entail “deference” in any normal sense of that term.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

71

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

reputable attempt at legislative self-dealing rather than
an earnest effort to facilitate First Amendment values and
safeguard the legitimacy of our political system. This
possibility, the Court apparently believes, licenses it to
run roughshod over Congress’ handiwork.
In my view, we should instead start by acknowledging
that “Congress surely has both wisdom and experience in
these matters that is far superior to ours.” Colorado
Republican Federal Campaign Comm. v. FEC, 518 U. S.
604, 650 (1996) (STEVENS, J., dissenting). Many of our
campaign finance precedents explicitly and forcefully
affirm the propriety of such presumptive deference. See,
e.g., McConnell, 540 U. S., at 158; Beaumont, 539 U. S., at
155–156; NRWC, 459 U. S., at 209–210.
Moreover,
“[j]udicial deference is particularly warranted where, as
here, we deal with a congressional judgment that has
remained essentially unchanged throughout a century of
careful legislative adjustment.” Beaumont, 539 U. S., at
162, n. 9 (internal quotation marks omitted); cf. Shrink
Missouri, 528 U. S., at 391 (“The quantum of empirical
evidence needed to satisfy heightened judicial scrutiny of
legislative judgments will vary up or down with the nov­
elty and plausibility of the justification raised”). In Amer­
ica, incumbent legislators pass the laws that govern cam­
paign finance, just like all other laws. To apply a level of
scrutiny that effectively bars them from regulating elec­
tioneering whenever there is the faintest whiff of self­
interest, is to deprive them of the ability to regulate
electioneering.
This is not to say that deference would be appropriate if
there were a solid basis for believing that a legislative
action was motivated by the desire to protect incumbents
or that it will degrade the competitiveness of the electoral
process.68 See League of United Latin American Citizens
——————
68 JUSTICE

BREYER has suggested that we strike the balance as fol­


72

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

v. Perry, 548 U. S. 399, 447 (2006) (STEVENS, J., concur­
ring in part and dissenting in part); Vieth v. Jubelirer, 541
U. S. 267, 317 (2004) (STEVENS, J., dissenting). Along
with our duty to balance competing constitutional con­
cerns, we have a vital role to play in ensuring that elec­
tions remain at least minimally open, fair, and competi­
tive. But it is the height of recklessness to dismiss
Congress’ years of bipartisan deliberation and its reasoned
judgment on this basis, without first confirming that the
statute in question was intended to be, or will function as,
a restraint on electoral competition. “Absent record evi­
dence of invidious discrimination against challengers as a
class, a court should generally be hesitant to invalidate
legislation which on its face imposes evenhanded restric­
tions.” Buckley, 424 U. S., at 31.
We have no record evidence from which to conclude that
BCRA §203, or any of the dozens of state laws that the
Court today calls into question, reflects or fosters such
invidious discrimination. Our colleagues have opined that
“ ‘any restriction upon a type of campaign speech that is
equally available to challengers and incumbents tends to
favor incumbents.’ ” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 249 (opinion
of SCALIA, J.). This kind of airy speculation could easily be
turned on its head. The electioneering prohibited by §203
might well tend to favor incumbents, because incumbents
have pre-existing relationships with corporations and
unions, and groups that wish to procure legislative bene­
fits may tend to support the candidate who, as a sitting
officeholder, is already in a position to dispense benefits
and is statistically likely to retain office. If a corporation’s
goal is to induce officeholders to do its bidding, the corpo­
——————
lows: “We should defer to [the legislature’s] political judgment that
unlimited spending threatens the integrity of the electoral process. But
we should not defer in respect to whether its solution . . . insulates
legislators from effective electoral challenge.” Shrink Missouri, 528
U. S., at 403–404 (concurring opinion).


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

73

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

ration would do well to cultivate stable, long-term rela­
tionships of dependency.
So we do not have a solid theoretical basis for condemn­
ing §203 as a front for incumbent self-protection, and it
seems equally if not more plausible that restrictions on
corporate electioneering will be self-denying. Nor do we
have a good empirical case for skepticism, as the Court’s
failure to cite any empirical research attests. Nor does the
legislative history give reason for concern. Congress
devoted years of careful study to the issues underlying
BCRA; “[f]ew legislative proposals in recent years have
received as much sustained public commentary or news
coverage”; “[p]olitical scientists and academic experts . . .
with no self-interest in incumbent protectio[n] were cen­
tral figures in pressing the case for BCRA”; and the legis­
lation commanded bipartisan support from the outset.
Pildes, The Supreme Court 2003 Term Foreword: The
Constitutionalization of Democratic Politics, 118 Harv.
L. Rev. 28, 137 (2004). Finally, it is important to remem­
ber just how incumbent-friendly congressional races were
prior to BCRA’s passage. As the Solicitor General aptly
remarked at the time, “the evidence supports overwhelm­
ingly that incumbents were able to get re-elected under
the old system just fine.” Tr. of Oral Arg. in McConnell v.
FEC, O. T. 2003, No. 02–1674, p. 61. “It would be hard to
develop a scheme that could be better for incumbents.”
Id., at 63.
In this case, then, “there is no convincing evidence that
th[e] important interests favoring expenditure limits are
fronts for incumbency protection.” Randall, 548 U. S., at
279 (STEVENS, J., dissenting). “In the meantime, a legisla­
tive judgment that ‘enough is enough’ should command
the greatest possible deference from judges interpreting a
constitutional provision that, at best, has an indirect
relationship to activity that affects the quantity . . . of
repetitive speech in the marketplace of ideas.” Id., at 279–


74

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

280. The majority cavalierly ignores Congress’ factual
findings and its constitutional judgment: It acknowledges
the validity of the interest in preventing corruption, but it
effectively discounts the value of that interest to zero.
This is quite different from conscientious policing for
impermissibly anticompetitive motive or effect in a sensi­
tive First Amendment context. It is the denial of Con­
gress’ authority to regulate corporate spending on
elections.
Austin and Corporate Expenditures
Just as the majority gives short shrift to the general
societal interests at stake in campaign finance regulation,
it also overlooks the distinctive considerations raised by
the regulation of corporate expenditures. The majority
fails to appreciate that Austin’s antidistortion rationale is
itself an anticorruption rationale, see 494 U. S., at 660
(describing “a different type of corruption”), tied to the
special concerns raised by corporations. Understood prop­
erly, “antidistortion” is simply a variant on the classic
governmental interest in protecting against improper
influences on officeholders that debilitate the democratic
process. It is manifestly not just an “ ‘equalizing’ ” ideal in
disguise. Ante, at 34 (quoting Buckley, 424 U. S., at 48).69
——————
69 THE

CHIEF JUSTICE denies this, ante, at 9–10, citing scholarship
that has interpreted Austin to endorse an equality rationale, along with
an article by Justice Thurgood Marshall’s former law clerk that states
that Marshall, the author of Austin, accepted “equality of opportunity”
and “equalizing access to the political process” as bases for campaign
finance regulation, Garrett, New Voices in Politics: Justice Marshall’s
Jurisprudence on Law and Politics, 52 Howard L. J. 655, 667–668
(2009) (internal quotation marks omitted). It is fair to say that Austin
can bear an egalitarian reading, and I have no reason to doubt this
characterization of Justice Marshall’s beliefs. But the fact that Austin
can be read a certain way hardly proves THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s charge
that there is nothing more to it. Many of our precedents can bear
multiple readings, and many of our doctrines have some “equalizing”
implications but do not rest on an equalizing theory: for example, our


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

75

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

1. Antidistortion
The fact that corporations are different from human
beings might seem to need no elaboration, except that the
majority opinion almost completely elides it. Austin set
forth some of the basic differences. Unlike natural per­
sons, corporations have “limited liability” for their owners
and managers, “perpetual life,” separation of ownership
and control, “and favorable treatment of the accumulation
and distribution of assets . . . that enhance their ability to
attract capital and to deploy their resources in ways that
maximize the return on their shareholders’ investments.”
494 U. S., at 658–659. Unlike voters in U. S. elections,
corporations may be foreign controlled.70 Unlike other
interest groups, business corporations have been “effec­
tively delegated responsibility for ensuring society’s eco­
nomic welfare”;71 they inescapably structure the life of
every citizen. “ ‘[T]he resources in the treasury of a busi­
ness corporation,’ ” furthermore, “ ‘are not an indication of
popular support for the corporation’s political ideas.’ ” Id.,
at 659 (quoting MCFL, 479 U. S., at 258). “ ‘They reflect
instead the economically motivated decisions of investors
and customers. The availability of these resources may
——————
takings jurisprudence and numerous rules of criminal procedure. More
important, the Austin Court expressly declined to rely on a speech­
equalization rationale, see 494 U. S., at 660, and we have never under­
stood Austin to stand for such a rationale. Whatever his personal
views, Justice Marshall simply did not write the opinion that THE
CHIEF JUSTICE suggests he did; indeed, he “would have viewed it as
irresponsible to write an opinion that boldly staked out a rationale
based on equality that no one other than perhaps Justice White would
have even considered joining,” Garrett, 52 Howard L. J., at 674.
70 In state elections, even domestic corporations may be “foreign”­
controlled in the sense that they are incorporated in another jurisdic­
tion and primarily owned and operated by out-of-state residents.
71 Regan, Corporate Speech and Civic Virtue, in Debating Democ­
racy’s Discontent 289, 302 (A. Allen & M. Regan eds. 1998) (hereinafter
Regan).


76

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

make a corporation a formidable political presence, even
though the power of the corporation may be no reflection
of the power of its ideas.’ ” 494 U. S., at 659 (quoting
MCFL, 479 U. S., at 258).72
It might also be added that corporations have no con­
sciences, no beliefs, no feelings, no thoughts, no desires.
Corporations help structure and facilitate the activities of
human beings, to be sure, and their “personhood” often
serves as a useful legal fiction. But they are not them­
selves members of “We the People” by whom and for whom
our Constitution was established.
These basic points help explain why corporate election­
eering is not only more likely to impair compelling gov­
ernmental interests, but also why restrictions on that
electioneering are less likely to encroach upon First
Amendment freedoms. One fundamental concern of the
First Amendment is to “protec[t] the individual’s interest
in self-expression.” Consolidated Edison Co. of N. Y. v.
Public Serv. Comm’n of N. Y., 447 U. S. 530, 534, n. 2
(1980); see also Bellotti, 435 U. S., at 777, n. 12. Freedom
of speech helps “make men free to develop their faculties,”
Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357, 375 (1927) (Brandeis,
——————
72 Nothing in this analysis turns on whether the corporation is con­
ceptualized as a grantee of a state concession, see, e.g., Trustees of
Dartmouth College v. Woodward, 4 Wheat. 518, 636 (1819) (Marshall,
C. J.), a nexus of explicit and implicit contracts, see, e.g., F. Easterbrook
& D. Fischel, The Economic Structure of Corporate Law 12 (1991), a
mediated hierarchy of stakeholders, see, e.g., Blair & Stout, A Team
Production Theory of Corporate Law, 85 Va. L. Rev. 247 (1999) (herein­
after Blair & Stout), or any other recognized model. Austin referred to
the structure and the advantages of corporations as “state-conferred” in
several places, 494 U. S., at 660, 665, 667, but its antidistortion argu­
ment relied only on the basic descriptive features of corporations, as
sketched above. It is not necessary to agree on a precise theory of the
corporation to agree that corporations differ from natural persons in
fundamental ways, and that a legislature might therefore need to
regulate them differently if it is human welfare that is the object of its
concern. Cf. Hansmann & Kraakman 441, n. 5.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

77

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

J., concurring), it respects their “dignity and choice,”
Cohen v. California, 403 U. S. 15, 24 (1971), and it facili­
tates the value of “individual self-realization,” Redish, The
Value of Free Speech, 130 U. Pa. L. Rev. 591, 594 (1982).
Corporate speech, however, is derivative speech, speech by
proxy. A regulation such as BCRA §203 may affect the
way in which individuals disseminate certain messages
through the corporate form, but it does not prevent anyone
from speaking in his or her own voice. “Within the realm
of [campaign spending] generally,” corporate spending is
“furthest from the core of political expression.” Beaumont,
539 U. S., at 161, n. 8.
It is an interesting question “who” is even speaking
when a business corporation places an advertisement that
endorses or attacks a particular candidate. Presumably it
is not the customers or employees, who typically have no
say in such matters. It cannot realistically be said to be
the shareholders, who tend to be far removed from the
day-to-day decisions of the firm and whose political prefer­
ences may be opaque to management. Perhaps the officers
or directors of the corporation have the best claim to be
the ones speaking, except their fiduciary duties generally
prohibit them from using corporate funds for personal
ends. Some individuals associated with the corporation
must make the decision to place the ad, but the idea that
these individuals are thereby fostering their self­
expression or cultivating their critical faculties is fanciful.
It is entirely possible that the corporation’s electoral mes­
sage will conflict with their personal convictions. Take
away the ability to use general treasury funds for some of
those ads, and no one’s autonomy, dignity, or political
equality has been impinged upon in the least.
Corporate expenditures are distinguishable from indi­
vidual expenditures in this respect. I have taken the view
that a legislature may place reasonable restrictions on
individuals’ electioneering expenditures in the service of


78

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

the governmental interests explained above, and in recog­
nition of the fact that such restrictions are not direct
restraints on speech but rather on its financing. See, e.g.,
Randall, 548 U. S., at 273 (dissenting opinion). But those
restrictions concededly present a tougher case, because the
primary conduct of actual, flesh-and-blood persons is
involved. Some of those individuals might feel that they
need to spend large sums of money on behalf of a particu­
lar candidate to vindicate the intensity of their electoral
preferences. This is obviously not the situation with busi­
ness corporations, as their routine practice of giving “sub­
stantial sums to both major national parties” makes pellu­
cidly clear. McConnell, 540 U. S., at 148. “[C]orporate
participation” in elections, any business executive will tell
you, “is more transactional than ideological.” Supp. Brief
for Committee for Economic Development as Amicus
Curiae 10.
In this transactional spirit, some corporations have
affirmatively urged Congress to place limits on their elec­
tioneering communications. These corporations fear that
officeholders will shake them down for supportive ads,
that they will have to spend increasing sums on elections
in an ever-escalating arms race with their competitors,
and that public trust in business will be eroded. See id.,
at 10–19. A system that effectively forces corporations to
use their shareholders’ money both to maintain access to,
and to avoid retribution from, elected officials may ulti­
mately prove more harmful than beneficial to many corpo­
rations. It can impose a kind of implicit tax.73
——————
73 Not all corporations support BCRA §203, of course, and not all cor­
porations are large business entities or their tax-exempt adjuncts.
Some nonprofit corporations are created for an ideological purpose.
Some closely held corporations are strongly identified with a particular
owner or founder. The fact that §203, like the statute at issue in
Austin, regulates some of these corporations’ expenditures does not
disturb the analysis above. See 494 U. S., at 661–665. Small-business


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

79

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

In short, regulations such as §203 and the statute up­
held in Austin impose only a limited burden on First
Amendment freedoms not only because they target a
narrow subset of expenditures and leave untouched the
broader “public dialogue,” ante, at 25, but also because
they leave untouched the speech of natural persons.
Recognizing the weakness of a speaker-based critique of
Austin, the Court places primary emphasis not on the
corporation’s right to electioneer, but rather on the lis­
tener’s interest in hearing what every possible speaker
may have to say. The Court’s central argument is that
laws such as §203 have “ ‘deprived [the electorate] of in­
formation, knowledge and opinion vital to its function,’ ”
ante, at 38 (quoting CIO, 335 U. S., at 144 (Rutledge, J.,
concurring in judgment)), and this, in turn, “interferes
with the ‘open marketplace’ of ideas protected by the First
Amendment,” ante, at 38 (quoting New York State Bd. of
Elections v. Lopez Torres, 552 U. S. 196, 208 (2008)).
There are many flaws in this argument. If the overrid­
ing concern depends on the interests of the audience,
surely the public’s perception of the value of corporate
speech should be given important weight. That perception
today is the same as it was a century ago when Theodore
Roosevelt delivered the speeches to Congress that, in time,
led to the limited prohibition on corporate campaign ex­
penditures that is overruled today. See WRTL, 551 U. S.,
at 509–510 (Souter, J., dissenting) (summarizing President
——————
owners may speak in their own names, rather than the business’, if
they wish to evade §203 altogether. Nonprofit corporations that want
to make unrestricted electioneering expenditures may do so if they
refuse donations from businesses and unions and permit members to
disassociate without economic penalty. See MCFL, 479 U. S. 238, 264
(1986). Making it plain that their decision is not motivated by a con­
cern about BCRA’s coverage of nonprofits that have ideological mis­
sions but lack MCFL status, our colleagues refuse to apply the SnoweJeffords Amendment or the lower courts’ de minimis exception to
MCFL. See ante, at 10–12.


80

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

Roosevelt’s remarks). The distinctive threat to democratic
integrity posed by corporate domination of politics was
recognized at “the inception of the republic” and “has been
a persistent theme in American political life” ever since.
Regan 302. It is only certain Members of this Court, not
the listeners themselves, who have agitated for more cor­
porate electioneering.
Austin recognized that there are substantial reasons
why a legislature might conclude that unregulated general
treasury expenditures will give corporations “unfai[r]
influence” in the electoral process, 494 U. S., at 660, and
distort public debate in ways that undermine rather than
advance the interests of listeners. The legal structure of
corporations allows them to amass and deploy financial
resources on a scale few natural persons can match. The
structure of a business corporation, furthermore, draws a
line between the corporation’s economic interests and the
political preferences of the individuals associated with the
corporation; the corporation must engage the electoral
process with the aim “to enhance the profitability of the
company, no matter how persuasive the arguments for a
broader or conflicting set of priorities,” Brief for American
Independent Business Alliance as Amicus Curiae 11; see
also ALI, Principles of Corporate Governance: Analysis
and Recommendations §2.01(a), p. 55 (1992) (“[A] corpora­
tion . . . should have as its objective the conduct of busi­
ness activities with a view to enhancing corporate profit
and shareholder gain”). In a state election such as the one
at issue in Austin, the interests of nonresident corpora­
tions may be fundamentally adverse to the interests of
local voters. Consequently, when corporations grab up the
prime broadcasting slots on the eve of an election, they can
flood the market with advocacy that bears “little or no
correlation” to the ideas of natural persons or to any
broader notion of the public good, 494 U. S., at 660. The
opinions of real people may be marginalized. “The expen­


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

81

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

diture restrictions of [2 U. S. C.] §441b are thus meant to
ensure that competition among actors in the political
arena is truly competition among ideas.” MCFL, 479
U. S., at 259.
In addition to this immediate drowning out of noncorpo­
rate voices, there may be deleterious effects that follow
soon thereafter. Corporate “domination” of electioneering,
Austin, 494 U. S., at 659, can generate the impression that
corporations dominate our democracy. When citizens turn
on their televisions and radios before an election and hear
only corporate electioneering, they may lose faith in their
capacity, as citizens, to influence public policy. A Gov­
ernment captured by corporate interests, they may come
to believe, will be neither responsive to their needs nor
willing to give their views a fair hearing. The predictable
result is cynicism and disenchantment: an increased
perception that large spenders “ ‘call the tune’ ” and a
reduced “ ‘willingness of voters to take part in democratic
governance.’ ” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 144 (quoting
Shrink Missouri, 528 U. S., at 390). To the extent that
corporations are allowed to exert undue influence in elec­
toral races, the speech of the eventual winners of those
races may also be chilled. Politicians who fear that a
certain corporation can make or break their reelection
chances may be cowed into silence about that corporation.
On a variety of levels, unregulated corporate electioneer­
ing might diminish the ability of citizens to “hold officials
accountable to the people,” ante, at 23, and disserve the
goal of a public debate that is “uninhibited, robust, and
wide-open,” New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S.
254, 270 (1964). At the least, I stress again, a legislature
is entitled to credit these concerns and to take tailored
measures in response.
The majority’s unwillingness to distinguish between
corporations and humans similarly blinds it to the possi­
bility that corporations’ “war chests” and their special


82

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

“advantages” in the legal realm, Austin, 494 U. S., at 659,
may translate into special advantages in the market for
legislation. When large numbers of citizens have a com­
mon stake in a measure that is under consideration, it
may be very difficult for them to coordinate resources on
behalf of their position. The corporate form, by contrast,
“provides a simple way to channel rents to only those who
have paid their dues, as it were. If you do not own stock,
you do not benefit from the larger dividends or apprecia­
tion in the stock price caused by the passage of private
interest legislation.” Sitkoff, Corporate Political Speech,
Political Extortion, and the Competition for Corporate
Charters, 69 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1103, 1113 (2002). Corpora­
tions, that is, are uniquely equipped to seek laws that
favor their owners, not simply because they have a lot of
money but because of their legal and organizational struc­
ture. Remove all restrictions on their electioneering, and
the door may be opened to a type of rent seeking that is
“far more destructive” than what noncorporations are
capable of. Ibid. It is for reasons such as these that our
campaign finance jurisprudence has long appreciated that
“the ‘differing structures and purposes’ of different entities
‘may require different forms of regulation in order to
protect the integrity of the electoral process.’ ” NRWC, 459
U. S., at 210 (quoting California Medical Assn., 453 U. S.,
at 201).
The Court’s facile depiction of corporate electioneering
assumes away all of these complexities. Our colleagues
ridicule the idea of regulating expenditures based on
“nothing more” than a fear that corporations have a spe­
cial “ability to persuade,” ante, at 11 (opinion of ROBERTS,
C. J.), as if corporations were our society’s ablest debaters
and viewpoint-neutral laws such as §203 were created to
suppress their best arguments. In their haste to knock
down yet another straw man, our colleagues simply ignore
the fundamental concerns of the Austin Court and the


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

83

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

legislatures that have passed laws like §203: to safeguard
the integrity, competitiveness, and democratic responsive­
ness of the electoral process. All of the majority’s theoreti­
cal arguments turn on a proposition with undeniable
surface appeal but little grounding in evidence or experi­
ence, “that there is no such thing as too much speech,”
Austin, 494 U. S., at 695 (SCALIA, J., dissenting)).74 If
individuals in our society had infinite free time to listen to
and contemplate every last bit of speech uttered by any­
one, anywhere; and if broadcast advertisements had no
special ability to influence elections apart from the merits
of their arguments (to the extent they make any); and if
legislators always operated with nothing less than perfect
virtue; then I suppose the majority’s premise would be
sound. In the real world, we have seen, corporate domina­
tion of the airwaves prior to an election may decrease the
average listener’s exposure to relevant viewpoints, and it
may diminish citizens’ willingness and capacity to partici­
pate in the democratic process.
None of this is to suggest that corporations can or
should be denied an opportunity to participate in election
campaigns or in any other public forum (much less that a
work of art such as Mr. Smith Goes to Washington may be
banned), or to deny that some corporate speech may con­
tribute significantly to public debate. What it shows,
however, is that Austin’s “concern about corporate domi­
nation of the political process,” 494 U. S., at 659, reflects
more than a concern to protect governmental interests
outside of the First Amendment. It also reflects a concern
to facilitate First Amendment values by preserving some
breathing room around the electoral “marketplace” of
ideas, ante, at 19, 34, 38, 52, 54, the marketplace in which
the actual people of this Nation determine how they will
——————
74 Of course, no presiding person in a courtroom, legislature, class­
room, polling place, or family dinner would take this hyperbole literally.


84

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

govern themselves. The majority seems oblivious to the
simple truth that laws such as §203 do not merely pit the
anticorruption interest against the First Amendment, but
also pit competing First Amendment values against each
other. There are, to be sure, serious concerns with any
effort to balance the First Amendment rights of speakers
against the First Amendment rights of listeners. But
when the speakers in question are not real people and
when the appeal to “First Amendment principles” depends
almost entirely on the listeners’ perspective, ante, at 1, 48,
it becomes necessary to consider how listeners will actu­
ally be affected.
In critiquing Austin’s antidistortion rationale and cam­
paign finance regulation more generally, our colleagues
place tremendous weight on the example of media corpora­
tions. See ante, at 35–38, 46; ante, at 1, 11 (opinion of
ROBERTS, C. J.); ante, at 6 (opinion of SCALIA, J.). Yet it is
not at all clear that Austin would permit §203 to be ap­
plied to them. The press plays a unique role not only in
the text, history, and structure of the First Amendment
but also in facilitating public discourse; as the Austin
Court explained, “media corporations differ significantly
from other corporations in that their resources are devoted
to the collection of information and its dissemination to
the public,” 494 U. S., at 667. Our colleagues have raised
some interesting and difficult questions about Congress’
authority to regulate electioneering by the press, and
about how to define what constitutes the press. But that
is not the case before us. Section 203 does not apply to
media corporations, and even if it did, Citizens United is
not a media corporation. There would be absolutely no
reason to consider the issue of media corporations if the
majority did not, first, transform Citizens United’s as­
applied challenge into a facial challenge and, second,
invent the theory that legislatures must eschew all “iden­
tity”-based distinctions and treat a local nonprofit news


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

85

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

outlet exactly the same as General Motors.75 This calls to
mind George Berkeley’s description of philosophers: “[W]e
have first raised a dust and then complain we cannot see.”
Principles of Human Knowledge/Three Dialogues 38, ¶3
(R. Woolhouse ed. 1988).
It would be perfectly understandable if our colleagues
feared that a campaign finance regulation such as §203
may be counterproductive or self-interested, and therefore
attended carefully to the choices the Legislature has
made. But the majority does not bother to consider such
practical matters, or even to consult a record; it simply
stipulates that “enlightened self-government” can arise
only in the absence of regulation. Ante, at 23. In light of
the distinctive features of corporations identified in Aus
tin, there is no valid basis for this assumption. The mar­
ketplace of ideas is not actually a place where items—or
laws—are meant to be bought and sold, and when we
move from the realm of economics to the realm of corpo­
rate electioneering, there may be no “reason to think the
market ordering is intrinsically good at all,” Strauss 1386.
The Court’s blinkered and aphoristic approach to the
First Amendment may well promote corporate power at
the cost of the individual and collective self-expression the
Amendment was meant to serve. It will undoubtedly
cripple the ability of ordinary citizens, Congress, and the
States to adopt even limited measures to protect against
corporate domination of the electoral process. Americans
may be forgiven if they do not feel the Court has advanced
——————
75 Under

the majority’s view, the legislature is thus damned if it does
and damned if it doesn’t. If the legislature gives media corporations an
exemption from electioneering regulations that apply to other corpora­
tions, it violates the newly minted First Amendment rule against
identity-based distinctions. If the legislature does not give media
corporations an exemption, it violates the First Amendment rights of
the press. The only way out of this invented bind: no regulations
whatsoever.


86

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

the cause of self-government today.
2. Shareholder Protection
There is yet another way in which laws such as §203 can
serve First Amendment values. Interwoven with Austin’s
concern to protect the integrity of the electoral process is a
concern to protect the rights of shareholders from a kind of
coerced speech: electioneering expenditures that do not
“reflec[t] [their] support.” 494 U. S., at 660–661. When
corporations use general treasury funds to praise or attack a
particular candidate for office, it is the shareholders, as the
residual claimants, who are effectively footing the bill.
Those shareholders who disagree with the corporation’s
electoral message may find their financial investments
being used to undermine their political convictions.
The PAC mechanism, by contrast, helps assure that
those who pay for an electioneering communication actu­
ally support its content and that managers do not use
general treasuries to advance personal agendas. Ibid. It
“ ‘allows corporate political participation without the temp­
tation to use corporate funds for political influence, quite
possibly at odds with the sentiments of some shareholders
or members.’ ” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 204 (quoting
Beaumont, 539 U. S., at 163). A rule that privileges the
use of PACs thus does more than facilitate the political
speech of like-minded shareholders; it also curbs the rent
seeking behavior of executives and respects the views of
dissenters. Austin’s acceptance of restrictions on general
treasury spending “simply allows people who have in­
vested in the business corporation for purely economic
reasons”—the vast majority of investors, one assumes—“to
avoid being taken advantage of, without sacrificing their
economic objectives.” Winkler, Beyond Bellotti, 32 Loyola
(LA) L. Rev. 133, 201 (1998).
The concern to protect dissenting shareholders and
union members has a long history in campaign finance


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

87

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

reform. It provided a central motivation for the Tillman
Act in 1907 and subsequent legislation, see Pipefitters v.
United States, 407 U. S. 385, 414–415 (1972); Winkler, 92
Geo. L. J., at 887–900, and it has been endorsed in a long
line of our cases, see, e.g., McConnell, 540 U. S., at 204–
205; Beaumont, 539 U. S., at 152–154; MCFL, 479 U. S., at
258; NRWC, 459 U. S., at 207–208; Pipefitters, 407 U. S.,
at 414–416; see also n. 60, supra. Indeed, we have unani­
mously recognized the governmental interest in “pro­
tect[ing] the individuals who have paid money into a
corporation or union for purposes other than the support
of candidates from having that money used to support
political candidates to whom they may be opposed.”
NRWC, 459 U. S., at 207–208.
The Court dismisses this interest on the ground that
abuses of shareholder money can be corrected “through
the procedures of corporate democracy,” ante, at 46 (inter­
nal quotation marks omitted), and, it seems, through
Internet-based disclosures, ante, at 55.76 I fail to under­
stand how this addresses the concerns of dissenting union
members, who will also be affected by today’s ruling, and I
fail to understand why the Court is so confident in these
mechanisms. By “corporate democracy,” presumably the
Court means the rights of shareholders to vote and to
bring derivative suits for breach of fiduciary duty. In
practice, however, many corporate lawyers will tell you
that “these rights are so limited as to be almost nonexis­
——————
76 I note that, among the many other regulatory possibilities it has
left open, ranging from new versions of §203 supported by additional
evidence of quid pro quo corruption or its appearance to any number of
tax incentive or public financing schemes, today’s decision does not
require that a legislature rely solely on these mechanisms to protect
shareholders. Legislatures remain free in their incorporation and tax
laws to condition the types of activity in which corporations may
engage, including electioneering activity, on specific disclosure re­
quirements or on prior express approval by shareholders or members.


88

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

tent,” given the internal authority wielded by boards and
managers and the expansive protections afforded by the
business judgment rule. Blair & Stout 320; see also id., at
298–315; Winkler, 32 Loyola (LA) L. Rev., at 165–166,
199–200. Modern technology may help make it easier to
track corporate activity, including electoral advocacy, but
it is utopian to believe that it solves the problem. Most
American households that own stock do so through inter­
mediaries such as mutual funds and pension plans, see
Evans, A Requiem for the Retail Investor? 95 Va. L. Rev.
1105 (2009), which makes it more difficult both to monitor
and to alter particular holdings. Studies show that a
majority of individual investors make no trades at all
during a given year. Id., at 1117. Moreover, if the corpo­
ration in question operates a PAC, an investor who sees
the company’s ads may not know whether they are being
funded through the PAC or through the general treasury.
If and when shareholders learn that a corporation has
been spending general treasury money on objectionable
electioneering, they can divest. Even assuming that they
reliably learn as much, however, this solution is only
partial. The injury to the shareholders’ expressive rights
has already occurred; they might have preferred to keep
that corporation’s stock in their portfolio for any number
of economic reasons; and they may incur a capital gains
tax or other penalty from selling their shares, changing
their pension plan, or the like. The shareholder protection
rationale has been criticized as underinclusive, in that
corporations also spend money on lobbying and charitable
contributions in ways that any particular shareholder
might disapprove. But those expenditures do not impli­
cate the selection of public officials, an area in which “the
interests of unwilling . . . corporate shareholders [in not
being] forced to subsidize that speech” “are at their ze­
nith.” Austin, 494 U. S., at 677 (Brennan, J., concurring).
And in any event, the question is whether shareholder


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

89

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

protection provides a basis for regulating expenditures in
the weeks before an election, not whether additional types
of corporate communications might similarly be condi­
tioned on voluntariness.
Recognizing the limits of the shareholder protection
rationale, the Austin Court did not hold it out as an ade­
quate and independent ground for sustaining the statute
in question. Rather, the Court applied it to reinforce the
antidistortion rationale, in two main ways. First, the
problem of dissenting shareholders shows that even if
electioneering expenditures can advance the political
views of some members of a corporation, they will often
compromise the views of others. See, e.g., id., at 663 (dis­
cussing risk that corporation’s “members may be . . . reluc­
tant to withdraw as members even if they disagree with
[its] political expression”). Second, it provides an addi­
tional reason, beyond the distinctive legal attributes of the
corporate form, for doubting that these “expenditures
reflect actual public support for the political ideas es­
poused,” id., at 660. The shareholder protection rationale,
in other words, bolsters the conclusion that restrictions on
corporate electioneering can serve both speakers’ and
listeners’ interests, as well as the anticorruption interest.
And it supplies yet another reason why corporate expendi­
tures merit less protection than individual expenditures.
V
Today’s decision is backwards in many senses. It ele­
vates the majority’s agenda over the litigants’ submis­
sions, facial attacks over as-applied claims, broad constitu­
tional theories over narrow statutory grounds, individual
dissenting opinions over precedential holdings, assertion
over tradition, absolutism over empiricism, rhetoric over
reality. Our colleagues have arrived at the conclusion that
Austin must be overruled and that §203 is facially uncon­
stitutional only after mischaracterizing both the reach and


90

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

rationale of those authorities, and after bypassing or
ignoring rules of judicial restraint used to cabin the
Court’s lawmaking power. Their conclusion that the
societal interest in avoiding corruption and the appear­
ance of corruption does not provide an adequate justifica­
tion for regulating corporate expenditures on candidate
elections relies on an incorrect description of that interest,
along with a failure to acknowledge the relevance of estab­
lished facts and the considered judgments of state and
federal legislatures over many decades.
In a democratic society, the longstanding consensus on
the need to limit corporate campaign spending should
outweigh the wooden application of judge-made rules. The
majority’s rejection of this principle “elevate[s] corpora­
tions to a level of deference which has not been seen at
least since the days when substantive due process was
regularly used to invalidate regulatory legislation thought
to unfairly impinge upon established economic interests.”
Bellotti, 435 U. S., at 817, n. 13 (White, J., dissenting). At
bottom, the Court’s opinion is thus a rejection of the com­
mon sense of the American people, who have recognized a
need to prevent corporations from undermining self­
government since the founding, and who have fought
against the distinctive corrupting potential of corporate
electioneering since the days of Theodore Roosevelt. It is a
strange time to repudiate that common sense. While
American democracy is imperfect, few outside the majority
of this Court would have thought its flaws included a
dearth of corporate money in politics.
I would affirm the judgment of the District Court.

