(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION

COMMISSION 

APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
No. 08–205.

Argued March 24, 2009—Reargued September 9, 2009––
Decided January 21, 2010

As amended by §203 of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002
(BCRA), federal law prohibits corporations and unions from using
their general treasury funds to make independent expenditures for
speech that is an “electioneering communication” or for speech that
expressly advocates the election or defeat of a candidate. 2 U. S. C.
§441b. An electioneering communication is “any broadcast, cable, or
satellite communication” that “refers to a clearly identified candidate
for Federal office” and is made within 30 days of a primary election,
§434(f)(3)(A), and that is “publicly distributed,” 11 CFR §100.29(a)(2),
which in “the case of a candidate for nomination for President . . .
means” that the communication “[c]an be received by 50,000 or more
persons in a State where a primary election . . . is being held within
30 days,” §100.29(b)(3)(ii). Corporations and unions may establish a
political action committee (PAC) for express advocacy or electioneer
ing communications purposes. 2 U. S. C. §441b(b)(2). In McConnell
v. Federal Election Comm’n, 540 U. S. 93, 203–209, this Court upheld
limits on electioneering communications in a facial challenge, relying
on the holding in Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce, 494
U. S. 652, that political speech may be banned based on the speaker’s
corporate identity.
In January 2008, appellant Citizens United, a nonprofit corpora
tion, released a documentary (hereinafter Hillary) critical of thenSenator Hillary Clinton, a candidate for her party’s Presidential
nomination. Anticipating that it would make Hillary available on
cable television through video-on-demand within 30 days of primary
elections, Citizens United produced television ads to run on broadcast


2

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Syllabus
and cable television. Concerned about possible civil and criminal
penalties for violating §441b, it sought declaratory and injunctive re
lief, arguing that (1) §441b is unconstitutional as applied to Hillary;
and (2) BCRA’s disclaimer, disclosure, and reporting requirements,
BCRA §§201 and 311, were unconstitutional as applied to Hillary
and the ads. The District Court denied Citizens United a prelimi
nary injunction and granted appellee Federal Election Commission
(FEC) summary judgment.

Held:
1. Because the question whether §441b applies to Hillary cannot be
resolved on other, narrower grounds without chilling political speech,
this Court must consider the continuing effect of the speech suppres
sion upheld in Austin. Pp. 5–20.
(a) Citizen United’s narrower arguments—that Hillary is not an
“electioneering communication” covered by §441b because it is not
“publicly distributed” under 11 CFR §100.29(a)(2); that §441b may
not be applied to Hillary under Federal Election Comm’n v. Wisconsin
Right to Life, Inc., 551 U. S. 449 (WRTL), which found §441b uncon
stitutional as applied to speech that was not “express advocacy or its
functional equivalent,” id., at 481 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.), deter
mining that a communication “is the functional equivalent of express
advocacy only if [it] is susceptible of no reasonable interpretation
other than as an appeal to vote for or against a specific candidate,”
id., at 469–470; that §441b should be invalidated as applied to movies
shown through video-on-demand because this delivery system has a
lower risk of distorting the political process than do television ads;
and that there should be an exception to §441b’s ban for nonprofit
corporate political speech funded overwhelming by individuals—are
not sustainable under a fair reading of the statute. Pp. 5–12.
(b) Thus, this case cannot be resolved on a narrower ground
without chilling political speech, speech that is central to the First
Amendment’s meaning and purpose. Citizens United did not waive
this challenge to Austin when it stipulated to dismissing the facial
challenge below, since (1) even if such a challenge could be waived,
this Court may reconsider Austin and §441b’s facial validity here be
cause the District Court “passed upon” the issue, Lebron v. National
Railroad Passenger Corporation, 513 U. S. 374, 379; (2) throughout
the litigation, Citizens United has asserted a claim that the FEC has
violated its right to free speech; and (3) the parties cannot enter into
a stipulation that prevents the Court from considering remedies nec
essary to resolve a claim that has been preserved. Because Citizen
United’s narrower arguments are not sustainable, this Court must, in
an exercise of its judicial responsibility, consider §441b’s facial valid
ity. Any other course would prolong the substantial, nationwide


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
chilling effect caused by §441b’s corporate expenditure ban. This
conclusion is further supported by the following: (1) the uncertainty
caused by the Government’s litigating position; (2) substantial time
would be required to clarify §441b’s application on the points raised
by the Government’s position in order to avoid any chilling effect
caused by an improper interpretation; and (3) because speech itself is
of primary importance to the integrity of the election process, any
speech arguably within the reach of rules created for regulating po
litical speech is chilled. The regulatory scheme at issue may not be a
prior restraint in the strict sense. However, given its complexity and
the deference courts show to administrative determinations, a
speaker wishing to avoid criminal liability threats and the heavy
costs of defending against FEC enforcement must ask a governmen
tal agency for prior permission to speak. The restrictions thus func
tion as the equivalent of a prior restraint, giving the FEC power
analogous to the type of government practices that the First Amend
ment was drawn to prohibit. The ongoing chill on speech makes it
necessary to invoke the earlier precedents that a statute that chills
speech can and must be invalidated where its facial invalidity has
been demonstrated. Pp. 12–20.
2. Austin is overruled, and thus provides no basis for allowing the
Government to limit corporate independent expenditures. Hence,
§441b’s restrictions on such expenditures are invalid and cannot be
applied to Hillary. Given this conclusion, the part of McConnell that
upheld BCRA §203’s extension of §441b’s restrictions on independent
corporate expenditures is also overruled. Pp. 20–51.
(a) Although the First Amendment provides that “Congress shall
make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech,” §441b’s prohibition
on corporate independent expenditures is an outright ban on speech,
backed by criminal sanctions. It is a ban notwithstanding the fact
that a PAC created by a corporation can still speak, for a PAC is a
separate association from the corporation. Because speech is an es
sential mechanism of democracy—it is the means to hold officials ac
countable to the people—political speech must prevail against laws
that would suppress it by design or inadvertence. Laws burdening
such speech are subject to strict scrutiny, which requires the Gov
ernment to prove that the restriction “furthers a compelling interest
and is narrowly tailored to achieve that interest.” WRTL, 551 U. S.,
at 464. This language provides a sufficient framework for protecting
the interests in this case. Premised on mistrust of governmental
power, the First Amendment stands against attempts to disfavor cer
tain subjects or viewpoints or to distinguish among different speak
ers, which may be a means to control content. The Government may
also commit a constitutional wrong when by law it identifies certain


4

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Syllabus
preferred speakers. There is no basis for the proposition that, in the
political speech context, the Government may impose restrictions on
certain disfavored speakers. Both history and logic lead to this con
clusion. Pp. 20–25.
(b) The Court has recognized that the First Amendment applies
to corporations, e.g., First Nat. Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U. S.
765, 778, n. 14, and extended this protection to the context of political
speech, see, e.g., NAACP v. Button, 371 U. S. 415, 428–429. Address
ing challenges to the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, the
Buckley Court upheld limits on direct contributions to candidates, 18
U. S. C. §608(b), recognizing a governmental interest in preventing
quid pro quo corruption. 424 U. S., at 25–26. However, the Court in
validated §608(e)’s expenditure ban, which applied to individuals,
corporations, and unions, because it “fail[ed] to serve any substantial
governmental interest in stemming the reality or appearance of cor
ruption in the electoral process,” id., at 47–48. While Buckley did not
consider a separate ban on corporate and union independent expendi
tures found in §610, had that provision been challenged in Buckley’s
wake, it could not have been squared with the precedent’s reasoning
and analysis. The Buckley Court did not invoke the overbreadth doc
trine to suggest that §608(e)’s expenditure ban would have been con
stitutional had it applied to corporations and unions but not indi
viduals. Notwithstanding this precedent, Congress soon recodified
§610’s corporate and union expenditure ban at 2 U. S. C. §441b, the
provision at issue. Less than two years after Buckley, Bellotti reaf
firmed the First Amendment principle that the Government lacks the
power to restrict political speech based on the speaker’s corporate
identity. 435 U.S., at 784–785. Thus the law stood until Austin up
held a corporate independent expenditure restriction, bypassing
Buckley and Bellotti by recognizing a new governmental interest in
preventing “the corrosive and distorting effects of immense aggrega
tions of [corporate] wealth . . . that have little or no correlation to the
public’s support for the corporation’s political ideas.” 494 U. S., at
660. Pp. 25–32.
(c) This Court is confronted with conflicting lines of precedent: a
pre-Austin line forbidding speech restrictions based on the speaker’s
corporate identity and a post-Austin line permitting them. Neither
Austin’s antidistortion rationale nor the Government’s other justifica
tions support §441b’s restrictions. Pp. 32–47.
(1) The First Amendment prohibits Congress from fining or
jailing citizens, or associations of citizens, for engaging in political
speech, but Austin’s antidistortion rationale would permit the Gov
ernment to ban political speech because the speaker is an association
with a corporate form. Political speech is “indispensable to decision


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Syllabus
making in a democracy, and this is no less true because the speech
comes from a corporation.” Bellotti, supra, at 777 (footnote omitted).
This protection is inconsistent with Austin’s rationale, which is
meant to prevent corporations from obtaining “ ‘an unfair advantage
in the political marketplace’ ” by using “ ‘resources amassed in the
economic marketplace.’ ” 494 U. S., at 659. First Amendment protec
tions do not depend on the speaker’s “financial ability to engage in
public discussion.” Buckley, supra, at 49. These conclusions were re
affirmed when the Court invalidated a BCRA provision that in
creased the cap on contributions to one candidate if the opponent
made certain expenditures from personal funds. Davis v. Federal
Election Comm’n, 554 U. S. ___, ___. Distinguishing wealthy indi
viduals from corporations based on the latter’s special advantages of,
e.g., limited liability, does not suffice to allow laws prohibiting
speech. It is irrelevant for First Amendment purposes that corporate
funds may “have little or no correlation to the public’s support for the
corporation’s political ideas.” Austin, supra, at 660. All speakers, in
cluding individuals and the media, use money amassed from the eco
nomic marketplace to fund their speech, and the First Amendment
protects the resulting speech. Under the antidistortion rationale,
Congress could also ban political speech of media corporations. Al
though currently exempt from §441b, they accumulate wealth with
the help of their corporate form, may have aggregations of wealth,
and may express views “hav[ing] little or no correlation to the public’s
support” for those views. Differential treatment of media corpora
tions and other corporations cannot be squared with the First
Amendment, and there is no support for the view that the Amend
ment’s original meaning would permit suppressing media corpora
tions’ political speech. Austin interferes with the “open marketplace”
of ideas protected by the First Amendment. New York State Bd. of
Elections v. Lopez Torres, 552 U. S. 196, 208. Its censorship is vast in
its reach, suppressing the speech of both for-profit and nonprofit,
both small and large, corporations. Pp. 32–40.
(2) This reasoning also shows the invalidity of the Govern
ment’s other arguments. It reasons that corporate political speech
can be banned to prevent corruption or its appearance. The Buckley
Court found this rationale “sufficiently important” to allow contribu
tion limits but refused to extend that reasoning to expenditure limits,
424 U.S., at 25, and the Court does not do so here. While a single
Bellotti footnote purported to leave the question open, 435 U. S., at
788, n. 26, this Court now concludes that independent expenditures,
including those made by corporations, do not give rise to corruption
or the appearance of corruption. That speakers may have influence
over or access to elected officials does not mean that those officials


6

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Syllabus
are corrupt. And the appearance of influence or access will not cause
the electorate to lose faith in this democracy. Caperton v. A. T.
Massey Coal Co., 556 U. S. ___, distinguished. Pp. 40–45.
(3) The Government’s asserted interest in protecting share
holders from being compelled to fund corporate speech, like the anti
distortion rationale, would allow the Government to ban political
speech even of media corporations. The statute is underinclusive; it
only protects a dissenting shareholder’s interests in certain media for
30 or 60 days before an election when such interests would be impli
cated in any media at any time. It is also overinclusive because it
covers all corporations, including those with one shareholder. P. 46.
(4) Because §441b is not limited to corporations or associa
tions created in foreign countries or funded predominately by foreign
shareholders, it would be overbroad even if the Court were to recog
nize a compelling governmental interest in limiting foreign influence
over the Nation’s political process. Pp. 46–47.
(d) The relevant factors in deciding whether to adhere to stare
decisis, beyond workability—the precedent’s antiquity, the reliance
interests at stake, and whether the decision was well reasoned—
counsel in favor of abandoning Austin, which itself contravened the
precedents of Buckley and Bellotti. As already explained, Austin was
not well reasoned. It is also undermined by experience since its an
nouncement. Political speech is so ingrained in this country’s culture
that speakers find ways around campaign finance laws. Rapid
changes in technology—and the creative dynamic inherent in the
concept of free expression—counsel against upholding a law that re
stricts political speech in certain media or by certain speakers. In
addition, no serious reliance issues are at stake. Thus, due consid
eration leads to the conclusion that Austin should be overruled. The
Court returns to the principle established in Buckley and Bellotti that
the Government may not suppress political speech based on the
speaker’s corporate identity. No sufficient governmental interest jus
tifies limits on the political speech of nonprofit or for-profit corpora
tions. Pp. 47–50.
3. BCRA §§201 and 311 are valid as applied to the ads for Hillary
and to the movie itself. Pp. 50–57.
(a) Disclaimer and disclosure requirements may burden the abil
ity to speak, but they “impose no ceiling on campaign-related activi
ties,” Buckley, 424 U. S., at 64, or “ ‘ “prevent anyone from speak
ing,” ’ ” McConnell, supra, at 201. The Buckley Court explained that
disclosure can be justified by a governmental interest in providing
“the electorate with information” about election-related spending
sources. The McConnell Court applied this interest in rejecting facial
challenges to §§201 and 311. 540 U. S., at 196. However, the Court


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Syllabus
acknowledged that as-applied challenges would be available if a
group could show a “ ‘reasonable probability’ ” that disclosing its con
tributors’ names would “ ‘subject them to threats, harassment, or re
prisals from either Government officials or private parties.’ ” Id., at
198. Pp. 50–52.
(b) The disclaimer and disclosure requirements are valid as ap
plied to Citizens United’s ads. They fall within BCRA’s “electioneer
ing communication” definition: They referred to then-Senator Clinton
by name shortly before a primary and contained pejorative references
to her candidacy. Section 311 disclaimers provide information to the
electorate, McConnell, supra, at 196, and “insure that the voters are
fully informed” about who is speaking, Buckley, supra, at 76. At the
very least, they avoid confusion by making clear that the ads are not
funded by a candidate or political party. Citizens United’s arguments
that §311 is underinclusive because it requires disclaimers for broad
cast advertisements but not for print or Internet advertising and that
§311 decreases the quantity and effectiveness of the group’s speech
were rejected in McConnell. This Court also rejects their contention
that §201’s disclosure requirements must be confined to speech that
is the functional equivalent of express advocacy under WRTL’s test
for restrictions on independent expenditures, 551 U. S., at 469–476
(opinion of ROBERTS, C.J.). Disclosure is the less-restrictive alterna
tive to more comprehensive speech regulations. Such requirements
have been upheld in Buckley and McConnell. Citizens United’s ar
gument that no informational interest justifies applying §201 to its
ads is similar to the argument this Court rejected with regard to dis
claimers. Citizens United finally claims that disclosure requirements
can chill donations by exposing donors to retaliation, but offers no
evidence that its members face the type of threats, harassment, or
reprisals that might make §201 unconstitutional as applied. Pp. 52–
55.
(c) For these same reasons, this Court affirms the application of
the §§201 and 311 disclaimer and disclosure requirements to Hillary.
Pp. 55–56.
Reversed in part, affirmed in part, and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA and ALITO, JJ., joined, in which THOMAS, J., joined as
to all but Part IV, and in which STEVENS, GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined as to Part IV. ROBERTS, C. J., filed a concurring
opinion, in which ALITO, J., joined. SCALIA, J., filed a concurring opin
ion, in which ALITO, J., joined, and in which THOMAS, J., joined in part.
STEVENS, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part,
in which GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. THOMAS, J.,
filed an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part.

