Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–205
_________________

CITIZENS UNITED, APPELLANT v. FEDERAL 

ELECTION COMMISSION 

ON APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
[January 21, 2010]

JUSTICE THOMAS, concurring in part and dissenting in
part.
I join all but Part IV of the Court’s opinion.
Political speech is entitled to robust protection under
the First Amendment. Section 203 of the Bipartisan
Campaign Reform Act of 2002 (BCRA) has never been
reconcilable with that protection. By striking down §203,
the Court takes an important first step toward restoring
full constitutional protection to speech that is “indispensa­
ble to the effective and intelligent use of the processes of
popular government.” McConnell v. Federal Election
Comm’n, 540 U. S. 93, 265 (2003) (THOMAS, J., concurring
in part, concurring in judgment in part, and dissenting in
part) (internal quotation marks omitted). I dissent from
Part IV of the Court’s opinion, however, because the
Court’s constitutional analysis does not go far enough.
The disclosure, disclaimer, and reporting requirements in
BCRA §§201 and 311 are also unconstitutional. See id., at
275–277, and n. 10.
Congress may not abridge the “right to anonymous
speech” based on the “ ‘simple interest in providing voters
with additional relevant information,’ ” id., at 276 (quoting
McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Comm’n, 514 U. S. 334, 348
(1995)). In continuing to hold otherwise, the Court misap­
prehends the import of “recent events” that some amici


2

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

describe “in which donors to certain causes were black­
listed, threatened, or otherwise targeted for retaliation.”
Ante, at 54. The Court properly recognizes these events as
“cause for concern,” ibid., but fails to acknowledge their
constitutional significance. In my view, amici’s submis­
sions show why the Court’s insistence on upholding §§201
and 311 will ultimately prove as misguided (and ill fated)
as was its prior approval of §203.
Amici’s examples relate principally to Proposition 8, a
state ballot proposition that California voters narrowly
passed in the 2008 general election.
Proposition 8
amended California’s constitution to provide that “[o]nly
marriage between a man and a woman is valid or recog­
nized in California.” Cal. Const., Art. I, §7.5. Any donor
who gave more than $100 to any committee supporting or
opposing Proposition 8 was required to disclose his full
name, street address, occupation, employer’s name (or
business name, if self-employed), and the total amount of
his contributions.1 See Cal. Govt. Code Ann. §84211(f)
(West 2005). The California Secretary of State was then
required to post this information on the Internet. See
§§84600–84601; §§84602–84602.1 (West Supp. 2010);
§§84602.5–84604 (West 2005); §85605 (West Supp. 2010);
§§84606–84609 (West 2005).
Some opponents of Proposition 8 compiled this informa­
tion and created Web sites with maps showing the loca­
tions of homes or businesses of Proposition 8 supporters.
Many supporters (or their customers) suffered property
damage, or threats of physical violence or death, as a
——————
1 BCRA imposes similar disclosure requirements. See, e.g., 2 U. S. C.
§434(f)(2)(F) (“Every person who makes a disbursement for the direct
costs of producing and airing electioneering communications in an
aggregate amount in excess of $10,000 during any calendar year” must
disclose “the names and addresses of all contributors who contributed
an aggregate amount of $1,000 or more to the person making the
disbursement”).


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

result. They cited these incidents in a complaint they filed
after the 2008 election, seeking to invalidate California’s
mandatory disclosure laws. Supporters recounted being
told: “Consider yourself lucky. If I had a gun I would have
gunned you down along with each and every other sup­
porter,” or, “we have plans for you and your friends.”
Complaint in ProtectMarriage.com—Yes on 8 v. Bowen,
Case No. 2:09–cv–00058–MCE–DAD (ED Cal.), ¶31.
Proposition 8 opponents also allegedly harassed the meas­
ure’s supporters by defacing or damaging their property.
Id., ¶32. Two religious organizations supporting Proposi­
tion 8 reportedly received through the mail envelopes
containing a white powdery substance. Id., ¶33.
Those accounts are consistent with media reports de­
scribing Proposition 8-related retaliation. The director of
the nonprofit California Musical Theater gave $1,000 to
support the initiative; he was forced to resign after artists
complained to his employer. Lott & Smith, Donor Disclo­
sure Has Its Downsides, Wall Street Journal, Dec. 26,
2008, p. A13. The director of the Los Angeles Film Festi­
val was forced to resign after giving $1,500 because oppo­
nents threatened to boycott and picket the next festival.
Ibid. And a woman who had managed her popular, fam­
ily-owned restaurant for 26 years was forced to resign
after she gave $100, because “throngs of [angry] protest­
ers” repeatedly arrived at the restaurant and “shout[ed]
‘shame on you’ at customers.” Lopez, Prop. 8 Stance Up­
ends Her Life, Los Angeles Times, Dec. 14, 2008, p. B1.
The police even had to “arriv[e] in riot gear one night to
quell the angry mob” at the restaurant. Ibid. Some sup­
porters of Proposition 8 engaged in similar tactics; one real
estate businessman in San Diego who had donated to a
group opposing Proposition 8 “received a letter from the
Prop. 8 Executive Committee threatening to publish his
company’s name if he didn’t also donate to the ‘Yes on 8’
campaign.” Donor Disclosure, supra, at A13.


4

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

The success of such intimidation tactics has apparently
spawned a cottage industry that uses forcibly disclosed
donor information to pre-empt citizens’ exercise of their
First Amendment rights. Before the 2008 Presidential
election, a “newly formed nonprofit group . . . plann[ed] to
confront donors to conservative groups, hoping to create a
chilling effect that will dry up contributions.” Luo, Group
Plans Campaign Against G.O.P. Donors, N. Y. Times, Aug.
8, 2008, p. A15. Its leader, “who described his effort as
‘going for the jugular,’ ” detailed the group’s plan to send a
“warning letter . . . alerting donors who might be consider­
ing giving to right-wing groups to a variety of potential
dangers, including legal trouble, public exposure and
watchdog groups digging through their lives.” Ibid.
These instances of retaliation sufficiently demonstrate
why this Court should invalidate mandatory disclosure
and reporting requirements. But amici present evidence
of yet another reason to do so—the threat of retaliation
from elected officials. As amici’s submissions make clear,
this threat extends far beyond a single ballot proposition
in California. For example, a candidate challenging an
incumbent state attorney general reported that some
members of the State’s business community feared donat­
ing to his campaign because they did not want to cross the
incumbent; in his words, “ ‘I go to so many people and hear
the same thing: “I sure hope you beat [the incumbent], but
I can’t afford to have my name on your records. He might
come after me next.” ’ ” Strassel, Challenging Spitzerism
at the Polls, Wall Street Journal, Aug. 1, 2008, p. A11.
The incumbent won reelection in 2008.
My point is not to express any view on the merits of the
political controversies I describe. Rather, it is to demon­
strate—using real-world, recent examples—the fallacy in
the Court’s conclusion that “[d]isclaimer and disclosure
requirements . . . impose no ceiling on campaign-related
activities, and do not prevent anyone from speaking.”


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Ante, at 51 (internal quotation marks and citations omit­
ted). Of course they do. Disclaimer and disclosure re­
quirements enable private citizens and elected officials to
implement political strategies specifically calculated to
curtail campaign-related activity and prevent the lawful,
peaceful exercise of First Amendment rights.
The Court nevertheless insists that as-applied chal­
lenges to disclosure requirements will suffice to vindicate
those speech rights, as long as potential plaintiffs can
“show a reasonable probability that disclosure . . . will
subject them to threats, harassment, or reprisals from
either Government officials or private parties.” Ante, at 52
(internal quotation marks omitted). But the Court’s opin­
ion itself proves the irony in this compromise. In correctly
explaining why it must address the facial constitutionality
of §203, see ante, at 5–20, the Court recognizes that “[t]he
First Amendment does not permit laws that force speakers
to . . . seek declaratory rulings before discussing the most
salient political issues of our day,” ante, at 7; that as­
applied challenges to §203 “would require substantial
litigation over an extended time” and result in an “inter­
pretive process [that] itself would create an inevitable,
pervasive, and serious risk of chilling protected speech
pending the drawing of fine distinctions that, in the end,
would themselves be questionable,” ante, at 9–10; that “a
court would be remiss in performing its duties were it to
accept an unsound principle merely to avoid the necessity
of making a broader ruling,” ante, at 12; and that avoiding
a facial challenge to §203 “would prolong the substantial,
nation-wide chilling effect” that §203 causes, ante, at 16.
This logic, of course, applies equally to as-applied chal­
lenges to §§201 and 311.
Irony aside, the Court’s promise that as-applied chal­
lenges will adequately protect speech is a hollow assur­
ance. Now more than ever, §§201 and 311 will chill pro­
tected speech because—as California voters can attest—


6

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

“the advent of the Internet” enables “prompt disclosure of
expenditures,” which “provide[s]” political opponents “with
the information needed” to intimidate and retaliate
against their foes. Ante, at 55. Thus, “disclosure permits
citizens . . . to react to the speech of [their political oppo­
nents] in a proper”—or undeniably improper—“way” long
before a plaintiff could prevail on an as-applied challenge.2
Ibid.
I cannot endorse a view of the First Amendment that
subjects citizens of this Nation to death threats, ruined
careers, damaged or defaced property, or pre-emptive and
threatening warning letters as the price for engaging in
“core political speech, the ‘primary object of First Amend­
ment protection.’ ” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 264 (THOMAS,
J., concurring in part, concurring in judgment in part, and
dissenting in part) (quoting Nixon v. Shrink Missouri
Government PAC, 528 U. S. 377, 410–411 (2000) (THOMAS,
J., dissenting)). Accordingly, I respectfully dissent from
the Court’s judgment upholding BCRA §§201 and 311.

——————
2 But cf. Hill v. Colorado, 530 U. S. 703, 707–710 (2000) (approving a
statute restricting speech “within 100 feet” of abortion clinics because it
protected women seeking an abortion from “ ‘sidewalk counseling,’ ”
which “consists of efforts ‘to educate, counsel, persuade, or inform
passersby about abortion and abortion alternatives by means of verbal
or written speech,’ ” and which “sometimes” involved “strong and
abusive language in face-to-face encounters”).

