(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

GOLAN ET AL. v. HOLDER, ATTORNEY GENERAL, 

ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE TENTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–545.

Argued October 5, 2011—Decided January 18, 2012

The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
(Berne), which took effect in 1886, is the principal accord governing
international copyright relations. Berne’s 164 member states agree
to provide a minimum level of copyright protection and to treat authors from other member countries as well as they treat their own.
Of central importance in this case, Article 18 of Berne requires countries to protect the works of other member states unless the works’
copyright term has expired in either the country where protection is
claimed or the country of origin. A different system of transnational
copyright protection long prevailed in this country. Throughout most
of the 20th century, the only foreign authors eligible for Copyright
Act protection were those whose countries granted reciprocal rights
to American authors and whose works were printed in the United
States. Despite Article 18, when the United States joined Berne in
1989, it did not protect any foreign works lodged in the U. S. public
domain, many of them works never protected here. In 1994, however, the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights mandated implementation of Berne’s first 21 articles, on pain
of enforcement by the World Trade Organization.
In response, Congress applied the term of protection available to
U. S. works to preexisting works from Berne member countries. Section 514 of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act (URAA) grants copyright protection to works protected in their country of origin, but
lacking protection in the United States for any of three reasons: The
United States did not protect works from the country of origin at the
time of publication; the United States did not protect sound recordings fixed before 1972; or the author had not complied with certain


2

GOLAN v. HOLDER
Syllabus
U. S. statutory formalities. Works encompassed by §514 are granted
the protection they would have enjoyed had the United States maintained copyright relations with the author’s country or removed formalities incompatible with Berne. As a consequence of the barriers
to U. S. copyright protection prior to §514’s enactment, foreign works
“restored” to protection by the measure had entered the public domain in this country. To cushion the impact of their placement in
protected status, §514 provides ameliorating accommodations for
parties who had exploited affected works before the URAA was
enacted.
Petitioners are orchestra conductors, musicians, publishers, and
others who formerly enjoyed free access to works §514 removed from
the public domain. They maintain that Congress, in passing §514,
exceeded its authority under the Copyright Clause and transgressed
First Amendment limitations. The District Court granted the Attorney General’s motion for summary judgment. Affirming in part, the
Tenth Circuit agreed that Congress had not offended the Copyright
Clause, but concluded that §514 required further First Amendment
inspection in light of Eldred v. Ashcroft, 537 U. S. 186. On remand,
the District Court granted summary judgment to petitioners on the
First Amendment claim, holding that §514’s constriction of the public
domain was not justified by any of the asserted federal interests. The
Tenth Circuit reversed, ruling that §514 was narrowly tailored to fit
the important government aim of protecting U. S. copyright holders’
interests abroad.

Held:
1. Section 514 does not exceed Congress’ authority under the Copyright Clause. Pp. 13–23.
(a) The text of the Copyright Clause does not exclude application
of copyright protection to works in the public domain. Eldred is
largely dispositive of petitioners’ claim that the Clause’s confinement
of a copyright’s lifespan to a “limited Tim[e]” prevents the removal of
works from the public domain. In Eldred, the Court upheld the Copyright Term Extension Act (CTEA), which extended, by 20 years, the
terms of existing copyrights. The text of the Copyright Clause, the
Court observed, contains no “command that a time prescription, once
set, becomes forever ‘fixed’ or ‘inalterable,’ ” and the Court declined to
infer any such command. 537 U. S., at 199. The construction petitioners tender here is similarly infirm. The terms afforded works restored by §514 are no less “limited” than those the CTEA lengthened.
Nor had the “limited Tim[e]” already passed for the works at issue
here—many of them works formerly denied any U. S. copyright protection—for a period of exclusivity must begin before it may end. Petitioners also urge that the Government’s position would allow Con-


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
gress to legislate perpetual copyright terms by instituting successive
“limited” terms as prior terms expire. But as in Eldred, such hypothetical misbehavior is far afield from this case. In aligning the
United States with other nations bound by Berne, Congress can hardly be charged with a design to move stealthily toward a perpetual
copyright regime. Pp. 13–15.
(b) Historical practice corroborates the Court’s reading of the Copyright Clause to permit the protection of previously unprotected
works. In the Copyright Act of 1790, the First Congress protected
works that had been freely reproducible under State copyright laws.
Subsequent actions confirm that Congress has not understood the
Copyright Clause to preclude protection for existing works. Several
private bills restored the copyrights and patents of works and inventions previously in the public domain. Congress has also passed generally applicable legislation granting copyrights and patents to works
and inventions that had lost protection. Pp. 15–19.
(c) Petitioners also argue that §514 fails to “promote the Progress of
Science” as contemplated by the initial words of the Copyright
Clause. Specifically, they claim that because §514 affects only works
already created, it cannot meet the Clause’s objective. The creation
of new works, however, is not the sole way Congress may promote
“Science,” i.e., knowledge and learning. In Eldred, this Court rejected
a nearly identical argument, concluding that the Clause does not demand that each copyright provision, examined discretely, operate to
induce new works. Rather the Clause “empowers Congress to determine the intellectual property regimes that, overall, in that body’s
judgment, will serve the ends of the Clause.” 537 U. S., at 222.
Nothing in the text or history of the Copyright Clause, moreover, confines the “Progress of Science” exclusively to “incentives for creation.”
Historical evidence, congressional practice, and this Court’s decisions, in fact, suggest that inducing the dissemination of existing
works is an appropriate means to promote science. Pp. 20–22.
(d) Considered against this backdrop, §514 falls comfortably within
Congress’ Copyright Clause authority. Congress had reason to believe that a well-functioning international copyright system would
encourage the dissemination of existing and future works. And testimony informed Congress that full compliance with Berne would expand the foreign markets available to U. S. authors and invigorate
protection against piracy of U. S. works abroad, thus benefitting copyright-intensive industries stateside and inducing greater investment
in the creative process. This Court has no warrant to reject Congress’
rational judgment that exemplary adherence to Berne would serve
the objectives of the Copyright Clause. Pp. 22–23.
2. The First Amendment does not inhibit the restoration author-


4

GOLAN v. HOLDER
Syllabus
ized by §514. Pp. 23–32.
(a) The pathmarking Eldred decision is again instructive. There,
the Court held that the CTEA’s enlargement of a copyright’s duration
did not offend the First Amendment’s freedom of expression guarantee. Recognizing that some restriction on expression is the inherent
and intended effect of every grant of copyright, the Court observed
that the Framers regarded copyright protection not simply as a limit
on the manner in which expressive works may be used, but also as an
“engine of free expression.” 537 U. S., at 219. The “traditional contours” of copyright protection, i.e., the “idea/expression dichotomy”
and the “fair use” defense, moreover, serve as “built-in First Amendment accommodations.” Ibid. Given the speech-protective purposes
and safeguards embraced by copyright law, there was no call for the
heightened review sought in Eldred. The Court reaches the same
conclusion here. Section 514 leaves undisturbed the idea/expression
distinction and the fair use defense. Moreover, Congress adopted
measures to ease the transition from a national scheme to an international copyright regime. Pp. 23–26.
(b) Petitioners claim that First Amendment interests of a higher
order are at stake because they—unlike their Eldred counterparts—
enjoyed “vested rights” in works that had already entered the public
domain. Their contentions depend on an argument already considered and rejected, namely, that the Constitution renders the public
domain largely untouchable by Congress. Nothing in the historical
record, subsequent congressional practice, or this Court’s jurisprudence warrants exceptional First Amendment solicitude for copyrighted works that were once in the public domain. Congress has
several times adjusted copyright law to protect new categories of
works as well as works previously in the public domain. Section 514,
moreover, does not impose a blanket prohibition on public access.
The question is whether would-be users of certain foreign works must
pay for their desired use of the author’s expression, or else limit their
exploitation to “fair use” of those works. By fully implementing
Berne, Congress ensured that these works, like domestic and most
other foreign works, would be governed by the same legal regime.
Section 514 simply placed foreign works in the position they would
have occupied if the current copyright regime had been in effect when
those works were created and first published. Pp. 26–30.

609 F. 3d 1076, affirmed.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.
BREYER, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which ALITO, J., joined. KAGAN, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.

