6

CAVAZOS v. SMITH
Per Curiam

record concluding that sudden shearing or tearing of the
brainstem was the cause of Etzel’s death, the Ninth Circuit determined that there was “no evidence to permit an
expert conclusion one way or the other” on that question
because there was “no physical evidence of . . . tearing or
shearing, and no other evidence supporting death by
violent shaking.” Id., at 890. The court said that the
State’s experts “reached [their] conclusion because there
was no evidence in the brain itself of the cause of death.”
Ibid. (emphasis in original). The court concluded that
because “[a]bsence of evidence cannot constitute proof
beyond a reasonable doubt,” ibid., the California Court of
Appeal had “unreasonably applied” this Court’s opinion in
Jackson v. Virginia in upholding Smith’s conviction, 437
F. 3d, at 890.
That conclusion was plainly wrong. Jackson says that
evidence is sufficient to support a conviction so long as
“after viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to
the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have found
the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable
doubt.” 443 U. S., at 319. It also unambiguously instructs
that a reviewing court “faced with a record of historical
facts that supports conflicting inferences must presume—
even if it does not affirmatively appear in the record—that
the trier of fact resolved any such conflicts in favor of the
prosecution, and must defer to that resolution.” Id., at
326. When the deference to state court decisions required
by §2254(d) is applied to the state court’s already deferential review, see Renico, 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 11),
there can be no doubt of the Ninth Circuit’s error below.
The jury was presented with competing views of how
Etzel died. It was made aware of the various experts’
qualifications and their familiarity with both the subject
of SBS and the physical condition of Etzel’s body. It observed the attorneys for each party cross-examine the
experts and elicit concessions from them. The State’s

