8

CAVAZOS v. SMITH
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

Moreover, Smith’s counsel, Ubiwe Eriye,4 represented
her poorly at trial. In a case as trying as this one, compe­
tent counsel might have persuaded the jury to disbelieve
the prosecution’s case. A few examples from the record
are illustrative. At the suppression hearing, the presiding
judge was so disturbed about Eriye’s preparation for trial
that he remarked to the defendant, “Miss Smith, I’m
scared.” Tr. A52. Eriye badly misportrayed the burden of
proof when he declared, both at the suppression hearing
and in his opening remarks, that he would prove, beyond a
shadow of a doubt, that Smith was not guilty. Id., at A58–
A59, 213. The two experts Eriye called presented testi­
mony that hardly meshed.5
In sum, this is a notably fact-bound case in which the
Court of Appeals unquestionably stated the correct rule of
law. It is thus “the type of case in which we are most
inclined to deny certiorari.” Kyles v. Whitley, 514 U. S.
419, 460 (1995) (SCALIA, J., dissenting). Nevertheless, the
Court is bent on rebuking the Ninth Circuit for what it
conceives to be defiance of our prior remands. See ante, at
8. I would not ignore Smith’s plight and choose her case
as a fit opportunity to teach the Ninth Circuit a lesson.
But even if granting review qualified as a proper exer­
cise of our discretionary authority, I would resist summary
reversal of the Court of Appeals’ decision. The fact­
intensive character of the case calls for attentive review of
the record, including a trial transcript that runs over
1,500 pages. Careful inspection of the record would be
aided by the adversarial presentation that full briefing
——————
4 Eriye has since resigned from the California Bar with discipline
charges pending.
5 Dr. Goldie testified that the old blood in Etzel’s brain did not con­
tribute to his death, and Etzel died of SIDS. Id., at 994–995, 1403. In
contrast, Dr. Siegler testified that the old blood provided the basis for
his conclusion that Etzel died of an earlier brain trauma, id., at 1152–
1153, 1166–1167, not SIDS, id., at 1193–1194.

