2

CAVAZOS v. SMITH
Per Curiam

On November 29, 1996, Etzel’s mother, Tomeka, put
Etzel to sleep on a sofa before going to sleep herself in
another room. Respondent Shirley Ree Smith—Tomeka’s
mother—slept on the floor next to Etzel. Several hours later,
Smith ran into Tomeka’s room, holding Etzel, who was
limp, and told her that “[s]omething [was] wrong with
Etzel.” Tr. 416. By the time emergency officials arrived,
Etzel was not breathing and had no heartbeat. Smith
reported that she thought Etzel had fallen off the sofa.
The officials’ efforts to resuscitate Etzel failed.
Doctors initially attributed Etzel’s death to sudden
infant death syndrome (SIDS), the customary diagnosis
when an infant shows no outward signs of trauma. But
after an autopsy, the coroner concluded that the cause of
death was instead shaken baby syndrome (SBS). When a
social worker informed Smith of that finding, Smith told
her that Etzel had not responded to her touch while sleeping, so she had picked him up and given him “a little
shake, a jostle” to wake him. Id., at 842. According to the
social worker, Smith then said something to the effect of,
“Oh, my God. Did I do it? Did I do it? Oh, my God.” Id.,
at 847 (internal quotation marks omitted). In an interview with the police a few days later, Smith said that she
had shaken Etzel, but then she corrected herself and said
that she had twisted him to try to elicit a reaction. Smith
was arrested and charged with assault on a child resulting
in death. See Cal. Penal Code Ann. §273ab (West 2008)
(“Any person who, having the care or custody of a child
who is under eight years of age, assaults the child by
means of force that to a reasonable person would be likely
to produce great bodily injury, resulting in the child’s
death, shall be punished by imprisonment . . .”).
At trial, the jury heard seven days of expert medical
testimony on the cause of Etzel’s death. The prosecution
offered three experts, each of whom attested that Etzel’s
death was the result of SBS—not SIDS, as the defense

