Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Per Curiam

contended. The first expert, Dr. Eugene Carpenter, was
the medical examiner for the Los Angeles County Coroner
who had supervised Etzel’s autopsy. Dr. Carpenter is
board certified in forensic, anatomic, and clinical pathology. He testified that Etzel’s autopsy revealed recent hemorrhages in the brain, and he opined that the bleeding and
other features of Etzel’s pathology, including a bruise and
abrasion on the lower back of the baby’s head, were consistent with violent shaking. Dr. Carpenter identified two
means by which shaking can result in a baby’s death: The
first is that the shaking causes blood vessels in the brain
to tear, creating a pool of blood that pushes the brain
downward into the spinal canal, resulting in death but
little direct damage to the brain. The second is that the
shaking itself is sufficiently severe that the brain directly
tears in vital areas, causing death with very little bleeding. Dr. Carpenter testified that Etzel’s injuries were
consistent with the latter pathology. He also explained
that the injuries could not be attributed to either a fall
from the sofa or the administration of cardiopulmonary
resuscitation. Nor, according to Dr. Carpenter, was it
possible that Etzel perished from SIDS, given the signs of
internal trauma. Dr. Carpenter did testify, however, that
while SBS victims often suffer retinal hemorrhaging,
Etzel’s autopsy revealed no such injury.
The prosecution’s second expert, Dr. Stephanie Erlich,
was the associate deputy medical examiner who actually
performed Etzel’s autopsy. She is board certified in anatomic pathology and neuropathology. She corroborated
Dr. Carpenter’s testimony about the autopsy findings, and
added that a followup neuropathological examination of
Etzel’s brain confirmed the existence of recent hemorrhaging. Noting only a minimal amount of new blood in Etzel’s
brain, she testified that the cause of death was direct
trauma to the brainstem. On cross-examination, she
agreed with defense counsel that retinal hemorrhaging

