(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION ET AL. v.
FOX TELEVISION STATIONS, INC., ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 10–1293. Argued January 10, 2012—Decided June 21, 2012*
Title 18 U. S. C. §1464 bans the broadcast of “any obscene, indecent, or
profane language.”
The Federal Communications Commission
(Commission) began enforcing §1464 in the 1970’s. In FCC v. Pacifica Foundation, 438 U. S. 726, this Court found that the Commission’s
order banning George Carlin’s “Filthy Words” monologue passed
First Amendment scrutiny, but did not decide whether “an occasional
expletive . . . would justify any sanction,” id., at 750. In the ensuing
years, the Commission went from strictly observing the narrow circumstances of Pacifica to indicating that it would assess the full context of allegedly indecent broadcasts rather than limit its regulation
to an index of indecent words or pictures. However, it continued to
note the important difference between isolated and repeated broadcasts of indecent material. And in a 2001 policy statement, it even
included, as one of the factors significant to the determination of
what was patently offensive, “whether the material dwells on or repeats at length” the offending description or depiction.
It was against this regulatory background that the three incidents
at issue took place. Two concern isolated utterances of obscene words
during two live broadcasts aired by respondent Fox Television Stations, Inc. The third occurred during an episode of a television show
broadcast by respondent ABC Television Network, when the nude
buttocks of an adult female character were shown for approximately
seven seconds and the side of her breast for a moment. After these
incidents, but before the Commission issued Notices of Apparent Lia——————
* Together with Federal Communications Commission v. ABC, Inc.,
et al. (see this Court’s Rule 12.4), also on certiorari to the same court.


2

FCC v. FOX TELEVISION STATIONS, INC.
Syllabus
bility to Fox and ABC, the Commission issued its Golden Globes Order, declaring for the first time that fleeting expletives could be actionable. It then concluded that the Fox and ABC broadcasts violated
this new standard. It found the Fox broadcasts indecent, but declined to propose forfeitures. The Second Circuit reversed, finding
the Commission’s decision to modify its indecency enforcement regime to regulate fleeting expletives arbitrary and capricious. This
Court reversed and remanded for the Second Circuit to address respondents’ First Amendment challenges. FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc., 556 U. S. 502. On remand, the Second Circuit found the
policy unconstitutionally vague and invalidated it in its entirety. In
the ABC case, the Commission found the display actionably indecent,
and imposed a $27,500 forfeiture on each of the 45 ABC-affiliated
stations that aired the episode. The Second Circuit vacated the order
in light of its Fox decision.

Held: Because the Commission failed to give Fox or ABC fair notice
prior to the broadcasts in question that fleeting expletives and momentary nudity could be found actionably indecent, the Commission’s
standards as applied to these broadcasts were vague. Pp. 11–18.
(a) The fundamental principle that laws regulating persons or entities must give fair notice of what conduct is required or proscribed,
see, e.g., Connally v. General Constr. Co., 269 U. S. 385, 391, is essential to the protections provided by the Fifth Amendment’s Due Process Clause, see United States v. Williams, 553 U. S. 285, 304, which
requires the invalidation of impermissibly vague laws. A conviction
or punishment fails to comply with due process if the statute or regulation under which it is obtained “fails to provide a person of ordinary
intelligence fair notice of what is prohibited, or is so standardless
that it authorizes or encourages seriously discriminatory enforcement.” Ibid. The void for vagueness doctrine addresses at least two
connected but discrete due process concerns: Regulated parties
should know what is required of them so they may act accordingly;
and precision and guidance are necessary so that those enforcing the
law do not act in an arbitrary or discriminatory way. When speech is
involved, rigorous adherence to those requirements is necessary to
ensure that ambiguity does not chill protected speech. Pp. 11–12.
(b) These concerns are implicated here, where the broadcasters
claim that the lengthy procedural history of their cases shows that
they did not have fair notice of what was forbidden. Under the 2001
Guidelines in force when the broadcasts occurred, a key consideration
was “whether the material dwell[ed] on or repeat[ed] at length” the
offending description or depiction, but in the 2004 Golden Globes Order, issued after the broadcasts, the Commission changed course and
held that fleeting expletives could be a statutory violation. It then


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
applied this new principle to these cases. Its lack of notice to Fox and
ABC of its changed interpretation failed to give them “fair notice of
what is prohibited.” Williams, supra, at 304. Pp. 12–13.
(c) Neither of the Government’s contrary arguments is persuasive.
It claims that Fox cannot establish unconstitutional vagueness because the Commission declined to impose a forfeiture on Fox and said
that it would not consider the indecent broadcast in renewing station
licenses or in other contexts. But the Commission has the statutory
power to take into account “any history of prior offenses” when setting a forfeiture penalty, 47 U. S. C. §503(b)(2)(E), and the due process protection against vague regulations “does not leave [regulated
parties] . . . at the mercy of noblesse oblige.” United States v. Stevens,
559 U. S. ___, ___. The challenged orders could also have an adverse
impact on Fox’s reputation with audiences and advertisers alike.
The Government argues that ABC had notice that its broadcast
would be considered indecent. But an isolated statement in a 1960
Commission decision declaring that televising nudes might be contrary to §1464 does not suffice for the fair notice required when the
Government intends to impose over a $1 million fine for allegedly
impermissible speech. Moreover, previous Commission decisions had
declined to find isolated and brief moments of nudity actionably indecent. In light of these agency decisions, and the absence of any notice
in the 2001 Guidance that seven seconds of nude buttocks would be
found indecent, ABC lacked constitutionally sufficient notice prior to
being sanctioned. Pp. 13–17.
(d) It is necessary to make three observations about this decision’s
scope. First, because the Court resolves these cases on fair notice
grounds under the Due Process Clause, it need not address the First
Amendment implications of the Commission’s indecency policy or reconsider Pacifica at this time. Second, because the Court rules that
Fox and ABC lacked notice at the time of their broadcasts that their
material could be found actionably indecent under then-existing policies, the Court need not address the constitutionality of the current
indecency policy as expressed in the Golden Globes Order and subsequent adjudications. Third, this opinion leaves the Commission free
to modify its current indecency policy in light of its determination of
the public interest and applicable legal requirements and leaves
courts free to review the current, or any modified, policy in light of its
content and application. Pp. 17–18.
613 F. 3d 317 (first case) and 404 Fed. Appx. 530 (second case), vacated
and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, THOMAS, BREYER, ALITO, and KAGAN, JJ., joined.


4

FCC v. FOX TELEVISION STATIONS, INC.
Syllabus

GINSBURG, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment. SOTOMAYOR,
J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the cases.

