Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

B
Blueford maintains that even if the jury did not acquit
him of capital and first-degree murder, a second trial on
those offenses would nonetheless violate the Double Jeopardy Clause, because the trial court’s declaration of a
mistrial was improper. Blueford acknowledges that a trial
can be discontinued without barring a subsequent one for
the same offense when “particular circumstances manifest
a necessity” to declare a mistrial. Wade v. Hunter, 336
U. S. 684, 690 (1949); see also United States v. Perez, 9
Wheat. 579, 580 (1824). He also acknowledges that the
trial court’s reason for declaring a mistrial here—that
the jury was unable to reach a verdict—has long been considered the “classic basis” establishing such a necessity.
Arizona v. Washington, 434 U. S. 497, 509 (1978).
Blueford therefore accepts that a second trial on manslaughter and negligent homicide would pose no double
jeopardy problem. He contends, however, that there was
no necessity for a mistrial on capital and first-degree
murder, given the foreperson’s report that the jury had
voted unanimously against guilt on those charges. According to Blueford, the court at that time should have taken
“some action,” whether through partial verdict forms or
other means, to allow the jury to give effect to those votes,
and then considered a mistrial only as to the remaining
charges. Reply Brief for Petitioner 11, n. 8.
We reject that suggestion. We have never required a
trial court, before declaring a mistrial because of a hung
jury, to consider any particular means of breaking the
impasse—let alone to consider giving the jury new options
for a verdict. See Renico v. Lett, 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010)
(slip op., at 8).2 As permitted under Arkansas law, the
——————
2 Finding our reliance on Renico “perplexing,” the dissent reads that
decision to have “little to say about a trial judge’s responsibilities, or
this Court’s, on direct review.” Post, at 10–11, n. 4. But Renico’s

