4

BLUEFORD v. ARKANSAS
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

reported that the jury had not voted on negligent homicide
because the jurors “couldn’t get past the manslaughter”
count on which they were deadlocked. Id., at 65.
In this context, the forewoman’s announcement in open
court that the jury was “unanimous against” conviction on
capital and first-degree murder, id., at 64–65, was an
acquittal for double jeopardy purposes.2 Per Arkansas
law, the jury’s determination of reasonable doubt as to
those offenses was an acquittal “in essence.” Hughes, 347
Ark., at 707, 66 S. W. 3d, at 651. By deciding that the
State “had failed to come forward with sufficient proof,”
the jury resolved the charges of capital and first-degree
murder adversely to the State. Burks, 437 U. S., at 10.
That acquittal cannot be reconsidered without putting
Blueford twice in jeopardy.
Green and Price v. Georgia, 398 U. S. 323 (1970), bolster
——————
2 The jury’s acquittals on the murder counts were unsurprising in
light of the deficiencies in the State’s case. For example, Dr. Adam
Craig—the medical examiner who autopsied the victim, Matthew
McFadden, Jr., and whose testimony was essential to the State’s theory
of the crime—was not board certified in anatomical pathology, having failed the certification examination five times. Dr. Craig took only
2 slides of Matthew’s brain, not the 10 to 20 called for by prevailing professional standards. He dismissed Blueford’s explanation for
Matthew’s death—that Blueford accidentally knocked Matthew to the
floor—on the basis of an outdated paper on child head injuries, acknowledging that he was only “vaguely aware” of a more recent, seminal paper that supported Blueford’s account. Record 390; see Goldsmith & Plunkett, A Biomechanical Analysis of the Causes of
Traumatic Brain Injury in Infants and Children, 25 Am. J. Forensic
Med. & Pathology 89 (2004). Blueford’s expert pathologist, Dr. Robert
Bux, testified that Dr. Craig’s autopsy was inadequate to establish
whether Matthew’s death was accidental or intentional. And Blueford’s expert pediatrician, Dr. John Galaznik, testified that the State’s
theory—that Blueford slammed Matthew into a mattress on the floor—
was “not a likely cause” of the boy’s injuries when assessed in view of
current medical literature. Record 766. Even the trial judge observed
that the State’s proof was “circumstantial at best,” and that this was
“probably . . . a lesser included offense case.” Id., at 610.

