2

BLUEFORD v. ARKANSAS
Opinion of the Court

at trial was that Blueford had injured McFadden intentionally, causing the boy’s death “[u]nder circumstances
manifesting extreme indifference to the value of human
life.” Ark. Code Ann. §5–10–101(a)(9)(A) (Supp. 2011).
The defense, in contrast, portrayed the death as the result of Blueford accidentally knocking McFadden onto the
ground.
The trial court instructed the jury that the charge of
capital murder included three lesser offenses: first-degree
murder, manslaughter, and negligent homicide. In addition to describing these offenses, the court addressed the
order in which the jury was to consider them: “If you have
a reasonable doubt of the defendant’s guilt on the charge
of capital murder, you will consider the charge of murder
in the first degree. . . . If you have a reasonable doubt of
the defendant’s guilt on the charge of murder in the first
degree, you will then consider the charge of manslaughter. . . . If you have a reasonable doubt of the defendant’s
guilt on the charge of manslaughter, you will then consider the charge of negligent homicide.” App. 51–52.
The prosecution commented on these instructions in its
closing argument. It told the jury, for example, that “before you can consider a lesser included of capital murder,
you must first, all 12, vote that this man is not guilty of
capital murder.” Id., at 55. The prosecution explained
that this was “not a situation where you just lay everything out here and say, well, we have four choices. Which
one does it fit the most?” Id., at 59. Rather, the prosecution emphasized, “unless all 12 of you agree that this
man’s actions were not consistent with capital murder,
then and only then would you go down to murder in the
first degree.” Ibid.
After the parties concluded their arguments, the court
presented the jury with a set of five verdict forms, each
representing a possible verdict. There were four separate
forms allowing the jury to convict on each of the charged

