Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

sonable circumstances, they would at least take a vote
on negligent homicide.” App. 65–66. And after the jury
retired for the last half-hour of deliberations, the judge
said, “I don’t think they have an understanding of really
that they don’t have to get past every charge unanimously
before they can move to the next charge.” Id., at 69. That
misstated Arkansas law as well as the judge’s own instructions. The jury was required to reach a unanimous
decision on a greater offense before considering a lesser.
See supra, at 2–3. In discharging the jury, the judge said,
“Madam Foreman, there seems to be a lot of confusion on
the part . . . of the jury about some of the instructions.
And because of the confusion and because of the timeliness
and the amount of hours that has gone by without being
able to reach a verdict, the Court is going to declare a
mistrial.” App. 69–70.
If, as these comments suggest, the judge wrongly believed that the jury was not required to reach unanimity
on a greater offense before considering a lesser, then he
accorded insufficient finality and weight to the forewoman’s earlier announcement of acquittal on capital and firstdegree murder. That mistake of law negates the deference
due the judge’s decision to declare a mistrial. The judge
explained that the jury was being discharged in part based
on its “confusion” with respect to the instructions, when in
fact, the confusion was the judge’s. Ibid.; see, e.g., Washington, 434 U. S., at 510, n. 28 (“If the record reveals that
the trial judge has failed to exercise the ‘sound discretion’
entrusted to him, the reason for . . . deference by an appellate court disappears”); Illinois v. Somerville, 410 U. S.
458, 469 (1973) (critiquing “erratic” mistrial inquiry); Gori,
367 U. S., at 371, n. 3 (Douglas, J., dissenting) (noting that
“[i]n state cases, a second prosecution has been barred
where the jury was discharged through the trial judge’s
misconstruction of the law,” and collecting cases). And a
trial court “by definition abuses its discretion when it

