(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BLUEFORD v. ARKANSAS
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF ARKANSAS
No. 10–1320. Argued February 22, 2012—Decided May 24, 2012
The State of Arkansas charged petitioner Alex Blueford with capital
murder for the death of a one-year-old child. That charge included
the lesser offenses of first-degree murder, manslaughter, and negligent homicide. Before the start of deliberations, the trial court instructed the jury to consider the offenses as follows: “If you have a
reasonable doubt of the defendant’s guilt on the charge of capital
murder, you will consider the charge of murder in the first degree. . . .
If you have a reasonable doubt of the defendant’s guilt on the charge
of murder in the first degree, you will then consider the charge of
manslaughter. . . . If you have a reasonable doubt of the defendant’s
guilt on the charge of manslaughter, you will then consider the
charge of negligent homicide.” The court also presented the jury with
a set of verdict forms, which allowed the jury either to convict
Blueford of one of the charged offenses, or to acquit him of all of
them. Acquitting on some but not others was not an option.
After deliberating for a few hours, the jury reported that it could
not reach a verdict. The court inquired about the jury’s progress on
each offense. The foreperson disclosed that the jury was unanimous
against guilt on the charges of capital murder and first-degree murder, was deadlocked on manslaughter, and had not voted on negligent homicide. The court told the jury to continue to deliberate. The
jury did so but still could not reach a verdict, and the court declared a
mistrial. When the State subsequently sought to retry Blueford, he
moved to dismiss the capital and first-degree murder charges on double jeopardy grounds. The trial court denied the motion, and the Supreme Court of Arkansas affirmed on interlocutory appeal.
Held: The Double Jeopardy Clause does not bar retrying Blueford on
charges of capital murder and first-degree murder. Pp. 5−10.
(a) The jury did not acquit Blueford of capital or first-degree mur-

