8

BLUEFORD v. ARKANSAS
Opinion of the Court

first-degree murder. At that point, nothing in the instructions prohibits the jury from doing what juries often do:
revisit a prior vote. “The very object of the jury system,”
after all, “is to secure unanimity by a comparison of views,
and by arguments among the jurors themselves.” Allen,
164 U. S., at 501. A single juror’s change of mind is all it
takes to require the jury to reconsider a greater offense.
It was therefore possible for Blueford’s jury to revisit the
offenses of capital and first-degree murder, notwithstanding its earlier votes. And because of that possibility, the
foreperson’s report prior to the end of deliberations lacked
the finality necessary to amount to an acquittal on those
offenses, quite apart from any requirement that a formal
verdict be returned or judgment entered.
That same lack of finality undermines Blueford’s reliance on Green v. United States, 355 U. S. 184 (1957), and
Price v. Georgia, 398 U. S. 323 (1970). In those cases, we
held that the Double Jeopardy Clause is violated when
a defendant, tried for a greater offense and convicted of
a lesser included offense, is later retried for the greater
offense. See Green, supra, at 190; Price, supra, at 329.
Blueford argues that the only fact distinguishing his case
from Green and Price is that his case involves a deadlock
on the lesser included offense, as opposed to a conviction.
In his view, that distinction only favors him, because the
Double Jeopardy Clause should, if anything, afford greater
protection to a defendant who is not found guilty of the
lesser included offense.
Blueford’s argument assumes, however, that the votes
reported by the foreperson did not change, even though
the jury deliberated further after that report. That assumption is unjustified, because the reported votes were,
for the reasons noted, not final. Blueford thus overlooks
the real distinction between the cases: In Green and Price,
the verdict of the jury was a final decision; here, the report
of the foreperson was not.

