Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

that would otherwise have been forthcoming and thus
require the expense of a retrial.” Tsanas, 572 F. 2d, at
346. But a State willing to incur that expense loses nothing by overcharging in an acquittal-first regime. At worst,
the State enjoys a second opportunity to convict, “with the
possibility that the earlier ‘trial run’ will strengthen the
prosecution’s case.” Crist, 437 U. S., at 52 (Powell, J.,
dissenting). If a State wants the benefits of requiring a
jury to acquit before compromising, it should not be permitted to deprive a defendant of the corresponding benefits of having been acquitted. The Double Jeopardy Clause
expressly prohibits that outcome.
The majority observes that we “have never required a
trial court, before declaring a mistrial because of a hung
jury, to consider any particular means of breaking the
impasse—let alone to consider giving the jury new options
for a verdict.” Ante, at 10 (citing Renico v. Lett, 559 U. S.
___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 8)). That hands-off approach
dilutes Perez beyond recognition. This Court has never
excused a trial judge from exercising “scrupulous” care
before discharging a jury. Jorn, 400 U. S., at 485 (plurality opinion). Rather, we have insisted that a trial judge
may not act “irrationally,” “irresponsibly,” or “precipitately.” Washington, 434 U. S., at 514–515. Nor have we
retreated from the rule that “reviewing courts have an
obligation to ensure themselves that . . . the trial judge
exercised ‘sound discretion’ in declaring a mistrial.” Id., at
514 (quoting Perez, 9 Wheat., at 580).4
——————
4 The

majority’s reliance on Renico, a habeas corpus case decided
under the deferential standard of review prescribed by the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), is perplexing.
As Renico made clear, the question there was “not whether the trial
judge should have declared a mistrial. It is not even whether it was an
abuse of discretion for her to have done so—the applicable standard on
direct review. The question under AEDPA is instead whether the
determination of the Michigan Supreme Court that there was no abuse

