2

BLUEFORD v. ARKANSAS
Syllabus
der. Blueford contends that the foreperson’s report that the jury was
unanimous against guilt on the murder offenses represented a resolution of some or all of the elements of those offenses in his favor.
But the report was not a final resolution of anything. When the foreperson told the court how the jury had voted on each offense, the jury’s
deliberations had not yet concluded. The jurors in fact went back to
the jury room to deliberate further, and nothing in the court’s instructions prohibited them from reconsidering their votes on capital
and first-degree murder as deliberations continued. The foreperson’s
report prior to the end of deliberations therefore lacked the finality
necessary to amount to an acquittal on those offenses. That same
lack of finality undermines Blueford’s reliance on Green v. United
States, 355 U. S. 184, and Price v. Georgia, 398 U. S. 323. In both of
those cases, the verdict of the jury was a final decision; here, the report of the foreperson was not. Pp. 5−8.
(b) The trial court’s declaration of a mistrial was not improper. A
trial can be discontinued without barring a subsequent one for the
same offense when “particular circumstances manifest a necessity” to
declare a mistrial. Wade v. Hunter, 336 U. S. 684, 690. Blueford contends that there was no necessity for a mistrial on capital and firstdegree murder, given the foreperson’s report that the jury had voted
unanimously against guilt on those charges. According to Blueford,
the court at that time should have taken some action, whether
through new partial verdict forms or other means, to allow the jury to
give effect to those votes, and then considered a mistrial only as to
the remaining charges. Blueford acknowledges, however, that the
trial court’s reason for declaring a mistrial here—that the jury was
unable to reach a verdict—has long been considered the “classic basis” establishing necessity for doing so. Arizona v. Washington, 434
U. S. 497, 509. And this Court has never required a trial court, before declaring a mistrial because of a hung jury, to consider any particular means of breaking the impasse―let alone to consider giving
the jury new options for a verdict. See Renico v. Lett, 559 U. S. ___,
___. As permitted under Arkansas law, the jury’s options in this case
were limited to two: either convict on one of the offenses, or acquit on
all. The trial court did not abuse its discretion by refusing to add another option—that of acquitting on some offenses but not others.
Pp. 9−10.

2011 Ark. 8, ___ S. W. 3d ___, affirmed.
ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which SCALIA,
KENNEDY, THOMAS, BREYER, and ALITO, JJ., joined. SOTOMAYOR, J.,
filed a dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG and KAGAN, JJ., joined.

