Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

But even if we assume that the instructions required a
unanimous vote before the jury could consider a lesser
offense—as the State assumes for purposes of this case,
see Brief for Respondent 25, n. 3—nothing in the instructions prohibited the jury from reconsidering such a vote.
The instructions said simply, “If you have a reasonable
doubt of the defendant’s guilt on the charge of [the greater
offense], you will [then] consider the charge of [the lesser
offense].” App. 51–52. The jurors were never told that
once they had a reasonable doubt, they could not rethink
the issue. The jury was free to reconsider a greater offense, even after considering a lesser one.1
A simple example illustrates the point. A jury enters
the jury room, having just been given these instructions.
The foreperson decides that it would make sense to determine the extent of the jurors’ agreement before discussions begin. Accordingly, she conducts a vote on capital
murder, and everyone votes against guilt. She does the
same for first-degree murder, and again, everyone votes
against guilt. She then calls for a vote on manslaughter,
and there is disagreement. Only then do the jurors engage in a discussion about the circumstances of the crime.
While considering the arguments of the other jurors on
how the death was caused, one of the jurors starts rethinking his own stance on a greater offense. After reflecting on
the evidence, he comes to believe that the defendant did
knowingly cause the death—satisfying the definition of
——————
1 In reaching a contrary conclusion, post, at 6 (opinion of SOTOMAYOR,
J.), the dissent construes the jury instructions to “require a jury to
complete its deliberations on a greater offense before it may consider a
lesser,” post, at 3 (emphasis added). But no such requirement can be
found in the text of the instructions themselves. And the dissent’s
attempt to glean such a requirement from the Arkansas Supreme
Court’s decision in Hughes v. State, 347 Ark. 696, 66 S. W. 3d 645
(2002), is unavailing, for that decision nowhere addresses the issue
here—whether a jury can reconsider a greater offense after considering
a lesser one.

