6

BLUEFORD v. ARKANSAS
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

was not an acquittal because it “was not a final resolution
of anything.” Ante, at 6. In the majority’s view, the jury
might have revisited its decisions on the murder counts
during the 31 minutes of deliberations that followed the
forewoman’s announcement. We cannot know whether
the jury did so, the majority reasons, because the jury was
discharged without confirming that it remained “unanimous against” convicting Blueford of capital and firstdegree murder. Ante, at 6–8.3
Putting to one side the lack of record evidence to support
this speculation—by far the more plausible inference is
that the jurors spent those 31 minutes attempting to
resolve their deadlock on manslaughter—I do not agree
that the jury was free to reconsider its decisions when
its deliberations resumed. “A verdict of acquittal on the
issue of guilt or innocence is, of course, absolutely final.”
Bullington v. Missouri, 451 U. S. 430, 445 (1981). The
jury heard instructions and argument that it was required
unanimously to acquit on capital and first-degree murder
before it could reach manslaughter. And as the forewoman’s colloquy makes plain, the jury followed those instructions scrupulously. There is no reason to believe that the
jury’s vote was anything other than a verdict in substance—that is, a “final collective decision . . . reached
——————
3 This Court granted certiorari to decide “[w]hether, if a jury deadlocks on a lesser-included offense, the Double Jeopardy Clause bars
reprosecution of a greater offense after a jury announces that it has
voted against guilt on the greater offense.” Pet. for Cert. i. The majority resolves the question presented by determining that the forewoman’s
announcements were not final, such that Blueford’s jury did not necessarily deadlock on the lesser included offense of manslaughter. See
ante, at 8–9, n. 2. In light of that determination, I do not read today’s
opinion to express any view with respect to the requirements of the
Double Jeopardy Clause where a jury does deadlock on a lesser included offense. Cf., e.g., State v. Tate, 256 Conn. 262, 284–285, 773
A. 2d 308, 324–325 (2001); Whiteaker v. State, 808 P. 2d 270, 274
(Alaska App. 1991).

