12

BLUEFORD v. ARKANSAS
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

B
Even if the Double Jeopardy Clause did not compel that
broader rule, the facts of this case confirm that there was
no necessity, let alone manifest necessity, for a mistrial.
There was no reason for the judge not to have asked the
jury, prior to discharge, whether it remained “unanimous
against” conviction on capital and first-degree murder.
There would have been no intrusion on the jury’s deliberative process. The judge was not required to issue new
instructions or verdict forms, allow new arguments, direct
further deliberations, or take any other action that might
have threatened to coerce the jury. Merely repeating his
earlier question would have sufficed. Because the judge
failed to take even this modest step—or indeed, to explore
any alternatives to a mistrial, or even to make an on-therecord finding of manifest necessity—I conclude that there
was an abuse of discretion. See, e.g., id., at 486; see also
Washington, 434 U. S., at 525 (Marshall, J., dissenting)
(manifest necessity requires showing “that there were no
meaningful and practical alternatives to a mistrial, or
that the trial court scrupulously considered available alternatives and found all wanting but a termination of the
proceedings”).
Indeed, the only reason I can divine for the judge’s
failure to take this modest step is his misperception of
Arkansas law with respect to the transitional instruction.
After the colloquy with the forewoman, the judge commented at sidebar that the jurors “haven’t even taken a
vote on [negligent homicide]. . . . I don’t think they’ve
completed their deliberation. . . . I mean, under any rea——————
of discretion was ‘an unreasonable application of . . . clearly established
Federal law.’ ” 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 5) (quoting 28 U. S. C.
§2254(d)(1)); accord, 559 U. S., at ___, n. 3 (slip op., at 11, n. 3). Renico
thus has little to say about a trial judge’s responsibilities, or this
Court’s, on direct review. Cf. Cullen v. Pinholster, 563 U. S. ___, ___
(2011) (slip op., at 30–31).

