6

BLUEFORD v. ARKANSAS
Opinion of the Court

contends that despite the absence of a formal verdict, a
jury’s announcement constitutes an acquittal if it “ ‘actually represents a resolution . . . of some or all of the factual
elements of the offense charged.’ ” Brief for Petitioner 21.
Here, according to Blueford, the foreperson’s announcement of the jury’s unanimous votes on capital and firstdegree murder represented just that: a resolution of some
or all of the elements of those offenses in Blueford’s favor.
We disagree. The foreperson’s report was not a final
resolution of anything. When the foreperson told the court
how the jury had voted on each offense, the jury’s deliberations had not yet concluded. The jurors in fact went back
to the jury room to deliberate further, even after the foreperson had delivered her report. When they emerged a
half hour later, the foreperson stated only that they were
unable to reach a verdict. She gave no indication whether
it was still the case that all 12 jurors believed Blueford
was not guilty of capital or first-degree murder, that 9 of
them believed he was guilty of manslaughter, or that a
vote had not been taken on negligent homicide. The fact
that deliberations continued after the report deprives that
report of the finality necessary to constitute an acquittal
on the murder offenses.
Blueford maintains, however, that any possibility that
the jurors revisited the murder offenses was foreclosed by
the instructions given to the jury. Those instructions, he
contends, not only required the jury to consider the offenses in order, from greater to lesser, but also prevented
it from transitioning from one offense to the next without unanimously—and definitively—resolving the greater
offense in his favor. “A jury is presumed to follow its
instructions.” Weeks v. Angelone, 528 U. S. 225, 234
(2000). So, Blueford says, the foreperson’s report that the
jury was deadlocked on manslaughter necessarily establishes that the jury had acquitted Blueford of the greater
offenses of capital and first-degree murder.

