2

FREEMAN v. QUICKEN LOANS, INC.
Syllabus
transactions could be collapsed into one. Their reading—that a
settlement-service provider can “make” a charge and then “accept” the
portion of the charge consisting of 100 percent—does not avoid collapsing the sequential relationship of the two stages and would destroy the tandem character of activities that the text envisions at
stage two (i.e., a giving and accepting). And if the consumer were the
person who “give[s]” a “portion, split, or percentage” of the charge to
the provider who “accepts” it, consumers would become lawbreakers
themselves. Pp. 3–8.
(2) The normal usage of the terms “portion,” “split,” and “percentage”—which, when referring to a portion or percentage of a
whole, usually mean less than 100 percent—reinforces the conclusion
that §2607(b) does not apply where a settlement-service provider retains the entirety of a fee received from a consumer. The meaning is
also confirmed by the “commonsense canon of noscitur a sociis, which
counsels that a word is given more precise content by the neighboring
words with which it is associated.” United States v. Williams, 553
U. S. 285, 294. This connation is not undermined by the canon
against surplusage. “Portion,” “split,” and “percentage” may all mean
the same thing, but the canon merely favors that interpretation
which avoids surplusage, see Microsoft Corp. v. i4i Ltd. Partnership,
564 U. S. ___, ___, and petitioners’ interpretation no more achieves
that end than the Court’s does. Pp. 8–11.
(b) Petitioners’ arguments in favor of their contrary interpretation
are unpersuasive. Section 2607(b), as interpreted here, is not rendered surplusage by §2607(a)’s express prohibition of kickbacks, for
each subsection reaches conduct that the other does not. RESPA’s general purpose—to protect consumers from “certain abusive practices,”
§2601(a)—also provides no warrant for expanding §2607(b)’s prohibition beyond the field to which it is unambiguously limited: the
splitting of fees paid for settlement services. And giving §2607(b) its
natural meaning would not lead to absurd results. Pp. 11–13.

626 F. 3d 799, affirmed.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

