Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

the consumer-provider transaction (the “charge” that is
“made or received”) and the fee-sharing transaction (the
“portion, split, or percentage” that is “give[n]” or “accept[ed]”) would be pointless if, as petitioners contend, the
two transactions could be collapsed into one.
Petitioners try to merge the two stages by arguing
that a settlement-service provider can “make” a charge
(stage one) and then “accept” (stage two) the portion
of the charge consisting of 100 percent. See Reply Brief
for Petitioners 6. But then is not the provider also “receiv[ing]” the charge at the same time he is “accept[ing]”
the portion of it? And who “give[s]” the portion of the
charge consisting of 100 percent? The same provider who
“accept[s]” it? This reading does not avoid collapsing the
sequential relationship of the two stages, and it would
simply destroy the tandem character of activities that the
text envisions at stage two (i.e., a giving and accepting).
Petitioners seek to avoid this consequence, at stage two
at least, by saying that the consumer is the person who
“give[s]” a “portion, split, or percentage” of the charge to
the provider who “accept[s]” it. See Brief for Petitioners
21; Reply Brief for Petitioners 5. But since under this
statute it is (so to speak) as accursed to give as to receive,
this would make lawbreakers of consumers—the very
class for whose benefit §2607(b) was enacted, see §2601. It
is no answer to say that a consumer would not face damages liability because a violator is liable only “to the
person or persons charged for the settlement service,”
§2607(d)(2), and it would not make sense to render a
consumer liable to himself. It is the logical consequence
that a consumer would be liable to himself, not the specter
of actual damages liability, which provides strong indication that something in petitioners’ interpretation is amiss.
At any rate, §2607(b) is also enforceable through criminal prosecutions, §2607(d)(1), and actions for injunctive
relief brought by federal and state regulators, §2607(d)(4).

