(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FREEMAN ET AL. v. QUICKEN LOANS, INC.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–1042. Argued February 21, 2012—Decided May 24, 2012
The Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA), provides, as relevant here, that “[n]o person shall give and no person shall accept any
portion, split, or percentage of any charge made or received for the
rendering of a real estate settlement service . . . other than for services actually performed.” 12 U. S. C. §2607(b). Petitioners, three
couples who obtained mortgage loans from respondent, filed separate
state-court actions, alleging that respondent had violated §2607(b) by
charging them fees for which no services were provided in return. After the cases were removed to federal court and consolidated, respondent sought summary judgment, arguing that petitioners’ claims
were not cognizable under §2607(b) because the allegedly unearned
fees were not split with another party. The District Court agreed;
and because petitioners had not alleged any splitting of fees, it
granted respondent summary judgment. The Fifth Circuit affirmed.
Held: In order to establish a violation of §2607(b), a plaintiff must
demonstrate that a charge for settlement services was divided between two or more persons. Pp. 3–13.
(a) Section 2607(b) unambiguously covers only a settlement-service
provider’s splitting of a fee with one or more other persons; it cannot
be understood to reach a single provider’s retention of an unearned
fee. Pp. 3–11.
(1) Section 2607(b) clearly describes two distinct exchanges.
First, a “charge” is “made” to or “received” from a consumer by a settlement-service provider. That provider then “give[s],” and another
person “accept[s],” a “portion, split, or percentage” of the charge.
Congress’s use of different sets of verbs, with distinct tenses, to distinguish between the consumer-provider transaction and the feesharing one would be pointless if, as petitioners contend, the two

