6

FREEMAN v. QUICKEN LOANS, INC.
Opinion of the Court

In short, petitioners contend that, by allegedly charging each of them an unearned fee, respondent “accept[ed]”
a “portion, split, or percentage” of a settlement, service
charge (i.e., 100 percent of the charge) “other than for
services actually performed.” §2607(b) (2006 ed.).
The parties vigorously dispute whether the position set
forth in HUD’s 2001 policy statement should be accorded
deference under the framework announced by this Court
in Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense
Council, Inc., 467 U. S. 837 (1984). We need not resolve
that dispute—or address whether, if Chevron deference
would otherwise apply, it is eliminated by the policy
statement’s palpable overreach with regard to price controls. For we conclude that even the more limited position
espoused by the policy statement and urged by petitioners
“goes beyond the meaning that the statute can bear,” MCI
Telecommunications Corp. v. American Telephone & Telegraph Co., 512 U. S. 218, 229 (1994). In our view,
§2607(b) unambiguously covers only a settlement-service
provider’s splitting of a fee with one or more other persons;
it cannot be understood to reach a single provider’s retention of an unearned fee.5
By providing that no person “shall give” or “shall accept”
a “portion, split, or percentage” of a “charge” that has been
“made or received,” “other than for services actually performed,” §2607(b) clearly describes two distinct exchanges.
First, a “charge” is “made” to or “received” from a consumer by a settlement-service provider. That provider then
“give[s],” and another person “accept[s],” a “portion, split,
or percentage” of the charge. Congress’s use of different
sets of verbs, with distinct tenses, to distinguish between
——————
5 Petitioners also contend that the position set forth in the 2001 policy
statement is consistent with a HUD regulation, 24 CFR §3500.14(c)
(2011), and with prior administrative guidance. In light of our conclusion that §2607(b) unambiguously forecloses petitioners’ position, we
have no need to address this issue.

