Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

end than ours does. It is impossible to imagine a “portion”
(even a portion consisting of the entirety) or a “split” that
is not also a “percentage.”
Petitioners invoke the presumption against surplusage
a second time, urging that if §2607(b) is not construed
to reach undivided unearned fees, it would be rendered
“largely surplusage” in light of §2607(a)’s express prohibition of kickbacks. Brief for Petitioners 24. Not so. Section
2607(a) prohibits giving or accepting “any fee, kickback, or
thing of value pursuant to any agreement or understanding . . . that business incident to or a part of a real estate
settlement service . . . shall be referred to any person.”
§2607(a).
That prohibition is at once broader than
§2607(b)’s (because it applies to the transfer of any “thing
of value,” rather than to the dividing of a “charge” paid
by a consumer) and narrower (because it requires an
“agreement or understanding” to refer business). Thus, a
settlement-service provider who agrees to exchange valuable
tickets to a sporting event in return for a referral of business would violate §2607(a), but not §2607(b). So too a
provider who agrees to pay a monetary referral fee that is
not tied in any respect to a charge paid by a particular
consumer—for instance, a “retainer” agreement pursuant
to which the provider pays a monthly lump sum in exchange for the recipient’s agreement to refer any business
that comes his way. By contrast, a settlement-service
provider who gives a portion of a charge to another person
who has not rendered any services in return would violate
§2607(b), even if an express referral arrangement does
not exist or cannot be shown. In short, each subsection
reaches conduct that the other does not; there is no
need to adopt petitioners’ improbable reading of §2607(b)
to avoid rendering any portion of §2607 superfluous.
It follows that petitioners can derive no support from
§2607’s caption: “Prohibition against kickbacks and unearned fees.” Subsection (a) prohibits certain kickbacks

