Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

dence showing whether there was probable cause for the
charges would always be “available and apt to prove or
disprove retaliatory causation.” 547 U. S., at 261. In this
Court’s view, the presence of probable cause, while not
a “guarantee” that retaliatory motive did not cause the
prosecution, still precluded any prima facie inference that
retaliatory motive was the but-for cause of the plaintiff ’s
injury. Id., at 265. This was especially true because, as
Hartman next emphasized, retaliatory prosecution claims
involve particularly attenuated causation between the defendant’s alleged retaliatory animus and the plaintiff ’s
injury. Id., at 259–261. In a retaliatory prosecution case,
the key defendant is typically not the prosecutor who
made the charging decision that injured the plaintiff,
because prosecutors enjoy absolute immunity for their
decisions to prosecute. Rather, the key defendant is the
person who allegedly prompted the prosecutor’s decision.
Thus, the intervening decision of the third-party prosecutor widens the causal gap between the defendant’s animus
and the plaintiff ’s injury. Id., at 261–263.
Like retaliatory prosecution cases, evidence of the presence or absence of probable cause for the arrest will be
available in virtually every retaliatory arrest case. Such
evidence could be thought similarly fatal to a plaintiff ’s
claim that animus caused his arrest, given that retaliatory
arrest cases also present a tenuous causal connection
between the defendant’s alleged animus and the plaintiff ’s
injury. An officer might bear animus toward the content
of a suspect’s speech. But the officer may decide to arrest
the suspect because his speech provides evidence of a
crime or suggests a potential threat. See, e.g., Wayte v.
United States, 470 U. S. 598, 612–613 (1985) (noting that
letters of protest written to the Selective Service, in which
the author expressed disagreement with the draft, “provided strong, perhaps conclusive evidence” of the nonregistrant’s intent not to comply—one of the elements of the

