2

REICHLE v. HOWARDS
Syllabus
cause.

Held: Petitioners are entitled to qualified immunity because, at the
time of Howards’ arrest, it was not clearly established that an arrest
supported by probable cause could give rise to a First Amendment violation. Pp. 5−12.
(a) Courts may grant qualified immunity on the ground that a purported right was not “clearly established” by prior case law. Pearson
v. Callahan, 555 U. S. 223, 236. To be clearly established, a right
must be sufficiently clear “that every ‘reasonable official would [have
understood] that what he is doing violates that right.’ ” Ashcroft v. alKidd, 563 U. S. ___, ___. Pp. 5−6.
(b) The “clearly established” standard is not satisfied here. This
Court has never recognized a First Amendment right to be free from
a retaliatory arrest that is supported by probable cause; nor was such
a right otherwise clearly established at the time of Howards’ arrest.
P. 6.
(c) At that time, Hartman’s impact on the Tenth Circuit’s precedent
was far from clear. Although Hartman’s facts involved only a retaliatory prosecution, reasonable law enforcement officers could have
questioned whether its rule also applied to arrests. First, Hartman
was decided against a legal backdrop that treated retaliatory arrest
claims and retaliatory prosecution claims similarly. It resolved a
Circuit split concerning the impact of probable cause on retaliatory
prosecution claims, but some of the conflicting cases involved both retaliatory prosecution and retaliatory arrest claims and made no distinction between the two when considering the relevance of probable
cause. Second, a reasonable official could have interpreted Hartman’s rationale to apply to retaliatory arrests. Like in retaliatory
prosecution cases, evidence of the presence or absence of probable
cause for the arrest will be available in virtually all retaliatory arrest
cases, and the causal link between the defendant’s alleged retaliatory
animus and the plaintiff’s injury may be tenuous. Finally, decisions
from other Circuits in the wake of Hartman support the conclusion
that, for qualified immunity purposes, it was at least arguable at the
time of Howards’ arrest that Hartman extended to retaliatory arrests. Pp. 7−12.
634 F. 3d 1131, reversed and remanded.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. GINSBURG, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which BREYER,
J., joined. KAGAN, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the
case.

