10

REICHLE v. HOWARDS
Opinion of the Court

offense” of willful failure to register for the draft). Like
retaliatory prosecution cases, then, the connection between alleged animus and injury may be weakened in the
arrest context by a police officer’s wholly legitimate consideration of speech.
To be sure, we do not suggest that Hartman’s rule in
fact extends to arrests. Nor do we suggest that every aspect of Hartman’s rationale could apply to retaliatory
arrests. Hartman concluded that the causal connection in
retaliatory prosecution cases is attenuated because those
cases necessarily involve the animus of one person and
the injurious action of another, 547 U. S., at 262, but in
many retaliatory arrest cases, it is the officer bearing the alleged animus who makes the injurious arrest. Moreover,
Hartman noted that, in retaliatory prosecution cases, the
causal connection between the defendant’s animus and the
prosecutor’s decision is further weakened by the “presumption of regularity accorded to prosecutorial decisionmaking.” Id., at 263. That presumption does not
apply here. Nonetheless, the fact remains that, for qualified immunity purposes, at the time of Howards’ arrest it
was at least arguable that Hartman’s rule extended to
retaliatory arrests.6
Decisions from other Federal Courts of Appeals in the
wake of Hartman support this assessment. Shortly before
——————
6 Howards argues that petitioners violated his clearly established
First Amendment right even if Hartman’s rule applies equally to
retaliatory arrests. According to Howards, Hartman did not hold that a
prosecution violates the First Amendment only when it is unsupported
by probable cause. Rather, Howards argues, Hartman made probable
cause relevant only to a plaintiff ’s ability to recover damages for a First
Amendment violation. See Brief for Respondent 37–41. We need not
resolve whether Hartman is best read as defining the scope of the First
Amendment right or as simply establishing a prerequisite for recovery.
Nor need we decide whether that distinction matters. It suffices, for
qualified immunity purposes, that the answer would not have been
clear to a reasonable official when Howards was arrested.

