NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press. No. 08–103 [March 2, 2010]  JUSTICE THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court. Subject to certain exceptions, the Copyright Act (Act) requires copyright holders to register their works before suing for copyright infringement. 17 U. S. C. A. §411(a) (Supp. 2009). In this case, the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit held that a copyright holder’s failure to comply with §411(a)’s registration requirement deprives a federal court of jurisdiction to adjudicate his copyright infringement claim. We disagree. Section 411(a)’s regis tration requirement is a precondition to filing a claim that does not restrict a federal court’s subject-matter jurisdiction. The Constitution grants Congress the power “[t]o pro mote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors . . . the exclusive Right to . . . their . . . Writings.” Art. I, §8, cl. 8. Exercising this power, Congress has crafted a comprehensive statutory scheme governing the existence and scope of “[c]opyright protec tion” for “original works of authorship fixed in any tangi
ble medium of expression.” 17 U. S. C. §102(a). This scheme gives copyright owners “the exclusive rights” (with specified statutory exceptions) to distribute, reproduce, or publicly perform their works. §106. “Anyone who violates any of the exclusive rights of the copyright owner as pro vided” in the Act “is an infringer of the copyright.” §501(a). When such infringement occurs, a copyright owner “is entitled, subject to the requirements of section 411, to institute an action” for copyright infringement. §501(b) (emphasis added). This case concerns “the requirements of section 411” to which §501(b) refers. Section 411(a) provides, inter alia and with certain exceptions, that “no civil action for in fringement of the copyright in any United States work shall be instituted until preregistration or registration of the copyright claim has been made in accordance with this title.”1 This provision is part of the Act’s remedial scheme. It establishes a condition—copyright registration—that plaintiffs ordinarily must satisfy before filing an infringe ment claim and invoking the Act’s remedial provisions. We address whether §411(a) also deprives federal courts of subject-matter jurisdiction to adjudicate infringement claims involving unregistered works. The relevant proceedings in this case began after we U. S. 483 (2001). In Tasini, we agreed with the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit that several owners of online databases and print publishers had infringed the copyrights of six freelance authors by reproducing the authors’ works electronically without first securing their
permission. See id., at 493. In so holding, we affirmed the principal theory of liability underlying copyright infringe ment suits that other freelance authors had filed after the Court of Appeals had issued its opinion in Tasini. These other suits, which were stayed pending our decision in Tasini, resumed after we issued our opinion and were consolidated in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York by the Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation. The consolidated complaint alleged that the named plaintiffs each own at least one copyright, typically in a freelance article written for a newspaper or a magazine, that they had registered in accordance with §411(a). The class, however, included both authors who had registered their copyrighted works and authors who had not. See App. 94. Because of the growing size and complexity of the law suit, the District Court referred the parties to mediation. For more than three years, the freelance authors, the publishers (and their insurers), and the electronic data bases (and their insurers) negotiated. Finally, in March 2005, they reached a settlement agreement that the par ties intended “to achieve a global peace in the publishing industry.” In re Literary Works in Electronic Databases Copyright Litigation, 509 F. 3d 116, 119 (CA2 2007). The parties moved the District Court to certify a class for settlement and to approve the settlement agreement. Ten freelance authors, including Irvin Muchnick (herein after Muchnick respondents), objected. The District Court overruled the objections; certified a settlement class of freelance authors under Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 23(a) and (b)(3); approved the settlement as fair, reason able, and adequate under Rule 23(e); and entered final judgment. At no time did the Muchnick respondents or any other party urge the District Court to dismiss the case, or to refuse to certify the class or approve the settle
ment, for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction. The Muchnick respondents appealed, renewing their objections to the settlement on procedural and substantive grounds. Shortly before oral argument, the Court of Ap peals sua sponte ordered briefing on the question whether §411(a) deprives federal courts of subject-matter jurisdic tion over infringement claims involving unregistered copyrights. All parties filed briefs asserting that the District Court had subject-matter jurisdiction to approve the settlement agreement even though it included unreg istered works. Relying on two Circuit precedents holding that §411(a)’s registration requirement was jurisdictional, see 509 F. 3d, ness Concepts, Inc., 259 F. 3d 65, 72–73 (CA2 2001)), the Court of Appeals concluded that the District Court lacked jurisdiction to certify a class of claims arising from the infringement of unregistered works, and also lacked juris diction to approve a settlement with respect to those claims, 509 F. 3d, at 121 (citing “widespread agreement among the circuits that section 411(a) is jurisdictional”).2 Judge Walker dissented. He concluded “that §411(a) is more like the [nonjurisdictional] employee-numerosity (2006)]” than the jurisdictional statutory time limit in Accordingly, he reasoned that §411(a)’s registration re
quirement does not limit federal subject-matter jurisdic tion over infringement suits involving unregistered works. Ibid. We granted the owners’ and publishers’ petition for a writ of certiorari, and formulated the question presented to ask whether §411(a) restricts the subject-matter juris diction of the federal courts over copyright infringement actions. 555 U. S. ____ (2009). Because no party supports the Court of Appeals’ jurisdictional holding, we appointed an amicus curiae to defend the Court of Appeals’ judg ment.3 556 U. S. ____ (2009). We now reverse. “Jurisdiction” refers to “a court’s adjudicatory author ingly, the term “jurisdictional” properly applies only to “prescriptions delineating the classes of cases (subject matter jurisdiction) and the persons (personal jurisdic tion)” implicating that authority. Ibid.; see also Steel Co. (“subject-matter jurisdiction” refers to “the courts’ statu tory or constitutional power to adjudicate the case” (em U. S. 244, 274 (1994) (“[J]urisdictional statutes ‘speak to the power of the court rather than to the rights or obliga tions of the parties’ ” (quoting Republic Nat. Bank of Mi concurring))). While perhaps clear in theory, the distinction between jurisdictional conditions and claim-processing rules can be confusing in practice. Courts—including this Court—have sometimes mischaracterized claim-processing rules or
elements of a cause of action as jurisdictional limitations, particularly when that characterization was not central to the case, and thus did not require close analysis. See Arbaugh, supra, at 511–512 (citing examples); Steel Co., 523 U. S., at 91 (same). Our recent cases evince a marked desire to curtail such “drive-by jurisdictional rulings,” ibid., which too easily can miss the “critical difference[s]” between true jurisdictional conditions and nonjurisdic tional limitations on causes of action, Kontrick, supra, at 456; see also Arbaugh, 546 U. S., at 511. In light of the important distinctions between jurisdic tional prescriptions and claim-processing rules, see, e.g., id., at 514, we have encouraged federal courts and liti gants to “facilitat[e]” clarity by using the term “jurisdic tional” only when it is apposite, Kontrick, supra, at 455. In Arbaugh, we described the general approach to distin guish “jurisdictional” conditions from claim-processing requirements or elements of a claim: “If the Legislature clearly states that a threshold limi tation on a statute’s scope shall count as jurisdic tional, then courts and litigants will be duly in structed and will not be left to wrestle with the issue. But when Congress does not rank a statutory limita tion on coverage as jurisdictional, courts should treat the restriction as nonjurisdictional in character.” 546 U. S., at 515–516 (citation and footnote omitted). The plaintiff in Arbaugh brought a claim under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which makes it unlawful “for an employer . . . to discriminate,” inter alia, on the basis of sex. 42 U. S. C. §2000e–2(a)(1). But employees can bring Title VII claims only against employers that have “fifteen or more employees.” §2000e(b). Arbaugh addressed whether that employee numerosity requirement “affects federal-court subject-matter jurisdiction or, in stead, delineates a substantive ingredient of a Title VII
claim for relief.” 546 U. S., at 503. We held that it does the latter. Our holding turned principally on our examination of the text of §2000e(b), the section in which Title VII’s nu merosity requirement appears. Section 2000e(b) does not “clearly stat[e]” that the employee numerosity threshold on Title VII’s scope “count[s] as jurisdictional.” Id., at 515–516, and n. 11. And nothing in our prior Title VII cases compelled the conclusion that even though the nu merosity requirement lacks a clear jurisdictional label, it nonetheless imposed a jurisdictional limit. See id., at 511–513. Similarly, §2000e(b)’s text and structure did not demonstrate that Congress “rank[ed]” that requirement as jurisdictional. See id., at 513–516. As we observed, the employee numerosity requirement is located in a provision “separate” from §2000e–5(f)(3), Title VII’s jurisdiction granting section, distinguishing it from the “amount-in controversy threshold ingredient of subject-matter juris diction . . . in diversity-of-jurisdiction under 28 U. S. C. §1332.” Arbaugh, 546 U. S., at 514–515. Accordingly, the numerosity requirement could not fairly be read to “ ‘speak in jurisdictional terms or in any way refer to the jurisdic Trans World Airlines, Inc., 455 U. S. 385, 394 (1982)). We thus “refrain[ed] from” construing the numerosity re quirement to “constric[t] §1331 or Title VII’s jurisdictional provision.” Arbaugh, supra, at 515 (internal quotation marks omitted). We now apply this same approach to §411(a). Section 411(a) provides: “Except for an action brought for a violation of the rights of the author under section 106A(a), and sub ject to the provisions of subsection (b), no civil action for infringement of the copyright in any United States
work shall be instituted until preregistration or regis tration of the copyright claim has been made in accor dance with this title. In any case, however, where the deposit, application, and fee required for registration have been delivered to the Copyright Office in proper form and registration has been refused, the applicant is entitled to institute a civil action for infringement if notice thereof, with a copy of the complaint, is served on the Register of Copyrights. The Register may, at his or her option, become a party to the action with respect to the issue of registrability of the copyright claim by entering an appearance within sixty days af ter such service, but the Register’s failure to become a party shall not deprive the court of jurisdiction to de termine that issue.” We must consider whether §411(a) “clearly states” that its registration requirement is “jurisdictional.” Arbaugh, supra, at 515. It does not. Amicus disagrees, pointing to the presence of the word “jurisdiction” in the last sentence of §411(a) and contending that the use of the term there indicates the jurisdictional cast of §411(a)’s first sentence as well. Brief for Court-Appointed Amicus Curiae in support of Judgment Below 18 (hereinafter Amicus Brief). But this reference to “jurisdiction” cannot bear the weight that amicus places upon it. The sentence upon which amicus relies states: “The Register [of Copyrights] may, at his or her op tion, become a party to the [copyright infringement] action with respect to the issue of registrability of the copyright claim by entering an appearance within sixty days after such service, but the Register’s failure to become a party shall not deprive the court of juris diction to determine that issue.” §411(a) (emphasis added). Congress added this sentence to the Act in 1976, 90
Stat. 2583, to clarify that a federal court can determine “the issue of registrability of the copyright claim” even if the Register does not appear in the infringement suit. That clarification was necessary because courts had inter preted §411(a)’s precursor provision,4 which imposed a similar registration requirement, as prohibiting copyright owners who had been refused registration by the Register of Copyrights from suing for infringement until the owners first sought mandamus against the Register. See Watch Co., 260 F. 2d 637, 640–641 (CA2 1958) (construing §411(a)’s precursor). The 1976 amendment made it clear that a federal court plainly has adjudicatory authority to determine “that issue,” §411(a) (emphasis added)—i.e., the issue of registrability—regardless of whether the Register is a party to the infringement suit. The word “jurisdic tion,” as used here, thus says nothing about whether a federal court has subject-matter jurisdiction to adjudicate claims for infringement of unregistered works. Moreover, §411(a)’s registration requirement, like Title VII’s numerosity requirement, is located in a provision “separate” from those granting federal courts subject matter jurisdiction over those respective claims. See Arbaugh, supra, at 514–515. Federal district courts have subject-matter jurisdiction over copyright infringement actions based on 28 U. S. C. §§1331 and 1338. But neither §1331, which confers subject-matter jurisdiction over questions of federal law, nor §1338(a), which is specific to copyright claims, conditions its jurisdictional grant on whether copyright holders have registered their works before suing for infringement. Cf. Arbaugh, supra, at 515 (“Title VII’s jurisdictional provision” does not “specif[y] any threshold ingredient akin to 28 U. S. C. §1332’s mone tary floor”).
Nor does any other factor suggest that 17 U. S. C. A. §411(a)’s registration requirement can be read to “ ‘speak in jurisdictional terms or refer in any way to the jurisdic tion of the district courts.’ ” Arbaugh, 546 U. S., at 515 (quoting Zipes, 455 U. S., at 394). First, and most signifi cantly, §411(a) expressly allows courts to adjudicate in fringement claims involving unregistered works in three circumstances: where the work is not a U. S. work, where the infringement claim concerns rights of attribution and integrity under §106A, or where the holder attempted to register the work and registration was refused. Sepa rately, §411(c) permits courts to adjudicate infringement actions over certain kinds of unregistered works where the author “declare[s] an intention to secure copyright in the work” and “makes registration for the work, if required by subsection (a), within three months after [the work’s] first transmission.” 17 U. S. C. §§411(c)(1)–(2). It would be at least unusual to ascribe jurisdictional significance to a condition subject to these sorts of exceptions.5 That the numerosity requirement in Arbaugh could be considered an element of a Title VII claim, rather than a prerequisite to initiating a lawsuit, does not change this conclusion, as our decision in Zipes demonstrates. Zipes (upon which Arbaugh relied) held that Title VII’s require ment that sex-discrimination claimants timely file a dis crimination charge with the EEOC before filing a civil action in federal court was nonjurisdictional. See 455 U. S., at 393; 42 U. S. C. §2000e–5(f)(1) (establishing
specific time periods within which a discrimination claim ant must file a lawsuit after filing a charge with the EEOC). A statutory condition that requires a party to take some action before filing a lawsuit is not automati cally “a jurisdictional prerequisite to suit.” Zipes, 455 U. S., at 393 (emphasis added). Rather, the jurisdictional analysis must focus on the “legal character” of the re quirement, id., at 395, which we discerned by looking to the condition’s text, context, and relevant historical treat ment, id., at 393–395; see also National Railroad Passen We similarly have treated as nonjurisdictional other types of threshold requirements that claimants must complete, or exhaust, before filing a lawsuit.6 The registration requirement in 17 U. S. C. A. §411(a) fits in this mold. Section 411(a) imposes a precondition to filing a claim that is not clearly labeled jurisdictional, is not located in a jurisdiction-granting provision, and ad mits of congressionally authorized exceptions. See §§411(a)–(c). Section 411(a) thus imposes a type of pre condition to suit that supports nonjurisdictional treatment under our precedents. Amicus insists that our decision in Bowles, 551 U. S. 205, compels a conclusion contrary to the one we reach today. Amicus cites Bowles for the proposition that where Congress did not explicitly label a statutory condition as
jurisdictional, a court nevertheless should treat it as such if that is how the condition consistently has been inter preted and if Congress has not disturbed that interpreta tion. Amicus Brief 26. Specifically, amicus relies on a footnote in Bowles to argue that here, as in Bowles, it would be improper to characterize the statutory condition as nonjurisdictional because doing so would override “ ‘a century’s worth of precedent’ ” treating §411(a)’s registra tion requirement as jurisdictional. Amicus Brief 26 (quot ing Bowles, supra, at 209, n. 2). This argument focuses on the result in Bowles, rather than on the analysis we employed. Bowles did not hold that any statutory condition devoid of an express jurisdictional label should be treated as jurisdictional simply because courts have long treated it as such. Nor did it hold that all statutory conditions impos ing a time limit should be considered jurisdictional.7
Rather, Bowles stands for the proposition that context, including this Court’s interpretation of similar provisions in many years past, is relevant to whether a statute ranks a requirement as jurisdictional. In Bowles, we considered 28 U. S. C. §2107, which re quires parties in a civil action to file a notice of appeal within 30 days of the judgment being appealed, and Rule 4 of the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure, which “car ries §2107 into practice.” 551 U. S., at 208. After analyz ing §2107’s specific language and this Court’s historical treatment of the type of limitation §2107 imposes (i.e., statutory deadlines for filing appeals), we concluded that Congress had ranked the statutory condition as jurisdic tional. Our focus in Bowles on the historical treatment of statutory conditions for taking an appeal is thus consis tent with the Arbaugh framework. Indeed, Bowles em phasized that this Court had long treated such conditions as jurisdictional, including in statutes other than §2107, and specifically in statutes that predated the creation of the courts of appeals. See 551 U. S., at 209–210, and n. 2. Bowles therefore demonstrates that the relevant ques tion here is not (as amicus puts it) whether §411(a) itself has long been labeled jurisdictional, but whether the type of limitation that §411(a) imposes is one that is properly ranked as jurisdictional absent an express designation. The statutory limitation in Bowles was of a type that we had long held did “speak in jurisdictional terms” even absent a “jurisdictional” label, and nothing about §2107’s text or context, or the historical treatment of that type of limitation, justified a departure from this view. That was not the case, however, for the types of conditions in Zipes and Arbaugh. Here, that same analysis leads us to conclude that §411(a) does not implicate the subject-matter jurisdiction 
of federal courts. Although §411(a)’s historical treatment as “jurisdictional” is a factor in the analysis, it is not dispositive. The other factors discussed above demon strate that §411(a)’s registration requirement is more analogous to the nonjurisdictional conditions we consid ered in Zipes and Arbaugh than to the statutory time limit at issue in Bowles.8 We thus conclude that §411(a)’s regis tration requirement is nonjurisdictional, notwithstanding its prior jurisdictional treatment.9 Amicus argues that even if §411(a) is nonjurisdictional, we should nonetheless affirm on estoppel grounds the Court of Appeals’ judgment vacating the District Court’s order approving the settlement and dismissing the case. According to amicus, petitioners asserted previously in these proceedings that copyright registration was jurisdic tional, and this assertion should estop them from now asserting a right to waive objections to the authors’ failure to register. Amicus urges us to prevent the parties “from ‘playing fast and loose with the courts’ by ‘deliberately changing positions according to the exigencies of the mo
Maine, 532 U. S. 742, 750 (2001)). We agree that some statements in the parties’ submis sions to the District Court and the Court of Appeals are in tension with their arguments here. But we decline to apply judicial estoppel. As we explained in New Hamp shire, that doctrine typically applies when, among other things, a “party has succeeded in persuading a court to accept that party’s earlier position, so that judicial accep tance of an inconsistent position in a later proceeding would create the perception that either the first or the second court was misled.” Id., at 750 (internal quotation marks omitted). Such circumstances do not exist here for two reasons. First, the parties made their prior statements when nego tiating or defending the settlement agreement. We do not fault the parties’ lawyers for invoking in the negotiations binding Circuit precedent that supported their clients’ positions. Perhaps more importantly, in approving the settlement, the District Court did not adopt petitioners’ interpretation of §411(a) as jurisdictional. Second, when the Court of Appeals asked petitioners to brief whether §411(a) restricted the District Court’s subject-matter jurisdiction, they argued that it did not, and the Court of Appeals rejected their arguments. See App. to Reply Brief for Petitioners 3a–5a, and n. 2. Accepting petitioners’ arguments here thus cannot create “inconsistent court determinations” in their favor. New Hampshire, supra, at 751 (internal quotation marks omitted). We therefore hold that the District Court had authority to adjudicate the parties’ request to approve their settlement. Our holding that §411(a) does not restrict a federal court’s subject-matter jurisdiction precludes the need for us to address the parties’ alternative arguments as to
whether the District Court had authority to approve the settlement even under the Court of Appeals’ erroneous reading of §411. In concluding that the District Court had jurisdiction to approve the settlement, we express no opinion on the settlement’s merits. We also decline to address whether §411(a)’s registra tion requirement is a mandatory precondition to suit nia, 530 U. S. 392, 412–413 (2000) (res judicata defense); County, 493 U. S. 20, 26, 31 (1989) (Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 notice provision)—district courts may or should enforce sua sponte by dismissing copyright infringement claims involving unregistered works. * * * We reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit and remand this case for proceedings consistent with this opinion. It is so ordered. JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR took no part in the consideration or decision of this case.
——————
1 Other

sections of the Act—principally §§408–410—detail the regis
tration process, and establish remedial incentives to encourage copy
right holders to register their works, see, e.g., §410(c); 17 U. S. C. A.
§412 (2005 ed. and Supp. 2009).


——————
2 See

La Resolana Architects, PA v. Clay Realtors Angel Fire, 416
F. 3d 1195, 1200–1201 (CA10 2005); Positive Black Talk Inc. v. Cash
Money Records Inc., 394 F. 3d 357, 365 (CA5 2004); Xoom, Inc. v.
Imageline, Inc., 323 F. 3d 279, 283 (CA4 2003); Murray Hill Publica
tions, Inc. v. ABC Communications, Inc., 264 F. 3d 622, 630, and n. 1
(CA6 2001); Brewer-Giorgio v. Producers Video, Inc., 216 F. 3d 1281,
1285 (CA11 2000); Data Gen. Corp. v. Grumman Systems Support
Corp., 36 F. 3d 1147, 1163 (CA1 1994).


——————
3 We appointed Deborah Jones Merritt to brief and argue the case, as
amicus curiae, in support of the Court of Appeals’ judgment. Ms.
Merritt has ably discharged her assigned responsibilities.


——————
4 See

Act of Mar. 4, 1909, §12, 35 Stat. 1078.


——————
5 Cf.

Zipes, 455 U. S., at 393–394, 397 (relying on the fact that Con
gress had “approved” at least some cases awarding Title VII relief to
claimants who had not complied with the statute’s Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC) filing requirement in holding that the
filing requirement was not a jurisdictional prerequisite to suit); United
States v. Cotton, 535 U. S. 625, 630 (2002) (“[J]urisdiction” properly
refers to a court’s power to hear a case, a matter that “can never be
forfeited or waived”).


——————
6 See Jones v. Bock, 549 U. S. 199, 211 (2007) (treating the adminis
trative exhaustion requirement of the Prison Litigation Reform Act of
1995 (PLRA)—which states that “no action shall be brought with
respect to prison conditions under §1983 of this title, or any other
Federal law, by a prisoner . . . until such administrative remedies as
are available are exhausted,” 42 U. S. C. §1997e(a)—as an affirmative
defense even though “[t]here is no question that exhaustion is manda
tory under the PLRA and that unexhausted claims cannot be brought
in court”); Woodford v. Ngo, 548 U. S. 81, 93 (2006) (same).


——————
7 Bowles, for example, distinguished Scarborough v. Principi, 541
U. S. 401 (2004), which characterized as nonjurisdictional an express
statutory time limit for initiating postjudgment proceedings for attor
ney’s fees under the Equal Access to Justice Act. See 551 U. S., at 211.
As we explained, the time limit in Scarborough “concerned ‘a mode of
relief . . . ancillary to the judgment of a court’ that already had plenary
jurisdiction.” 551 U. S., at 211 (quoting Scarborough, supra, at 413;
(emphasis added)). Bowles also distinguished Kontrick v. Ryan, 540
U. S. 443 (2004), and Eberhart v. United States, 546 U. S. 12 (2005) (per
curiam), as cases in which the Court properly held that certain time
limits were nonjurisdictional because they were imposed by rules that
did not purport to have any jurisdictional significance. See 551 U. S.,
at 210–211. Kontrick involved “time constraints applicable to objec
tions to discharge” in bankruptcy proceedings. 540 U. S., at 453. In
that case, we first examined 28 U. S. C. §157(b)(2)(J), the statute
“conferring jurisdiction over objections to discharge,” and observed that
it did not contain a timeliness requirement. Kontrick, 540 U. S., at 453.
Rather, the “time constraints applicable to objections to discharge”
were contained in the Bankruptcy Rules, which expressly state that
they “ ‘shall not be construed to extend or limit the jurisdiction of the
courts.’ ” See ibid. (quoting Fed. Rule Bkrtcy. Proc. 9030). Eberhart, in
turn, treated as nonjurisdictional certain rules that the Court held


—————— 

“closely parallel[ed]” those in Kontrick. 546 U. S., at 15. 



——————
8 This conclusion mirrors our holding in Zipes that Title VII’s EEOC
filing requirement was nonjurisdictional, even though some of our own
decisions had characterized it as jurisdictional. See 455 U. S., at 395
(noting that “the legal character of the requirement was not at issue in
those” earlier cases); see also National Railroad Passenger Corporation
v. Morgan, 536 U. S. 101, 109, 121 (2002) (relying on the analysis in
Zipes).
9 Amicus’ remaining jurisdictional argument—that the policy goals
underlying copyright registration support construing §411(a)’s registra
tion provisions as jurisdictional, see Amicus Brief 45—is similarly
unavailing. We do not agree that a condition should be ranked as
jurisdictional merely because it promotes important congressional
objectives. See Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp., 546 U. S. 500, 504, 515–516
(2006) (holding that Title VII’s numerosity requirement is nonjurisdic
tional even though it serves the important policy goal of “spar[ing] very
small businesses from Title VII liability”).

