Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Per Curiam

The jurors in Mitts’s case could not have plausibly
thought that if they declined to recommend the death
penalty Mitts would “escape all penalties for his alleged
participation in the crime.” Beck, supra, at 629. They had
just convicted him on two counts of aggravated murder
and two counts of attempted murder. They were specifi
cally instructed that if they did not find that the aggravat
ing factors outweighed the mitigating factors—and there
fore did not recommend the death penalty—they would
choose from two life sentence options. There is accord
ingly no reason to believe that the jurors in this case,
unlike the jurors in Beck, could have been improperly
influenced by a fear that a decision short of death would
have resulted in Mitts walking free.
We all but decided the question presented here in
Spisak itself. After rejecting the contention that the Ohio
instructions were contrary to Mills, we noted that “the
Court of Appeals found the jury instructions unconstitu
tional for an additional reason, that the instructions ‘re
quire[d] the jury to unanimously reject a death sentence
before considering other sentencing alternatives.’ ” 558
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 9) (quoting Spisak v. Mitchell, 465
F. 3d 684, 709 (CA6 2006)). That is essentially the Beck
claim presented here. See 620 F. 3d, at 658 (holding that
a “jury instruction violates due process if it requires a
mandatory death penalty sentence that can only be
avoided by an acquittal before the jury has an opportunity
to consider life imprisonment”). We rejected that claim in
Spisak under AEDPA, noting that “[w]e have not . . .
previously held jury instructions unconstitutional for this
reason.” 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 9). Although neither
the parties nor the courts below in Spisak had cited Beck,
a separate concurrence in Spisak would have struck down
the instructions in reliance on that decision. See 558
U. S., at ___ (Stevens, J., concurring in part and concur
ring in judgment) (slip op., at 3–6). The Court nonetheless

