Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Per Curiam

“risk of an unwarranted conviction” because it “interjects
irrelevant considerations into the factfinding process,
diverting the jury’s attention from the central issue of
whether the State has satisfied its burden of proving
beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant is guilty of a
capital crime.” Id., at 638, 642. “[F]orcing the jury to
choose between conviction on the capital offense and ac
quittal,” we observed, “may encourage the jury to convict
for an impermissible reason—its belief that the defendant
is guilty of some serious crime and should be punished,”
even when there is “some doubt with respect to an ele
ment” of the capital offense. Id., at 632, 642, 637. Be
cause the scheme in Beck created a danger that the jury
would resolve any doubts in favor of conviction, we con
cluded that it violated due process. See id., at 638, 643.
According to the Court of Appeals below, the penalty
phase instructions given at Mitts’s trial—and the Supreme
Court of Ohio decision upholding their use—were “con
trary to” Beck, because they “interposed before the jury
the same false choice” that our holding in Beck prohibits.
620 F. 3d, at 658, 657 (internal quotation marks omitted).
Referring to the instructions as “acquittal-first,” the Court
of Appeals stated that they impermissibly required the
jury to first decide whether to “acquit” Mitts of the death
penalty before considering “mercy and some form of life
imprisonment.” Id., at 656–657. Interpreting Beck to
stand for the proposition that “a jury instruction violates
due process if it requires a mandatory death penalty sen
tence that can only be avoided by an acquittal before the
jury has an opportunity to consider life imprisonment,” the
Court of Appeals concluded that the instructions given
during the penalty phase of Mitts’s trial unconstitutionally
“deprived the jury of a meaningful opportunity to con
sider” a life sentence. 620 F. 3d, at 658, 657 (internal
quotation marks omitted).
The instructions here are surely not invalid under our

