10

BOND v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

a State by ensuring that laws enacted in excess of dele­
gated governmental power cannot direct or control their
actions. See ibid. By denying any one government com­
plete jurisdiction over all the concerns of public life, feder­
alism protects the liberty of the individual from arbitrary
power. When government acts in excess of its lawful
powers, that liberty is at stake.
The limitations that federalism entails are not therefore
a matter of rights belonging only to the States. States are
not the sole intended beneficiaries of federalism. See New
York, supra, at 181. An individual has a direct interest in
objecting to laws that upset the constitutional balance
between the National Government and the States when
the enforcement of those laws causes injury that is con­
crete, particular, and redressable. Fidelity to principles of
federalism is not for the States alone to vindicate.
The recognition of an injured person’s standing to object
to a violation of a constitutional principle that allocates
power within government is illustrated, in an analogous
context, by cases in which individuals sustain discrete,
justiciable injury from actions that transgress separation­
of-powers limitations. Separation-of-powers principles are
intended, in part, to protect each branch of government
from incursion by the others. Yet the dynamic between
and among the branches is not the only object of the Con­
stitution’s concern. The structural principles secured by
the separation of powers protect the individual as well.
In the precedents of this Court, the claims of individu­
als—not of Government departments—have been the
principal source of judicial decisions concerning separation
of powers and checks and balances. For example, the re­
quirement that a bill enacted by Congress be presented
to the President for signature before it can become law
gives the President a check over Congress’ exercise of
legislative power. See U. S. Const., Art. I, §7. Yet indi­
viduals, too, are protected by the operations of separation

