(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BOND v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 09–1227. Argued February 22, 2011—Decided June 16, 2011
When petitioner Bond discovered that her close friend was pregnant by
Bond’s husband, she began harassing the woman. The woman suf
fered a minor burn after Bond put caustic substances on objects the
woman was likely to touch. Bond was indicted for violating 18
U. S. C. §229, which forbids knowing possession or use, for nonpeace
ful purposes, of a chemical that “can cause death, temporary inca
pacitation or permanent harm to humans,” §§229(a); 229F(1); (7); (8),
and which is part of a federal Act implementing a chemical weapons
treaty ratified by the United States. The District Court denied
Bond’s motion to dismiss the §229 charges on the ground that the
statute exceeded Congress’ constitutional authority to enact. She en
tered a conditional guilty plea, reserving the right to appeal the rul
ing on the statute’s validity. She did just that, renewing her Tenth
Amendment claim. The Third Circuit, however, accepted the Gov
ernment’s position that she lacked standing. The Government has
since changed its view on Bond’s standing.
Held: Bond has standing to challenge the federal statute on grounds
that the measure interferes with the powers reserved to States.
Pp. 3–14.
(a) The Third Circuit relied on a single sentence in Tennessee Elec.
Power Co. v. TVA, 306 U. S. 118. Pp. 3–8.
(1) The Court has disapproved of Tennessee Electric as authorita
tive for purposes of Article III’s case-or-controversy requirement. See
Association of Data Processing Service Organizations, Inc. v. Camp,
397 U. S. 150, 152–154. Here, Article III’s standing requirement had
no bearing on Bond’s capacity to assert defenses in the District Court.
And Article III’s prerequisites are met with regard to her standing to
appeal. Pp. 3–5.

