Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

are derived.
Federalism has more than one dynamic. It is true that
the federal structure serves to grant and delimit the pre­
rogatives and responsibilities of the States and the Na­
tional Government vis-à-vis one another. The allocation
of powers in our federal system preserves the integrity,
dignity, and residual sovereignty of the States. The fed­
eral balance is, in part, an end in itself, to ensure that
States function as political entities in their own right.
But that is not its exclusive sphere of operation. Feder­
alism is more than an exercise in setting the boundary
between different institutions of government for their own
integrity. “State sovereignty is not just an end in itself:
‘Rather, federalism secures to citizens the liberties that
derive from the diffusion of sovereign power.’ ” New York v.
United States, 505 U. S. 144, 181 (1992) (quoting Coleman
v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, 759 (1991) (Blackmun, J.,
dissenting)).
Some of these liberties are of a political character. The
federal structure allows local policies “more sensitive to
the diverse needs of a heterogeneous society,” permits
“innovation and experimentation,” enables greater citizen
“involvement in democratic processes,” and makes gov­
ernment “more responsive by putting the States in com­
petition for a mobile citizenry.” Gregory v. Ashcroft, 501
U. S. 452, 458 (1991). Federalism secures the freedom of
the individual. It allows States to respond, through the
enactment of positive law, to the initiative of those who
seek a voice in shaping the destiny of their own times
without having to rely solely upon the political processes
that control a remote central power. True, of course, these
objects cannot be vindicated by the Judiciary in the ab­
sence of a proper case or controversy; but the individual
liberty secured by federalism is not simply derivative of
the rights of the States.
Federalism also protects the liberty of all persons within

