2

BOND v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
(2) Tennessee Electric is also irrelevant with respect to prudential
standing rules. There, the Court declined to reach the merits where
private power companies sought to enjoin the federally chartered
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) from producing and selling electric
power, claiming that the statute creating the TVA exceeded the Na
tional Government’s powers in violation of the Tenth Amendment. In
doing so, the Court repeatedly stated that the problem with the
power companies’ suit was a lack of “standing” or a “cause of action,”
treating those concepts as interchangeable. E.g., 306 U. S., at 139.
The question whether a plaintiff states a claim for relief typically
“goes to the merits” of a case, however, not to the dispute’s justiciabil
ity, Steel Co. v. Citizens for Better Environment, 523 U. S. 83, 92, and
conflation of the two concepts can cause confusion. This happened
with Tennessee Electric’s Tenth Amendment discussion. The state
ment on which the Third Circuit relied here, see 306 U. S., at 144,
should be read to refer to the absence of a cause of action for injury
caused by economic competition. To the extent the statement might
instead be read to suggest a private party does not have standing to
raise a Tenth Amendment issue, it is inconsistent with this Court’s
later precedents and should be deemed neither controlling nor in
structive on the issue of standing as that term is now defined and ap
plied. Pp. 5–8.
(b) Amicus, appointed to defend the judgment, contends that for
Bond to argue the National Government has interfered with state
sovereignty in violation of the Tenth Amendment is to assert only a
State’s legal rights and interests. But in arguing that the Govern
ment has acted in excess of the authority that federalism defines,
Bond seeks to vindicate her own constitutional interests. Pp. 8–14.
(1) Federalism has more than one dynamic. In allocating powers
between the States and National Government, federalism “ ‘secures
to citizens the liberties that derive from the diffusion of sovereign
power,’ ” New York v. United States, 505 U. S. 144, 181. It enables
States to enact positive law in response to the initiative of those who
seek a voice in shaping the destiny of their own times, and it protects
the liberty of all persons within a State by ensuring that law enacted
in excess of delegated governmental power cannot direct or control
their actions. See Gregory v. Ashcroft, 501 U. S. 452, 458. Federal
ism’s limitations are not therefore a matter of rights belonging only
to the States. In a proper case, a litigant may challenge a law as en
acted in contravention of federalism, just as injured individuals may
challenge actions that transgress, e.g., separation-of-powers limita
tions, see, e.g., INS v. Chadha, 462 U. S. 919. The claim need not de
pend on the vicarious assertion of a State’s constitutional interests,
even if those interests are also implicated. Pp. 8–12.

