Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

third of her federal sentence.
There is no basis to support the Government’s pro­
posed distinction between different federalism arguments
for purposes of prudential standing rules. The principles of limited national powers and state sovereignty are
intertwined. While neither originates in the Tenth Amend­
ment, both are expressed by it. Impermissible interfer­
ence with state sovereignty is not within the enumerated
powers of the National Government, see New York, 505
U. S., at 155–159, and action that exceeds the National
Government’s enumerated powers undermines the sover­
eign interests of States. See United States v. Lopez, 514
U. S. 549, 564 (1995). The unconstitutional action can
cause concomitant injury to persons in individual cases.
An individual who challenges federal action on these
grounds is, of course, subject to the Article III require­
ments, as well as prudential rules, applicable to all liti­
gants and claims. Individuals have “no standing to com­
plain simply that their Government is violating the law.”
Allen v. Wright, 468 U. S. 737, 755 (1984). It is not
enough that a litigant “suffers in some indefinite way in
common with people generally.” Frothingham v. Mellon,
262 U. S. 447, 488 (1923) (decided with Massachusetts v.
Mellon). If, in connection with the claim being asserted, a
litigant who commences suit fails to show actual or immi­
nent harm that is concrete and particular, fairly traceable
to the conduct complained of, and likely to be redressed by
a favorable decision, the Federal Judiciary cannot hear the
claim. Lujan, 504 U. S., at 560–561. These requirements
must be satisfied before an individual may assert a consti­
tutional claim; and in some instances, the result may be
that a State is the only entity capable of demonstrating
the requisite injury.
In this case, however, where the litigant is a party to an
otherwise justiciable case or controversy, she is not forbid­
den to object that her injury results from disregard of the

