Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

had no bearing upon Bond’s capacity to assert defenses in
the District Court. As for Bond’s standing to appeal, it is
clear Article III’s prerequisites are met. Bond’s challenge
to her conviction and sentence “satisfies the case-or­
controversy requirement, because the incarceration . . .
constitutes a concrete injury, caused by the conviction and
redressable by invalidation of the conviction.” Spencer v.
Kemna, 523 U. S. 1, 7 (1998).
To resolve the case, this Court must consider next
whether Tennessee Electric is irrelevant with respect to
prudential rules of standing as well. The question in
Tennessee Electric was whether a group of private power
companies could bring suit to enjoin the federally char­
tered Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) from producing
and selling electric power. It was conceded that competi­
tion from the TVA would “inflict substantial damage” upon
the power companies. 306 U. S., at 137. According to the
companies, the federal statute authorizing the creation
and operation of the TVA was invalid because, among
other reasons, it exceeded the powers of the National
Government in violation of the Tenth Amendment.
Declining to reach the merits, the Court concluded the
power companies’ lawsuit should be dismissed. It ex­
plained that the suit was premised on the principle that a
person threatened with injury by conduct “which, but for
statutory authority for its performance, would be a viola­
tion of his legal rights” could request an injunction from a
court of equity and by this means test the validity of the
statute. Ibid. But the Court concluded that the TVA,
even if it were shorn of congressional statutory authority,
had done nothing more than compete as a supplier of
electricity. Id., at 138. And since state law did not pur­
port to grant any of the power companies a monopoly,
there was no basis for a suit in which the TVA might be
forced to invoke its congressional authorization. Id., at
138–143.

