6

BOND v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

In that part of its analysis, and throughout its opinion,
the Tennessee Electric Court stated that the problem with
the power companies’ suit was a lack of “standing” or a
“cause of action.” It treated those concepts as inter­
changeable. E.g., id., at 139 (no “standing” because no
“legal cause of complaint”); id., at 139–140 (no “standing”
without “a cause of action or a right to sue”); id., at 142
(“no standing,” no “right to sue for an injunction”); id.,
at 144 (no Tenth Amendment “standing” and no Ninth
Amendment “cause of action” for same reasons); see also
Bellia, Article III and the Cause of Action, 89 Iowa L. Rev.
777, 826–830 (2004).
Even though decisions since Tennessee Electric have
been careful to use the terms “cause of action” and “stand­
ing” with more precision, the distinct concepts can be
difficult to keep separate. If, for instance, the person
alleging injury is remote from the zone of interests a stat­
ute protects, whether there is a legal injury at all and
whether the particular litigant is one who may assert it
can involve similar inquiries. Steel Co. v. Citizens for
Better Environment, 523 U. S. 83, 96–97, and n. 2 (1998)
(noting that statutory standing and the existence of a
cause of action are “closely connected” and “sometimes
identical” questions).
Still, the question whether a plaintiff states a claim for
relief “goes to the merits” in the typical case, not the justi­
ciability of a dispute, id., at 92, and conflation of the two
concepts can cause confusion. This is the case with the
Tenth Amendment discussion in Tennessee Electric. The
Tennessee Electric Court noted that “[a] distinct ground
upon which standing to maintain the suit is said to rest is
that the acts of the Authority cannot be upheld without
permitting federal regulation of purely local matters re­
served to the states or the people by the Tenth Amend­
ment.” 306 U. S., at 143. The Court rejected the argu­
ment, however, concluding the Tenth Amendment did not

