6

CREDIT SUISSE SECURITIES (USA) LLC v. SIMMONDS
Opinion of the Court

ery of the fraud “ ‘where the party injured by the fraud
remains in ignorance of it without any fault or want of
diligence or care on his part.’ ” Lampf, supra, at 363 (quoting Bailey v. Glover, 21 Wall. 342, 348 (1875); emphasis
added). Allowing tolling to continue beyond the point at
which a §16(b) plaintiff is aware, or should have been
aware, of the facts underlying the claim would quite certainly be inequitable and inconsistent with the general
purpose of statutes of limitations: “to protect defendants
against stale or unduly delayed claims.” John R. Sand &
Gravel Co. v. United States, 552 U. S. 130, 133 (2008).
The inequity of the Whittaker rule is especially apparent
in a case such as this, where the theory of §16(b) liability
of underwriters is so novel that petitioners can plausibly
claim that they were not aware they were required to file a
§16(a) statement. And where they disclaim the necessity
of filing, the Whittaker rule compels them either to file or
to face the prospect of §16(b) litigation in perpetuity.
Simmonds has acknowledged that “under her theory she
could buy stocks in companies who had IPOs 20 years ago
and bring claims for short-swing transactions if the underwriters had undervalued a stock.” 602 F. Supp. 2d, at
1218. The potential for such endless tolling in cases in
which a reasonably diligent plaintiff would know of the
facts underlying the action is out of step with the purpose
of limitations periods in general. And it is especially at
odds with a provision that imposes strict liability on putative insiders, see Gollust, 501 U. S., at 122. Had Congress
intended this result, it most certainly would have said so.
Simmonds maintains that failing to apply the Whittaker
rule would obstruct Congress’s objective of curbing shortswing speculation by corporate insiders. This objective,
according to Simmonds, is served by §16(a) statements,
which “provide the information necessary to trigger §16(b)
enforcement.” Brief for Respondent 24. Simmonds—like
the Ninth Circuit in Whittaker—disregards the most

