Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

glaring indication that Congress did not intend that the
limitations period be categorically tolled until the statement is filed: The limitations provision does not say so.
This fact alone is reason enough to reject a departure from
settled equitable-tolling principles. Moreover, §16’s purpose is fully served by the rules outlined above, under
which the limitations period would not expire until two
years after a reasonably diligent plaintiff would have
learned the facts underlying a §16(b) action. The usual
equitable-tolling inquiry will thus take account of the
unavailability of sources of information other than the
§16(a) filing. Cf., e.g., Ruth v. Unifund CCR Partners, 604
F. 3d 908, 911–913 (CA6 2010); Santos ex rel. Beato v.
United States, 559 F. 3d 189, 202–203 (CA3 2009). The
oddity of Simmonds’ position is well demonstrated by
the circumstances of this case. Under the Whittaker rule,
because petitioners have yet to file §16(a) statements (as
noted earlier they do not think themselves subject to that
requirement), Simmonds still has two years to bring suit,
even though she is so well aware of her alleged cause of
action that she has already sued. If §16(a) statements
were, as Simmonds suggests, indispensable to a party’s
ability to sue, Simmonds would not be here.
Simmonds also asserts that application of established
equitable-tolling doctrine in this context would be inconsistent with Congress’s intention to establish in §16
a clear rule that is capable of “mechanical application.”
Brief for Respondent 57 (internal quotation marks omitted). Equitable tolling, after all, involves fact-intensive
disputes “about what the notice was, where it was disseminated, who received it, when it was received, and whether
it provides sufficient notice of relevant Section 16(a) facts.”
Id, at 56–57. Of course this argument counsels just as
much in favor of the “statute of repose” rule that petitioners urge (that is, no tolling whatever) as it does in favor of
the Whittaker rule. No tolling is certainly an easily ad-

