8

CREDIT SUISSE SECURITIES (USA) LLC v. SIMMONDS
Opinion of the Court

ministrable bright-line rule. And assuming some form of
tolling does apply, it is preferable to apply that form which
Congress was certainly aware of, as opposed to the rule
the Ninth Circuit has fashioned.7 See Meyer v. Holley, 537
U. S. 280, 286 (2003) (“Congress’ silence, while permitting
an inference that Congress intended to apply ordinary
background tort principles, cannot show that it intended
to apply an unusual modification of those rules”).
*
*
*
Having determined that §16(b)’s limitations period is
not tolled until the filing of a §16(a) statement, we remand
for the lower courts to consider how the usual rules of
equitable tolling apply to the facts of this case.8 We are
divided 4 to 4 concerning, and thus affirm without precedential effect, the Court of Appeals’ rejection of petitioners’
contention that §16(b) establishes a period of repose that
is not subject to tolling. The judgment of the Court of
Appeals is vacated, and the case is remanded for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE took no part in the consideration or
decision of this case.
——————
7 It is for this reason that we also reject the Second Circuit’s rule that
the 2-year period is tolled until the plaintiff “gets actual notice that a
person subject to Section 16(a) has realized specific short-swing profits
that are worth pursuing,” Litzler v. CC Investments, L. D. C., 362 F. 3d
203, 208 (2004). As that court itself recognized, this actual-notice rule
departs from usual equitable-tolling principles. See id., at 207.
8 The District Court said that “there is no dispute that all of the facts
giving rise to Ms. Simmonds’ complaints against [petitioners] were
known to the shareholders of the Issuer Defendants for at least five
years before these cases were filed,” 602 F. Supp. 2d, at 1217. The
Court of Appeals did not consider the accuracy of that statement, which
Simmonds disputes, Brief for Respondent 12, since it concluded the
period is tolled until a §16(a) statement is filed.

