2

CREDIT SUISSE SECURITIES (USA) LLC v. SIMMONDS
Opinion of the Court

that suits must be brought within “two years after the
date such profit was realized.”2 15 U. S. C. §78p(b).
In 2007, respondent Vanessa Simmonds filed 55 nearly
identical actions under §16(b) against financial institutions that had underwritten various initial public offerings
(IPOs) in the late 1990’s and 2000, including these petitioners.3 In a representative complaint, she alleged that
the underwriters and the issuers’ insiders employed various mechanisms to inflate the aftermarket price of the
——————
2 Section

16(b) provides in full:
“For the purpose of preventing the unfair use of information which
may have been obtained by such beneficial owner, director, or officer by
reason of his relationship to the issuer, any profit realized by him from
any purchase and sale, or any sale and purchase, of any equity security
of such issuer (other than an exempted security) or a security-based
swap agreement (as defined in section 206B of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley
Act) involving any such equity security within any period of less than
six months, unless such security or security-based swap agreement was
acquired in good faith in connection with a debt previously contracted,
shall inure to and be recoverable by the issuer, irrespective of any intention on the part of such beneficial owner, director, or officer in entering into such transaction of holding the security or security-based
swap agreement purchased or of not repurchasing the security or
security-based swap agreement sold for a period exceeding six months.
Suit to recover such profit may be instituted at law or in equity in any
court of competent jurisdiction by the issuer, or by the owner of any
security of the issuer in the name and in behalf of the issuer if the
issuer shall fail or refuse to bring such suit within sixty days after
request or shall fail diligently to prosecute the same thereafter; but no
such suit shall be brought more than two years after the date such
profit was realized. This subsection shall not be construed to cover any
transaction where such beneficial owner was not such both at the time
of the purchase and sale, or the sale and purchase, of the security or
security-based swap agreement (as defined in section 206B of the
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act) involved, or any transaction or transactions
which the [Securities and Exchange] Commission by rules and regulations may exempt as not comprehended within the purpose of this
subsection.” 15 U. S. C. §78p(b).
3 Simmonds also named the issuing companies as nominal defendants. In re: Section 16(b) Litigation, 602 F. Supp. 2d 1202, 1204 (WD
Wash. 2009).

