Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1224
_________________

UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. GRAYDON 

EARL COMSTOCK, JR., ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT

[May 17, 2010] 


JUSTICE ALITO, concurring in the judgment.
I am concerned about the breadth of the Court’s lan
guage, see ante, at 2–4 (KENNEDY, J., concurring in judg
ment), and the ambiguity of the standard that the Court
applies, see post, at 9 (THOMAS, J., dissenting), but I am
persuaded, on narrow grounds, that it was “necessary and
proper” for Congress to enact the statute at issue in this
case, 18 U. S. C. §4248, in order to “carr[y] into Execution”
powers specifically conferred on Congress by the Constitu
tion, see Art. I, §8, cl. 18.
Section 4248 was enacted to protect the public from
federal prisoners who suffer from “a serious mental ill
ness, abnormality, or disorder” and who, if released, would
have “serious difficulty in refraining from sexually violent
conduct or child molestation.”
See §§4247(a)(5), (6),
4248(d). Under this law, if neither the State of a pris
oner’s domicile nor the State in which the prisoner was
tried will assume the responsibility for the prisoner’s
“custody, care, and treatment,” the Federal Government is
authorized to undertake that responsibility. §4248(d).
The statute recognizes that, in many cases, no State will
assume the heavy financial burden of civilly committing a
dangerous federal prisoner who, as a result of lengthy
federal incarceration, no longer has any substantial ties to
any State.


2

UNITED STATES v. COMSTOCK
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

I entirely agree with the dissent that “[t]he Necessary
and Proper Clause empowers Congress to enact only those
laws that ‘carr[y] into Execution’ one or more of the federal
powers enumerated in the Constitution,” post, at 1, but
§4248 satisfies that requirement because it is a necessary
and proper means of carrying into execution the enumer
ated powers that support the federal criminal statutes
under which the affected prisoners were convicted. The
Necessary and Proper Clause provides the constitutional
authority for most federal criminal statutes. In other
words, most federal criminal statutes rest upon a congres
sional judgment that, in order to execute one or more of
the powers conferred on Congress, it is necessary and
proper to criminalize certain conduct, and in order to do
that it is obviously necessary and proper to provide for the
operation of a federal criminal justice system and a federal
prison system.
All of this has been recognized since the beginning of
our country. The First Congress enacted federal criminal
laws,1 created federal law enforcement and prosecutorial
positions,2 established a federal court system,3 provided
for the imprisonment of persons convicted of federal
crimes,4 and gave United States marshals the responsibil
——————
1 See,

e.g., ch. 9, 1 Stat. 112 (“An Act for the Punishment of certain
Crimes against the United States”).
2 Ch. 20, §35, id., at 92 (“[T]here shall be appointed in each district a
meet person learned in the law to act as attorney for the United States
in such district, . . . whose duty it shall be to prosecute in such district
all delinquents for crimes and offences, cognizable under the authority
of the United States”).
3 §1, id., at 73 (“An Act to establish the Judicial Courts of the United
States”).
4 See, e.g., §9, id., at 76–77 (providing that the federal district courts
shall have exclusive jurisdiction over “all crimes and offences that shall
be cognizable under the authority of the United States, . . . where no
other punishment than whipping, not exceeding thirty stripes, a fine
not exceeding one hundred dollars, or a term of imprisonment not


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

ity of securing federal prisoners.5
The only additional question presented here is whether,
in order to carry into execution the enumerated powers on
which the federal criminal laws rest, it is also necessary
and proper for Congress to protect the public from dangers
created by the federal criminal justice and prison systems.
In my view, the answer to that question is “yes.” Just as it
is necessary and proper for Congress to provide for the
apprehension of escaped federal prisoners, it is necessary
and proper for Congress to provide for the civil commit
ment of dangerous federal prisoners who would otherwise
escape civil commitment as a result of federal imprison
ment.
Some years ago, a distinguished study group created by
the Judicial Conference of the United States found that, in
a disturbing number of cases, no State was willing to
assume the financial burden of providing for the civil
commitment of federal prisoners who, if left at large after
the completion of their sentences, would present a danger
to any communities in which they chose to live or visit.
See ante, at 11; Greenwood v. United States, 350 U. S. 366,
373–374 (1956). These federal prisoners, having been held
——————
exceeding six months, is to be inflicted”); see also J. Roberts, The
Federal Bureau of Prisons: Its Mission, Its History, and Its Partnership
With Probation and Pretrial Services, 61 Fed. Probation 53 (1997)
(explaining that federal prisoners were originally housed in state and
county facilities on a contract basis).
5 See ch. 20, §27, 1 Stat. 87 (“[A] marshal shall be appointed in and
for each district for the term of four years, . . . whose duty it shall be to
attend the district and circuit courts when sitting therein, . . . [a]nd to
execute throughout the district, all lawful precepts directed to him, and
issued under the authority of the United States”); id., at 88 (“[T]he
marshal shall be held answerable for the delivery to his successor of all
prisoners which may be in his custody at the time of his removal, or
when the term for which he is appointed shall expire, and for that
purpose may retain such prisoners in his custody until his successor
shall be appointed and qualified as the law directs”).


4

UNITED STATES v. COMSTOCK
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

for years in a federal prison, often had few ties to any
State; it was a matter of speculation where they would
choose to go upon release; and accordingly no State was
enthusiastic about volunteering to shoulder the burden of
civil commitment.
The Necessary and Proper Clause does not give Con
gress carte blanche. Although the term “necessary” does
not mean “absolutely necessary” or indispensable, the
term requires an “appropriate” link between a power
conferred by the Constitution and the law enacted by
Congress. See McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 415
(1819). And it is an obligation of this Court to enforce
compliance with that limitation. Id., at 423.
The law in question here satisfies that requirement.
This is not a case in which it is merely possible for a court
to think of a rational basis on which Congress might have
perceived an attenuated link between the powers underly
ing the federal criminal statutes and the challenged civil
commitment provision. Here, there is a substantial link to
Congress’ constitutional powers.
For this reason, I concur in the judgment that Congress
had the constitutional authority to enact 18 U. S. C.
§4248.

