2

KAPPOS v. HYATT
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

there may be situations in which a litigant’s conduct
before the PTO calls into question the propriety of admitting evidence presented for the first time in a §145 proceeding before a district court. The most well-known
example was presented in Barrett Co. v. Koppers Co., 22 F.
2d 395, 396 (CA3 1927), a case in which the Barrett Company, during proceedings before the Patent Office, “expressly refused to disclose and to allow their witnesses
to answer questions” essential to establishing the priority
of its invention. After the Patent Office ruled against it,
the Barrett Company attempted to present in a subsequent
R. S. 4915 proceeding “the very subject-matter concerning
which . . . witnesses for the [patent] application were
asked questions and the Barrett Company forbade them to
answer.” Id., at 396. The Third Circuit understandably
found the Barrett Company estopped from introducing
evidence that it had “purposely” withheld from prior factfinders, lest the company be allowed “to profit by [its] own
. . . wrong doing.” Id., at 397. See also Dowling v. Jones,
67 F. 2d 537, 538 (CA2 1933) (L. Hand, J.) (describing
Barrett as a case in which “the Third Circuit refused to
consider evidence which the inventor had deliberately
suppressed”).
For the reasons the Court articulates, §145 proceedings
are not limited to the administrative record developed before the PTO and applicants are entitled to present new
evidence to the district court. Accordingly, as Judge
Hand suggested, a court’s equitable authority to exclude
evidence in such proceedings is limited, and must be
exercised with caution. See Dowling, 67 F. 2d, at 538
(describing as “doubtful” the proposition that a court should
exclude evidence that was “not suppressed, but merely
neglected” before the Patent Office). Thus, when a patent
applicant fails to present evidence to the PTO due to
ordinary negligence, a lack of foresight, or simple attorney
error, the applicant should not be estopped from present-

