2

KAPPOS v. HYATT
Opinion of the Court

In deciding what weight to afford that evidence, the district court may, however, consider whether the applicant
had an opportunity to present the evidence to the PTO.
I
The Patent Act of 1952 establishes the process by which
the PTO examines patent applications. A patent examiner first determines whether the application satisfies the
statutory prerequisites for granting a patent. 35 U. S. C.
§131. If the examiner denies the application, the applicant may file an administrative appeal with the PTO’s
Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences (Board). §134.
If the Board also denies the application, the Patent Act
gives the disappointed applicant two options for judicial
review of the Board’s decision. The applicant may either:
(1) appeal the decision directly to the United States Court
of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, pursuant to §141; or (2)
file a civil action against the Director of the PTO in the
United States District Court for the District of Columbia
pursuant to §145.1
In a §141 proceeding, the Federal Circuit must review
the PTO’s decision on the same administrative record that
was before the PTO. §144. Thus, there is no opportunity
for the applicant to offer new evidence in such a proceeding. In Dickinson v. Zurko, 527 U. S. 150 (1999), we ad——————
1 On September 16, 2011, the President signed the Leahy-Smith
America Invents Act, 125 Stat. 284, into law. That Act made significant changes to Title 35 of the United States Code, some of which are
related to the subject matter of this case. For example, the Act changed
the venue for §145 actions from the United States District Court for the
District of Columbia to the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, id., at 316, changed the name of the Board
of Patent Appeals and Interferences to the Patent Trial and Appeal
Board, id., at 290, and changed the name of interferences to derivation
proceedings, ibid. Neither party contends that the Act has any effect
on the questions before us, and all references and citations in this
opinion are to the law as it existed prior to the Act.

