2

KAPPOS v. HYATT
Syllabus

Held: There are no limitations on a patent applicant’s ability to introduce new evidence in a §145 proceeding beyond those already present
in the Federal Rules of Evidence and the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. If new evidence is presented on a disputed question of fact,
the district court must make de novo factual findings that take account of both the new evidence and the administrative record before
the PTO. Pp. 5−14.
(a) Section 145, by its express terms, neither imposes unique evidentiary limits in district court proceedings nor establishes a heightened standard of review for PTO factual findings. Nonetheless, the
Director contends that background principles of administrative law
govern the admissibility of new evidence and impose a deferential
standard of review in §145 proceedings. As the Director concedes,
however, judicial review in §145 proceedings is not limited to the administrative record because the district court may consider new evidence. If it does so, the district court must act as a factfinder and
cannot apply the APA’s deferential standard to PTO factual findings
when those findings are contradicted by new evidence. Moreover, the
doctrine of administrative exhaustion―the primary purpose of which
is “the avoidance of premature interruption of the administrative
process,” McKart v. United States, 395 U. S. 185, 193―does not apply
because the PTO process is complete by the time a §145 proceeding
occurs. Pp. 5−7.
(b) The core language of the 1870 Patent Act, codified as Revised
Statute §4915 (R. S. 4915), remains largely unchanged in §145. Decisions interpreting R. S. 4915 thus inform this Court’s understanding
of §145. Both Butterworth v. United States ex rel. Hoe, 112 U. S. 50,
and Morgan v. Daniels, 153 U. S. 120, describe the nature of R. S.
4915 proceedings, but the two opinions can be perceived as being in
some tension. Butterworth described the proceeding as an original
civil action seeking de novo adjudication of the merits of a patent application, while Morgan described it as a suit for judicial review of
agency action under a deferential standard. The cases are distinguishable, however, because they addressed different circumstances.
Butterworth discussed a patent applicant’s challenge to the denial of
his application, whereas Morgan involved an interference proceeding
that would now be governed by §146, not §145, and in which no new
evidence was presented. Here, this Court is concerned only with a
§145 proceeding in which new evidence was presented to the District
Court, so Butterworth guides this Court’s decision. Thus, a district
court conducting a §145 proceeding may consider all competent evidence adduced and is not limited to considering only new evidence
that could not have been presented to the PTO. The introduction of
new evidence in §145 proceedings is subject only to the Federal Rules

