6

DAVIS v. UNITED STATES
BREYER, J., dissenting

rights,” ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted). But
those benefits do not justify exclusion where, as here, the
police act with “simple, isolated negligence” or an “objec
tively reasonable good-faith belief that their conduct is
lawful,” ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted).
If the Court means what it says, what will happen to the
exclusionary rule, a rule that the Court adopted nearly a
century ago for federal courts, Weeks v. United States, 232
U. S. 383, and made applicable to state courts a half cen
tury ago through the Fourteenth Amendment, Mapp v.
Ohio, 367 U. S. 643? The Court has thought of that rule
not as punishment for the individual officer or as repara
tion for the individual defendant but more generally as
an effective way to secure enforcement of the Fourth
Amendment’s commands. Weeks, supra, at 393 (without
the exclusionary rule, the Fourth Amendment would be “of
no value,” and “might as well be stricken from the Consti
tution”). This Court has deviated from the “suppression”
norm in the name of “good faith” only a handful of times
and in limited, atypical circumstances: where a magistrate
has erroneously issued a warrant, United States v. Leon,
468 U. S. 897 (1984); where a database has erroneously
informed police that they have a warrant, Arizona v.
Evans, 514 U. S. 1 (1995), Herring v. United States, 555
U. S. 135 (2009); and where an unconstitutional statute
purported to authorize the search, Illinois v. Krull, 480
U. S. 340 (1987). See Herring, supra, at 142 (“good faith”
exception inaptly named).
The fact that such exceptions are few and far between is
understandable. Defendants frequently move to suppress
evidence on Fourth Amendment grounds. In many, per
haps most, of these instances the police, uncertain of how
the Fourth Amendment applied to the particular factual
circumstances they faced, will have acted in objective good
faith. Yet, in a significant percentage of these instances,
courts will find that the police were wrong. And, unless

