2

DAVIS v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
Amendment rights, the benefits of exclusion tend to outweigh the
costs. Herring, supra, at 144. But when the police act with an objec
tively reasonable good-faith belief that their conduct is lawful, or
when their conduct involves only simple, isolated negligence, the de
terrent value of suppression is diminished, and exclusion cannot “pay
its way.” See Leon, supra, at 909, 919, 908, n. 6; Herring, supra, at
137. Pp. 6–9.
(b) Although the search in this case turned out to be unconstitu
tional under Gant, Davis concedes that the officers’ conduct was in
strict compliance with then-binding Circuit law and was not culpable
in any way. Under this Court’s exclusionary-rule precedents, the ac
knowledged absence of police culpability dooms Davis’s claim. Pp. 9–
11.
(c) The Court is not persuaded by arguments that other considera
tions should prevent the good-faith exception from applying in this
case. Pp. 11–19.
(1) The argument that the availability of the exclusionary rule to
enforce new Fourth Amendment precedent is a retroactivity issue,
not a good-faith issue, is unpersuasive. This argument erroneously
conflates retroactivity with remedy. Because Davis’s conviction had
not become final when Gant was announced, Gant applies retroac
tively in this case, and Davis may invoke its newly announced rule as
a basis for seeking relief. See Griffith v. Kentucky, 479 U. S. 314,
326, 328. But retroactive application of a new rule does not deter
mine the question of what remedy the defendant should obtain. See
Powell v. Nevada, 511 U. S. 79, 83, 84. The remedy of exclusion does
not automatically follow from a Fourth Amendment violation, see
Arizona v. Evans, 514 U. S. 1, 13, and applies only where its “purpose
is effectively advanced,” Illinois v. Krull, 480 U. S. 340, 347. The ap
plication of the good-faith exception here neither contravenes Griffith
nor denies retroactive effect to Gant. Pp. 12–16.
(2) Nor is the Court persuaded by the argument that applying
the good-faith exception to searches conducted in reliance on binding
precedent will stunt the development of Fourth Amendment law by
discouraging criminal defendants from attacking precedent. Facili
tating the overruling of precedent has never been a relevant consid
eration in this Court’s exclusionary-rule cases. In any event, apply
ing the good-faith exception in this context will not prevent this
Court’s review of Fourth Amendment precedents. If precedent from a
federal court of appeals or state court of last resort upholds a particu
lar type of search or seizure, defendants in jurisdictions where the
question remains open will still have an undiminished incentive to
litigate the issue, and this Court can grant certiorari in one of those
cases. Davis’s claim that this Court’s Fourth Amendment precedents

