Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

discovery, independent source, attenuated basis, [and]
standing . . . sharply limit the impact of newly-announced
rules”). The good-faith exception, however, is no less an
established limit on the remedy of exclusion than is inevi
table discovery. Its application here neither contravenes
Griffith nor denies retroactive effect to Gant.5
It is true that, under the old retroactivity regime of
Linkletter, the Court’s decisions on the “retroactivity prob
lem in the context of the exclusionary rule” did take
into account whether “law enforcement officers reasonably
believed in good faith” that their conduct was in compli
ance with governing law. Peltier, 422 U. S., at 535–537.
As a matter of retroactivity analysis, that approach is no
longer applicable. See Griffith, 479 U. S. 314. It does not
follow, however, that reliance on binding precedent is
irrelevant in applying the good-faith exception to the
exclusionary rule. When this Court adopted the good-faith
exception in Leon, the Court’s opinion explicitly relied on
Peltier and imported its reasoning into the good-faith
inquiry. See 468 U. S., at 918–919. That reasonable
reliance by police was once a factor in our retroactivity
cases does not make it any less relevant under our Leon
——————
5 The

dissent argues that the good-faith exception is “unlike . . . inevi
table discovery” because the former applies in all cases where the police
reasonably rely on binding precedent, while the latter “applies only
upon occasion.” Post, at 3. We fail to see how this distinction makes
any difference. The same could be said—indeed, the same was said—of
searches conducted in reasonable reliance on statutes. See Krull, 480
U. S., at 368–369 (O’Connor, J., dissenting) (arguing that result in
Krull was inconsistent with Griffith). When this Court strikes down a
statute on Fourth Amendment grounds, the good-faith exception may
prevent the exclusionary rule from applying “in every case pending
when [the statute] is overturned.” Post, at 3. This result does not
make the Court’s newly announced rule of Fourth Amendment law any
less retroactive. It simply limits the applicability of a suppression
remedy. See Krull, supra, at 354–355, n. 11.

