16

DAVIS v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

line of cases.6
B
Davis also contends that applying the good-faith ex
ception to searches conducted in reliance on binding pre
cedent will stunt the development of Fourth Amendment
law. With no possibility of suppression, criminal defen
dants will have no incentive, Davis maintains, to request
that courts overrule precedent.7
1
This argument is difficult to reconcile with our modern
understanding of the role of the exclusionary rule. We
have never held that facilitating the overruling of prece
dent is a relevant consideration in an exclusionary-rule
case. Rather, we have said time and again that the sole
purpose of the exclusionary rule is to deter misconduct by
law enforcement. See, e.g., Sheppard, 468 U. S., at 990
(“ ‘adopted to deter unlawful searches by police’ ”); Evans,
supra, at 14 (“historically designed as a means of deterring
police misconduct”).
We have also repeatedly rejected efforts to expand the
focus of the exclusionary rule beyond deterrence of culpa
ble police conduct. In Leon, for example, we made clear
——————
6 Nor

does United States v. Johnson, 457 U. S. 537 (1982), foreclose
application of the good-faith exception in cases involving changing law.
Johnson distinguished Peltier and held that all Fourth Amendment
cases should be retroactive on direct review so long as the new decision
is not a “clear break” from prior precedent. 457 U. S., at 562. Johnson
had no occasion to opine on the good-faith exception to the exclusionary
rule, which we adopted two years later in Leon.
7 Davis also asserts that a good-faith rule would permit “new Fourth
Amendment decisions to be applied only prospectively,” thus amounting
to “a regime of rule-creation by advisory opinion.” Brief for Petitioner
23, 25. For reasons discussed in connection with Davis’s argument that
application of the good-faith exception here would revive the Linkletter
regime, this argument conflates the question of retroactivity with the
question of remedy.

