Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

On an April evening in 2007, police officers in Greenville,
Alabama, conducted a routine traffic stop that eventually
resulted in the arrests of driver Stella Owens (for driving
while intoxicated) and passenger Willie Davis (for giving a
false name to police). The police handcuffed both Owens
and Davis, and they placed the arrestees in the back of
separate patrol cars. The police then searched the pas
senger compartment of Owens’s vehicle and found a re
volver inside Davis’s jacket pocket.
Davis was indicted in the Middle District of Alabama on
one count of possession of a firearm by a convicted felon.
See 18 U. S. C. §922(g)(1). In his motion to suppress
the revolver, Davis acknowledged that the officers’ search
fully complied with “existing Eleventh Circuit precedent.”
App. 13–15. Like most courts, the Eleventh Circuit had
long read Belton to establish a bright-line rule authorizing
substantially contemporaneous vehicle searches incident
to arrests of recent occupants. See United States v. Gon
zalez, 71 F. 3d 819, 822, 824–827 (CA11 1996) (upholding
automobile search conducted after the defendant had been
“pulled from the vehicle, handcuffed, laid on the ground,
and placed under arrest”). Davis recognized that the Dis
trict Court was obligated to follow this precedent, but
he raised a Fourth Amendment challenge to preserve “the
issue for review” on appeal. App. 15. The District Court
denied the motion, and Davis was convicted on the fire
arms charge.
While Davis’s appeal was pending, this Court decided
Gant. The Eleventh Circuit, in the opinion below, applied
Gant’s new rule and held that the vehicle search incident
to Davis’s arrest “violated [his] Fourth Amendment
rights.” 598 F. 3d 1259, 1263 (CA11 2010). As for
whether this constitutional violation warranted suppres
sion, the Eleventh Circuit viewed that as a separate issue
that turned on “the potential of exclusion to deter wrong
ful police conduct.” Id., at 1265 (quoting Herring v. United

