Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

BREYER, J., dissenting

rule and (2) availability of a remedy is highly artificial and
runs counter to precedent. To determine that a new rule
is retroactive is to determine that, at least in the normal
case, there is a remedy. As we have previously said, the
“source of a ‘new rule’ is the Constitution itself, not any
judicial power to create new rules of law”; hence, “[w]hat
we are actually determining when we assess the ‘retroac
tivity’ of a new rule is not the temporal scope of a newly
announced right, but whether a violation of the right that
occurred prior to the announcement of the new rule will
entitle a criminal defendant to the relief sought.” Dan
forth v. Minnesota, 552 U. S. 264, 271 (2008). The Court’s
“good faith” exception (unlike, say, inevitable discovery, a
remedial doctrine that applies only upon occasion) creates
“a categorical bar to obtaining redress” in every case pend
ing when a precedent is overturned. Ante, at 13–14.
For another thing, the Court’s holding re-creates the
very problems that led the Court to abandon Linkletter’s
approach to retroactivity in favor of Griffith’s. One such
problem concerns workability. The Court says that its
exception applies where there is “objectively reasonable”
police “reliance on binding appellate precedent.” Ante, at
1, 19. But to apply the term “binding appellate precedent”
often requires resolution of complex questions of degree.
Davis conceded that he faced binding anti-Gant precedent
in the Eleventh Circuit. But future litigants will be less
forthcoming. Ante, at 18. Indeed, those litigants will now
have to create distinctions to show that previous Circuit
precedent was not “binding” lest they find relief foreclosed
even if they win their constitutional claim.
At the same time, Fourth Amendment precedents fre
quently require courts to “slosh” their “way through the
factbound morass of ‘reasonableness.’ ” Scott v. Harris,
550 U. S. 372, 383 (2007). Suppose an officer’s conduct is
consistent with the language of a Fourth Amendment rule
that a court of appeals announced in a case with clearly

