(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

DAVIS v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–11328.

Argued March 21, 2011—Decided June 16, 2011

While conducting a routine vehicle stop, police arrested petitioner Wil
lie Davis, a passenger, for giving a false name. After handcuffing
Davis and securing the scene, the police searched the vehicle and
found Davis’s revolver. Davis was then indicted on charges of being a
felon in possession of a firearm. In a suppression motion, Davis ac
knowledged that the search of the vehicle complied with existing
Eleventh Circuit precedent interpreting New York v. Belton, 453
U. S. 454, but Davis raised a Fourth Amendment challenge to pre
serve the issue on appeal. The District Court denied the motion, and
Davis was convicted. While his appeal was pending, this Court an
nounced, in Arizona v. Gant, 556 U. S. ___, ___, a new rule governing
automobile searches incident to arrests of recent occupants. The
Eleventh Circuit held, under Gant, that the vehicle search at issue
violated Davis’s Fourth Amendment rights, but the court declined to
suppress the revolver and affirmed Davis’s conviction.
Held: Searches conducted in objectively reasonable reliance on binding
appellate precedent are not subject to the exclusionary rule. Pp. 6–
20.
(a) The exclusionary rule’s sole purpose is to deter future Fourth
Amendment violations, e.g., Herring v. United States, 555 U. S. 135,
141, and its operation is limited to situations in which this purpose is
“thought most efficaciously served,” United States v. Calandra, 414
U. S. 338, 348. For exclusion to be appropriate, the deterrence bene
fits of suppression must outweigh the rule’s heavy costs. Under a
line of cases beginning with United States v. Leon, 468 U. S. 897, the
result of this cost-benefit analysis turns on the “flagrancy of the po
lice misconduct” at issue. Id., at 909, 911. When the police exhibit
“deliberate,” “reckless,” or “grossly negligent” disregard for Fourth

