Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

the police conduct falls into one of the exceptions previ
ously noted, courts have required the suppression of the
evidence seized. 1 W. LaFave, Search and Seizure §1.3,
pp. 103–104 (4th ed. 2004) (“good faith” exception has not
yet been applied to warrantless searches and seizures
beyond the “rather special situations” of Evans, Herring,
and Krull). See Valdes, Frequency and Success: An Em
pirical Study of Criminal Law Defenses, Federal Constitu
tional Evidentiary Claims, and Plea Negotiations, 153
U. Pa. L. Rev. 1709, 1728 (2005) (suppression motions are
filed in approximately 7% of criminal cases; approximately
12% of suppression motions are successful); LaFave, su
pra, at 64 (“Surely many more Fourth Amendment viola
tions result from carelessness than from intentional con
stitutional violations”); Stewart, The Road to Mapp v.
Ohio and Beyond: The Origins, Development and Future
of the Exclusionary Rule in Search-and-Seizure Cases, 83
Colum. L. Rev. 1365, 1389 (1983) (“[T]he vast majority of
fourth amendment violations . . . [are] motivated by com
mendable zeal, not condemnable malice”).
But an officer who conducts a search that he believes
complies with the Constitution but which, it ultimately
turns out, falls just outside the Fourth Amendment’s
bounds is no more culpable than an officer who follows
erroneous “binding precedent.” Nor is an officer more
culpable where circuit precedent is simply suggestive
rather than “binding,” where it only describes how to treat
roughly analogous instances, or where it just does not
exist. Thus, if the Court means what it now says, if it
would place determinative weight upon the culpability of
an individual officer’s conduct, and if it would apply the
exclusionary rule only where a Fourth Amendment viola
tion was “deliberate, reckless, or grossly negligent,” then
the “good faith” exception will swallow the exclusionary
rule. Indeed, our broad dicta in Herring—dicta the Court
repeats and expands upon today—may already be leading

