14

DAVIS v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

defendant should obtain. See Powell v. Nevada, 511 U. S.
79, 84 (1994) (noting that it “does not necessarily follow”
from retroactive application of a new rule that the defen
dant will “gain . . . relief”). Remedy is a separate, analyti
cally distinct issue. Cf. American Trucking Assns., Inc. v.
Smith, 496 U. S. 167, 189 (1990) (plurality opinion) (“[T]he
Court has never equated its retroactivity principles with
remedial principles”). As a result, the retroactive applica
tion of a new rule of substantive Fourth Amendment law
raises the question whether a suppression remedy applies;
it does not answer that question. See Leon, 468 U. S., at
906 (“Whether the exclusionary sanction is appropriately
imposed in a particular case . . . is ‘an issue separate from
the question whether the Fourth Amendment rights of the
party seeking to invoke the rule were violated by police
conduct’ ”).
When this Court announced its decision in Gant, Davis’s
conviction had not yet become final on direct review. Gant
therefore applies retroactively to this case. Davis may
invoke its newly announced rule of substantive Fourth
Amendment law as a basis for seeking relief. See Griffith,
supra, at 326, 328. The question, then, becomes one of
remedy, and on that issue Davis seeks application of the
exclusionary rule. But exclusion of evidence does not
automatically follow from the fact that a Fourth Amend
ment violation occurred. See Evans, 514 U. S., at 13–14.
The remedy is subject to exceptions and applies only
where its “purpose is effectively advanced.” Krull, 480
U. S., at 347.
The dissent and Davis recognize that at least some of
the established exceptions to the exclusionary rule limit
its availability in cases involving new Fourth Amendment
rules. Suppression would thus be inappropriate, the
dissent and Davis acknowledge, if the inevitable-discovery
exception were applicable in this case. See post, at 3;
Reply Brief for Petitioner 22 (“Doctrines such as inevitable

