10

DAVIS v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

pression” in this case would “impl[y] no assignment of
blame”).
Under our exclusionary-rule precedents, this acknowl
edged absence of police culpability dooms Davis’s claim.
Police practices trigger the harsh sanction of exclusion
only when they are deliberate enough to yield “mean
ingfu[l]” deterrence, and culpable enough to be “worth the
price paid by the justice system.” Herring, 555 U. S., at
144. The conduct of the officers here was neither of these
things. The officers who conducted the search did not
violate Davis’s Fourth Amendment rights deliberately,
recklessly, or with gross negligence. See ibid. Nor does
this case involve any “recurring or systemic negligence” on
the part of law enforcement. Ibid. The police acted in
strict compliance with binding precedent, and their behav
ior was not wrongful. Unless the exclusionary rule is to
become a strict-liability regime, it can have no application
in this case.
Indeed, in 27 years of practice under Leon’s good-faith
exception, we have “never applied” the exclusionary rule to
suppress evidence obtained as a result of nonculpable,
innocent police conduct. Herring, supra, at 144. If the
police in this case had reasonably relied on a warrant in
conducting their search, see Leon, supra, or on an errone
ous warrant record in a government database, Herring,
supra, the exclusionary rule would not apply. And if
Congress or the Alabama Legislature had enacted a stat
ute codifying the precise holding of the Eleventh Circuit’s
decision in Gonzalez,4 we would swiftly conclude that
——————
4 Cf. Kan. Stat. Ann. §22–2501(c) (2007) (“When a lawful arrest is
effected a law enforcement officer may reasonably search the person
arrested and the area within such person’s immediate presence for the
purpose of . . . [d]iscovering the fruits, instrumentalities, or evidence of
a crime”). The Kansas Supreme Court recently struck this provision
down in light of Arizona v. Gant, 556 U. S. ___ (2009). State v. Hen
ning, 289 Kan. 136, 137, 209 P. 3d 711, 714 (2009). But it has applied

