Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

Opinion of the Court

be given the benefit of the victory by permitting the sup
pression of evidence in that one case. Such a result would
undoubtedly be a windfall to this one random litigant.
But the exclusionary rule is “not a personal constitutional
right.” Stone, 428 U. S., at 486. It is a “judicially created”
sanction, Calandra, 414 U. S., at 348, specifically designed
as a “windfall” remedy to deter future Fourth Amendment
violations. See Stone, supra, at 490. The good-faith excep
tion is a judicially created exception to this judicially
created rule. Therefore, in a future case, we could, if
necessary, recognize a limited exception to the good-faith
exception for a defendant who obtains a judgment over
ruling one of our Fourth Amendment precedents. Cf. Friendly, The Bill of Rights as a Code of
Criminal Procedure, 53 Cal. L. Rev. 929, 952–953 (1965)
(“[T]he same authority that empowered the Court to sup
plement the amendment by the exclusionary rule a hun
dred and twenty-five years after its adoption, likewise
allows it to modify that rule as the lessons of experience
may teach” (internal quotation marks and footnotes
omitted)).10
——————
10 Davis contends that a criminal defendant will lack Article III
standing to challenge an existing Fourth Amendment precedent if the
good-faith exception to the exclusionary rule precludes the defendant
from obtaining relief based on police conduct that conformed to that
precedent. This argument confuses weakness on the merits with
absence of Article III standing. See ASARCO Inc. v. Kadish, 490 U. S.
605, 624 (1989) (standing does not “ ‘depen[d] on the merits of [a
claim]’ ”). And as a practical matter, the argument is also overstated.
In many instances, as in Gant, see 556 U. S., at __ (slip op., at 8),
defendants will not simply concede that the police conduct conformed to
the precedent; they will argue instead that the police conduct did not
fall within the scope of the precedent.
In any event, even if some criminal defendants will be unable to
challenge some precedents for the reason that Davis suggests, that
provides no good reason for refusing to apply the good-faith exception.
As noted, the exclusionary rule is not a personal right, see Stone, 428
U. S., at 486, 490, and therefore the rights of these defendants will not

