Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

KAGAN, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–11311
_________________

MARCUS SYKES, PETITIONER v. UNITED STATES
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT

[June 9, 2011]


JUSTICE KAGAN, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG joins,
dissenting.
Vehicular flight comes in different varieties, and so too
the statutes that criminalize the conduct. A person may
attempt to outrun police officers by driving recklessly and
at high speed, in disregard of traffic laws and with disdain
for others’ safety. Or a person may fail to heed an officer’s
command to pull over, but otherwise drive in a lawful
manner, perhaps just trying to find a better place to stop.
In Indiana, as in most States, both of these individuals are
lawbreakers. But in Indiana, again as in most States, the
law takes account of the differences between them, by
distinguishing simple from aggravated forms of vehicular
flight. Unlike the Court, I would attend to these distinc
tions when deciding which of Indiana’s several vehicular
flight crimes count as “violent felon[ies]” under the Armed
Career Criminal Act (ACCA), 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2)(B).
Because petitioner Marcus Sykes was convicted only of
simple vehicular flight, and not of any flight offense in
volving aggressive or dangerous activity, I would find that
he did not commit a “violent felony” under ACCA.
I
As the Court relates, we must decide whether the crime
of which Sykes was convicted falls within ACCA’s “resid
ual clause.” See ante, at 5–6. To do so, the crime must


2

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
KAGAN, J., dissenting

“presen[t] a serious potential risk of physical injury to
another,” §924(e)(2)(B)(ii), and involve conduct that is
“purposeful, violent, and aggressive,” Begay v. United
States, 553 U. S. 137, 145 (2008).1 Because we use the
“categorical approach,” we do not concern ourselves with
Sykes’s own conduct. See Taylor v. United States, 495
U. S. 575, 602 (1990). Nor do we proceed by exploring
whether some platonic form of an offense—here, some
abstract notion of vehicular flight—satisfies ACCA’s re
sidual clause. We instead focus on the elements of the
actual state statute at issue. Cf. Chambers v. United
States, 555 U. S. 122, 126–127 (2009) (breaking down an
Illinois statute into discrete offenses to decide whether the
crime of conviction fit within the residual clause); James v.
United States, 550 U. S. 192, 202 (2007) (examining how
Florida’s law defined attempted burglary to determine if
the residual clause included that offense). More particu
larly, we ask whether “the conduct encompassed by the
elements” of that statute, “in the ordinary case” (not in
every conceivable case), involves the requisite danger and
violence. Id., at 208. By making this inquiry, we attempt
——————
1 I understand the majority to retain the “purposeful, violent, and
aggressive” test, but to conclude that it is “redundant” in this case. See
ante, at 11. Like JUSTICE SCALIA, see ante, at 3 (dissenting opinion), I
find this conclusion puzzling. I do not think the majority could mean to
limit the test to “strict liability, negligence, and recklessness crimes.”
Ante, at 11 (majority opinion). As JUSTICE SCALIA notes, see ante, at 3,
that would be to eliminate the test’s focus on “violence” and “aggres
sion.” And it would collide with Chambers v. United States, 555 U. S.
122 (2009)—a decision the majority cites approvingly, see ante, at 8—
which applied the test to an intentional crime. See 555 U. S., at 128
(opinion of the Court), 130 (Appendix A to opinion of the Court) (hold
ing that “knowin[g] fail[ure] to report to a penal institution” does not
involve “purposeful, violent, or aggressive conduct” (internal quotation
marks omitted)). So I assume this test will make a resurgence—that it
will be declared non-redundant—the next time the Court considers a
crime, whether intentional or not, that involves risk of injury but not
aggression or violence.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

KAGAN, J., dissenting

to determine whether the crime involved is “characteristic
of the armed career criminal”—or otherwise said, whether
the prohibited conduct is of a kind that “makes more likely
that an offender, later possessing a gun, will use that gun
deliberately to harm a victim.” Begay, 553 U. S., at 145 (in
ternal quotation marks omitted).
Under this approach, some vehicular flight offenses
should count as violent felonies under ACCA. Consider,
for example, a statute that makes it a crime to “willfully
flee from a law enforcement officer by driving at high
speed or otherwise demonstrating reckless disregard for
the safety of others.” Such a statute, by its terms, encom
passes conduct that ordinarily “presents a serious poten
tial risk of physical injury to another.” §924(e)(2)(B)(ii).
And the covered conduct qualifies as “purposeful, violent,
and aggressive.” Id., at 145. When a motorist responds to
an officer’s signal to stop by increasing his speed or taking
reckless evasive action, he turns his car into a weapon and
provokes confrontation. In so doing, he engages in behav
ior “roughly similar, in kind as well as in degree of risk
posed,” to that involved in ACCA’s enumerated offenses—
the sort of conduct, in other words, “typically committed
by . . . ‘armed career criminals.’ ” Id., at 143, 146. Like the
majority, see ante, at 9–10, I therefore would classify
crimes of this type—call them aggravated vehicular flight
offenses—as violent felonies under ACCA.
But a vehicular flight offense need not target aggressive
and dangerous behavior. Imagine the converse of the
statute described above—a statute making it a crime to
“willfully flee from a law enforcement officer without
driving at high speed or otherwise demonstrating reckless
disregard for the safety of others.” That hypothetical
statute addresses only simple vehicular flight: mere dis
regard of a police officer’s directive to stop, devoid of addi
tional conduct creating risk to others. This behavior—
often called “failure to stop”—is illegal in most States


4

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
KAGAN, J., dissenting

(under a wide variety of statutory provisions). In Indiana,
for example, a driver who “know[s] that a police officer
wishes to effectuate a traffic stop” may commit a felony if
he attempts to “choose the location of the stop,” rather
than pulling over immediately; it makes no difference that
the driver “did not speed or disobey any . . . traffic laws.”
Woodward v. State, 770 N. E. 2d 897, 902 (Ind. App.
2002).2 But a mere failure to stop does not usually “pre
sen[t] a serious potential risk of physical injury to an
other,” §924(e)(2)(B)(ii), any more than normal driving
does. Nor is this conduct “violent . . . and aggressive.”
Begay, 553 U. S., at 145; see Brief for United States 43
(characterizing as “nonviolent” a flight from police that
complies with “all traffic laws”). True, the offender is
ignoring a command he should obey. But nothing in his
behavior is affirmatively belligerent: It does not “show an
increased likelihood that [he] is the kind of person who
might deliberately point the gun and pull the trigger.”
Begay, 553 U. S., at 146.3 And so, under our precedents, a
statute criminalizing only simple vehicular flight would
not fall within ACCA’s residual clause. I do not under
——————
2 The majority attempts to show that Woodward involved conduct
more risky and violent than a simple failure to stop. See ante, at 3; see
also ante, at 7 (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment). But the facts of
that case, like the facts of this one, are irrelevant. Under ACCA, all
that matters is the elements of the offense, and the Indiana Court of
Appeals held in Woodward that a person who “merely fail[s] to stop” for
police, and does nothing more, commits a felony under state law. 770
N. E. 2d, at 900–902.
3 Indeed, a driver may refrain from pulling over immediately out of
concern for his own safety. He may worry, for example, that road con
ditions make it hazardous to stop. Or a driver may fear that the
person initiating the stop is a criminal rather than a police officer. See,
e.g., Brennan, Rapist to Spend Life in Prison, Tampa Tribune, Feb. 18,
2011, Metro section, p. 3 (“[A man] impersonating a police officer . . .
used the ruse to pull over a woman . . . and then kidnap and rape her”);
DeKunder, Watch for “Fake” Police, Local Authorities Warn, Northeast
Herald, Jan. 14, 2010, pp. 12, 13 (noting several similar incidents).


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

KAGAN, J., dissenting

stand the majority to disagree.
The Indiana provision under which Sykes was convicted
straddles the two hypothetical statutes I have just de
scribed. That provision, subsection (b)(1)(A), states that a
person commits a felony if he “flees from a law enforce
ment officer” while “us[ing] a vehicle.” Ind. Code §§35–44–
3–3(a)(3), (b)(1)(A) (2009). As the Indiana courts have
recognized, the subsection thus criminalizes mere failure
to stop, which should not count as a violent felony under
ACCA. See Woodward, 770 N. E. 2d 897; supra, at 4, and
n. 2. But the provision also includes more violent forms of
vehicular flight: It covers a person who speeds or drives
recklessly, who leads the police on a “Hollywood-style car
chase,” Scott v. Harris, 550 U. S. 372, 380 (2007), and who
endangers police officers, other drivers, and pedestrians.
And so the “conduct encompassed by the elements” of
this subsection, James, 550 U. S., at 208, runs the gamut—
from simple to aggravated vehicular flight, from the least
violent to the most violent form of the activity. Accord,
ante, at 9–10 (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment) (stat
ing that subsection (b)(1)(A) is “not restrict[ed] . . . to
nonrisky conduct”). The question presented is whether
such a facially broad provision meets the requirements of
ACCA’s residual clause.
If subsection (b)(1)(A) were the whole of Indiana’s law
on vehicular flight, the majority would have a reasonable
argument that the provision does so. As noted, a statute
fits within the residual clause if it covers conduct that in
the ordinary case—not in every conceivable case—poses
serious risk of physical injury and is purposeful, violent,
and aggressive. See James, 550 U. S., at 208; Begay, 553
U. S., at 145. We therefore must decide what the ordinary
case of vehicular flight actually is. Is it the person trying
to escape from police by speeding or driving recklessly, in
a way that endangers others? Or is it instead the person
driving normally who, for whatever reason, fails to re


6

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
KAGAN, J., dissenting

spond immediately to a police officer’s signal? The Gov
ernment has not presented any empirical evidence ad
dressing this question, and such evidence may not in fact
exist.4 See Wells & Falcone, Research on Police Pursuits:
Advantages of Multiple Data Collection Strategies, 20
Policing Int’l J. Police Strategies & Management 729
(1997) (“Collecting valid and reliable data on policing
activities is a perennial problem . . . . This is particularly
true when studying . . . vehicle pursuits”); cf. Begay, 553
U. S., at 154 (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment) (“Need
less to say, we do not have these relevant statistics”). But
the majority’s intuition that dangerous flights outstrip
mere failures to stop—that the aggravated form of the
activity is also the ordinary form—seems consistent with
common sense and experience. So that judgment, even
though unsupported by data, would likely be sufficient to
justify the Court’s conclusion were subsection (b)(1)(A) the
only relevant provision.
But subsection (b)(1)(A) does not stand alone, and the
context of the provision casts a different light on it. Like a
great many States (45 by my count), Indiana divides the
——————
4 The Government offers anecdotal examples and statistical surveys
of vehicular flights, see Brief for United States 13–15, 17–22, but none
helps to answer whether the “ordinary” case of vehicular flight is
aggravated or simple. Cf. ante, at 4–6 (SCALIA, J., dissenting). The an
ecdotes and all but one of the surveys demonstrate only that some
vehicular flights result in serious injury, a proposition no one does or
could dispute. The single statistical study cited by the Government
that posits an injury rate for vehicular flight concludes that about 4% of
7,737 reported police pursuits harmed police or bystanders. But that
study may well involve only aggravated flights. See C. Lum & G.
Fachner, Police Pursuits in an Age of Innovation and Reform 55 (2008)
(noting that the study relies on voluntary and non-systematic reporting
and that participating police departments might not have reported
“informal” incidents). And even assuming the study is comprehensive,
it is entirely consistent with the possibility that the “ordinary case”—
i.e., the most common form—of vehicular flight is mere failure to stop,
which produces a much lower rate of injury.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

KAGAN, J., dissenting

world of vehicular flight into discrete categories, corre
sponding to the seriousness of the criminal behavior. At
the time of Sykes’s conviction, Indiana had four degrees
of vehicular flight, only the first of which—subsection
(b)(1)(A)—covered mere failure to stop.5 See Ind. Code
§35–44–3–3. Indiana classified as a felon any person who:
•	 “flees from a law enforcement officer” while “us[ing]
a vehicle,” §3(b)(1)(A);
•	 “flees from a law enforcement officer” while “op
erat[ing] a vehicle in a manner that creates a sub
stantial risk of bodily injury to another person,”
§3(b)(1)(B);6
•	 “flees from a law enforcement officer” while “op
erat[ing] a vehicle in a manner that causes serious
bodily injury to another person,” §3(b)(2); or
•	 “flees from a law enforcement officer” while “op
erat[ing] a vehicle in a manner that causes the
death of another person,” §3(b)(3) (all emphasis
added).
Vehicular flight in Indiana is therefore not a single of
fense, but instead a series of separate, escalating crimes.
Each category captures conduct more dangerous than the
one before it, as shown by the language italicized above.7
——————
5 After Sykes’s conviction, Indiana added yet a fifth degree. See 2010
Ind. Acts p. 1197. The four degrees described above remain unchanged.
6 This provision also bars a range of other conduct. See n. 9, infra.
7 JUSTICE THOMAS attempts to bisect this series by stating that the
two most serious degrees of aggravated vehicular flight “enhance
punishment based solely on the results of the flight, not the degree of
risk it posed.” Ante, at 11–12. But conduct that leads to serious injury
or death is ordinarily more risky, viewed ex ante, than conduct that
does not produce these results. And in any event, the fundamental
point here is that the Indiana statute grades vehicular flight according
to the seriousness of the behavior—ranging from flight that need not
pose any risk of harm, through flight posing a substantial risk of harm,
to flight involving a certainty of harm. Subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3)


8

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
KAGAN, J., dissenting

And at the very beginning of this series is subsection
(b)(1)(A), the offense of which Sykes was convicted.
That placement alters the nature of the analysis. We
have previously examined the way statutory provisions
relate to each other to determine whether a particular
provision counts as a violent felony under ACCA. In
Chambers, 555 U. S., at 126–127, we considered an Illinois
statute prohibiting within a single section several differ
ent kinds of behavior, including escape from a penal insti
tution and failure to report to a penal institution. The
courts below had treated the statute as defining a single
crime of felonious escape and held that crime to qualify as
a violent felony under ACCA. See id., at 125; United
States v. Chambers, 473 F. 3d 724, 725–726 (CA7 2007).
We disagreed, stating that failure to report was a distinct
offense, which did not meet ACCA’s requirements. That
was so, we stated, because “[t]he behavior that likely
underlies a failure to report would seem less likely to
involve a risk of physical harm than the less passive, more
aggressive behavior underlying an escape from custody.”
Chambers, 555 U. S., at 127. In addition, we noted, the
statute “list[ed] escape and failure to report separately
(in its title and its body).” Ibid. We thus considered
the failure-to-report clause in its statutory context—as
one part of a legislature’s delineation of related criminal
offenses—to determine whether the behavior it encom
passed ordinarily poses a serious risk of injury.
That same focus on statutory structure resolves this
case, because it reveals subsection (b)(1)(A) to aim at a
single form—the least serious form—of vehicular flight.
Remember: Indiana has made a purposeful choice to di
vide the full spectrum of vehicular flight into different
—————— 

thus underscore that Indiana has divided the world of vehicular flight

into discrete, ascending crimes, rather than treating all vehicular flight 

as of a piece. 



Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

KAGAN, J., dissenting

degrees, based on the danger associated with a driver’s
conduct. Once again, starting with the most serious con
duct: flight resulting in death; flight resulting in physical
injury; flight creating a substantial risk of physical injury; flight. That last category—flight—almost screams to
have the word “mere” placed before it. Under the In
diana statute, flight—the conduct prohibited by subsection
(b)(1)(A)—is what is left over when no aggravating factor
causing substantial risk or harm exists. Put on blinders,
and the subsection is naturally understood to address all
flight, up to and including the most dangerous kinds. But
take off those blinders—view the statute as a whole—and
the subsection is instead seen to target failures to stop.
In this vein, the distinction between subsections
(b)(1)(A) and (b)(1)(B) is especially telling. As noted,
subsection (b)(1)(B) prohibits vehicular flight that “creates
a substantial risk of bodily injury to another person.”
That language almost precisely tracks the phrasing of
ACCA’s residual clause, which refers to conduct that
“presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to
another.” 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2)(B)(ii). This correspon
dence indicates that the conduct criminalized under sub
section (b)(1)(B) qualifies as a violent felony under ACCA.
But subsection (b)(1)(A) lacks the very feature that makes
subsection (b)(1)(B) and ACCA such a perfect match: It
does not require any behavior that poses serious risk to
others. This difference in statutory elements indicates
that subsection (b)(1)(B)—but not subsection (b)(1)(A)—is
directed toward the conduct described in ACCA’s residual
clause. To count both as ACCA offenses is to pay insuffi
cient heed to the way the Indiana Legislature drafted its
statute—as a series of escalating offenses, ranging from
the simple to the most aggravated.8
——————
8 None of this is to deny that prosecutors may sometimes charge vio
lent and dangerous offenders under subsection (b)(1)(A). A prosecutor


10

SYKES v. UNITED STATES

KAGAN, J., dissenting 


II 

The Court does not deny that a State’s decision to divide
a generic form of conduct (like vehicular flight) into sep
arate, escalating crimes may make a difference under
ACCA; rather, the Court declines to address that question.
See ante, at 13. The Court rejects the structural argument
here for one, and only one, reason. Indiana, the majority says, “treats violations of subsections (b)(1)(A) and
(b)(1)(B) as crimes of the same magnitude”: They are both
class D felonies carrying the same punishment.9 See also
——————
may elect to use a lower grade of vehicular flight when he could use a
higher one, either as a matter of discretion or because the defendant
entered into a plea bargain. This case provides one example, see ante,
at 4 (majority opinion), and JUSTICE THOMAS offers several others, see
ante, at 6–7. But as everyone agrees, what matters in determining
whether an offense qualifies under ACCA’s residual clause is the
“ordinary case” of conviction. And in the absence of reliable empirical
evidence, the structure of the Indiana statute provides the best way to
discern the ordinary case under each subsection.
9 The Government spurns the structural argument on a different
ground, contending that subsection (b)(1)(A) is not a lesser included
offense of subsection (b)(1)(B). The Court wisely does not accept this
claim. Both subsections (b)(1)(A) and (b)(1)(B) involve the use of a
vehicle to flee, with subsection (b)(1)(B) additionally requiring that this
use “creat[e] a substantial risk of bodily injury.” So a fleeing driver
who violates subsection (b)(1)(B) necessarily runs afoul of subsection
(b)(1)(A) as well. The Government contends, in response, that a person
can violate subsection (b)(1)(B) and not (b)(1)(A) by engaging in conduct
other than vehicular flight. See Brief for United States 48–49, n. 11.
That is because subsection (b)(1)(B) additionally prohibits “obstruct
[ing]” or “resist[ing]” a police officer by a variety of means, including
through use of a vehicle. But Indiana law makes clear that subsec
tion (b)(1)(A) still counts as a lesser included offense of subsection
(b)(1)(B) in any prosecution involving vehicular flight. See Wright v.
State, 658 N. E. 2d 563, 566–567 (Ind. 1995) (holding a crime to be a
lesser included offense if its elements are “factually” subsumed within
another offense). And even if that were not the case, it should make no
difference. The meaningful question for purposes of ACCA is whether
subsection (b)(1)(B)’s prohibition of aggravated vehicular flight indi
cates that subsection (b)(1)(A) targets simple vehicular flight. That a


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

KAGAN, J., dissenting

ante, at 8–9 (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment). But
the Court is wrong to think that fact dispositive.
In general, “similar punishment does not necessarily
imply similar risk” (or similar violence). James, 550 U. S.,
at 217 (SCALIA, J., dissenting). Because this is so, the
Court has never suggested that all state offenses falling
within a single felony class and subject to the same penal
ties must receive the same treatment under ACCA. To the
contrary, we have always focused on the “conduct encom
passed by the elements of the offense,” id., at 208 (major
ity opinion)—an inquiry that does not mention the of
fense’s sentencing consequences. And that is for good
reason. It would be quite remarkable if either all or none
of Indiana’s (or any State’s) class D felonies satisfied the
requirements of the residual clause. In Indiana, other
such felonies, subject to “the same magnitude” of punish
ment, ante, at 12, include election fraud, computer tam
pering, and “cemetery mischief.” See Ind. Code §3–14–2–1
et seq. (2009); §35–43–1–4; §35–43–1–2.1. I presume the
Court does not also intend to treat these offenses as vio
lent felonies under ACCA.
Moreover, Indiana sentencing law has always enabled
judges to take account of the difference between subsec
tions (b)(1)(A) and (b)(1)(B) in imposing punishment. As
the majority notes, ante, at 12, Indiana provides for a
range of prison terms for class D felonies, stretching
from six months to three years. And in deciding what
term to impose (or whether to suspend the term), courts
may consider an array of aggravating factors—including
whether the crime “threatened serious harm to persons,” §35–38–1–7.1(b)(1). Convictions under subsections
(b)(1)(A) and (b)(1)(B) therefore may produce widely vary
ing sentences, as judges respond to the different forms
—————— 

person can violate subsection (b)(1)(B) by means independent of any

vehicular flight has no bearing on that question. 



12

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
KAGAN, J., dissenting

of vehicular flight targeted by the offenses.
The Court argues, in support of its position, that the
“similarity in punishment” reveals that the conduct falling
within subsection (b)(1)(A) is “rough[ly] equivalent,” in
terms of risk, to the conduct falling within subsection
(b)(1)(B). Ante, at 12 (internal quotation marks omitted);
see also ante, at 10–11 (THOMAS, J., concurring in judg
ment). More specifically, the Court claims that the Indi
ana Legislature added subsection (b)(1)(A) to the statute
in 1998 because it determined that vehicular flight is per
se risky—and that all such flight therefore deserves the
same punishment as is meted out to the various non-flight
conduct that subsection (b)(1)(B) prohibits upon a showing
of risk. See ante, at 12; see also n. 9, supra. But that
argument disregards the legislature’s decision to criminal
ize vehicular flight in both provisions—that is, to retain
subsection (b)(1)(B)’s prohibition on risky vehicular flight
alongside subsection (b)(1)(A)’s ban on simple flight. In
effect, the Court reads subsection (b)(1)(A) as including all
vehicular flight and subsection (b)(1)(B) as including only
the other (non-flight) things it mentions—even though
subsection (b)(1)(B) specifically bars “flee[ing] from a law
enforcement officer . . . in a manner that creates a sub
stantial risk of bodily injury.”
Perhaps the Court assumes that the Indiana Legisla
ture, in enacting subsection (b)(1)(A), simply forgot to
remove the reference to vehicular flight in subsection
(b)(1)(B). Cf. ante, at 10 (THOMAS, J., concurring in judg
ment) (acknowledging superfluity). But if so, the legis
lature forgot four more times to correct its error, as it
serially amended and re-amended its vehicular-flight statute over the last 13 years.10 And more fundamentally, a
——————
10 See 2011 Ind. Acts pp. 91–92; 2010 Ind. Acts pp. 1196–1197, 1186–
1187; 2006 Ind. Acts p. 2470. Notably, one of these amendments
revised subsection (b)(1)(B) itself. See ibid.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

KAGAN, J., dissenting

better explanation than legislative mistake is available for
Indiana’s decision to enact subsection (b)(1)(A) while
keeping subsection (b)(1)(B)’s ban on risky vehicular flight.
Prior to 1998, Indiana, unlike most other States in the
nation, cf. infra, at 13, did not criminalize simple vehicu
lar flight (i.e., failure to stop) at all. See 1998 Ind. Acts
677–678. So Indiana’s decision to create that offense in
subsection (b)(1)(A)—and to distinguish it from the more
aggravated forms of vehicular flight already penalized
under subsections (b)(1)(B), (b)(2), and (b)(3)—brought
the State’s vehicular-flight statute into conformity with
the prevailing approach used nationwide. Especially given
that backdrop, I would not impute shoddy draftsmanship
to the Indiana Legislature. I would heed what that body
said, rather than assume (just because it made both of
fenses class D felonies) that it must have meant something
different. And what the legislature said is that vehicular
flight comes in different forms—one posing substantial
risk of injury (subsection (b)(1)(B)) and one not (subsection
(b)(1)(A)).
The best that can be said for the Court’s approach is
that it is very narrow—indeed, that it decides almost no
case other than this one. As noted above, see supra, at 10,
the Court reserves the question whether a vehicular flight
provision like subsection (b)(1)(A) is a crime of violence
under ACCA “where that offense carries a less severe
penalty than [a greater] offense that includes it.” Ante, at
13. But as fate would have it, that reservation describes
the great majority of vehicular flight statutes across the
country. Indiana is idiosyncratic in this respect; other
States not only separately prohibit, but also differently
punish, simple and aggravated vehicular flight.11 Or
——————
11 See, e.g., Fla. Stat. §316.1935 (2010); Mich. Comp. Laws Ann.
§257.602a (West 2010); Minn. Stat. §609.487 (2009); N. J. Stat. Ann.
§2C:29–2 (West Supp. 2011); S. C. Code Ann. §56–5–750 (2006); Tenn.


14

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
KAGAN, J., dissenting

perhaps I should say Indiana was idiosyncratic. That is
because in 2006, a few years after Sykes’s conviction,
Indiana amended its vehicular flight statute to set differ
ent penalties for violations of subsections (b)(1)(A) and
(b)(1)(B). A person who violates subsection (b)(1)(B) today
faces a mandatory 30-day sentence that cannot be sus
pended; that sentence rises to six months or one year
for repeat offenders. See Ind. Code §35–44–3–3(d). By
contrast, a person who violates subsection (b)(1)(A), even
more than once, is not subject to any mandatory jail time.
See §35–44–3–3(d). So by its own terms, the Court’s
opinion—our fourth applying ACCA’s residual clause in as
many years—applies only to a single State’s vehicular
flight statute as it existed from 1998 to 2006. Cf. ante, at
7 (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (“[W]e will be doing ad hoc appli
cation of ACCA . . . until the cows come home”).
*
*
*
The Indiana statute before us creates a series of escalat
ing offenses dividing the universe of vehicular flight into
discrete categories. One of those categories, subsection
(b)(1)(B), requires proof that the defendant operated “a
vehicle in a manner that creates a substantial risk of
bodily injury.” That phrase tracks the language that
ACCA’s residual clause uses to define a crime of violence.
Other provisions in the Indiana statute demand even
more—actual injury or death. In stark contrast, subsec
tion (b)(1)(A), the least severe of the State’s vehicular
flight offenses and the one of which Sykes was convicted,
lacks any element relating to threat of physical injury. In
deciding this case, I would respect that statutory differ
ence. And because I would take the Indiana Legislature
at its word, I respectfully dissent.
——————
Code Ann. §39–16–603 (Supp. 2011); Tex. Penal Code §38.04 (West
2011); Utah Code Ann. §76–8–305.5 (Lexis 2008).

