(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is being
done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–11311.

Argued January 12, 2011—Decided June 9, 2011

When he pleaded guilty to being a felon in possession of a firearm, see 8
U. S. C. §922(g)(1), petitioner Sykes had prior convictions for at least
three felonies, including the state-law crime of “us[ing] a vehicle” to
“knowingly or intentionally” “fle[e] from a law enforcement officer”
after being ordered to stop, Ind. Code §35–44–3–3(b)(1)(A) (2004).
The Federal District Court decided that the prior convictions sub
jected Sykes to the 15-year mandatory minimum prison term that the
Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA), 18 U. S. C. §924(e), provides for
an armed defendant who has three prior “violent felony” convictions.
Rejecting Sykes’ argument that his vehicle flight felony was not “vio
lent” under ACCA, the Seventh Circuit affirmed.
Held: Felony vehicle flight, as proscribed by Indiana law, is a violent
felony for purposes of ACCA. Pp. 5–14.
(a) The “categorical approach” used to determine if a particular
crime is a violent felony “consider[s] whether the elements of the of
fense are of the type that would justify its inclusion within the resid
ual provision [of 18 U. S. C. §924(e)(2)(B)], without inquiring into the
specific conduct of th[e] particular offender.” James v. United States,
550 U. S. 192, 202 (emphasis deleted). When punishable by more
than one year in prison, burglary, arson, extortion, and crimes that
involve use of explosives are violet felonies. Under the residual
clause in question so too is a crime that “otherwise involves conduct
that presents a serious potential risk of physical injury to another,”
§924(e)(2)(B)(ii), i.e., a risk “comparable to that posed by its closest
analog among” the statute’s enumerated offenses. Id., at 203. When
a perpetrator flees police in a car, his determination to elude capture
makes a lack of concern for the safety of others an inherent part of
the offense. Even if he drives without going full speed or the wrong


2

SYKES v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
way, he creates the possibility that police will, in a legitimate and
lawful manner, exceed or almost match his speed or use force to bring
him within their custody. His indifference to these collateral conse
quences has violent—even lethal—potential for others. A fleeing
criminal who creates a risk of this dimension takes action similar in
degree of danger to that involved in arson, which also entails inten
tional release of a destructive force dangerous to others. Also telling
is a comparison to burglary, which is dangerous because it can end in
confrontation leading to violence. In fact, the risks associated with
vehicle flight may outstrip the dangers of both burglary and arson.
While statistics are not dispositive, studies show that the risk of per
sonal injuries is about 20% lower for each of those enumerated crimes
than for vehicle pursuits. Thus, Indiana’s prohibition on vehicle
flight falls within §924(e)(2)(B)(ii)’s residual clause because, as a
categorical matter, it presents a serious potential risk of physical in
jury to another. Pp. 5–9.
(b) Sykes’ argument—that Begay v. United States, 553 U. S. 137,
and Chambers v. United States, 555 U. S. 122, require ACCA predi
cate crimes to be purposeful, violent, and aggressive in ways that ve
hicle flight is not—overreads those opinions. In general, levels of risk
divide crimes that qualify as violent felonies from those that do not.
Chambers is no exception: It explained that failure to report does not
qualify because the typical offender is not “significantly more likely
than others to attack, or physically to resist, an apprehender.” 555
U. S., at ___–___. Begay, which held that driving under the influence
(DUI) is not an ACCA predicate and stated that it is not purposeful,
violent, and aggressive, 553 U. S., at 145–148, is the Court’s sole re
sidual clause decision in which risk was not the dispositive factor.
But Begay also gave a more specific reason for its holding: DUI “need
not be purposeful or deliberate,” id., at 145, and is analogous to
strict-liability, negligence, and recklessness crimes. Begay’s “pur
poseful, violent, and aggressive” phrase is an addition to the statu
tory text that has no precise link to the residual clause. Because ve
hicle flight is not a strict-liability, negligence, or recklessness crime
and is, as a categorical matter, similar in risk to the crimes listed in
the residual clause, it is a violent felony. Pp. 10–11
(c) Sykes contends that the fact that Ind. Code §35–44–3–3(b)(1)(B)
criminalizes flight by an offender who “operates a vehicle in a man
ner that creates a substantial risk of bodily injury to another person”
indicates that Indiana did not intend for §35–44–3–3(b)(1)(A), under
which he was convicted, to encompass the particular class of vehicle
flights reached by subsection (b)(1)(B). This argument is unconvinc
ing. Indiana treats the two subsections as felonies of the same mag
nitude carrying similar prison terms, suggesting that subsection


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
(b)(1)(A) is roughly equivalent to one type of subsection (b)(1)(B) vio
lation. Pp. 11–13.
(d) Congress framed ACCA in general and qualitative, rather than
encyclopedic, terms. The residual clause imposes enhanced punish
ment for unlawful firearm possession when the relevant prior of
fenses involved a potential risk of physical injury similar to that pre
sented by several enumerated offenses.
It instructs potential
recidivists regarding the applicable sentencing regime if they again
transgress. This intelligible principle provides guidance, allowing a
person to conform his conduct to the law. While this approach may at
times be more difficult for courts to implement, it is within congres
sional power to enact. Pp. 13–14.
598 F. 3d 334, affirmed
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. THOMAS, J., filed
an opinion concurring in the judgment. SCALIA, J., filed a dissenting
opinion. KAGAN, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, J.,
joined.

