Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–11121
_________________

J. D. B., PETITIONER v. NORTH CAROLINA
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF

NORTH CAROLINA

[June 16, 2011] 


JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR delivered the opinion of the Court.
This case presents the question whether the age of a
child subjected to police questioning is relevant to the
custody analysis of Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U. S. 436
(1966). It is beyond dispute that children will often feel
bound to submit to police questioning when an adult in the
same circumstances would feel free to leave. Seeing no
reason for police officers or courts to blind themselves to
that commonsense reality, we hold that a child’s age prop
erly informs the Miranda custody analysis.
I

A

Petitioner J. D. B. was a 13-year-old, seventh-grade
student attending class at Smith Middle School in Chapel
Hill, North Carolina when he was removed from his class
room by a uniformed police officer, escorted to a closed
door conference room, and questioned by police for at least
half an hour.
This was the second time that police questioned J. D. B.
in the span of a week. Five days earlier, two home break
ins occurred, and various items were stolen. Police
stopped and questioned J. D. B. after he was seen behind a


2

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

residence in the neighborhood where the crimes occurred.
That same day, police also spoke to J. D. B.’s grand
mother—his legal guardian—as well as his aunt.
Police later learned that a digital camera matching the
description of one of the stolen items had been found at
J. D. B.’s middle school and seen in J. D. B.’s possession.
Investigator DiCostanzo, the juvenile investigator with
the local police force who had been assigned to the case,
went to the school to question J. D. B. Upon arrival,
DiCostanzo informed the uniformed police officer on detail
to the school (a so-called school resource officer), the assis
tant principal, and an administrative intern that he was
there to question J. D. B. about the break-ins. Although
DiCostanzo asked the school administrators to verify
J. D. B.’s date of birth, address, and parent contact in
formation from school records, neither the police offi
cers nor the school administrators contacted J. D. B.’s
grandmother.
The uniformed officer interrupted J. D. B.’s afternoon
social studies class, removed J. D. B. from the classroom,
and escorted him to a school conference room.1 There,
J. D. B. was met by DiCostanzo, the assistant principal,
and the administrative intern. The door to the conference
room was closed. With the two police officers and the two
administrators present, J. D. B. was questioned for the
next 30 to 45 minutes. Prior to the commencement of
questioning, J. D. B. was given neither Miranda warnings
nor the opportunity to speak to his grandmother. Nor was
he informed that he was free to leave the room.
Questioning began with small talk—discussion of sports
and J. D. B.’s family life. DiCostanzo asked, and J. D. B.
——————
1 Although the State suggests that the “record is unclear as to who
brought J. D. B. to the conference room, and the trial court made no
factual findings on this specific point,” Brief for Respondent 3, n. 1, the
State agreed at the certiorari stage that “the SRO [school resource
officer] escorted petitioner” to the room, Brief in Opposition 3.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

agreed, to discuss the events of the prior weekend. Deny
ing any wrongdoing, J. D. B. explained that he had been in
the neighborhood where the crimes occurred because he
was seeking work mowing lawns. DiCostanzo pressed
J. D. B. for additional detail about his efforts to obtain
work; asked J. D. B. to explain a prior incident, when one
of the victims returned home to find J. D. B. behind her
house; and confronted J. D. B. with the stolen camera.
The assistant principal urged J. D. B. to “do the right
thing,” warning J. D. B. that “the truth always comes out
in the end.” App. 99a, 112a.
Eventually, J. D. B. asked whether he would “still be in
trouble” if he returned the “stuff.” Ibid. In response,
DiCostanzo explained that return of the stolen items
would be helpful, but “this thing is going to court” regard
less. Id., at 112a; ibid. (“[W]hat’s done is done[;] now you
need to help yourself by making it right”); see also id., at
99a. DiCostanzo then warned that he may need to seek a
secure custody order if he believed that J. D. B. would
continue to break into other homes. When J. D. B. asked
what a secure custody order was, DiCostanzo explained
that “it’s where you get sent to juvenile detention before
court.” Id., at 112a.
After learning of the prospect of juvenile detention,
J. D. B. confessed that he and a friend were responsible for
the break-ins. DiCostanzo only then informed J. D. B.
that he could refuse to answer the investigator’s questions
and that he was free to leave.2 Asked whether he under
——————
2 The

North Carolina Supreme Court noted that the trial court’s fac
tual findings were “uncontested and therefore . . . binding” on it. In re
J. D. B., 363 N. C. 664, 668, 686 S. E. 2d 135, 137 (2009). The court
described the sequence of events set forth in the text. See id., at 670–
671, 686 S. E. 2d, at 139. (“Immediately following J. D. B.’s initial
confession, Investigator DiCostanzo informed J. D. B. that he did not
have to speak with him and that he was free to leave” (internal quota
tion marks and alterations omitted)). Though less than perfectly


4

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

stood, J. D. B. nodded and provided further detail, includ
ing information about the location of the stolen items.
Eventually J. D. B. wrote a statement, at DiCostanzo’s
request. When the bell rang indicating the end of the
schoolday, J. D. B. was allowed to leave to catch the bus
home.
B
Two juvenile petitions were filed against J. D. B., each
alleging one count of breaking and entering and one count
of larceny. J. D. B.’s public defender moved to suppress
his statements and the evidence derived therefrom, argu
ing that suppression was necessary because J. D. B. had
been “interrogated by police in a custodial setting without
being afforded Miranda warning[s],” App. 89a, and be
cause his statements were involuntary under the totality
of the circumstances test, id., at 142a; see Schneckloth v.
Bustamonte, 412 U. S. 218, 226 (1973) (due process pre
cludes admission of a confession where “a defendant’s will
was overborne” by the circumstances of the interrogation).
After a suppression hearing at which DiCostanzo and
J. D. B. testified, the trial court denied the motion, decid
ing that J. D. B. was not in custody at the time of the
schoolhouse interrogation and that his statements were
voluntary. As a result, J. D. B. entered a transcript of
admission to all four counts, renewing his objection to the
denial of his motion to suppress, and the court adjudicated
J. D. B. delinquent. 

—————— 

explicit, the trial court’s order indicates a finding that J. D. B. initially

confessed prior to DiCostanzo’s warnings. See App. 99a.
Nonetheless, both parties’ submissions to this Court suggest that
the warnings came after DiCostanzo raised the possibility of a secure
custody order but before J. D. B. confessed for the first time. See Brief
for Petitioner 5; Brief for Respondent 5. Because we remand for a
determination whether J. D. B. was in custody under the proper analy
sis, the state courts remain free to revisit whether the trial court made
a conclusive finding of fact in this respect.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

A divided panel of the North Carolina Court of Appeals
affirmed. In re J. D. B., 196 N. C. App. 234, 674 S. E. 2d
795 (2009). The North Carolina Supreme Court held, over
two dissents, that J. D. B. was not in custody when he
confessed, “declin[ing] to extend the test for custody to
include consideration of the age . . . of an individual sub
jected to questioning by police.” In re J. D. B., 363 N. C.
664, 672, 686 S. E. 2d 135, 140 (2009).3
We granted certiorari to determine whether the
Miranda custody analysis includes consideration of a
juvenile suspect’s age. 562 U. S. ___ (2010).
II 

A

Any police interview of an individual suspected of a
crime has “coercive aspects to it.” Oregon v. Mathiason,
429 U. S. 492, 495 (1977) (per curiam). Only those inter
rogations that occur while a suspect is in police custody,
however, “heighte[n] the risk” that statements obtained
are not the product of the suspect’s free choice. Dickerson
v. United States, 530 U. S. 428, 435 (2000).
By its very nature, custodial police interrogation entails
“inherently compelling pressures.” Miranda, 384 U. S., at
467. Even for an adult, the physical and psychological
isolation of custodial interrogation can “undermine the
individual’s will to resist and . . . compel him to speak
where he would not otherwise do so freely.” Ibid. Indeed,
the pressure of custodial interrogation is so immense that
it “can induce a frighteningly high percentage of people to
confess to crimes they never committed.” Corley v. United
States, 556 U. S. __, __ (2009) (slip op., at 16) (citing Drizin
——————
3 J. D. B.’s challenge in the North Carolina Supreme Court focused on
the lower courts’ conclusion that he was not in custody for purposes of
Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U. S. 436 (1966). The North Carolina Su
preme Court did not address the trial court’s holding that the state
ments were voluntary, and that question is not before us.


6

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

& Leo, The Problem of False Confessions in the Post-DNA
World, 82 N. C. L. Rev. 891, 906–907 (2004)); see also
Miranda, 384 U. S., at 455, n. 23. That risk is all the
more troubling—and recent studies suggest, all the more
acute—when the subject of custodial interrogation is a
juvenile. See Brief for Center on Wrongful Convictions of
Youth et al. as Amici Curiae 21–22 (collecting empirical
studies that “illustrate the heightened risk of false confes
sions from youth”).
Recognizing that the inherently coercive nature of cus
todial interrogation “blurs the line between voluntary and
involuntary statements,” Dickerson, 530 U. S., at 435,
this Court in Miranda adopted a set of prophylactic mea
sures designed to safeguard the constitutional guarantee
against self-incrimination. Prior to questioning, a suspect
“must be warned that he has a right to remain silent, that
any statement he does make may be used as evidence
against him, and that he has a right to the presence of an
attorney, either retained or appointed.” 384 U. S., at 444;
see also Florida v. Powell, 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip
op., at 8) (“The four warnings Miranda requires are in
variable, but this Court has not dictated the words in
which the essential information must be conveyed”). And,
if a suspect makes a statement during custodial interroga
tion, the burden is on the Government to show, as a “pre
requisit[e]” to the statement’s admissibility as evidence in
the Government’s case in chief, that the defendant “volun
tarily, knowingly and intelligently” waived his rights.4
Miranda, 384 U. S., at 444, 475–476; Dickerson, 530 U. S.,
at 443–444.
——————
4 Amici on behalf of J. D. B. question whether children of all ages can
comprehend Miranda warnings and suggest that additional procedural
safeguards may be necessary to protect their Miranda rights. Brief for
Juvenile Law Center et al. as Amici Curiae 13–14, n. 7. Whatever the
merit of that contention, it has no relevance here, where no Miranda
warnings were administered at all.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

Because these measures protect the individual against
the coercive nature of custodial interrogation, they are
required “ ‘only where there has been such a restriction on
a person’s freedom as to render him “in custody.” ’ ” Stans
bury v. California, 511 U. S. 318, 322 (1994) (per curiam)
(quoting Oregon v. Mathiason, 429 U. S. 492, 495 (1977)
(per curiam)).
As we have repeatedly emphasized,
whether a suspect is “in custody” is an objective inquiry.
“Two discrete inquiries are essential to the determina
tion: first, what were the circumstances surrounding
the interrogation; and second, given those circum
stances, would a reasonable person have felt he or she
was at liberty to terminate the interrogation and
leave. Once the scene is set and the players’ lines and
actions are reconstructed, the court must apply an ob
jective test to resolve the ultimate inquiry: was there
a formal arrest or restraint on freedom of movement
of the degree associated with formal arrest.” Thomp
son v. Keohane, 516 U. S. 99, 112 (1995) (internal quo
tation marks, alteration, and footnote omitted).
See also Yarborough v. Alvarado, 541 U. S. 652, 662–663
(2004); Stansbury, 511 U. S., at 323; Berkemer v. McCarty,
468 U. S. 420, 442, and n. 35 (1984). Rather than demar
cate a limited set of relevant circumstances, we have
required police officers and courts to “examine all of the
circumstances surrounding the interrogation,” Stansbury,
511 U. S., at 322, including any circumstance that “would
have affected how a reasonable person” in the suspect’s
position “would perceive his or her freedom to leave,” id.,
at 325. On the other hand, the “subjective views harbored
by either the interrogating officers or the person being
questioned” are irrelevant. Id., at 323. The test, in other
words, involves no consideration of the “actual mindset” of
the particular suspect subjected to police questioning.
Alvarado, 541 U. S., at 667; see also California v. Beheler,


8

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

463 U. S. 1121, 1125, n. 3 (1983) (per curiam).
The benefit of the objective custody analysis is that it is
“designed to give clear guidance to the police.” Alvarado,
541 U. S., at 668. But see Berkemer, 468 U. S., at 441
(recognizing the “occasiona[l] . . . difficulty” that police and
courts nonetheless have in “deciding exactly when a sus
pect has been taken into custody”). Police must make in
the-moment judgments as to when to administer Miranda
warnings. By limiting analysis to the objective circum
stances of the interrogation, and asking how a reasonable
person in the suspect’s position would understand his
freedom to terminate questioning and leave, the objective
test avoids burdening police with the task of anticipating
the idiosyncrasies of every individual suspect and divining
how those particular traits affect each person’s subjective
state of mind. See id., at 430–431 (officers are not re
quired to “make guesses” as to circumstances “unknow
able” to them at the time); Alvarado, 541 U. S., at 668
(officers are under no duty “to consider . . . contingent
psychological factors when deciding when suspects should
be advised of their Miranda rights”).
B
The State and its amici contend that a child’s age has no
place in the custody analysis, no matter how young the
child subjected to police questioning. We cannot agree. In
some circumstances, a child’s age “would have affected
how a reasonable person” in the suspect’s position “would
perceive his or her freedom to leave.” Stansbury, 511
U. S., at 325. That is, a reasonable child subjected to
police questioning will sometimes feel pressured to submit
when a reasonable adult would feel free to go. We think
it clear that courts can account for that reality without
doing any damage to the objective nature of the custody
analysis.
A child’s age is far “more than a chronological fact.”


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455 U. S. 104, 115 (1982); accord,
Gall v. United States, 552 U. S. 38, 58 (2007); Roper v.
Simmons, 543 U. S. 551, 569 (2005); Johnson v. Texas, 509
U. S. 350, 367 (1993). It is a fact that “generates common
sense conclusions about behavior and perception.” Alva
rado, 541 U. S., at 674 (BREYER, J., dissenting). Such
conclusions apply broadly to children as a class. And, they
are self-evident to anyone who was a child once himself,
including any police officer or judge.
Time and again, this Court has drawn these common
sense conclusions for itself. We have observed that chil
dren “generally are less mature and responsible than
adults,” Eddings, 455 U. S., at 115–116; that they “often
lack the experience, perspective, and judgment to recog
nize and avoid choices that could be detrimental to them,”
Bellotti v. Baird, 443 U. S. 622, 635 (1979) (plurality opin
ion); that they “are more vulnerable or susceptible to . . .
outside pressures” than adults, Roper, 543 U. S., at 569;
and so on. See Graham v. Florida, 560 U. S. ___, ___
(2010) (slip op., at 17) (finding no reason to “reconsider”
these observations about the common “nature of juve
niles”). Addressing the specific context of police interroga
tion, we have observed that events that “would leave a
man cold and unimpressed can overawe and overwhelm a
lad in his early teens.” Haley v. Ohio, 332 U. S. 596, 599
(1948) (plurality opinion); see also Gallegos v. Colorado,
370 U. S. 49, 54 (1962) (“[N]o matter how sophisticated,” a
juvenile subject of police interrogation “cannot be com
pared” to an adult subject). Describing no one child in
particular, these observations restate what “any parent
knows”—indeed, what any person knows—about children
generally. Roper, 543 U. S., at 569.5
——————
5 Although citation to social science and cognitive science authorities
is unnecessary to establish these commonsense propositions, the
literature confirms what experience bears out. See, e.g., Graham v.


10

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

Our various statements to this effect are far from
unique. The law has historically reflected the same as
sumption that children characteristically lack the capacity
to exercise mature judgment and possess only an incom
plete ability to understand the world around them. See,
e.g., 1 W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of Eng
land *464–*465 (hereinafter Blackstone) (explaining that
limits on children’s legal capacity under the common law
“secure them from hurting themselves by their own im
provident acts”). Like this Court’s own generalizations,
the legal disqualifications placed on children as a class—
e.g., limitations on their ability to alienate property, enter
a binding contract enforceable against them, and marry
without parental consent—exhibit the settled understand
ing that the differentiating characteristics of youth are
universal.6
Indeed, even where a “reasonable person” standard
——————
Florida, 560 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 17) (“[D]evelopments in
psychology and brain science continue to show fundamental differences
between juvenile and adult minds”).
6 See, e.g., 1 E. Farnsworth, Contracts §4.4, p. 379, and n. 1 (1990)
(“Common law courts early announced the prevailing view that a
minor’s contract is ‘voidable’ at the instance of the minor” (citing 8 W.
Holdsworth, History of English Law 51 (1926))); 1 D. Kramer, Legal
Rights of Children §8.1, p. 663 (rev. 2d ed. 2005) (“[W]hile minor
children have the right to acquire and own property, they are consid
ered incapable of property management” (footnote omitted)); 2 J. Kent,
Commentaries on American Law *78–*79, *90 (G. Comstock ed., 11th
ed. 1867); see generally id., at *233 (explaining that, under the common
law, “[t]he necessity of guardians results from the inability of infants to
take care of themselves . . . and this inability continues, in contempla
tion of law, until the infant has attained the age of [21]”); 1 Blackstone
*465 (“It is generally true, that an infant can neither aliene his lands,
nor do any legal act, nor make a deed, nor indeed any manner of
contract, that will bind him”); Roper v. Simmons, 543 U. S. 551, 569
(2005) (“In recognition of the comparative immaturity and irresponsi
bility of juveniles, almost every State prohibits those under 18 years
of age from voting, serving on juries, or marrying without parental
consent”).


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

otherwise applies, the common law has reflected the real
ity that children are not adults. In negligence suits, for
instance, where liability turns on what an objectively
reasonable person would do in the circumstances, “[a]ll
American jurisdictions accept the idea that a person’s
childhood is a relevant circumstance” to be considered.
Restatement (Third) of Torts §10, Comment b, p. 117
(2005); see also id., Reporters’ Note, pp. 121–122 (collect
ing cases); Restatement (Second) of Torts §283A, Com
ment b, p. 15 (1963–1964) (“[T]here is a wide basis of
community experience upon which it is possible, as a
practical matter, to determine what is to be expected of
[children]”).
As this discussion establishes, “[o]ur history is replete
with laws and judicial recognition” that children cannot be
viewed simply as miniature adults. Eddings, 455 U. S., at
115–116. We see no justification for taking a different
course here. So long as the child’s age was known to the
officer at the time of the interview, or would have been
objectively apparent to any reasonable officer, including
age as part of the custody analysis requires officers nei
ther to consider circumstances “unknowable” to them,
Berkemer, 468 U. S., at 430, nor to “anticipat[e] the frail
ties or idiosyncrasies” of the particular suspect whom they
question, Alvarado, 541 U. S., at 662 (internal quotation
marks omitted). The same “wide basis of community
experience” that makes it possible, as an objective matter,
“to determine what is to be expected” of children in other
contexts, Restatement (Second) of Torts §283A, at 15; see
supra, at 10, and n. 6, likewise makes it possible to know
what to expect of children subjected to police questioning.
In other words, a child’s age differs from other personal
characteristics that, even when known to police, have no
objectively discernible relationship to a reasonable per
son’s understanding of his freedom of action. Alvarado,
holds, for instance, that a suspect’s prior interrogation


12

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

history with law enforcement has no role to play in the
custody analysis because such experience could just as
easily lead a reasonable person to feel free to walk away
as to feel compelled to stay in place. 541 U. S., at 668.
Because the effect in any given case would be “contingent
[on the] psycholog[y]” of the individual suspect, the Court
explained, such experience cannot be considered without
compromising the objective nature of the custody analysis.
Ibid. A child’s age, however, is different. Precisely be
cause childhood yields objective conclusions like those we
have drawn ourselves—among others, that children are
“most susceptible to influence,” Eddings, 455 U. S., at 115,
and “outside pressures,” Roper, 543 U. S., at 569—
considering age in the custody analysis in no way involves
a determination of how youth “subjectively affect[s] the
mindset” of any particular child, Brief for Respondent 14.7
In fact, in many cases involving juvenile suspects, the
custody analysis would be nonsensical absent some con
sideration of the suspect’s age. This case is a prime exam
ple. Were the court precluded from taking J. D. B.’s youth
into account, it would be forced to evaluate the circum
stances present here through the eyes of a reasonable
person of average years. In other words, how would a
reasonable adult understand his situation, after being
removed from a seventh-grade social studies class by a
uniformed school resource officer; being encouraged by his
assistant principal to “do the right thing”; and being
warned by a police investigator of the prospect of juvenile
detention and separation from his guardian and primary
caretaker? To describe such an inquiry is to demonstrate
——————
7 Thus, contrary to the dissent’s protestations, today’s holding neither
invites consideration of whether a particular suspect is “unusually
meek or compliant,” post, at 9 (opinion of ALITO, J.), nor “expan[ds]” the
Miranda custody analysis, post, at 8, into a test that requires officers to
anticipate and account for a suspect’s every personal characteristic, see
post, at 11–12.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

its absurdity. Neither officers nor courts can reasonably
evaluate the effect of objective circumstances that, by their
nature, are specific to children without accounting for the
age of the child subjected to those circumstances.
Indeed, although the dissent suggests that concerns
“regarding the application of the Miranda custody rule to
minors can be accommodated by considering the unique
circumstances present when minors are questioned in
school,” post, at 17 (opinion of ALITO, J.), the effect of the
schoolhouse setting cannot be disentangled from the iden
tity of the person questioned. A student—whose presence
at school is compulsory and whose disobedience at school
is cause for disciplinary action—is in a far different posi
tion than, say, a parent volunteer on school grounds to
chaperone an event, or an adult from the community on
school grounds to attend a basketball game. Without
asking whether the person “questioned in school” is a
“minor,” ibid., the coercive effect of the schoolhouse setting
is unknowable.
Our prior decision in Alvarado in no way undermines
these conclusions. In that case, we held that a state-court
decision that failed to mention a 17-year-old’s age as part
of the Miranda custody analysis was not objectively un
reasonable under the deferential standard of review set
forth by the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty
Act of 1996 (AEDPA), 110 Stat. 1214. Like the North
Carolina Supreme Court here, see 363 N. C., at 672, 686
S. E. 2d, at 140, we observed that accounting for a juve
nile’s age in the Miranda custody analysis “could be
viewed as creating a subjective inquiry,” 541 U. S., at 668.
We said nothing, however, of whether such a view would
be correct under the law. Cf. Renico v. Lett, 559 U. S. ___,
____, n. 3 (2010) (slip op., at 11, n. 3) (“[W]hether the
[state court] was right or wrong is not the pertinent ques
tion under AEDPA”). To the contrary, Justice O’Connor’s
concurring opinion explained that a suspect’s age may


14

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

indeed “be relevant to the ‘custody’ inquiry.” Alvarado,
541 U. S., at 669.
Reviewing the question de novo today, we hold that so
long as the child’s age was known to the officer at the time
of police questioning, or would have been objectively ap
parent to a reasonable officer, its inclusion in the custody
analysis is consistent with the objective nature of that
test.8 This is not to say that a child’s age will be a deter
minative, or even a significant, factor in every case. Cf.
ibid. (O’Connor, J., concurring) (explaining that a state
court decision omitting any mention of the defendant’s age
was not unreasonable under AEDPA’s deferential stan
dard of review where the defendant “was almost 18 years
old at the time of his interview”); post, at 17 (suggesting
that “teenagers nearing the age of majority” are likely to
react to an interrogation as would a “typical 18-year-old
in similar circumstances”). It is, however, a reality that
courts cannot simply ignore.
III
The State and its amici offer numerous reasons that
courts must blind themselves to a juvenile defendant’s
age. None is persuasive.
To start, the State contends that a child’s age must be
——————
8 This approach does not undermine the basic principle that an inter
rogating officer’s unarticulated, internal thoughts are never—in and of
themselves—objective circumstances of an interrogation. See supra, at
7; Stansbury v. California, 511 U. S. 318, 323 (1994) (per curiam).
Unlike a child’s youth, an officer’s purely internal thoughts have no
conceivable effect on how a reasonable person in the suspect’s position
would understand his freedom of action. See id., at 323–325; Berkemer
v. McCarty, 468 U. S. 420, 442 (1984). Rather than “overtur[n]” that
settled principle, post, at 13, the limitation that a child’s age may
inform the custody analysis only when known or knowable simply
reflects our unwillingness to require officers to “make guesses” as to
circumstances “unknowable” to them in deciding when to give Miranda
warnings, Berkemer, 468 U. S., at 430–431.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

excluded from the custody inquiry because age is a per
sonal characteristic specific to the suspect himself rather
than an “external” circumstance of the interrogation.
Brief for Respondent 21; see also id., at 18–19 (distin
guishing “personal characteristics” from “objective facts
related to the interrogation itself” such as the location and
duration of the interrogation). Despite the supposed
significance of this distinction, however, at oral argument
counsel for the State suggested without hesitation that at
least some undeniably personal characteristics—for in
stance, whether the individual being questioned is blind—
are circumstances relevant to the custody analysis. See
Tr. of Oral Arg. 41. Thus, the State’s quarrel cannot be
that age is a personal characteristic, without more.9
The State further argues that age is irrelevant to the
custody analysis because it “go[es] to how a suspect may
internalize and perceive the circumstances of an interro
gation.” Brief for Respondent 12; see also Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 21 (hereinafter U. S. Brief) (argu
ing that a child’s age has no place in the custody analysis
because it goes to whether a suspect is “particularly sus
ceptible” to the external circumstances of the interrogation
(some internal quotation marks omitted)). But the same
can be said of every objective circumstance that the State
agrees is relevant to the custody analysis: Each circum
stance goes to how a reasonable person would “internalize
and perceive” every other. See, e.g., Stansbury, 511 U. S.,
at 325. Indeed, this is the very reason that we ask
whether the objective circumstances “add up to custody,”
——————
9 The State’s purported distinction between blindness and age—that
taking account of a suspect’s youth requires a court “to get into the
mind” of the child, whereas taking account of a suspect’s blindness does
not, Tr. of Oral Arg. 41–42—is mistaken. In either case, the question
becomes how a reasonable person would understand the circumstances,
either from the perspective of a blind person or, as here, a 13-year-old
child.


16

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

Keohane, 516 U. S., at 113, instead of evaluating the cir
cumstances one by one.
In the same vein, the State and its amici protest that
the “effect of . . . age on [the] perception of custody is
internal,” Brief for Respondent 20, or “psychological,” U. S.
Brief 21. But the whole point of the custody analysis is to
determine whether, given the circumstances, “a reason
able person [would] have felt he or she was . . . at liberty
to terminate the interrogation and leave.” Keohane, 516
U. S., at 112. Because the Miranda custody inquiry turns
on the mindset of a reasonable person in the suspect’s
position, it cannot be the case that a circumstance is sub
jective simply because it has an “internal” or “psychologi
cal” impact on perception. Were that so, there would be no
objective circumstances to consider at all.
Relying on our statements that the objective custody
test is “designed to give clear guidance to the police,”
Alvarado, 541 U. S., at 668, the State next argues that a
child’s age must be excluded from the analysis in order to
preserve clarity. Similarly, the dissent insists that the
clarity of the custody analysis will be destroyed unless a
“one-size-fits-all reasonable-person test” applies. Post, at
13. In reality, however, ignoring a juvenile defendant’s
age will often make the inquiry more artificial, see supra,
at 12–13, and thus only add confusion. And in any event,
a child’s age, when known or apparent, is hardly an ob
scure factor to assess. Though the State and the dissent
worry about gradations among children of different ages,
that concern cannot justify ignoring a child’s age alto
gether. Just as police officers are competent to account for
other objective circumstances that are a matter of degree
such as the length of questioning or the number of officers
present, so too are they competent to evaluate the effect of
relative age. Indeed, they are competent to do so even
though an interrogation room lacks the “reflective atmos
phere of a [jury] deliberation room,” post, at 15. The same


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

is true of judges, including those whose childhoods have
long since passed, see post, at 14. In short, officers and
judges need no imaginative powers, knowledge of devel
opmental psychology, training in cognitive science, or
expertise in social and cultural anthropology to account for
a child’s age. They simply need the common sense to
know that a 7-year-old is not a 13-year-old and neither is
an adult.
There is, however, an even more fundamental flaw with
the State’s plea for clarity and the dissent’s singular focus
on simplifying the analysis: Not once have we excluded
from the custody analysis a circumstance that we deter
mined was relevant and objective, simply to make the
fault line between custodial and noncustodial “brighter.”
Indeed, were the guiding concern clarity and nothing else,
the custody test would presumably ask only whether the
suspect had been placed under formal arrest. Berkemer,
468 U. S., at 441; see ibid. (acknowledging the “occa
siona[l] . . . difficulty” police officers confront in determin
ing when a suspect has been taken into custody). But
we have rejected that “more easily administered line,”
recognizing that it would simply “enable the police to
circumvent the constraints on custodial interrogations
established by Miranda.” Ibid.; see also ibid., n. 33.10
Finally, the State and the dissent suggest that excluding
——————
10 Contrary to the dissent’s intimation, see post, at 8, Miranda does
not answer the question whether a child’s age is an objective circum
stance relevant to the custody analysis. Miranda simply holds that
warnings must be given once a suspect is in custody, without “paus[ing]
to inquire in individual cases whether the defendant was aware of his
rights without a warning being given.” 384 U. S., at 468; see also id., at
468–469 (“Assessments of the knowledge the defendant possessed,
based on information as to age, education, intelligence, or prior contact
with authorities, can never be more than speculation; a warning is a
clearcut fact” (footnote omitted)). That conclusion says nothing about
whether age properly informs whether a child is in custody in the first
place.


18

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

age from the custody analysis comes at no cost to juve
niles’ constitutional rights because the due process volun
tariness test independently accounts for a child’s youth.
To be sure, that test permits consideration of a child’s age,
and it erects its own barrier to admission of a defendant’s
inculpatory statements at trial. See Gallegos, 370 U. S., at
53–55; Haley, 332 U. S., at 599–601; see also post, at 17–
18 (“[C]ourts should be instructed to take particular care
to ensure that [young children’s] incriminating statements
were not obtained involuntarily”). But Miranda’s proce
dural safeguards exist precisely because the voluntariness
test is an inadequate barrier when custodial interrogation
is at stake. See 384 U. S., at 458 (“Unless adequate pro
tective devices are employed to dispel the compulsion
inherent in custodial surroundings, no statement obtained
from the defendant can truly be the product of his free
choice”); Dickerson, 530 U. S., at 442 (“[R]eliance on the
traditional totality-of-the-circumstances test raise[s] a risk
of overlooking an involuntary custodial confession”); see
also supra, at 5–6. To hold, as the State requests, that a
child’s age is never relevant to whether a suspect has been
taken into custody—and thus to ignore the very real dif
ferences between children and adults—would be to deny
children the full scope of the procedural safeguards that
Miranda guarantees to adults.
*
*
*
The question remains whether J. D. B. was in custody
when police interrogated him. We remand for the state
courts to address that question, this time taking account
of all of the relevant circumstances of the interrogation,
including J. D. B.’s age at the time. The judgment of the
North Carolina Supreme Court is reversed, and the case
is remanded for proceedings not inconsistent with this
opinion.
It is so ordered.

