(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BLOATE v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–728.

Argued October 6, 2009—Decided March 8, 2010

The Speedy Trial Act of 1974 (Act) requires a criminal defendant’s trial
to commence within 70 days of his indictment or initial appearance,
18 U. S. C. §3161(c)(1), and entitles him to dismissal of the charges if
that deadline is not met, §3162(a)(2). As relevant here, the Act
automatically excludes from the 70-day period “delay resulting from
. . . proceedings concerning the defendant,” 18 U. S. C. A. §3161(h)(1)
(hereinafter subsection (h)(1)), and separately permits a district court
to exclude “delay resulting from a continuance” it grants, provided
the court makes findings required by §3161(h)(7) (hereinafter subsec
tion (h)(7)). Petitioner’s indictment on federal firearm and drug pos
session charges started the 70-day clock on August 24, 2006. After
petitioner’s arraignment, the Magistrate Judge ordered the parties to
file pretrial motions by September 13. On September 7, the court
granted petitioner’s motion to extend that deadline, but on the new
due date, September 25, petitioner waived his right to file pretrial
motions. On October 4, the Magistrate Judge found the waiver vol
untary and intelligent. Over the next three months, petitioner’s trial
was delayed several times, often at petitioner’s instigation. On Feb
ruary 19, 2007—179 days after he was indicted—he moved to dismiss
the indictment, claiming that the Act’s 70-day limit had elapsed. In
denying the motion, the District Court excluded the time from Sep
tember 7 through October 4 as pretrial motion preparation time. At
trial, petitioner was found guilty on both counts and sentenced to
concurrent prison terms. The Eighth Circuit affirmed the denial of
the motion to dismiss, holding that the period from September 7
through October 4 was automatically excludable from the 70-day
limit under subsection (h)(1).
Held: The time granted to prepare pretrial motions is not automatically


2

BLOATE v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
excludable from the 70-day limit under subsection (h)(1). Such time
may be excluded only when a district court grants a continuance
based on appropriate findings under subsection (h)(7). Pp. 6–18.
(a) The delay at issue is governed by subsection (h)(1)(D) (hereinaf
ter subparagraph (D)), the enumerated category that renders auto
matically excludable “delay resulting from any pretrial motion, from
the filing of the motion through the conclusion of the hearing on, or
other prompt disposition of, such motion.” This provision communi
cates Congress’ judgment that pretrial motion-related delay is auto
matically excludable only from the time a pretrial motion is filed
through a specified hearing or disposition point, and that other pre
trial motion-related delay is excludable only if it results in a continu
ance under subsection (h)(7). This limitation is significant because
Congress knew how to define the boundaries of subsection (h)(1)’s
enumerated exclusions broadly when it so desired. Although the pe
riod of delay the Government seeks to exclude in this case results
from a proceeding governed by subparagraph (D), that period pre
cedes the first day upon which Congress specified that such delay
may be excluded automatically and thus is not automatically exclud
able. Pp. 7–10.
(b) This analysis resolves the automatic excludability inquiry be
cause “[a] specific provision” (here, subparagraph (D)) “controls one[s]
of more general application” (here, subsections (h)(1) and (h)(7)).
Gozlon-Peretz v. United States, 498 U. S. 395, 407. A contrary result
would depart from the statute in a manner that underscores the pro
priety of this Court’s approach. Subsection (h)(1)’s phrase “including
but not limited to” does not show that subsection (h)(1) permits auto
matic exclusion of delay related to an enumerated category of pro
ceedings, but outside the boundaries set forth in the subparagraph
expressly addressed to that category. That would confuse the illus
trative nature of the subsection’s list of categories with the contents
of the categories themselves. Reading the “including but not limited
to” clause to modify the contents of each subparagraph in the list as
well as the list itself would violate settled statutory construction
principles by ignoring subsection (h)(1)’s structure and grammar and
in so doing rendering even the clearest of the subparagraphs inde
terminate and virtually superfluous. See generally id., at 410. Sub
section (h)(1)’s context supports this Court’s conclusion. Subsection
(h)(7) provides that delay “resulting from a continuance granted by
any judge” may be excluded, but only if the judge finds that “the ends
of justice served by taking such action outweigh the best interest of
the public and the defendant in a speedy trial,” and records those
findings. In setting forth the statutory factors justifying a subsection
(h)(7) continuance, Congress twice recognized the importance of ade


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
quate pretrial preparation time.
See §§3161(h)(7)(B)(ii),
3161(h)(7)(B)(iv). The Court’s determination that the delay at issue
is not automatically excludable gives full effect to subsection (h)(7),
and respects its provisions for excluding certain types of delay only
where a district court makes findings justifying the exclusion. The
Court’s precedents also support this reading of subsection (h)(1). See
Zedner v. United States, 547 U. S. 489, 502. Pp. 10–16.
(c) The Act does not force a district court to choose between reject
ing a defendant’s request for time to prepare pretrial motions and
risking dismissal of the indictment if preparation time delays the
trial. A court may still exclude preparation time under subsection
(h)(7) by granting a continuance for that purpose based on recorded
findings. Subsection (h)(7) provides “[m]uch of the Act’s flexibility,”
Zedner, 547 U. S., at 498, giving district courts “discretion . . . to ac
commodate limited delays for case-specific needs,” id., at 499. The
Government suggests that a district court may fail to make the nec
essary subsection (h)(7) findings, leading to a windfall gain for a de
fendant who induces delay beyond the 70-day limit. But dismissal
need not represent a windfall. If the court dismisses the charges
without prejudice, the Government may refile charges or reindict. In
ruling on a motion to dismiss under the Act, the district court should
consider, inter alia, the party responsible for the delay. Pp. 16–18.
(d) This Court does not consider whether any of the Act’s other ex
clusions would apply to all or part of the September 7 through Octo
ber 4 period that is not automatically excludable under subsection
(h)(1). P. 18.
534 F. 3d 893, reversed and remanded.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and STEVENS, SCALIA, KENNEDY, GINSBURG, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined. GINSBURG, J., filed a concurring opinion. ALITO, J., filed a dis
senting opinion, in which BREYER, J., joined.

