Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

egregious because all three uses appear in the same sen
tence. See id., at 118 (“[The] presumption [is] surely at its
most vigorous when a term is repeated within a given
sentence”).
The Court responds by noting another part of the stat
ute, a provision stating that prisoners shall receive cloth
ing, money, and transportation “[u]pon the release of [the]
prisoner on the expiration of the prisoner’s term of impris
onment.” §3624(d). A prisoner is released at the end of
his actual time behind bars, says the Court, and so “term
of imprisonment” must here refer to time actually served.
Yet release also comes at the end of a prisoner’s “term” in
the sense described above—that is, when the balance of
the sentence has been reduced to zero through a combina
tion of prison time and good time credits. Indeed, this
administrative use of the phrase fits well with the word
“expiration,” which in its most natural sense in this con
text refers to the close of a formal accounting period. See
Black’s Law Dictionary 619 (8th ed. 2004) (“A coming to
an end; esp., a formal termination on a closing date”). By
contrast, it is awkward at best to say, as the Court would
have it, that a prisoner’s actual time behind bars is some
thing that “expires.”
The Court’s approach produces yet another oddity. The
statute requires that prorated credit be awarded for “the
last year or portion of a year of the term of imprisonment.”
One might naturally assume that the last year of a ten
year term would be year ten. That is how things work
under the approach described above, in which a ten-year
sentence is subdivided into ten administrative segments.
But under the Court’s reading, a prisoner serving a ten
year sentence will never reach year ten of his term; year
ten simply does not exist. According to the Court, year
nine is the final year, and even year nine is not a full year:
It lasts “no more than 298 days.” Ante, at 3. If this
sounds confusing, it will be all the more so to the prisoner

