16

BARBER v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

that this system will be more comprehensible to prisoners
than one, like the BOP’s, that provides credit for actual
years.)
Third, under the dissent’s approach, credit is earned at
different rates during a single sentence. For the first
“administrative segmen[t]” in its 10-year example, the
prisoner serves 365 days and earns 54 days of credit. The
ratio of credit earned to days served is .148. For the sec
ond “administrative segmen[t],” the prisoner serves 311
days and earns 54 days of credit. This time, the ratio of
credit earned to days served is .174. (For the last “admin
istrative segmen[t],” the dissent tells us the prisoner will
receive “credit in a prorated amount,” but it does not tell
us which ratio should be used for the proration. Post, at
3.) The use of different rates finds no support in the stat
ute. The dissent objects that the statute “prescribes no
particular rate,” post, at 7, but in fact it does—54 days of
credit per year of good behavior—and it further requires
that credit for the last year be “prorated” using the same
proportion. Moreover, the dissent’s application of different
rates leads to odd results. For example, a model prisoner
sentenced on two separate 5-year terms (with a break in
between) will serve a different number of days from one
sentenced to a single 10-year term. How can this be if
both prisoners are earning 54 days of credit for each of
their 10 years in prison?
Fourth, §3624(b)(2) provides that good time credit “shall
vest on the date the prisoner is released from custody.”
(This provision does not apply to prisoners, like petition
ers, who committed their offenses before it was amended
in 1996, but the dissent plainly intends for its approach to
apply more broadly. See post, at 9 (noting the effect on
“almost 200,000 federal prisoners”).) Yet under the dis
sent’s approach, credit appears to vest immediately. See
post, at 3 (Days of credit for the first year “go toward
completion of the next year” so that the prisoner “would

