2

BARBER v. THOMAS
Syllabus
it awards credit for the sentence imposed, regardless of how much
time is actually served, a prisoner could receive credit for a year that
he does not spend in prison. Moreover the calculation of credit for
such a year would not be made “at the end of” that year. Nor could
the BOP determine whether the prisoner had exemplary behavior
“during that year.” This language did not find its way into the stat
ute by accident. The differences between the prior provision (re
pealed in 1984)—which granted the prisoner a deduction at the out
set of his sentence, subject to forfeiture for breaking prison rules—
and the present statute—under which “credit” is “earned” “at the end
of” the year based on an evaluation of behavior “during that year”—
show an intent to move from a prospective entitlement to a retrospec
tive award. The BOP’s method also furthers the basic purpose of the
statute. Section 3624 was part of the comprehensive Sentencing Re
form Act of 1984, which sought to achieve both increased sentencing
uniformity and greater honesty by “mak[ing] all sentences basically
determinate.” Mistretta v. United States, 488 U. S. 361, 367. There
after, the sentence the judge imposed would be the one the offender
actually served, with a sole statutory exception for good time credits.
Ibid. Section 3624(b) states the reason for the exception: to provide
an incentive for prisoners to “compl[y] with institutional disciplinary
regulations.” The exception is limited and tailored to its purpose—
credit is earned at the end of the year after compliance with institu
tional rules is demonstrated and thereby rewards and reinforces a
readily identifiable period of good behavior. The BOP’s approach fur
thers §3624’s objectives by tying the award directly to good behavior
during the preceding year. In contrast, petitioners’ approach would
allow a prisoner to earn credit for both the portion of his sentence
that he served and the portion offset with earned credit, which would
loosen the statute’s connection between good behavior and the good
time award. Pp. 5–8.
(b) Arguments to the contrary are unconvincing. Context indicates
that the phrase “term of imprisonment” as used in the portion of
§3624(b) at issue here refers to prison time actually served not, as pe
titioners contend, to the sentence imposed by the judge. Petitioners’
reliance on legislative history is misplaced. A U. S. Sentencing Com
mission Supplementary Report is not helpful to them either, because
there is no indication that the Commission, in that report or in the
Guidelines themselves, considered or referred to the particular ques
tion whether to base good time credit on time served or the sentence
imposed. Nor, in light of the statute’s text, structure, history, and
purpose, is this a case in which there is a “grievous ambiguity or un
certainty in the statute,” Muscarello v. United States, 524 U. S. 125,
139, permitting application of the rule of lenity. Because the BOP’s

