Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

satisfied through time spent behind bars. Assuming the
prisoner is well behaved, however, he may earn good time
credits along the way; and those credits may substitute for
actual prison time. Each year of the term comprises a full
365 days, which must be accounted for through a combina
tion of prison time and credits. Thus conceived, a pris
oner’s “term” is the administrative period along which
progress toward eventual freedom is marked.
Consider the Court’s example of a prisoner subject to a
ten-year sentence. See ante, at 2–4. The sentence is
divided into ten 365-day segments. Each segment consti
tutes a year of the term. The prisoner will spend the first
365 days behind bars. In the statute’s words, he has
reached “the end of the first year of the term.” Now is the
time for credit to be awarded, and he may receive up to 54
days if sufficiently well behaved. Because he has already
completed a full year of his term, those credits go toward
completion of the next year. If, based on good behavior, he
has earned the maximum of 54 days, he would need an
other 311 days behind bars before the second year of his
term of imprisonment is at an end (because 54 + 311 =
365). If he has earned fewer than 54 days, a longer incar
ceration will be required to reach 365. Regardless, once
the prisoner reaches the end of the second year of his
term, he will again be eligible to receive good time credits.
This process repeats itself for the third year of the term,
and so on. In the final year of his term (in this example,
the tenth segment into which his term has been divided),
the prisoner will receive credit in a prorated amount, to be
awarded “within the last six weeks of the sentence.” This
ensures that the prisoner does not reach the end of year
ten, only to find that he has just earned 54 days of credit
he no longer needs.
The controlling rule is that each year of the prisoner’s
term—each of the ten administrative segments—
comprises 365 days that must be completed through a

