Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

“credit in a prorated amount.” Ibid. In the end, the pris
oner will have served 10 “administrative segments,” ibid.,
collectively comprising 3,117 days in prison and 533 days
of credit.
The dissent claims “[r]eading ‘term of imprisonment’
this way is consistent with all parts of the statute.” Post,
at 4. We see at least four problems. First, the opening
sentence of §3624(a) instructs that “[a] prisoner shall be
released” upon “the expiration of the prisoner’s term of
imprisonment, less any time credited” for good behavior.
But if a prisoner’s “term of imprisonment” is the “period
that a prisoner must complete in order to earn his free
dom,” post, at 4, and it is “accounted for through a combi
nation of prison time and credits,” post, at 3, then a pris
oner should be released exactly at the end of his term of
imprisonment (without any further adjustment). Because
the dissent’s approach would require us to read words out
of the statute, or give prisoners double credit, its definition
cannot be used here.
Second, §3624(b)(1) tells us that a prisoner receives
credit “at the end of each year” based on behavior “during
that year.” Under the dissent’s approach, however, a
prisoner may receive credit at the end of each “administra
tive segmen[t]” presumably based on his behavior during
that segment. And because an “administrative segmen[t]”
is made up of some “combination of service and credits,”
post, at 4, each one lasts less than a calendar year. We do
not see how a system in which “a prisoner may complete a
particular year of his term in less than 365 calendar days,”
ibid., and receive full good time credit for doing so, can
possibly represent the most natural reading of this statu
tory language. Nor do we know, because the BOP has not
had an opportunity to tell us, whether a system in which a
“year” lasts anywhere from 311 to 365 calendar days (and
in which the “years” of a single prisoner’s sentence may all
be of different lengths), is easily administrable. (We doubt

