4

BARBER v. THOMAS
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

combination of service and credits. By combining actual
prison time with the credits he has earned, a prisoner may
complete a particular year of his term in less than 365
calendar days. As a result, credits may enable a well
behaved prisoner to complete his ten-year sentence before
ten calendar years have elapsed. For a ten-year (3,650
day) sentence, a prisoner will serve 3,117 days behind bars
if he earns a maximum of approximately 533 credits. This
is 63 more days of credit than under the Court’s reading—
more than 6 additional credit days for every year of the
sentence imposed.
Reading “term of imprisonment” this way is consistent
with all parts of the statute. The prisoner receives his
credit “at the end of each year of [his] term of imprison
ment,” a process that “begin[s] at the end of the first year
of the term.” Credit is only awarded if the prisoner has
proven well behaved “during that year.” This interpreta
tion fulfills the “objective of §3624”—rewarding a prisoner
for exemplary conduct during the preceding year. See
ante, at 8.
This approach also has a textual integrity that the
Court’s reading does not: It gives “term of imprisonment”
the same meaning each time it is used by the statute.
Every time it appears in §3624(b)(1), “term of imprison
ment” refers to the administrative period that a prisoner
must complete in order to earn his freedom. The Court, by
contrast, would read this phrase to mean “time actually
served” the third time it is used, but “the sentence im
posed” the first two times it is used (“ ‘a prisoner who is
serving a term of imprisonment of more than 1 year[,]
other than a term of imprisonment for the duration of the
prisoner’s life’ ”). See ante, at 8–9. The Court’s interpreta
tion thus runs afoul of the “ ‘presumption that a given
term is used to mean the same thing throughout a stat
ute.’ ” Ante, at 9 (quoting Brown v. Gardner, 513 U. S.
115, 118 (1994)). The inconsistency here is particularly

