(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BARBER ET AL. v. THOMAS, WARDEN
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–5201. Argued March 30, 2010—Decided June 7, 2010
The federal sentencing statute at issue provides that a “prisoner . . .
serving a term of imprisonment of more than 1 year . . . may receive
credit toward the service of [that] sentence . . . of up to 54 days at the
end of each year” subject to the Bureau of Prison’s (BOP) “determina
tion . . . that, during that year, the prisoner” has behaved in an ex
emplary fashion. 18 U. S. C. §3624(b)(1). Credit “for the last year or
portion of a year of the term of imprisonment [is] prorated . . . .” Ibid.
The BOP applies this statute using a methodology that awards 54
days of credit at the end of each year the prisoner serves and sets
those days to the side. When the difference between the time re
maining in the sentence and the amount of accumulated credit is less
than one year, the BOP awards a prorated amount of credit for that
final year proportional to the awards in other years.
Petitioners claim that the BOP’s calculation method is unlawful
because §3624(b)(1) requires a calculation based on the length of the
term of imprisonment imposed by the sentencing judge, not the
length of time that the prisoner actually serves. The District Court
rejected this challenge in each of petitioner’s cases, and the Ninth
Circuit affirmed.
Held: Because the BOP’s method for calculating good time credit re
flects the most natural reading of the statute, it is lawful. Pp. 5–17.
(a) The statute’s language and purpose, taken together, support the
BOP’s method. That method tracks §3624(b)’s language by providing
a prisoner a maximum credit of 54 days for each full year of impris
onment and a proportionally adjusted amount of credit for any addi
tional time served that is less than a full year. As §3624(b) directs,
the BOP awards the credit “at the end of each year” of imprisonment.
Petitioners’ approach cannot be reconciled with the statute. Because

