10

BARBER v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

prisoner is provided with these necessities at the time of
his actual release from prison (sometime during Year 9 in
our example), not at the end of the term that the judge
imposed (which would be over a year later). Since the
statute uses the same phrase “term of imprisonment” in
two different ways, the presumption cannot help petition
ers here. And, for the reasons we have given, see Part II,
supra, context here indicates that the particular instance
of the phrase “term of imprisonment” at issue refers to
prison time actually served rather than the sentence
imposed by the judge.
Second, petitioners seek to draw support from the stat
ute’s legislative history. But those who consider legisla
tive history significant cannot find that history helpful to
petitioners here. Petitioners point, for example, to a
statement in the Senate Report accompanying the Sen
tencing Reform Act, which says that the “method of calcu
lation” of good time “will be considerably less complicated
than under current law in many respects,” and that “credit
toward early release is earned at a steady and easily
determined rate that will have an obvious impact on the
prisoner’s release date.” S. Rep. No. 98–225, p. 146–147
(1983); see Brief for Petitioners 31–32. But these state
ments are consistent with the BOP’s interpretation of the
statute. Its method, as we understand it, is not particu
larly difficult to apply and it is certainly less complex than
prior law, which provided for the accumulation of two
different kinds of good time credit (general and industrial),
calculated in different manners (prospectively and retro
spectively), and awarded at different rates, depending on
the length of sentence imposed on the prisoner (5 to 10
days per month for general) or the year of employment (3
or 5 days per month for industrial). See 18 U. S. C.
§§4161, 4162 (1982 ed.).
Petitioners also point to various statements contained in
the Act’s Conference Report and made by individual legis

