6

BARBER v. THOMAS
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

who has just received his sentence and turns to the statute
books to figure out when to expect his freedom.
The Court does not even attempt to defend these flaws.
Instead, it points to four supposed defects in the approach
described above. None withstands examination.
First, the Court notes that the statute requires the
release of a prisoner “upon ‘the expiration of the prisoner’s
term of imprisonment, less any time credited’ for good
behavior.” Ante, at 15 (quoting §3624(a)). But if “term of
imprisonment” truly refers to the entire span that a pris
oner must complete to earn his freedom—a period that
accounts both for actual time and for good time credits—
then why would the “less any time credited” language be
appropriate? The answer is that this provision—which
appears at the very beginning of the section entitled “Re
lease of a prisoner”—announces to a prisoner when release
may be expected: when the prisoner’s term expires, taking
into account credit days “as provided in subsection (b).”
§3624(a) (bold face deleted). This use of language is com
mon. A debtor who says “I will write a check for what I
owe you, less what you owe me” is simply saying “I will
pay what I owe, taking into account your debts to me.”
Perhaps the same meaning could have been conveyed
using different words, but this is hardly probative.
Second, the Court alleges that the above approach con
flicts with the statute’s requirement that credit be
awarded “at the end of each year” based upon behavior
“during that year.” After all, if a year of the term can be
satisfied in part through credit, then it may last less than
a full calendar year. Yet the statute does not require that
credit be awarded at the end of a calendar year for good
behavior during a calendar year. What it requires is that
credit be awarded “at the end of each year of the prisoner’s
term of imprisonment” for good behavior “during that
year.” And this is precisely what the above approach does.
Third, the Court frets that, under the approach above,

