Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

prisoners will earn credit at different rates during a single
sentence. It admonishes that “[t]he use of different rates
finds no support in the statute.” Ante, at 16. This re
sponse is telling. The statute, in fact, prescribes no par
ticular rate—and certainly no formula based on a rate—
except as embodied in one clear directive: Prisoners are
eligible to earn “up to 54 days at the end of each year of
the prisoner’s term of imprisonment.” As to that com
mand, the above approach is perfectly faithful.
Fourth, the Court suggests that the above approach
causes credit to vest immediately, contrary to the statute.
Again, this is not true. As per the statute, credit only
vests “on the date the prisoner is released from custody,”
§3624(b)(2), meaning that it can be revoked at any time
before that date. This gives prisoners approaching their
release date an extra incentive to behave.
As a fallback, the Court wonders what would happen if
a prisoner misbehaved on the final day of his ten-year
sentence. Would the Bureau of Prisons (BOP) be forced to
“retroactively adjust the duration of all of his [term years]
to 365 days”? Ante, at 17. The answer is what one might
suppose: A prisoner whose credits are revoked will find
himself precisely where he would have been if those cred
its had never been earned. All years of the term remain
365 days, as they always have. But a misbehaving pris
oner who had formerly earned, say, 500 credits will find
himself without the benefit of those 500 days. That will
leave him with more of his term to complete—500 days
more, to be precise. If he behaves well again, he can re
sume earning credit for the remainder of his term, but he
has lost the opportunity to earn credits for any prior years.
See §3624(b)(1). This is not at all confusing for a prisoner;
and certainly it is as straightforward, if not more so, than
the Court’s approach. The Court’s view causes a prisoner’s
“term of imprisonment” to shrink over time according to
an algebraic formula, only to expand again if he misbe

