2

BARBER v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

The Bureau of Prisons (BOP) applies this statute using a
methodology that petitioners in this case challenge as
unlawful. In order to explain the BOP method, we shall
use a simplified example that captures its essential ele
ments. The unsimplified calculations described by the
BOP in its policy statement, see App. 96–100, will reach
approximately the same results as, and are essentially the
mathematical equivalent of, the simplified system we
describe (there may be other ways to describe the calcula
tion as well). To the extent that there are any differences
between the methodology employed by the BOP and that
reflected in our example, they are of no consequence to the
resolution of petitioners’ challenge and are therefore not
before us. Similarly, although petitioners committed their
crimes before the current version of §3624 was enacted
and are therefore subject to a previous version that dif
fered slightly in certain details, see 18 U. S. C. §3624
(1988 ed.), the differences between the two versions are
immaterial to the questions presented by this case. The
parties refer to the current version as the relevant provi
sion of law, see Brief for Petitioners 2–3; Brief for Respon
dent 8, n. 2, and we shall do the same.
In our example we shall imagine a prisoner who has
received a sentence of 10 years’ imprisonment. We shall
assume that his behavior throughout his confinement is
exemplary and that prison authorities will consequently
consider him to merit the maximum good time credit that
the statute will allow. And we shall ignore leap years.
Thus, at the end of the first year (Year 1) that prisoner
would earn the statute’s maximum credit of 54 days. The
relevant official (whom we shall call the “good time calcu
lator”) would note that fact and, in effect, preliminarily
put the 54 days to the side. At the end of Year 2 the pris
oner would earn an additional 54 days of good time credit.
The good time calculator would add this 54 days to the
first 54 days, note the provisional total of 108 days, and

