Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Per Curiam

due process of law. Brief for Respondent 4. Because the
Ninth Circuit held that “the admission of Romero’s unreli
able and misleading testimony violated [respondent’s] due
process rights,” 525 F. 3d, at 797, and in respondent’s view
merely applied Jackson (erroneously) to determine
whether that error was harmless, he asks us to affirm the
judgment below on the basis of what he calls his “DNA due
process” claim, Brief for Respondent 35.
As respondent acknowledges, in order to prevail on this
claim, he would have to show that the state court’s adjudi
cation of the claim was “contrary to, or involved an unrea
sonable application of, clearly established Federal law.”
28 U. S. C. §2254(d)(1). The clearly established law he
points us to is Manson v. Brathwaite, 432 U. S. 98, 114
(1977), in which we held that when the police have used a
suggestive eyewitness identification procedure, “reliability
is the linchpin in determining” whether an eyewitness
identification may be admissible, with reliability deter
mined according to factors set out in Neil v. Biggers, 409
U. S. 188 (1972). Respondent argues that the admission of
the inaccurate DNA testimony violated Brathwaite be
cause the testimony was “identification testimony,” 432
U. S., at 114, was “unnecessarily suggestive,” id., at 113,
and was unreliable.
Respondent has forfeited this claim, which he makes for
the very first time in his brief on the merits in this Court.
Respondent did not present his new “DNA due process”
claim in his federal habeas petition, but instead consis
tently argued that Romero’s testimony should be excluded
from the Jackson analysis simply because it was “unreli
able” and that the due process violation occurred because
the remaining evidence was insufficient to convict. See
App. to Pet. for Cert. 157a (“[Respondent] asserts . . . that
the DNA evidence was unreliable and should not have
been admitted at his trial. If so, then, . . . the state pre
sented insufficient evidence at trial to prove [respondent]

