14

MCDANIEL v. BROWN
Per Curiam

the conflict in favor of the prosecution, the jury must have
found that Troy left the bar in time to be the assailant. It
is undisputed that Troy washed his clothes immediately
upon returning home. The court notes this is “plausibly
consistent with him being the assailant” but also that he
provided an alternative reason for washing his clothes.
Ibid. Viewed in the light most favorable to the prosecu
tion, the evidence supports an inference that Troy washed
the clothes immediately to clean blood from them.
To be sure, the court’s Jackson analysis relied substan
tially upon a concession made by the State in state post
conviction proceedings that “absent the DNA findings,
there was insufficient evidence to convict [Troy] of the
crime.” App. 1180. But that concession posited a situation
in which there was no DNA evidence at all,6 not a situa
tion in which some pieces of testimony regarding the DNA
evidence were called into question. In sum, the Court of
Appeals’ analysis failed to preserve “the factfinder’s role as
weigher of the evidence” by reviewing “all of the evidence
. . . in the light most favorable to the prosecution,” Jack
son, supra, at 319, and it further erred in finding that the
Nevada Supreme Court’s resolution of the Jackson claim
was objectively unreasonable.
IV
Resolution of the Jackson claim does not end our consid
eration of this case because respondent asks us to affirm
on an alternative ground. He contends the two errors “in
describing the statistical meaning” of the DNA evidence
rendered his trial fundamentally unfair and denied him
——————
6 The concession was made in the context of proceedings in which
respondent argued that competent counsel would have objected to the
admissibility of the DNA evidence on a number of grounds—including
Romero’s qualifications, chain-of-custody problems, and failure to follow
the proper testing protocol—and might have successfully excluded the
DNA evidence altogether. See App. 1099–1100.

