16

MCDANIEL v. BROWN
Per Curiam

guilty”). In the Ninth Circuit, too, respondent presented
only his Jackson claim,7 and it is, at the least, unclear
whether respondent presented his newly minted due
process claim in the state courts.8 Recognizing that his
Jackson claim cannot prevail, respondent tries to rewrite
his federal habeas petition. His attempt comes too late,
however, and he cannot now start over.
*
*
*
We have stated before that “DNA testing can provide
powerful new evidence unlike anything known before.”
District Attorney’s Office for Third Judicial Dist. v. Os
borne, 557 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 8). Given the
persuasiveness of such evidence in the eyes of the jury, it
is important that it be presented in a fair and reliable
manner. The State acknowledges that Romero committed
the prosecutor’s fallacy, Brief for Petitioners 54, and the
Mueller Report suggests that Romero’s testimony may
have been inaccurate regarding the likelihood of a match
with one of respondent’s brothers. Regardless, ample
——————
7 The Court of Appeals did reason that Romero’s testimony must be
excluded from the Jackson analysis on due process grounds. 525 F. 3d,
at 797. But that decision was inextricably intertwined with the claim
respondent did make in his federal habeas petition under Jackson. It is
clear the Ninth Circuit was never asked to consider—and did not pass
upon—the question whether the Nevada Supreme Court entered a
decision on direct appeal that was contrary to or an unreasonable
application of Manson v. Brathwaite, 432 U. S. 98 (1977), or any other
clearly established law regarding due process other than Jackson.
8 The State contends the claim is either not exhausted or procedurally
defaulted. The State has objected from the beginning that respondent
did not raise a due process claim regarding the reliability of the DNA
evidence in state court. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 182a–183a. Respon
dent consistently answered the State’s exhaustion objection by arguing
he presented his Jackson claim in the Nevada Supreme Court. See
App. 1521–1526. The Ninth Circuit held respondent exhausted his
insufficiency claim. 525 F. 3d, at 793. The court had no occasion to
consider whether respondent exhausted any due process claim other
than his Jackson claim.

