Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Per Curiam

of Appeals’ application of Jackson. Cf. Pacific Bell, supra,
at ___ (slip op., at 7).
Respondent no longer argues it was proper for the Dis
trict Court to admit the Mueller Report for the purpose of
evaluating his Jackson claim, Brief for Respondent 35,
and concedes the “purpose of a Jackson analysis is to
determine whether the jury acted in a rational manner in
returning a guilty verdict based on the evidence before it,
not whether improper evidence violated due process,” id.,
at 2. There has been no suggestion that the evidence
adduced at trial was insufficient to convict unless some of
it was excluded. Respondent’s concession thus disposes of
his Jackson claim. The concession is also clearly correct.
An “appellate court’s reversal for insufficiency of the evi
dence is in effect a determination that the government’s
case against the defendant was so lacking that the trial
court should have entered a judgment of acquittal.” Lock
hart v. Nelson, 488 U. S. 33, 39 (1988). Because reversal
for insufficiency of the evidence is equivalent to a judg
ment of acquittal, such a reversal bars a retrial. See
Burks v. United States, 437 U. S. 1, 18 (1978). To “make
the analogy complete” between a reversal for insufficiency
of the evidence and the trial court’s granting a judgment of
acquittal, Lockhart, 488 U. S., at 42, “a reviewing court
must consider all of the evidence admitted by the trial
court,” regardless whether that evidence was admitted
erroneously, id., at 41.
Respondent therefore correctly concedes that a review
ing court must consider all of the evidence admitted at
trial when considering a Jackson claim. Even if we set
that concession aside, however, and assume that the Court
of Appeals could have considered the Mueller Report in
the context of a Jackson claim, the court made an egre
gious error in concluding the Nevada Supreme Court’s
rejection of respondent’s insufficiency-of-the-evidence
claim “involved an unreasonable application of . . . clearly

