Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Per Curiam

match among two brothers—because two of Troy’s four
brothers lived in Utah. Second, although Jane Doe men
tioned Trent as her assailant, and Travis lived in a nearby
trailer, the evidence indicates that both (unlike Troy) were
sober and went to bed early on the night of the crime.
Even under Mueller’s odds, a rational jury could consider
the DNA evidence to be powerful evidence of guilt.
Furthermore, the Court of Appeals’ discussion of the
non-DNA evidence departed from the deferential review
that Jackson and §2254(d)(1) demand. A federal habeas
court can only set aside a state-court decision as “an un
reasonable application of . . . clearly established Federal
law,” §2254(d)(1), if the state court’s application of that
law is “objectively unreasonable,” Williams v. Taylor, 529
U. S. 362, 409 (2000). And Jackson requires a reviewing
court to review the evidence “in the light most favorable to
the prosecution.” 443 U. S., at 319. Expressed more fully,
this means a reviewing court “faced with a record of his
torical facts that supports conflicting inferences must
presume—even if it does not affirmatively appear in the
record—that the trier of fact resolved any such conflicts in
favor of the prosecution, and must defer to that resolu
tion.” Id., at 326; see also Schlup v. Delo, 513 U. S. 298,
330 (1995) (“The Jackson standard . . . looks to whether
there is sufficient evidence which, if credited, could sup
port the conviction”). The Court of Appeals acknowledged
that it must review the evidence in the light most favor
able to the prosecution, but the court’s recitation of incon
sistencies in the testimony shows it failed to do that.
For example, the court highlights conflicting testimony
regarding when Troy left the Peacock. 525 F. 3d, at 797.
It is true that if a juror were to accept the testimony of one
bartender that Troy left the bar at 1:30 a.m., then Troy
would have left the bar after the attack occurred. Yet the
jury could have credited a different bartender’s testimony
that Troy left the Peacock at around 12:15 a.m. Resolving

