12

MCDANIEL v. BROWN
Per Curiam

established Federal law,” 28 U. S. C. §2254(d)(1).4
Even if the Court of Appeals could have considered it,
the Mueller Report provided no warrant for entirely ex
cluding the DNA evidence or Romero’s testimony from
that court’s consideration. The Report did not contest that
the DNA evidence matched Troy. That DNA evidence
remains powerful inculpatory evidence even though the
State concedes Romero overstated its probative value by
failing to dispel the prosecutor’s fallacy. And Mueller’s
claim that Romero used faulty assumptions and underes
timated the probability of a DNA match between brothers
indicates that two experts do not agree with one another,
not that Romero’s estimates were unreliable.5
Mueller’s opinion that “the chance that among four
brothers one or more would match is 1 in 66,” App. 1583,
is substantially different from Romero’s estimate of a 1 in
6,500 chance that one brother would match. But even if
Romero’s estimate is wrong, our confidence in the jury
verdict is not undermined. First, the estimate that is
more pertinent to this case is 1 in 132—the probability of a
——————
4 The

Court of Appeals also clearly erred in concluding the Nevada
Supreme Court’s decision was “contrary to” Jackson. The Court of
Appeals held the Nevada Supreme Court’s decision was “contrary to”
Jackson because the Nevada court stated a standard that turns on a
“reasonable” jury, not a “rational” one, and that assesses whether the
jury could have been convinced of a defendant’s guilt, rather than
whether it could have been convinced of each element of the crime.
Brown v. Farwell, 525 F. 3d 787, 794–795 (CA9 2008). It is of little
moment that the Nevada Supreme Court analyzed whether a “reason
able” jury could be convinced of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, rather
than asking whether a “rational” one could be convinced of each ele
ment of guilt; a reasonable jury could hardly be convinced of guilt
unless it found each element satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt.
5 The State has called our attention to cases in which courts have
criticized opinions rendered by Professor Mueller in the past. See Brief
for Petitioners 53–54. We need not pass on the relative credibility of
the two experts because even assuming that Mueller’s estimate is
correct, respondent’s claim fails.

