2

MCDANIEL v. BROWN
THOMAS, J., concurring

mony from that court’s consideration” because the report
“did not contest that the DNA evidence matched Troy” or
otherwise show that the State’s DNA estimates were
“unreliable,” ante, at 12. Based on these observations, the
Court concludes that the Mueller Report did not under
mine the State’s DNA tests as “powerful inculpatory evi
dence.” Ibid. That is true, but even if the report had
completely undermined the DNA evidence—which the
Ninth Circuit may have mistakenly believed it did, see
Brown v. Farwell, 525 F. 3d 787, 795–796 (2008)—the
panel still would have erred in considering the report to
resolve respondent’s Jackson claim. The reason, as the
Court reaffirms, is that Jackson claims must be decided
solely on the evidence adduced at trial. See ante, at 11.
Accordingly, the Court need not correct any erroneous
impressions the Ninth Circuit may have had concerning
the report’s impact on the State’s DNA evidence to resolve
respondent’s Jackson claim.* Because that is the only
claim properly before us, I do not join the Court’s dicta
about how the Mueller Report’s findings could affect a
constitutional analysis to which we have long held such
post-trial evidence does not apply. See Jackson, supra, at
318.
——————
* Correcting the Ninth Circuit’s apparent misconception of the effects
of the Mueller Report is the only plausible reason for the Court’s
decision to explain that the report would not have undermined the
State’s DNA results “even if” the Court of Appeals could have consid
ered it in resolving respondent’s Jackson claim. Ante, at 11–12. That
discussion cannot properly be read to suggest either that there are
circumstances in which post-trial evidence would “warrant” excluding
DNA trial evidence from a Jackson analysis, ante, at 12, or that courts
applying Jackson may consider post-trial evidence for any other pur
pose. Both points are squarely foreclosed by the precedents on which
the Court relies in reversing the Ninth Circuit’s judgment. See ante, at
1 (citing Jackson, v. Virginia, 443 U. S. 307, 324 (1979)); ante, at 11
(citing Lockhart, v. Nelson, 488 U. S. 33, 39 (1988)), respectively.

