14

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
Opinion of the Court

no pre-emption where the defendant could “unilaterally”
do what state law required). Accepting Mensing and
Demahy’s argument would render conflict pre-emption
largely meaningless because it would make most conflicts
between state and federal law illusory. We can often
imagine that a third party or the Federal Government
might do something that makes it lawful for a private
party to accomplish under federal law what state law
requires of it. In these cases, it is certainly possible that,
had the Manufacturers asked the FDA for help, they
might have eventually been able to strengthen their warn­
ing label. Of course, it is also possible that the Manufac­
turers could have convinced the FDA to reinterpret its
regulations in a manner that would have opened the CBE
process to them. Following Mensing and Demahy’s argu­
ment to its logical conclusion, it is also possible that,
by asking, the Manufacturers could have persuaded the
FDA to rewrite its generic drug regulations entirely or
talked Congress into amending the Hatch-Waxman
Amendments.
If these conjectures suffice to prevent federal and state
law from conflicting for Supremacy Clause purposes, it
is unclear when, outside of express pre-emption, the Su­
premacy Clause would have any force.6 We do not read
the Supremacy Clause to permit an approach to pre­
emption that renders conflict pre-emption all but mean­
ingless. The Supremacy Clause, on its face, makes federal
law “the supreme Law of the Land” even absent an ex­
press statement by Congress. U. S. Const., Art. VI, cl. 2.
——————
6 The dissent asserts that we are forgetting “purposes-and-objectives”
pre-emption. Post, at 15–16. But as the dissent acknowledges, pur­
poses-and-objectives pre-emption is a form of conflict pre-emption.
Post, at 9, 16. If conflict pre-emption analysis must take into account
hypothetical federal action, including possible changes in Acts of
Congress, then there is little reason to think that pre-emption based on
the purposes and objectives of Congress would survive either.

