Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

drug consumers of compensation when they are injured by
inadequate warnings. “If Congress had intended to de
prive injured parties of [this] long available form of com
pensation, it surely would have expressed that intent more
clearly.” Bates, 544 U. S., at 449. Given the longstanding
existence of product liability actions, including for failure
to warn, “[i]t is difficult to believe that Congress would,
without comment, remove all means of judicial recourse
for those injured by illegal conduct.” Silkwood, 464 U. S.,
at 251; see also Bruesewitz v. Wyeth LLC, 562 U. S. ___,
___ (2011) (slip op., at 16) (noting our previously expressed
“doubt that Congress would quietly preempt product
liability claims without providing a federal substitute”).
In concluding that Congress silently immunized generic
manufacturers from all failure-to-warn claims, the major
ity disregards our previous hesitance to infer congres
sional intent to effect such a sweeping change in tradi
tional state-law remedies.
As the majority itself admits, a drug consumer’s right
to compensation for inadequate warnings now turns on
the happenstance of whether her pharmacist filled her pre
scription with a brand-name drug or a generic. If a con
sumer takes a brand-name drug, she can sue the manufac
turer for inadequate warnings under our opinion in Wyeth.
If, however, she takes a generic drug, as occurs 75 percent
of the time, she now has no right to sue. The majority
offers no reason to think—apart from its new articulation
of the impossibility standard—that Congress would have
intended such an arbitrary distinction. In some States,
pharmacists must dispense generic drugs absent instruc
tion to the contrary from a consumer’s physician. Even
when consumers can request brand-name drugs, the price
of the brand-name drug or the consumers’ insurance plans
may make it impossible to do so. As a result, in many
cases, consumers will have no ability to preserve their
state-law right to recover for injuries caused by inade

