16

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
Opinion of the Court
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

gether”); Ludlow’s Heirs v. Johnston, 3 Ohio 553, 564
(1828) (“[I]f by any fair course of reasoning the two [stat­
utes] can be reconciled, both shall stand”); Doolittle v.
Bryan, 14 How. 563, 566 (1853) (requiring “the repug­
nance be quite plain” before finding implied repeal). A
non obstante provision thus was a useful way for legisla­
tures to specify that they did not want courts distorting
the new law to accommodate the old. Nelson, supra, at
240–242; see also J. Sutherland, Statutes and Statutory
Construction §147, p. 199 (1891) (“[W]hen there is inserted
in a statute a provision [of non obstante] . . . . It is to be
supposed that courts will be less inclined against recogniz­
ing repugnancy in applying such statutes”); Weston’s Case,
73 Eng. Rep. 780, 781 (K. B. 1576) (“[W]hen there are two
statutes, one in appearance crossing the other, and no
clause of non obstante is contained in the second statute
. . . the exposition ought to be that both should stand in
force”); G. Jacob, A New Law Dictionary (J. Morgan ed.,
10th ed. 1782) (definition of “statute,” ¶6: “[W]hen there is
a seeming variance between two statutes, and no clause of
non obstante in the latter, such construction shall be made
that both may stand”). The non obstante provision of
he Supremacy Clause indicates that a court need look no
further than “the ordinary meanin[g]” of federal law, and
should not distort federal law to accommodate conflicting
state law. Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 588 (THOMAS, J., concur­
ring in judgment) (internal quotation marks omitted).
To consider in our pre-emption analysis the contingen­
cies inherent in these cases—in which the Manufacturers’
ability to comply with state law depended on uncertain
federal agency and third-party decisions—would be incon­
sistent with the non obstante provision of the Supremacy
Clause. The Manufacturers would be required continually
to prove the counterfactual conduct of the FDA and brand­
name manufacturer in order to establish the supremacy of
federal law. We do not think the Supremacy Clause con­

