Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
pre-emption question. Pp. 5–10.
(b) Where state and federal law directly conflict, state law must
give way. See, e.g., Wyeth v. Levine, 555 U. S. 555, 583. Such a con
flict exists where it is “impossible for a private party to comply with
both state and federal requirements.” Freightliner Corp. v. Myrick,
514 U. S. 280, 287. Pp. 11–14, 17–20.
(1) The Court finds impossibility here. If the Manufacturers had
independently changed their labels to satisfy their state-law duty to
attach a safer label to their generic metoclopramide, they would have
violated the federal requirement that generic drug labels be the same
as the corresponding brand-name drug labels. Thus, it was impossi
ble for them to comply with both state and federal law. And even if
they had fulfilled their federal duty to ask for FDA help in strength
ening the corresponding brand-name label, assuming such a duty ex
ists, they would not have satisfied their state tort-law duty. State
law demanded a safer label; it did not require communication with
the FDA about the possibility of a safer label. Pp. 11–12.
(2) The Court rejects the argument that the Manufacturers’ pre
emption defense fails because they failed to ask the FDA for help in
changing the corresponding brand-name label. The proper question
for “impossibility” analysis is whether the private party could inde
pendently do under federal law what state law requires of it. See
Wyeth, supra, at 573. Accepting respondents’ argument would render
conflict pre-emption largely meaningless by making most conflicts be
tween state and federal law illusory. In these cases, it is possible
that, had the Manufacturers asked the FDA for help, they might
have eventually been able to strengthen their warning label. But it
is also possible that they could have convinced the FDA to reinterpret
its regulations in a manner that would have opened the CBE process
to them, persuaded the FDA to rewrite its generic drug regulations
entirely, or talked Congress into amending the Hatch-Waxman
Amendments. If these conjectures sufficed to prevent federal and
state law from conflicting, it is unclear when, outside of express pre
emption, the Supremacy Clause would have any force. That Clause—
which makes federal law “the supreme Law of the Land . . . any
Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary not
withstanding,” U. S. Const., Art. VI, cl. 2—cannot be read to permit
an approach to pre-emption that renders conflict pre-emption all but
meaningless. Here, it is enough to hold that when a party cannot
satisfy its state duties without the Federal Government’s special
permission and assistance, which is dependent on the exercise of
judgment by a federal agency, that party cannot independently sat
isfy those state duties for pre-emption purposes. Pp. 12–14, 17.
(3) Wyeth is not to the contrary. The Court there held that a

