Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

not yet responded to a generic manufacturer’s request for
a label change at the time a plaintiff’s injuries arose. A
generic manufacturer might also show that the FDA had
itself considered whether to request enhanced warnings in
light of the evidence on which a plaintiff’s claim rests but
had decided to leave the warnings as is. (The Manufac
turers make just such an argument in these cases. See,
e.g., Brief for Petitioner Actavis et al. 11.) But these are
questions of fact to be established through discovery.
Because the burden of proving impossibility falls on the
defendant, I would hold that federal law does not render
it impossible for generic manufacturers to comply with
a state-law duty to warn as a categorical matter.
This conclusion flows naturally from the overarching prin
ciples governing our pre-emption doctrine. See supra,
at 8. Our “respect for the States as ‘independent sover
eigns in our federal system’ leads us to assume that ‘Con
gress does not cavalierly pre-empt state-law causes of
action.’ ” Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 565–566, n. 3 (quoting Lohr,
518 U. S., at 485). It is for this reason that we hold defen
dants asserting impossibility to a “demanding” standard.
Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 573. This presumption against pre
emption has particular force when the Federal Govern
ment has afforded defendants a mechanism for complying
with state law, even when that mechanism requires fed
eral agency action. (The presumption has even greater
force when federal law requires defendants to invoke that
mechanism, as the majority assumes in these cases.) In
such circumstances, I would hold, defendants will usually
be unable to sustain their burden of showing impossibility
if they have not even attempted to employ that mecha
nism. Any other approach threatens to infringe the
States’ authority over traditional matters of state inter
est—such as the failure-to-warn claims here—when Con
gress expressed no intent to pre-empt state law.

