Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

sponding brand-name label, they might eventually have
been able to accomplish under federal law what state law
requires. That is true enough. The Manufacturers “freely
concede” that they could have asked the FDA for help.
PLIVA Brief 48. If they had done so, and if the FDA
decided there was sufficient supporting information, and
if the FDA undertook negotiations with the brand-name
manufacturer, and if adequate label changes were decided
on and implemented, then the Manufacturers would have
started a Mouse Trap game that eventually led to a better
label on generic metoclopramide.
This raises the novel question whether conflict pre­
emption should take into account these possible actions by
the FDA and the brand-name manufacturer. Here, what
federal law permitted the Manufacturers to do could have
changed, even absent a change in the law itself, depending
on the actions of the FDA and the brand-name manufac­
turer. Federal law does not dictate the text of each ge­
neric drug’s label, but rather ties those labels to their
brand-name counterparts. Thus, federal law would permit
the Manufacturers to comply with the state labeling re­
quirements if, and only if, the FDA and the brand-name
manufacturer changed the brand-name label to do so.
Mensing and Demahy assert that when a private party’s
ability to comply with state law depends on approval and
assistance from the FDA, proving pre-emption requires
that party to demonstrate that the FDA would not have
allowed compliance with state law. Here, they argue, the
Manufacturers cannot bear their burden of proving impos­
sibility because they did not even try to start the process
that might ultimately have allowed them to use a safer
label. Brief for Respondents 47. This is a fair argument,
but we reject it.
The question for “impossibility” is whether the private
party could independently do under federal law what state
law requires of it. See Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 573 (finding

