Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

With so little support in our case law, the majority un
derstandably turns to other rationales. None of the
rationales that it offers, however, makes any sense. First,
it offers a reductio ad absurdum: If the possibility of FDA
approval of a label change is sufficient to avoid conflict in
these cases, it warns, as a “logical conclusion” so too would
be the possibility that the FDA might rewrite its regula
tions or that Congress might amend the Hatch-Waxman
Amendments. Ante, at 14. The logic of this conclusion
escapes me. Conflict analysis necessarily turns on exist
ing law. It thus would be ridiculous to conclude that
federal and state law do not conflict on the ground that the
defendant could have asked a federal agency or Congress
to change the law. Here, by contrast, the Manufacturers’
compliance with their state-law duty to warn did not re
quire them to ask for a change in federal law, as the
majority itself recognizes. See ante, at 13 (“[F]ederal law
would permit the Manufacturers to comply with the state
labeling requirements if, and only if, the FDA and the
brand-name manufacturer changed the brand-name label
to do so”). The FDA already afforded them a mechanism
for attempting to comply with their state-law duties.
Indeed, the majority assumes that FDA regulations re
quired the Manufacturers to request a label change when
they had “reasonable evidence of an association of a seri
ous hazard with a drug.” 21 CFR §201.57(e).
Second, the majority suggests that any other approach
would render conflict pre-emption “illusory” and “meaning
less.” Ante, at 14. It expresses concern that, without a
robust view of what constitutes conflict, the Supremacy
Clause would not have “any force” except in cases of ex
press pre-emption. Ibid. To the extent the majority’s
purported concern is driven by its reductio ad absurdum,
see ante, at 14, n. 6, that concern is itself illusory, for the
reasons just stated. To the extent the majority is con
cerned that our traditionally narrow view of what consti

