12

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

FDA approval of the label change did not make compliance
with federal and state law impossible in every case. In
stead, because the defendant bore the burden to show
impossibility, we required it to produce “clear evidence
that the FDA would not have approved a change to [the]
label.” Ibid.
I would apply the same approach in these cases. State
law, respondents allege, required the Manufacturers to
provide a strengthened warning about the dangers of
long-term metoclopramide use.11 Just like the brand-name
manufacturer in Wyeth, the Manufacturers had available
to them a mechanism for attempting to comply with their
state-law duty to warn. Federal law thus “accommodated”
the Manufacturers’ state-law duties. See ante, at 18, n. 8.
It was not necessarily impossible for the Manufacturers to
comply with both federal and state law because, had they
approached the FDA, the FDA may well have agreed that
a label change was necessary. Accordingly, as in Wyeth, I
would require the Manufacturers to show that the FDA
would not have approved a proposed label change. They
have not made such a showing: They do “not argue that
[they] attempted to give the kind of warning required by
[state law] but [were] prohibited from doing so by the
FDA.” Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 572.
This is not to say that generic manufacturers could
never show impossibility. If a generic-manufacturer de
fendant proposed a label change to the FDA but the FDA
rejected the proposal, it would be impossible for that
defendant to comply with a state-law duty to warn. Like
wise, impossibility would be established if the FDA had
——————
would have approved or disapproved the label change. The claim in
Wyeth does not appear to have arisen during that period.
11 Respondents’ state-law claim is not that the Manufacturers were
required to ask the FDA for assistance in changing the labels; the role
of the FDA arises only as a result of the Manufacturers’ pre-emption
defense.

