18

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
Opinion of the Court

both state and federal law. Id., at 572–573.7 Specifically,
the CBE regulation, 21 CFR §314.70(c)(6)(iii), permitted a
brand-name drug manufacturer like Wyeth “to unilater­
ally strengthen its warning” without prior FDA approval.
555 U. S., at 573; cf. supra, at 7–8. Thus, the federal
regulations applicable to Wyeth allowed the company, of
its own volition, to strengthen its label in compliance with
its state tort duty.8
We recognize that from the perspective of Mensing and
Demahy, finding pre-emption here but not in Wyeth makes
little sense. Had Mensing and Demahy taken Reglan, the
brand-name drug prescribed by their doctors, Wyeth would
control and their lawsuits would not be pre-empted. But
——————
7 Wyeth also urged that state tort law “creat[ed] an unacceptable
‘obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes
and objectives of Congress.’ ” 555 U. S., at 563–564 (quoting Hines v.
Davidowitz, 312 U. S. 52, 67 (1941)). The Court rejected that argu­
ment, and that type of pre-emption is not argued here. Cf. post, at 16,
n. 13 (opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.).
8 The FDA, however, retained the authority to eventually rescind
Wyeth’s unilateral CBE changes. Accordingly, the Court noted that
Wyeth could have attempted to show, by “clear evidence,” that the FDA
would have rescinded any change in the label and thereby demonstrate
that it would in fact have been impossible to do under federal law
what state law required. Wyeth, supra, at 571. Wyeth offered no such
evidence.
That analysis is consistent with our holding today. The Court in
Wyeth asked what the drug manufacturer could independently do under
federal law, and in the absence of clear evidence that Wyeth could not
have accomplished what state law required of it, found no pre-emption.
The Wyeth Court held that, because federal law accommodated state
law duties, “the possibility of impossibility” was “not enough.” Post, at
10; see also Rice v. Norman Williams Co., 458 U. S. 654, 659 (1982)
(rejecting “hypothetical” impossibility). But here, “existing” federal law
directly conflicts with state law. Post, at 15 (“Conflict analysis neces­
sarily turns on existing law”). The question in these cases is not
whether the possibility of impossibility establishes pre-emption, but
rather whether the possibility of possibility defeats pre-emption. Post,
at 10.

