6

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

§314.80(b). If a manufacturer receives a report of a seri
ous and unexpected adverse drug experience, it must re
port the event to the FDA within 15 days and must
“promptly investigate.” §§314.80(c)(1)(i)–(ii); see also Tr.
of Oral Arg. 8. Most other adverse drug experiences must
be reported on a quarterly or yearly basis.6 §314.80(c)(2).
Generic manufacturers must also submit to the FDA an
annual report summarizing “significant new information
from the previous year that might affect the safety, ef
fectiveness, or labeling of the drug product,” including a
“description of actions the [manufacturer] has taken or
intends to take as a result of this new information.”
§314.81(b)(2)(i); see also §314.98(c).
Generic manufacturers, the majority assumes, also bear
responsibility under federal law for monitoring the ade
quacy of their warnings. I agree with the majority’s con
clusion that generic manufacturers are not permitted
unilaterally to change their labels through the “changes
being-effected” (CBE) process or to issue additional warn
ings through “Dear Doctor” letters. See ante, at 6–9.
According to the FDA, however, that generic manufactur
——————
6 At congressional hearings on the Hatch-Waxman Amendments,
representatives of the generic drug manufacturers confirmed both their
obligation and their ability to conduct postapproval investigation of
adverse drug experiences. See Drug Legislation: Hearings on H. R.
1554 et al. before the Subcommittee on Health and the Environment of
the House Committee on Energy and Commerce, 98th Cong., 1st Sess.,
45 (1983) (statement of Kenneth N. Larsen, chairman of the Generic
Pharmaceutical Industry Association (GPhA)) (generic manufacturers
“are sensitive to the importance of looking at adverse reactions”); id., at
47–48 (“[W]e will do and provide whatever is required to be performed
to meet the regulatory requirement to provide for the safety and well
being of those that are using the drug, this is our role and responsibil
ity. This is an obligation to be in this business”); id., at 50–51 (state
ment of Bill Haddad, executive officer and president of GPhA) (“Every
single generic drug company that I know has a large research staff. It
not only researches the drug that they are copying, or bringing into the
market but it researches new drugs, researches adverse reaction[s]”).

