14

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

C
The majority concedes that the Manufacturers might
have been able to accomplish under federal law what state
law requires. Ante, at 12–13. To reach the conclusion that
the Manufacturers have nonetheless satisfied their bur
den to show impossibility, the majority invents a new pre
emption rule: “The question for ‘impossibility’ is whether
the private party could independently do under federal
law what state law requires of it.” Ante, at 13 (emphasis added). Because the Manufacturers could not have
changed their labels without the exercise of judgment by
the FDA, the majority holds, compliance with both state
and federal law was impossible in these cases.12
The majority’s new test has no basis in our precedents.
The majority cites only Wyeth in support of its test. As
discussed above, however, Wyeth does not stand for the
proposition that it is impossible to comply with both fed
eral and state law whenever federal agency approval is
required. To the contrary, label changes by brand-name
manufacturers such as Wyeth are subject to FDA review
and acceptance. See supra, at 11–12. And, even if Wyeth
could be characterized as turning on the fact that the
brand-name manufacturer could change its label unilater
ally, the possibility of unilateral action was, at most, a
sufficient condition for rejecting the impossibility defense
in that case. Wyeth did not hold that unilateral action is a
necessary condition in every case.
——————
12 These cases do not involve a situation where a brand-name
manufacturer itself produces generic drugs. See Okie, Multinational
Medicines—Ensuring Drug Quality in an Era of Global Manufactur
ing, 361 N. Eng. J. Med. 737, 738 (2009); see also GPhA, Frequently
Asked Questions About Generics, http://www.gphaonline.org/about
gpha/about-generics/faq (“Brand-name companies make about half of
generic drugs”). In that case, the manufacturer could independently
change the brand-name label under the CBE regulation, triggering a
corresponding change to its own generic label.

