Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

ers cannot disseminate additional warnings on their own
does not mean that federal law permits them to remain
idle when they conclude that their labeling is inadequate.
FDA regulations require that labeling “be revised to in
clude a warning as soon as there is reasonable evidence of
an association of a serious hazard with a drug.” 21 CFR
§201.57(e) (2006), currently codified at 21 CFR §201.80(e)
(2010); see also Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 570–571. The FDA
construes this regulation to oblige generic manufacturers
“to seek to revise their labeling and provide FDA with
supporting information about risks” when they believe that
additional warnings are necessary.7 U. S. Brief 20.
The Manufacturers disagree. They read the FDA regu
lation to require them only to ensure that their labels
match the brand-name labels. See Brief for Petitioner
PLIVA et al. 38–41. I need not decide whether the regula
tion in fact obliges generic manufacturers to approach the
FDA to propose a label change. The majority assumes
that it does. And even if generic manufacturers do not
have a duty to propose label changes, two points remain
undisputed. First, they do have a duty under federal law
——————
7 The FDA’s construction of this regulation mirrors the guidance it
provided to generic manufacturers nearly 20 years ago in announcing
the final rule implementing the abbreviated application process for
generic drugs:
“If an ANDA [i.e., application for approval of a generic drug] applicant
believes new safety information should be added to a product’s labeling,
it should contact FDA, and FDA will determine whether the labeling
for the generic and listed drugs should be revised. After approval of an
ANDA, if an ANDA holder believes that new safety information should
be added, it should provide adequate supporting information to FDA,
and FDA will determine whether the labeling for the generic and listed
drugs should be revised.” 57 Fed. Reg. 17961 (1992).
FDA’s internal procedures recognize that the Office of Generic Drugs
will have to consult with other FDA components on “some labeling
reviews.” Manual of Policies and Procedures 5200.6, p. 1 (May 9, 2001).
Consultations involving “possible serious safety concerns” receive the
highest priority. Id., at 3.

