OCTOBER TERM, 2010

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

PLIVA, INC., ET AL. v. MENSING
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–993.

Argued March 30, 2011—Decided June 23, 2011*

Five years after the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) first ap
proved metoclopramide, a drug commonly used to treat digestive
tract problems, under the brand name Reglan, generic manufacturers
such as petitioners also began producing the drug. Because of accu
mulating evidence that long-term metoclopramide use can cause
tardive dyskinesia, a severe neurological disorder, warning labels for
the drug have been strengthened and clarified several times, most re
cently in 2009.
Respondents were prescribed Reglan in 2001 and 2002, but both
received the generic drug from their pharmacists. After taking the
drug as prescribed for several years, both developed tardive dyskine
sia. In separate state-court tort actions, they sued petitioners, the
generic drug manufacturers that produced the metoclopramide they
took (Manufacturers). Each respondent alleged, inter alia, that long
term metoclopramide use caused her disorder and that the Manufac
turers were liable under state tort law for failing to provide adequate
warning labels. In both suits, the Manufacturers urged that federal
statutes and FDA regulations pre-empted the state tort claims by re
quiring the same safety and efficacy labeling for generic metoclopra
mide as was mandated at the time for Reglan. The Fifth and Eighth
Circuits rejected these arguments, holding that respondents’ claims
were not pre-empted.
Held: The judgment is reversed, and the cases are remanded.
——————
* Together with No. 09–1039, Actavis Elizabeth, LLC v. Mensing, also
on certiorari to the same court, and No. 09–1501, Actavis, Inc. v. De
mahy, on certiorari to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth
Circuit.

