Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

Opinion of the Court

because pharmacists, acting in full accord with state law,
substituted generic metoclopramide instead, federal law
pre-empts these lawsuits. See, e.g., Minn. Stat. §151.21
(2010) (describing when pharmacists may substitute ge­
neric drugs); La. Rev. Stat. Ann. §37:1241(A)(17) (West
2007) (same). We acknowledge the unfortunate hand that
federal drug regulation has dealt Mensing, Demahy, and
others similarly situated.9
But “it is not this Court’s task to decide whether the
statutory scheme established by Congress is unusual or
even bizarre.” Cuomo v. Clearing House Assn., L. L. C.,
557 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (THOMAS, J., concurring in part
and dissenting in part) (slip op., at 21) (internal quotation
marks and brackets omitted). It is beyond dispute that
the federal statutes and regulations that apply to brand­
name drug manufacturers are meaningfully different than
those that apply to generic drug manufacturers. Indeed, it
is the special, and different, regulation of generic drugs
that allowed the generic drug market to expand, bringing
more drugs more quickly and cheaply to the public. But
different federal statutes and regulations may, as here,
lead to different pre-emption results. We will not distort
the Supremacy Clause in order to create similar pre­
emption across a dissimilar statutory scheme. As always,
Congress and the FDA retain the authority to change the
——————
9 That said, the dissent overstates what it characterizes as the “many
absurd consequences” of our holding. Post, at 18. First, the FDA in­
forms us that “[a]s a practical matter, genuinely new information about
drugs in long use (as generic drugs typically are) appears infre­
quently.” U. S. Brief 34–35. That is because patent protections ordi­
narily prevent generic drugs from arriving on the market for a number
of years after the brand-name drug appears. Indeed, situations like the
one alleged here are apparently so rare that the FDA has no “formal
regulation” establishing generic drug manufacturers’ duty to initiate a
label change, nor does it have any regulation setting out that label­
change process. Id., at 20–21. Second, the dissent admits that, even
under its approach, generic drug manufacturers could establish pre­
emption in a number of scenarios. Post, at 12–13.

