20

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

quate warnings.
Second, the majority’s decision creates a gap in the
parallel federal-state regulatory scheme in a way that
could have troubling consequences for drug safety. As we
explained in Wyeth, “[s]tate tort suits uncover unknown
drug hazards and provide incentives for drug manufactur
ers to disclose safety risks promptly.” 555 U. S., at 579.
Thus, we recognized, “state law offers an additional, and
important, layer of consumer protection that complements
FDA regulation.” Ibid. Today’s decision eliminates the
traditional state-law incentives for generic manufacturers
to monitor and disclose safety risks. When a generic drug
has a brand-name equivalent on the market, the brand
name manufacturer will remain incentivized to uncover
safety risks. But brand-name manufacturers often leave
the market once generic versions are available, see supra,
at 4–5, meaning that there will be no manufacturer sub
ject to failure-to-warn liability. As to those generic drugs,
there will be no “additional . . . layer of consumer protec
tion.” Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 579.
Finally, today’s decision undoes the core principle of
the Hatch-Waxman Amendments that generic and brand
name drugs are the “same” in nearly all respects.15 See
Brief for Rep. Henry A. Waxman as Amicus Curiae 9.
The majority pins the expansion of the generic drug market
on “the special, and different, regulation of generic drugs,”
which allows generic manufacturers to produce their
drugs more cheaply. Ante, at 19. This tells only half the
story. The expansion of the market for generic drugs has
also flowed from the increased acceptance of, and trust in,
——————
15 According to the GPhA, both the FDA and the generic drug indus
try “spend millions of dollars each year . . . seeking to reassure consum
ers that affordable generic drugs really are—as federal law compels
them to be—the same as their pricier brand-name counterparts.” Brief
for GPhA as Amicus Curiae on Pet. for Cert. in Nos. 09–993, 09–1039,
pp. 2–3.

