2

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
Syllabus

588 F. 3d 603 and 593 F. 3d 428, reversed and remanded.
JUSTICE THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court with respect to
all but Part III–B–2, concluding that federal drug regulations appli
cable to generic drug manufacturers directly conflict with, and thus
pre-empt, these state claims. Pp. 4–14, 17–20.
(a) Because pre-emption analysis requires a comparison between
federal and state law, the Court begins by identifying the state tort
duties and federal labeling requirements applicable to the Manufac
turers. Pp. 4–10.
(1) State tort law requires a manufacturer that is, or should be,
aware of its drug’s danger to label it in a way that renders it rea
sonably safe. Respondents pleaded that the Manufacturers knew, or
should have known, both that the long-term use of their products car
ried a high risk of tardive dyskinesia and that their labels did not
adequately warn of that risk. Taking these allegations as true, the
state-law duty required the Manufacturers to use a different,
stronger label than the one they actually used. Pp. 4–5.
(2) On the other hand, federal drug regulations, as interpreted by
the FDA, prevented the Manufacturers from independently changing
their generic drugs’ safety labels. A manufacturer seeking federal
approval to market a new drug must prove that it is safe and effec
tive and that the proposed label is accurate and adequate. Although
the same rules originally applied to all drugs, the 1984 law commonly
called the Hatch-Waxman Amendments allows a generic drug manu
facturer to gain FDA approval simply by showing that its drug is
equivalent to an already-approved brand-name drug, and that the
safety and efficacy labeling proposed for its drug is the same as that
approved for the brand-name drug. Respondents contend that fed
eral law nevertheless provides avenues through which the Manufac
turers could have altered their metoclopramide labels in time to pre
vent the injuries here. These include: (1) the FDA’s “changes-being
effected” (CBE) process, which permits drug manufacturers, without
preapproval, to add or strengthen a warning label; and (2) sending
“Dear Doctor” letters providing additional warnings to prescribing
physicians and other healthcare professionals. However, the FDA
denies that the Manufacturers could have used either of these proc
esses to unilaterally strengthen their warning labels. The Court de
fers to the FDA’s views because they are not plainly erroneous or in
consistent with the regulations, and there is no other reason to doubt
that they reflect the FDA’s fair and considered judgment. Auer v.
Robbins, 519 U. S. 452, 461, 462. Assuming, without deciding, that
the FDA is correct that federal law nevertheless required the Manu
facturers to ask for the agency’s assistance in convincing the brand
name manufacturer to adopt a stronger label, the Court turns to the

