6

WELLONS v. HALL
Per Curiam

ultimate outcome” of the matter. Lawrence v. Chater, 516
U. S. 163, 167 (1996) (per curiam). As already discussed,
there is, at least, a “reasonable probability,” ibid., that the
denial of discovery and an evidentiary hearing rested in
part on the Cone error. And in light of the unusual facts of
the case, a “redetermination may determine the ultimate
outcome,” 516 U. S., at 167; cf. Williams v. Taylor, 529
U. S. 420, 442 (2000) (holding that several “omissions as a
whole disclose the need for an evidentiary hearing”);
Smith v. Phillips, 455 U. S. 209, 215 (1982) (“This Court
has long held that the remedy for allegations of juror
partiality is a hearing in which the defendant has an
opportunity to prove actual bias”). The Eleventh Circuit’s
opinion is ambiguous in significant respects. It would be
highly inappropriate to assume away that ambiguity in
respondent’s favor. That is especially so in a case in which
petitioner’s allegations and the unusual facts raise a
serious question about the fairness of a capital trial.
Both dissenting opinions suggest that if there is a strong
case for discovery and an evidentiary hearing, then the
Court “should summarily reverse or set the case for argu
ment.” Post, at 2 (opinion of SCALIA, J.); see also post, at
4–5 (opinion of ALITO, J.). But as we have explained, “a
GVR order conserves the scarce resources of this Court,”
“assists the court below by flagging a particular issue that
it does not appear to have fully considered,” and “assists
this Court by procuring the benefit of the lower court’s
insight before we rule on the merits.” Lawrence, supra, at
167.
Unlike JUSTICE SCALIA, post, at 3, we do not believe that
a “self-respecting” court of appeals would or should re
spond to our remand order with a “summary reissuance”
of essentially the same opinion, absent the procedural
default discussion. To the contrary, in light of our decision
in Cone, we assume the court will consider, on the merits,
whether petitioner’s allegations, together with the undis

