Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Per Curiam

cuit, Wellons “argue[d] that the district court erred in
denying his motions for discovery and an evidentiary
hearing to develop his judge, juror, and bailiff misconduct
claims because they are not procedurally barred.” Id., at
935. The court disagreed, holding that Wellons’ claims
were procedurally barred. Ibid.
As our dissenting colleagues acknowledge, post, at 1
(opinion of SCALIA, J.); post, at 1 (opinion of ALITO, J.), the
Eleventh Circuit’s holding was an error under Cone, 556
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 17–18). “When a state court
declines to review the merits of a petitioner’s claim on the
ground that it has done so already, it creates no bar to
federal habeas review.” Id., at __ (slip op., at 17). Both
dissenting opinions assume that “the issue on which Cone
throws light does not affect the outcome” because “the
Eleventh Circuit . . . also decided that petitioner was not
entitled to habeas relief on the merits.” Post, at 1–2 (opin
ion of SCALIA, J.). Having found a procedural bar, how
ever, the Eleventh Circuit had no need to address whether
petitioner was otherwise entitled to an evidentiary hear
ing and gave this question, at most, perfunctory considera
tion that may well have turned on the District Court’s
finding of a procedural bar.
Although Wellons appealed the denial of “his motions
for discovery and an evidentiary hearing,” 554 F. 3d, at
935, the Eleventh Circuit did not purport to address the
merits of that issue at all.2 The court stated only that
“[e]ven if we assume that Wellons’s misconduct claims are
not procedurally barred, they do not entitle Wellons to
—————— 

murdered by a man after he completed serving a life sentence. Id., at 

36.
2 As JUSTICE ALITO explains at some length, see post, at 2–4, the Dis
trict Court did discuss the merits of that issue, but the District Court’s
analysis has little relevance on whether the Court of Appeals made an
alternative holding or rather affirmed the District Court’s decision on
the ground that petitioner’s claim was procedurally barred.

