Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Per Curiam

Moreover, even assuming that the Eleventh Circuit
intended to address Wellons’ motions for discovery and an
evidentiary hearing, we cannot be sure that its reasoning
really was independent of the Cone error. The fact that
his claims rested on “speculation” and “surmise” was due
to the absence of a record, which was in part based on the
Cone error. And as the Eleventh Circuit’s reasoning
turned on “the evidence presented before the Georgia
Supreme Court,” 554 F. 3d, at 937, there is serious doubt
about whether it necessarily relied on the very holes in the
record that Wellons was trying to fill.
Our dissenting colleagues allege that the Court is “de
grad[ing] . . . our traditional requirements for a GVR.”
Post, at 2 (opinion of SCALIA, J.); see post, at 4 (opinion of
ALITO, J.). But the standard for an order granting certio
rari, vacating the judgment below, and remanding the
case (GVR) remains as it always has been: A GVR is ap
propriate when “intervening developments . . . reveal a
reasonable probability that the decision below rests upon a
premise that the lower court would reject if given the
opportunity for further consideration, and where it ap
pears that such a redetermination may determine the
——————
Moreover, the allegedly “unequivocal” holding that JUSTICE ALITO
quotes was preceded by a discussion of the deference owed under the
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA) to the
“Georgia Supreme Court’s judgment as to the substance and effect of
the ex parte communication.” Id., at 937. This is the classic formula
tion of a decision of whether to grant habeas relief. Indeed, it would be
bizarre if a federal court had to defer to state-court factual findings,
made without any evidentiary record, in order to decide whether it
could create an evidentiary record to decide whether the factual find
ings were erroneous. If that were the case, then almost no habeas
petitioner could ever get an evidentiary hearing: So long as the state
court found a fact that the petitioner was trying to disprove through the
presentation of evidence, then there could be no hearing. AEDPA does
not require such a crabbed and illogical approach to habeas procedures,
and there is no reason to believe that the Eleventh Circuit thought
otherwise.

