4

WELLONS v. HALL
Per Curiam

habeas relief.” Id., at 936 (emphasis added). This opaque
statement appears to address only whether petitioner was
entitled to ultimate relief in the form of a new trial, not
whether petitioner’s allegations, combined with the facts
he had learned, entitled him to the discovery and eviden
tiary hearing that he sought.
The Eleventh Circuit’s reasoning does not suggest oth
erwise. The court observed that Wellons’ claims of mis
conduct were “grounded in his speculation as to the mean
ing underlying the jurors’ chocolate ‘gifts’ ” and “the
surmise attached to their passive receipt of these gifts.”
Ibid. This statement likewise indicates only that on the
existing record, habeas relief was inappropriate, not that
an evidentiary hearing should be denied. After all, had
there been discovery or an evidentiary hearing, Wellons
may have been able to present more than “speculation”
and “surmise.” The Eleventh Circuit also pointed to the
state court’s decision on direct appeal, see id., at 937, and
reviewed that decision “[i]n light of the evidence presented
before the Georgia Supreme Court,” ibid. This, too, is
typical of a court reviewing the denial of habeas relief, not
the denial of discovery or an evidentiary hearing. 3
——————
3 JUSTICE ALITO asserts that the Eleventh Circuit “stated in unequivo
cal terms that its holding on the merits of petitioner’s claim was inde
pendent of its holding on the question of procedural default.” Post, at 1.
But that does not address the question: The merits of what? The
question whether to grant habeas relief or whether to permit discovery
and an evidentiary hearing?
Contrary to our dissenting colleagues, post, at 4 (opinion of ALITO, J.),
we do not find it dispositive that the section of the Eleventh Circuit’s
opinion about judge, juror, and bailiff misconduct began with a full
page statement of the standard of review, which in turn included a
sentence about the circumstances under which an evidentiary hearing
is warranted. See 554 F. 3d, at 934–935. Immediately following the
standard of review that JUSTICE ALITO quotes, the panel explained that
“ ‘if the record . . . precludes habeas relief, a district court is not re
quired to hold an evidentiary hearing,’ ” and that “the record reveals
that [Wellons’] claims . . . are procedurally barred.” Id., at 935.

