4

WELLONS v. HALL
ALITO, J., dissenting

when the judge entered the room in a restaurant where
the jurors were dining—the District Court concluded that
“nothing that Petitioner has presented provides even the
slightest indication that anything more than a simple
greeting occurred,” App. C to Pet. for Cert. 43.
With respect to the gifts that were given to the judge
and a bailiff after the trial ended, the District Court
stressed that they were “inappropriate” and represented
“an unusual display of poor taste in the context of a pro
ceeding so grave as a capital trial,” ibid., but the Court
noted that petitioner had not proffered any evidence that
any of the jurors or court personnel who were interviewed
had said anything that substantiated the assertion that
“an inappropriate relationship existed between the judge,
the bailiff, and the jury,” id., at 44.
A fair reading of the Court of Appeals’ opinion is that
that court likewise held that petitioner was not entitled to
the discovery he sought because that discovery was
unlikely to yield evidence substantiating his claim. See
554 F. 3d, at 935 (quoting Schriro v. Landrigan, 550 U. S.
465, 474 (2007) (“When deciding whether to grant a fed
eral habeas petitioner’s request for an evidentiary hear
ing, ‘a federal court must consider whether such a hearing
could enable an applicant to prove the petition’s factual
allegations, which, if true, would entitle the applicant to
federal habeas relief’ ”)).
I agree with the Court that the strange and tasteless
gifts that were given to the trial judge and bailiff are
facially troubling, and I am certainly not prepared at this
point to say that the decision below on the discovery issue
was correct. But unlike the Court, I do not think it is
proper for us to use a GVR to address this matter. The
lower courts have decided the discovery issue, and now
this Court has two options. First, if we wish to review the
question whether petitioner made a sufficient showing to
justify interrogation of the jurors, we should grant the

