Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

ALITO, J., dissenting

erations.2 Cf. Fed. Rule Evid. 606(b). Interestingly, the
proffer does not reflect that the attorneys asked any of the
jurors what would appear to be the most critical question,
namely, why the strange gifts were given to the judge or
the bailiff.3 See App. C to Pet. for Cert. 34–38. If any such
questions had been asked and answers favorable to peti
tioner’s position had been provided, one would expect that
information to appear in the proffer.
After examining the proffer made by petitioner’s attor
neys, the District Court concluded that this submission
did not justify formal discovery. With respect to what the
per curiam describes as the “unreported ex parte contacts
between the jury and the judge,” ante, at 1—which appar
ently consisted of a brief exchange of words that occurred
——————
2 The

per curiam assumes that the jurors who were interviewed must
have spoken only “in the briefest of terms” because “ ‘everything that
Petitioner. . . learned’ ” “filled only a few sheets of paper.” Ibid. The
mere fact that the unsworn proffer submitted by petitioner’s state
habeas counsel consisted of four pages, see App. C to Pet. for Cert. 35–
38, does not seem to me to provide a sufficient basis for concluding that
the jurors interviewed spoke only “in the briefest of terms.” The length
of the proffer is equally consistent with the possibility that the jurors
interviewed spoke at length but did not supply information that peti
tioner’s counsel deemed helpful to his case.
3 The main reason for the interviews was to inquire about the gifts,
and the proffer shows that the jurors who were interviewed discussed
this matter. See, e.g., App. C to Pet. for Cert. 35 (a juror “stated that
‘we,’ the jurors gave a pair of chocolate breasts to the bailiff and the
chocolate penis just followed”); ibid. (a juror “stated that some of the
jurors decided to send a pair of edible chocolate breasts to one of the
female bailiffs and an edible chocolate penis to the trial judge”); id., at
37 (a juror “remembered discussion about giving a chocolate penis to
the judge”). Nevertheless, petitioner’s proffer includes no information
as to why the gifts were given—not even a statement to the effect that
the jurors interviewed were asked this question and said that they did
not know. Cf. id., at 35 (noting that a particular juror “did not know
whose idea it was to send the chocolate penis to the judge,” but not
including any representation as to her understanding of why the gifts
may have been given (emphasis added)).

