2

WELLONS v. HALL
ALITO, J., dissenting

not procedurally barred, they do not entitle Wellons to
habeas relief”). But the per curiam states that the Court
of Appeals’ consideration of the merits “may well have
turned on the District Court’s finding of a procedural bar”
and that “we cannot be sure that [the panel’s] reasoning
really was independent of the Cone error.” Ante, at 3, 5.
Even worse, the per curiam unjustifiably suggests that
the Court of Appeals gave at most only “perfunctory con
sideration” to petitioner’s claim that he was entitled to an
evidentiary hearing and may not have “carefully reviewed”
the relevant facts. Ante, at 3, 1. The majority may not be
satisfied with the Court of Appeals’ discussion, but the
majority has no good reason for suggesting that the lower
court did not give the issue careful consideration.
The District Court refused petitioner’s discovery request
on the ground that petitioner did not make a sufficient
showing to warrant interrogation of the jurors. As the
detailed opinion of the District Court reveals, the state
habeas judge allowed petitioner’s attorneys to contact all
of the jurors and relevant court personnel; the attorneys
succeeded in contacting all but 1 of the jurors; 6 of the 11
jurors who were contacted, as well as the bailiffs and court
reporter, were interviewed; and the attorneys made a
proffer of the information provided by these interviewees.1
There is no suggestion that the attorneys were restricted
in the questions that they were permitted to ask the inter
viewees, and it appears that the jurors who were inter
viewed spoke freely, even discussing their understanding
of the judge’s instructions on the law and the jury’s delib
——————
1 As the District Court observed, “[p]etitioner’s state habeas corpus
counsel contacted all but one of the jurors seeking their comments.”
App. C to Pet. for Cert. 34. The proffer shows that six jurors were
interviewed: DeArmond, id., at 35, Henry, ibid., Givhan, id., at 36,
Humphrey, id., at 37, Moore, ibid. and Smith, ibid. The Court’s de
scription of some of the matters that the jurors mentioned during the
interview confirms that these jurors “spoke freely.” See ante, at 2, n. 1.

