2

WELLONS v. HALL
Per Curiam

himself caught in a procedural morass: He raised the issue
on direct appeal but was constrained by the nonexistent
record, and the State Supreme Court affirmed his convic
tion and sentence. Wellons v. State, 266 Ga. 77, 88, 463
S. E. 2d 868, 880 (1995). He sought state habeas relief
and moved to develop evidence. But the court held that
the matter had been decided on appeal and thus was res
judicata. See 554 F. 3d, at 932. He raised the issue again
in his federal habeas petition, seeking discovery and an
evidentiary hearing. But the District Court “concluded
that Wellons’ claims . . . were procedurally barred, and
accordingly denied his motion for an evidentiary hearing
on these claims.” Id., at 933.1 Before the Eleventh Cir
——————
1 Although the District Court found most of petitioner’s claims to be
procedurally barred, it alternatively declined to permit an evidentiary
hearing because Wellons did not have enough evidence of bias or
misconduct. JUSTICE ALITO wrongly suggests that the District Court
reached that conclusion by reviewing a proffer that Wellons’ attorneys
assembled by “contacting all but 1 of the jurors,” many of whom “spoke
freely.” Post, at 2 (dissenting opinion). Even apart from the fact that
these interviews were informal and unsworn, they shed almost no light
on what had occurred. The juror who allegedly “gave the penis to the
judge,” App. C to Pet. for Cert. 36, was “hostile and refused to talk,” id.,
at 37; one “refused to talk about the trial,” id., at 36; another “did not
want to talk about the case,” id., at 37; and one “conferr[ed]” with his
wife who then “slammed and bolted the door,” ibid. Of those jurors who
were willing to talk at all, one admitted to being “concerned that she
might say something that would be used for a mistrial,” id., at 35, and
none admitted to knowing how or why the jury selected its “gifts,” see
id., at 35–36, 37. (Implausibly, JUSTICE ALITO suggests that Wellons’
lawyers may not have asked how or why the jury selected its “gifts,”
post, at 3, though he bases that speculation only on the fact that no
questions appeared in the proffer of facts.) Rather, the jurors discussed
other matters and did so in the briefest of terms. All told, “everything
that Petitioner . . . learned,” App. C to Pet. for Cert. 38, filled only a few
sheets of paper, see id., at 35–36, 37.
Moreover, the subjects that the jurors did discuss may very well sup
port Wellons’ view that his trial was tainted by bias or misconduct. For
example, one interviewee “was surprised” that a fellow juror had been
allowed to serve on a capital trial, given that her sister had been

