2

WELLONS v. HALL
SCALIA, J., dissenting

does not affect the outcome.
The Court has previously asserted a power to GVR
whenever there is “a reasonable probability that the deci
sion below rests upon a premise that the lower court
would reject if given the opportunity for further considera
tion, and where it appears that such a redetermination
may determine the ultimate outcome of the litigation.”
Lawrence v. Chater, 516 U. S. 163, 167 (1996) (per cu
riam). I have protested even that flabby standard, see id.,
at 190–191 (SCALIA, J., dissenting), but today the Court
outdoes itself. It GVRs where the decision below does not
“rest upon” the objectionable faulty premise, but is inde
pendently supported by other grounds—so that redeter
mination of the faulty ground will assuredly not “deter
mine the ultimate outcome of the litigation.” The power to
“revise and correct for error,” which the Court has already
turned into “a power to void for suspicion,” id., at 190
(same) (internal quotation marks and alteration omitted),
has now become the power to send back for a re-do. We
have no authority to decree that. If the Court thinks that
the Eleventh Circuit’s merits holding is wrong, then it
should summarily reverse or set the case for argument;
otherwise, the judgment below must stand. The same is
true if (as the Court evidently believes) the Court of Ap
peals should have required an evidentiary hearing before
resolving the merits question. If they erred in that regard
their judgment should be reversed rather than remanded
“in light of Cone v. Bell”—a disposition providing no hint
that what we really want them to do (as the Court be
lieves) is to consider an evidentiary hearing.
The systematic degradation of our traditional require
ments for a GVR has spawned a series of unusual disposi
tions, including the GVR so the government can try a less
extravagant argument on remand, see Department of
Interior v. South Dakota, 519 U. S. 919, 921 (1996)
(SCALIA, J., dissenting), the GVR in light of nothing, see

