Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

27

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

community at large and in the responses to the written
questionnaire, it was critical for the District Court to take
“strong measures” to ensure the selection of “an impartial
jury free from outside influences.” Sheppard, 384 U. S., at
362. As this Court has recognized, “[i]n a community
where most veniremen will admit to a disqualifying preju­
dice, the reliability of the others’ protestations may be
drawn into question.” Murphy, 421 U. S., at 803; see also
Groppi v. Wisconsin, 400 U. S. 505, 510 (1971) (“ ‘[A]ny
judge who has sat with juries knows that in spite of forms
they are extremely likely to be impregnated by the envi­
roning atmosphere’ ” (quoting Frank v. Mangum, 237 U. S.
309, 349 (1915) (Holmes, J., dissenting))). Perhaps be­
cause it had underestimated the public’s antipathy toward
Skilling, the District Court’s 5-hour voir dire was mani­
festly insufficient to identify and remove biased jurors.13
As an initial matter, important lines of inquiry were not
——————
13 The majority points out that the jury selection processes in the
three previous Enron trials that had been held in Houston were simi­
larly brief. See ante, at 23. The circumstances of those cases, however,
were very different. In particular, the defendants had not been person­
ally subjected to anything approaching the withering public criticism
that had been directed at Skilling and Lay. As earlier noted, see, e.g.,
supra, at 25–26, it was the trial of Skilling and Lay that was widely
seen as the climactic event of the Enron saga. Accordingly, my conclu­
sion that the jury selection process in this unusual case did not suffice
to select an impartial jury does not cast doubt on the adequacy of the
processes used in the earlier Enron prosecutions.
Moreover, in referencing the length of the voir dire in this case, I do
not mean to suggest that length should be a principal measure of the
adequacy of a jury selection process. Trial courts, including this one,
should be commended for striving to be efficient, but they must always
take care to ensure that their expeditiousness does not compromise a
defendant’s fair-trial right. I also express no view with respect to court­
led versus attorney-led voir dire. Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure
24(a) gives district courts discretion to choose between these options,
and I have no doubt that either is capable of producing an impartial
jury even in high profile cases so long as the trial court assures that the
scope of the voir dire is tailored to the circumstances.

