(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1394. Argued March 1, 2010—Decided June 24, 2010
Founded in 1985, Enron Corporation grew from its headquarters in
Houston, Texas, into the seventh highest-revenue-grossing company
in America. Petitioner Jeffrey Skilling, a longtime Enron officer, was
Enron’s chief executive officer from February until August 2001,
when he resigned. Less than four months later, Enron crashed into
bankruptcy, and its stock plummeted in value. After an investigation
uncovered an elaborate conspiracy to prop up Enron’s stock prices by
overstating the company’s financial well-being, the Government
prosecuted dozens of Enron employees who participated in the
scheme. In time, the Government worked its way up the chain of
command, indicting Skilling and two other top Enron executives.
These three defendants, the indictment charged, engaged in a scheme
to deceive investors about Enron’s true financial performance by ma
nipulating its publicly reported financial results and making false
and misleading statements. Count 1 of the indictment charged Skill
ing with, inter alia, conspiracy to commit “honest-services” wire
fraud, 18 U. S. C. §§371, 1343, 1346, by depriving Enron and its
shareholders of the intangible right of his honest services. Skilling
was also charged with over 25 substantive counts of securities fraud,
wire fraud, making false representations to Enron’s auditors, and in
sider trading.
In November 2004, Skilling moved for a change of venue, contend
ing that hostility toward him in Houston, coupled with extensive pre
trial publicity, had poisoned potential jurors. He submitted hundreds
of news reports detailing Enron’s downfall, as well as affidavits from
experts he engaged portraying community attitudes in Houston in
comparison to other potential venues. The District Court denied the
motion, concluding that pretrial publicity did not warrant a presump

