Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

the coming Skilling/Lay trial as “the main event” and “The
Big One,” which would finally bring “the true measure of
justice in the Enron saga.” Record 40002; App. 1457a,
1460a.2 On the day the superseding indictment charging
Lay was issued, “the Chronicle dedicated three-quarters of
its front page, 2 other full pages, and substantial portions
of 4 other pages, all in the front or business sections, to
th[e] story.” Id., ¶57, at 580a–581a.
Citing the widely felt sense of victimhood among Hous­
tonians and the voluminous adverse publicity, Skilling
moved in November 2004 for a change of venue.3 The
District Court denied the motion, characterizing the media
coverage as largely “objective and unemotional.” App. to
Brief for United States 11a. Voir dire, it concluded, would
provide an effective means to “ferret out any bias” in the
jury pool. Id., at 18a; see ante, at 4.
To that end, the District Court began the jury selection
process by mailing screening questionnaires to 400 pro­
spective jurors in November 2005. The completed ques­
tionnaires of the 283 respondents not excused for hardship
dramatically illustrated the widespread impact of Enron’s
——————
price plummeted); 3 Supp. Record 1711 (discussing the role of Skilling
and Lay in “the granddaddy of all corporate frauds”).
2 According to Skilling’s media expert, local television stations
“adopted these same themes” and “dr[o]ve them home through such
vivid and repeated visual imagery as replaying footage of Skilling’s . . .
‘perp walk’ when details about Skilling’s upcoming trial [we]re dis­
cussed.” App. ¶65, p. 584a. During arraignment, news outlets “fol­
lowed each man as he drove from his home to FBI headquarters, to the
court, and back home, often providing ‘color’ commentary—such as
interviewing former Enron employees for comment on the day’s events.”
Id., ¶60, at 581a.
3 Reporting on the change-of-venue motion, the Chronicle described
Skilling as a “desperate defendant,” and the Austin AmericanStatesman opined that while a change of venue may make sense “[f]rom
a legal perspective,” “from the standpoint of pure justice, the wealthy
executives really should be judged right where their economic hurri­
cane struck with the most force.” Id., at 748a, 747a.

