Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

31

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

879a, 966a.17 When prospective jurors were more forth­
coming, their responses tended to highlight the ubiquity
and negative tone of the local news coverage, thus under­
scoring the need to press the more guarded members of
the venire for further information.18 Juror 17, for exam­
ple, mentioned hearing a radio program that very morning
in which a former Enron employee compared persons who
did not think Skilling was guilty to Holocaust deniers. See
id., at 863a (“[H]e said he thought that he would find them
guilty automatically if he was on the jury because he said
that it would be worse than a German trying to say that
they didn’t kill the Jews”).19 Other jurors may well have
encountered, and been influenced by, similarly incendiary
rhetoric.
These deficiencies in the form and content of the voir
——————
17 The

majority’s criticism of Skilling’s counsel for failing to ask ques­
tions of many of the prospective jurors, cf. ante, at 23–24, is thus
misplaced. Given the District Court’s express warning early in the voir
dire that it would not allow counsel “to ask individual questions if
[they] abuse[d]” that right, App. 879a, counsel can hardly be blamed for
declining to test the court’s boundaries at every turn. Moreover, the
court’s perfunctory exchanges with prospective jurors often gave
counsel no clear avenue for further permissible inquiry.
18 Although the District Court underestimated the extent of the com­
munity hostility, it was certainly aware of the ubiquity of the pretrial
publicity, acknowledging that “all of us have been exposed to substan­
tial media attention about this case.” Id., at 841a. The court even
made an offhand remark about one of the prior Enron prosecutions,
“the Nigerian barge case,” apparently expecting that the prospective
jurors would understand the reference. Id., at 840a.
19 Taking a more defendant-favorable line than most prospective ju­
rors, Juror 17 stated that he “thought the guy [on the radio] was pretty
narrow minded,” that “everyone should be considered innocent totally
until they get a chance to come [to] court,” and that the Government
might have been overzealous in some of its Enron-related prosecutions.
Id., at 863a–864a. He added, however, that he “believe[d] there was
probably some accounting fraud [at Enron].” Id., at 864a. The District
Court denied the Government’s request to remove Juror 17 for cause,
but he did not ultimately sit on the jury.

