16

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

Irvin, including that he had purportedly confessed. Id., at
725. Nearly 90 percent of the 430 prospective jurors ex­
amined during the trial court’s voir dire “entertained some
opinion as to guilt—ranging in intensity from mere suspi­
cion to absolute certainty.” Id., at 727. Of the 12 jurors
seated, 8 “thought petitioner was guilty,” although “each
indicated that notwithstanding his opinion he could ren­
der an impartial verdict.” Id., at 727, 724.
Despite the seated jurors’ assurances of impartiality,
this Court invalidated Irvin’s conviction for want of due
process. “It is not required,” this Court declared, “that the
jurors be totally ignorant of the facts and issues involved.
. . . It is sufficient if the juror can lay aside his impression
or opinion and render a verdict based on the evidence
presented in court.” Id., at 722–723. The Court empha­
sized, however, that a juror’s word on this matter is not
decisive, particularly when “the build-up of prejudice [in
the community] is clear and convincing.” Id., at 725.
Many of Irvin’s jurors, the Court noted, had been influ­
enced by “the pattern of deep and bitter prejudice shown
to be present throughout the community.” Id., at 727
(internal quotation marks omitted). The Court did not
“doubt [that] each juror was sincere when he said that he
would be fair and impartial to [Irvin], but . . . [w]here so
many, so many times, admitted prejudice, such a state­
ment of impartiality can be given little weight.” Id., at
728.
The media coverage and community animosity in Irvin
was particularly intense. In three subsequent cases, this
Court recognized that high-profile cases may generate
substantial publicity without stirring similar public pas­
sions. The jury selection process in such cases, the Court
clarified, generally need not be as exhaustive as in a case
such as Irvin. So long as the trial court conducts a rea­
sonable inquiry into extrajudicial influences and the abil­
ity of prospective jurors to presume innocence and render

