2

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
tion that Skilling would be unable to obtain a fair trial in Houston.
Despite incidents of intemperate commentary, the court observed,
media coverage, on the whole, had been objective and unemotional,
and the facts of the case were neither heinous nor sensational. More
over, the court asserted, effective voir dire would detect juror bias.
In the months before the trial, the court asked the parties for ques
tions it might use to screen prospective jurors. Rejecting the Gov
ernment’s sparer inquiries in favor of Skilling’s more probing and
specific questions, the court converted Skilling’s submission, with
slight modifications, into a 77-question, 14-page document. The
questionnaire asked prospective jurors about their sources of news
and exposure to Enron-related publicity, beliefs concerning Enron
and what caused its collapse, opinions regarding the defendants and
their possible guilt or innocence, and relationships to the company
and to anyone affected by its demise. The court then mailed the
questionnaire to 400 prospective jurors and received responses from
nearly all of them. It granted hardship exemptions to about 90 indi
viduals, and the parties, with the court’s approval, further winnowed
the pool by excusing another 119 for cause, hardship, or physical dis
ability. The parties agreed to exclude, in particular, every prospec
tive juror who said that a preexisting opinion about Enron or the de
fendants would prevent her from being impartial.
In December 2005, three weeks before the trial date, one of Skill
ing’s co-defendants, Richard Causey, pleaded guilty. Skilling re
newed his change-of-venue motion, arguing that the juror question
naires revealed pervasive bias and that news accounts of Causey’s
guilty plea further tainted the jury pool. The court again declined to
move the trial, ruling that the questionnaires and voir dire provided
safeguards adequate to ensure an impartial jury. The court also de
nied Skilling’s request for attorney-led voir dire on the ground that
potential jurors were more forthcoming with judges than with law
yers. But the court promised to give counsel an opportunity to ask
follow-up questions, agreed that venire members should be examined
individually about pretrial publicity, and allotted the defendants
jointly two extra peremptory challenges.
Voir dire began in January 2006. After questioning the venire as a
group, the court examined prospective jurors individually, asking
each about her exposure to Enron-related news, the content of any
stories that stood out in her mind, and any questionnaire answers
that raised a red flag signaling possible bias. The court then permit
ted each side to pose follow-up questions and ruled on the parties’
challenges for cause. Ultimately, the court qualified 38 prospective
jurors, a number sufficient, allowing for peremptory challenges, to
empanel 12 jurors and 4 alternates. After a 4-month trial, the jury

