6

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
recorded in Irvin; and Skilling’s seated jurors exhibited nothing like
the display of bias shown in Irvin. In any event, the District Court
did not simply take venire members at their word. It questioned
each juror individually to uncover concealed bias. This face-to-face
opportunity to gauge demeanor and credibility, coupled with informa
tion from the questionnaires regarding jurors’ backgrounds, opinions,
and news sources, gave the court a sturdy foundation to assess fit
ness for jury service. Pp. 22–30.
(3) Skilling’s allegation that several jurors were openly biased
also fails. In reviewing such claims, the deference due to district
courts is at its pinnacle: “ ‘A trial court’s findings of juror impartiality
may be overturned only for manifest error.’ ” Mu’Min, 500 U. S., at
428. Skilling, moreover, unsuccessfully challenged only one of the
seated jurors for cause, “strong evidence that he was convinced the
[other] jurors were not biased and had not formed any opinions as to
his guilt.” Beck v. Washington, 369 U. S. 541, 557–558. A review of
the record reveals no manifest error regarding the empaneling of Ju
rors 11, 20, and 63, each of whom indicated, inter alia, that he or she
would be fair to Skilling and would require the Government to prove
its case. Four other jurors Skilling claims he would have excluded
with extra peremptory strikes, Jurors 38, 67, 78, and 84, exhibited no
signs of prejudice this Court can discern. Pp. 31–34.
2. Section 1346, which proscribes fraudulent deprivations of “the
intangible right of honest services,” is properly confined to cover only
bribery and kickback schemes. Because Skilling’s alleged misconduct
entailed no bribe or kickback, it does not fall within the Court’s con
finement of §1346’s proscription. Pp. 34–51.
(a) To place Skilling’s claim that §1346 is unconstitutionally
vague in context, the Court reviews the origin and subsequent appli
cation of the honest-services doctrine. Pp. 34–38.
(1) In a series of decisions beginning in the 1940s, the Courts
of Appeals, one after another, interpreted the mail-fraud statute’s
prohibition of “any scheme or artifice to defraud” to include depriva
tions not only of money or property, but also of intangible rights.
See, e.g., Shushan v. United States, 117 F. 2d 110, which stimulated
the development of the “honest-services” doctrine. Unlike traditional
fraud, in which the victim’s loss of money or property supplied the de
fendant’s gain, with one the mirror image of the other, the honest
services doctrine targeted corruption that lacked similar symmetry.
While the offender profited, the betrayed party suffered no depriva
tion of money or property; instead, a third party, who had not been
deceived, provided the enrichment. Even if the scheme occasioned a
money or property gain for the betrayed party, courts reasoned, ac
tionable harm lay in the denial of that party’s right to the offender’s

