Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of SCALIA, J.

and what was out.2
II
The Court is aware of all this. It knows that adopting
by reference “the pre-McNally honest-services doctrine,”
ante, at 42, is adopting by reference nothing more precise
than the referring term itself (“the intangible right of
honest services”). Hence the deus ex machina: “[W]e pare
that body of precedent down to its core,” ante, at 39. Since
the honest-services doctrine “had its genesis” in bribery
prosecutions, and since several cases and counsel for
Skilling referred to bribery and kickback schemes as “core”
or “paradigm” or “typical” examples, or “[t]he most obvious
form,” of honest-services fraud, ante, at 43 (internal quota­
tion marks omitted), and since two cases and counsel for
the Government say that they formed the “vast majority,”
or “most” or at least “[t]he bulk” of honest-services cases,
ante, at 42–44 (internal quotation marks omitted),
THEREFORE it must be the case that they are all
Congress meant by its reference to the honest-services
doctrine.
Even if that conclusion followed from its premises, it
would not suffice to eliminate the vagueness of the stat­
ute. It would solve (perhaps) the indeterminacy of what
acts constitute a breach of the “honest services” obligation
under the pre-McNally law. But it would not solve the
most fundamental indeterminacy: the character of the
“fiduciary capacity” to which the bribery and kickback
——————
2 Courts since §1346’s enactment have fared no better, reproducing
some of the same disputes that predated McNally. See, e.g., Sorich v.
United States, 555 U. S. ___, ___–___ (2009) (SCALIA, J., dissenting from
denial of certiorari) (slip op., at 3–4) (collecting cases). We have previ­
ously found important to our vagueness analysis “the conflicting results
which have arisen from the painstaking attempts of enlightened judges
in seeking to carry out [a] statute in cases brought before them.”
United States v. L. Cohen Grocery Co., 255 U. S. 81, 89 (1921). I am at
a loss to explain why the Court barely mentions those conflicts today.

