Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Syllabus
tion of §1346 absent Congress’ clear instruction otherwise. “If Con
gress desires to go further,” the Court reiterates, “it must speak more
clearly than it has.” McNally, 483 U. S., at 360. Pp. 45–47.
(5) Interpreted to encompass only bribery and kickback
schemes, §1346 is not unconstitutionally vague. A prohibition on
fraudulently depriving another of one’s honest services by accepting
bribes or kickbacks presents neither a fair-notice nor an arbitrary
prosecution problem. See Kolender, 461 U. S., at 357. As to fair no
tice, it has always been clear that bribes and kickbacks constitute
honest-services fraud, Williams v. United States, 341 U. S. 97, 101,
and the statute’s mens rea requirement further blunts any notice
concern, see, e.g., Screws v. United States, 325 U. S. 91, 101–104. As
to arbitrary prosecutions, the Court perceives no significant risk that
the honest-services statute, as here interpreted, will be stretched out
of shape. Its prohibition on bribes and kickbacks draws content not
only from the pre-McNally case law, but also from federal statutes
proscribing and defining similar crimes. Pp. 48–49.
(c) Skilling did not violate §1346, as the Court interprets the
statute. The Government charged Skilling with conspiring to de
fraud Enron’s shareholders by misrepresenting the company’s fiscal
health to his own profit, but the Government never alleged that he
solicited or accepted side payments from a third party in exchange for
making these misrepresentations. Because the indictment alleged
three objects of the conspiracy—honest-services wire fraud, money
or-property wire fraud, and securities fraud—Skilling’s conviction is
flawed. See Yates v. United States, 354 U. S. 298. This determina
tion, however, does not necessarily require reversal of the conspiracy
conviction, for errors of the Yates variety are subject to harmless
error analysis. The Court leaves the parties’ dispute about whether
the error here was harmless for resolution on remand, along with the
question whether reversal on the conspiracy count would touch any of
Skilling’s other convictions. Pp. 49–50.
554 F. 3d 529, affirmed in part, vacated in part, and remanded.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, Part I of which was
joined by ROBERTS, C. J., and STEVENS, SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and
ALITO, JJ., Part II of which was joined by ROBERTS, C. J., and SCALIA,
KENNEDY, and THOMAS, JJ., and Part III of which was joined by ROBERTS, C. J., and STEVENS, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ. SCALIA,
J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment,
in which THOMAS, J., joined, and KENNEDY, J., joined except as to Part
III. ALITO, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the
judgment. SOTOMAYOR, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and dis
senting in part, in which STEVENS and BREYER, JJ., joined.

