6

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

defendant’s “failure to disclose his receipt of kickbacks and
consulting fees from [his employer’s] suppliers resulted in
a breach of his fiduciary duties depriving his employer of
his loyal and honest services.” United States v. Bryza, 522
F. 2d 414, 422 (CA7 1975). Another opinion, however,
demanded more than an intentional failure to disclose:
“There must be a failure to disclose something which in
the knowledge or contemplation of the employee poses an
independent business risk to the employer.” Lemire, 720
F. 2d, at 1337. Other courts required that the victim
suffer some loss, see, e.g., Ballard, supra, at 541–542—a
proposition that, of course, other courts rejected, see, e.g.,
United States v. Newman, 664 F. 2d 12, 20 (CA2 1981);
United States v. O’Malley, 535 F. 2d 589, 592 (CA10 1976).
The Court’s statement today that there was a deprivation
of honest services even if “the scheme occasioned a money
or property gain for the betrayed party,” ante, at 35, is
therefore true, except to the extent it is not.
In short, the first step in the Court’s analysis—holding
that “the intangible right of honest services” refers to “the
honest-services doctrine recognized in Court of Appeals’
decisions before McNally,” ante, at 39—is a step out of the
frying pan into the fire. The pre-McNally cases provide no
clear indication of what constitutes a denial of the right of
honest services. The possibilities range from any action
that is contrary to public policy or otherwise immoral, to
only the disloyalty of a public official or employee to his
principal, to only the secret use of a perpetrator’s position
of trust in order to harm whomever he is beholden to. The
duty probably did not have to be rooted in state law, but
maybe it did. It might have been more demanding in the
case of public officials, but perhaps not. At the time §1346
was enacted there was no settled criterion for choosing
among these options, for conclusively settling what was in

