Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

cantly waned. 467 U. S., at 1032; see also ibid. (in the
months preceding the defendant’s retrial, newspaper
reports about the case averaged “less than one article per
month,” and public interest was “minimal”). The Enron
story was a continuing saga, and “publicity remained
intense throughout.” 554 F. 3d, at 560. Not only did
Enron’s downfall generate wall-to-wall news coverage, but
so too did a succession of subsequent Enron-related
events.12 Of particular note is the highly publicized guilty
plea of codefendant Causey just weeks before Skilling’s
trial. If anything, the time that elapsed between the
bankruptcy and the trial made the task of seating an
unbiased jury more difficult, not less. For many members
of the jury pool, each highly publicized Enron-related
guilty plea or conviction likely served to increase their
certainty that Skilling too had engaged in—if not master­
minded—criminal acts, particularly given that the media
——————
12 Among the highlights: In 2002, Skilling testified before Congress,
and other Enron executives invoked their Fifth Amendment rights;
Enron auditor Arthur Andersen was indicted, tried, convicted, and
sentenced on charges of obstruction of justice; the Enron Task Force
charged Enron CFO and Skilling-protégé Andrew Fastow with fraud,
money laundering, and other crimes; and at least two Enron employees
pleaded guilty on fraud and tax charges. In 2003, the Enron Task
Force indicted numerous Enron employees, including Ben Glisan, Jr.
(the company’s treasurer), Lea Fastow (wife of Andrew and an assistant
treasurer), and more than half a dozen executives of Enron Broadband
Services; several Enron employees entered guilty pleas and received
prison sentences; and Enron filed its bankruptcy reorganization plan.
In 2004, Andrew and Lea Fastow both pleaded guilty; Skilling and
Causey were indicted in February; a superseding indictment adding
Lay was filed in July; a number of additional Enron employees entered
guilty pleas; and former Enron employees and Merrill Lynch bankers
were defendants in a 6-week trial in Houston concerning an Enron deal
involving the sale of Nigerian barges. In 2005, a 3-month trial was held
in Houston for five executives of Enron Broadband Services; various
pretrial proceedings occurred in the run up to the trial of Skilling, Lay,
and Causey; and, three weeks before the scheduled trial date, Causey
pleaded guilty to securities fraud.

