Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Syllabus
ate steps to mitigate that risk. Pp. 18–19.
(b) No actual prejudice contaminated Skilling’s jury. The Court
rejects Skilling’s assertions that voir dire did not adequately detect
and defuse juror prejudice and that several seated jurors were biased.
Pp. 20–34.
(1) No hard-and-fast formula dictates the necessary depth or
breadth of voir dire. Jury selection is “particularly within the prov
ince of the trial judge.” Ristaino v. Ross, 424 U. S. 589, 594–595.
When pretrial publicity is at issue, moreover, “primary reliance on
the judgment of the trial court makes [especially] good sense” be
cause the judge “sits in the locale where the publicity is said to have
had its effect” and may base her evaluation on her “own perception of
the depth and extent of news stories that might influence a juror.”
Mu’Min v. Virginia, 500 U. S. 415, 427. The Court considers the ade
quacy of jury selection in Skilling’s case attentive to the respect due
to district-court determinations of juror impartiality and of the
measures necessary to ensure that impartiality. Pp. 20–21.
(2) Skilling failed to show that his voir dire fell short of consti
tutional requirements. The jury-selection process was insufficient,
Skilling maintains, because voir dire lasted only five hours, most of
the District Court’s questions were conclusory and failed adequately
to probe jurors’ true feelings, and the court consistently took prospec
tive jurors at their word once they claimed they could be fair, no mat
ter any other indications of bias. This Court’s review of the record,
however, yields a different appraisal. The District Court initially
screened venire members by eliciting their responses to a comprehen
sive questionnaire drafted in large part by Skilling. That survey
helped to identify prospective jurors excusable for cause and served
as a springboard for further questions; voir dire thus was the culmi
nation of a lengthy process. Moreover, inspection of the question
naires and voir dire of the seated jurors reveals that, notwithstand
ing the flaws Skilling lists, the selection process secured jurors
largely uninterested in publicity about Enron and untouched by the
corporation’s collapse. Whatever community prejudice existed in
Houston generally, Skilling’s jurors were not under its sway. Relying
on Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U. S., at 727–728, Skilling asserts the District
Court should not have accepted jurors’ promises of fairness. But a
number of factors show that the District Court had far less reason
than the trial court in Irvin to discredit jurors’ assurances of imparti
ality: News stories about Enron contained nothing resembling the
horrifying information rife in reports about Leslie Irvin’s rampage of
robberies and murders; Houston shares little in common with the ru
ral community in which Irvin’s trial proceeded; circulation figures for
Houston media sources were far lower than the 95% saturation level

