Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
found Skilling guilty of 19 counts, including the honest-services-fraud
conspiracy charge, and not guilty of 9 insider-trading counts.
On appeal, Skilling raised two arguments relevant here. First, he
contended that pretrial publicity and community prejudice prevented
him from obtaining a fair trial. Second, he alleged that the jury im
properly convicted him of conspiracy to commit honest-services wire
fraud. As to the former, the Fifth Circuit initially determined that
the volume and negative tone of media coverage generated by Enron’s
collapse created a presumption of juror prejudice. Stating, however,
that the presumption is rebuttable, the court examined the voir dire,
found it “proper and thorough,” and held that the District Court had
empaneled an impartial jury. The Court of Appeals also rejected
Skilling’s claim that his conduct did not indicate any conspiracy to
commit honest-services fraud. It did not address Skilling’s argument
that the honest-services statute, if not interpreted to exclude his ac
tions, should be invalidated as unconstitutionally vague.
Held:
1. Pretrial publicity and community prejudice did not prevent Skill
ing from obtaining a fair trial. He did not establish that a presump
tion of juror prejudice arose or that actual bias infected the jury that
tried him. Pp. 11–34.
(a) The District Court did not err in denying Skilling’s requests
for a venue transfer. Pp. 11–19.
(1) Although the Sixth Amendment and Art. III, §2, cl. 3, pro
vide for criminal trials in the State and district where the crime was
committed, these place-of-trial prescriptions do not impede transfer
of a proceeding to a different district if extraordinary local prejudice
will prevent a fair trial. Pp. 11–12.
(2) The foundation precedent for the presumption of prejudice
from which the Fifth Circuit’s analysis proceeded is Rideau v. Louisi
ana, 373 U. S. 723. Wilbert Rideau robbed a small-town bank, kid
naped three bank employees, and killed one of them. Police interro
gated Rideau in jail without counsel present and obtained his
confession, which, without his knowledge, was filmed and televised
three times to large local audiences shortly before trial. After the
Louisiana trial court denied Rideau’s change-of-venue motion, he was
convicted, and the conviction was upheld on direct appeal. This
Court reversed. “[T]o the tens of thousands of people who saw and
heard it,” the Court explained, the interrogation “in a very real sense
was Rideau’s trial—at which he pleaded guilty.”
Id., at 726.
“[W]ithout pausing to examine . . . the voir dire,” the Court held that
the “kangaroo court proceedings” trailing the televised confession vio
lated due process. Id., at 726–727. The Court followed Rideau in two
other cases in which media coverage manifestly tainted criminal

