14

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

situations to safeguard a defendant’s constitutional right
to a fair trial before an impartial jury.
At one end of the spectrum, this Court has, on rare
occasion, confronted such inherently prejudicial circum­
stances that it has reversed a defendant’s conviction
“without pausing to examine . . . the voir dire examination
of the members of the jury.” Rideau v. Louisiana, 373
U. S. 723, 727 (1963). In Rideau, repeated television
broadcasts of the defendant’s confession to murder, rob­
bery, and kidnaping so thoroughly poisoned local senti­
ment as to raise doubts that even the most careful voir
dire could have secured an impartial jury. A change of
venue, the Court determined, was thus the only way to
assure a fair trial. Ibid.; see also 6 W. LaFave, J. Israel,
N. King, & O. Kerr, Criminal Procedure §23.2(a), p. 264
(3d ed. 2007) (hereinafter LaFave) (“The best reading of
Rideau is that the Court there recognized that prejudicial
publicity may be so inflammatory and so pervasive that
the voir dire simply cannot be trusted to fully reveal the
likely prejudice among prospective jurors”).
As the majority describes, ante, at 14, this Court
reached similar conclusions in Estes v. Texas, 381 U. S.
532 (1965), and Sheppard, 384 U. S. 333. These cases
involved not only massive pretrial publicity but also media
disruption of the trial process itself. Rejecting the argu­
ment that the defendants were not entitled to relief from
their convictions because they “ha[d] established no isola­
table prejudice,” the Court described the “untoward cir­
cumstances” as “inherently suspect.” Estes, 381 U. S., at
542, 544. It would have been difficult for the jurors not to
have been swayed, at least subconsciously, by the “bed­
lam” that surrounded them. Sheppard, 384 U. S., at 355.
Criticizing the trial courts’ failures “to protect the jury
from outside influence,” id., at 358, the Court stressed
that, “where there is a reasonable likelihood that prejudi­
cial news prior to trial will prevent a fair trial, the judge

