8

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

restriction applies. Does it apply only to public officials?
Or in addition to private individuals who contract with the
public? Or to everyone, including the corporate officer
here? The pre-McNally case law does not provide an
answer. Thus, even with the bribery and kickback limita­
tion the statute does not answer the question “What is the
criterion of guilt?”
But that is perhaps beside the point, because it is obvi­
ous that mere prohibition of bribery and kickbacks was
not the intent of the statute. To say that bribery and
kickbacks represented “the core” of the doctrine, or that
most cases applying the doctrine involved those offenses,
is not to say that they are the doctrine. All it proves is
that the multifarious versions of the doctrine overlap with
regard to those offenses. But the doctrine itself is much
more. Among all the pre-McNally smörgåsbord-offerings
of varieties of honest-services fraud, not one is limited to
bribery and kickbacks. That is a dish the Court has
cooked up all on its own.
Thus, the Court’s claim to “respec[t] the legislature,”
ante, at 44, n. 43 (emphasis deleted), is false. It is entirely
clear (as the Court and I agree) that Congress meant to
reinstate the body of pre-McNally honest-services law; and
entirely clear that that prohibited much more (though
precisely what more is uncertain) than bribery and kick­
backs. Perhaps it is true that “Congress intended §1346 to
reach at least bribes and kickbacks,” ante, at 44. That
simply does not mean, as the Court now holds, that “§1346
criminalizes only” bribery and kickbacks, ibid.
Arriving at that conclusion requires not interpretation
but invention. The Court replaces a vague criminal stan­
dard that Congress adopted with a more narrow one (in­
cluded within the vague one) that can pass constitutional
muster. I know of no precedent for such “paring down,”3
——————
3 The

only alleged precedent the Court dares to describe is Civil Ser

