4

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
prosecutions. However, it later explained that those decisions “can
not be made to stand for the proposition that juror exposure to . . .
news accounts of the crime . . . alone presumptively deprives the de
fendant of due process.” Murphy v. Florida, 421 U. S. 794, 798–799.
Thus, prominence does not necessarily produce prejudice, and juror
impartiality does not require ignorance. See, e.g., Irvin v. Dowd, 366
U. S. 717, 722. A presumption of prejudice attends only the extreme
case. Pp. 12–16.
(3) Important differences separate Skilling’s prosecution from
those in which the Court has presumed juror prejudice. First, the
Court has emphasized the size and characteristics of the community
in which the crime occurred. In contrast to the small-town setting in
Rideau, for example, the record shows that Houston is the Nation’s
fourth most populous city. Given the large, diverse pool of residents
eligible for jury duty, any suggestion that 12 impartial individuals
could not be empaneled in Houston is hard to sustain. Second, al
though news stories about Skilling were not kind, they contained no
blatantly prejudicial information such as Rideau’s dramatically
staged admission of guilt. Third, unlike Rideau and other cases in
which trial swiftly followed a widely reported crime, over four years
elapsed between Enron’s bankruptcy and Skilling’s trial. Although
reporters covered Enron-related news throughout this period, the
decibel level of media attention diminished somewhat in the years
following Enron’s collapse. Finally, and of prime significance, Skill
ing’s jury acquitted him of nine insider-trading counts. Similarly,
earlier instituted Enron-related prosecutions yielded no overwhelm
ing victory for the Government. It would be odd for an appellate
court to presume prejudice in a case in which jurors’ actions run
counter to that presumption. Pp. 16–18.
(4) The Fifth Circuit presumed juror prejudice based primarily
on the magnitude and negative tone of the media attention directed
at Enron. But “pretrial publicity—even pervasive, adverse public
ity—does not inevitably lead to an unfair trial.” Nebraska Press
Assn. v. Stuart, 427 U. S. 539, 554. Here, news stories about Enron
did not present the kind of vivid, unforgettable information the Court
has recognized as particularly likely to produce prejudice, and Hous
ton’s size and diversity diluted the media’s impact. Nor did Enron’s
sheer number of victims trigger a presumption. Although the wide
spread community impact necessitated careful identification and in
spection of prospective jurors’ connections to Enron, the extensive
screening questionnaire and follow-up voir dire yielded jurors whose
links to Enron were either nonexistent or attenuated. Finally, while
Causey’s well publicized decision to plead guilty shortly before trial
created a danger of juror prejudice, the District Court took appropri

