16

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

impression or some opinion in respect to its merits.”). A
presumption of prejudice, our decisions indicate, attends
only the extreme case.
3
Relying on Rideau, Estes, and Sheppard, Skilling as­
serts that we need not pause to examine the screening
questionnaires or the voir dire before declaring his jury’s
verdict void. We are not persuaded. Important differ­
ences separate Skilling’s prosecution from those in which
we have presumed juror prejudice.14
First, we have emphasized in prior decisions the size
and characteristics of the community in which the crime
occurred. In Rideau, for example, we noted that the mur­
der was committed in a parish of only 150,000 residents.
Houston, in contrast, is the fourth most populous city in
the Nation: At the time of Skilling’s trial, more than 4.5
million individuals eligible for jury duty resided in the
Houston area. App. 627a. Given this large, diverse pool of
potential jurors, the suggestion that 12 impartial indi­
viduals could not be empaneled is hard to sustain. See
Mu’Min v. Virginia, 500 U. S. 415, 429 (1991) (potential
for prejudice mitigated by the size of the “metropolitan
Washington [D. C.] statistical area, which has a popula­
tion of over 3 million, and in which, unfortunately, hun­
dreds of murders are committed each year”); Gentile v.
State Bar of Nev., 501 U. S. 1030, 1044 (1991) (plurality
opinion) (reduced likelihood of prejudice where venire was
drawn from a pool of over 600,000 individuals).15
——————
14 Skilling’s reliance on Estes and Sheppard is particularly misplaced;
those cases involved media interference with courtroom proceedings
during trial. See supra, at 14. Skilling does not assert that news
coverage reached and influenced his jury after it was empaneled.
15 According to a survey commissioned by Skilling in conjunction with
his first motion for a venue change, only 12.3% of Houstonians named
him when asked to list Enron executives they believed guilty of crimes.

