Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of the Court

Nor did Enron’s “sheer number of victims,” 554 F. 3d, at
560, trigger a presumption of prejudice. Although the
widespread community impact necessitated careful identi­
fication and inspection of prospective jurors’ connections to
Enron, the extensive screening questionnaire and follow­
up voir dire were well suited to that task. And hindsight
shows the efficacy of these devices; as we discuss infra,
at 24, jurors’ links to Enron were either nonexistent or
attenuated.
Finally, although Causey’s “well-publicized decision to
plead guilty” shortly before trial created a danger of juror
prejudice, 554 F. 3d, at 559, the District Court took appro­
priate steps to reduce that risk. The court delayed the
proceedings by two weeks, lessening the immediacy of that
development. And during voir dire, the court asked about
prospective jurors’ exposure to recent publicity, including
news regarding Causey. Only two venire members re­
called the plea; neither mentioned Causey by name, and
neither ultimately served on Skilling’s jury. App. 888a,
993a. Although publicity about a codefendant’s guilty plea
calls for inquiry to guard against actual prejudice, it does
not ordinarily—and, we are satisfied, it did not here—
warrant an automatic presumption of prejudice.
Persuaded that no presumption arose,18 we conclude
that the District Court, in declining to order a venue
change, did not exceed constitutional limitations.19
——————
transfer suggested that a slim percentage of Enron-related stories
specifically named him. App. 572a. “[W]hen publicity is about the
event, rather than directed at individual defendants, this may lessen
any prejudicial impact.” United States v. Hueftle, 687 F. 2d 1305, 1310
(CA10 1982).
18 The parties disagree about whether a presumption of prejudice can
be rebutted, and, if it can, what standard of proof governs that issue.
Compare Brief for Petitioner 25–35 with Brief for United States 24–32,
35–36. Because we hold that no presumption arose, we need not, and
do not, reach these questions.
19 The dissent acknowledges that “the prospect of seating an unbiased

