Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

29

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

conversations, particularly once they learned upon receiv­
ing the written questionnaire that they might end up on
Skilling’s jury.
Prospective jurors’ personal interactions, moreover, may
well have left them with the sense that the community
was counting on a conviction. Yet this too was a subject
the District Court did not adequately explore. On the few
occasions when prospective jurors were asked whether
they would feel pressure from the public to convict, they
acknowledged that it might be difficult to return home
after delivering a not-guilty verdict. Juror 75, for in­
stance, told the court, “I think a lot of people feel that
they’re guilty. And maybe they’re expecting something to
come out of this trial.” Id., at 956a. It would be “tough,”
she recognized, “to vote not guilty and go back into the
community.” Id., at 957a; see also id., at 852a (Juror 10)
(admitting “some hesitancy” about “telling people the
government didn’t prove its case”).
With respect to potential nonmedia sources of bias, the
District Court’s exchange with Juror 101 is particularly
troubling.15 Although Juror 101 responded in the negative
when asked whether she had “read anything in the news­
paper that [stood] out in [her] mind,” she volunteered that
she “just heard that, between the two of them, [Skilling
and Lay] had $43 million to contribute for their case and
that there was an insurance policy that they could collect
on, also.” Id., at 998a. This information, she explained,
“was just something I overheard today—other jurors
talking.” Ibid. It seemed suspicious, she intimated, “to
have an insurance policy ahead of time.” Id., at 999a. The
court advised her that “most corporations provide insur­
ance for their officers and directors.” Ibid. The court,
however, did not investigate the matter further, even
——————
15 Portions of the voir dire transcript erroneously refer to this pro­
spective juror as “Juror 110.” See, e.g., id., at 996a.

