28

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

pursued at all. The majority accepts, for instance, that
“publicity about a codefendant’s guilty plea calls for in­
quiry to guard against actual prejudice.” Ante, at 19.
Implying that the District Court undertook this inquiry,
the majority states that “[o]nly two venire members re­
called [Causey’s] plea.” Ibid. In fact, the court asked very
few prospective jurors any questions directed to their
knowledge of or feelings about that event.14 Considering
how much news the plea generated, many more than two
venire members were likely aware of it. The lack of ques­
tioning, however, makes the prejudicial impact of the plea
on those jurors impossible to assess.
The court also rarely asked prospective jurors to de­
scribe personal interactions they may have had about the
case, or to consider whether they might have difficulty
avoiding discussion of the case with family, friends, or
colleagues during the course of the lengthy trial. The
tidbits of information that trickled out on these subjects
provided cause for concern. In response to general media­
related questions, several prospective jurors volunteered
that they had spoken with others about the case. Juror
74, for example, indicated that her husband was the “news
person,” that they had “talked about it,” that she had also
heard things “from work,” and that what she heard was
“all negative, of course.” App. 948a. The court, however,
did not seek elaboration about the substance of these
interactions. Surely many prospective jurors had similar
——————
14 Juror 33 brought up the plea in response to the District Court’s
question about whether he “recall[ed] listening to any particular
programs about the case.” App. 888a. Juror 96, meanwhile, told the
court that he read the “whole” Houston Chronicle every day, including
“all the articles about Enron.” Id., at 992a. The court, however, did not
ask any questions designed to elicit information about the Causey plea.
Instead, Juror 96 remarked on the plea only after Skilling’s counsel
managed to squeeze in a follow-up as to whether he had “read about
any guilty pleas in this case over the last month or two.” Id., at 993a.

