Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

ence, whether of private talk or public print.” Patterson v.
Colorado ex rel. Attorney General of Colo., 205 U. S. 454,
462 (1907) (opinion for the Court by Holmes, J.). When
does the publicity attending conduct charged as criminal
dim prospects that the trier can judge a case, as due proc­
ess requires, impartially, unswayed by outside influence?
Because most cases of consequence garner at least some
pretrial publicity, courts have considered this question in
diverse settings. We begin our discussion by addressing
the presumption of prejudice from which the Fifth Cir­
cuit’s analysis in Skilling’s case proceeded. The founda­
tion precedent is Rideau v. Louisiana, 373 U. S. 723
(1963).
Wilbert Rideau robbed a bank in a small Louisiana
town, kidnaped three bank employees, and killed one of
them. Police interrogated Rideau in jail without counsel
present and obtained his confession. Without informing
Rideau, no less seeking his consent, the police filmed the
interrogation. On three separate occasions shortly before
the trial, a local television station broadcast the film to
audiences ranging from 24,000 to 53,000 individuals.
Rideau moved for a change of venue, arguing that he could
not receive a fair trial in the parish where the crime oc­
curred, which had a population of approximately 150,000
people. The trial court denied the motion, and a jury
eventually convicted Rideau. The Supreme Court of Lou­
isiana upheld the conviction.
We reversed. “What the people [in the community] saw
on their television sets,” we observed, “was Rideau, in jail,
flanked by the sheriff and two state troopers, admitting in
detail the commission of the robbery, kidnapping, and
murder.” Id., at 725. “[T]o the tens of thousands of people
who saw and heard it,” we explained, the interrogation “in
a very real sense was Rideau’s trial—at which he pleaded
guilty.” Id., at 726. We therefore “d[id] not hesitate to
hold, without pausing to examine a particularized tran­

