Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

should continue the case until the threat abates, or trans­
fer it to another [venue] not so permeated with publicity.”
Id., at 363. Estes and Sheppard thus applied Rideau’s
insight that in particularly extreme circumstances even
the most rigorous voir dire cannot suffice to dispel the
reasonable likelihood of jury bias.
Apart from these exceptional cases, this Court has
declined to discount voir dire entirely and has instead
examined the particulars of the jury selection process to
determine whether it sufficed to produce a jury untainted
by pretrial publicity and community animus. The Court
has recognized that when antipathy toward a defendant
pervades the community there is a high risk that biased
jurors will find their way onto the panel. The danger is
not merely that some prospective jurors will deliberately
hide their prejudices, but also that, as “part of a commu­
nity deeply hostile to the accused,” “they may unwittingly
[be] influenced” by the fervor that surrounds them. Mur
phy, 421 U. S., at 803. To assure an impartial jury in such
adverse circumstances, a trial court must carefully con­
sider the knowledge and attitudes of prospective jurors
and then closely scrutinize the reliability of their assur­
ances of fairness. Cf. Morgan v. Illinois, 504 U. S. 719,
729 (1992) (“[P]art of the guarantee of a defendant’s right
to an impartial jury is an adequate voir dire to identify
unqualified jurors”).
Irvin offers an example of a case in which the trial
court’s voir dire did not suffice to counter the “wave of
public passion” that had swept the community prior to the
defendant’s trial. 366 U. S., at 728. The local news media
had “extensively covered” the crimes (a murder spree),
“arous[ing] great excitement and indignation.” Id., at 719
(internal quotation marks omitted). Following Irvin’s
arrest, the press “blanketed” the community with “a bar­
rage of newspaper headlines, articles, cartoons and pic­
tures” communicating numerous unfavorable details about

