Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of the Court

assessments of the media’s impact on jurors should be
mindful that their judgments lack the on-the-spot com­
prehension of the situation possessed by trial judges.
Reviewing courts are properly resistant to second­
guessing the trial judge’s estimation of a juror’s impartial­
ity, for that judge’s appraisal is ordinarily influenced by a
host of factors impossible to capture fully in the record—
among them, the prospective juror’s inflection, sincerity,
demeanor, candor, body language, and apprehension of
duty. See Reynolds, 98 U. S., at 156–157. In contrast to
the cold transcript received by the appellate court, the in­
the-moment voir dire affords the trial court a more inti­
mate and immediate basis for assessing a venire member’s
fitness for jury service. We consider the adequacy of jury
selection in Skilling’s case, therefore, attentive to the
respect due to district-court determinations of juror im­
partiality and of the measures necessary to ensure that
impartiality.20
——————
20 The

dissent recognizes “the ‘wide discretion’ owed to trial courts
when it comes to jury-related issues,” post, at 22 (quoting Mu’Min v.
Virginia, 500 U. S. 415, 427 (1991)), but its analysis of the District
Court’s voir dire sometimes fails to demonstrate that awareness. For
example, the dissent faults the District Court for not questioning
prospective jurors regarding their “knowledge of or feelings about”
Causey’s guilty plea. Post, at 28. But the court could reasonably
decline to ask direct questions involving Causey’s plea to avoid tipping
off until-that-moment uninformed venire members that the plea had
occurred. Cf. App. 822a (counsel for Skilling urged District Court to
find a way to question venire members about Causey “without mention­
ing anything”). Nothing inhibited defense counsel from inquiring about
venire members’ knowledge of the plea; indeed, counsel posed such a
question, id., at 993a; cf. post, at 28, n. 14 (acknowledging that counsel
“squeeze[d] in” an inquiry whether a venire member had “read about
any guilty pleas in this case over the last month or two” (internal
quotation marks omitted)). From this Court’s lofty and “panoramic”
vantage point, post, at 22, lines of voir dire inquiry that “might be
helpful in assessing whether a juror is impartial” are not hard to
conceive. Mu’Min, 500 U. S., at 425. “To be constitutionally compelled,
however, it is not enough that such questions might be helpful. Rather,

