18

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

prospective jurors had heard of the case, and 77 percent
“admitted they would carry an opinion into the jury box.”
Id., at 1029. Declining to grant relief on federal habeas
review, this Court stressed the significant interval be­
tween Yount’s first trial—when “adverse publicity and the
community’s sense of outrage were at their height”—and
his second trial, which “did not occur until four years later,
at a time when prejudicial publicity was greatly dimin­
ished and community sentiment had softened.” Id., at
1032. While 8 of the 14 seated jurors and alternates had
“at some time . . . formed an opinion as to Yount’s guilt,”
the “particularly extensive” voir dire confirmed that “time
had weakened or eliminated any” bias they once may have
harbored. Id., at 1029–1030, 1034, n. 10, 1033. Accord­
ingly, this Court concluded, “the trial court did not commit
manifest error in finding that the jury as a whole was
impartial.” Id., at 1032.
This Court most recently wrestled with the issue of
pretrial publicity in Mu’Min v. Virginia, 500 U. S. 415
(1991). Mu’Min stood accused of murdering a woman
while out of prison on a work detail. Citing 47 newspaper
articles about the crime, Mu’Min moved for a change of
venue. The state trial court deferred its ruling and at­
tempted to seat a jury. During group questioning, 16 of
the 26 prospective jurors indicated that they had heard
about the case from media or other sources. Dividing
these prospective jurors into panels of four, the court
asked further general questions about their ability to be
fair given what they had heard or read. One juror an­
swered equivocally and was dismissed for cause. The
court refused Mu’Min’s request to ask more specific ques­
tions “relating to the content of news items that potential
jurors might have read or seen.” Id., at 419. Of the 12
persons who served on the jury, “8 had at one time or
another read or heard something about the case. None
had indicated that he had formed an opinion about the

