Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

37

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

While several seated jurors and alternates did not make
specific comments suggesting prejudice, their written and
oral responses were so abbreviated as to make it virtually
impossible for the District Court reliably to assess
whether they harbored any latent biases. Juror 13, for
instance, wrote on his questionnaire that he had heard
about the Enron cases from the “[n]ews.” Supp. App. 42sa.
The court questioned him for two minutes, during which
time he confirmed that he had “heard what’s on the news,
basically,” including “that the trial had moved from the
17th to the 31st.” He added that the story “was all over
the news on every detail of Enron.” App. 858a–860a. No
meaningful information about his knowledge or attitudes
was obtained. Similarly, Juror 78 wrote that she had not
followed Enron-related news but was aware that “[m]any
people lost their jobs.” Supp. App. 151sa. The court ques­
tioned her for less than 90 seconds. During that time, she
acknowledged that she had “caught glimpses” of the cov­
erage and “kn[e]w generally, you know, that the company
went bankrupt” and that there “were some employees that
went off and did their own businesses.” App. 969a. Little
more was learned.24
——————
195sa (Juror 90) (heard Enron-related news from his wife, co-workers,
and television; wrote that “[i]t’s not right for someone . . . to take” away
the money that the “small average worker saves . . . for retirement all
his life”; and described the Government’s Enron investigation as “a
good thing”); id., at 221sa–225sa (Juror 113) (obtained information
about Enron from a “co-worker [who] was in the jury pool for Mrs.
Fastow’s trial”; worked for an employer who lost money as a result of
Enron’s collapse; found it “sad” that the collapse had affected “such a
huge number of people”; and thought “someone had to be doing some­
thing illegal”); id., at 236sa–237sa (Juror 116) (knew a colleague who
lost money in Enron’s collapse; obtained Enron-related news from the
“Houston Chronicle, Time Magazine, local TV news [and] radio, friends,
family, [and] co-workers, [and] internet news sources”; and noted
that what stood out was “[t]he employees and retirees that lost their
savings”).
24 Several other jurors fell into this category. Juror 67 wrote on his

