2

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of ALITO, J.

the jury-trial right. Where there is extraordinary pretrial
publicity and community hostility, he contends, a court
must presume juror prejudice and thus grant a change of
venue. Brief for Petitioner 25–34. I disagree. Careful voir
dire can often ensure the selection of impartial jurors even
where pretrial media coverage has generated much hostile
community sentiment. Moreover, once a jury has been
selected, there are measures that a trial judge may take to
insulate jurors from media coverage during the course of
the trial. What the Sixth Amendment requires is “an
impartial jury.” If the jury that sits and returns a verdict
is impartial, a defendant has received what the Sixth
Amendment requires.
The rule that petitioner advances departs from the text
of the Sixth Amendment and is difficult to apply. It re
quires a trial judge to determine whether the adverse
pretrial media coverage and community hostility in a
particular case has reached a certain level of severity, but
there is no clear way of demarcating that level or of de
termining whether it has been met.
Petitioner relies chiefly on three cases from the 1960’s—
Sheppard v. Maxwell, 384 U. S. 333 (1966), Estes v. Texas,
381 U. S. 532 (1965), and Rideau v. Louisiana, 373 U. S.
723 (1963). I do not read those cases as demanding peti
tioner’s suggested approach.
As the Court notes,
Sheppard and Estes primarily “involved media interfer
ence with courtroom proceedings during trial.” Ante, at
16, n. 14; see also post, at 20 (SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring
in part and dissenting in part). Rideau involved unique
events in a small community.
I share some of JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s concerns about
the adequacy of the voir dire in this case and the trial
judge’s findings that certain jurors could be impartial. See
post, at 34–37. But those highly fact-specific issues are
not within the question presented. Pet. for Cert. i. I also
do not understand the opinion of the Court as reaching

