8

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

for individual examination. Although the questions var­
ied, the process generally tracked the following format:
The court asked about exposure to Enron-related news
and the content of any stories that stood out in the pro­
spective juror’s mind. Next, the court homed in on ques­
tionnaire answers that raised a red flag signaling possible
bias. The court then permitted each side to pose follow-up
questions. Finally, after the venire member stepped away,
the court entertained and ruled on challenges for cause.
In all, the court granted one of the Government’s forcause challenges and denied four; it granted three of the
defendants’ challenges and denied six. The parties agreed
to excuse three additional jurors for cause and one for
hardship.
By the end of the day, the court had qualified 38 pro­
spective jurors, a number sufficient, allowing for peremp­
tory challenges, to empanel 12 jurors and 4 alternates.6
Before the jury was sworn in, Skilling objected to the
seating of six jurors. He did not contend that they were in
fact biased; instead, he urged that he would have used
——————
6 Selection

procedures of similar style and duration took place in
three Enron-related criminal cases earlier prosecuted in Houston—
United States v. Arthur Andersen LLP, No. 4:02–cr–00121–1 (SD Tex.)
(charges against Enron’s outside accountants); United States v. Bayly,
No. 4:03–cr–00363 (SD Tex.) (charges against Merrill Lynch and Enron
executives for alleged sham sales of Nigerian barges); United States v.
Hirko, No. 4:03–cr–00093 (SD Tex.) (fraud and insider-trading charges
against five Enron Broadband Services executives). See Brief for
United States 9 (In all three cases, the District Court “distributed a
jury questionnaire to a pool of several hundred potential jurors; dis­
missed individuals whose responses to the questionnaire demonstrated
bias or other disqualifying characteristics; and, after further question­
ing by the court and counsel, selected a jury from the remaining venire
in one day.”); Government’s Memorandum of Law in Response to
Defendants’ Joint Motion to Transfer Venue in United States v. Skilling
et al., No. 4:04–cr–00025 (SD Tex., Dec. 3, 2004), Record, Doc. 231,
pp. 21–28 (describing in depth the jury-selection process in the Arthur
Andersen and Bayly trials).

