Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010) 


49

Opinion of the Court 


C

It remains to determine whether Skilling’s conduct
violated §1346. Skilling’s honest-services prosecution, the
Government concedes, was not “prototypical.” Brief for
United States 49. The Government charged Skilling with
conspiring to defraud Enron’s shareholders by misrepre­
senting the company’s fiscal health, thereby artificially
inflating its stock price. It was the Government’s theory
at trial that Skilling “profited from the fraudulent scheme
. . . through the receipt of salary and bonuses, . . . and
through the sale of approximately $200 million in Enron
stock, which netted him $89 million.” Id., at 51.
The Government did not, at any time, allege that Skill­
ing solicited or accepted side payments from a third party
in exchange for making these misrepresentations. See
Record 41328 (May 11, 2006 Letter from the Government
to the District Court) (“[T]he indictment does not allege,
and the government’s evidence did not show, that [Skill­
ing] engaged in bribery.”). It is therefore clear that, as we
read §1346, Skilling did not commit honest-services fraud.
Because the indictment alleged three objects of the conspiracy—honest-services wire fraud, money-or-property
wire fraud, and securities fraud—Skilling’s conviction
is flawed. See Yates v. United States, 354 U. S. 298
(1957) (constitutional error occurs when a jury is in­
structed on alternative theories of guilt and returns a
general verdict that may rest on a legally invalid theory).
This determination, however, does not necessarily require
reversal of the conspiracy conviction; we recently con­
firmed, in Hedgpeth v. Pulido, 555 U. S. ___ (2008) (per
curiam), that errors of the Yates variety are subject to
harmless-error analysis. The parties vigorously dispute
whether the error was harmless. Compare Brief for
United States 52 (“[A]ny juror who voted for conviction
based on [the honest-services theory] also would have
found [Skilling] guilty of conspiring to commit securities

