Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

the desire for conviction was widely shared. 554 F. 3d, at
559–560.
The level of public animus toward Skilling dwarfed that
present in cases such as Murphy and Mu’Min. The pre­
trial publicity in those cases consisted of dozens of news
reports, most of which were “largely factual in nature.”
Murphy, 421 U. S., at 802. There was no indication that
the relevant communities had been captivated by the
cases or had adopted fixed views about the defendants. In
contrast, the number of media reports in this case reached
the tens of thousands, and full-throated denunciations of
Skilling were common. The much closer analogy is thus to
Irvin, which similarly featured a “barrage” of media cover­
age and a “huge . . . wave of public passion,” 366 U. S., at
725, 728, although even that case did not, as here, involve
direct harm to entire segments of the community.10
Attempting to distinguish Irvin, the majority suggests
that Skilling’s economic offenses were less incendiary than
Irvin’s violent crime spree and that “news stories about
Enron contained nothing resembling the horrifying infor­
mation rife in reports about Irvin’s rampage of robberies
and murders.” Ante, at 28. Along similar lines, the Dis­
trict Court described “the facts of this case [as] neither
heinous nor sensational.” App. to Brief for United States
10a. The majority also points to the four years that
passed between Enron’s declaration of bankruptcy and the
start of Skilling’s trial, asserting that “the decibel level of
media attention diminished somewhat” over this time.
Ante, at 17. Neither of these arguments is persuasive.
First, while violent crimes may well provoke widespread
community outrage more readily than crimes involving
monetary loss, economic crimes are certainly capable of
——————
10 One of Skilling’s experts noted that, “[i]n cases involving 200 or
more articles, trial judges granted a change of venue 59% of the time.”
App. ¶30, p. 611a.

