26

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

pressed sympathy for victims of Enron’s bankruptcy and
speculated that greed contributed to the corporation’s
collapse, these sentiments did not translate into animus
toward Skilling. When asked whether they “ha[d] an
opinion about . . . Jeffrey Skilling,” none of the seated
jurors and alternates checked the “yes” box.29 And in
response to the question whether “any opinion [they] may
have formed regarding Enron or [Skilling] [would] pre­
vent” their impartial consideration of the evidence at trial,
every juror—despite options to mark “yes” or “unsure”—
instead checked “no.”
The District Court, Skilling asserts, should not have
“accept[ed] at face value jurors’ promises of fairness.”
Brief for Petitioner 37. In Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U. S., at
727–728, Skilling points out, we found actual prejudice
despite jurors’ assurances that they could be impartial.
Brief for Petitioner 26. JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, in turn,
repeatedly relies on Irvin, which she regards as closely
analogous to this case. See post, at 23 (opinion concurring
in part and dissenting in part) (hereinafter dissent). See
also, e.g., post, at 15–16, 33, 35, 39–40. We disagree with
that characterization of Irvin.
The facts of Irvin are worlds apart from those presented
——————
(“[R]emarkably in the eyes of many,” “[c]ases such as those involving
the Watergate defendants, the Abscam defendants, and . . . John
DeLorean, all characterized by massive pretrial media reportage and
commentary, nevertheless proceeded to trial with juries which . . . were
satisfactorily disclosed to have been unaffected (indeed, in some in­
stances blissfully unaware of or untouched) by that publicity.”); Brief
for ABC, Inc., et al. as Amici Curiae 25–31 (describing other examples).
29 One juror did not check any box, explaining that she lived in an­
other State when Enron went bankrupt and therefore “was not fully
aware of all the facts regarding Enron’s fall [and] the media coverage.”
Supp. App. 62sa (Juror 20). Two other jurors, Juror 10 and Juror 63,
indicated in answer to a different question that they had an opinion
about Skilling’s guilt, but voir dire established they could be impartial.
See infra, at 32, and 33, n. 33.

