Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

29

Opinion of the Court

recorded in Irvin, see App. to Brief for United States 15a
(“The Houston Chronicle . . . reaches less than one-third of
occupied households in Houston.” (internal quotation
marks omitted)). Skilling’s seated jurors, moreover, exhib­
ited nothing like the display of bias shown in Irvin. See
supra, at 24–26 (noting, inter alia, that none of Skilling’s
jurors answered “yes” when asked if they “ha[d] an opinion
about . . . Skilling”). See also post, at 19 (dissent) (distin­
guishing Mu’Min from Irvin on similar bases: the “offense
occurred in [a large] metropolitan . . . area,” media “cover­
age was not as pervasive as in Irvin and did not contain
the same sort of damaging information,” and “the seated
jurors uniformly disclaimed having ever formed an opinion
about the case” (internal quotation marks omitted)). In
light of these large differences, the District Court had far
less reason than did the trial court in Irvin to discredit
jurors’ promises of fairness.
The District Court, moreover, did not simply take venire
members who proclaimed their impartiality at their
word.30 As noted, all of Skilling’s jurors had already af­
firmed on their questionnaires that they would have no
trouble basing a verdict only on the evidence at trial.
Nevertheless, the court followed up with each individually
to uncover concealed bias. This face-to-face opportunity to
gauge demeanor and credibility, coupled with information
from the questionnaires regarding jurors’ backgrounds,
opinions, and sources of news, gave the court a sturdy
foundation to assess fitness for jury service. See 554 F. 3d,
at 562 (The District Court made “thorough” credibility
determinations that “requir[ed] more than just the [venire
——————
30 The court viewed with skepticism, for example, Venire Member
104’s promises that she could “abide by law,” follow the court’s instruc­
tions, and find Skilling not guilty if the Government did not prove its
case, App. 1004a; “I have to gauge . . . demeanor, all the answers she
gave me,” the court stated, and “[s]he persuaded me that she could not
be fair and impartial, so she’s excused,” id., at 1006a.

