Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

vesting public, including Enron’s shareholders, . . .
about the true performance of Enron’s businesses by:
(a) manipulating Enron’s publicly reported financial
results; and (b) making public statements and repre­
sentations about Enron’s financial performance and
results that were false and misleading.” App. ¶5, p.
277a.
Skilling and his co-conspirators, the indictment continued,
“enriched themselves as a result of the scheme through
salary, bonuses, grants of stock and stock options, other
profits, and prestige.” Id., ¶14, at 280a.
Count 1 of the indictment charged Skilling with con­
spiracy to commit securities and wire fraud; in particular,
it alleged that Skilling had sought to “depriv[e] Enron and
its shareholders of the intangible right of [his] honest
services.” Id., ¶87, at 318a.1 The indictment further
charged Skilling with more than 25 substantive counts of
securities fraud, wire fraud, making false representations
to Enron’s auditors, and insider trading.
In November 2004, Skilling moved to transfer the trial
to another venue; he contended that hostility toward him
in Houston, coupled with extensive pretrial publicity, had
poisoned potential jurors. To support this assertion, Skill­
ing, aided by media experts, submitted hundreds of news
reports detailing Enron’s downfall; he also presented
affidavits from the experts he engaged portraying commu­
nity attitudes in Houston in comparison to other potential
venues.
The U. S. District Court for the Southern District of
——————
1 The mail- and wire-fraud statutes criminalize the use of the mails or
wires in furtherance of “any scheme or artifice to defraud, or for obtain­
ing money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses,
representations, or promises.” 18 U. S. C. §1341 (mail fraud); §1343
(wire fraud). The honest-services statute, §1346, defines “the term
‘scheme or artifice to defraud’ ” in these provisions to include “a scheme
or artifice to deprive another of the intangible right of honest services.”

