Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

Arguing that the Fifth Circuit erred in its consideration
of these claims, Skilling sought relief from this Court. We
granted certiorari, 558 U. S. ___ (2009), and now affirm in
part, vacate in part, and remand for further proceedings.9
We consider first Skilling’s allegation of juror prejudice,
and next, his honest-services argument.
II
Pointing to “the community passion aroused by Enron’s
collapse and the vitriolic media treatment” aimed at him,
Skilling argues that his trial “never should have proceeded
in Houston.” Brief for Petitioner 20. And even if it had
been possible to select impartial jurors in Houston, “[t]he
truncated voir dire . . . did almost nothing to weed out
prejudices,” he contends, so “[f]ar from rebutting the pre­
sumption of prejudice, the record below affirmatively
confirmed it.” Id., at 21. Skilling’s fair-trial claim thus
raises two distinct questions. First, did the District Court
err by failing to move the trial to a different venue based
on a presumption of prejudice? Second, did actual preju­
dice contaminate Skilling’s jury?10
A
1
The Sixth Amendment secures to criminal defendants
——————
9 We

also granted certiorari and heard arguments this Term in two
other cases raising questions concerning the honest-services statute’s
scope. See Black v. United States, No. 08–876; Weyhrauch v. United
States, No. 08–1196. Today we vacate and remand those decisions in
light of this opinion. Black, post, p. ___; Weyhrauch, post, p. ___.
10 Assuming, as the Fifth Circuit found, that a presumption of preju­
dice arose in Houston, the question presented in Skilling’s petition for
certiorari casts his actual-prejudice argument as an inquiry into when,
if ever, that presumption may be rebutted. See Pet. for Cert. i. Al­
though we find a presumption of prejudice unwarranted in this case, we
consider the actual-prejudice issue to be fairly subsumed within the
question we agreed to decide. See this Court’s Rule 14.1(a).

