Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

35

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

accepted her assurance that she could “absolutely” pre­
sume innocence. App. 937a.22
Indeed, the District Court’s anemic questioning did little
to dispel similar doubts about the impartiality of numer­
ous other seated jurors and alternates. In my estimation,
more than half of those seated made written and oral
comments suggesting active antipathy toward the defen­
dants. The majority thus misses the mark when it asserts
that “Skilling’s seated jurors . . . exhibited nothing like the
display of bias shown in Irvin.” Ante, at 29. Juror 10, for
instance, reported on his written questionnaire that he
knew several co-workers who owned Enron stock; that he
personally may have owned Enron stock through a mutual
fund; that he heard and read about the Enron cases from
the “Houston Chronicle, all three Houston news channels,
Fox news, talking with friends [and] co-workers, [and]
Texas Lawyer Magazine”; that he believed Enron’s col­
lapse “was due to greed and mismanagement”; that “[i]f
[Lay] did not know what was going on in his company, he
was really a poor manager/leader”; and that the defen­
dants were “suspect.” Supp. App. 11sa–19sa. During
questioning, he said he “th[ought]” he could presume
innocence and “believe[d]” he could put the Government to
its proof, but he also acknowledged that he might have
“some hesitancy” “in telling people the government didn’t
prove its case.” App. 851a–852a.
——————
22 As

one of Skilling’s jury experts observed, there is a “tendency in
voir dire of jury pool members in high-profile cases to minimize their
exposure to media, their knowledge of prejudicial information, and any
biases they may have.” App. 763a; see also id., at 637a (“Those who
perceive themselves or wish to be perceived as good citizens are reluc­
tant to admit they cannot be fair”). For this reason, the fact that “none
of the seated jurors and alternates checked the ‘yes’ box” on the written
questionnaire when “asked whether they ‘ha[d] an opinion about
[Skilling],’ ” ante, at 26, is of minimal significance, particularly given
that the Causey plea and the impending trial received significant
media coverage after the questionnaires were submitted.

