4

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

sums of money, faced eviction from their homes, could not
afford Christmas gifts for their children, and felt “scared,”
“hurt,” “humiliat[ed],” “helpless,” and “betrayed.” Id., ¶71,
at 585a–586a. The conventional wisdom that blame for
Enron’s devastating implosion and the ensuing human
tragedy ultimately rested with Skilling and former Enron
Chairman Kenneth Lay became so deeply ingrained in the
popular imagination that references to their involvement
even turned up on the sports pages: “If you believe the
story about [Coach Bill Parcells] not having anything to do
with the end of Emmitt Smith’s Cowboys career, then you
probably believe in other far-fetched concepts. Like Jeff
Skilling having nothing to do with Enron’s collapse.” 3
Supp. Record 811.
When a federal grand jury indicted Skilling, Lay, and
Richard Causey—Enron’s former chief accounting officer—
in 2004 on charges of conspiracy to defraud, securities
fraud, and other crimes, the media placed them directly in
its crosshairs. In the words of one article, “there was one
thing those whose lives were touched by the once-exalted
company all seemed to agree upon: The indictment of
former Enron CEO Jeff Skilling was overdue.” App.
1393a. Scoffing at Skilling’s attempts to paint himself as
“a ‘victim’ of his subordinates,” id., at 1394a, the Chronicle
derided “the doofus defense” that Lay and Skilling were
expected to offer, id., at 1401a.1 The Chronicle referred to
——————
1 See

also App. 735a (describing Enron as “hardball fraud” and noting
that “Enron prosecutors have approached the case more like an organ­
ized crime investigation than a corporate fraud prosecution,” a “tactic
[that] makes sense” given “the sheer pervasiveness of fraud, corruption,
and self-dealing”); id., at 1403a (“Lay stood proudly in front of Enron’s
facade of success, while Skilling and his own prot[égé], [Andrew]
Fastow, ginned up increasingly convoluted mechanisms for concealing
the financial reality. . . . A court will decide the particulars, but yes,
Ken Lay knew”); id., 1406a, 1409a (describing Enron’s collapse as
“failure as a result of fraud” and criticizing Skilling for using “vitriol
[as] a smokescreen” and “bolting for the door” just before Enron’s stock

