22

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

2
Skilling deems the voir dire insufficient because, he
argues, jury selection lasted “just five hours,” “[m]ost of
the court’s questions were conclusory[,] high-level, and
failed adequately to probe jurors’ true feelings,” and the
court “consistently took prospective jurors at their word
once they claimed they could be fair, no matter what other
indications of bias were present.” Brief for Petitioner 10–
11 (emphasis deleted). Our review of the record, however,
yields a different appraisal.21
As noted, supra, at 4–6, and n. 4, the District Court
initially screened venire members by eliciting their re­
sponses to a comprehensive questionnaire drafted in large
part by Skilling. That survey helped to identify prospec­
tive jurors excusable for cause and served as a spring­
board for further questions put to remaining members of
the array. Voir dire thus was, in the court’s words, the
“culmination of a lengthy process.” App. 841a; see 554
F. 3d, at 562, n. 51 (“We consider the . . . questionnaire in
——————
the trial court’s failure to ask these questions must render the defen­
dant’s trial fundamentally unfair.” Id., at 425–426. According appro­
priate deference to the District Court, we cannot characterize jury­
selection in this case as fundamentally unfair. Cf. supra, at 8, n. 6
(same selection process was used in other Enron-related prosecutions).
21 In addition to focusing on the adequacy of voir dire, our decisions
have also “take[n] into account . . . other measures [that] were used to
mitigate the adverse effects of publicity.” Nebraska Press Assn. v.
Stuart, 427 U. S. 539, 565 (1976). We have noted, for example, the
prophylactic effect of “emphatic and clear instructions on the sworn
duty of each juror to decide the issues only on evidence presented in
open court.” Id., at 564. Here, the District Court’s instructions were
unequivocal; the jurors, the court emphasized, were duty bound “to
reach a fair and impartial verdict in this case based solely on the
evidence [they] hear[d] and read in th[e] courtroom.” App. 1026a.
Peremptory challenges, too, “provid[e] protection against [prejudice],”
United States ex rel. Darcy v. Handy, 351 U. S. 454, 462 (1956); the
District Court, as earlier noted, exercised its discretion to grant the
defendants two extra peremptories, App. 1020a; see supra, at 7.

