10

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

prejudice stemming from Causey’s guilty plea and from
the large number of victims in Houston—from the
“[t]housands of Enron employees . . . [who] lost their jobs,
and . . . saw their 401(k) accounts wiped out,” to Housto­
nians who suffered spillover economic effects. Id., at 559–
560.
The Court of Appeals stated, however, that “the pre­
sumption [of prejudice] is rebuttable,” and it therefore
examined the voir dire to determine whether “the District
Court empanelled an impartial jury.” Id., at 561 (internal
quotation marks, italics, and some capitalization omitted).
The voir dire was, in the Fifth Circuit’s view, “proper and
thorough.” Id., at 562. Moreover, the court noted, Skilling had challenged only one seated juror—Juror 11—for
cause. Although Juror 11 made some troubling comments
about corporate greed, the District Court “observed [his]
demeanor, listened to his answers, and believed he would
make the government prove its case.” Id., at 564. In sum,
the Fifth Circuit found that the Government had overcome
the presumption of prejudice and that Skilling had not
“show[n] that any juror who actually sat was prejudiced
against him.” Ibid.
The Court of Appeals also rejected Skilling’s claim that
his conduct did not indicate any conspiracy to commit
honest-services fraud. “[T]he jury was entitled to convict
Skilling,” the court stated, “on these elements”: “(1) a
material breach of a fiduciary duty . . . (2) that results in a
detriment to the employer,” including one occasioned by
an employee’s decision to “withhold material information,
i.e., information that he had reason to believe would lead a
reasonable employer to change its conduct.” Id., at 547.
The Fifth Circuit did not address Skilling’s argument that
the honest-services statute, if not interpreted to exclude
his actions, should be invalidated as unconstitutionally
vague. Brief of Defendant-Appellant Jeffrey K. Skilling in
No. 06–20885 (CA5), p. 65, n. 21.

