38

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

In assessing the likelihood that bias lurked in the minds
of at least some of these seated jurors, I find telling the
way in which voir dire played out. When the District
Court asked the prospective jurors as a group whether
they had any reservations about their ability to presume
innocence and put the Government to its proof, only two
answered in the affirmative, and both were excused for
cause. Id., at 815a–820a. The District Court’s individual
questioning, though truncated, exposed disqualifying
prejudices among numerous additional prospective jurors
who had earlier expressed no concerns about their impar­
tiality. See n. 7, supra. It thus strikes me as highly likely
that at least some of the seated jurors, despite stating that
they could be fair, harbored similar biases that a more
probing inquiry would likely have exposed. Cf. Yount,
467 U. S., at 1034, n. 10 (holding that the trial court’s
“particularly extensive” 10-day voir dire assured the jury’s
impartiality).25
——————
questionnaire that he had heard about Enron from the Chronicle and
“Internet news sources.” Id., at 133sa. He was questioned for 90
seconds, during which time he indicated that he had read an article on
the Internet the preceding night “about the jury selection taking place
today, stuff like that.” App. 944a. Juror 99 wrote that she had not
heard or read about the Enron cases and did not “know anything about”
Enron. Supp. App. 210sa. The District Court questioned her for barely
one minute. She stated that she had “[n]ot really” learned more about
the case, but added that she had heard “this and that” from her par­
ents. App. 995a–996a. The court did not press further.
25 The majority suggests that the fact that Skilling “challenged only
one of the seated jurors for cause” indicates that he did not believe the
other jurors were biased. Ante, at 30. Our decisions, however, distin­
guish claims involving “the partiality of an individual juror” from
antecedent claims directed at “the partiality of the trial jury as a
whole.” Patton v. Yount, 467 U. S. 1025, 1036 (1984); see also Frazier v.
United States, 335 U. S. 497, 514 (1948) (“[T]he two sorts of challenge[s]
are distinct and are therefore to be dealt with separately”). If the jury
selection process does not, as here, give a defendant a fair opportunity
to identify biased jurors, the defendant can hardly be faulted for failing
to make for-cause challenges.

