Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

jury actually selected.9
B
In concluding that the voir dire “adequately detect[ed]
and defuse[d] juror bias,” ante, at 20, the Court downplays
the extent of the community’s antipathy toward Skilling
and exaggerates the rigor of the jury selection process.
The devastating impact of Enron’s collapse and the relent­
less media coverage demanded exceptional care on the
part of the District Court to ensure the seating of an im­
partial jury. While the procedures employed by the Dis­
trict Court might have been adequate in the typical high­
profile case, they did not suffice in the extraordinary
circumstances of this case to safeguard Skilling’s constitu­
tional right to a fair trial before an impartial jury.
——————
9 Whether

the District Court abused its discretion in declining to
change venue pursuant to the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure is a
different question. See Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 21(a) (“Upon the defen­
dant’s motion, the court must transfer the proceeding against that
defendant to another district if the court is satisfied that so great a
prejudice against the defendant exists in the transferring district that
the defendant cannot obtain a fair and impartial trial there”). As this
Court has indicated, its supervisory powers confer “more latitude” to set
standards for the conduct of trials in federal courts than in state courts.
Mu’Min v. Virginia, 500 U. S. 415, 424 (1991). While the circumstances
may not constitutionally compel a change of venue “without pausing to
examine . . . the voir dire,” Rideau v. Louisiana, 373 U. S. 723, 727
(1963), the widely felt sense of victimhood among Houstonians and the
community’s deep-seated animus toward Skilling certainly meant that
the task of reliably identifying untainted jurors posed a major chal­
lenge, with no guarantee of success. It likely would have been far
easier to empanel an impartial jury in a venue where the Enron story
had less salience. I thus agree with the Court of Appeals that “[i]t
would not have been imprudent for the [District] [C]ourt to have
granted Skilling’s transfer motion.” 554 F. 3d 529, 558 (CA5 2009).
Skilling, however, likely forfeited any Rule 21 or supervisory powers
claim by failing to present it either in his opening brief before the Fifth
Circuit, see id., at 559, n. 39, or in his petition for certiorari, cf. ante, at
12, n. 11.

