Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

Once it identified 38 qualified prospective jurors, the
court allowed the defense and Government to exercise
their allotted peremptory challenges. This left 12 jurors
and 4 alternates, who were sworn in and instructed, for
the first time, “not [to] read anything dealing with the
case or listen to any discussion of the case on radio or
television or access any Internet sites that may deal with
the case” and to “inform your friends and family members
that they should not discuss with you anything they may
have read or heard about this case.” Id., at 1026a. Start
to finish, the selection process took about five hours.
Skilling’s trial commenced the next day and lasted four
months. After several days of deliberations, the jury
found Skilling guilty of conspiracy, 12 counts of securities
fraud, 5 counts of making false representations to audi­
tors, and 1 count of insider trading; it acquitted on 9 in­
sider trading counts. The jury found Lay guilty on all
counts.
On appeal, Skilling asserted that he had been denied his
constitutional right to a fair trial before an impartial jury.
Addressing this claim, the Court of Appeals began by
disavowing the District Court’s findings concerning “com­
munity hostility.” There was, the court concluded, “suffi­
cient inflammatory pretrial material to require a finding
of presumed prejudice, especially in light of the immense
volume of coverage.” 554 F. 3d, at 559. “[P]rejudice was
[also] inherent in an alleged co-conspirator’s well­
——————
“stole money” from their employees); id., at 922a (Juror 55) (admitted
that she “lean[ed] towards prejudging” the defendants); id., at 946a
(Juror 71) (stated that she would place the burden of proof on the
defendants); id., at 954a–960a (Juror 75) (indicated that she could not
set aside her view that there was fraud at Enron); id., at 1003a–1006a
(Juror 104) (stated that she questioned the defendants’ innocence and
that she “would be very upset with the government if they could not
prove their case”); id., at 1008a (Juror 112) (expressed that the view
that the defendants were guilty).

