24

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

rousing public passions, particularly when thousands of
unsuspecting people are robbed of their livelihoods and
retirement savings. Indeed, the record in this case is
replete with examples of visceral outrage toward Skilling
and other Enron executives. See, e.g., Record 39946
(front-page, eve-of-trial story describing “the hurt and
anger and resentment . . . churn[ing] inside” the people of
Houston). Houstonians compared Skilling to, among other
things, a rapist, an axe murderer, and an Al Qaeda terror­
ist.11 As one commentator observed, “[i]t’s a sign of how
shocked Houstonians are about Enron’s ignominious
demise that Sept. 11 can be invoked—and is frequently—
to explain the shock of the company’s collapse.” 3 Supp.
Record 544. The bad blood was so strong that Skilling and
other top executives hired private security to protect
themselves from persons inclined to take the law into their
own hands. See, e.g., App. 1154a (“After taking the tem­
perature of Enron’s victims, [a local lawyer] says the
Enron executives are wise to take security precautions”).
Second, the passage of time did little to soften commu­
nity sentiment. Contrary to the Court’s suggestion, ante,
at 17, this case in no way resembles Yount, where, by the
time of the defendant’s retrial, “prejudicial publicity [had]
greatly diminished” and community animus had signifi­
——————
11 See, e.g., 554 F. 3d, at 559, n. 42 (“I’m livid, absolutely livid . . . . I
have lost my entire friggin’ retirement to these people. They have
raped all of us” (internal quotation marks omitted)); App. 382a (“Hurt­
ing that many elderly people so severely is, I feel, the equivalent of
being an axe murderer. His actions were just as harmful as an axe
murderer to the [community]” (alteration in original)); id., at 1152a–
1153a (“Not having the stuff of suicide bombers, Enron’s executive
pilots took full advantage of golden parachutes to bail out of their high­
flying corporate jet after setting the craft on a course to financial
oblivion. In a business time frame, Enron pancaked faster than the
twin towers”); id., at 1163a (noting that “Skilling’s picture turned up
alongside Osama bin Laden’s on ‘Wanted’ posters inside the company
headquarters”).

