34

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

fair. Ibid. The court denied the challenge, stating, “You
know, she tried.” Ibid.
3
The majority takes solace in the fact that most of the
persons actually seated as jurors and alternates “specifi­
cally stated that they had paid scant attention to Enron­
related news.” Ante, at 24–25, and n. 26.21 In context,
however, these general declarations reveal little about the
seated jurors’ actual knowledge or views or the possible
pressure they might have felt to convict, and thus cannot
instill confidence that the jurors “were not under [the]
sway” of the prevailing community sentiment. Cf. ante, at
25. Jurors who did not “get into details” of Enron’s com­
plicated accounting schemes, App. 856a, nevertheless
knew the outline of the oft-repeated story, including that
Skilling and Lay had been cast as the leading villains.
Juror 63, for instance, told the court that she “may have
heard a little bit” about Enron-related litigation but had
not “really pa[id] attention.” Id., at 935a. Yet she was
clearly aware of some specifics. On her questionnaire,
despite stating that she had not followed Enron-related
news, she wrote about “whistleblowers and Arthur Ander­
sen lying about Enron’s accounting,” and she expressed
the view that Skilling and Lay “probably knew they were
breaking the law.” Supp. App. 105sa–106sa. During
questioning, which lasted barely four minutes, the District
Court obtained no meaningful information about the
actual extent of Juror 63’s familiarity with the case or the
basis for her belief in Skilling’s guilt. Yet it nevertheless
——————
21 The majority also notes that about two-thirds of the seated jurors
and alternates (11 of 16) had no personal Enron connection. Ante, at
24, and n. 25. This means, of course, that five of the seated jurors and
alternates did have connections to friends or colleagues who had lost
jobs or money as a result of Enron’s collapse—a fact that does not strike
me as particularly reassuring.

