8

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
supplied by a third party who had not been deceived. In parsing the
various pre-McNally decisions, the Court acknowledges that Skill
ing’s vagueness challenge has force, for honest-services decisions
were not models of clarity or consistency. It has long been the
Court’s practice, however, before striking a federal statute as imper
missibly vague, to consider whether the prescription is amenable to a
limiting construction. See, e.g., Hooper v. California, 155 U. S. 648,
657. Arguing against any limiting construction, Skilling contends
that it is impossible to identify a salvageable honest-services core be
cause the pre-McNally cases are inconsistent and hopelessly unclear.
This Court rejected an argument of the same tenor in Letter Carriers,
413 U. S., at 571–572. Although some applications of the preMcNally honest-services doctrine occasioned disagreement among the
Courts of Appeals, these decisions do not cloud the fact that the vast
majority of cases involved offenders who, in violation of a fiduciary
duty, participated in bribery or kickback schemes. Indeed, McNally
itself presented a paradigmatic kickback fact pattern. 483 U. S., at
352–353, 360. In view of this history, there is no doubt that Congress
intended §1346 to reach at least bribes and kickbacks. Because read
ing the statute to proscribe a wider range of offensive conduct would
raise vagueness concerns, the Court holds that §1346 criminalizes
only the bribe-and-kickback core of the pre-McNally case law.
Pp. 41–45.
(4) The Government urges the Court to go further by reading
§1346 to proscribe another category of conduct: undisclosed self
dealing by a public official or private employee. Neither of the Gov
ernment’s arguments in support of this position withstands close in
spection. Contrary to the first, McNally itself did not center on non
disclosure of a conflicting financial interest, but rather involved a
classic kickback scheme. See 483 U. S., at 352–353, 360. Reading
§1346 to proscribe bribes and kickbacks—and nothing more—
satisfies Congress’ undoubted aim to reverse McNally on its facts.
Nor is the Court persuaded by the Government’s argument that the
pre-McNally conflict-of-interest cases constitute core applications of
the honest-services doctrine. Although the Courts of Appeals upheld
honest-services convictions for some conflict-of-interest schemes, they
reached no consensus on which schemes qualified. Given the relative
infrequency of those prosecutions and the intercircuit inconsistencies
they produced, the Court concludes that a reasonable limiting con
struction of §1346 must exclude this amorphous category of cases.
Further dispelling doubt on this point is the principle that “ambigu
ity concerning the ambit of criminal statutes should be resolved in
favor of lenity.” Cleveland v. United States, 531 U. S. 12, 25. The
Court therefore resists the Government’s less constrained construc

