4

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

Texas, in accord with rulings in two earlier instituted
Enron-related prosecutions,2 denied the venue-transfer
motion. Despite “isolated incidents of intemperate com­
mentary,” the court observed, media coverage “ha[d]
[mostly] been objective and unemotional,” and the facts of
the case were “neither heinous nor sensational.” App. to
Brief for United States 10a–11a.3 Moreover, “courts ha[d]
commonly” favored “effective voir dire . . . to ferret out any
[juror] bias.” Id., at 18a. Pretrial publicity about the case,
the court concluded, did not warrant a presumption that
Skilling would be unable to obtain a fair trial in Houston.
Id., at 22a.
In the months leading up to the trial, the District Court
solicited from the parties questions the court might use to
screen prospective jurors. Unable to agree on a questionnaire’s format and content, Skilling and the Govern­
ment submitted dueling documents. On venire members’
sources of Enron-related news, for example, the Govern­
——————
2 See United States v. Fastow, 292 F. Supp. 2d 914, 918 (SD Tex.
2003); Order in United States v. Hirko, No. 4:03–cr–00093 (SD Tex.,
Nov. 24, 2004), Doc. 484, p. 6. These rulings were made by two other
judges of the same District. Three judges residing in the area thus
independently found that defendants in Enron-related cases could
obtain a fair trial in Houston.
3 Painting a different picture of the media coverage surrounding En­
ron’s collapse, JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s opinion relies heavily on affidavits
of media experts and jury consultants submitted by Skilling in support
of his venue-transfer motion. E.g., post, at 2, 3, 4, 5 (opinion concurring
in part and dissenting in part) (hereinafter dissent); post, at 5, n. 2, and
23, n. 10; post, at 26, and 35, n. 22. These Skilling-employed experts
selected and emphasized negative statements in various news stories.
But the District Court Judge did not find the experts’ samples repre­
sentative of the coverage at large; having “[m]eticulous[ly] review[ed]
all of the evidence” Skilling presented, the court concluded that “inci­
dents [of news reports using] less-than-objective language” were
dwarfed by “the largely fact-based tone of most of the articles.” App. to
Brief for United States 7a, 10a, 11a. See also post, at 3 (acknowledging
that “many of the stories were straightforward news items”).

