Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

not “recall another instance where a local paper dedicated
as many resources to a single topic over such an extended
period of time as the Houston Chronicle . . . dedicated to
Enron.” App. ¶32, p. 570a. Local television news coverage
was similarly pervasive and, in terms of “editorial theme,”
“largely followed the Chronicle’s lead.” Id., ¶11, at 559a;
see also id., at 717a. Between May 2002 and October
2004, local stations aired an estimated 19,000 news seg­
ments involving Enron, more than 1600 of which men­
tioned Skilling. 3 Supp. Record 2116.
While many of the stories were straightforward news
items, many others conveyed and amplified the commu­
nity’s outrage at the top executives perceived to be respon­
sible for the company’s bankruptcy. A Chronicle report on
Skilling’s 2002 testimony before Congress is typical of the
coverage. It began, “Across Houston, Enron employees
watched former chief executive Jeffrey Skilling’s congres­
sional testimony on television, turning incredulous, angry
and then sarcastic by turns, as a man they knew as savvy
and detail-oriented pleaded memory failure and ignorance
about critical financial transactions at the now-collapsed
energy giant.” App. 1218a. “ ‘He is lying; he knew every­
thing,’ said [an employee], who said she had seen Skilling
frequently over her 18 years with the firm, where Skilling
was known for his intimate grasp of the inner doings at
the company. ‘I am getting sicker by the minute.’ ” Id., at
1219a. A companion piece quoted a local attorney who
called Skilling an “idiot” who was “in denial”; he added,
“I’m glad [Skilling’s] not my client.” Id., at 592a–593a.
Articles deriding Enron’s senior executives were juxta­
posed with pieces expressing sympathy toward and soli­
darity with the company’s many victims. Skilling’s media
expert counted nearly a hundred victim-related stories in
the Chronicle, including a “multi-page layout entitled ‘The
Faces of Enron,’ ” which poignantly described the gut­
wrenching experiences of former employees who lost vast

