10

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

providing a standard admonition about the need to be fair
and impartial and to decide the case based solely on the
trial evidence and jury instructions. The court then asked
whether anyone had “any reservations about your ability
to conscientiously and fairly follow these very important
rules.” App. 815a. Two individuals raised their hands
and were called forward to the bench. One told the court
that he thought Lay and Skilling “knew exactly what they
were doing” and would have to prove their innocence. Id.,
at 818a–819a. The second juror, who had stated on his
written questionnaire that he held no opinion that would
preclude him from being impartial, declared that he
“would dearly love to sit on this jury. I would love to
claim responsibility, at least 1⁄12 of the responsibility, for
putting these sons of bitches away for the rest of their
lives.” Id., at 819a–820a. The court excused both jurors
for cause.
The court proceeded to question individual jurors from
the bench. As the majority recounts, ante, at 7–8, the
court asked them a few general yes/no questions about
their exposure to Enron-related news, often variations of,
“Do you recall any particular articles that stand out that
you’ve read about the case?” App. 850a. The court also
asked about questionnaire answers that suggested bias,
focusing mainly on whether, notwithstanding seemingly
partial comments, the prospective jurors believed they
“could be fair” and “put the government to its proof.” Id.,
at 852a. Counsel were permitted to follow up on issues
raised by the court. The court made clear, however, that
its patience would be limited, see, e.g., id., at 879a, and
questioning tended to be brief—generally less than five
minutes per person. Even so, it exposed disqualifying
biases among several prospective jurors who had earlier
expressed no concerns about their ability to be fair.7
——————
7 See

App. 894a (Juror 43) (expressed the view that the defendants

