Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

sent to the remaining members of the jury panel and the
court’s voir dire examination of the jury panel provide
adequate safeguards to defendants and will result in the
selection of a fair and impartial jury in this case.” Id., at
14115–14116. The court did agree to delay the trial by
two weeks, until January 30, 2006.
The coming trial featured prominently in local news
outlets. A front-page, eve-of-trial story in the Chronicle
described “the hurt and anger and resentment” that had
been “churn[ing] inside” Houstonians since Enron’s col­
lapse. Id., at 39946. Again criticizing Lay and Skilling for
offering a “doofus defense” (“a plea of not guilty by reason
of empty-headedness”), the paper stated that “Lay and
Skilling took hundreds of millions in compensation yet
now fail to accept the responsibility that went with it.”
Ibid. The article allowed that the defendants’ guilt,
“though perhaps widely assumed, remains even now an
assertion. A jury now takes up the task of deciding
whether that assertion is valid.” Id., at 39947. The next
paragraph, however, assured readers that “it’s normal for
your skin to crawl when Lay or Skilling claim with doe­
eyed innocence that they were unaware that something
was amiss at Enron. The company’s utter failure belies
the claim.” Ibid. (one paragraph break omitted); see also
id., at 39904 (declaring that Lay and Skilling would “have
to offer a convincing explanation for how executives once
touted as corporate geniuses could be so much in the dark
about the illegal activities and deceptive finances of their
own company”).
It is against this backdrop of widespread community
impact and pervasive pretrial publicity that jury selection
in Skilling’s case unfolded. Approximately 160 prospective
jurors appeared for voir dire at a federal courthouse lo­
cated “about six blocks from Enron’s former headquar­
ters.” 554 F. 3d, at 561. Addressing them as a group, the
District Court began by briefly describing the case and

