18

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

whelming victory for the Government.16 In Rideau, Estes,
and Sheppard, in marked contrast, the jury’s verdict did
not undermine in any way the supposition of juror bias. It
would be odd for an appellate court to presume prejudice
in a case in which jurors’ actions run counter to that pre­
sumption. See, e.g., United States v. Arzola-Amaya, 867
F. 2d 1504, 1514 (CA5 1989) (“The jury’s ability to discern
a failure of proof of guilt of some of the alleged crimes
indicates a fair minded consideration of the issues and
reinforces our belief and conclusion that the media cover­
age did not lead to the deprivation of [the] right to an
impartial trial.”).
4
Skilling’s trial, in short, shares little in common with
those in which we approved a presumption of juror preju­
dice. The Fifth Circuit reached the opposite conclusion
based primarily on the magnitude and negative tone of
media attention directed at Enron. But “pretrial public­
ity—even pervasive, adverse publicity—does not inevita­
bly lead to an unfair trial.” Nebraska Press Assn. v. Stu
art, 427 U. S. 539, 554 (1976). In this case, as just noted,
news stories about Enron did not present the kind of vivid,
unforgettable information we have recognized as particu­
larly likely to produce prejudice, and Houston’s size and
diversity diluted the media’s impact.17
——————
16 As

the United States summarizes, “[i]n Hirko, the jury deliberated
for several days and did not convict any Enron defendant; in Bayly,
which was routinely described as ‘the first Enron criminal trial,’ the
jury convicted five defendants, . . . but acquitted a former Enron execu­
tive. At the sentencing phase of Bayly, the jury found a loss amount of
slightly over $13 million, even though the government had argued that
the true loss . . . was $40 million.” Brief for United States 9–10 (cita­
tion omitted).
17 The Fifth Circuit, moreover, did not separate media attention
aimed at Skilling from that devoted to Enron’s downfall more generally.
Data submitted by Skilling in support of his first motion for a venue

