Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

peremptories to exclude them had he not exhausted his
supply by striking several venire members after the court
refused to excuse them for cause. Supp. App. 3sa–4sa
(Sealed).7 The court overruled this objection.
After the jurors took their oath, the District Court told
them they could not discuss the case with anyone or follow
media accounts of the proceedings. “[E]ach of you,” the
court explained, “needs to be absolutely sure that your
decisions concerning the facts will be based only on the
evidence that you hear and read in this courtroom.” App.
1026a.
Following a 4-month trial and nearly five days of delib­
eration, the jury found Skilling guilty of 19 counts, includ­
ing the honest-services-fraud conspiracy charge, and not
guilty of 9 insider-trading counts. The District Court
sentenced Skilling to 292 months’ imprisonment, 3 years’
supervised release, and $45 million in restitution.
On appeal, Skilling raised a host of challenges to his
convictions, including the fair-trial and honest-services
arguments he presses here. Regarding the former, the
Fifth Circuit initially determined that the volume and
negative tone of media coverage generated by Enron’s
collapse created a presumption of juror prejudice. 554
F. 3d 529, 559 (2009).8 The court also noted potential
——————
7 Skilling had requested an additional peremptory strike each time
the District Court rejected a for-cause objection. The court, which had
already granted two extra peremptories, see supra, at 7, denied each
request.
8 The Fifth Circuit described the media coverage as follows:
“Local newspapers ran many personal interest stories in which
sympathetic individuals expressed feelings of anger and betrayal
toward Enron. . . . Even the [Houston] Chronicle’s sports page wrote of
Skilling’s guilt as a foregone conclusion. Similarly, the Chronicle’s
‘Pethouse Pet of the Week’ section mentioned that a pet had ‘enjoyed
watching those Enron jerks being led away in handcuffs.’ These are
but a few examples of the Chronicle’s coverage.” 554 F. 3d, at 559
(footnote omitted).

