12

TALK AMERICA, INC. v. MICHIGAN BELL 

TELEPHONE CO.
Opinion of the Court 





nection. Compensation for transport and termination—
that is, for delivering local telephone calls placed by
another carrier’s customer—is governed by separate stat­
utory provisions and regulations.
See 47 U. S. C.
§§251(b)(5), 252(d)(2); 47 CFR §51.701. The Commission
explains that a competitive LEC typically pays one fee for
interconnection—“just for having the link”—and then an
additional fee for the transport and termination of tele­
phone calls. Tr. of Oral Arg. 28; see also Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 3, n. 1. Entrance facilities, at
least when used for the mutual exchange of traffic, seem
to us to fall comfortably within the definition of intercon­
nection. See 597 F. 3d, at 388 (Sutton, J., dissenting)
(noting that entrance facilities are “designed for the very
purpose of linking two carriers’ networks” (internal quota­
tion marks omitted)).
In sum, the Commission’s interpretation of its regula­
tions is neither plainly erroneous nor inconsistent with the
regulatory text. Contrary to AT&T’s assertion, there is no
danger that deferring to the Commission would effectively
“permit the agency, under the guise of interpreting a
regulation, to create de facto a new regulation.”5 Christen
sen v. Harris County, 529 U. S. 576, 588 (2000).
D
Nor is there any other “reason to suspect that the inter­
pretation does not reflect the agency’s fair and considered
judgment on the matter in question.” Auer, 519 U. S., at
462. We are not faced with a post-hoc rationalization by
——————
5 There

is no merit to AT&T’s assertion that the FCC is improperly
amending the list of “[t]echnically feasible methods of obtaining inter­
connection” set forth in 47 CFR §51.321(b). By its own terms, that list
is nonexhaustive. See §51.321(b) (“[t]echnically feasible methods of
obtaining interconnection . . . include, but are not limited to” the listed
examples); see also §51.321(a) (“[A]n incumbent LEC shall provide . . .
any technically feasible method of obtaining interconnection” (emphasis
added)).

