(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

TALK AMERICA, INC. v. MICHIGAN BELL TELE-

PHONE CO. DBA AT&T MICHIGAN 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–313.

Argued March 30, 2011—Decided June 9, 2011*

The Telecommunications Act of 1996 requires incumbent local ex
change carriers (LECs)—i.e., providers of local telephone service—to
share their physical networks with competitive LECs at cost-based
rates in two ways relevant here. First, 47 U. S. C. §251(c)(3) requires
an incumbent LEC to lease “on an unbundled basis”—i.e., a la carte—
network elements specified by the Federal Communications Commis
sion (FCC) to allow a competitor to create its own network without
having to build every element from scratch. In identifying those ele
ments, the FCC must consider whether access is “necessary” and
whether failing to provide it would “impair” the competitor’s provi
sion of service. §251(d)(2). Second, §251(c)(2) mandates that incum
bent LECs “provide . . . interconnection” between their networks and
competitive LECs’ to ensure that a competitor’s customers can call
the incumbent’s customers, and vice versa. The interconnection duty
is independent of the unbundling rules and not subject to impairment
analysis.
In 2003, the FCC issued its Triennial Review Order deciding, con
trary to previous orders, that §251(c)(3) did not require an incumbent
LEC to provide a competitive LEC with cost-based unbundled access
to existing “entrance facilities”—i.e., transmission facilities (typically
wires or cables) that connect the two LECs’ networks—because such
facilities are not network elements at all. The FCC noted, however,
that entrance facilities are used for both interconnection and back
hauling, and it emphasized that its order did not alter incumbent
——————
* Together with No. 10–329, Isiogu et al. v. Michigan Bell Telephone
Co. dba AT&T Michigan, also on certiorari to the same court.

