10

TALK AMERICA, INC. v. MICHIGAN BELL 

TELEPHONE CO.
Opinion of the Court 





3
Finally, the FCC contends that providing access to the
entrance facilities here for interconnection purposes is
technically feasible. Under the Commission’s regulations,
an incumbent LEC bears the burden of showing that a
requested method or point of interconnection is technically
infeasible. See 47 CFR §§51.305(e), 51.321(d); see also
§§51.305(d), 51.321(c) (previously successful intercon­
nection is “substantial evidence” of technical feasibility).
AT&T does not dispute technical feasibility here.4
C
The FCC’s interpretation is not “plainly erroneous or
inconsistent with the regulation[s]. ” Auer, supra, at 461
(internal quotation marks omitted). First, we disagree
with AT&T’s argument that entrance facilities are not a
part of incumbent LECs’ networks. Indeed, the Commis­
sion’s view on this question is more than reasonable; it is
certainly not plainly erroneous. The Triennial Review
Remand Order responded to the D. C. Circuit’s decision
questioning the Commission’s earlier finding that en­
trance facilities are not network elements. It revised
the definition of dedicated transport—a type of network
——————
4 These cases concern only existing entrance facilities, and the Com­
mission expressly declines to address whether it reads its regulations to
require incumbent LECs to build new entrance facilities for intercon­
nection. Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 25, n. 7. The Com­
mission suggests here, as it has before, that additional considerations of
cost or reasonableness might be appropriate if a competitive LEC were
to request that an incumbent LEC build new entrance facilities for
interconnection. Ibid. (noting that the Commission’s Wireline Competi­
tion Bureau has declined to require an incumbent LEC to bear the
entire cost of building new entrance facilities); see also Local Competi
tion Order ¶553 (explaining with respect to meet-point arrangements
that “the parties and state commissions are in a better position than
the Commission to determine the appropriate distance that would
constitute the required reasonable accommodation of interconnection”).
We express no view on the matter.

