2

TALK AMERICA, INC. v. MICHIGAN BELL 

TELEPHONE CO.
Syllabus 





LECs’ §251(c)(2) obligation to provide for interconnection. Thus, the
practical effect of the order was only that incumbent LECs were not
obligated to unbundle entrance facilities for backhauling purposes.
In 2005, following D. C. Circuit review, the FCC issued its Trien
nial Review Remand Order. The FCC retreated from the view that
entrance facilities are not network elements, but adhered to its pre
vious position that cost-based unbundled access to such facilities
need not be provided under §251(c)(3). Treating entrance facilities as
network elements, the FCC concluded that competitive LECs are not
impaired without access to such facilities. The FCC again empha
sized that competitive LECs’ §251(c)(2) right to obtain interconnec
tion had not been altered.
In the Remand Order’s wake, respondent AT&T notified competi
tive LECs that it would no longer provide entrance facilities at cost
based rates for either backhauling or interconnection, but would in
stead charge higher rates. Competitive LECs complained to the
Michigan Public Service Commission that AT&T was unlawfully ab
rogating their §251(c)(2) right to cost-based interconnection. The
Michigan Public Service Commission agreed and ordered AT&T to
continue providing entrance facilities for interconnection at cost
based rates. AT&T challenged the ruling. Relying on the Remand
Order, the Federal District Court ruled in AT&T’s favor. The Sixth
Circuit affirmed, declining to defer to the FCC’s argument that the
order did not change incumbent LECs’ interconnection obligations,
including the obligation to lease entrance facilities for interconnec
tion.
Held: The FCC has advanced a reasonable interpretation of its regula
tions—i.e., that to satisfy its duty under §251(c)(2), an incumbent
LEC must make its existing entrance facilities available to competi
tors at cost-based rates if the facilities are to be used for interconnec
tion—and this Court defers to the FCC’s views. Pp. 6–16.
(a) No statute or regulation squarely addresses the question. Pp.
6–7.
(b) Absent an unambiguous statute or regulation, the Court turns
to the FCC’s interpretation of its regulations in its amicus brief. See,
e.g., Chase Bank USA, N. A. v. McCoy, 562 U. S. ___, ___. The FCC
proffers a three-step argument why its regulations require AT&T to
provide access at cost-based rates to existing entrance facilities for
interconnection purposes. Pp. 7–10.
(1) Interpreting 47 CFR §51.321(a), the FCC first contends that
an incumbent LEC must lease “technically feasible” facilities for in
terconnection. Pp. 8–9.
(2) The FCC contends, second, that existing entrance facilities
are part of an incumbent LEC’s network, 47 CFR §51.319(e), and

