4

TALK AMERICA, INC. v. MICHIGAN BELL 

TELEPHONE CO.
Opinion of the Court 





Review Order). Explaining that its previous approach had
been “misguided” and “overly broad,” id., ¶¶366, 365, the
Commission concluded that entrance facilities were not
subject to the unbundling requirement because they are
not network elements at all. See id., ¶366 (entrance facili­
ties “exist outside the incumbent LEC’s local network”).
The Commission therefore did not conduct an impairment
analysis.
The FCC emphasized, however, the limits of this ruling.
Entrance facilities are used for two purposes: interconnec­
tion and backhauling.2 It expressly “d[id] not alter” an
incumbent LEC’s obligation under §251(c)(2) to provide
“facilities in order to ‘interconnect with the incumbent
LEC’s network.’ ” Id., ¶366 (brackets omitted). Thus, al­
though the Commission specified that §251(c)(3) did not
require any unbundled leasing of entrance facilities, it
determined in practical effect only that “incumbent LECs
[were not obligated] to unbundle [entrance facilities] for
the purpose of backhauling traffic.” Id., ¶365.
On direct review, the D. C. Circuit questioned the Com­
mission’s determination that entrance facilities are not
network elements under §251(c)(3), but found the agency
rulemaking record insufficient and remanded to the
Commission for further consideration. See United States
Telecom Assn. v. FCC, 359 F. 3d 554, 586, cert. denied, 543
U. S. 925 (2004). The court noted that if entrance facilities
were in fact “ ‘network elements,’ ” then “an analysis of
——————
2 Although the parties and their amici disagree over the precise defi­
nition of backhauling, they all appear to agree that backhauling is
important to competitive LECs and occurs when a competitive LEC
uses an entrance facility to transport traffic from a leased portion of an
incumbent network to the competitor’s own facilities. Backhauling does
not involve the exchange of traffic between incumbent and competitive
networks. See, e.g., Brief for Petitioners in No. 10–329, p. 25; Brief for
United States Telecom Association et al. as Amici Curiae 32. It thus
differs from interconnection—“the linking of two networks for the
mutual exchange of traffic.” 47 CFR §51.5 (2010).

