Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

2
More importantly, AT&T’s characterization of what the
Commission has done, and is doing, is inaccurate. The
Triennial Review orders eliminated incumbent LECs’ obli­
gation under §251(c)(3) to provide unbundled access to
entrance facilities. But the FCC emphasized in both
orders that it “d[id] not alter” the obligation on incumbent
LECs under §251(c)(2) to provide facilities for interconnec­
tion purposes. Triennial Review Order ¶366; Triennial
Review Remand Order ¶140. Because entrance facilities
are used for backhauling and interconnection purposes,
the FCC effectively eliminated only unbundled access to
entrance facilities for backhauling purposes—a nuance it
expressly noted in the first Triennial Review order. Tri
ennial Review Order ¶365. That distinction is neither
unusual nor ambiguous.6 In these cases, the Commission
is simply explaining the interconnection obligation that it
left undisturbed in the Triennial Review orders. We see
no conflict between the Triennial Review orders and the
Commission’s views expressed here.7
We are not concerned that the Triennial Review Re
mand Order did not expressly distinguish between back­
——————
6 The Commission has long recognized that a single facility can be
used for different functions and that its regulatory treatment can vary
depending on its use. Unbundled network elements, for example, may
not be used for the exclusive provision of mobile wireless or long­
distance services. 47 CFR §51.309(b) (2010). Similarly, interconnection
arrangements may be used for local telephone service but not for long­
distance services. §51.305(b).
7 The parties and their amici dispute whether an incumbent LEC
has any way of knowing how a competitive LEC is using an entrance
facility. This technical factual dispute simply underscores the appro­
priateness of deferring to the FCC. So long as the Commission is acting
within the scope of its delegated authority and in accordance with
prescribed procedures, it has greater expertise and stands in a better
position than this Court to make the technical and policy judgments
necessary to administer the complex regulatory program at issue here.

