2

TALK AMERICA, INC. v. MICHIGAN BELL 

TELEPHONE CO.
SCALIA, J., concurring 





itself, but the distinction is there, and without it ¶140 has
no point.
It is comforting to know that I would reach the Court’s
result even without Auer. For while I have in the past
uncritically accepted that rule, I have become increasingly
doubtful of its validity. On the surface, it seems to be a
natural corollary—indeed, an a fortiori application—of the
rule that we will defer to an agency’s interpretation of the
statute it is charged with implementing, see Chevron
U. S. A. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467
U. S. 837 (1984). But it is not. When Congress enacts an
imprecise statute that it commits to the implementation of
an executive agency, it has no control over that implemen­
tation (except, of course, through further, more precise,
legislation). The legislative and executive functions are
not combined. But when an agency promulgates an im­
precise rule, it leaves to itself the implementation of that
rule, and thus the initial determination of the rule’s mean­
ing. And though the adoption of a rule is an exercise of
the executive rather than the legislative power, a properly
adopted rule has fully the effect of law. It seems contrary
to fundamental principles of separation of powers to per­
mit the person who promulgates a law to interpret it as
well. “When the legislative and executive powers are
united in the same person, or in the same body of magis­
trates, there can be no liberty; because apprehensions may
arise, lest the same monarch or senate should enact ty­
rannical laws, to execute them in a tyrannical manner.”
Montesquieu, Spirit of the Laws bk. XI, ch. 6, pp. 151–152
(O. Piest ed., T. Nugent transl. 1949).
Deferring to an agency’s interpretation of a statute does
not encourage Congress, out of a desire to expand its
power, to enact vague statutes; the vagueness effectively
cedes power to the Executive. By contrast, deferring to an
agency’s interpretation of its own rule encourages the
agency to enact vague rules which give it the power, in

