Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

STEVENS, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–338
_________________

PAUL RENICO, WARDEN, PETITIONER v.

REGINALD LETT

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT

[May 3, 2010]


JUSTICE STEVENS, with whom JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR
joins, and with whom JUSTICE BREYER joins as to Parts I
and II, dissenting.
At common law, courts went to great lengths to ensure
the jury reached a verdict. Fourteenth-century English
judges reportedly loaded hung juries into oxcarts and
carried them from town to town until a judgment
“ ‘bounced out.’ ”1 Less enterprising colleagues kept jurors
as de facto “prisoners” until they achieved unanimity.2
The notion of a mistrial based on jury deadlock did not
appear in Blackstone’s Commentaries;3 it is no surprise,
then, that colonial juries virtually always returned a
verdict.4 Well into the 19th and even the 20th century,
——————
1 Comment, Deadlocked Juries and Dynamite: A Critical Look at the
“Allen Charge,” 31 U. Chi. L. Rev. 386 (1964) (citing G. Crabb, A
History of English Law 287 (1829)); see King v. Ledgingham, 1 Vent.
97, 86 Eng. Rep. 67 (K. B. 1670); 2 M. Hale, Pleas of the Crown 297
(1736).
2 J. Baker, An Introduction to English Legal History 75 (4th ed.
2002); see also 1 W. Holdsworth, A History of English Law 318–319
(rev. 7th ed. 1956).
3 “When the evidence on both sides is closed,” Blackstone observed of
criminal cases, “the jury cannot be discharged till they have given in
their verdict.” 4 Commentaries on the Laws of England 354 (1769).
4 See Thomas & Greenbaum, Justice Story Cuts the Gordian Knot of
Hung Jury Instructions, 15 Wm. & Mary Bill Rights J. 893, 897 (2007).


2

RENICO v. LETT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

some American judges continued to coax unresolved juries
toward consensus by threatening to deprive them of heat,5
sleep,6 or sustenance7 or to lock them in a room for a pro
longed period of time.8
Mercifully, our legal system has evolved, and such harsh
measures are no longer tolerated. Yet what this history
demonstrates—and what has not changed—is the respect
owed “a defendant’s valued right to have his trial com
pleted by a particular tribunal.” Wade v. Hunter, 336
U. S. 684, 689 (1949). Our longstanding doctrine applying
the Double Jeopardy Clause attests to the durability and
fundamentality of this interest.
“The reasons why this ‘valued right’ merits constitu
tional protection are worthy of repetition.” Arizona v.
Washington, 434 U. S. 497, 503 (1978).
“Even if the first trial is not completed, a second
prosecution may be grossly unfair. It increases the fi
nancial and emotional burden on the accused, pro
longs the period in which he is stigmatized by an un
resolved accusation of wrongdoing, and may even
enhance the risk that an innocent defendant may be
convicted. The danger of such unfairness to the de
fendant exists whenever a trial is aborted before it is
completed. Consequently, as a general rule, the
prosecutor is entitled to one, and only one, opportu
nity to require an accused to stand trial.” Id., at 503–
505 (footnotes omitted).
——————
According to these scholars, “[t]he first report of a mistrial for failure to
reach a verdict in an American court was 1807.” Ibid.
5 See, e.g., Mead v. Richland Center, 237 Wis. 537, 540–541, 297
N. W. 419, 421 (1941).
6 See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Moore, 398 Pa. 198, 204–205, 157 A. 2d
65, 69 (1959).
7 See, e.g., Cole v. Swan, 4 Greene 32, 33 (Iowa 1853).
8 See, e.g., Canterberry v. Commonwealth, 222 Ky. 510, 513–514, 1
S. W. 2d 976, 977 (1928).


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., dissenting

“The underlying idea . . . is that the State with all its
resources and power should not be allowed to make re
peated attempts to convict an individual for an alleged
offense, thereby subjecting him to embarrassment, ex
pense and ordeal and compelling him to live in a continu
ing state of anxiety and insecurity, as well as enhancing
the possibility that even though innocent he may be found
guilty.” Green v. United States, 355 U. S. 184, 187–188
(1957).9
We have come over the years to recognize that jury
coercion poses a serious threat to jurors and defendants
alike, and that the accused’s interest in a single proceed
ing must sometimes yield “to the public’s interest in fair
trials designed to end in just judgments,” Wade, 336 U. S.,
at 689; and we have therefore carved out exceptions to the
common-law rule. But the exceptions are narrow. For a
mistrial to be granted at the prosecutor’s request, “the
prosecutor must shoulder the burden of justifying the
mistrial if he is to avoid the double jeopardy bar. His
burden is a heavy one.” Washington, 434 U. S., at 505. A
judge who acts sua sponte in declaring a mistrial must
similarly make sure, and must enable a reviewing court to
confirm, that there is a “ ‘manifest necessity’ ” to deprive
the defendant of his valued right. Ibid.
In this case, the trial judge did not meet that burden.
The record suggests that she discharged the jury without
considering any less extreme courses of action, and the
record makes quite clear that she did not fully appreciate
the scope or significance of the ancient right at stake. The
Michigan Supreme Court’s decision rejecting Reginald
Lett’s double jeopardy claim was just as clearly in error.
——————
9 As Justice Harlan observed, “[a] power in government to subject the
individual to repeated prosecutions for the same offense would cut
deeply into the framework of procedural protections which the Consti
tution establishes for the conduct of a criminal trial.” United States v.
Jorn, 400 U. S. 470, 479 (1971) (plurality opinion).


4

RENICO v. LETT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

I
No one disputes that a “genuinely deadlocked jury” is
“the classic basis” for declaring a mistrial or that such
declaration, under our doctrine, does not preclude reprose
cution, id., at 509; what is disputed in this case is whether
the trial judge took adequate care to ensure the jury was
genuinely deadlocked. A long line of precedents from this
Court establishes the “governing legal principle[s],” Wil
liams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362, 413 (2000), for resolving
this question. Although the Court acknowledges these
precedents, ante, at 6–8, it minimizes the heavy burden we
have placed on trial courts.
“The fountainhead decision . . . is United States v. Perez,
9 Wheat. 579 (1824).” Illinois v. Somerville, 410 U. S. 458,
461 (1973).10 Writing for a unanimous Court, Justice
Story articulated a “manifest necessity” standard that
continues to govern the double jeopardy analysis for mis
trial orders:
“We think, that in all cases of this nature, the law has
invested Courts of justice with the authority to dis
charge a jury from giving any verdict, whenever, in
their opinion, taking all the circumstances into con
sideration, there is a manifest necessity for the act, or
the ends of public justice would otherwise be defeated.
They are to exercise a sound discretion on the subject;
and it is impossible to define all the circumstances,
which would render it proper to interfere. To be sure,
the power ought to be used with the greatest caution,
under urgent circumstances, and for very plain and
obvious causes; and, in capital cases especially, Courts
should be extremely careful how they interfere with
any of the chances of life, in favour of the prisoner.
But, after all, they have the right to order the dis
——————
10 See also Gori v. United States, 367 U. S. 364, 368 (1961) (Perez is
“authoritative starting point of our law in this field”).


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., dissenting

charge; and the security which the public have for the
faithful, sound, and conscientious exercise of this dis
cretion, rests, in this, as in other cases, upon the re
sponsibility of the Judges, under their oaths of office.”
United States v. Perez, 9 Wheat. 579, 580 (1824).
This passage, too, is worthy of repetition, because in it
the Perez Court struck a careful balance. The Court estab
lished the authority of trial judges to discharge the jury
prior to verdict, but in recognition of the novelty and
potential injustice of the practice, the Court subjected that
authority to several constraints: The judge may not de
clare a mistrial unless “there is a manifest necessity for
the act” or “the ends of public justice” so require; and in
determining whether such conditions exist, the judge must
exercise “sound discretion,” “conscientious[ness],” and “the
greatest caution,” reserving the discharge power for “ur
gent circumstances” and “very plain and obvious causes.”
Ibid. What exact circumstances and causes would meet
that bar, the Court declined to specify. Recognizing that
trial proceedings may raise innumerable complications, so
that “it is impossible to define” in advance all of the possi
ble grounds for “interfere[nce],” the Court set forth general
standards for judicial conduct rather than categorical
rules for specific classes of situations. Ibid.
The seeds of our entire jurisprudence on the permissibil
ity of retrial following an initial mistrial are packed into
this one passage. Later Courts have fleshed out Perez,
without making significant innovations or additions.
Justice Story’s formulation has been “quoted over and over
again to provide guidance in the decision of a wide variety
of cases,” Washington, 434 U. S., at 506, and it has been
“consistently adhered to by this Court in subsequent
decisions,” Somerville, 410 U. S., at 462.
Thus, we have repeatedly reaffirmed that the power to
discharge the jury prior to verdict should be reserved for


6

RENICO v. LETT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

“extraordinary and striking circumstances,” Downum v.
United States, 372 U. S. 734, 736 (1963) (internal quota
tion marks omitted); that the trial judge may not take this
“weighty” step, Somerville, 410 U. S., at 471, unless and
until he has “scrupulous[ly]” assessed the situation and
“take[n] care to assure himself that [it] warrants action on
his part foreclosing the defendant from a potentially fa
vorable judgment by the tribunal,” United States v. Jorn,
400 U. S. 470, 485, 486 (1971) (plurality opinion);11 that, to
exercise sound discretion, the judge may not act “irration
ally,” “irresponsibly,” or “precipitately” but must instead
act “deliberately” and “careful[ly],” Washington, 434 U. S.,
at 514–515, 516;12 and that, in view of “the elusive nature
of the problem,” mechanical rules are no substitute in the
double jeopardy mistrial context for the sensitive applica
tion of general standards, Jorn, 400 U. S., at 485 (plurality
opinion).13 The governing legal principles in this area are
just that—principles—and their application to any par
ticular set of facts entails an element of judgment.
As the Court emphasizes, we have also repeatedly reaf
——————
11 See

also Jorn, 400 U. S., at 486 (“[I]n the final analysis, the judge
must always temper the decision whether or not to abort the trial by
considering the importance to the defendant of being able, once and for
all, to conclude his confrontation with society through the verdict of a
tribunal he might believe to be favorably disposed to his fate”). Jorn
was technically a plurality opinion, but in all relevant respects it was a
majority product. Justices Black and Brennan believed the Court
lacked jurisdiction over the appeal, and for that reason they withheld
their full assent. Id., at 488 (statement concurring in judgment).
“However, in view of a decision by a majority of the Court to reach the
merits, they join[ed] the judgment of the Court.” Ibid. As petitioner
acknowledges, Jorn broke no new ground: Its “holding is consistent
[with] and no broader than Perez.” Reply Brief for Petitioner 18, n. 50.
12 See Brief for Petitioner 13–14, 25, 32 (recognizing this “constitu
tional floor”).
13 Accord, Arizona v. Washington, 434 U. S. 497, 506 (1978); Illinois v.
Somerville, 410 U. S. 458, 462 (1973); Downum v. United States, 372
U. S. 734, 737 (1963); Gori, 367 U. S., at 369.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

STEVENS, J., dissenting

firmed that trial judges have considerable leeway in de
termining whether the jury is deadlocked, that they are
not bound to use specific procedures or to make specific
findings, and that reviewing courts must accord broad
deference to their decisions. Ante, at 6–8. But the review
ing court still has an important role to play; the applica
tion of deference “does not, of course, end the inquiry.”
Washington, 434 U. S., at 514. “In order to ensure that
[the defendant’s constitutional] interest is adequately
protected, reviewing courts have an obligation to satisfy
themselves that, in the words of Mr. Justice Story, the
trial judge exercised ‘sound discretion’ in declaring a
mistrial.” Ibid. “If the record reveals that the trial judge
has failed to exercise the ‘sound discretion’ entrusted to
him, the reason for . . . deference by an appellate court
disappears.” Id., at 510, n. 28. And while trial judges
need not follow any precise regimen to facilitate appellate
review, they must at least take care to ensure that “[t]he
basis for [a] mistrial order is adequately disclosed by the
record.” Id., at 517.
Our precedents contain examples of judicial action on
both sides of the line. We have, for instance, allowed a
second trial when the jurors in the first trial, after 40
hours of deliberation, “announced in open court that they
were unable to agree,” and no “specific and traversable
fact[s]” called their deadlock into question. Logan v.
United States, 144 U. S. 263, 298 (1892). We have like
wise permitted reprosecution when the initial judge heard
“extended argument” from both parties on the mistrial
motion, acted with evident “concern for the possible double
jeopardy consequences of an erroneous ruling,” and “ac
corded careful consideration to [the defendant’s] interest
in having the trial concluded in a single proceeding.”
Washington, 434 U. S., at 501, 515, 516.
On the other hand, we have barred retrial when the first
judge acted “abruptly,” cutting off the prosecutor “in mid


8

RENICO v. LETT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

stream” and discharging the jury without giving the par
ties an opportunity to object. Jorn, 400 U. S., at 487 (plu
rality opinion); see also Somerville, 410 U. S., at 469
(characterizing Jorn judge’s actions as “erratic”). And we
have opined that, while trial judges have considerable
leeway in deciding whether to discharge the jury, “[w]e
resolve any doubt in favor of the liberty of the citizen,
rather than exercise what would be an unlimited, uncer
tain, and arbitrary judicial discretion.” Downum, 372
U. S., at 738 (internal quotation marks omitted).
II
The Court accurately describes the events leading up to
this trial judge’s declaration of mistrial, ante, at 2–3, but it
glides too quickly over a number of details that, taken
together, show her decisionmaking was neither careful nor
well considered. If the “manifest necessity” and “sound
discretion” standards are to have any force, we must
demand more from our trial courts.
It is probably fair to say that this trial was not espe
cially complex, ante, at 4, 10, but neither was it a trivial
affair. Lett was charged with the most serious of crimes,
first-degree murder, as well as possession of a firearm
during the commission of a felony. He faced a potential
sentence of life imprisonment if convicted. Seventeen
witnesses provided testimony over the course of 10 calen
dar days. See 507 F. Supp. 2d 777, 779, 785–786 (ED
Mich. 2007); see also id., at 785 (discussing “piecemeal
fashion” in which evidence was presented to the jury).
The jury’s first period of deliberation on Thursday after
noon lasted less than 40 minutes. “The jury likely spent”
that brief session “doing little more than electing a fore
person.” People v. Lett, 466 Mich. 206, 227, 644 N. W. 2d
743, 755 (2002) (Cavanagh, J., dissenting). The jury de
liberated a few more hours on Friday morning prior to
discharge. During that time, it sent the trial court seven


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

STEVENS, J., dissenting

notes. Most were inconsequential, routine queries. The
first note on Friday morning raised “ ‘a concern about [the
jurors’] voice levels,’ ” Letter from M. McCowan to Clerk of
Court (Mar. 4, 2010), p. 2, but nothing in the record re
lates this concern to the substance or tenor of their discus
sion. At 12:27 p.m., the jury sent the fateful missive,
asking: “ ‘What if we can’t agree? [M]istrial? [R]etrial?
[W]hat?’ ” Ibid. Seconds later, still at 12:27 p.m., the jury
sent another note: “ ‘What about lunch?’ ” Ibid.
At 12:45 p.m., the trial judge initiated a colloquy with
the foreperson that concluded in the mistrial declaration.
See ante, at 2–3 (reproducing transcript of colloquy). Even
accounting for the imprecision of oral communication, the
judge made an inordinate number of logical and legal
missteps during this short exchange. Cf. Somerville, 410
U. S., at 469 (critiquing “erratic” mistrial inquiry). It does
not take much exegetical skill to spot them.
The judge began by stating: “ ‘I received your note ask
ing me what if you can’t agree? And I have to conclude
from that that that is your situation at this time.’ ” Ante,
at 2. This “ ‘conclu[sion]’ ” was a non sequitur. The note
asked what would happen if the jury could not agree; it
gave no indication that the jury had already reached an
irrevocable impasse. The judge ignored the request for
information that the note actually contained. Instead, she
announced that deadlock was the jury’s “ ‘situation at this
time,’ ” thereby prejudging the question she had ostensibly
summoned the foreperson to probe: namely, whether the
jury was in fact deadlocked.
The judge continued: “ ‘I need to ask you if the jury is
deadlocked; in other words, is there a disagreement as to
the verdict?’ ” Ante, at 2–3. As the Federal Court of Ap
peals observed, this question “improperly conflated dead
lock with mere disagreement.” 316 Fed. Appx. 421, 426
(CA6 2009). Deadlock is a “condition or situation in which
it is impossible to proceed or act; a complete standstill.” 4


10

RENICO v. LETT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

Oxford English Dictionary 290 (2d ed. 1989). Disagree
ment among jurors is perfectly normal and does not come
close to approaching the “imperious necessity” we have
required for their discharge. Downum, 372 U. S., at 736.
The trial judge then modulated her inquiry: “ ‘Do you
believe [the jury] is hopelessly deadlocked?’ ” Ante, at 3.
The foreperson was in the midst of replying, “ ‘The major
ity of us don’t believe that—,’ ” when the judge appears to
have cut her off. Ibid. One cannot “fault the trial judge”
for wanting “to preserve the secrecy of jury deliberations,”
507 F. Supp. 2d, at 787, but two aspects of the foreperson’s
truncated reply are notable. First, it “tends to show that
the foreperson did not feel prepared to declare definitively
that the jury was hopelessly deadlocked.” Ibid. If she had
been so prepared, then it is hard to see why she would
begin her response with a descriptive account of the “ ‘ma
jority’ ” viewpoint.
Second, the foreperson’s reply suggests the jury may
have been leaning toward acquittal. Admittedly, this is
crude speculation, but it is entirely possible that the fore
person was in the process of saying, “The majority of us
don’t believe that he’s guilty.” Or: “The majority of us
don’t believe that there is sufficient evidence to prove one
of the counts.” (On retrial, Lett was convicted on both
counts.) These possibilities are, I submit, linguistically
more probable than something like the following: “The
majority of us don’t believe that Lett is guilty, whereas a
minority of us believe that he is—and we are hopelessly
deadlocked on the matter.” And they are logically far more
probable than something along the lines of, “The majority
of us don’t believe that we will ever be able to reach a
verdict,” as the foreperson had been given no opportunity
to poll her colleagues on this point. Yet only such implau
sible endings could have supported a conclusion that it


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

STEVENS, J., dissenting

was manifestly necessary to discharge the jury.14
The judge then steered the conversation back to the
issue of deadlock, asking: “ ‘Are you going to reach a unani
mous verdict, or not?’ ” Ante, at 3. After the foreperson
hesitated, the judge persisted: “ ‘Yes or no?’ ” Ibid. The
foreperson replied: “ ‘No, Judge.’ ” Ibid. Two aspects of
this interchange are also notable. First, the judge’s ques
tion, though “very direct,” was “actually rather ambigu
ous,” because it gave the foreperson no temporal or legal
context within which to understand what was being asked.
507 F. Supp. 2d, at 787. “The foreperson could have easily
thought the judge meant, ‘Are you going to reach a
unanimous verdict in the next hour?’ or ‘before the lunch
recess?’ or ‘by the end of the day?’ ” Ibid. (emphasis de
leted). Even if the foreperson assumed no time constraint,
she could have easily thought the judge meant, “Are you,
in your estimation, more likely than not to reach a unani
mous verdict?” An affirmative answer to that question
would likewise fall far short of manifest necessity.
Second, the foreperson’s hesitation suggests a lack of
confidence in her position. That alone ought to have called
into question the propriety of a mistrial order. But the
judge bore down and demanded an unqualified answer,
“ ‘Yes or no.’ ” Most of the time when we worry about
judicial coercion of juries, we worry about judges pressur
ing them, in the common-law manner, to keep deliberating
until they return a verdict they may not otherwise have
——————
14 Another reading of the foreperson’s reply is available: Her state
ment,“ ‘The majority of us don’t believe that,’ ” may have been a com
plete sentence. In other words, she may have meant to convey, “The
majority of us don’t believe that we are hopelessly deadlocked.” The
trial-court transcript places an em dash rather than a period after the
word “that,” but this is hardly dispositive evidence of intonation or
intent. However, the trial judge’s contemporaneous reaction, the fact
that the foreperson was not permitted to consult with the other jurors
on the issue of deadlock, and respondent’s failure to advance this
reading undercut its plausibility.


12

RENICO v. LETT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

chosen. This judge exerted pressure so as to prevent the
jury from reaching any verdict at all. In so doing, she cut
off deliberations well before the point when it was clear
they would no longer be fruitful. Recall that prior to
summoning the foreperson for their colloquy, the trial
judge gave her no opportunity to consult with the other
jurors on the matter that would be discussed. So, the
foreperson had no solid basis for estimating the likelihood
of deadlock. Recall, as well, that almost immediately after
sending the judge a note asking what would happen if
they disagreed, the jury sent a note asking about lunch.
Plainly, this was a group that was prepared to go on with
its work.
The judge then declared a mistrial on the spot. Her
entire exchange with the foreperson took three minutes,
from 12:45 p.m. to 12:48 p.m. App. to Pet. for Cert. 93a–
94a. The entire jury deliberations took roughly four
hours. The judge gave the parties no opportunity to com
ment on the foreperson’s remarks, much less on the ques
tion of mistrial. Cf. Washington, 434 U. S., at 515–516
(trial judge “gave both defense counsel and the prosecutor
full opportunity to explain their positions on the propriety
of a mistrial”); Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 26.3 (“Before order
ing a mistrial, the court must give each defendant and the
government an opportunity to comment on the propriety of
the order, to state whether that party consents or objects,
and to suggest alternatives”). Just as soon as the judge
declared a mistrial, she set a new pretrial date, discharged
the jury, and concluded proceedings. By 12:50 p.m., eve
ryone was free to take off for the weekend. App. to Pet. for
Cert. 94a.
In addition to the remarkable “hast[e],” Washington, 434
U. S., at 515, n. 34, and “inexplicabl[e] abrupt[ness],” 316
Fed. Appx., at 428, with which she acted, it is remarkable
what the trial judge did not do. “Never did the trial judge
consider alternatives or otherwise provide evidence that


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

STEVENS, J., dissenting

she exercised sound discretion. For example, the judge did
not poll the jurors, give an instruction ordering further
deliberations, query defense counsel about his thoughts on
continued deliberations, or indicate on the record why a
mistrial declaration was necessary.” Lett, 466 Mich., at
227–228, 644 N. W. 2d, at 755 (Cavanagh, J., dissenting).
Nor did the judge invite any argument or input from the
prosecutor, make any findings of fact or provide any
statements illuminating her thought process, follow up on
the foreperson’s final response, or give any evident consid
eration to the ends of public justice or the balance between
the defendant’s rights and the State’s interests. The
manner in which this discharge decision was made con
travened standard trial-court guidelines.15 The judge may
not have had a constitutional obligation to take any one of
——————
15 See,

e.g., ABA Standards for Criminal Justice, Discovery and Trial
by Jury 15–5.4, pp. 256–257 (3d ed. 1996) (“A trial judge should be able
to send the jury back for further deliberations notwithstanding its
indication that it has been unable to agree. The general view is that a
court may send the jury back for additional deliberations even though
the jury has indicated once, twice, or several times that it cannot agree
or even after jurors have requested that they be discharged. . . . [I]t is
believed that a jury should not be permitted to avoid a reasonable
period of deliberation merely by repeated indications that it is unhappy
over its inability to agree”); Federal Judicial Center, Manual on Recur
ring Problems in Criminal Trials 162 (5th ed. 2001) (“Before declaring a
mistrial, a trial judge must consider all the procedural alternatives to a
mistrial, and, after finding none of them to be adequate, make a finding
of manifest necessity for the declaration of a mistrial”); National
Conference of State Trial Judges of the Judicial Administration Divi
sion of the American Bar Association and the National Judicial College,
The Judge’s Book 220 (2d ed. 1994) (“The jury should be given full
opportunity to decide the case, considering the number of days of
evidence it heard”); State Justice Institute, National Center for State
Courts & National Judicial College, Jury Trial Management for the
21st
Century
§3,
Module
#3
(2009),
online
at
http://www.icmelearning.com/jtm (as visited Apr. 30, 2010, and avail
able in Clerk of Court’s case file) (“ ‘Deliberating jurors should be
offered assistance when apparent impasse is reported’ ”).


14

RENICO v. LETT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

the aforementioned measures, but she did have an obliga
tion to exercise sound discretion and thus to “assure
h[er]self that the situation warrant[ed] action on h[er]
part foreclosing the defendant from a potentially favorable
judgment by the tribunal.” Jorn, 400 U. S., at 486 (plural
ity opinion).
Add all these factors up, and I fail to see how the trial
judge exercised anything resembling “sound discretion” in
declaring a mistrial, as we have defined that term. In
deed, I fail to see how a record could disclose much less
evidence of sound decisionmaking. Within the realm of
realistic, nonpretextual possibilities, this mistrial declara
tion was about as precipitate as one is liable to find.
Despite the multitude of cases involving hung-jury mistri
als that have arisen over the years, neither petitioner nor
the Court has been able to identify any in which such
abrupt judicial action has been upheld. See Tr. of Oral
Arg. 12–15. Even the prosecutor felt compelled to ac
knowledge that the trial court’s decision to discharge the
jury “ ‘clearly was error.’ ” 316 Fed. Appx., at 427 (quoting
postconviction hearing transcript).
The Michigan Supreme Court’s contrary conclusion was
unreasonable. The court suggested that an abuse of dis
cretion should only be found “ ‘when the result is “so pal
pably and grossly violative of fact and logic that it evi
dences not the exercise of will but perversity of will, not
the exercise of judgment but defiance thereof.” ’ ” Lett, 466
Mich., at 221, n. 12, 644 N. W. 2d, at 751, n. 12 (quoting
Alken-Ziegler, Inc. v. Waterbury Headers Corp., 461 Mich.
219, 227, 600 N. W. 2d 638, 642 (1999)). Finding that the
record in this case “provides sufficient justification for the
mistrial declaration,” Lett, 466 Mich., at 218, 644 N. W.
2d, at 750, the court concluded that the declaration consti
tuted a permissible exercise of judicial discretion, id., at
223, 644 N. W. 2d, at 753. The court listed, without ex
plaining, several reasons for this conclusion. The jury


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

STEVENS, J., dissenting

“had deliberated for at least four hours following a rela
tively short, and far from complex, trial”; it “had sent out
several notes over the course of its deliberations, including
one that appears to indicate that its discussions may have
been particularly heated”; the parties did not object to the
mistrial order; and, “[m]ost important,” “the jury foreper
son expressly stated that the jury was not going to reach a
verdict.” Ibid.; see ante, at 10 (reprising this list).16
These reasons do not suffice to justify the mistrial order.
Four hours is not a long time for jury deliberations, par
ticularly in a first-degree murder case. Indeed, it would
have been “remarkable” if the jurors “could review the
testimony of all [the] witnesses in the time they were
given, let alone conclude that they were deadlocked.” 507
F. Supp. 2d, at 786. The jury’s note pertaining to its vol
ume level does not necessarily indicate anything about the
“heated[ness],” Lett, 466 Mich., at 223, 644 N. W. 2d, at
753, of its discussion. “[T]here is no other suggestion in
the record that such was the case, and the trial judge did
not draw that conclusion.” 507 F. Supp. 2d, at 786. Al
——————
16 Like

the trial court before it, the Michigan Supreme Court did not
make any factual findings to bolster its unreasonable legal conclusion.
As the State Court of Appeals noted, the trial judge declared a mistrial
as soon as she extracted a suggestive answer from the foreperson. She
“never even found on the record that the jury was genuinely dead
locked.” People v. Lett, No. 209513, 2000 WL 33423221, *4 (Apr. 21,
2000) (per curiam); see also People v. Lett, 466 Mich. 206, 225, 644
N. W. 2d 743, 754 (2002) (trial court did not “articulate a rationale on
the record”). The Michigan Supreme Court expressly declined to
commit to the position that the jury really was deadlocked or that
manifest necessity really did exist. See, e.g., id., at 220, 644 N. W. 2d,
at 751 (“The issue is not whether this Court would have found manifest
necessity”). Accordingly, even if 28 U. S. C. §2254(e)(1) were to apply to
this appeal, there were no “determination[s] of a factual issue made by
a State court” that we would have to “presum[e] to be correct.” In any
event, none of the relevant facts in the case are disputed, and no
argument concerning §2254(e)(1) was properly raised in this Court or
passed upon below.


16

RENICO v. LETT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

though it would have been preferable if Lett had tried to
lodge an objection, defense counsel was given no meaning
ful opportunity to do so—the judge discharged the jury
simultaneously with her mistrial order, counsel received
no advance notice of either action, and he may not even
have been informed of the content of the jury’s notes. See
ante, at 2; 316 Fed. Appx., at 428 (“At no point before the
actual declaration of the mistrial was it even mentioned
on the record as a potential course of action by the court.
The summary nature of the trial court’s actions . . . ren
dered an objection both unlikely and meaningless” (inter
nal quotation marks omitted)). Counsel’s failure to object
is therefore legally irrelevant.17 And, as detailed above,
the foreperson’s remarks were far more equivocal and
ambiguous, in context, than the Michigan Supreme Court
allowed.
The Michigan Supreme Court’s defense of the trial
court’s actions is thus weak on its own terms. It collapses
entirely under the weight of the many defects in the trial
court’s process, virtually all of which the court either
overlooked or discounted.
The unreasonableness of the Michigan Supreme Court’s
decision is highlighted by the decisions of the three other
courts that have addressed Lett’s double jeopardy claim,
each of which ruled in his favor, as well as the dissent
filed by two Michigan Supreme Court Justices and the
——————
17 See

Jorn, 400 U. S., at 487 (plurality opinion) (“[I]ndeed, the trial
judge acted so abruptly in discharging the jury that, had the . . . defen
dant [been disposed] to object to the discharge of the jury, there would
have been no opportunity to do so”); see also Lett, 2000 WL 33423221,
*2 (noting that failure to object to the jury’s discharge does not consti
tute consent under Michigan law). While a defendant’s affirmative
request for or consent to a mistrial may be relevant to the double
jeopardy inquiry, see, e.g., Jorn, 400 U. S., at 485 (plurality opinion), we
have never suggested that defendants must object to such orders to
preserve a claim, much less object to an order issued sua sponte and
without any advance notice.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

STEVENS, J., dissenting

opinion of the State’s own prosecutor. This Court’s deci
sion unfortunately compounds the deleterious conse
quences of the Michigan Supreme Court’s ruling. “Al
though the trial judge’s decision is entitled to great
deference, it is not the place of a reviewing court to extract
factoids from the record in an attempt to salvage a bad
decision.” 507 F. Supp. 2d, at 787.
III
The Court does not really try to vindicate the Michigan
Supreme Court on the merits, but instead ascribes today’s
outcome to the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty
Act of 1996 (AEDPA). The foregoing analysis shows why
the Michigan Supreme Court’s ruling cannot be saved by
28 U. S. C. §2254(d)(1), however construed. That ruling
was not only incorrect but also unreasonable by any fair
measure. Three particular facets of the Court’s AEDPA
analysis require a brief comment.
First, the fact that the substantive legal standard ap
plied by the state court “is a general one” has no bearing
on the standard of review. Ante, at 11. We have said that
“[t]he more general the rule, the more leeway courts have
in reaching outcomes in case-by-case determinations.”
Yarborough v. Alvarado, 541 U. S. 652, 664 (2004). But
this statement stands only for the unremarkable proposi
tion that more broadly framed rules will tend to encom
pass a broader set of conforming applications. Regardless
of the nature of the legal principle at issue, the task of a
federal court remains the same under §2254(d)(1): to
determine whether the state court’s decision “was contrary
to, or involved an unreasonable application of, clearly
established Federal law.” General standards are no less
binding law than discrete rules.18
——————
18 In recognition of this basic insight, our precedents “have made
clear” that a state-court decision may be “unreasonable” within the
meaning of §2254(d)(1) when the “state court has misapplied a ‘govern


18

RENICO v. LETT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

Second, I do not agree that the Federal Court of Appeals
“erred” by “rel[ying] upon its own decision” applying Ari
zona v. Washington. Ante, at 11. The Sixth Circuit was
well aware that its own decision “does not constitute
‘clearly established Federal law, as determined by the
Supreme Court.’ ” Ante, at 11–12 (quoting §2254(d)(1)).
The panel expressly stated that it “review[ed] the Michi
gan Supreme Court’s decision to determine only whether
it was objectively unreasonable in light of the holdings of
the Supreme Court.” 316 Fed. Appx., at 425. The panel
examined its own precedents not as the relevant “clearly
established Federal law” under AEDPA, but as a tool for
illuminating the precise contours of that law. Lower
courts routinely look to circuit cases to “provide evidence
that Supreme Court precedents ha[ve] clearly established
a rule as of a particular time or [to] shed light on the
‘reasonableness’ of the state courts’ application of existing
Supreme Court precedents.” 2 R. Hertz & J. Liebman,
Federal Habeas Corpus Practice and Procedure §32.3,
p. 1585, n. 10 (5th ed. 2005) (hereinafter Hertz & Lieb
man). This is a healthy practice—indeed, a vital practice,
considering how few cases this Court decides—and we
have never disapproved it.
Finally, I do not agree that AEDPA authorizes “the dual
layers of deference” the Court has utilized in this case.
Ante, at 11. There is little doubt that AEDPA “directs
federal courts to attend to every state-court judgment with
utmost care.” Williams, 529 U. S., at 389 (opinion of
——————
ing legal principle’ to ‘a set of facts different from those of the case in
which the principle was announced.’ ” Wiggins v. Smith, 539 U. S. 510,
520 (2003) (quoting Lockyer v. Andrade, 538 U. S. 63, 76 (2003)); see
also Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362, 413 (2000). This is a critical
feature of our AEDPA jurisprudence. Federal habeas review would be
meaningless if, for relief to be granted, we required a perfect congru
ence between the facts that gave rise to our governing precedents and
the facts that confronted the state court in any particular case.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

STEVENS, J., dissenting

STEVENS, J.). But the statute never uses the term “defer
ence,” and the legislative history makes clear that Con
gress meant to preserve robust federal-court review. Id.,
at 386–387; see also Hertz & Liebman §32.3, at 1587–
1589, n. 13 (summarizing congressional record and noting
that “[t]he aspect of prior practice that most troubled
AEDPA’s supporters was the federal court’s inattention to,
and lack of respect for, state court decisions that the fed
eral court, if it only looked, would find to be legally cor
rect”). Any attempt to prevent federal courts from exercis
ing independent review of habeas applications would have
been a radical reform of dubious constitutionality, and
Congress “would have spoken with much greater clarity” if
that had been its intent. Williams, 529 U. S., at 379 (opin
ion of STEVENS, J.).
So on two levels, it is absolutely “necessary for us to
decide whether the Michigan Supreme Court’s decision . . .
was right or wrong.” Ante, at 11, n. 3. If a federal judge
were firmly convinced that such a decision were wrong,
then in my view not only would he have no statutory duty
to uphold it, but he might also have a constitutional obli
gation to reverse it. And regardless of how one conceptu
alizes the distinction between an incorrect and an “unrea
sonable” state-court ruling under §2254(d)(1), one must
always determine whether the ruling was wrong to be able
to test the magnitude of any error. Substantive and meth
odological considerations compel federal courts to give
habeas claims a full, independent review—and then to
decide for themselves. Even under AEDPA, there is no
escaping the burden of judgment.
*
*
*
In this case, Reginald Lett’s constitutional rights were
violated when the trial court terminated his first trial
without adequate justification and he was subsequently
prosecuted for the same offense. The majority does not


20

RENICO v. LETT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

appear to dispute this point, but it nevertheless denies
Lett relief by applying a level of deference to the state
court’s ruling that effectively effaces the role of the federal
courts. Nothing one will find in the United States Code or
the United States Reports requires us to turn a blind eye
to this manifestly unlawful conviction.
I respectfully dissent.

