Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–338
_________________

PAUL RENICO, WARDEN, PETITIONER v.

REGINALD LETT

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT

[May 3, 2010]


CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS delivered the opinion of the
Court.
This case requires us to review the grant of a writ of
habeas corpus to a state prisoner under the Antiterrorism
and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), 28
U. S. C. §2254(d). The District Court in this case issued
the writ to respondent Reginald Lett on the ground that
his Michigan murder conviction violated the Double Jeop
ardy Clause of the Constitution, and the U. S. Court of
Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed. In doing so, how
ever, these courts misapplied AEDPA’s deferential stan
dard of review. Because we conclude that the Michigan
Supreme Court’s application of federal law was not unrea
sonable, we reverse.
I
On August 29, 1996, an argument broke out in a Detroit
liquor store. The antagonists included Adesoji Latona, a
taxi driver; Charles Jones, a passenger who claimed he
had been wrongfully ejected from Latona’s cab; and
Reginald Lett, a friend of Jones’s. After the argument
began, Lett left the liquor store, retrieved a handgun from


2

RENICO v. LETT
Opinion of the Court

another friend outside in the parking lot, and returned to
the store. He shot Latona twice, once in the head and once
in the chest. Latona died from his wounds shortly thereaf
ter. See People v. Lett, 466 Mich. 206, 208–209, 644 N. W.
2d 743, 745 (2002).
Michigan prosecutors charged Lett with first-degree
murder and possession of a firearm during the commission
of a felony. His trial took place in June 1997. From jury
selection to jury instructions the trial took less than nine
hours, spread over six different days. Id., at 209, 644
N. W. 2d, at 745.
The jury’s deliberations began on June 12, 1997, at 3:24
p.m., and ran that day until 4 p.m. Id., at 209, n. 1, 644
N. W. 2d, at 745, n. 1. After resuming its work the next
morning, the jury sent the trial court a note—one of seven
it sent out in its two days of deliberations—stating that
the jurors had “ ‘a concern about our voice levels disturb
ing any other proceedings that might be going on.’ ” Id., at
209, n. 2, 644 N. W. 2d, at 745, n. 2. Later, the jury sent
out another note, asking “ ‘What if we can’t agree?
[M]istrial? [R]etrial? [W]hat?’ ” Id., at 209, 644 N. W. 2d,
at 745.
The trial transcript does not reveal whether the judge
discussed the jury’s query with counsel, off the record,
upon receiving this last communication. Id., at 209, n. 3,
644 N. W. 2d, at 745, n. 3. What is clear is that at 12:45
p.m. the judge called the jury back into the courtroom,
along with the prosecutor and defense counsel. Once the
jury was seated, the following exchange took place:
“THE COURT: I received your note asking me what
if you can’t agree? And I have to conclude from that
that that is your situation at this time. So, I’d like to
ask the foreperson to identify themselves, please?
“THE FOREPERSON: [Identified herself.] 

“THE COURT: Okay, thank you. All right. I need



Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

to ask you if the jury is deadlocked; in other words, is
there a disagreement as to the verdict?
“THE FOREPERSON: Yes, there is.
“THE COURT: All right. Do you believe that it is
hopelessly deadlocked?
“THE FOREPERSON: The majority of us don’t be
lieve that—
“THE COURT: (Interposing) Don’t say what you’re
going to say, okay?
“THE FOREPERSON: Oh, I’m sorry.
“THE COURT: I don’t want to know what your ver
dict might be, or how the split is, or any of that.
Thank you. Okay? Are you going to reach a unani
mous verdict, or not?
“THE FOREPERSON: (No response)
“THE COURT: Yes or no?
“THE FOREPERSON: No, Judge.” Tr. in No. 96–
08252 (Recorder’s Court, Detroit, Mich.), pp. 319–320.
The judge then declared a mistrial, dismissed the jury,
and scheduled a new trial for later that year. Neither the
prosecutor nor Lett’s attorney made any objection.
Lett’s second trial was held before a different judge and
jury in November 1997. This time, the jury was able to
reach a unanimous verdict—that Lett was guilty of sec
ond-degree murder—after deliberating for only 3 hours
and 15 minutes. Lett, supra, at 210, and n. 4, 644 N. W.
2d, at 746, and n. 4.
Lett appealed his conviction to the Michigan Court of
Appeals. He argued that the judge in his first trial had
announced a mistrial without any manifest necessity for
doing so. Because the mistrial was an error, Lett main
tained, the State was barred by the Double Jeopardy
Clause of the U. S. Constitution from trying him a second
time. The Michigan Court of Appeals agreed with Lett
and reversed his conviction.


4

RENICO v. LETT
Opinion of the Court

The State appealed to the Michigan Supreme Court,
which reversed the Court of Appeals. The court explained
that under our decision in United States v. Perez, 9 Wheat.
579 (1824), a defendant may be retried following the dis
charge of a deadlocked jury, even if the discharge occurs
without the defendant’s consent. Lett, 466 Mich., at 216–
217, 644 N. W. 2d, at 749. There is no Double Jeopardy
Clause violation in such circumstances, it noted, so long as
the trial court exercised its “ ‘sound discretion’ ” in conclud
ing that the jury was deadlocked and thus that there was
a “ ‘manifest necessity’ ” for a mistrial. Ibid. (quoting
Perez, supra, at 580; emphasis deleted). The court further
observed that, under our decision in Arizona v. Washing
ton, 434 U. S. 497, 506–510 (1978), an appellate court
must generally defer to a trial judge’s determination that
a deadlock has been reached. 466 Mich., at 218–222, 644
N. W. 2d, at 750–752.
After setting forth the applicable law, the Michigan
Supreme Court determined that the judge at Lett’s first
trial had not abused her discretion in declaring the mis
trial. Id., at 223, 644 N. W. 2d, at 753. The court cited the
facts that the jury “had deliberated for at least four hours
following a relatively short, and far from complex, trial,”
that the jury had sent out several notes, “including one
that appears to indicate that its discussions may have
been particularly heated,” and—“[m]ost important”—“that
the jury foreperson expressly stated that the jury was not
going to reach a verdict.” Ibid.
Lett petitioned for a federal writ of habeas corpus.
Again he argued that the trial court’s declaration of a
mistrial constituted an abuse of discretion because there
was no manifest necessity to cut short the jury’s delibera
tions. He further contended that the Michigan Supreme
Court’s rejection of his double jeopardy claim amounted to
“an unreasonable application of . . . clearly established
Federal law, as determined by the Supreme Court of the


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

United States,” and thus that he was not barred by
AEDPA, 28 U. S. C. §2254(d)(1), from obtaining federal
habeas relief. The District Court agreed and granted the
writ. 507 F. Supp. 2d 777 (ED Mich. 2007). On appeal, a
divided panel of the U. S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth
Circuit affirmed. 316 Fed. Appx. 421 (2009). The State
petitioned for review in our Court, and we granted certio
rari. 558 U. S. ___ (2009).
II
It is important at the outset to define the question be
fore us. That question is not whether the trial judge
should have declared a mistrial. It is not even whether it
was an abuse of discretion for her to have done so—the
applicable standard on direct review. The question under
AEDPA is instead whether the determination of the
Michigan Supreme Court that there was no abuse of dis
cretion was “an unreasonable application of . . . clearly
established Federal law.” §2254(d)(1).
We have explained that “an unreasonable application of
federal law is different from an incorrect application of
federal law.” Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362, 410
(2000). Indeed, “a federal habeas court may not issue the
writ simply because that court concludes in its independ
ent judgment that the relevant state-court decision ap
plied clearly established federal law erroneously or incor
rectly.” Id., at 411. Rather, that application must be
“objectively unreasonable.” Id., at 409. This distinction
creates “a substantially higher threshold” for obtaining
relief than de novo review. Schriro v. Landrigan, 550
U. S. 465, 473 (2007). AEDPA thus imposes a “highly
deferential standard for evaluating state-court rulings,”
Lindh v. Murphy, 521 U. S. 320, 333, n. 7 (1997), and
“demands that state-court decisions be given the benefit of
the doubt,” Woodford v. Visciotti, 537 U. S. 19, 24 (2002)


6

RENICO v. LETT
Opinion of the Court

(per curiam).1
The “clearly established Federal law” in this area is
largely undisputed. In Perez, we held that when a judge
discharges a jury on the grounds that the jury cannot
reach a verdict, the Double Jeopardy Clause does not bar a
new trial for the defendant before a new jury. 9 Wheat., at
579–580. We explained that trial judges may declare a
mistrial “whenever, in their opinion, taking all the cir
cumstances into consideration, there is a manifest neces
sity” for doing so. Id., at 580. The decision to declare a
mistrial is left to the “sound discretion” of the judge, but
“the power ought to be used with the greatest caution,
under urgent circumstances, and for very plain and obvi
ous causes.” Ibid.
Since Perez, we have clarified that the “manifest neces
sity” standard “cannot be interpreted literally,” and that a
mistrial is appropriate when there is a “ ‘high degree’ ” of
necessity. Washington, supra, at 506. The decision
whether to grant a mistrial is reserved to the “broad dis
cretion” of the trial judge, a point that “has been consis
tently reiterated in decisions of this Court.” Illinois v.
Somerville, 410 U. S. 458, 462 (1973). See also Gori v.
United States, 367 U. S. 364, 368 (1961).
In particular, “[t]he trial judge’s decision to declare a
mistrial when he considers the jury deadlocked is . . .
accorded great deference by a reviewing court.” Washing
——————
1 The

dissent correctly points out that AEDPA itself “never uses the
term ‘deference.’ ” Post, at 19 (opinion of STEVENS, J.). But our cases
have done so over and over again to describe the effect of the threshold
restrictions in 28 U. S. C. §2254(d) on granting federal habeas relief to
state prisoners. See, e.g., Wellons v. Hall, 558 U. S. ___, ___, n. 3 (2010)
(per curiam) (slip op., at 5, n. 3); Smith v. Spisak, 558 U. S. ___, ___
(2010) (slip op., at 2); McDaniel v. Brown, 558 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (per
curiam) (slip op., at 13); Cone v. Bell, 556 U. S. ___, ___, (2009) (slip op.,
at 13, 23); Knowles v. Mirzayance, 556 U. S. ___, ___ n. 2 (2009) (slip
op., at 9, n. 2); Waddington v. Sarausad, 555 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip
op., at 14).


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

ton, 434 U. S., at 510. A “mistrial premised upon the trial
judge’s belief that the jury is unable to reach a verdict [has
been] long considered the classic basis for a proper mis
trial.” Id., at 509; see also Downum v. United States, 372
U. S. 734, 736 (1963) (deadlocked jury is the “classic ex
ample” of when the State may try the same defendant
twice).
The reasons for “allowing the trial judge to exercise
broad discretion” are “especially compelling” in cases
involving a potentially deadlocked jury. Washington, 434
U. S., at 509. There, the justification for deference is that
“the trial court is in the best position to assess all the
factors which must be considered in making a necessarily
discretionary determination whether the jury will be able
to reach a just verdict if it continues to deliberate.” Id., at
510, n. 28. In the absence of such deference, trial judges
might otherwise “employ coercive means to break the
apparent deadlock,” thereby creating a “significant risk
that a verdict may result from pressures inherent in the
situation rather than the considered judgment of all the
jurors.” Id., at 510, 509.
This is not to say that we grant absolute deference to
trial judges in this context. Perez itself noted that the
judge’s exercise of discretion must be “sound,” 9 Wheat., at
580, and we have made clear that “[i]f the record reveals
that the trial judge has failed to exercise the ‘sound discre
tion’ entrusted to him, the reason for such deference by an
appellate court disappears.” Washington, 434 U. S., at
510, n. 28. Thus “if the trial judge acts for reasons com
pletely unrelated to the trial problem which purports to be
the basis for the mistrial ruling, close appellate scrutiny is
appropriate.” Ibid. Similarly, “if a trial judge acts irra
tionally or irresponsibly, . . . his action cannot be con
doned.” Id., at 514 (citing United States v. Jorn, 400 U. S.
470 (1971), and Somerville, supra, at 469).
We have expressly declined to require the “mechanical


8

RENICO v. LETT
Opinion of the Court

application” of any “rigid formula” when trial judges de
cide whether jury deadlock warrants a mistrial. Wade v.
Hunter, 336 U. S. 684, 691, 690 (1949). We have also
explicitly held that a trial judge declaring a mistrial is not
required to make explicit findings of “ ‘manifest necessity’ ”
nor to “articulate on the record all the factors which in
formed the deliberate exercise of his discretion.” Washing
ton, supra, at 517. And we have never required a trial
judge, before declaring a mistrial based on jury deadlock,
to force the jury to deliberate for a minimum period of
time, to question the jurors individually, to consult with
(or obtain the consent of) either the prosecutor or defense
counsel, to issue a supplemental jury instruction, or to
consider any other means of breaking the impasse. In
1981, then-Justice Rehnquist noted that this Court had
never “overturned a trial court’s declaration of a mistrial
after a jury was unable to reach a verdict on the ground
that the ‘manifest necessity’ standard had not been met.”
Winston v. Moore, 452 U. S. 944, 947 (opinion dissenting
from denial of certiorari). The same remains true today,
nearly 30 years later.
The legal standard applied by the Michigan Supreme
Court in this case was whether there was an abuse of the
“broad discretion” reserved to the trial judge. Somerville,
supra, at 462; Washington, supra, at 509. This type of
general standard triggers another consideration under
AEDPA. When assessing whether a state court’s applica
tion of federal law is unreasonable, “the range of reason
able judgment can depend in part on the nature of the
relevant rule” that the state court must apply. Yarbor
ough v. Alvarado, 541 U. S. 652, 664 (2004). Because
AEDPA authorizes federal courts to grant relief only when
state courts act unreasonably, it follows that “[t]he more
general the rule” at issue—and thus the greater the poten
tial for reasoned disagreement among fair-minded
judges—“the more leeway [state] courts have in reaching


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

outcomes in case-by-case determinations.” Ibid.; see also
Knowles v. Mirzayance, 556 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op.,
at 11).
III
In light of all the foregoing, the Michigan Supreme
Court’s decision in this case was not unreasonable under
AEDPA, and the decision of the Court of Appeals to grant
Lett a writ of habeas corpus must be reversed.
The Michigan Supreme Court’s adjudication involved a
straightforward application of our longstanding prece
dents to the facts of Lett’s case. The court cited our own
double jeopardy cases—from Perez to Washington—
elaborating upon the “manifest necessity” standard for
granting a mistrial and noting the broad deference that
appellate courts must give trial judges in deciding whether
that standard has been met in any given case. Lett, 466
Mich., at 216–222, 644 N. W. 2d, at 749–752. It then
applied those precedents to the particular facts before it
and found no abuse of discretion, especially in light of the
length of deliberations after a short and uncomplicated
trial, the jury notes suggesting heated discussions and
asking what would happen “if we can’t agree,” and—
“[m]ost important”—“the fact that the jury foreperson
expressly stated that the jury was not going to reach a
verdict.” Id., at 223, 644 N. W. 2d, at 753. In these cir
cumstances, it was reasonable for the Michigan Supreme
Court to determine that the trial judge had exercised
sound discretion in declaring a mistrial.
The Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit concluded
otherwise. It did not contest the Michigan Supreme
Court’s description of the objective facts, but disagreed
with the inferences to be drawn from them. For example,
it speculated that the trial judge may have misinterpreted
the jury’s notes as signs of discord and deadlock when,
read literally, they expressly stated no such thing. 316


10

RENICO v. LETT
Opinion of the Court

Fed. Appx., at 427. It further determined that the judge’s
brief colloquy with the foreperson may have wrongly
implied a false equivalence between “mere disagreement”
and “genuine deadlock,” and may have given rise to “inap
propriate pressure” on her to say that the jury would be
unable to reach a verdict. Id., at 426–427. The trial
judge’s mistakes were so egregious, in the Court of Ap
peals’ view, that the Michigan Supreme Court’s opinion
finding no abuse of discretion was not only wrong but
objectively unreasonable. Id., at 427.
The Court of Appeals’ interpretation of the trial record
is not implausible. Nor, for that matter, is the more in
ventive (surely not “crude”) speculation of the dissent.
Post, at 10. After all, the jury only deliberated for four
hours, its notes were arguably ambiguous, the trial judge’s
initial question to the foreperson was imprecise, and the
judge neither asked for elaboration of the foreperson’s
answers nor took any other measures to confirm the fore
person’s prediction that a unanimous verdict would not be
reached.2
But other reasonable interpretations of the record are
also possible. Lett’s trial was not complex, and there is no
reason that the jury would necessarily have needed more
than a few hours to deliberate over his guilt. The notes
the jury sent to the judge certainly could be read as re
flecting substantial disagreement, even if they did not say
so outright. Most important, the foreperson expressly told
the judge—in response to her unambiguous question “Are
you going to reach a unanimous verdict, or not?”—that the
jury would be unable to agree. Lett, supra, at 210, 644
N. W. 2d, at 745.
Given the foregoing facts, the Michigan Supreme
——————
2 We do not think it reasonable, however, to contend that “the fore
person had no solid basis for estimating the likelihood of deadlock.”
Post, at 12. She had, after all, participated in the jury’s deliberations.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

Court’s decision upholding the trial judge’s exercise of
discretion—while not necessarily correct—was not objec
tively unreasonable.3 Not only are there a number of
plausible ways to interpret the record of Lett’s trial, but
the standard applied by the Michigan Supreme Court—
whether the judge exercised sound discretion—is a general
one, to which there is no “plainly correct or incorrect”
answer in this case. Yarborough, 541 U. S., at 664; see
also Knowles, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 11). The Court of
Appeals’ ruling in Lett’s favor failed to grant the Michigan
courts the dual layers of deference required by AEDPA
and our double jeopardy precedents.
The Court of Appeals also erred in a second respect. It
relied upon its own decision in Fulton v. Moore, 520 F. 3d
522 (CA6 2008), for the proposition “that Arizona v. Wash
ington sets forth three factors that determine whether a
judge has exercised sound discretion in declaring a mis
trial: whether the judge (1) heard the opinions of the
parties’ counsel about the propriety of the mistrial; (2)
considered the alternatives to a mistrial; and (3) acted
deliberately, instead of abruptly.” 316 Fed. Appx., at 426.
It then cited Fulton’s interpretation of Washington to
buttress its conclusion that the Michigan Supreme Court
erred in concluding that the trial judge had exercised
sound discretion. 316 Fed. Appx., at 428.
The Fulton decision, however, does not constitute
“clearly established Federal law, as determined by the
——————
3 It is not necessary for us to decide whether the Michigan Supreme
Court’s decision—or, for that matter, the trial judge’s declaration of a
mistrial—was right or wrong. The latter question, in particular, is a
close one. As Lett points out, at a hearing before the Michigan Court of
Appeals, the state prosecutor expressed the view that the judge had in
fact erred in dismissing the jury and declaring a mistrial. The Michi
gan Supreme Court declined to accept this confession of error, People v.
Lett, 463 Mich. 939, 620 N. W. 2d 855 (2000), and in any event—for the
reasons we have explained—whether the trial judge was right or wrong
is not the pertinent question under AEDPA.


12

RENICO v. LETT
Opinion of the Court

Supreme Court,” §2254(d)(1), so any failure to apply that
decision cannot independently authorize habeas relief
under AEDPA. Nor, as the dissent suggests, can Fulton
be understood merely to “illuminat[e]” Washington. Post,
at 18. Washington nowhere established these three fac
tors as a constitutional test that “determine[s]” whether a
trial judge has exercised sound discretion in declaring a
mistrial. 316 Fed. Appx., at 426.
In concluding that Lett is not entitled to a writ of ha
beas corpus, we do not deny that the trial judge could have
been more thorough before declaring a mistrial. As the
Court of Appeals pointed out, id., at 427–428, she could
have asked the foreperson additional followup questions,
granted additional time for further deliberations, or con
sulted with the prosecutor and defense counsel before
acting. Any of these steps would have been appropriate
under the circumstances. None, however, was required—
either under our double jeopardy precedents or, by exten
sion, under AEDPA.
*
*
*
AEDPA prevents defendants—and federal courts—from
using federal habeas corpus review as a vehicle to second
guess the reasonable decisions of state courts. Whether or
not the Michigan Supreme Court’s opinion reinstating
Lett’s conviction in this case was correct, it was clearly not
unreasonable. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is
reversed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

