2

ASHCROFT v. AL-KIDD
Syllabus
Court has the discretion to correct the lower court’s errors at each
step. P. 3.
(b) Whether a detention is reasonable under the Fourth Amend
ment “is predominantly an objective inquiry.” Indianapolis v. Ed
mond, 531 U. S. 32, 47. Courts ask whether “the circumstances,
viewed objectively, justify [the challenged] action.” Scott v. United
States, 436 U. S. 128, 138. Except for cases that involve special
needs, e.g., Vernonia School Dist. 47J v. Acton, 515 U. S. 646, 653, or
administrative searches, e.g., Michigan v. Clifford, 464 U. S. 287,
294, this Court has almost uniformly rejected invitations to probe
subjective intent. The Court of Appeals was mistaken in believing
that Edmond established that “ ‘programmatic purpose’ is relevant to
Fourth Amendment analysis of programs of seizures without prob
able cause.” 580 F. 3d 949, 968. It was not the absence of probable
cause that triggered Edmond’s invalidating-purpose inquiry, but the
checkpoints’ failure to be based on “individualized suspicion.” 531
U. S., at 47. Here a neutral Magistrate Judge issued a warrant au
thorizing al-Kidd’s arrest, and the affidavit accompanying the war
rant application gave individualized reasons to believe that he was a
material witness who would soon disappear. A warrant based on in
dividualized suspicion grants more protection than existed in most of
this Court’s cases eschewing inquiries into intent, e.g., Whren v.
United States, 517 U. S. 806, 813, and Terry v. Ohio, 392 U. S. 1, 21–
22. Al-Kidd’s contrary, narrow reading of those cases is rejected. Be
cause he concedes that individualized suspicion supported the issu
ance of the material-witness arrest warrant; and does not assert that
his arrest would have been unconstitutional absent the alleged pre
text; there is no Fourth Amendment violation here. Pp. 3–9.
2. Ashcroft did not violate clearly established law and thus is enti
tled to qualified immunity. A Government official’s conduct violates
clearly established law when, at the time of the challenged conduct,
“[t]he contours of [a] right [are] sufficiently clear” that every “reason
able official would have understood that what he is doing violates
that right.” Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U. S. 635, 640. Here, the as
serted constitutional right falls far short of that threshold. At the
time of al-Kidd’s arrest, not a single judicial opinion had held that
pretext could render an objectively reasonable arrest pursuant to a
material-witness warrant unconstitutional. The Ninth Circuit’s reli
ance on a District Court’s footnoted dictum, irrelevant cases from this
Court, and the Fourth Amendment’s broad purposes and history is
rejected. Because Ashcroft did not violate clearly established law, the
question whether he enjoys absolute immunity need not be ad
dressed. Pp. 9–12.

580 F. 3d 949, reversed and remanded.

