(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ASHCROFT v. AL-KIDD
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–98. Argued March 2, 2011—Decided May 31, 2011
Respondent al-Kidd alleges that, after the September 11th terrorist
attacks, then-Attorney General Ashcroft authorized federal officials
to detain terrorism suspects using the federal material-witness stat
ute, 18 U. S. C. §3144. He claims that this pretextual detention pol
icy led to his material-witness arrest as he was boarding a plane to
Saudi Arabia. To secure the warrant, federal officials had told a
Magistrate Judge that information “crucial” to Sami Omar alHussayen’s prosecution would be lost if al-Kidd boarded his flight.
Prosecutors never called al-Kidd as a witness, and (as he alleges)
never meant to do so. Al-Kidd filed suit pursuant to Bivens v. Six
Unknown Fed. Narcotics Agents, 403 U. S. 388, challenging the con
stitutionality of Ashcroft’s alleged policy. The District Court denied
Ashcroft’s motion to dismiss on absolute and qualified immunity
grounds. The Ninth Circuit affirmed, holding that the Fourth
Amendment prohibits pretextual arrests absent probable cause of
criminal wrongdoing, and that Ashcroft could not claim qualified or
absolute immunity.
Held:
1. The objectively reasonable arrest and detention of a material
witness pursuant to a validly obtained warrant cannot be challenged
as unconstitutional on the basis of allegations that the arresting au
thority had an improper motive. Pp. 3–9.
(a) Qualified immunity shields a government official from money
damages unless (1) the official violated a statutory or constitutional
right, and (2) that right was “clearly established” at the time of the
challenged conduct. Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U. S. 800, 818.
Where, as here, a court considers both prongs of this inquiry, this

