Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

KENNEDY, J., concurring

their functions in a single jurisdiction, say within the con
fines of one State or one federal judicial district. They
“reasonably can anticipate when their conduct may give
rise to liability for damages” and so are expected to adjust
their behavior in accordance with local precedent. Davis
v. Scherer, 468 U. S. 183, 195 (1984); see also Anderson v.
Creighton, 483 U. S. 635, 639–640 (1987). In contrast the
Attorney General occupies a national office and so sets
policies implemented in many jurisdictions throughout the
country. The official with responsibilities in many juris
dictions may face ambiguous and sometimes inconsistent
sources of decisional law. While it may be clear that one
Court of Appeals has approved a certain course of conduct,
other Courts of Appeals may have disapproved it, or at
least reserved the issue.
When faced with inconsistent legal rules in different
jurisdictions, national officeholders should be given some
deference for qualified immunity purposes, at least if they
implement policies consistent with the governing law of
the jurisdiction where the action is taken. As we have
explained, qualified immunity is lost when plaintiffs point
either to “cases of controlling authority in their jurisdic
tion at the time of the incident” or to “a consensus of cases
of persuasive authority such that a reasonable officer
could not have believed that his actions were lawful.”
Wilson v. Layne, 526 U. S. 603, 617 (1999); see also ante,
at 9–10. These standards ensure the officer has “fair and
clear warning” of what the Constitution requires. United
States v. Lanier, 520 U. S. 259, 271 (1997).
A national officeholder intent on retaining qualified
immunity need not abide by the most stringent standard
adopted anywhere in the United States. And the national
officeholder need not guess at when a relatively small set
of appellate precedents have established a binding legal
rule. If national officeholders were subject to personal
liability whenever they confronted disagreement among

