Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

Terry v. Ohio, 392 U. S. 1, 21–22 (1968), and Knights, 534
U. S., at 121–122, applied an objective standard to war
rantless searches justified by a lesser showing of reason
able suspicion.
We review even some suspicionless
searches for objective reasonableness. See Bond, 529
U. S., at 335–336, 338, n. 2. If concerns about improper
motives and pretext do not justify subjective inquiries in
those less protective contexts, we see no reason to adopt
that inquiry here.
Al-Kidd would read our cases more narrowly. He as
serts that Whren establishes that we ignore subjective
intent only when there exists “probable cause to believe
that a violation of law has occurred,” 517 U. S., at 811—
which was not the case here. That is a distortion of Whren.
Our unanimous opinion held that we would not look
behind an objectively reasonable traffic stop to determine
whether racial profiling or a desire to investigate other
potential crimes was the real motive. See id., at 810, 813.
In the course of our analysis, we dismissed Whren’s
reliance on our inventory-search and administrative
inspection cases by explaining that those cases do not
“endors[e] the principle that ulterior motives can invali
date police conduct that is justifiable on the basis of prob
able cause to believe that a violation of law has occurred,”
id., at 811 But to say that ulterior motives do not in
validate a search that is legitimate because of probable
cause to believe a crime has occurred is not to say that it
does invalidate all searches that are legitimate for other
reasons.
“[O]nly an undiscerning reader,” ibid., would think
otherwise. We referred to probable cause to believe that a
violation of law had occurred because that was the legiti
mating factor in the case at hand. But the analysis of
our opinion swept broadly to reject inquiries into motive
generally. See id., at 812–815. We remarked that our
special-needs and administrative-inspection cases are un

