8

ASHCROFT v. AL-KIDD
Opinion of the Court

usual in their concern for pretext, and do nothing more
than “explain that the exemption from the need for prob
able cause (and warrant), which is accorded to searches
made for the purpose of inventory or administrative regu
lation, is not accorded to searches that are not made for
those purposes,” id., at 811–812. And our opinion empha
sized that we had at that time (prior to Edmond) rejected
every request to examine subjective intent outside the
narrow context of special needs and administrative inspec
tions. See 517 U. S., at 812. Thus, al-Kidd’s approach
adds an “only” to a sentence plucked from the Whren
opinion, and then elevates that sentence (as so revised)
over the remainder of the opinion, and over the consistent
holdings of our other cases.
Because al-Kidd concedes that individualized suspicion
supported the issuance of the material-witness arrest
warrant; and does not assert that his arrest would have
been unconstitutional absent the alleged pretextual use of
the warrant; we find no Fourth Amendment violation.3
Efficient4 and evenhanded application of the law demands
——————
3 The

concerns of JUSTICES GINSBURG and SOTOMAYOR about the valid
ity of the warrant in this case are beside the point. See post, at 1–2
(GINSBURG, J., concurring in judgment); post, at 2 (SOTOMAYOR, J.,
concurring in judgment). The validity of the warrant is not our “open
ing assumption,” post, at 2 (GINSBURG, J., concurring in judgment); it is
the premise of al-Kidd’s argument. Al-Kidd does not claim that
Ashcroft is liable because the FBI agents failed to obtain a valid war
rant. He takes the validity of the warrant as a given, and argues that
his arrest nevertheless violated the Constitution because it was moti
vated by an illegitimate purpose. His separate Fourth Amendment and
statutory claims against the FBI agents who sought the material
witness warrant, which are the focus of both concurrences, are not
before us.
4 We may note in passing that al-Kidd alleges that the Attorney Gen
eral authorized the use of material-witness warrants for detention of
suspected terrorists, but not that he forbade the use of those warrants
to detain material witnesses. Which means that if al-Kidd’s inquiry
into actual motive is accepted, mere determination that the Attorney

