Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

allowed royal officials to search and seize whatever and
whomever they pleased while investigating crimes or
affronts to the Crown. See Stanford v. Texas, 379 U. S.
476, 481–485 (1965). According to the Court of Appeals,
Ashcroft should have seen that a pretextual warrant
similarly “gut[s] the substantive protections of the Fourth
Amendmen[t]” and allows the State “to arrest upon the
executive’s mere suspicion.” 580 F. 3d, at 972.
Ashcroft must be forgiven for missing the parallel,
which escapes us as well. The principal evil of the general
warrant was addressed by the Fourth Amendment’s par
ticularity requirement, Stanford, supra, at 485, which
Ashcroft’s alleged policy made no effort to evade. The
warrant authorizing al-Kidd’s arrest named al-Kidd and
only al-Kidd. It might be argued, perhaps, that when, in
response to the English abuses, the Fourth Amendment
said that warrants could only issue “on probable cause” it
meant only probable cause to suspect a violation of law,
and not probable cause to believe that the individual
named in the warrant was a material witness. But that
would make all arrests pursuant to material-witness
warrants unconstitutional, whether pretextual or not—
and that is not the position taken by al-Kidd in this case.
While featuring a District Court’s footnoted dictum, the
Court of Appeals made no mention of this Court’s affirma
tion in Edmond of the “predominan[t]” rule that reason
ableness is an objective inquiry, 531 U. S., at 47. Nor did it
mention Whren’s and Knights’ statements that subjective
intent mattered in a very limited subset of our Fourth
Amendment cases; or Terry’s objective evaluation of inves
tigatory searches premised on reasonable suspicion rather
than probable cause; or Bond’s objective evaluation of a
suspicionless investigatory search. The Court of Appeals
seems to have cherry-picked the aspects of our opinions
that gave colorable support to the proposition that the un
constitutionality of the action here was clearly established.

