4

ASHCROFT v. AL-KIDD
GINSBURG, J., concurring in judgment

I also agree with JUSTICE KENNEDY that al-Kidd’s
treatment presents serious questions, unaddressed by the
Court, concerning “the [legality of] the Government’s use
of the Material Witness Statute in this case.” Ante, at 1
(concurring opinion). In addition to the questions JUSTICE
KENNEDY poses, and even if the initial material witness
classification had been proper, what even arguably legiti
mate basis could there be for the harsh custodial condi
tions to which al-Kidd was subjected: Ostensibly held only
to secure his testimony, al-Kidd was confined in three
different detention centers during his 16 days’ incarcera
tion, kept in high-security cells lit 24 hours a day, strip
searched and subjected to body-cavity inspections on more
than one occasion, and handcuffed and shackled about his
wrists, legs, and waist. App. 29–36; cf. Bell v. Wolfish, 441
U. S. 520, 539, n. 20 (1979) (“[L]oading a detainee with
chains and shackles and throwing him in a dungeon may
ensure his presence at trial and preserve the security of
the institution. But it would be difficult to conceive of a
situation where conditions so harsh, employed to achieve
objectives that could be accomplished in so many alterna
tive and less harsh methods, would not support a conclu
sion that the purpose for which they were imposed was to
punish.”).
However circumscribed al-Kidd’s Bivens claim against
Ashcroft may have been, see Bivens v. Six Unknown Fed.
Narcotics Agents, 403 U. S. 388 (1971); ante, at 8 (majority
opinion); ante, at 1 (KENNEDY, J., concurring), his remain
——————
or “throwing . . . a surprise birthday party” than with criminal suspects,
ante, at 6, n. 2 (internal quotation marks omitted), is hardly credible.
The import of the term in legal argot is not genuinely debatable. When
the evening news reports that a murder “suspect” is on the loose, the
viewer is meant to be on the lookout for the perpetrator, not the wit
ness. Ashcroft understood the term as lawyers commonly do: He spoke
of detaining material witnesses as a means to “tak[e] suspected terror
ists off the street.” App. 41 (internal quotation marks omitted).

