2

ASHCROFT v. AL-KIDD
GINSBURG, J., concurring in judgment

obtained” when the affidavit on which it is based fails to
inform the issuing Magistrate Judge that “the Govern
ment has no intention of using [al-Kidd as a witness] at
[another’s] trial,” post, at 1, and does not disclose that alKidd had cooperated with FBI agents each of the several
times they had asked to interview him, App. 26?
Casting further doubt on the assumption that the war
rant was validly obtained, the Magistrate Judge was not
told that al-Kidd’s parents, wife, and children were all
citizens and residents of the United States. In addition,
the affidavit misrepresented that al-Kidd was about to
take a one-way flight to Saudi Arabia, with a first-class
ticket costing approximately $5,000; in fact, al-Kidd had a
round-trip, coach-class ticket that cost $1,700.2 Given
these omissions and misrepresentations, there is strong
cause to question the Court’s opening assumption—a valid
material-witness warrant—and equally strong reason to
conclude that a merits determination was neither neces
sary nor proper.3
——————
2 Judicial officers asked to issue material witness warrants must
determine whether the affidavit supporting the application shows that
“the testimony of a person is material in a criminal proceeding” and
that “it may become impracticable to secure the presence of the person
by subpoena.” 18 U. S. C. §3144. Even if these conditions are met,
issuance of the warrant is discretionary. Ibid. (“judicial officer may
order the arrest of the person” (emphasis added)). Al-Kidd’s experience
illustrates the importance of vigilant exercise of this checking role by
the judicial officer to whom the warrant application is presented.
The affidavit used to secure al-Kidd’s detention was spare; it did not
state with particularity the information al-Kidd purportedly possessed,
nor did it specify how al-Kidd’s knowledge would be material to Sami
Omar al-Hussayen’s prosecution. As to impracticability, the affidavit
contained only this unelaborated statement: “It is believed that if AlKidd travels to Saudi Arabia, the United States Government will be
unable to secure his presence at trial via subpoena.” App. 64. Had the
Magistrate Judge insisted on more concrete showings of materiality
and impracticability, al-Kidd might have been spared the entire ordeal.
3 The Court thrice states that the material witness warrant for al

