6

ASHCROFT v. AL-KIDD
Opinion of the Court

relevant in Edmond because “programmatic purposes may
be relevant to the validity of Fourth Amendment intru
sions undertaken pursuant to a general scheme without
individualized suspicion,” id., at 45–46 (emphasis added).1
Needless to say, warrantless, “suspicionless intrusions
pursuant to a general scheme,” id., at 47, are far removed
from the facts of this case. A warrant issued by a neutral
Magistrate Judge authorized al-Kidd’s arrest. The affida
vit accompanying the warrant application (as al-Kidd
concedes) gave individualized reasons to believe that he
was a material witness and that he would soon disappear.
The existence of a judicial warrant based on individualized
suspicion takes this case outside the domain of not only
our special-needs and administrative-search cases, but of
Edmond as well.
A warrant based on individualized suspicion2 in fact
grants more protection against the malevolent and the
incompetent than existed in most of our cases eschewing
inquiries into intent. In Whren, 517 U. S., at 813, and
Devenpeck, 543 U. S., at 153, we declined to probe the
motives behind seizures supported by probable cause but
lacking a warrant approved by a detached magistrate.
——————
1 The Court of Appeals also relied upon Ferguson v. Charleston, 532
U. S. 67 (2001), which held unconstitutional a program of mandatory
drug testing of maternity patients. Like Edmond, that case involved a
general scheme of searches without individualized suspicion. 532 U. S.,
at 77, n. 10.
2 JUSTICE GINSBURG suggests that our use of the word “suspicion” is
peculiar because that word “ordinarily” means “that the person sus
pected has engaged in wrongdoing.” Post, at 3, n. 2 (opinion concurring
in judgment). We disagree. No usage of the word is more common and
idiomatic than a statement such as “I have a suspicion he knows
something about the crime,” or even “I have a suspicion she is throwing
me a surprise birthday party.” The many cases cited by JUSTICE
GINSBURG, post, at 3, n. 2, which use the neutral word “suspicion” in
connection with wrongdoing, prove nothing except that searches and
seizures for reasons other than suspected wrongdoing are rare.

