Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

U. S. 803, 809 (1989). In the context of the LHWCA’s
comprehensive, reticulated regime for worker benefits—in
which §906 plays a pivotal role—“awarded compensation”
is much more sensibly interpreted to mean “statutorily
entitled to compensation because of disability.”5
1
Section 906 governs compensation in all LHWCA cases.
As explained above, see supra, at 3, the LHWCA requires
employers to pay benefits voluntarily, and in the vast
majority of cases, that is just what occurs. Under Roberts’
——————
5 JUSTICE GINSBURG’s view, not advanced by any party, is that an
employee is “awarded compensation” when his employer “voluntarily
pays compensation or is officially ordered to do so.” Post, at 3 (opinion
concurring in part and dissenting in part). But reading “awarded
compensation” as synonymous with “receiving compensation” is farther
from the ordinary meaning of “award” than the Court’s approach: A
person who slipped and fell on a negligently maintained sidewalk
would not say that she had been “awarded money damages” if the
business responsible for the sidewalk voluntarily paid her hospital bills.
Cf. post, at 3–4.
Moreover, if Congress had intended “awarded compensation” to mean
“receiving compensation,” it could have said so—as, in fact, it did
in §906(c)’s parallel clause, which pertains to beneficiaries “currently
receiving compensation for permanent total disability or death.” See
nn. 1–2, supra. JUSTICE GINSBURG’s reading denies effect to Congress’
textual shift, and therefore “runs afoul of the usual rule that ‘when the
legislature uses certain language in one part of the statute and differ­
ent language in another, the court assumes different meanings were
intended.’ ” Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain, 542 U. S. 692, 711, n. 9 (2004).
Nor is JUSTICE GINSBURG’s reliance on a single sentence of legislative
history persuasive. See post, at 4–5. True, a Senate committee report
described those “newly awarded compensation” as those “who begin
receiving compensation.” S. Rep. No. 92–1125, p. 18 (1972). But a
subsequent House committee report did not. Cf. H. R. Rep. No. 92–
1441, p. 15 (1972) (statute provides a “method for determining maxi­
mum and minimum compensation (to be applicable to persons currently
receiving compensation as well as those newly awarded compensa­
tion)”). The legislative materials are a push.

