4

ROBERTS v. SEA-LAND SERVICES, INC.
Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

I was newly awarded money damages yesterday.” See Tr.
of Oral Arg. 28.
The inconsistency between the Court’s interpretation of
“newly awarded compensation” and my reading of the
phrase is best illustrated by contextual example. Assume
an employee is injured in 2002 and the employer refuses
to pay compensation voluntarily. Then, five years later,
an ALJ finds in favor of the employee and orders the
employer to pay benefits to the employee. Under the
Court’s view, the employee was “newly awarded compensation” in 2002, even though the employee did not receive
a penny—and the employer was not obligated to pay a
penny—until 2007. Only the most strained interpretation
of “newly awarded” could demand that result.1
The Court’s view, moreover, does not fit the Act’s design.
As explained supra, at 2–3, the Act envisions that an
eligible employee will begin receiving benefits in either
of two ways. The Court’s interpretation disregards this
design, assuming instead that all employees are awarded
benefits in the same way: by the Act at the time they
become disabled.
Section 906(c)’s legislative history further confirms that
Congress intended “newly awarded compensation” to have
its commonsense meaning. In describing §906, the Senate
Committee on Labor and Public Welfare reported:
——————
1 As the Court notes, the maximum rate for a given fiscal year applies
to two groups of injured workers: those who are “newly awarded compensation during such [year],” and those who are “currently receiving
compensation for permanent total disability or death benefits during
such [year].” 33 U. S. C. §906(c). Ante, at 7, n. 5. Contrary to the
Court’s charge, I do not read “newly awarded compensation” as synonymous with “currently receiving compensation.” See ibid. An injured
worker who is “currently receiving compensation” in a given fiscal year
was “newly awarded compensation” in a previous year. My interpretation therefore gives “effect to Congress’ textual shift,” ibid.: It identifies
two distinct groups of workers who are entitled to a given year’s maximum rate.

