Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

sen to distinguish between survivors in this manner. And
the Benefits Review Board has quite sensibly interpreted
§908(d) to mean that “an employee has a vested interest in
benefits which accrue during his lifetime, and, after he
dies, his estate is entitled to those benefits, regardless of
when an award is made.” Wood v. Ingalls Shipbuilding,
Inc., 28 BRBS 27, 36 (1994) (per curiam).10
Finally, §933(b) provides: “For the purpose of this sub­
section, the term ‘award’ with respect to a compensation
order means a formal order issued by the deputy commis­
sioner, an administrative law judge, or Board.” Unless
award may mean something other than “award in a com­
——————
10 Roberts’

interpretation also would afford unwarranted significance
to the entry of an order in other circumstances, resulting in arbitrary distinctions within other classes of beneficiaries. For example,
§908(c)(22) provides that if an employee suffers from more than one
scheduled disability, the “awards” for each “shall run consecutively.”
Under Roberts’ interpretation, §908(c)(22) would require consecutive
payments only for employees who were receiving scheduled disability
benefits pursuant to orders; those receiving voluntary payments pre­
sumably would be entitled to concurrent payments. See §§914(a)–(b).
That result would conflict with §908(c)(22)’s text, which states that
consecutive payments must be made “[i]n any case” involving multiple
scheduled disabilities. See, e.g., Thornton v. Northrop Grumman
Shipbuilding, Inc., 44 BRBS 111 (2010) (per curiam).
Similarly, §910(h)(1) sets out two formulas for increasing benefits
for pre-1972 disability or death in light of the higher rates Congress
provided in the 1972 LHWCA amendments. The first applies to those
receiving compensation at the then-applicable maximum rate; the
second applies to those “awarded compensation . . . at less than the
maximum rate.” See Dept. of Labor, OWCP Bulletin No. 10–73, Ad­
justment of Compensation for Total Permanent Disability or Death
Prior to LS/HW Amendments of 1972, pp. 2–4 (1973). Roberts’ inter­
pretation would make the second formula applicable only to beneficiar­
ies receiving less than the maximum rate pursuant to orders, not to all
such beneficiaries. Again, there is no reason to believe that Congress
intended this distinction, nor has OWCP applied it. See ibid. (prescrib­
ing a “uniform” method for computing the increase in all “[c]ases being
compensated at less than the maximum rate,” with no reference to the
existence of an order).

