(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, 

LLC, ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
No. 11–139.

Argued January 17, 2012—Decided April 25, 2012

Ordinarily, the Government must assess a deficiency against a taxpayer within “3 years after the return was filed,” 26 U. S. C. §6501(a),
but that period is extended to 6 years when a taxpayer “omits from
gross income an amount properly includible therein which is in excess of 25 percent of the amount of gross income stated in the return,”
§6501(e)(1)(A). Respondent taxpayers overstated the basis of certain
property that they had sold. As a result, their returns understated
the gross income they received from the sale by an amount in excess
of 25%. The Commissioner asserted the deficiency outside the 3-year
limitations period but within the 6-year period. The Fourth Circuit
concluded that the taxpayers’ overstatements of basis, and resulting
understatements of gross income, did not trigger the extended limitations period.
Held: The judgment is affirmed.
634 F. 3d 249, affirmed.
JUSTICE BREYER delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to
Part IV–C, concluding that §6501(e)(1)(A) does not apply to an overstatement of basis. Pp. 2–8.
(a) In Colony, Inc. v. Commissioner, 357 U. S. 28, the Court interpreted a provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1939 containing
language materially indistinguishable from the language at issue
here, holding that taxpayer misstatements that overstate the basis in
property do not fall within the statute’s scope. The Court recognized
that such an overstatement wrongly understates a taxpayer’s income,
but concluded that the phrase “omits . . . an amount” limited the
statute’s scope to situations in which specific receipts are left out of


2

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, LLC
Syllabus
the computation of gross income. The Court also noted that while the
statute’s language was not “unambiguous,” id., at 33, the statutory
history showed that Congress intended to restrict the extended limitations period to situations that did not include overstatements of basis. Finally, the Court found its conclusion “in harmony with the
unambiguous language of §6501(e)(1)(A),” id., at 37, the provision
enacted as part of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 and applicable
here. Pp. 2–4.
(b) Colony determines the outcome of this case. The operative language of the 1939 provision and the provision at issue is identical. It
would be difficult to give the same language here a different interpretation without overruling Colony, a course of action stare decisis
counsels against. John R. Sand & Gravel Co. v. United States, 552
U. S. 130, 139. The Government suggests that differences in other
nearby parts of the 1954 Code favor a different interpretation than
the one adopted in Colony. However, its arguments are too fragile to
bear the significant weight it seeks to place upon them. Pp. 4–7.
(c) The Court also rejects the Government’s argument that a recently promulgated Treasury Regulation interpreting the statute’s
operative language in its favor should be granted deference under
Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467
U. S. 837. See National Cable & Telecommunications Assn. v. Brand
X Internet Services, 545 U. S. 967, 982. Colony has already interpreted the statute, and there is no longer any different construction that
is consistent with Colony and available for adoption by the agency.
Pp. 7–8.

BREYER, J. delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to Part IV–C.
ROBERTS, C. J., and THOMAS and ALITO, JJ., joined that opinion in full,
and SCALIA, J., joined except for Part IV–C. SCALIA, J., filed an opinion
concurring in part and concurring in the judgment. KENNEDY, J., filed
a dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined.

