Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 11–139
_________________

UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. HOME CONCRETE
& SUPPLY, LLC, ET AL.
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
[April 25, 2012]

JUSTICE BREYER delivered the opinion of the Court,
except as to Part IV–C.
Ordinarily, the Government must assess a deficiency
against a taxpayer within “3 years after the return was
filed.” 26 U. S. C. §6501(a) (2000 ed.). The 3-year period
is extended to 6 years, however, when a taxpayer “omits
from gross income an amount properly includible therein
which is in excess of 25 percent of the amount of gross
income stated in the return.” §6501(e)(1)(A) (emphasis
added). The question before us is whether this latter
provision applies (and extends the ordinary 3-year limitations period) when the taxpayer overstates his basis in
property that he has sold, thereby understating the gain
that he received from its sale. Following Colony, Inc. v.
Commissioner, 357 U. S. 28 (1958), we hold that the provision does not apply to an overstatement of basis. Hence
the 6-year period does not apply.
I
For present purposes the relevant underlying circumstances are not in dispute. We consequently assume that
(1) the respondent taxpayers filed their relevant tax re-


2

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, LLC
Opinion of the Court

turns in April 2000; (2) the returns overstated the basis
of certain property that the taxpayers had sold; (3) as a
result the returns understated the gross income that the
taxpayers received from the sale of the property; and
(4) the understatement exceeded the statute’s 25% threshold. We also take as undisputed that the Commissioner
asserted the relevant deficiency within the extended 6year limitations period, but outside the default 3-year
period. Thus, unless the 6-year statute of limitations
applies, the Government’s efforts to assert a tax deficiency
came too late. Our conclusion—that the extended limitations period does not apply—follows directly from this
Court’s earlier decision in Colony.
II
In Colony this Court interpreted a provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1939, the operative language of
which is identical to the language now before us. The
Commissioner there had determined
“that the taxpayer had understated the gross profits
on the sales of certain lots of land for residential purposes as a result of having overstated the ‘basis’ of
such lots by erroneously including in their cost certain
unallowable items of development expense.” Id., at
30.
The Commissioner’s assessment came after the ordinary
3-year limitations period had run. And, it was consequently timely only if the taxpayer, in the words of the
1939 Code, had “omit[ted] from gross income an amount
properly includible therein which is in excess of 25 per centum of the amount of gross income stated in the return . . . .”
26 U. S. C. §275(c) (1940 ed.). The Code provision applicable to this case, adopted in 1954, contains materially
indistinguishable language. See §6501(e)(1)(A) (2000 ed.)
(same, but replacing “per centum” with “percent”). See also
Appendix, infra.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

In Colony this Court held that taxpayer misstatements,
overstating the basis in property, do not fall within the
scope of the statute. But the Court recognized the Commissioner’s contrary argument for inclusion. 357 U. S., at
32. Then as now, the Code itself defined “gross income” in
this context as the difference between gross revenue (often
the amount the taxpayer received upon selling the property) and basis (often the amount the taxpayer paid for the
property). Compare 26 U. S. C. §§22, 111 (1940 ed.) with
§§61(a)(3), 1001(a) (2000 ed.). And, the Commissioner
pointed out, an overstatement of basis can diminish the
“amount” of the gain just as leaving the item entirely off
the return might do. 357 U. S., at 32. Either way, the
error wrongly understates the taxpayer’s income.
But, the Court added, the Commissioner’s argument did
not fully account for the provision’s language, in particular
the word “omit.” The key phrase says “omits . . . an
amount.” The word “omits” (unlike, say, “reduces” or “understates”) means “ ‘[t]o leave out or unmentioned; not
to insert, include, or name.’ ” Ibid. (quoting Webster’s New
International Dictionary (2d ed. 1939)). Thus, taken
literally, “omit” limits the statute’s scope to situations in
which specific receipts or accruals of income are left out
of the computation of gross income; to inflate the basis,
however, is not to “omit” a specific item, not even of profit.
While finding this latter interpretation of the language
the “more plausibl[e],” the Court also noted that the language was not “unambiguous.” Colony, 357 U. S., at 33. It
then examined various congressional Reports discussing
the relevant statutory language. It found in those Reports
“persuasive indications that Congress merely had in
mind failures to report particular income receipts and
accruals, and did not intend the [extended] limitation
to apply whenever gross income was understated . . . .”
Id., at 35.


4

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, LLC
Opinion of the Court

This “history,” the Court said, “shows . . . that the Congress intended an exception to the usual three-year statute of limitations only in the restricted type of situation
already described,” a situation that did not include overstatements of basis. Id., at 36.
The Court wrote that Congress, in enacting the
provision,
“manifested no broader purpose than to give the
Commissioner an additional two [now three] years to
investigate tax returns in cases where, because of a
taxpayer’s omission to report some taxable item, the
Commissioner is at a special disadvantage . . . [because] the return on its face provides no clue to the existence of the omitted item. . . . [W]hen, as here [i.e.,
where the overstatement of basis is at issue], the understatement of a tax arises from an error in reporting
an item disclosed on the face of the return the Commissioner is at no such disadvantage . . . whether the
error be one affecting ‘gross income’ or one, such as
overstated deductions, affecting other parts of the return.” Ibid. (emphasis added).
Finally, the Court noted that Congress had recently
enacted the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. And the
Court observed that “the conclusion we reach is in harmony with the unambiguous language of §6501(e)(1)(A),”
id., at 37, i.e., the provision relevant in this present case.
III
In our view, Colony determines the outcome in this case.
The provision before us is a 1954 reenactment of the 1939
provision that Colony interpreted. The operative language
is identical. It would be difficult, perhaps impossible, to
give the same language here a different interpretation
without effectively overruling Colony, a course of action
that basic principles of stare decisis wisely counsel us not


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

to take. John R. Sand & Gravel Co. v. United States, 552
U. S. 130, 139 (2008) (“[S]tare decisis in respect to statutory interpretation has special force, for Congress remains
free to alter what we have done” (internal quotation marks
omitted)); Patterson v. McLean Credit Union, 491 U. S.
164, 172–173 (1989).
The Government, in an effort to convince us to interpret
the operative language before us differently, points to
differences in other nearby parts of the 1954 Code. It
suggests that these differences counsel in favor of a different interpretation than the one adopted in Colony. For
example, the Government points to a new provision,
§6501(e)(1)(A)(i), which says:
“In the case of a trade or business, the term ‘gross income’ means the total of the amounts received or accrued from the sale of goods or services (if such
amounts are required to be shown on the return) prior
to the diminution by the cost of such sales or services.”
If the section’s basic phrase “omi[ssion] from gross income”
does not apply to overstatements of basis (which is what
Colony held), then what need would there be for clause (i),
which leads to the same result in a specific subset of
cases?
And why, the Government adds, does a later paragraph,
referring to gifts and estates, speak of a taxpayer who
“omits . . . items includible in [the] gross estate”? See
§6501(e)(2) (emphasis added). By speaking of “items”
there does it not imply that omission of an “amount” covers more than omission of individual items—indeed that
it includes overstatements of basis, which, after all, diminish the amount of the profit that should have been reported as gross income?
In our view, these points are too fragile to bear the significant argumentative weight the Government seeks to
place upon them. For example, at least one plausible


6

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, LLC
Opinion of the Court

reason why Congress might have added clause (i) has
nothing to do with any desire to change the meaning of the
general rule. Rather when Congress wrote the 1954 Code
(prior to Colony), it did not yet know how the Court would
interpret the provision’s operative language. At least one
lower court had decided that the provision did not apply to
overstatements about the cost of goods that a business
later sold. See Uptegrove Lumber Co. v. Commissioner,
204 F. 2d 570 (CA3 1953). But see Reis v. Commissioner,
142 F. 2d 900, 902–903 (CA6 1944). And Congress could
well have wanted to ensure that, come what may in the
Supreme Court, Uptegrove’s interpretation would remain
the law where a “trade or business” was at issue.
Nor does our interpretation leave clause (i) without
work to do. TRW Inc. v. Andrews, 534 U. S. 19, 31 (2001)
(noting canon that statutes should be read to avoid making any provision “superfluous, void, or insignificant”
(internal quotation marks omitted)). That provision also
explains how to calculate the denominator for purposes of
determining whether a conceded omission amounts to 25%
of “gross income.” For example, it tells us that a merchant
who fails to include $10,000 of revenue from sold goods
has not met the 25% test if total revenue is more than
$40,000, regardless of the cost paid by the merchant to
acquire those goods. But without clause (i), the general
statutory definition of “gross income” requires subtracting
the cost from the sales price. See 26 U. S. C. §§61(a)(3),
1012. Under such a definition of “gross income,” the calculation would take (1) total revenue from sales, $40,000,
minus (2) “the cost of such sales,” say, $25,000. The
$10,000 of revenue would thus amount to 67% of the
“gross income” of $15,000. And the clause does this work
in respect to omissions from gross income irrespective of
our interpretation regarding overstatements of basis.
The Government’s argument about subsection (e)(2)’s
use of the word “item” instead of “amount” is yet weaker.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

The Court in Colony addressed a similar argument about
the word “amount.” It wrote:
“The Commissioner states that the draftsman’s use
of the word ‘amount’ (instead of, for example, ‘item’)
suggests a concentration on the quantitative aspect of
the error—that is whether or not gross income was
understated by as much as 25%.” 357 U. S., at 32.
But the Court, while recognizing the Commissioner’s logic,
rejected the argument (and the significance of the word
“amount”) as insufficient to prove the Commissioner’s
conclusion. And the addition of the word “item” in a different subsection similarly fails to exert an interpretive
force sufficiently strong to affect our conclusion. The
word’s appearance in subsection (e)(2), we concede, is new.
But to rely in the case before us on this solitary word
change in a different subsection is like hoping that a new
batboy will change the outcome of the World Series.
IV 

A

Finally, the Government points to Treasury Regulation
§301.6501(e)–1, which was promulgated in final form in
December 2010. See 26 CFR §301.6501(e)–1 (2011). The
regulation, as relevant here, departs from Colony and
interprets the operative language of the statute in the
Government’s favor. The regulation says that “an understated amount of gross income resulting from an overstatement of unrecovered cost or other basis constitutes an
omission from gross income.” §301.6501(e)–1(a)(1)(iii). In
the Government’s view this new regulation in effect overturns Colony’s interpretation of this statute.
The Government points out that the Treasury Regulation constitutes “an agency’s construction of a statute
which it administers.” Chevron, U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural
Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U. S. 837, 842 (1984).


8

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, LLC
Opinion of the Court
Opinion of BREYER, J.

See also Mayo Foundation for Medical Ed. and Research v.
United States, 562 U. S. ___ (2011) (applying Chevron in
the tax context). The Court has written that a “court’s
prior judicial construction of a statute trumps an agency
construction otherwise entitled to Chevron deference only
if the prior court decision holds that its construction follows from the unambiguous terms of the statute . . . .”
National Cable & Telecommunications Assn. v. Brand X
Internet Services, 545 U. S. 967, 982 (2005) (emphasis
added). And, as the Government notes, in Colony itself
the Court wrote that “it cannot be said that the language
is unambiguous.” 357 U. S., at 33. Hence, the Government
concludes, Colony cannot govern the outcome in this case.
The question, rather, is whether the agency’s construction
is a “permissible construction of the statute.” Chevron,
supra, at 843. And, since the Government argues that the
regulation embodies a reasonable, hence permissible,
construction of the statute, the Government believes it
must win.
B
We do not accept this argument. In our view, Colony
has already interpreted the statute, and there is no longer
any different construction that is consistent with Colony
and available for adoption by the agency.
C
The fatal flaw in the Government’s contrary argument
is that it overlooks the reason why Brand X held that a
“prior judicial construction,” unless reflecting an “unambiguous” statute, does not trump a different agency construction of that statute. 545 U. S., at 982. The Court
reveals that reason when it points out that “it is for agencies, not courts, to fill statutory gaps.” Ibid. The fact that
a statute is unambiguous means that there is “no gap for
the agency to fill” and thus “no room for agency discre-


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court
Opinion of BREYER, J.

tion.” Id., at 982–983.
In so stating, the Court sought to encapsulate what
earlier opinions, including Chevron, made clear. Those
opinions identify the underlying interpretive problem as
that of deciding whether, or when, a particular statute in
effect delegates to an agency the power to fill a gap, thereby implicitly taking from a court the power to void a reasonable gap-filling interpretation. Thus, in Chevron the
Court said that, when
“Congress has explicitly left a gap for the agency to
fill, there is an express delegation of authority to the
agency to elucidate a specific provision of the statute
by regulation. . . . Sometimes the legislative delegation to an agency on a particular question is implicit
rather than explicit. [But in either instance], a court
may not substitute its own construction of a statutory
provision for a reasonable interpretation made by the
administrator of an agency.” 467 U. S., at 843–844.
See also United States v. Mead Corp., 533 U. S. 218, 229
(2001); Smiley v. Citibank (South Dakota), N. A., 517 U. S.
735, 741 (1996); INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U. S. 421,
448 (1987); Morton v. Ruiz, 415 U. S. 199, 231 (1974).
Chevron and later cases find in unambiguous language
a clear sign that Congress did not delegate gap-filling
authority to an agency; and they find in ambiguous language at least a presumptive indication that Congress did
delegate that gap-filling authority. Thus, in Chevron the
Court wrote that a statute’s silence or ambiguity as to
a particular issue means that Congress has not “directly
addressed the precise question at issue” (thus likely delegating gap-filling power to the agency). 467 U. S., at 843.
In Mead the Court, describing Chevron, explained:
“Congress . . . may not have expressly delegated authority or responsibility to implement a particular
provision or fill a particular gap. Yet it can still be


10

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, LLC
Opinion of the Court
Opinion of BREYER, J.

apparent from the agency’s generally conferred authority and other statutory circumstances that Congress would expect the agency to be able to speak with
the force of law when it addresses ambiguity in the
statute or fills a space in the enacted law, even one
about which Congress did not actually have an intent
as to a particular result.” 533 U. S., at 229 (internal
quotation marks omitted).
Chevron added that “[i]f a court, employing traditional
tools of statutory construction, ascertains that Congress
had an intention on the precise question at issue, that
intention is the law and must be given effect.” 467 U. S.,
at 843, n. 9 (emphasis added).
As the Government points out, the Court in Colony
stated that the statutory language at issue is not “unambiguous.” 357 U. S., at 33. But the Court decided that
case nearly 30 years before it decided Chevron. There is
no reason to believe that the linguistic ambiguity noted by
Colony reflects a post-Chevron conclusion that Congress
had delegated gap-filling power to the agency. At the
same time, there is every reason to believe that the Court
thought that Congress had “directly spoken to the question at hand,” and thus left “[no] gap for the agency to fill.”
Chevron, supra, at 842–843.
For one thing, the Court said that the taxpayer had the
better side of the textual argument. Colony, 357 U. S., at
33. For another, its examination of legislative history led
it to believe that Congress had decided the question definitively, leaving no room for the agency to reach a contrary
result. It found in that history “persuasive indications”
that Congress intended overstatements of basis to fall
outside the statute’s scope, and it said that it was satisfied
that Congress “intended an exception . . . only in the restricted type of situation” it had already described. Id., at
35–36. Further, it thought that the Commissioner’s inter-


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court
Opinion of BREYER, J.

pretation (the interpretation once again advanced here)
would “create a patent incongruity in the tax law.” Id., at
36–37. And it reached this conclusion despite the fact
that, in the years leading up to Colony, the Commissioner
had consistently advocated the opposite in the circuit
courts. See, e.g., Uptegrove, 204 F. 2d 570; Reis, 142 F. 2d
900; Goodenow v. Commisioner, 238 F. 2d 20 (CA8 1956);
American Liberty Oil Co. v. Commissioner, 1 T. C. 386
(1942). Cf. Slaff v. Commisioner, 220 F. 2d 65 (CA9 1955);
Davis v. Hightower, 230 F. 2d 549 (CA5 1956). Thus, the
Court was aware it was rejecting the expert opinion of the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue. And finally, after
completing its analysis, Colony found its interpretation of
the 1939 Code “in harmony with the [now] unambiguous
language” of the 1954 Code, which at a minimum suggests
that the Court saw nothing in the 1954 Code as inconsistent with its conclusion. 357 U. S., at 37.
It may be that judges today would use other methods to
determine whether Congress left a gap to fill. But that
is beside the point. The question is whether the Court in
Colony concluded that the statute left such a gap. And, in
our view, the opinion (written by Justice Harlan for the
Court) makes clear that it did not.
Given principles of stare decisis, we must follow that
interpretation. And there being no gap to fill, the Government’s gap-filling regulation cannot change Colony’s
interpretation of the statute. We agree with the taxpayer
that overstatements of basis, and the resulting understatement of gross income, do not trigger the extended
limitations period of §6501(e)(1)(A). The Court of Appeals
reached the same conclusion. See 634 F. 3d 249 (CA4
2011). And its judgment is affirmed.
It is so ordered.


12

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, LLC
Opinion of the Court
Appendix to opinion of the Court

APPENDIX
We reproduce the applicable sections of the two relevant
versions of the U. S. Code below. Section 6501 was
amended and reorganized in 2010. See Hiring Incentives
to Restore Employment Act, §513, 124 Stat. 111. But the
parties agree that the amendments do not affect this case.
We therefore have referred to, and reproduce here, the
section as it appears in the 2000 edition of the U. S. Code.
Title 26 U. S. C. §275 (1940 ed.)
“Period of limitation upon assessment and collection.
.
.
.
.
.
“(a) General rule.
“The amount of income taxes imposed by this chapter
shall be assessed within three years after the return was
filed, and no proceeding in court without assessment for
the collection of such taxes shall be begun after the expiration of such period.
.
.
.
.
.
“(c) Omission from gross income.
“If the taxpayer omits from gross income an amount
properly includible therein which is in excess of 25 per
centum of the amount of gross income stated in the return,
the tax may be assessed, or a proceeding in court for the
collection of such tax may be begun without assessment,
at any time within 5 years after the return was filed.”
Title 26 U. S. C. §6501 (2000 ed.)
“Limitations on assessment and collection.
“(a) General rule
“Except as otherwise provided in this section, the
amount of any tax imposed by this title shall be assessed


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court
Appendix to opinion of the Court

within 3 years after the return was filed (whether or not
such return was filed on or after the date prescribed) or, if
the tax is payable by stamp, at any time after such tax
became due and before the expiration of 3 years after the
date on which any part of such tax was paid, and no proceeding in court without assessment for the collection
of such tax shall be begun after the expiration of such
period. . . .
.
.
.
.
.
“(e) Substantial omission of items
“Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)—
“(1) Income taxes
“In the case of any tax imposed by subtitle A—
“(A) General rule
“If the taxpayer omits from gross income an amount
properly includible therein which is in excess of 25
percent of the amount of gross income stated in the
return, the tax may be assessed, or a proceeding in
court for the collection of such tax may be begun without assessment, at any time within 6 years after the
return was filed. For purposes of this subparagraph—
“(i) In the case of a trade or business, the term
‘gross income’ means the total of the amounts received or accrued from the sale of goods or services
(if such amounts are required to be shown on the return) prior to diminution by the cost of such sales or
services; and
“(ii) In determining the amount omitted from
gross income, there shall not be taken into account
any amount which is omitted from gross income
stated in the return if such amount is disclosed in
the return, or in a statement attached to the return,
in a manner adequate to apprise the Secretary of
the nature and amount of such item.
.
.
.
.
.


14

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, LLC
Opinion of the Court
Appendix to opinion of the Court

“(2) Estate and gift taxes
“In the case of a return of estate tax under chapter 11
or a return of gift tax under chapter 12, if the taxpayer
omits from the gross estate or from the total amount of
the gifts made during the period for which the return
was filed items includible in such gross estate or such
total gifts, as the case may be, as exceed in amount 25
percent of the gross estate stated in the return or the
total amount of gifts stated in the return, the tax may be
assessed, or a proceeding in court for the collection of
such tax may be begun without assessment, at any time
within 6 years after the return was filed. . . .”

