(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BILSKI ET AL. v. KAPPOS, UNDER SECRETARY OF 

COMMERCE FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND 

DIRECTOR, PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
No. 08–964.

Argued November 9, 2009—Decided June 28, 2010

Petitioners’ patent application seeks protection for a claimed invention
that explains how commodities buyers and sellers in the energy mar
ket can protect, or hedge, against the risk of price changes. The key
claims are claim 1, which describes a series of steps instructing how
to hedge risk, and claim 4, which places the claim 1 concept into a
simple mathematical formula. The remaining claims explain how
claims 1 and 4 can be applied to allow energy suppliers and consum
ers to minimize the risks resulting from fluctuations in market de
mand. The patent examiner rejected the application on the grounds
that the invention is not implemented on a specific apparatus, merely
manipulates an abstract idea, and solves a purely mathematical
problem. The Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences agreed and
affirmed. The Federal Circuit, in turn, affirmed. The en banc court
rejected its prior test for determining whether a claimed invention
was a patentable “process” under Patent Act, 35 U. S. C. §101—i.e.,
whether the invention produced a “useful, concrete, and tangible re
sult,” see, e.g., State Street Bank & Trust Co v. Signature Financial
Group, Inc., 149 F. 3d 1368, 1373—holding instead that a claimed
process is patent eligible if: (1) it is tied to a particular machine or
apparatus, or (2) it transforms a particular article into a different
state or thing. Concluding that this “machine-or-transformation test”
is the sole test for determining patent eligibility of a “process” under
§101, the court applied the test and held that the application was not
patent eligible.
Held: The judgment is affirmed.


2

BILSKI v. KAPPOS
Syllabus

545 F. 3d 943, affirmed.
JUSTICE KENNEDY delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to
Parts II–B–2 and II–C–2, concluding that petitioners’ claimed inven
tion is not patent eligible. Pp. 4–8, 10–11, 12–16.
(a) Section 101 specifies four independent categories of inventions
or discoveries that are patent eligible: “process[es],” “machin[es],”
“manufactur[es],” and “composition[s] of matter.” “In choosing such
expansive terms, . . . Congress plainly contemplated that the patent
laws would be given wide scope,” Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U. S.
303, 308, in order to ensure that “ ‘ingenuity should receive a liberal
encouragement,’ ” id., at 308–309. This Court’s precedents provide
three specific exceptions to §101’s broad principles: “laws of nature,
physical phenomena, and abstract ideas.” Id., at 309. While not re
quired by the statutory text, these exceptions are consistent with the
notion that a patentable process must be “new and useful.” And, in
any case, the exceptions have defined the statute’s reach as a matter
of statutory stare decisis going back 150 years. See Le Roy v.
Tatham, 14 How. 156, 174. The §101 eligibility inquiry is only a
threshold test. Even if a claimed invention qualifies in one of the
four categories, it must also satisfy “the conditions and requirements
of this title,” §101(a), including novelty, see §102, nonobviousness, see
§103, and a full and particular description, see §112. The invention
at issue is claimed to be a “process,” which §100(b) defines as a “proc
ess, art or method, and includes a new use of a known process, ma
chine, manufacture, composition of matter, or material.” Pp. 4–5.
(b) The machine-or-transformation test is not the sole test for pat
ent eligibility under §101. The Court’s precedents establish that al
though that test may be a useful and important clue or investigative
tool, it is not the sole test for deciding whether an invention is a pat
ent-eligible “process” under §101. In holding to the contrary, the
Federal Circuit violated two principles of statutory interpretation:
Courts “ ‘should not read into the patent laws limitations and condi
tions which the legislature has not expressed,’ ” Diamond v. Diehr,
450 U. S. 175, 182, and, “[u]nless otherwise defined, ‘words will be in
terpreted as taking their ordinary, contemporary, common mean
ing,’ ” ibid. The Court is unaware of any ordinary, contemporary,
common meaning of “process” that would require it to be tied to a
machine or the transformation of an article. Respondent Patent Di
rector urges the Court to read §101’s other three patentable catego
ries as confining “process” to a machine or transformation. However,
the doctrine of noscitur a sociis is inapplicable here, for §100(b) al
ready explicitly defines “process,” see Burgess v. United States, 553
U. S. 124, 130, and nothing about the section’s inclusion of those
other categories suggests that a “process” must be tied to one of them.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
Finally, the Federal Circuit incorrectly concluded that this Court has
endorsed the machine-or-transformation test as the exclusive test.
Recent authorities show that the test was never intended to be ex
haustive or exclusive. See, e.g., Parker v. Flook, 437 U. S. 584, 588,
n. 9. Pp. 5–8.
(c) Section 101 similarly precludes a reading of the term “process”
that would categorically exclude business methods.
The term
“method” within §100(b)’s “process” definition, at least as a textual
matter and before other consulting other Patent Act limitations and
this Court’s precedents, may include at least some methods of doing
business. The Court is unaware of any argument that the “ordinary,
contemporary, common meaning,” Diehr, supra, at 182, of “method”
excludes business methods. Nor is it clear what a business method
exception would sweep in and whether it would exclude technologies
for conducting a business more efficiently. The categorical exclusion
argument is further undermined by the fact that federal law explic
itly contemplates the existence of at least some business method pat
ents: Under §273(b)(1), if a patent-holder claims infringement based
on “a method in [a] patent,” the alleged infringer can assert a defense
of prior use. By allowing this defense, the statute itself acknowledges
that there may be business method patents. Section 273 thus clari
fies the understanding that a business method is simply one kind of
“method” that is, at least in some circumstances, eligible for patent
ing under §101. A contrary conclusion would violate the canon
against interpreting any statutory provision in a manner that would
render another provision superfluous. See Corley v. United States,
556 U. S. ___, ___. Finally, while §273 appears to leave open the pos
sibility of some business method patents, it does not suggest broad
patentability of such claimed inventions. Pp. 10–11.
(d) Even though petitioners’ application is not categorically outside
of §101 under the two atextual approaches the Court rejects today,
that does not mean it is a “process” under §101. Petitioners seek to
patent both the concept of hedging risk and the application of that
concept to energy markets. Under Benson, Flook, and Diehr, how
ever, these are not patentable processes but attempts to patent ab
stract ideas. Claims 1 and 4 explain the basic concept of hedging and
reduce that concept to a mathematical formula. This is an unpat
entable abstract idea, just like the algorithms at issue in Benson and
Flook. Petitioners’ remaining claims, broad examples of how hedging
can be used in commodities and energy markets, attempt to patent
the use of the abstract hedging idea, then instruct the use of well
known random analysis techniques to help establish some of the in
puts into the equation. They add even less to the underlying abstract
principle than the invention held patent ineligible in Flook. Pp. 12–


4

BILSKI v. KAPPOS
Syllabus
15.
(e) Because petitioners’ patent application can be rejected under
the Court’s precedents on the unpatentability of abstract ideas, the
Court need not define further what constitutes a patentable “proc
ess,” beyond pointing to the definition of that term provided in
§100(b) and looking to the guideposts in Benson, Flook, and Diehr.
Nothing in today’s opinion should be read as endorsing the Federal
Circuit’s past interpretations of §101. See, e.g., State Street, 49 F. 3d,
at 1373. The appeals court may have thought it needed to make the
machine-or-transformation test exclusive precisely because its case
law had not adequately identified less extreme means of restricting
business method patents. In disapproving an exclusive machine-or
transformation test, this Court by no means desires to preclude the
Federal Circuit’s development of other limiting criteria that further
the Patent Act’s purposes and are not inconsistent with its text.
P. 16.

KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, except for Parts II–
B–2 and II–C–2. ROBERTS, C. J., and THOMAS and ALITO, JJ., joined the
opinion in full, and SCALIA, J., joined except for Parts II–B–2 and II–C–
2. STEVENS, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which
GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. BREYER, J., filed an
opinion concurring in the judgment, in which SCALIA, J., joined as to
Part II.

