(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MAPLES v. THOMAS, COMMISSIONER, ALABAMA 

DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–63. Argued October 4, 2011—January 18, 2012
Petitioner Cory R. Maples was found guilty of murder and sentenced to
death in Alabama state court. In 2001, Maples sought postconviction
relief in state court under Alabama Rule 32. Maples alleged, among
other things, that his underpaid and inexperienced trial attorneys
failed to afford him the effective assistance guaranteed by the Sixth
Amendment. His petition was written by two pro bono attorneys,
Jaasai Munanka and Clara Ingen-Housz, both associated with the
New York offices of the Sullivan & Cromwell law firm. As required
by Alabama law, the two attorneys engaged an Alabama lawyer,
John Butler, to move their admission pro hac vice. Butler made
clear, however, that he would undertake no substantive involvement
in the case.
In 2002, while Maples’ state postconviction petition was pending,
Munanka and Ingen-Housz left Sullivan & Cromwell. Their new employment disabled them from representing Maples. They did not inform Maples of their departure and consequent inability to serve as
his counsel. In disregard of Alabama law, neither sought the trial
court’s leave to withdraw. No other Sullivan & Cromwell attorney
entered an appearance, moved to substitute counsel, or otherwise notified the court of a change in Maples’ representation. Thus, Munanka, Ingen-Housz, and Butler remained Maples’ listed, and only, attorneys of record.
The trial court denied Maples’ petition in May 2003. Notices of the
order were posted to Munanka and Ingen-Housz at Sullivan &
Cromwell’s address. When those postings were returned, unopened,
the trial court clerk attempted no further mailing. Butler also received a copy of the order, but did not act on it. With no attorney of

