8

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

Opposition 8a. A similar stamp appeared on the envelope
addressed to Ingen-Housz, along with the handwritten
notation “Return to Sender—Left Firm.” Id., at 7a.
Upon receiving back the unopened envelopes he had
mailed to Munanka and Ingen-Housz, the Alabama court
clerk took no further action. In particular, the clerk did
not contact Munanka or Ingen-Housz at the personal
telephone numbers or home addresses they had provided
in their pro hac vice applications. See Ingen-Housz Verified Application for Admission to Practice Under Rule VII,
p. 1; and Munanka Verified Application for Admission to
Practice Under Rule VII, p. 1, in Maples v. State, No. CC–
95–842.60 (C. C. Morgan Cty., Ala.). Nor did the clerk
alert Sullivan & Cromwell or Butler. Butler received his
copy of the order, but did not act on it. App. to Pet. for
Cert. 256a. He assumed that Munanka and Ingen-Housz,
who had been “CC’d” on the order, would take care of filing
an appeal. Ibid.
Meanwhile, the clock ticked on Maples’ appeal. Under
Alabama’s Rules of Appellate Procedure, Maples had 42
days to file a notice of appeal from the trial court’s May 22,
2003 order denying Maples’ petition for postconviction
relief. Rule 4(a)(1) (2000). No appeal notice was filed, and
the time allowed for filing expired on July 7, 2003.
A little over a month later, on August 13, 2003, Alabama Assistant Attorney General Jon Hayden, the attorney representing the State in Maples’ collateral review
proceedings, sent a letter directly to Maples. App. to Pet.
for Cert. 253a–254a. Hayden’s letter informed Maples of
the missed deadline for initiating an appeal within the
State’s system, and notified him that four weeks remained
during which he could file a federal habeas petition. Ibid.
Hayden mailed the letter to Maples only, using his prison
address. Ibid. No copy was sent to Maples’ attorneys of
record, or to anyone else acting on Maples’ behalf. Ibid.
Upon receiving the State’s letter, Maples immediately

