2

MAPLES v. THOMAS
SCALIA, J., dissenting

particularly high . . . when a state prisoner, through a
procedural default, prevents adjudication of his constitutional claims in state court.” Coleman v. Thompson, 501
U. S. 722, 748 (1991). In that situation, the prisoner has
“deprived the state courts of an opportunity to address
those claims in the first instance,” id., at 732, thereby
leaving the state courts without “a chance to mend their
own fences and avoid federal intrusion,” Engle, 456 U. S.,
at 129. For that reason, and because permitting federalcourt review of defaulted claims would “undercu[t] the
State’s ability to enforce its procedural rules,” ibid., we
have held that when a state court has relied on an adequate and independent state procedural ground in denying
a prisoner’s claims, the prisoner ordinarily may not obtain
federal habeas relief. Coleman, 501 U. S., at 729–730.
To be sure, the prohibition on federal-court review of
defaulted claims is not absolute. A habeas petitioner’s default in state court will not bar federal habeas review if
“the petitioner demonstrates cause and actual prejudice,”
id., at 748—“cause” constituting “something external to
the petitioner, something that cannot fairly be attributed
to him,” that impeded compliance with the State’s procedural rule, id., at 753. As a general matter, an attorney’s
mistakes (or omissions) do not meet the standard “because
the attorney is the petitioner’s agent when acting, or
failing to act, in furtherance of the litigation, and the
petitioner must ‘bear the risk of attorney error.’ ” Ibid.
(quoting Murray v. Carrier, 477 U. S. 478, 488 (1986)).
See also Link v. Wabash R. Co., 370 U. S. 626, 633–634,
and n. 10 (1962).
When an attorney’s error occurs at a stage of the proceedings at which the defendant has a constitutional right
to effective assistance of counsel, that error may constitute
cause to excuse a resulting procedural default. A State’s
failure in its duty to provide an effective attorney, as
measured by the standard set forth in Strickland v. Wash-

