4

MAPLES v. THOMAS
SCALIA, J., dissenting

This conduct amounted to renunciation of their roles as
Maples’ agents, see 1 Restatement (Second) of Agency
§119, Comment b (1957) (hereinafter Restatement 2d),
and thus terminated their authority to act on Maples’
behalf, id., §118. As a result, Munanka’s and IngenHousz’s failure to take action in response to the trial
court’s order should not be imputed to Maples.
It is an unjustified leap, however, to conclude that Maples was left unrepresented during the relevant window
between the Alabama trial court’s dismissal of his postconviction petition and expiration of the 42-day period for
filing a notice of appeal established by Alabama Rule of
Appellate Procedure 4(a)(1) (2009). Start with Maples’
own allegations: In his amended federal habeas petition,
Maples alleged that, at the time he sought postconviction relief in Alabama trial court, he “was represented by
Sullivan & Cromwell of New York, New York.” App. 256.
Although the petition went on to identify Munanka and
Ingen-Housz as “the two Sullivan lawyers handling the
matter,” id., at 257, its statement that Maples was “represented” by the firm itself strongly suggests that Maples
viewed himself as having retained the services of the firm
as a whole, a perfectly natural understanding. “When a
client retains a lawyer who practices with a firm, the
presumption is that both the lawyer and the firm have
been retained.” 1 Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers §31, Comment f, p. 222 (1998). Admittedly,
in connection with the attempt before the Alabama trial
court to extend the time for appeal, Sullivan & Cromwell
partner Marc De Leeuw submitted an affidavit stating
that the firm’s lawyers “handle pro bono cases on an individual basis” and that the lawyers who had appeared in
Maples’ case had followed that practice, “attempt[ing] not
to use the firm name on correspondence or court papers.”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 257a. But Maples’ habeas petition is
the pleading that initiated the current litigation; and

