20

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

Notably, the State did not treat Butler as Maples’ actual
representative. Assistant Attorney General Hayden addressed the letter informing Maples of the default directly
to Maples in prison. See supra, at 8. Hayden sent no copy
to, nor did he otherwise notify, any of the attorneys listed
as counsel of record for Maples. Lawyers in Alabama have
an ethical obligation to refrain from communicating directly with an opposing party known to be represented by
counsel. See Ala. Rule of Professional Conduct 4.2 (2003);
Ala. Rule Crim. Proc. 34.4 (requiring that the service of all
documents “be made upon the attorney of record”). In
writing directly and only to Maples, notwithstanding this
ethical obligation, Assistant Attorney General Hayden
must have believed that Maples was no longer represented
by counsel, out-of-state or local.10
In sum, the record admits of only one reading: At no
time before the missed deadline was Butler serving as
Maples’ agent “in any meaningful sense of that word.”
Holland, 560 U. S., at ___ (opinion of ALITO, J.) (slip op.,
at 6).
3
Not only was Maples left without any functioning attorney of record, the very listing of Munanka, Ingen-Housz,
and Butler as his representatives meant that he had no
right personally to receive notice. See supra, at 16. He in
——————
10 It

bears note, as well, that the State served its response to Maples’
Rule 32 petition only on Munanka at Sullivan & Cromwell’s New York
address, not on Butler. App. 26. While the State may not be obligated
to serve more than one attorney of record, its selection of New York
rather than local counsel is some indication that, from the start, the
State was cognizant of the limited role Butler would serve. Conforming
the State’s Rule to common practice, in 2006, the Alabama Supreme
Court amended the provision on appearances by out-of-state counsel to
eliminate the requirement that such attorneys associate local counsel
when representing indigent criminal defendants pro bono in postconviction proceedings. See supra, at 5, n. 3.

