Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

SCALIA, J., dissenting

simply because they had not yet qualified before the Alabama court. Though it would have been “illegal” for these
attorneys to file a notice of appeal without being authorized to practice in Alabama, nothing prevented them from
first seeking to secure admission to practice, as Munanka
and Ingen-Housz initially had done, and then filing a
notice of appeal.
It would create a huge gap in our Coleman jurisprudence to disregard all attorney errors committed before
admission to the relevant court; and an even greater gap
to disregard (as the Court suggests) all errors committed
before the attorney enters an appearance. Moreover, even
if these attorneys cannot be regarded as Maples’ agents for
purposes of conducting the Alabama litigation, they were
at least his agents for purposes of advising him of the
impending deadline. His unawareness was the fault of
counsel who were his agents, and must be charged to him.
What happened here is simply “[a]ttorney ignorance or
inadvertence” of the sort that does not furnish cause to
excuse a procedural default. Coleman, 501 U. S., at 753.
But even leaving aside the question of Maples’ “unadmitted” attorneys at Sullivan & Cromwell, Maples had a
fully admitted attorney, who had entered an appearance,
in the person of local counsel, John Butler. There is no
support for the Court’s conclusion that Butler “did not
even begin to represent Maples.” Ante, at 19. True, the
affidavit Butler filed with the Alabama trial court in the
proceeding seeking extension of the deadline stated that
he had “no substantive involvement” with the case, and
that he had “agreed to serve as local counsel only.” App. to
Pet. for Cert. 255a. But a disclaimer of “substantive involvement” in a case, whether or not it violates a lawyer’s
ethical obligations, see ante, at 19, is not equivalent to a
denial of any agency role at all. A local attorney’s “nonsubstantive” involvement would surely include, at a minimum, keeping track of local court orders and advising

