16

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

(2004) (employees cannot perform outside work without first obtaining authorization from the Commission),
available at http://ec.europa.eu/civil_service/docs/toc100_
en.pdf (as visited Jan. 13, 2012, and in Clerk of Court’s
case file). Hornbook agency law establishes that the attorneys’ departure from Sullivan & Cromwell and their
commencement of employment that prevented them from
representing Maples ended their agency relationship with
him. See 1 Restatement (Second) of Agency §112 (1957)
(hereinafter Restatement (Second)) (“[T]he authority of an
agent terminates if, without knowledge of the principal, he
acquires adverse interests or if he is otherwise guilty of
a serious breach of loyalty to the principal.”); 2 id., §394,
Comment a (“[T]he agent commits a breach of duty [of
loyalty] to his principal by acting for another in an undertaking which has a substantial tendency to cause him to
disregard his duty to serve his principal with only his
principal’s purposes in mind.”).
Furthermore, the two attorneys did not observe Alabama’s Rule requiring them to seek the trial court’s permission to withdraw. See Ala. Rule Crim. Proc. 6.2,
Comment. Cf. 1 Restatement (Second) §111, Comment b
(“[I]t is ordinarily inferred that a principal does not intend
an agent to do an illegal act.”). By failing to seek permission to withdraw, Munanka and Ingen-Housz allowed the
court’s records to convey that they represented Maples.
As listed attorneys of record, they, not Maples, would be
the addressees of court orders Alabama law requires the
clerk to furnish. See Ala. Rule Crim. Proc. 34.5 (“Upon
the entry of any order in a criminal proceeding made in
response to a motion, . . . the clerk shall, without undue
delay, furnish all parties a copy thereof by mail or by other
appropriate means.”) and 34.4 (“[W]here the defendant is
represented by counsel, service shall be made upon the
attorney of record.”).
Although acknowledging that Munanka and Ingen-

