Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

surely the allegations that it contained should be given
priority over representations made to prior courts.*
In any case, even if Maples had no attorney-client relationship with the Sullivan & Cromwell firm, Munanka
and Ingen-Housz were surely not the only Sullivan &
Cromwell lawyers who represented Maples on an individual basis. De Leeuw’s affidavit acknowledged that he had
“been involved in [Maples’] case since the summer of
2001,” ibid., roughly a year before Munanka and IngenHousz left Sullivan & Cromwell, and it further stated that
after “Ms. Ingen-Housz and Mr. Munanka” learned of the
court’s initial order denying the State’s motion to dismiss
Maples’ postconviction petition in December 2001, “the
lawyers working on this case for Mr. Maples prepared
for the evidentiary hearing” Maples had requested, id., at
258a. Moreover, when Sullivan & Cromwell attorney
Felice Duffy filed a motion to appear pro hac vice before
the Alabama trial court in connection with the attempt to
extend the deadline, she stated that she had “worked on
[Maples’] case since October 14, 2002,” App. 231, months
before the procedural default took place.
According to the Court, see ante, at 17, De Leeuw’s
affidavit does not make clear how he was “involved” in
——————

* The Court says that the allegations in Maples’ own habeas petition
are not “persuasive evidence,” ante, at 17–18, n. 8, because Maples’
lawyers at Sullivan & Cromwell labored under a conflict of interest
when they prepared the document. This is a curious point, since the
effect of Maples’ statement was to implicate Sullivan & Cromwell as a
firm in missing the filing deadline. The conflict would have induced the
Sullivan & Cromwell lawyers to exonerate the firm. To be sure, as the
case later developed (at this stage abandonment had not yet been
conceived as the litigating strategy), it would have been in Maples’
interest to say he had no lawyers. But the issue the petition’s statement raises is not whether Maples was cleverly represented; it is
whether the statement was true. And if Sullivan & Cromwell’s involvement in preparing the petition has any bearing upon that, it only
reinforces the truth.

