8

MAPLES v. THOMAS
SCALIA, J., dissenting

“substantive” counsel of impending deadlines. Nor did
Butler’s explanation for his failure to act when he received
a copy of the trial court’s order sound in abandonment.
Butler did not say, for instance, that he ignored the order
because he did not consider Maples to be his client. Instead, based on “past practice” and the content of the
order, Butler “assumed” that Maples’ lawyers at Sullivan
& Cromwell would receive a copy. App. to Pet. for Cert.
256a.
The Court gets this badly wrong when it states that
“Butler’s failure even to place a phone call to the New
York firm” demonstrates Butler’s “disclaimer of any genuinely representative role.” Ante, at 19. By equating the
very attorney error that contributed to Maples’ procedural
default with the absence of an agency relationship, the
Court ensures that today’s opinion will serve as a template
for future habeas petitioners seeking to evade Coleman’s
holding that ineffectiveness of postconviction counsel will
not furnish cause to excuse a procedural default. See 501
U. S., at 752–754. The trick will be to allege, not that
counsel was ineffective, but rather that counsel’s ineffectiveness demonstrates that he was not a genuinely representative agent. No precedent should be so easily circumvented by word games, but the damage is particularly
acute when the affected precedent is so firmly “grounded
in concerns of comity and federalism.” Id., at 730.
The Court’s last-gasp attempt to justify its conclusion
that Butler was not Maples’ agent is to point out that a
prosecutor sent a letter to Maples directly, informing him
of the defaulted appeal. See ante, at 20. The Court reasons that the prosecutor must have thought that Maples
had been abandoned by his lawyers, since to communicate
with a represented party would have been a violation of
ethical standards. Ibid. But even if this supposition is
correct, it is hard to understand what it proves. What
matters, after all, is not whether the prosecutor thought

