6

MAPLES v. THOMAS
SCALIA, J., dissenting

Maples’ case or whether lawyers other than Munanka and
Ingen-Housz were among those who prepared for the
anticipated evidentiary hearing; and Duffy’s motion does
not make clear what her “wor[k]” entailed. But there is
little doubt that Munanka and Ingen-Housz were not the
only attorneys who engaged in the preparations; and that
De Leeuw was “involved” and Duffy “worked” as lawyers
for Maples (what other role could they have taken on?).
De Leeuw’s distinction between “Ms. Ingen-Housz and Mr.
Munanka” and “the lawyers working on his case for Mr.
Maples” would have been senseless if the latter category
did not extend beyond the two named attorneys.
In sum, there is every indication that when the trial
court entered its order dismissing Maples’ postconviction
petition in May 2003, Maples continued to be represented
by a team of attorneys in Sullivan & Cromwell’s New York
office. The Court nonetheless insists that the actions of
these attorneys are irrelevant because they had not been
admitted to practice law in Alabama, had not entered
appearances in the Alabama trial court, and had not
sought to substitute for Munanka and Ingen-Housz. See
ante, at 18–19. The Court does not, however, explain why
these facts establish that the attorneys were not Maples’
agents for the purpose of attending to those aspects of the
case that did not require court appearance—which would
certainly include keeping track of orders issued and filing
deadlines. The Court’s quotation from the Restatement of
Agency, ante, at 18, that the “failure to acquire a qualification by the agent without which it is illegal to do an authorized act . . . terminates the agent’s authority to act,” 1
Restatement 2d, §111, at 290, omits the crucial condition
contained at the end of the section: “if thereafter he [the
agent] should infer that the principal, if he knew the facts,
would not consent to the further exercise of the authority.”
There was no basis whatever for these attorneys to infer
that Maples no longer wanted them to represent him,

