18

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

The slim record on activity at Sullivan & Cromwell,
however, does not warrant a remand to determine more
precisely the work done by firm lawyers other than Munanka and Ingen-Housz. For the facts essential to our
decision are not in doubt. At the time of the default, the
Sullivan & Cromwell attorneys who later came forward—
De Leeuw, Felice Duffy, and Kathy Brewer—had not been
admitted to practice law in Alabama, had not entered
their appearances on Maples’ behalf, and had done nothing to inform the Alabama court that they wished to substitute for Munanka and Ingen-Housz. Thus, none of
these attorneys had the legal authority to act on Maples’
behalf before his time to appeal expired. Cf. 1 Restatement (Second) §111 (The “failure to acquire a qualification
by the agent without which it is illegal to do an authorized
act . . . terminates the agent’s authority to act.”).9 What
they did or did not do in their New York offices is therefore
——————
therefore he had cause to be relieved from the default. Yet Sullivan &
Cromwell did not cede Maples’ representation to a new attorney, who
could have made Maples’ abandonment argument plain to the Court of
Appeals. Instead, the firm represented Maples through briefing and
oral argument in the Eleventh Circuit, where they attempted to cast
responsibility for the mishap on the clerk of the Alabama trial court.
Given Sullivan & Cromwell’s conflict of interest, Maples’ federal habeas
petition, prepared and submitted by the firm, is not persuasive evidence that Maples, prior to the default, ever “viewed himself” as represented by “the firm,” see post, at 4, rather than by his attorneys of
record, Munanka and Ingen-Housz.
9 The dissent argues that the Sullivan & Cromwell attorneys had no
basis “to infer that Maples no longer wanted them to represent him,
simply because they had not yet qualified before the Alabama court.”
Post, at 6–7. While that may be true, it is irrelevant. What the attorneys could have inferred is that Maples would not have wanted them to
file a notice of appeal on his behalf prior to their admission to practice
in Alabama, for doing so would be “illegal,” post, at 7 (internal quotation marks omitted). See also 1 Restatement (Second) §111, Comment
b, quoted supra, at 16. For the critical purpose of filing a notice of
appeal, then, the other Sullivan & Cromwell attorneys had no authority
to act for Maples.

