2

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Syllabus
record in fact acting on Maples’ behalf, the 42-day period Maples had
to file a notice of appeal ran out.
About a month later, an Alabama Assistant Attorney General sent
a letter directly to Maples. The letter informed Maples of the missed
deadline and notified him that he had four weeks remaining to file a
federal habeas petition. Maples immediately contacted his mother,
who called Sullivan & Cromwell. Three Sullivan & Cromwell attorneys, through Butler, moved the trial court to reissue its order,
thereby restarting the 42-day appeal period. The court denied the
motion. The Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals then denied a writ
of mandamus that would have granted Maples leave to file an out-oftime appeal, and the State Supreme Court affirmed.
Thereafter, Maples sought federal habeas relief. Both the District
Court and the Eleventh Circuit denied his request, pointing to the
procedural default in state court, i.e., Maples’ failure timely to appeal
the state trial court’s order denying his Rule 32 petition for postconviction relief.
Held: Maples has shown the requisite “cause” to excuse his procedural default. Pp. 11–22.
(a) As a rule, a federal court may not entertain a state prisoner’s
habeas claims “when (1) ‘a state court [has] declined to address
[those] claims because the prisoner had failed to meet a state procedural requirement,’ and (2) ‘the state judgment rests on independent
and adequate state procedural grounds.’ ” Walker v. Martin, 562
U. S. ___, ___. The bar to federal review may be lifted, however, if
“the prisoner can demonstrate cause for the [procedural] default [in
state court] and actual prejudice as a result of the alleged violation of
federal law.” Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, 750.
Cause for a procedural default exists where “something external to
the petitioner, something that cannot fairly be attributed to him[,]
. . . ‘impeded [his] efforts to comply with the State’s procedural rule.’ ”
Id., at 753. A prisoner’s postconviction attorney’s negligence does not
qualify as “cause,” ibid., because the attorney is the prisoner’s agent,
and under “well-settled” agency law, the principal bears the risk of
his agent’s negligent conduct, id., at 753–754. Thus, a petitioner is
bound by his attorney’s failure to meet a filing deadline and cannot
rely on that failure to establish cause. Ibid.
A markedly different situation arises, however, when an attorney
abandons his client without notice, and thereby occasions the default.
In such cases, the principal-agent relationship is severed and the attorney’s acts or omissions “cannot fairly be attributed to [the client].”
Id., at 753. Nor can the client be faulted for failing to act on his own
behalf when he lacks reason to believe his attorneys of record, in fact,
are not representing him.

