2

MAPLES v. THOMAS
ALITO, J., concurring

donment was a “cause” that is sufficient to overcome petitioner’s procedural default.
In an effort to obtain relief for his client, petitioner’s
counsel in the case now before us cast blame for what
occurred on Alabama’s system of providing legal representation for capital defendants at trial and in state collateral
proceedings. See Brief for Petitioner 3–6. But whatever
may be said about Alabama’s system, I do not think that
Alabama’s system had much if anything to do with petitioner’s misfortune. The quality of petitioner’s representation at trial obviously played no role in the failure to meet
the deadline for filing his notice of appeal from the denial
of his state postconviction petition. Nor do I see any important connection between what happened in this case
and Alabama’s system for providing representation for
prisoners who are sentenced to death and who wish to
petition the state courts for collateral relief. Unlike other
States, Alabama relies on attorneys who volunteer to
represent these prisoners pro bono, and we are told that
most of these volunteers work for large, out-of-state firms.
Id., at 4. Petitioner’s brief states that the Alabama system
had “a direct bearing on the events giving rise . . . to the
procedural default at issue,” id., at 3, but a similar combination of untoward events could have occurred if petitioner had been represented by Alabama attorneys who were
appointed by the court and paid for with state funds. The
firm whose lawyers represented petitioner pro bono is one
of the country’s most prestigious and expensive, and I
have little doubt that the vast majority of criminal defendants would think that they had won the lottery if they
were given the opportunity to be represented by attorneys
from such a firm. See id., at 9 (stating that it “seemed as
though Maples had won the lottery when two attorneys
working at an elite New York law firm . . . agreed to represent Maples pro bono”).
What occurred here was not a predictable consequence

