Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
Holland v. Florida, 560 U. S. ___, is instructive. There, the Court
found that the one-year deadline for filing a federal habeas petition
can be tolled for equitable reasons, and that an attorney’s unprofessional conduct may sometimes be an “extraordinary circumstance”
justifying equitable tolling. Id., at ___, ___–___. The Court recognized that an attorney’s negligence does not provide a basis for tolling
a statutory time limit. Id., at ___. Holland’s claim that he was abandoned by his attorney, however, if true, “would suffice to establish extraordinary circumstances beyond his control,” id., at ___ (opinion of
ALITO, J.). Pp. 11–15.
(b) From the time of his initial Rule 32 petition until well after
time ran out for appealing the trial court’s denial of that petition,
Maples’ sole attorneys of record were Munanka, Ingen-Housz, and
Butler. Unknown to Maples, none of those lawyers was in fact serving as his attorney during the 42-day appeal period. Pp. 15–21.
(1) The State contends that Sullivan & Cromwell represented
Maples throughout his state postconviction proceedings, and that, as
a result, Maples cannot establish abandonment by counsel during the
42-day period. But it is undisputed that Munanka and Ingen-Housz
severed their agency relationship with Maples long before the default
occurred. Furthermore, because the attorneys did not seek the trial
court’s permission to withdraw, they allowed court records to convey
that they remained the attorneys of record. As such, the attorneys,
not Maples, would be the addressees of court orders Alabama law requires the clerk to furnish.
The State asserts that, after Munanka’s and Ingen-Housz’s departure, other Sullivan & Cromwell attorneys came forward to serve as
Maples’ counsel. At the time of the default, however, those attorneys
had not been admitted to practice in Alabama, had not entered their
appearances on Maples’ behalf, and had done nothing to inform the
Alabama court that they wished to substitute for Munanka and IngenHousz. Thus, they lacked the legal authority to act on Maples’
behalf before his time to appeal expired. Pp. 15–19.
(2) Maples’ only other attorney of record, local counsel Butler, did
not even begin to represent Maples. Butler told Munanka and IngenHousz that he would serve as local counsel only for the purpose of enabling them to appear pro hac vice and would play no substantive
role in the case. Other factors confirm that Butler was not Maples’
“agent in any meaningful sense of that word.” Holland, 560 U. S., at
___ (opinion of ALITO, J.). Upon receiving a copy of the trial court’s
order, Butler did not contact Sullivan & Cromwell to ensure that firm
lawyers were taking appropriate action. Nor did the State treat Butler as Maples’ actual representative. Notably, the Alabama Assistant
Attorney General wrote directly and only to Maples, notwithstanding

