10

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

Having exhausted his state postconviction remedies,
Maples sought federal habeas corpus relief. Addressing
the ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claims Maples
stated in his federal petition, the State urged that Maples
had forever forfeited those claims. Maples did, indeed,
present the claims in his state postconviction (Rule 32)
petition, the State observed, but he did not timely appeal
from the trial court’s denial of his petition. That procedural default, the State maintained, precluded federalcourt consideration of the claims.6 Maples replied that the
default should be excused, because he missed the appeal
deadline “through no fault of his own.” App. 262 (internal
quotation marks omitted).
The District Court determined that Maples had defaulted his ineffective-assistance claims, and that he had not
shown “cause” sufficient to overcome the default. App. to
Pet. for Cert. 49a–55a. The court understood Maples to
argue that errors committed by his postconviction counsel,
not any lapse on the part of the court clerk in Alabama,
provided the requisite “cause” to excuse his failure to meet
Alabama’s 42-days-to-appeal Rule. Id., at 55a. Such an
argument was inadmissible, the court ruled, because this
Court, in Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722 (1991), had
held that the ineffectiveness of postconviction appellate
counsel could not qualify as cause. App. to Pet. for Cert.
55a (citing Coleman, 501 U. S., at 751).
A divided panel of the Eleventh Circuit affirmed. Maples v. Allen, 586 F. 3d 879 (2009) (per curiam). In accord
with the District Court, the Court of Appeals’ majority
held that Maples defaulted his ineffective-assistance
——————
6 In opposing Maples’ request for an out-of-time appeal, the State
argued to the Alabama Supreme Court that such an appeal was unwarranted. In that context, the State noted that Maples “may still present
his postconviction claims to [the federal habeas] court.” 35 Record, Doc.
No. 55, p. 22, n. 4. The State’s current position is in some tension with
that observation.

