Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

ALITO, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 11–210
_________________

UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. XAVIER ALVAREZ
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
[June 28, 2012]

JUSTICE ALITO,
TICE THOMAS join,

with whom JUSTICE SCALIA and JUSdissenting.
Only the bravest of the brave are awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor, but the Court today holds that
every American has a constitutional right to claim to have
received this singular award. The Court strikes down the
Stolen Valor Act of 2005, which was enacted to stem an
epidemic of false claims about military decorations. These
lies, Congress reasonably concluded, were undermining
our country’s system of military honors and inflicting real
harm on actual medal recipients and their families.
Building on earlier efforts to protect the military awards
system, Congress responded to this problem by crafting a
narrow statute that presents no threat to the freedom of
speech. The statute reaches only knowingly false statements about hard facts directly within a speaker’s personal knowledge. These lies have no value in and of
themselves, and proscribing them does not chill any
valuable speech.
By holding that the First Amendment nevertheless
shields these lies, the Court breaks sharply from a long
line of cases recognizing that the right to free speech does
not protect false factual statements that inflict real harm
and serve no legitimate interest. I would adhere to that
principle and would thus uphold the constitutionality of
this valuable law.


2

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
ALITO, J., dissenting


I

The Stolen Valor Act makes it a misdemeanor to “falsely
represen[t]” oneself as having been awarded a medal,
decoration, or badge for service in the Armed Forces of the
United States. 18 U. S. C. §704(b). Properly construed,
this statute is limited in five significant respects. First,
the Act applies to only a narrow category of false representations about objective facts that can almost always be
proved or disproved with near certainty. Second, the Act
concerns facts that are squarely within the speaker’s
personal knowledge. Third, as the Government maintains, see Brief for United States 1517, and both the
plurality, see ante, at 7, and the concurrence, see ante, at 3
(BREYER, J., concurring in judgment), seemingly accept, a
conviction under the Act requires proof beyond a reasonable doubt that the speaker actually knew that the representation was false.1 Fourth, the Act applies only to
statements that could reasonably be interpreted as communicating actual facts; it does not reach dramatic performances, satire, parody, hyperbole, or the like.2 Finally,
——————
1 Although

the Act does not use the term “knowing” or “knowingly,”
we have explained that criminal statutes must be construed “in light of
the background rules of the common law . . . in which the requirement
of some mens rea for a crime is firmly embedded.” Staples v. United
States, 511 U. S. 600, 605 (1994). The Act’s use of the phrase “falsely
represents,” moreover, connotes a knowledge requirement. See Black’s
Law Dictionary 1022 (8th ed. 2004) (defining a “misrepresentation” or
“false representation” to mean “[t]he act of making a false or misleading
assertion about something, usu. with the intent to deceive” (emphasis
added)).
2 See Black’s Law Dictionary, supra, at 1327 (defining “representation”
to mean a “presentation of fact”); see also Milkovich v. Lorain Journal
Co., 497 U. S. 1, 20 (1990) (explaining that the Court has protected
“statements that cannot ‘reasonably [be] interpreted as stating actual
facts’ about an individual” so that “public debate will not suffer for lack of
‘imaginative expression’ or the ‘rhetorical hyperbole’ which has traditionally added much to the discourse of our Nation” (quoting Hustler Magazine, Inc. v. Falwell, 485 U. S. 46, 50 (1988); alteration in original)).


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

ALITO, J., dissenting

the Act is strictly viewpoint neutral. The false statements
proscribed by the Act are highly unlikely to be tied to
any particular political or ideological message. In the rare
cases where that is not so, the Act applies equally to all
false statements, whether they tend to disparage or commend the Government, the military, or the system of military honors.
The Stolen Valor Act follows a long tradition of efforts to
protect our country’s system of military honors. When
George Washington, as the commander of the Continental
Army, created the very first “honorary badges of distinction” for service in our country’s military, he established
a rigorous system to ensure that these awards would be
received and worn by only the truly deserving. See General Orders of George Washington Issued at Newburgh
on the Hudson, 1782–1783, p. 35 (E. Boynton ed. 1883)
(reprint 1973) (requiring the submission of “incontestible proof ” of “singularly meritorious action” to the Commander in Chief). Washington warned that anyone with the
“insolence to assume” a badge that had not actually been
earned would be “severely punished.” Id., at 34.
Building on this tradition, Congress long ago made it a
federal offense for anyone to wear, manufacture, or sell
certain military decorations without authorization. See
Act of Feb. 24, 1923, ch. 110, 42 Stat. 1286 (codified as
amended at 18 U. S. C. §704(a)). Although this Court has
never opined on the constitutionality of that particular
provision, we have said that §702, which makes it a crime
to wear a United States military uniform without authorization, is “a valid statute on its face.” Schacht v. United
States, 398 U. S. 58, 61 (1970).
Congress passed the Stolen Valor Act in response to a
proliferation of false claims concerning the receipt of
military awards. For example, in a single year, more than
600 Virginia residents falsely claimed to have won the


4

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

Medal of Honor.3 An investigation of the 333 people listed
in the online edition of Who’s Who as having received a
top military award revealed that fully a third of the claims
could not be substantiated.4 When the Library of Congress compiled oral histories for its Veterans History
Project, 24 of the 49 individuals who identified themselves
as Medal of Honor recipients had not actually received
that award.5 The same was true of 32 individuals who
claimed to have been awarded the Distinguished Service
Cross and 14 who claimed to have won the Navy Cross.6
Notorious cases brought to Congress’ attention included
the case of a judge who falsely claimed to have been
awarded two Medals of Honor and displayed counterfeit
medals in his courtroom;7 a television network’s military
consultant who falsely claimed that he had received the
Silver Star;8 and a former judge advocate in the Marine
Corps who lied about receiving the Bronze Star and a
Purple Heart.9
——————
3 Colimore, Pinning Crime on Fake Heroes: N. J. Agent Helps Expose
and Convict Those with Bogus U. S. Medals, Philadelphia Inquirer,
Feb. 11, 2004, http://articles.philly.com/2004-02-11/news/25374213_1_
medals-military-imposters-distinguished-flying-cross (all Internet materials as visited June 25, 2012, and available in Clerk of Court’s case
file).
4 Crewdson, Claims of Medals Amount to Stolen Valor, Chicago Tribune, Oct. 26, 2008, http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/chi-valoroct25,0,4301227.story?page=1.
5 Half of MOH Entries in Oral History Project Are Incorrect, Marine
Corps Times, Oct. 1, 2007, 2007 WLNR 27917486.
6 Ibid.
7 Young, His Honor Didn’t Get Medal of Honor, Chicago Tribune, Oct.
21, 1994, http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1994-10-21/news/941021031
8_1_congressional-medal-highest-fritz.
8 Rutenberg, At Fox News, the Colonel Who Wasn’t, N. Y. Times, Apr.
29, 2002, http://www.nytimes.com/2002/04/29/business/at-fox-news-thecolonel-who-wasn-t.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm.
9 B. Burkett & G. Whitley, Stolen Valor: How the Vietnam Generation
Was Robbed of Its Heroes and Its History 179 (1998).


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

ALITO, J., dissenting

As Congress recognized, the lies proscribed by the Stolen Valor Act inflict substantial harm. In many instances,
the harm is tangible in nature: Individuals often falsely
represent themselves as award recipients in order to
obtain financial or other material rewards, such as lucrative contracts and government benefits.10 An investigation
of false claims in a single region of the United States, for
example, revealed that 12 men had defrauded the Department of Veterans Affairs out of more than $1.4 million
in veteran’s benefits.11 In other cases, the harm is less
tangible, but nonetheless significant. The lies proscribed
by the Stolen Valor Act tend to debase the distinctive
honor of military awards. See Stolen Valor Act of 2005,
§2, 120 Stat. 3266, note following 18 U. S. C. §704 (finding
that “[f]raudulent claims surrounding the receipt of [military decorations and medals] damage the reputation and
meaning of such decorations and medals”). And legitimate
award recipients and their families have expressed the
harm they endure when an imposter takes credit for heroic actions that he never performed. One Medal of Honor
recipient described the feeling as a “ ‘slap in the face
of veterans who have paid the price and earned their
medals.’ ”12
It is well recognized in trademark law that the proliferation of cheap imitations of luxury goods blurs the “ ‘signal’
——————
10 Indeed, the first person to be prosecuted under the Stolen Valor
Act apparently “parlayed his medals into lucrative security consulting
contracts.” Zambito, War Crime: FBI Targets Fake Heroes, New York
Daily News, May 6, 2007, http://www.nydailynews.com/news/crime/
war-crime-fbi-targets-fake-heroes-article-1.249168.
11 Dept. of Justice, Northwest Crackdown on Fake Veterans in “Operation Stolen Valor,” Sept. 21, 2007, http://www.justice.gov/usao/waw/
press/2007/sep/operationstolenvalor.html.
12 Cato, High Court Tussles With False Heroics: Free Speech or Felony? Pittsburg Tribune Review, Feb. 23, 2012, http://triblive.com/
usworld / nation / 1034434-85 / court - military - law-false-medals-supremevalor-act-federal-free.


6

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

given out by the purchasers of the originals.” Landes &
Posner, Trademark Law: An Economic Perspective, 30 J.
Law & Econ. 265, 308 (1987). In much the same way, the
proliferation of false claims about military awards blurs
the signal given out by the actual awards by making them
seem more common than they really are, and this diluting
effect harms the military by hampering its efforts to foster
morale and esprit de corps. Surely it was reasonable for
Congress to conclude that the goal of preserving the integrity of our country’s top military honors is at least as
worthy as that of protecting the prestige associated with
fancy watches and designer handbags. Cf. San Francisco
Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Comm., 483
U. S. 522, 539541 (1987) (rejecting First Amendment
challenge to law prohibiting certain unauthorized uses of
the word “Olympic” and recognizing that such uses harm
the U. S. Olympic Committee by “lessening the distinctiveness” of the term).
Both the plurality and JUSTICE BREYER argue that
Congress could have preserved the integrity of military
honors by means other than a criminal prohibition, but
Congress had ample reason to believe that alternative
approaches would not be adequate. The chief alternative
that is recommended is the compilation and release of a
comprehensive list or database of actual medal recipients.
If the public could readily access such a resource, it is
argued, imposters would be quickly and easily exposed,
and the proliferation of lies about military honors would
come to an end.
This remedy, unfortunately, will not work. The Department of Defense has explained that the most that it
can do is to create a database of recipients of certain top
military honors awarded since 2001. See Office of Undersecretary of Defense, Report to the Senate and House
Armed Services Committees on a Searchable Military


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

ALITO, J., dissenting

Valor Decorations Database 45 (2009).13
Because a sufficiently comprehensive database is not
practicable, lies about military awards cannot be remedied
by what the plurality calls “counterspeech.” Ante, at 15.
Without the requisite database, many efforts to refute
false claims may be thwarted, and some legitimate award
recipients may be erroneously attacked. In addition, a
steady stream of stories in the media about the exposure
of imposters would tend to increase skepticism among
members of the public about the entire awards system.
This would only exacerbate the harm that the Stolen Valor
Act is meant to prevent.
The plurality and the concurrence also suggest that
Congress could protect the system of military honors by
enacting a narrower statute. The plurality recommends a
law that would apply only to lies that are intended to
“secure moneys or other valuable considerations.” Ante, at
11. In a similar vein, the concurrence comments that “a
more finely tailored statute might . . . insist upon a showing that the false statement caused specific harm.” Ante,
at 9 (opinion of BREYER, J.). But much damage is caused,
both to real award recipients and to the system of military honors, by false statements that are not linked to
any financial or other tangible reward. Unless even a
small financial loss—say, a dollar given to a homeless man
falsely claiming to be a decorated veteran—is more important in the eyes of the First Amendment than the
damage caused to the very integrity of the military awards
system, there is no basis for distinguishing between the
Stolen Valor Act and the alternative statutes that the
plurality and concurrence appear willing to sustain.
——————
13 In

addition, since the Department may not disclose the Social Security numbers or birthdates of recipients, this database would be of
limited use in ascertaining the veracity of a claim involving a person
with a common name. Office of Undersecretary of Defense, Report, at
34.


8

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

JUSTICE BREYER also proposes narrowing the statute so
that it covers a shorter list of military awards, ante, at 9
(opinion concurring in judgment), but he does not provide
a hint about where he thinks the line must be drawn.
Perhaps he expects Congress to keep trying until it eventually passes a law that draws the line in just the right
place.
II

A

Time and again, this Court has recognized that as a
general matter false factual statements possess no intrinsic First Amendment value. See Illinois ex rel. Madigan v.
Telemarketing Associates, Inc., 538 U. S. 600, 612 (2003)
(“Like other forms of public deception, fraudulent charitable solicitation is unprotected speech”); BE&K Constr. Co.
v. NLRB, 536 U. S. 516, 531 (2002) (“[F]alse statements
may be unprotected for their own sake”); Hustler Magazine, Inc. v. Falwell, 485 U. S. 46, 52 (1988) (“False statements of fact are particularly valueless; they interfere
with the truth-seeking function of the marketplace of
ideas, and they cause damage to an individual’s reputation
that cannot easily be repaired by counterspeech, however
persuasive or effective”); Keeton v. Hustler Magazine, Inc.,
465 U. S. 770, 776 (1984) (“There is ‘no constitutional
value in false statements of fact’ ” (quoting Gertz v. Robert
Welch, Inc., 418 U. S. 323, 340 (1974))); Bill Johnson’s Restaurants, Inc. v. NLRB, 461 U. S. 731, 743 (1983)
(“[F]alse statements are not immunized by the First
Amendment right to freedom of speech”); Brown v.
Hartlage, 456 U. S. 45, 60 (1982) (“Of course, demonstrable falsehoods are not protected by the First Amendment
in the same manner as truthful statements”); Herbert v.
Lando, 441 U. S. 153, 171 (1979) (“Spreading false information in and of itself carries no First Amendment credentials”); Virginia Bd. of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

ALITO, J., dissenting

Consumer Council, Inc., 425 U. S. 748, 771 (1976) (“Untruthful speech, commercial or otherwise, has never been
protected for its own sake”); Gertz, supra, at 340 (“[T]he
erroneous statement of fact is not worthy of constitutional
protection”); Time, Inc. v. Hill, 385 U. S. 374, 389 (1967)
(“[T]he constitutional guarantees [of the First Amendment] can tolerate sanctions against calculated falsehood
without significant impairment of their essential function”); Garrison v. Louisiana, 379 U. S. 64, 75 (1964)
(“[T]he knowingly false statement and the false statement
made with reckless disregard of the truth, do not enjoy
constitutional protection”).
Consistent with this recognition, many kinds of false
factual statements have long been proscribed without
“ ‘rais[ing] any Constitutional problem.’ ” United States v.
Stevens, 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 6) (quoting
Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U. S. 568, 571572
(1942)). Laws prohibiting fraud, perjury, and defamation,
for example, were in existence when the First Amendment
was adopted, and their constitutionality is now beyond
question. See, e.g., Donaldson v. Read Magazine, Inc., 333
U. S. 178, 190 (1948) (explaining that the government’s
power “to protect people against fraud” has “always been
recognized in this country and is firmly established”);
United States v. Dunnigan, 507 U. S. 87, 97 (1993) (observing that “the constitutionality of perjury statutes is
unquestioned”); Beauharnais v. Illinois, 343 U. S. 250, 256
(1952) (noting that the “prevention and punishment” of
libel “have never been thought to raise any Constitutional
problem”).
We have also described as falling outside the First
Amendment’s protective shield certain false factual statements that were neither illegal nor tortious at the time of
the Amendment’s adoption. The right to freedom of
speech has been held to permit recovery for the intentional
infliction of emotional distress by means of a false state-


10

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

ment, see Falwell, supra, at 56, even though that tort did
not enter our law until the late 19th century, see W. Keeton,
D. Dobbs, R. Keeton, & D. Owen, Prosser and Keeton
on Law of Torts §12, p. 60, and n. 47. (5th ed. 1984) (hereinafter Prosser and Keeton). And in Hill, supra, at 390,
the Court concluded that the free speech right allows
recovery for the even more modern tort of false-light invasion of privacy, see Prosser and Keeton §117, at 863.
In line with these holdings, it has long been assumed
that the First Amendment is not offended by prominent
criminal statutes with no close common-law analog. The
most well known of these is probably 18 U. S. C. §1001,
which makes it a crime to “knowingly and willfully” make
any “materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or
representation” in “any matter within the jurisdiction of
the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the Government of the United States.” Unlike perjury, §1001
is not limited to statements made under oath or before
an official government tribunal. Nor does it require any
showing of “pecuniary or property loss to the government.”
United States v. Gilliland, 312 U. S. 86, 93 (1941). Instead, the statute is based on the need to protect “agencies
from the perversion which might result from the deceptive
practices described.” Ibid. (emphasis added).
Still other statutes make it a crime to falsely represent
that one is speaking on behalf of, or with the approval of,
the Federal Government. See, e.g., 18 U. S. C. §912 (making it a crime to falsely impersonate a federal officer); §709
(making it a crime to knowingly use, without authorization, the names of enumerated federal agencies, such as
“Federal Bureau of Investigation,” in a manner reasonably
calculated to convey the impression that a communication
is approved or authorized by the agency). We have recognized that §912, like §1001, does not require a showing of
pecuniary or property loss and that its purpose is to
“ ‘maintain the general good repute and dignity’ ” of Gov-


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

ALITO, J., dissenting

ernment service. United States v. Lepowitch, 318 U. S.
702, 704 (1943) (quoting United States v. Barnow, 239
U. S. 74, 80 (1915)). All told, there are more than 100
federal criminal statutes that punish false statements
made in connection with areas of federal agency concern.
See United States v. Wells, 519 U. S. 482, 505507, and
nn. 810 (1997) (Stevens, J., dissenting) (citing “at least
100 federal false statement statutes” in the United States
Code).
These examples amply demonstrate that false statements of fact merit no First Amendment protection in
their own right.14 It is true, as JUSTICE BREYER notes,
——————
14 The

plurality rejects this rule. Although we have made clear that
“[u]ntruthful speech . . . has never been protected for its own sake,”
Virginia Bd. of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, Inc.,
425 U. S. 748, 771 (1976), the most the plurality is willing to concede is
that “the falsity of speech bears upon whether it is protected,” ante, at
9. This represents a dramatic—and entirely unjustified—departure
from the sound approach taken in past cases.
Respondent and his supporting amici attempt to limit this rule to
certain subsets of false statements, see, e.g., Brief for Respondent 53
(asserting that, at most, only falsity that is proved to cause specific
harm is stripped of its First Amendment protection), but the examples
described above belie that attempt. These examples show that the rule
at least applies to (1) specific types of false statements that were
neither illegal nor tortious in 1791 (the torts of intentional infliction of
emotional distress and false-light invasion of privacy did not exist when
the First Amendment was adopted); (2) false speech that does not cause
pecuniary harm (the harm remedied by the torts of defamation, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and false-light invasion of privacy
is often nonpecuniary in nature, as is the harm inflicted by statements
that are illegal under §§912 and 1001); (3) false speech that does not
cause detrimental reliance (neither perjury laws nor many of the
federal false statement statutes require that anyone actually rely on
the false statement); (4) particular false statements that are not shown
in court to have caused specific harm (damages can be presumed in
defamation actions involving knowing or reckless falsehoods, and no
showing of specific harm is required in prosecutions under many of the
federal false statement statutes); and (5) false speech that does not
cause harm to a specific individual (the purpose of many of the federal


12

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

that many in our society either approve or condone certain
discrete categories of false statements, including false
statements made to prevent harm to innocent victims and
so-called “white lies.” See ante, at 4. But respondent’s
false claim to have received the Medal of Honor did not
fall into any of these categories. His lie did not “prevent
embarrassment, protect privacy, shield a person from
prejudice, provide the sick with comfort, or preserve a
child’s innocence.” Ibid. Nor did his lie “stop a panic or
otherwise preserve calm in the face of danger” or further
philosophical or scientific debate. Ibid. Respondent’s
claim, like all those covered by the Stolen Valor Act,
served no valid purpose.
Respondent and others who join him in attacking the
Stolen Valor Act take a different view. Respondent’s brief
features a veritable paean to lying. According to respondent, his lie about the Medal of Honor was nothing out of
the ordinary for 21st-century Americans. “Everyone lies,”
he says. Brief for Respondent 10. “We lie all the time.”
Ibid. “[H]uman beings are constantly forced to choose the
persona we present to the world, and our choices nearly
always involve intentional omissions and misrepresentations, if not outright deception.” Id., at 39. An academic
amicus tells us that the First Amendment protects the
right to construct “self-aggrandizing fabrications such as
having been awarded a military decoration.” Brief for
Jonathan D. Varat as Amicus Curiae 5.
This radical interpretation of the First Amendment is
not supported by any precedent of this Court. The lies
covered by the Stolen Valor Act have no intrinsic value
and thus merit no First Amendment protection unless
their prohibition would chill other expression that falls
within the Amendment’s scope. I now turn to that question.
—————— 

false statement statutes is to protect government processes). 



Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

ALITO, J., dissenting

B
While we have repeatedly endorsed the principle that
false statements of fact do not merit First Amendment
protection for their own sake, we have recognized that it is
sometimes necessary to “exten[d] a measure of strategic
protection” to these statements in order to ensure sufficient “ ‘breathing space’ ” for protected speech. Gertz, 418
U. S., at 342 (quoting NAACP v. Button, 371 U. S. 415, 433
(1963)). Thus, in order to prevent the chilling of truthful
speech on matters of public concern, we have held that
liability for the defamation of a public official or figure
requires proof that defamatory statements were made
with knowledge or reckless disregard of their falsity. See
New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254, 279280
(1964) (civil liability); Garrison, 379 U. S., at 7475 (criminal liability). This same requirement applies when public
officials and figures seek to recover for the tort of intentional infliction of emotional distress. See Falwell, 485
U. S., at 5556. And we have imposed “[e]xacting proof
requirements” in other contexts as well when necessary to
ensure that truthful speech is not chilled. Madigan, 538
U. S., at 620 (complainant in a fraud action must show
that the defendant made a knowingly false statement of
material fact with the intent to mislead the listener and
that he succeeded in doing so); see also BE&K Constr., 536
U. S., at 531 (regulation of baseless lawsuits limited to
those that are both “objectively baseless and subjectively
motivated by an unlawful purpose”); Hartlage, 456 U. S.,
at 61 (sustaining as-applied First Amendment challenge to
law prohibiting certain “factual misstatements in the
course of political debate” where there had been no showing that the disputed statement was made “other than in
good faith and without knowledge of its falsity, or . . . with
reckless disregard as to whether it was false or not”). All
of these proof requirements inevitably have the effect of


14

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

bringing some false factual statements within the protection of the First Amendment, but this is justified in order
to prevent the chilling of other, valuable speech.
These examples by no means exhaust the circumstances
in which false factual statements enjoy a degree of instrumental constitutional protection. On the contrary,
there are broad areas in which any attempt by the state to
penalize purportedly false speech would present a grave
and unacceptable danger of suppressing truthful speech.
Laws restricting false statements about philosophy, religion, history, the social sciences, the arts, and other matters of public concern would present such a threat. The
point is not that there is no such thing as truth or falsity
in these areas or that the truth is always impossible to
ascertain, but rather that it is perilous to permit the state
to be the arbiter of truth.
Even where there is a wide scholarly consensus concerning a particular matter, the truth is served by allowing
that consensus to be challenged without fear of reprisal.
Today’s accepted wisdom sometimes turns out to be mistaken. And in these contexts, “[e]ven a false statement
may be deemed to make a valuable contribution to public
debate, since it brings about ‘the clearer perception and
livelier impression of truth, produced by its collision with
error.’ ” Sullivan, supra, at 279, n. 19 (quoting J. Mill, On
Liberty 15 (R. McCallum ed. 1947)).
Allowing the state to proscribe false statements in these
areas also opens the door for the state to use its power for
political ends. Statements about history illustrate this
point. If some false statements about historical events
may be banned, how certain must it be that a statement is
false before the ban may be upheld? And who should
make that calculation? While our cases prohibiting viewpoint discrimination would fetter the state’s power to some
degree, see R. A. V. v. St. Paul, 505 U. S. 377, 384390
(1992) (explaining that the First Amendment does not


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

ALITO, J., dissenting

permit the government to engage in viewpoint discrimination under the guise of regulating unprotected speech), the
potential for abuse of power in these areas is simply too
great.
In stark contrast to hypothetical laws prohibiting false
statements about history, science, and similar matters,
the Stolen Valor Act presents no risk at all that valuable
speech will be suppressed. The speech punished by the
Act is not only verifiably false and entirely lacking in
intrinsic value, but it also fails to serve any instrumental purpose that the First Amendment might protect. Tellingly, when asked at oral argument what truthful speech
the Stolen Valor Act might chill, even respondent’s counsel
conceded that the answer is none. Tr. of Oral Arg. 36.
C
Neither of the two opinions endorsed by Justices in the
majority claims that the false statements covered by the
Stolen Valor Act possess either intrinsic or instrumental
value. Instead, those opinions appear to be based on the
distinct concern that the Act suffers from overbreadth.
See ante, at 10 (plurality opinion) (the Act applies to “personal, whispered conversations within a home”); ante, at 8
(BREYER, J., concurring in judgment) (the Act “applies in
family, social, or other private contexts” and in “political
contexts”). But to strike down a statute on the basis that
it is overbroad, it is necessary to show that the statute’s
“overbreadth [is] substantial, not only in an absolute
sense, but also relative to [its] plainly legitimate sweep.”
United States v. Williams, 553 U. S. 285, 292 (2008); see
also ibid. (noting that this requirement has been “vigorously enforced”). The plurality and the concurrence do not
even attempt to make this showing.
The plurality additionally worries that a decision sustaining the Stolen Valor Act might prompt Congress and
the state legislatures to enact laws criminalizing lies


16

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

about “an endless list of subjects.” Ante, at 11. The plurality apparently fears that we will see laws making it a
crime to lie about civilian awards such as college degrees
or certificates of achievement in the arts and sports.
This concern is likely unfounded. With very good reason, military honors have traditionally been regarded as
quite different from civilian awards. Nearly a century ago,
Congress made it a crime to wear a military medal without authorization; we have no comparable tradition regarding such things as Super Bowl rings, Oscars, or Phi
Beta Kappa keys.
In any event, if the plurality’s concern is not entirely
fanciful, it falls outside the purview of the First Amendment. The problem that the plurality foresees—that
legislative bodies will enact unnecessary and overly intrusive criminal laws—applies regardless of whether the laws
in question involve speech or nonexpressive conduct. If
there is a problem with, let us say, a law making it a
criminal offense to falsely claim to have been a high school
valedictorian, the problem is not the suppression of speech
but the misuse of the criminal law, which should be reserved for conduct that inflicts or threatens truly serious
societal harm. The objection to this hypothetical law
would be the same as the objection to a law making it a
crime to eat potato chips during the graduation ceremony
at which the high school valedictorian is recognized. The
safeguard against such laws is democracy, not the First
Amendment. Not every foolish law is unconstitutional.
The Stolen Valor Act represents the judgment of the
people’s elected representatives that false statements
about military awards are very different from false statements about civilian awards. Certainly this is true with
respect to the high honor that respondent misappropriated. Respondent claimed that he was awarded the Medal of
Honor in 1987 for bravery during the Iran hostage crisis.
This singular award, however, is bestowed only on those


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

ALITO, J., dissenting

members of the Armed Forces who “distinguis[h] [themselves] conspicuously by gallantry and intrepidity at the
risk of [their lives] above and beyond the call of duty.” 10
U. S. C. §3741; see also §§6241, 8741. More than half of
the heroic individuals to have been awarded the Medal of
Honor after World War I received it posthumously.15
Congress was entitled to conclude that falsely claiming to
have won the Medal of Honor is qualitatively different
from even the most prestigious civilian awards and that
the misappropriation of that honor warrants criminal
sanction.
*
*
*
The Stolen Valor Act is a narrow law enacted to address
an important problem, and it presents no threat to freedom of expression. I would sustain the constitutionality of
the Act, and I therefore respectfully dissent.

——————
15 See U. S. Army Center of Military History, Medal of Honor Statistics, http://www.history.army.mil/html/moh/mohstats.html.

