Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 11–210
_________________

UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. XAVIER ALVAREZ
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
[June 28, 2012]

JUSTICE KENNEDY announced the judgment of the
Court and delivered an opinion, in which THE CHIEF
JUSTICE, JUSTICE GINSBURG, and JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR
join.
Lying was his habit. Xavier Alvarez, the respondent
here, lied when he said that he played hockey for the
Detroit Red Wings and that he once married a starlet from
Mexico. But when he lied in announcing he held the Congressional Medal of Honor, respondent ventured onto new
ground; for that lie violates a federal criminal statute, the
Stolen Valor Act of 2005. 18 U. S. C. §704.
In 2007, respondent attended his first public meeting as
a board member of the Three Valley Water District Board.
The board is a governmental entity with headquarters in
Claremont, California. He introduced himself as follows:
“I’m a retired marine of 25 years. I retired in the year 2001.
Back in 1987, I was awarded the Congressional Medal of
Honor. I got wounded many times by the same guy.” 617
F. 3d 1198, 1201–1202 (CA9 2010). None of this was true.
For all the record shows, respondent’s statements were
but a pathetic attempt to gain respect that eluded him.
The statements do not seem to have been made to secure


2

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

employment or financial benefits or admission to privileges
reserved for those who had earned the Medal.
Respondent was indicted under the Stolen Valor Act
for lying about the Congressional Medal of Honor at the
meeting. The United States District Court for the Central
District of California rejected his claim that the statute is
invalid under the First Amendment. Respondent pleaded
guilty to one count, reserving the right to appeal on his
First Amendment claim. The United States Court of
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in a decision by a divided
panel, found the Act invalid under the First Amendment
and reversed the conviction. Id., at 1218. With further
opinions on the issue, and over a dissent by seven judges,
rehearing en banc was denied. 638 F. 3d 666 (2011). This
Court granted certiorari. 565 U. S. ___ (2011).
After certiorari was granted, and in an unrelated case,
the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit,
also in a decision by a divided panel, found the Act constitutional. United States v. Strandlof, 667 F. 3d 1146
(2012). So there is now a conflict in the Courts of Appeals
on the question of the Act’s validity.
This is the second case in two Terms requiring the Court
to consider speech that can disparage, or attempt to steal,
honor that belongs to those who fought for this Nation in
battle. See Snyder v. Phelps, 562 U. S. ___ (2011) (hateful
protests directed at the funeral of a serviceman who died
in Iraq). Here the statement that the speaker held the
Medal was an intended, undoubted lie.
It is right and proper that Congress, over a century ago,
established an award so the Nation can hold in its highest respect and esteem those who, in the course of carrying
out the “supreme and noble duty of contributing to the
defense of the rights and honor of the nation,” Selective
Draft Law Cases, 245 U. S. 366, 390 (1918), have acted
with extraordinary honor. And it should be uncontested
that this is a legitimate Government objective, indeed a


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

most valued national aspiration and purpose. This does
not end the inquiry, however. Fundamental constitutional
principles require that laws enacted to honor the brave
must be consistent with the precepts of the Constitution
for which they fought.
The Government contends the criminal prohibition is
a proper means to further its purpose in creating and
awarding the Medal. When content-based speech regulation is in question, however, exacting scrutiny is required.
Statutes suppressing or restricting speech must be judged
by the sometimes inconvenient principles of the First
Amendment. By this measure, the statutory provisions
under which respondent was convicted must be held invalid, and his conviction must be set aside.
I
Respondent’s claim to hold the Congressional Medal of
Honor was false. There is no room to argue about interpretation or shades of meaning. On this premise, respondent violated §704(b); and, because the lie concerned
the Congressional Medal of Honor, he was subject to an
enhanced penalty under subsection (c). Those statutory
provisions are as follows:
“(b) FALSE CLAIMS ABOUT RECEIPT OF MILITARY
DECORATIONS OR MEDALS.––Whoever falsely represents himself or herself, verbally or in writing, to have
been awarded any decoration or medal authorized by
Congress for the Armed Forces of the United States
. . . shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not
more than six months, or both.
“(c) ENHANCED PENALTY FOR OFFENSES INVOLVING
CONGRESSIONAL MEDAL OF HONOR.––
“(1) IN GENERAL.––If a decoration or medal involved
in an offense under subsection (a) or (b) is a Congressional Medal of Honor, in lieu of the punishment provided
in that subsection, the offender shall be fined under


4

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

this title, imprisoned not more than 1 year, or both.”
Respondent challenges the statute as a content-based
suppression of pure speech, speech not falling within any
of the few categories of expression where content-based
regulation is permissible. The Government defends the
statute as necessary to preserve the integrity and purpose
of the Medal, an integrity and purpose it contends are
compromised and frustrated by the false statements the
statute prohibits. It argues that false statements “have
no First Amendment value in themselves,” and thus “are
protected only to the extent needed to avoid chilling fully
protected speech.” Brief for United States 18, 20. Although the statute covers respondent’s speech, the Government argues that it leaves breathing room for protected speech, for example speech which might criticize
the idea of the Medal or the importance of the military.
The Government’s arguments cannot suffice to save the
statute.
II
“[A]s a general matter, the First Amendment means
that government has no power to restrict expression because of its message, its ideas, its subject matter, or its
content.” Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union, 535
U. S. 564, 573 (2002) (internal quotation marks omitted).
As a result, the Constitution “demands that content-based
restrictions on speech be presumed invalid . . . and that
the Government bear the burden of showing their constitutionality.” Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union,
542 U. S. 656, 660 (2004).
In light of the substantial and expansive threats to free
expression posed by content-based restrictions, this Court
has rejected as “startling and dangerous” a “free-floating
test for First Amendment coverage . . . [based on] an
ad hoc balancing of relative social costs and benefits.”
United States v. Stevens, 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op.,


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

at 7). Instead, content-based restrictions on speech have
been permitted, as a general matter, only when confined
to the few “ ‘historic and traditional categories [of expression] long familiar to the bar,’ ” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 5)
(quoting Simon & Schuster, Inc. v. Members of N. Y. State
Crime Victims Bd., 502 U. S. 105, 127 (1991) (KENNEDY,
J., concurring in judgment)). Among these categories are
advocacy intended, and likely, to incite imminent lawless
action, see Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U. S. 444 (1969)
(per curiam); obscenity, see, e.g., Miller v. California, 413
U. S. 15 (1973); defamation, see, e.g., New York Times Co.
v. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254 (1964) (providing substantial
protection for speech about public figures); Gertz v. Robert
Welch, Inc., 418 U. S. 323 (1974) (imposing some limits on
liability for defaming a private figure); speech integral to
criminal conduct, see, e.g., Giboney v. Empire Storage &
Ice Co., 336 U. S. 490 (1949); so-called “fighting words,”
see Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U. S. 568 (1942);
child pornography, see New York v. Ferber, 458 U. S. 747
(1982); fraud, see Virginia Bd. of Pharmacy v. Virginia
Citizens Consumer Council, Inc., 425 U. S. 748, 771 (1976);
true threats, see Watts v. United States, 394 U. S. 705
(1969) (per curiam); and speech presenting some grave
and imminent threat the government has the power to
prevent, see Near v. Minnesota ex rel. Olson, 283 U. S.
697, 716 (1931), although a restriction under the last
category is most difficult to sustain, see New York Times
Co. v. United States, 403 U. S. 713 (1971) (per curiam).
These categories have a historical foundation in the
Court’s free speech tradition. The vast realm of free
speech and thought always protected in our tradition can
still thrive, and even be furthered, by adherence to those
categories and rules.
Absent from those few categories where the law allows
content-based regulation of speech is any general exception to the First Amendment for false statements. This


6

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

comports with the common understanding that some false
statements are inevitable if there is to be an open and
vigorous expression of views in public and private conversation, expression the First Amendment seeks to guarantee. See Sullivan, supra, at 271 (“Th[e] erroneous
statement is inevitable in free debate”).
The Government disagrees with this proposition. It
cites language from some of this Court’s precedents to
support its contention that false statements have no value
and hence no First Amendment protection. See also Brief
for Eugene Volokh et al. as Amici Curiae 2–11. These
isolated statements in some earlier decisions do not support the Government’s submission that false statements,
as a general rule, are beyond constitutional protection.
That conclusion would take the quoted language far from
its proper context. For instance, the Court has stated
“[f]alse statements of fact are particularly valueless [because] they interfere with the truth-seeking function of
the marketplace of ideas,” Hustler Magazine, Inc. v. Falwell, 485 U. S. 46, 52 (1988), and that false statements
“are not protected by the First Amendment in the same
manner as truthful statements,” Brown v. Hartlage, 456
U. S. 45, 60–61 (1982). See also, e.g., Virginia Bd. of
Pharmacy, supra, at 771 (“Untruthful speech, commercial
or otherwise, has never been protected for its own sake”);
Herbert v. Lando, 441 U. S. 153, 171 (1979) (“Spreading
false information in and of itself carries no First Amendment credentials”); Gertz, supra, at 340 (“[T]here is no
constitutional value in false statements of fact”); Garrison
v. Louisiana, 379 U. S. 64, 75 (1964) (“[T]he knowingly
false statement and the false statement made with reckless disregard of the truth, do not enjoy constitutional
protection”).
These quotations all derive from cases discussing defamation, fraud, or some other legally cognizable harm
associated with a false statement, such as an invasion of


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

privacy or the costs of vexatious litigation. See Brief for
United States 18–19. In those decisions the falsity of
the speech at issue was not irrelevant to our analysis, but
neither was it determinative. The Court has never endorsed the categorical rule the Government advances: that
false statements receive no First Amendment protection.
Our prior decisions have not confronted a measure, like
the Stolen Valor Act, that targets falsity and nothing
more.
Even when considering some instances of defamation
and fraud, moreover, the Court has been careful to instruct that falsity alone may not suffice to bring the
speech outside the First Amendment. The statement must
be a knowing or reckless falsehood. See Sullivan, supra,
at 280 (prohibiting recovery of damages for a defamatory
falsehood made about a public official unless the statement was made “with knowledge that it was false or with
reckless disregard of whether it was false or not”); see
also Garrison, supra, at 73 (“[E]ven when the utterance is
false, the great principles of the Constitution which secure
freedom of expression . . . preclude attaching adverse
consequences to any except the knowing or reckless falsehood”); Illinois ex rel. Madigan v. Telemarketing Associates, Inc., 538 U. S. 600, 620 (2003) (“False statement
alone does not subject a fundraiser to fraud liability”).
The Government thus seeks to use this principle for a
new purpose. It seeks to convert a rule that limits liability
even in defamation cases where the law permits recovery
for tortious wrongs into a rule that expands liability in a
different, far greater realm of discourse and expression.
That inverts the rationale for the exception. The requirements of a knowing falsehood or reckless disregard for the
truth as the condition for recovery in certain defamation
cases exists to allow more speech, not less. A rule designed to tolerate certain speech ought not blossom to
become a rationale for a rule restricting it.


8

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

The Government then gives three examples of regulations on false speech that courts generally have found permissible: first, the criminal prohibition of a false statement made to a Government official, 18 U. S. C. §1001;
second, laws punishing perjury; and third, prohibitions on the false representation that one is speaking as a
Government official or on behalf of the Government, see,
e.g., §912; §709. These restrictions, however, do not establish a principle that all proscriptions of false statements
are exempt from exacting First Amendment scrutiny.
The federal statute prohibiting false statements to
Government officials punishes “whoever, in any matter
within the jurisdiction of the executive, legislative, or
judicial branch of the Government . . . makes any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or representation.” §1001. Section 1001’s prohibition on false
statements made to Government officials, in communications concerning official matters, does not lead to the broader
proposition that false statements are unprotected when
made to any person, at any time, in any context.
The same point can be made about what the Court has
confirmed is the “unquestioned constitutionality of perjury
statutes,” both the federal statute, §1623, and its state-law
equivalents. United States v. Grayson, 438 U. S. 41, 54
(1978). See also Konigsberg v. State Bar of Cal., 366 U. S.
36, 51, n. 10 (1961). It is not simply because perjured
statements are false that they lack First Amendment
protection. Perjured testimony “is at war with justice”
because it can cause a court to render a “judgment not
resting on truth.” In re Michael, 326 U. S. 224, 227 (1945).
Perjury undermines the function and province of the law
and threatens the integrity of judgments that are the
basis of the legal system. See United States v. Dunnigan,
507 U. S. 87, 97 (1993) (“To uphold the integrity of our
trial system . . . the constitutionality of perjury statutes is
unquestioned”). Unlike speech in other contexts, testi-


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

mony under oath has the formality and gravity necessary to
remind the witness that his or her statements will be the
basis for official governmental action, action that often
affects the rights and liberties of others. Sworn testimony
is quite distinct from lies not spoken under oath and simply intended to puff up oneself.
Statutes that prohibit falsely representing that one is
speaking on behalf of the Government, or that prohibit impersonating a Government officer, also protect the integrity of Government processes, quite apart from merely
restricting false speech. Title 18 U. S. C. §912, for example, prohibits impersonating an officer or employee of
the United States. Even if that statute may not require
proving an “actual financial or property loss” resulting
from the deception, the statute is itself confined to “maintain[ing] the general good repute and dignity of . . . government . . . service itself.” United States v. Lepowitch,
318 U. S. 702, 704 (1943) (internal quotation marks omitted). The same can be said for prohibitions on the unauthorized use of the names of federal agencies such as the
Federal Bureau of Investigation in a manner calculated to
convey that the communication is approved, see §709, or
using words such as “Federal” or “United States” in the
collection of private debts in order to convey that the
communication has official authorization, see §712. These
examples, to the extent that they implicate fraud or
speech integral to criminal conduct, are inapplicable here.
As our law and tradition show, then, there are instances
in which the falsity of speech bears upon whether it is
protected. Some false speech may be prohibited even if
analogous true speech could not be. This opinion does not
imply that any of these targeted prohibitions are somehow
vulnerable. But it also rejects the notion that false speech
should be in a general category that is presumptively
unprotected.
Although the First Amendment stands against any


10

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

“freewheeling authority to declare new categories of
speech outside the scope of the First Amendment,” Stevens, 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 9), the Court has
acknowledged that perhaps there exist “some categories of
speech that have been historically unprotected . . . but
have not yet been specifically identified or discussed . . . in
our case law.” Ibid. Before exempting a category of
speech from the normal prohibition on content-based restrictions, however, the Court must be presented with “persuasive evidence that a novel restriction on content is
part of a long (if heretofore unrecognized) tradition of
proscription,” Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Assn.,
564 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 4). The Government
has not demonstrated that false statements generally
should constitute a new category of unprotected speech on
this basis.
III
The probable, and adverse, effect of the Act on freedom of expression illustrates, in a fundamental way, the
reasons for the Law’s distrust of content-based speech
prohibitions.
The Act by its plain terms applies to a false statement
made at any time, in any place, to any person. It can be
assumed that it would not apply to, say, a theatrical performance. See Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co., 497 U. S.
1, 20 (1990) (recognizing that some statements nominally
purporting to contain false facts in reality “cannot reasonably be interpreted as stating actual facts about an individual” (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)).
Still, the sweeping, quite unprecedented reach of the
statute puts it in conflict with the First Amendment. Here
the lie was made in a public meeting, but the statute
would apply with equal force to personal, whispered conversations within a home. The statute seeks to control
and suppress all false statements on this one subject in


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

almost limitless times and settings. And it does so entirely without regard to whether the lie was made for the
purpose of material gain. See San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Comm., 483 U. S. 522,
539–540 (1987) (prohibiting a nonprofit corporation from
exploiting the “commercial magnetism” of the word “Olympic” when organizing an athletic competition (internal
quotation marks omitted)).
Permitting the government to decree this speech to be
a criminal offense, whether shouted from the rooftops or
made in a barely audible whisper, would endorse government authority to compile a list of subjects about which
false statements are punishable. That governmental
power has no clear limiting principle. Our constitutional
tradition stands against the idea that we need Oceania’s
Ministry of Truth. See G. Orwell, Nineteen Eighty-Four
(1949) (Centennial ed. 2003). Were this law to be sustained, there could be an endless list of subjects the National Government or the States could single out. Where
false claims are made to effect a fraud or secure moneys
or other valuable considerations, say offers of employment,
it is well established that the Government may restrict
speech without affronting the First Amendment. See, e.g.,
Virginia Bd. of Pharmacy, 425 U. S., at 771 (noting that
fraudulent speech generally falls outside the protections of
the First Amendment). But the Stolen Valor Act is not so
limited in its reach. Were the Court to hold that the interest in truthful discourse alone is sufficient to sustain a
ban on speech, absent any evidence that the speech was
used to gain a material advantage, it would give government a broad censorial power unprecedented in this
Court’s cases or in our constitutional tradition. The mere
potential for the exercise of that power casts a chill, a chill
the First Amendment cannot permit if free speech,
thought, and discourse are to remain a foundation of our
freedom.


12

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

IV
The previous discussion suffices to show that the Act
conflicts with free speech principles. But even when examined within its own narrow sphere of operation, the Act
cannot survive. In assessing content-based restrictions
on protected speech, the Court has not adopted a freewheeling approach, see Stevens, 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op.,
at 7) (“The First Amendment’s guarantee of free speech
does not extend only to categories of speech that survive
an ad hoc balancing of relative social costs and benefits”),
but rather has applied the “most exacting scrutiny.”
Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC, 512 U. S. 622,
642 (1994). Although the objectives the Government seeks
to further by the statute are not without significance, the
Court must, and now does, find the Act does not satisfy
exacting scrutiny.
The Government is correct when it states military medals “serve the important public function of recognizing and
expressing gratitude for acts of heroism and sacrifice in
military service,” and also “ ‘foste[r] morale, mission accomplishment and esprit de corps’ among service members.” Brief for United States 37, 38. General George
Washington observed that an award for valor would “cherish a virtuous ambition in . . . soldiers, as well as foster
and encourage every species of military merit.” General
Orders of George Washington Issued at Newburgh on the
Hudson, 1782–1783 (Aug. 7, 1782), p. 30 (E. Boynton ed.
1883). Time has not diminished this idea. In periods of
war and peace alike public recognition of valor and noble
sacrifice by men and women in uniform reinforces the
pride and national resolve that the military relies upon to
fulfill its mission.
These interests are related to the integrity of the military honors system in general, and the Congressional
Medal of Honor in particular. Although millions have
served with brave resolve, the Medal, which is the highest


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

military award for valor against an enemy force, has been
given just 3,476 times. Established in 1861, the Medal
is reserved for those who have distinguished themselves
“conspicuously by gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of
his life above and beyond the call of duty.” 10 U. S. C.
§§3741 (Army), 6241 (Navy and Marine Corps), 8741 (Air
Force), 14 U. S. C. §491 (Coast Guard). The stories of
those who earned the Medal inspire and fascinate, from
Dakota Meyer who in 2009 drove five times into the midst
of a Taliban ambush to save 36 lives, see Curtis, President
Obama Awards Medal of Honor to Dakota Meyer, The
White House Blog (Sept. 15, 2011) (all Internet materials
as visited June 25, 2012, and available in Clerk of Court’s
case file); to Desmond Doss who served as an army medic
on Okinawa and on June 5, 1945, rescued 75 fellow soldiers, and who, after being wounded, gave up his own
place on a stretcher so others could be taken to safety, see
America’s Heroes 88–90 (J. Willbanks ed. 2011); to William Carney who sustained multiple gunshot wounds to
the head, chest, legs, and arm, and yet carried the flag
to ensure it did not touch the ground during the Union
army’s assault on Fort Wagner in July 1863, id., at 44–45.
The rare acts of courage the Medal celebrates led President Truman to say he would “rather have that medal
round my neck than . . . be president of the United States.”
Truman Gives No. 1 Army Medal to 15 Heroes, Washington Post, Oct. 13, 1945, p. 5. The Government’s interest in
protecting the integrity of the Medal of Honor is beyond
question.
But to recite the Government’s compelling interests is
not to end the matter. The First Amendment requires
that the Government’s chosen restriction on the speech
at issue be “actually necessary” to achieve its interest. Entertainment Merchants Assn., 564 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
12). There must be a direct causal link between the restriction imposed and the injury to be prevented. See ibid.


14

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

The link between the Government’s interest in protecting
the integrity of the military honors system and the Act’s
restriction on the false claims of liars like respondent has
not been shown. Although appearing to concede that “an
isolated misrepresentation by itself would not tarnish the
meaning of military honors,” the Government asserts it is
“common sense that false representations have the tendency to dilute the value and meaning of military awards,”
Brief for United States 49, 54. It must be acknowledged
that when a pretender claims the Medal to be his own, the
lie might harm the Government by demeaning the high
purpose of the award, diminishing the honor it confirms,
and creating the appearance that the Medal is awarded
more often than is true. Furthermore, the lie may offend
the true holders of the Medal. From one perspective it insults their bravery and high principles when falsehood
puts them in the unworthy company of a pretender.
Yet these interests do not satisfy the Government’s
heavy burden when it seeks to regulate protected speech.
See United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group, Inc.,
529 U. S. 803, 818 (2000). The Government points to no
evidence to support its claim that the public’s general
perception of military awards is diluted by false claims
such as those made by Alvarez. Cf. Entertainment Merchants Assn., supra, at ___–___ (slip op., at 12–13) (analyzing and rejecting the findings of research psychologists
demonstrating the causal link between violent video
games and harmful effects on children). As one of the
Government’s amici notes “there is nothing that charlatans such as Xavier Alvarez can do to stain [the Medal
winners’] honor.” Brief for Veterans of Foreign Wars of
the United States et al. as Amici Curiae 1. This general
proposition is sound, even if true holders of the Medal
might experience anger and frustration.
The lack of a causal link between the Government’s
stated interest and the Act is not the only way in which


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

the Act is not actually necessary to achieve the Government’s stated interest. The Government has not shown,
and cannot show, why counterspeech would not suffice to
achieve its interest. The facts of this case indicate that
the dynamics of free speech, of counterspeech, of refutation, can overcome the lie. Respondent lied at a public
meeting. Even before the FBI began investigating him for
his false statements “Alvarez was perceived as a phony,”
617 F. 3d, at 1211. Once the lie was made public, he was
ridiculed online, see Brief for Respondent 3, his actions
were reported in the press, see Ortega, Alvarez Again
Denies Claim, Ontario, CA, Inland Valley Daily Bulletin
(Sept. 27, 2007), and a fellow board member called for his
resignation, see, e.g., Bigham, Water District Rep Requests Alvarez Resign in Wake of False Medal Claim,
San Bernardino Cty., CA, The Sun (May 21, 2008). There
is good reason to believe that a similar fate would befall
other false claimants. See Brief for Reporters Committee
for Freedom of the Press et al. as Amici Curiae 30–33
(listing numerous examples of public exposure of false
claimants). Indeed, the outrage and contempt expressed
for respondent’s lies can serve to reawaken and reinforce
the public’s respect for the Medal, its recipients, and its
high purpose. The acclaim that recipients of the Congressional Medal of Honor receive also casts doubt on the
proposition that the public will be misled by the claims of
charlatans or become cynical of those whose heroic deeds
earned them the Medal by right. See, e.g., Well Done,
Washington Post, Feb. 5, 1943, p. 8 (reporting on President Roosevelt’s awarding the Congressional Medal of
Honor to Maj. Gen. Alexander Vandegrift); Devroy, Medal
of Honor Given to 2 Killed in Somalia, Washington Post,
May 24, 1994, p. A6 (reporting on President Clinton’s
awarding the Congressional Medal of Honor to two special
forces soldiers killed during operations in Somalia).
The remedy for speech that is false is speech that is
true. This is the ordinary course in a free society. The


16

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

response to the unreasoned is the rational; to the uninformed, the enlightened; to the straight-out lie, the simple
truth. See Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357, 377 (1927)
(Brandeis, J., concurring) (“If there be time to expose
through discussion the falsehood and fallacies, to avert
the evil by the processes of education, the remedy to be applied is more speech, not enforced silence”). The theory of
our Constitution is “that the best test of truth is the power
of the thought to get itself accepted in the competition of
the market,” Abrams v. United States, 250 U. S. 616, 630
(1919) (Holmes, J., dissenting). The First Amendment
itself ensures the right to respond to speech we do not like,
and for good reason. Freedom of speech and thought flows
not from the beneficence of the state but from the inalienable rights of the person. And suppression of speech by
the government can make exposure of falsity more difficult, not less so. Society has the right and civic duty to
engage in open, dynamic, rational discourse. These ends
are not well served when the government seeks to orchestrate public discussion through content-based mandates.
Expressing its concern that counterspeech is insufficient, the Government responds that because “some
military records have been lost . . . some claims [are] unverifiable,” Brief for United States 50. This proves little,
however; for without verifiable records, successful criminal prosecution under the Act would be more difficult in
any event. So, in cases where public refutation will not
serve the Government’s interest, the Act will not either.
In addition, the Government claims that “many [false
claims] will remain unchallenged.” Id., at 55. The Government provides no support for the contention. And in
any event, in order to show that public refutation is not an
adequate alternative, the Government must demonstrate
that unchallenged claims undermine the public’s perception of the military and the integrity of its awards system.
This showing has not been made.


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

It is a fair assumption that any true holders of the
Medal who had heard of Alvarez’s false claims would have
been fully vindicated by the community’s expression of
outrage, showing as it did the Nation’s high regard for the
Medal. The same can be said for the Government’s interest. The American people do not need the assistance of a
government prosecution to express their high regard for
the special place that military heroes hold in our tradition. Only a weak society needs government protection or
intervention before it pursues its resolve to preserve the
truth. Truth needs neither handcuffs nor a badge for its
vindication.
In addition, when the Government seeks to regulate
protected speech, the restriction must be the “least restrictive means among available, effective alternatives.” Ashcroft, 542 U. S., at 666. There is, however, at least one
less speech-restrictive means by which the Government
could likely protect the integrity of the military awards
system. A Government-created database could list Congressional Medal of Honor winners. Were a database
accessible through the Internet, it would be easy to verify
and expose false claims. It appears some private individuals have already created databases similar to this,
see Brief for Respondent 25, and at least one database of past winners is online and fully searchable, see
Congressional Medal of Honor Society, Full Archive,
http://www.cmohs.org/recipient-archive.php. The Solicitor
General responds that although Congress and the Department of Defense investigated the feasibility of establishing a database in 2008, the Government “concluded
that such a database would be impracticable and insufficiently comprehensive.” Brief for United States 55.
Without more explanation, it is difficult to assess the Government’s claim, especially when at least one database of
Congressional Medal of Honor winners already exists.
The Government may have responses to some of these
criticisms, but there has been no clear showing of the


18

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

necessity of the statute, the necessity required by exacting
scrutiny.
*
*
*
The Nation well knows that one of the costs of the First
Amendment is that it protects the speech we detest as well
as the speech we embrace. Though few might find respondent’s statements anything but contemptible, his
right to make those statements is protected by the Constitution’s guarantee of freedom of speech and expression.
The Stolen Valor Act infringes upon speech protected by
the First Amendment.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.
It is so ordered.

