(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 11–210.

Argued February 22, 2012—Decided June 28, 2012

The Stolen Valor Act makes it a crime to falsely claim receipt of military decorations or medals and provides an enhanced penalty if the
Congressional Medal of Honor is involved. 18 U. S. C. §§704 (b), (c).
Respondent pleaded guilty to a charge of falsely claiming that he had
received the Medal of Honor, but reserved his right to appeal his
claim that the Act is unconstitutional. The Ninth Circuit reversed,
finding the Act invalid under the First Amendment.
Held: The judgment is affirmed. Pp. 3−18.
617 F. 3d 1198, affirmed.
JUSTICE KENNEDY, joined by THE CHIEF JUSTICE, JUSTICE GINSBURG,
and JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, concluded that the Act infringes upon
speech protected by the First Amendment. Pp. 3–18.
(a) The Constitution “demands that content-based restrictions on
speech be presumed invalid . . . and that the Government bear the
burden of showing their constitutionality.” Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union, 542 U. S. 656, 660.
Content-based restrictions on speech have been permitted only for
a few historic categories of speech, including incitement, obscenity,
defamation, speech integral to criminal conduct, so-called “fighting
words,” child pornography, fraud, true threats, and speech presenting
some grave and imminent threat the Government has the power to
prevent.
Absent from these few categories is any general exception for false
statements. The Government argues that cases such as Hustler
Magazine, Inc., v. Falwell, 485 U. S. 46, 52, support its claim that
false statements have no value and hence no First Amendment protection. But all the Government’s quotations derive from cases dis-


2

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Syllabus
cussing defamation, fraud, or some other legally cognizable harm associated with a false statement. In those decisions the falsity of the
speech at issue was not irrelevant to the Court’s analysis, but neither
was it determinative. These prior decisions have not confronted a
measure, like the Stolen Valor Act, that targets falsity and nothing
more.
Even when considering some instances of defamation or fraud, the
Court has instructed that falsity alone may not suffice to bring the
speech outside the First Amendment; the statement must be a knowing and reckless falsehood. See New York Times v. Sullivan, 376
U. S. 254, 280. Here, the Government seeks to convert a rule that
limits liability even in defamation cases where the law permits recovery for tortious wrongs into a rule that expands liability in a different, far greater realm of discourse and expression.
The Government’s three examples of false-speech regulation that
courts generally have found permissible do not establish a principle
that all proscriptions of false statements are exempt from rigorous
First Amendment scrutiny. The criminal prohibition of a false
statement made to Government officials in communications concerning official matters, 18 U. S. C. §1001, does not lead to the broader
proposition that false statements are unprotected when made to any
person, at any time, in any context. As for perjury statutes, perjured
statements lack First Amendment protection not simply because they
are false, but because perjury undermines the function and province
of the law and threatens the integrity of judgments. Finally, there
are statutes that prohibit falsely representing that one is speaking on
behalf of the Government, or prohibit impersonating a Government
officer. These examples, to the extent that they implicate fraud or
speech integral to criminal conduct, are inapplicable here.
While there may exist “some categories of speech that have been
historically unprotected,” but that the Court has not yet specifically
identified or discussed, United States v. Stevens, 559 U. S. ___, ___,
the Government has not demonstrated that false statements should
constitute a new category. Pp. 3−10.
(b) The Act seeks to control and suppress all false statements on
this one subject in almost limitless times and settings without regard
to whether the lie was made for the purpose of material gain. Permitting the Government to decree this speech to be a criminal offense
would endorse government authority to compile a list of subjects
about which false statements are punishable. That governmental
power has no clear limiting principle. Pp. 10−11.
(c) The Court applies the “most exacting scrutiny” in assessing content-based restrictions on protected speech. Turner Broadcasting
System Inc. v. FCC, 512 U. S. 622, 642. The Act does not satisfy that


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
scrutiny. While the Government’s interest in protecting the integrity
of the Medal of Honor is beyond question, the First Amendment requires that there be a direct causal link between the restriction imposed and the injury to be prevented. Here, that link has not been
shown. The Government points to no evidence supporting its claim
that the public’s general perception of military awards is diluted by
false claims such as those made by respondent. And it has not
shown, and cannot show, why counterspeech, such as the ridicule respondent received online and in the press, would not suffice to
achieve its interest.
In addition, when the Government seeks to regulate protected
speech, the restriction must be the “least restrictive means among
available, effective alternatives.” Ashcroft, 542 U. S., at 666. Here,
the Government could likely protect the integrity of the military
awards system by creating a database of Medal winners accessible
and searchable on the Internet, as some private individuals have already done. Pp. 12−18.
JUSTICE BREYER, joined by JUSTICE KAGAN, concluded that because
the Stolen Valor Act, as presently drafted, works disproportionate
constitutional harm, it fails intermediate scrutiny, and thus violates
the First Amendment. Pp. 1−10.
(a) In determining whether a statute violates the First Amendment, the Court has often found it appropriate to examine the fit between statutory ends and means, taking into account the seriousness
of the speech-related harm the provision will likely cause, the nature
and importance of the provision’s countervailing objectives, the extent to which the statute will tend to achieve those objectives, and
whether there are other, less restrictive alternatives. “Intermediate
scrutiny” describes this approach. Since false factual statements are
less likely than true factual statements to make a valuable contribution to the marketplace of ideas, and the government often has good
reason to prohibit such false speech, but its regulation can threaten
speech-related harm, such an approach is applied here. Pp. 1−3.
(b) The Act should be read as criminalizing only false factual
statements made with knowledge of their falsity and with intent that
they be taken as true. Although the Court has frequently said or implied that false factual statements enjoy little First Amendment protection, see, e.g., Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U. S. 323, 340, those
statements cannot be read to mean “no protection at all.” False factual statements serve useful human objectives in many contexts.
Moreover, the threat of criminal prosecution for making a false
statement can inhibit the speaker from making true statements,
thereby “chilling” a kind of speech that lies at the First Amendment’s
heart. See id., at 340−341. And the pervasiveness of false factual


4

UNITED STATES v. ALVAREZ
Syllabus
statements provides a weapon to a government broadly empowered to
prosecute falsity without more. Those who are unpopular may fear
that the government will use that weapon selectively against them.
Although there are many statutes and common-law doctrines making the utterance of certain kinds of false statements unlawful, they
tend to be narrower than the Act, in that they limit the scope of their
application in various ways, for example, by requiring proof of specific harm to identifiable victims. The Act lacks any such limiting features. Although it prohibits only knowing and intentional falsehoods
about readily verifiable facts within the personal knowledge of the
speaker, it otherwise ranges broadly, and that breadth means that it
creates a significant risk of First Amendment harm. Pp. 3−8.
(c) The Act nonetheless has substantial justification. It seeks to
protect the interests of those who have sacrificed their health and life
for their country by seeking to preserve intact the country’s recognition of that sacrifice in the form of military honors. P. 8.
(d) It may, however, be possible substantially to achieve the Government’s objective in less burdensome ways. The First Amendment
risks flowing from the Act’s breadth of coverage could be diminished
or eliminated by a more finely tailored statute, for example, a statute
that requires a showing that the false statement caused specific harm
or is focused on lies more likely to be harmful or on contexts where
such lies are likely to cause harm. Pp. 8−10.

KENNEDY, J., announced the judgment of the Court and delivered an
opinion, in which ROBERTS, C. J., and GINSBURG and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined. BREYER, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in
which KAGAN, J., joined. ALITO, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which
SCALIA and THOMAS, JJ., joined.

