(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

KURNS, EXECUTRIX OF THE ESTATE OF CORSON, 

DECEASED, ET AL. v. RAILROAD FRICTION 

PRODUCTS CORP. ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 10–879.

Argued November 9, 2011—Decided February 29, 2012

George Corson worked as a welder and machinist for a railroad carrier.
After retirement, Corson was diagnosed with mesothelioma. He and
his wife, a petitioner here, sued respondents Railroad Friction Products Corporation and Viad Corp in state court, claiming injury from
Corson’s exposure to asbestos in locomotives and locomotive parts
distributed by respondents. The Corsons alleged state-law claims of
defective design and failure to warn of the dangers posed by asbestos.
After Corson died, petitioner Kurns, executrix of his estate, was substituted as a party. Respondents removed the case to the Federal
District Court, which granted them summary judgment, ruling that
the state-law claims were pre-empted by the Locomotive Inspection
Act (LIA), 49 U. S. C. §20701 et seq. The Third Circuit affirmed.
Held: Petitioners’ state-law design-defect and failure-to-warn claims
fall within the field of locomotive equipment regulation pre-empted
by the LIA, as that field was defined in Napier v. Atlantic Coast Line
R. Co., 272 U. S. 605. Pp. 2−11.
(a) The LIA provides that a railroad carrier may use or allow to be
used a locomotive or tender on its railroad line only when the locomotive or tender and its parts or appurtenances are in proper condition
and safe to operate without unnecessary danger of personal injury,
have been inspected as required by the LIA and regulations prescribed thereunder by the Secretary of Transportation, and can withstand every test prescribed under the LIA by the Secretary. See
§20701. Pp. 2–3.
(b) Congress may expressly pre-empt state law. But even without


2

KURNS v. RAILROAD FRICTION PRODUCTS CORP.
Syllabus
an express pre-emption provision, state law must yield to a congressional Act to the extent of any conflict with a federal statute, see
Crosby v. National Foreign Trade Council, 530 U. S. 363, 372, or
when the federal statute’s scope indicates that Congress intended
federal law to occupy a field exclusively, see Freightliner Corp. v. Myrick, 514 U. S. 280, 287. This case involves only the latter, so-called
“field pre-emption.” Pp. 3–4.
(c) In Napier, this Court held two state laws prescribing the use of
locomotive equipment pre-empted by the LIA, concluding that the
broad power conferred by the LIA on the Interstate Commerce Commission (the agency then vested with authority to carry out the LIA’s
requirements) was a “general one” that “extends to the design, the
construction and the material of every part of the locomotive and
tender and of all appurtenances.” 272 U. S., at 611. The Court rejected the States’ contention that the scope of the pre-empted field
was to “be determined by the object sought through legislation, rather than the physical elements affected by it,” id., at 612, and found
it dispositive that “[t]he federal and state statutes are directed to the
same subject―the equipment of locomotives.” Ibid. Pp. 4−5.
(d) The Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (FRSA) did not alter
the LIA’s pre-emptive scope. By its terms, the FRSA—which instructs that “[t]he Secretary of Transportation . . . shall prescribe
regulations and issue orders for every area of railroad safety supplementing laws and regulations in effect on October 16, 1970,” 49
U. S. C. §20103(a)—does not alter pre-existing federal railroad safety
statutes. Rather, it leaves those statutes intact and authorizes the
Secretary to fill interstitial areas of railroad safety with supplemental regulation. Because the LIA was already in effect when the
FRSA was enacted, the FRSA left the LIA, and its pre-emptive scope
as defined by Napier, intact. P. 6.
(e) Petitioners do not argue that Napier should be overruled. Instead, petitioners contend that their claims fall outside the LIA’s
pre-empted field, as it was defined in Napier. Petitioners’ arguments
are unpersuasive. First, the argument that the pre-empted field
does not extend to state-law claims arising from the repair or
maintenance of locomotives is inconsistent with Napier’s holding
that Congress, in enacting the LIA, “manifest[ed] the intention to occupy the entire field of regulating locomotive equipment.” 272 U. S.,
at 611. Second, the argument that petitioners’ failure-to-warn
claims are not pre-empted because they do not base liability on the
design or manufacture of a product ignores that a failure-to-warn
claim alleges that the product itself is defective unless accompanied
by sufficient warnings or instructions. Because petitioners’ failureto-warn claims are therefore directed at the equipment of locomo-


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
tives, they fall within the pre-empted field defined by Napier. Third,
the argument that petitioners’ claims are not pre-empted because
manufacturers were not regulated under the LIA when Corson was
exposed to asbestos is inconsistent with Napier, which defined the
pre-empted field on the basis of the physical elements regulated, not
on the basis of the entity directly subject to regulation. Finally, contrary to petitioners’ argument, the LIA’s pre-emptive scope is not limited to state legislation or regulation but extends to state commonlaw duties and standards of care directed to the subject of locomotive
equipment. Pp. 6−11.
620 F. 3d 392, affirmed.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, ALITO, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. KAGAN, J.,
filed a concurring opinion. SOTOMAYOR, J., filed an opinion concurring
in part and dissenting in part, in which GINSBURG and BREYER, JJ.,
joined.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash­
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–879
_________________

GLORIA GAIL KURNS, EXECUTRIX OF THE ESTATE



OF GEORGE M. CORSON, DECEASED, ET AL., 

PETITIONERS v. RAILROAD FRICTION 

PRODUCTS CORPORATION ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT



[February 29, 2012]




JUSTICE THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court.
This case requires us to determine whether petitioners’
state-law tort claims for defective design and failure to
warn are pre-empted by the Locomotive Inspection Act
(LIA), 49 U. S. C. §20701 et seq. The United States Court
of Appeals for the Third Circuit determined that petition­
ers’ claims fall within the field pre-empted by that Act, as
that field was defined by this Court’s decision in Napier v.
Atlantic Coast Line R. Co., 272 U. S. 605 (1926). We
agree.
I
George Corson was employed as a welder and machinist
by the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul & Pacific Railroad
from 1947 until 1974. Corson worked in locomotive repair
and maintenance facilities, where his duties included
installing brakeshoes on locomotives and stripping insula­
tion from locomotive boilers. In 2005, Corson was diag­
nosed with malignant mesothelioma.
In 2007, Corson and his wife filed suit in Pennsylvania


2

KURNS v. RAILROAD FRICTION PRODUCTS CORP.
Opinion of the Court

state court against 59 defendants, including respondents
Railroad Friction Products Corporation (RFPC) and Viad
Corp (Viad). According to the complaint, RFPC distribut­
ed locomotive brakeshoes containing asbestos, and Viad
was the successor-in-interest to a company that manufac­
tured and sold locomotives and locomotive engine valves
containing asbestos. Corson alleged that he handled this
equipment and that he was injured by exposure to asbes­
tos. The complaint asserted state-law claims that the
equipment was defectively designed because it contained
asbestos, and that respondents failed to warn of the dan­
gers of asbestos or to provide instructions regarding its
safe use. After the complaint was filed, Corson passed
away, and the executrix of his estate, Gloria Kurns, was
substituted as a party. Corson’s widow and the executrix
are petitioners here.
Respondents removed the case to the United States
District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania
and moved for summary judgment. Respondents argued
that petitioners’ state-law claims were pre-empted by the
LIA. The District Court agreed and granted summary
judgment for respondents. See Kurns v. A. W. Chesterton,
Civ. Action No. 08–2216 (ED Pa., Feb. 3, 2009), App. to
Pet. for Cert. 39a. The Third Circuit affirmed. See Kurns
v. A. W. Chesterton, Inc., 620 F. 3d 392 (2010). We granted
certiorari. 563 U. S. ___ (2011).
II
Congress enacted the predecessor to the LIA, the Boiler
Inspection Act (BIA), in 1911. The BIA made it unlawful
to use a steam locomotive “unless the boiler of said loco­
motive and appurtenances thereof are in proper condition
and safe to operate . . . without unnecessary peril to life or
limb.” Act of Feb. 17, 1911, ch. 103, §2, 36 Stat. 913–914.
In 1915, Congress amended the BIA to apply to “the entire
locomotive and tender and all parts and appurtenances


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

thereof.”1 Act of Mar. 4, 1915, ch. 169, §1, 38 Stat. 1192.
The BIA as amended became commonly known as the
Locomotive Inspection Act. As relevant here, the LIA
provides:
“A railroad carrier may use or allow to be used
a locomotive or tender on its railroad line only
when the locomotive or tender and its parts and
appurtenances—
“(1) are in proper condition and safe to operate
without unnecessary danger of personal injury;
“(2) have been inspected as required under this
chapter and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of
Transportation under this chapter; and
“(3) can withstand every test prescribed by the Sec­
retary under this chapter.” 49 U. S. C. §20701.2
The issue presented in this case is whether the LIA pre­
empts petitioners’ state-law claims that respondents
defectively designed locomotive parts and failed to warn
Corson of dangers associated with those parts. In light of
this Court’s prior decision in Napier, supra, we conclude
that petitioners’ claims are pre-empted.
III



A

The Supremacy Clause provides that federal law “shall
be the supreme Law of the Land . . . any Thing in the
Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary not­
withstanding.” U. S. Const., Art. VI, cl. 2. Pre-emption of
——————
1 A “tender” is a “[a] car attached to a locomotive, for carrying a sup­
ply of fuel and water.” Webster’s New International Dictionary of the
English Language 2126 (1917).
2 At the time of Corson’s employment, this provision of the LIA was
worded somewhat differently. See 45 U. S. C. §23 (1946 ed.). Petition­
ers do not argue that the change in statutory language makes any
difference in this case.


4

KURNS v. RAILROAD FRICTION PRODUCTS CORP.
Opinion of the Court

state law thus occurs through the “direct operation of the
Supremacy Clause.” Brown v. Hotel Employees, 468 U. S.
491, 501 (1984). Congress may, of course, expressly pre­
empt state law, but “[e]ven without an express provision
for preemption, we have found that state law must yield to
a congressional Act in at least two circumstances.” Crosby
v. National Foreign Trade Council, 530 U. S. 363, 372
(2000). First, “state law is naturally preempted to the
extent of any conflict with a federal statute.” Ibid. Se­
cond, we have deemed state law pre-empted “when the
scope of a [federal] statute indicates that Congress intend­
ed federal law to occupy a field exclusively.” Freightliner
Corp. v. Myrick, 514 U. S. 280, 287 (1995). We deal here
only with the latter, so-called field pre-emption.
B
We do not, however, address the LIA’s pre-emptive effect on a clean slate, because this Court addressed that
issue 85 years ago in Napier. In that case, railroads chal­
lenged two state laws that “prohibit[ed] use within the
State of locomotives not equipped with” certain prescribed
devices, on the ground that the Interstate Commerce
Commission (ICC), the agency then vested with the au­
thority to carry out the LIA’s requirements, had not re­
quired the devices in question.3 272 U. S., at 607, 609. In
response, the States argued that their requirements were
not pre-empted because they were directed at a different
objective than the LIA. Id., at 612. According to the
States, their regulations were intended to protect railroad
workers from sickness and disease, whereas “the federal
regulation endeavors solely to prevent accidental injury in
——————
3 Act

of Feb. 17, 1911, §6, 36 Stat. 915. That authority has since
been transferred to the Secretary of Transportation. Department of
Transportation Act, §§6(e)(1)(E) and (F), 80 Stat. 939; see 49 U. S. C.
§§20701–20702.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

the operation of trains.” Ibid.
To determine whether the state requirements were pre­
empted, this Court asked whether the LIA “manifest[s]
the intention to occupy the entire field of regulating loco­
motive equipment[.]” Id., at 611. The Court answered
that question in the affirmative, stating that “[t]he broad
scope of the authority conferred upon the [ICC]” by Con­
gress in the LIA led to that conclusion. Id., at 613. The
power delegated to the ICC, the Court explained, was a
“general one” that “extends to the design, the construction
and the material of every part of the locomotive and ten­
der and of all appurtenances.” Id., at 611.
The Court rejected the States’ contention that the scope
of the pre-empted field was to “be determined by the object
sought through the legislation, rather than the physical
elements affected by it.” Id., at 612. The Court found it
dispositive that “[t]he federal and the state statutes are
directed to the same subject—the equipment of locomo­
tives.” Ibid. Because the States’ requirements operated
upon the same physical elements as the LIA, the Court
held that the state laws, “however commendable or how­
ever different their purpose,” id., at 613, fell within the
LIA’s pre-empted field.
IV
Against the backdrop of Napier, petitioners advance two
arguments in support of their position that their state-law
claims related to the use of asbestos in locomotive equip­
ment do not fall within the LIA’s pre-empted field. Peti­
tioners first contend that Napier no longer defines the
scope of the LIA’s pre-empted field because that field has
been narrowed by a subsequently enacted federal statute.
Alternatively, petitioners argue that their claims do not
fall within the LIA’s pre-empted field, even as that field
was defined by Napier. We address each of petitioners’
arguments in turn.


6

KURNS v. RAILROAD FRICTION PRODUCTS CORP.
Opinion of the Court

A
First, petitioners suggest that the Federal Railroad
Safety Act of 1970 (FRSA), 84 Stat. 971 (codified at 49
U. S. C. §20102 et seq.), altered the LIA’s pre-emptive
scope. The FRSA grants the Secretary of Transportation
broad regulatory authority over railroad safety. See
§20103(a). Petitioners point to the FRSA’s pre-emption
provision, which provides in part that “[a] State may adopt
or continue in force a law, regulation, or order related to
railroad safety . . . until the Secretary of Transportation
. . . prescribes a regulation or issues an order covering the
subject matter of the State requirement.” §20106(a)(2)
(2006 ed., Supp. III). According to petitioners, the FRSA’s
pre-emption provision supplanted the LIA’s pre-emption of
the field, with the result that petitioners’ claims are not
pre-empted because the Secretary has not issued a regula­
tion or order addressing the use of asbestos in locomotives
or locomotive parts.
Petitioners’ reliance on the FRSA is misplaced. The
FRSA instructs that “[t]he Secretary of Transportation,
as necessary, shall prescribe regulations and issue orders
for every area of railroad safety supplementing laws and
regulations in effect on October 16, 1970.” §20103(a) (2006
ed.) (emphasis added). By its terms, the FRSA does
not alter pre-existing federal statutes on railroad safety.
“Rather, it leaves existing statutes intact, . . . and author­
izes the Secretary to fill interstitial areas of railroad safety
with supplemental regulation.” Marshall v. Burlington
Northern, Inc., 720 F. 2d 1149, 1152–1153 (CA9 1983)
(Kennedy, J.). Because the LIA was already in effect
when the FRSA was enacted, we conclude that the FRSA
left the LIA, and its pre-emptive scope as defined by Napier, intact.
B
Since the LIA’s pre-emptive scope remains unaltered,


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

petitioners must contend with Napier. Petitioners do not
ask us to overrule Napier and thus do not seek to over­
come the presumption of stare decisis that attaches to this
85-year-old precedent. See Global-Tech Appliances, Inc. v.
SEB S. A., 563 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 9) (noting
the “special force of the doctrine of stare decisis with re­
gard to questions of statutory interpretation” (internal
quotation marks omitted)). Instead, petitioners advance
several arguments aimed at demonstrating that their
claims fall outside of the field pre-empted by the LIA, as it
was defined in Napier. Each is unpersuasive.
1
Petitioners, along with the Solicitor General as amicus
curiae, first argue that petitioners’ claims do not fall with­
in the LIA’s pre-empted field because the claims arise out
of the repair and maintenance of locomotives, rather than
the use of locomotives on a railroad line. Specifically, they
contend that the scope of the field pre-empted by the LIA
is coextensive with the scope of the Federal Government’s
regulatory authority under the LIA, which, they argue,
does not extend to the regulation of hazards arising from
the repair or maintenance of locomotives. Therefore, the
argument goes, state-law claims arising from repair or
maintenance—as opposed to claims arising from use on
the line—do not fall within the pre-empted field.
We reject this attempt to redefine the pre-empted field.
In Napier, the Court held that Congress, in enacting the
LIA, “manifest[ed] the intention to occupy the entire field
of regulating locomotive equipment,” and the Court did
not distinguish between hazards arising from repair and
maintenance as opposed to those arising from use on the
line. 272 U. S., at 611. The pre-empted field as defined
by Napier plainly encompasses the claims at issue here.
Petitioners’ common-law claims for defective design and
failure to warn are aimed at the equipment of locomotives.


8

KURNS v. RAILROAD FRICTION PRODUCTS CORP.
Opinion of the Court

Because those claims “are directed to the same subject” as
the LIA, Napier dictates that they fall within the pre­
empted field. Id., at 612.
2
Petitioners further argue that, even if their design­
defect claims are pre-empted, their failure-to-warn claims
do not suffer the same fate. In their complaint, petitioners
alleged in closely related claims (1) that respondents
negligently failed to warn of the risks associated with
asbestos and to provide instructions concerning safe­
guards for working with asbestos; and (2) that the asbestoscontaining products were defective because respondents
failed to give sufficient warnings or instructions con­
cerning the “risks, dangers, and harm inherent in said
asbestos products.” See App. 20–27 (¶¶7–10, 12), 42 (¶8);
see also Brief for Petitioners 11. According to petitioners,
these claims do not fall within the LIA’s pre-empted field
because “[t]he basis of liability for failure to warn . . . is
not the ‘design’ or ‘manufacture’ of a product,” but is in­
stead “the failure to provide adequate warnings regarding
the product’s risks.” Reply Brief for Petitioners 16.
We disagree. A failure-to-warn claim alleges that the
product itself is unlawfully dangerous unless accompanied
by sufficient warnings or instructions.
Restatement
(Third) of Torts: Products Liability §2(c) (1997) (A failure­
to-warn claim alleges that a product is defective “when the
foreseeable risks of harm posed by the product could have
been reduced or avoided by the provision of reasonable
instructions or warnings by the seller or other distribu­
tor, . . . and the omission of the instructions or warnings
renders the product not reasonably safe”); see also id.,
Comment l, at 33 (“Reasonable designs and instructions
or warnings both play important roles in the production
and distribution of reasonably safe products”). Thus, the
“gravamen” of petitioners’ failure-to-warn claims “is still


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

that [Corson] suffered harmful consequences as a result of
his exposure to asbestos contained in locomotive parts and
appurtenances.” 620 F. 3d, at 398, n. 8. Because petition­
ers’ failure-to-warn claims are therefore directed at the
equipment of locomotives, they fall within the pre-empted
field defined by Napier. 272 U. S., at 612.4
3
Petitioners also contend that their state-law claims
against manufacturers of locomotives and locomotive parts
fall outside of the LIA’s pre-empted field because manufac­
turers were not regulated under the LIA at the time that
Corson was allegedly exposed to asbestos. Petitioners
point out that the LIA, as originally enacted in the BIA,
subjected only common carriers to civil penalties. Act of
Feb. 17, 1911, §9, 36 Stat. 916. It was not until 1988, well
after the events of this case, that the LIA’s penalty provi­
sion was revised to apply to “[a]ny person” violating the
LIA. Rail Safety Improvement Act of 1988, §14(7)(A), 102
Stat. 633; see also §14(7)(B) (amending penalty provision
to provide that “an act by an individual that causes
a railroad to be in violation . . . shall be deemed a
violation”).
——————
4 JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR apparently agrees that petitioners’ failure-to­
warn claims are directed at the equipment of locomotives. Post, at 5
(opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). Yet, she argues,
those claims affect locomotive equipment only “ ‘tangentially.’ ” Ibid.
(quoting English v. General Elec. Co., 496 U. S. 72, 85 (1990)). Not
so. A failure-to-warn claim imposes liability on a particular design of
locomotive equipment unless warnings deemed sufficient under state
law are given. This duty to warn and the accompanying threat of
liability will inevitably influence a manufacturer’s choice whether to
use that particular design. By influencing design decisions in that
manner, failure-to-warn liability has a “ ‘direct and substantial effect’ ”
on the “physical elements” of a locomotive. Post, at 5 (quoting English,
supra, at 85).


10

KURNS v. RAILROAD FRICTION PRODUCTS CORP.
Opinion of the Court

This argument fails for the same reason as the two
preceding arguments: It is inconsistent with Napier.
Napier defined the field pre-empted by the LIA on the
basis of the physical elements regulated—“the equipment
of locomotives”—not on the basis of the entity directly
subject to regulation. 272 U. S., at 612. Because petition­
ers’ claims are directed at the equipment of locomotives,
they fall within the pre-empted field.
Petitioners’ proposed rule is also contrary to common
sense. Under petitioners’ approach, a State could not
require railroads to equip their locomotives with parts
meeting state-imposed specifications, but could require
manufacturers of locomotive parts to produce only parts
meeting those state-imposed specifications. We rejected a
similar approach in an express pre-emption context in
Engine Mfrs. Assn. v. South Coast Air Quality Management Dist., 541 U. S. 246 (2004). There, a state entity
argued that its rules prohibiting the purchase or lease of
vehicles that failed to meet stringent emissions require­
ments were not pre-empted by the Clean Air Act, 42
U. S. C. §7543(a), because the rules in question were
aimed at the purchase of vehicles, rather than their manu­
facture or sale. 541 U. S., at 248. We observed, however,
that “treating sales restrictions and purchase restrictions
differently for pre-emption purposes would make no
sense,” because the “manufacturer’s right to sell federally
approved vehicles is meaningless in the absence of a pur­
chaser’s right to buy them.” Id., at 255. Similarly, a
railroad’s ability to equip its fleet of locomotives in compli­
ance with federal standards is meaningless if manufactur­
ers are not allowed to produce locomotives and locomotive
parts that meet those standards. Petitioners’ claims thus
do not avoid pre-emption simply because they are aimed at
the manufacturers of locomotives and locomotive parts.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

4
Finally, petitioners contend that the LIA’s pre-emptive
scope does not extend to state common-law claims, as
opposed to state legislation or regulation. Petitioners note
that “a preempted field does not necessarily include state
common law.” Brief for Petitioners 38–39 (citing Silkwood
v. Kerr-McGee Corp., 464 U. S. 238 (1984); Sprietsma v.
Mercury Marine, 537 U. S. 51 (2002)). Napier, however,
held that the LIA “occup[ied] the entire field of regulating
locomotive equipment” to the exclusion of state regulation.
272 U. S., at 611–612. That categorical conclusion admits
of no exception for state common-law duties and standards
of care. As we have recognized, state “regulation can be
. . . effectively exerted through an award of damages,” and
“[t]he obligation to pay compensation can be, indeed is
designed to be, a potent method of governing conduct and
controlling policy.” San Diego Building Trades Council v.
Garmon, 359 U. S. 236, 247 (1959). Cf. Riegel v. Medtronic, Inc., 552 U. S. 312, 324 (2008) (“Absent other indication, reference to a State’s ‘requirements’ [in a federal
express pre-emption provision] includes its common-law
duties”). We therefore conclude that state common-law
duties and standards of care directed to the subject of
locomotive equipment are pre-empted by the LIA.
*
*
*
For the foregoing reasons, we hold that petitioners’
state-law design-defect and failure-to-warn claims fall
within the field of locomotive equipment regulation pre­
empted by the LIA, as that field was defined in Napier.
Accordingly, the judgment of the Court of Appeals is
affirmed.
It is so ordered.

