10

JOHNSON v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

of a statutory definition of “violent felony.” We do not
decide that the phrase has the same meaning in the con
text of defining a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence.
The issue is not before us, so we do not decide it.
In a similar vein, the Government asserts that our
interpretation will make it more difficult to remove, pur
suant to 8 U. S. C. §1227(a)(2)(E), an alien convicted of a
“crime of domestic violence.” That phrase is defined to
mean “any crime of violence (as defined in [18 U. S. C.
§16])” committed by certain persons, including spouses,
former spouses, and parents. §1227(a)(2)(E)(i). The Gov
ernment contends it will be harder to obtain removal
based upon battery convictions that, like those in Florida,
do not require the use of violent physical force. The dis
sent likewise anticipates that in the States it has identi
fied, post, at 6–7, and n. 3, as having generic felony
battery statutes that cover both violent force and un
wanted physical contact, our decision will render convic
tions under those statutes “outside the scope of [the
Armed Career Criminal Act],” post, at 8.
This exaggerates the practical effect of our decision.
When the law under which the defendant has been con
victed contains statutory phrases that cover several differ
ent generic crimes, some of which require violent force and
some of which do not, the “ ‘modified categorical approach’ ”
that we have approved, Nijhawan v. Holder, 557 U. S. ___,
___ (2009) (slip op., at 10), permits a court to determine
which statutory phrase was the basis for the conviction by
consulting the trial record—including charging docu
ments, plea agreements, transcripts of plea colloquies,
findings of fact and conclusions of law from a bench trial,
and jury instructions and verdict forms. See Chambers v.
United States, 555 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 4);
Shepard, 544 U. S., at 26 (plurality opinion); Taylor v.
United States, 495 U. S. 575, 602 (1990). Indeed, the
Government has in the past obtained convictions under

