8

JOHNSON v. UNITED STATES
ALITO, J., dissenting

no doubt, based on the use of violent force, the effect of the
Court’s decision will be to take all these convictions out
side the scope of ACCA—unless the Government is able to
produce documents that may properly be consulted under
the modified categorical approach and that conclusively
show that the offender’s conduct involved the use of vio
lent force, see ante, at 10–11. As the Government notes,
however, this will often be impossible because, in those
States in which the same battery provision governs both
the use of violent force and offensive touching, charging
documents frequently simply track the language of the
statute, and jury instructions often do not require juries to
draw distinctions based on the type of force that the de
fendant employed. See Brief for United States 42–43.
In addition, the Court’s interpretation of the term
“physical force” may hobble at least two federal statutes
that contain this identical term. Under 18 U. S. C.
§922(g)(9), a person convicted of a “misdemeanor crime of
domestic violence” may not lawfully possess a firearm, and
the term “misdemeanor crime of domestic violence” is
defined as applying only to crimes that “ha[ve], as an
element, the use or attempted use of physical force, or the
threatened use of a deadly weapon.” §921(a)(33)(A) (em
phasis added). As we recently explained, Congress recog
nized that “ ‘many people who engage in serious spousal or
child abuse ultimately are not charged with or convicted of
felonies,’ ” and Congress therefore enacted this provision to
keep firearms out of the hands of such abusers. United
States v. Hayes, 555 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 10).
Cases of spousal and child abuse are frequently prosecuted
under generally applicable assault and battery statutes,
ibid., and as noted, the assault and battery statutes of
almost half the States apply both to cases involving the
use of violent force and cases involving offensive touching.
As a result, if the Court’s interpretation of the term
“physical force” in ACCA is applied to §922(g)(9), a great

