8

JOHNSON v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

(indeed, much more readily) taken to describe violent
force, there is no reason to define “violent felony” by refer
ence to a nonviolent misdemeanor.
The Government argues that we cannot construe 18
U. S. C. §924(e)(2)(B)(i) to reach only offenses that have as
an element the use of violent force, because there is no
modifier in §924(e)(2)(B)(i) that specifies the degree of
“physical force” required. As we have discussed, however,
the term “physical force” itself normally connotes force
strong enough to constitute “power”—and all the more so
when it is contained in a definition of “violent felony.” Nor
is there any merit to the dissent’s contention, post, at 4,
that the term “force” in §924(e)(2)(B)(i) cannot be read to
require violent force, because Congress specifically named
“burglary” and “extortion” as “violent felon[ies]” in
§924(e)(2)(B)(ii) notwithstanding that those offenses can
be committed without violence. The point would have
force (so to speak) if burglary and extortion were listed in
§924(e)(2)(B)(i), as felonies that have “as an element the
use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical force.”
In fact, however, they are listed in §924(e)(2)(B)(ii), as
examples of felonies that “presen[t] a serious potential risk
of physical injury to another.” The Government has not
argued that intentional, unwanted touching qualifies
under this latter provision. What the dissent’s argument
comes down to, then, is the contention that, since felonies
that create a serious risk of physical injury qualify as
violent felonies under subparagraph (B)(ii), felonies that
involve a mere unwanted touching must involve the use of
physical force and qualify as violent felonies under sub
paragraph (B)(i). That obviously does not follow. 2
——————
2 Even further afield is the dissent’s argument, post, at 2–3, that since
§924(e)(2)(B)(ii) requires conduct that “presents a serious potential risk
of physical injury to another,” §924(e)(2)(B)(i) must not. That is rather
like saying a provision which includes (i) apples and (ii) overripe
oranges must exclude overripe apples. It does not follow.

