2

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
is the broad discretion exercised by immigration officials, who must
decide whether to pursue removal at all. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE), an agency within the Department of Homeland
Security, is responsible for identifying, apprehending, and removing
illegal aliens. It also operates the Law Enforcement Support Center,
which provides immigration status information to federal, state, and
local officials around the clock. Pp. 2–7.
2. The Supremacy Clause gives Congress the power to preempt
state law. A statute may contain an express preemption provision,
see, e.g., Chamber of Commerce of United States of America v. Whiting, 563 U. S. ___, ___, but state law must also give way to federal
law in at least two other circumstances. First, States are precluded
from regulating conduct in a field that Congress has determined
must be regulated by its exclusive governance. See Gade v. National
Solid Wastes Management Assn., 505 U. S. 88, 115. Intent can be inferred from a framework of regulation “so pervasive . . . that Congress left no room for the States to supplement it” or where a “federal
interest is so dominant that the federal system will be assumed to
preclude enforcement of state laws on the same subject.” Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., 331 U. S. 218, 230. Second, state laws are
preempted when they conflict with federal law, including when they
stand “as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full
purposes and objectives of Congress.” Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U. S.
52, 67. Pp. 7–8.
3. Sections 3, 5(C), and 6 of S. B. 1070 are preempted by federal
law. Pp. 8–19.
(a) Section 3 intrudes on the field of alien registration, a field in
which Congress has left no room for States to regulate. In Hines, a
state alien-registration program was struck down on the ground that
Congress intended its “complete” federal registration plan to be a
“single integrated and all-embracing system.” 312 U. S., at 74. That
scheme did not allow the States to “curtail or complement” federal
law or “enforce additional or auxiliary regulations.” Id., at 66–67.
The federal registration framework remains comprehensive. Because
Congress has occupied the field, even complementary state regulation
is impermissible. Pp. 8–11.
(b) Section 5(C)’s criminal penalty stands as an obstacle to the
federal regulatory system. The Immigration Reform and Control Act
of 1986 (IRCA), a comprehensive framework for “combating the employment of illegal aliens,” Hoffman Plastic Compounds, Inc. v.
NLRB, 535 U. S. 137, 147, makes it illegal for employers to knowingly hire, recruit, refer, or continue to employ unauthorized workers, 8
U. S. C. §§1324a(a)(1)(A), (a)(2), and requires employers to verify prospective
employees’
employment
authorization
status,

