2

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

ited, or in any way restricted, from sending to or receiving
from” federal officials “information regarding the immigration status” of an alien. 8 U. S. C. §1644. And, federal
law imposes an affirmative obligation on federal officials
to respond to a State’s immigration-related inquiries.
§1373(c).
Section 6 of S. B. 1070 authorizes Arizona law enforcement officers to make warrantless arrests when there is
probable cause to believe that an arrestee has committed a
public offense that renders him removable under federal
immigration law. States, as sovereigns, have inherent
authority to conduct arrests for violations of federal law,
unless and until Congress removes that authority. See
United States v. Di Re, 332 U. S. 581, 589 (1948) (holding
that state law determines the validity of a warrantless
arrest for a violation of federal law “in the absence of
an applicable federal statute”). Here, no federal statute
purports to withdraw that authority. As JUSTICE SCALIA
notes, ante, at 12 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part), federal law does limit the authority of federal
officials to arrest removable aliens, but those statutes do
not apply to state officers. And, federal law expressly
recognizes that state officers may “cooperate with the
Attorney General” in the “apprehension” and “detention”
of “aliens not lawfully present in the United States.”
§1357(g)(10)(B). Nothing in that statute indicates that
such cooperation requires a prior “request, approval, or
other instruction from the Federal Government.” Ante, at
18 (majority opinion).
Section 3 of S. B. 1070 makes it a crime under Arizona
law for an unlawfully present alien to willfully fail to
complete or carry an alien registration document in violation of 8 U. S. C. §1304(e) and §1306(a). Section 3 simply
incorporates federal registration standards. Unlike the
Court, I would not hold that Congress pre-empted the field
of enforcing those standards. “[O]ur recent cases have

