OCTOBER TERM, 2011

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ARIZONA ET AL. v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 11–182.

Argued April 25, 2012—Decided June 25, 2012

An Arizona statute known as S. B. 1070 was enacted in 2010 to address
pressing issues related to the large number of unlawful aliens in the
State. The United States sought to enjoin the law as preempted. The
District Court issued a preliminary injunction preventing four of its
provisions from taking effect. Section 3 makes failure to comply with
federal alien-registration requirements a state misdemeanor; §5(C)
makes it a misdemeanor for an unauthorized alien to seek or engage
in work in the State; §6 authorizes state and local officers to arrest
without a warrant a person “the officer has probable cause to believe
. . . has committed any public offense that makes the person removable from the United States”; and §2(B) requires officers conducting a
stop, detention, or arrest to make efforts, in some circumstances, to
verify the person’s immigration status with the Federal Government.
The Ninth Circuit affirmed, agreeing that the United States had established a likelihood of success on its preemption claims.
Held:
1. The Federal Government’s broad, undoubted power over immigration and alien status rests, in part, on its constitutional power to
“establish an uniform Rule of Naturalization,” Art. I, §8, cl. 4, and on
its inherent sovereign power to control and conduct foreign relations,
see Toll v. Moreno, 458 U. S. 1, 10. Federal governance is extensive
and complex. Among other things, federal law specifies categories of
aliens who are ineligible to be admitted to the United States, 8
U. S. C. §1182; requires aliens to register with the Federal Government and to carry proof of status, §§1304(e), 1306(a); imposes sanctions on employers who hire unauthorized workers, §1324a; and specifies which aliens may be removed and the procedures for doing so,
see §1227. Removal is a civil matter, and one of its principal features

