Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of ALITO, J.

Because §5(C) imposes such penalties, the Court concludes
that it stands as an obstacle to the method of enforcement
chosen by Congress. Ante, at 15.
The one thing that is clear from the federal scheme is
that Congress chose not to impose federal criminal penalties on aliens who seek or obtain unauthorized work. But
that does not mean that Congress also chose to pre-empt
state criminal penalties. The inference is plausible, but
far from necessary. As we have said before, the “decision
not to adopt a regulation” is not “the functional equivalent
of a regulation prohibiting all States and their political
subdivisions from adopting such a regulation.” Sprietsma
v. Mercury Marine, 537 U. S. 51, 65 (2002). With any
statutory scheme, Congress chooses to do some things and
not others. If that alone were enough to demonstrate preemptive intent, there would be little left over for the
States to regulate, especially now that federal authority
reaches so far and wide. States would occupy tiny islands
in a sea of federal power. This explains why state laws
implicating traditional state powers are not pre-empted
unless there is a “clear and manifest” congressional intention to do so.
Not only is there little evidence that Congress intended
to pre-empt state laws like §5(C), there is some evidence
that Congress intended the opposite result. In making it
unlawful for employers to hire unauthorized aliens, see 8
U. S. C. §1324a(a), Congress made it clear that “any State
or local law imposing civil or criminal sanctions (other
than through licensing and similar laws)” upon employers
was pre-empted, §1324a(h)(2). Noticeably absent is any
similar directive pre-empting state or local laws targeting
aliens who seek or obtain unauthorized employment.
Given that Congress expressly pre-empted certain state
and local laws pertaining to employers but remained silent
about laws pertaining to employees, one could infer that
Congress intended to preserve state and local authority to

