Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

23

Opinion of the Court

immigration status did not prolong a stop).
To take another example, a person might be held pend­
ing release on a charge of driving under the influence of
alcohol. As this goes beyond a mere stop, the arrestee
(unlike the jaywalker) would appear to be subject to the
categorical requirement in the second sentence of §2(B)
that “[a]ny person who is arrested shall have the person’s
immigration status determined before [he] is released.”
State courts may read this as an instruction to initiate a
status check every time someone is arrested, or in some
subset of those cases, rather than as a command to hold
the person until the check is complete no matter the cir­
cumstances. Even if the law is read as an instruction to
complete a check while the person is in custody, moreover,
it is not clear at this stage and on this record that the
verification process would result in prolonged detention.
However the law is interpreted, if §2(B) only requires
state officers to conduct a status check during the course
of an authorized, lawful detention or after a detainee has
been released, the provision likely would survive preemption—at least absent some showing that it has other
consequences that are adverse to federal law and its objec­
tives. There is no need in this case to address whether
reasonable suspicion of illegal entry or another immigra­
tion crime would be a legitimate basis for prolonging a
detention, or whether this too would be preempted by
federal law. See, e.g., United States v. Di Re, 332 U. S.
581, 589 (1948) (authority of state officers to make arrests
for federal crimes is, absent federal statutory instruction,
a matter of state law); Gonzales v. Peoria, 722 F. 2d 468,
475–476 (CA9 1983) (concluding that Arizona officers have
authority to enforce the criminal provisions of federal
immigration law), overruled on other grounds in HodgersDurgin v. de la Vina, 199 F. 3d 1037 (CA9 1999).
The nature and timing of this case counsel caution in
evaluating the validity of §2(B). The Federal Government

