Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of SCALIA, J.

registration system as “an available aid in the enforce­
ment of a number of statutes of the state applicable to
aliens whose constitutional validity has not been ques­
tioned.” Id., at 75–76 (Stone, J., dissenting). One such
statute is Arizona’s law forbidding illegal aliens to collect
unemployment benefits, Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §23–781(B)
(West 2012). To enforce that and other laws that validly
turn on alien status, Arizona has, in Justice Stone’s words,
an interest in knowing “the number and whereabouts of
aliens within the state” and in having “a means of their
identification,” 312 U. S., at 75. And it can punish the
aliens’ failure to comply with the provisions of federal law
that make that knowledge and identification possible.
In some areas of uniquely federal concern—e.g., fraud in
a federal administrative process (Buckman Co. v. Plain­
tiffs’ Legal Comm., 531 U. S. 341 (2001)) or perjury in
violation of a federally required oath (In re Loney, 134
U. S. 372 (1890))—this Court has held that a State has no
legitimate interest in enforcing a federal scheme. But the
federal alien registration system is certainly not of uniquely
federal interest. States, private entities, and individuals
rely on the federal registration system (including the
E-Verify program) on a regular basis. Arizona’s legitimate in­
terest in protecting (among other things) its unemployment­
benefits system is an entirely adequate basis for making
the violation of federal registration and carry require­
ments a violation of state law as well.
The Court points out, however, ante, at 11, that in some
respects the state law exceeds the punishments prescribed
by federal law: It rules out probation and pardon, which
are available under federal law. The answer is that it
makes no difference. Illegal immigrants who violate §3
violate Arizona law. It is one thing to say that the Su­
premacy Clause prevents Arizona law from excluding
those whom federal law admits. It is quite something else
to say that a violation of Arizona law cannot be punished

