Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

frequently rejected field pre-emption in the absence of
statutory language expressly requiring it.” Camps Newfound/Owatonna, Inc. v. Town of Harrison, 520 U. S. 564,
617 (1997) (THOMAS, J., dissenting); see, e.g., New York
State Dept. of Social Servs. v. Dublino, 413 U. S. 405, 415
(1973). Here, nothing in the text of the relevant federal
statutes indicates that Congress intended enforcement of
its registration requirements to be exclusively the province of the Federal Government. That Congress created a
“full set of standards governing alien registration,” ante, at
10 (majority opinion), merely indicates that it intended the
scheme to be capable of working on its own, not that it
wanted to preclude the States from enforcing the federal
standards. Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U. S. 52 (1941), is not
to the contrary. As JUSTICE SCALIA explains, ante, at 14,
Hines at most holds that federal law pre-empts the States
from creating additional registration requirements. But
here, Arizona is merely seeking to enforce the very registration requirements that Congress created.
Section 5(C) of S. B. 1070 prohibits unlawfully present
aliens from knowingly applying for, soliciting, or performing work in Arizona. Section 5(C) operates only on individuals whom Congress has already declared ineligible to
work in the United States. Nothing in the text of the
federal immigration laws prohibits States from imposing
their own criminal penalties on such individuals. Federal law expressly pre-empts States from “imposing civil or
criminal sanctions (other than through licensing and
similar laws) upon those who employ, or recruit or refer
for a fee for employment, unauthorized aliens.” 8 U. S. C.
§1324a(h)(2) (emphasis added). But it leaves States free
to impose criminal sanctions on the employees themselves.
Despite the lack of any conflict between the ordinary
meaning of the Arizona law and that of the federal laws at
issue here, the Court holds that various provisions of the
Arizona law are pre-empted because they “stan[d] as an

