Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

on its own terms. Permitting the State to impose its own
penalties for the federal offenses here would conflict with
the careful framework Congress adopted. Cf. Buckman
Co. v. Plaintiffs’ Legal Comm., 531 U. S. 341, 347–348
(2001) (States may not impose their own punishment for
fraud on the Food and Drug Administration); Wisconsin
Dept., supra, at 288 (States may not impose their own
punishment for repeat violations of the National Labor
Relations Act). Were §3 to come into force, the State
would have the power to bring criminal charges against
individuals for violating a federal law even in circum­
stances where federal officials in charge of the comprehen­
sive scheme determine that prosecution would frustrate
federal policies.
There is a further intrusion upon the federal scheme.
Even where federal authorities believe prosecution is appropriate, there is an inconsistency between §3 and federal law with respect to penalties. Under federal law,
the failure to carry registration papers is a misdemeanor
that may be punished by a fine, imprisonment, or a term
of probation. See 8 U. S. C. §1304(e) (2006 ed.); 18 U. S. C.
§3561. State law, by contrast, rules out probation as a
possible sentence (and also eliminates the possibility of
a pardon). See Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §13–1509(D) (West
Supp. 2011). This state framework of sanctions creates a
conflict with the plan Congress put in place. See Wisconsin Dept., supra, at 286 (“[C]onflict is imminent whenever
two separate remedies are brought to bear on the same
activity” (internal quotation marks omitted)).
These specific conflicts between state and federal law
simply underscore the reason for field preemption. As it
did in Hines, the Court now concludes that, with respect
to the subject of alien registration, Congress intended to
preclude States from “complement[ing] the federal law, or
enforc[ing] additional or auxiliary regulations.” 312 U. S.,
at 66–67. Section 3 is preempted by federal law.

