Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of the Court

bility than Congress has given to trained federal immigration officers. Under state law, officers who believe
an alien is removable by reason of some “public offense”
would have the power to conduct an arrest on that basis
regardless of whether a federal warrant has issued or
the alien is likely to escape. This state authority could be
exercised without any input from the Federal Government
about whether an arrest is warranted in a particular case.
This would allow the State to achieve its own immigra­
tion policy. The result could be unnecessary harassment
of some aliens (for instance, a veteran, college student, or
someone assisting with a criminal investigation) whom
federal officials determine should not be removed.
This is not the system Congress created. Federal law
specifies limited circumstances in which state officers may
perform the functions of an immigration officer. A princi­
pal example is when the Attorney General has granted
that authority to specific officers in a formal agreement
with a state or local government. See §1357(g)(1); see also
§1103(a)(10) (authority may be extended in the event of an
“imminent mass influx of aliens off the coast of the United
States”); §1252c (authority to arrest in specific circum­
stance after consultation with the Federal Government);
§1324(c) (authority to arrest for bringing in and harboring
certain aliens). Officers covered by these agreements are
subject to the Attorney General’s direction and super­
vision. §1357(g)(3). There are significant complexities
involved in enforcing federal immigration law, including
the determination whether a person is removable. See
Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U. S. ___, ___–___ (2010) (ALITO,
J., concurring in judgment) (slip op., at 4–7). As a result,
the agreements reached with the Attorney General must
contain written certification that officers have received
adequate training to carry out the duties of an immigra­
tion officer. See §1357(g)(2); cf. 8 CFR §§287.5(c) (arrest power contingent on training), 287.1(g) (defining the

