Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of ALITO, J.

officers in the event of an “actual or imminent mass influx of aliens arriving off the coast”); §1252c(a) (providing authority to arrest criminal aliens who had illegally
reentered the country but only after consultation with
the Federal Government); §1324(c) (providing authority
to make arrests for transporting and harboring certain
aliens). But a grant of federal arrest authority in some
cases does not manifest a clear congressional intent to
displace the States’ police powers in all other cases. Without more, such an inference is too weak to overcome our
presumption against pre-emption where traditional state
police powers are at stake. Accordingly, in our hypothetical case, the Arizona officer may arrest the driver for
violating §1325(a) if the officer has probable cause. And if
the officer has reasonable suspicion, the officer may detain
the driver, to the extent permitted by the Fourth Amendment, while the question of illegal entry is investigated.
We have held that a detention based on reasonable
suspicion that the detainee committed a particular crime
“can become unlawful if it is prolonged beyond the time
reasonably required to complete that mission.” Illinois v.
Caballes, 543 U. S. 405, 407 (2005). But if during the
course of a stop an officer acquires suspicion that a detainee committed a different crime, the detention may be
extended for a reasonable time to verify or dispel that
suspicion. Cf. Muehler v. Mena, 544 U. S. 93, 101 (2005)
(holding that “no additional Fourth Amendment justification” was required because any questioning concerning
immigration status did not prolong the detention). In our
hypothetical case, therefore, if the officer, after initially
stopping the car for speeding, has a reasonable suspicion
that the driver entered the country illegally, the officer
may investigate for evidence of illegal entry. But the
length and nature of this investigation must remain within the limits set out in our Fourth Amendment cases. An
investigative stop, if prolonged, can become an arrest and

