18

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

training).
By authorizing state officers to decide whether an
alien should be detained for being removable, §6 violates
the principle that the removal process is entrusted to the
discretion of the Federal Government. See, e.g., Reno v.
American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Comm., 525 U. S. 471,
483–484 (1999); see also Brief for Former INS Commis­
sioners 8–13. A decision on removability requires a de­
termination whether it is appropriate to allow a foreign
national to continue living in the United States. Decisions
of this nature touch on foreign relations and must be made
with one voice. See Jama v. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, 543 U. S. 335, 348 (2005) (“Removal deci­
sions, including the selection of a removed alien’s destina­
tion, may implicate [the Nation’s] relations with foreign
powers and require consideration of changing political and
economic circumstances” (internal quotation marks omit­
ted)); see also Galvan v. Press, 347 U. S. 522, 531 (1954)
(“Policies pertaining to the entry of aliens and their right
to remain here are . . . entrusted exclusively to Congress
. . .”); Truax v. Raich, 239 U. S. 33, 42 (1915) (“The author­
ity to control immigration—to admit or exclude aliens—is
vested solely in the Federal Government”).
In defense of §6, Arizona notes a federal statute permit­
ting state officers to “cooperate with the Attorney General
in the identification, apprehension, detention, or removal
of aliens not lawfully present in the United States.” 8
U. S. C. §1357(g)(10)(B). There may be some ambiguity as
to what constitutes cooperation under the federal law; but
no coherent understanding of the term would incorporate
the unilateral decision of state officers to arrest an alien
for being removable absent any request, approval, or other
instruction from the Federal Government. The Depart­
ment of Homeland Security gives examples of what would
constitute cooperation under federal law. These include
situations where States participate in a joint task force

