18

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of ALITO, J.

obligated to take the alien into custody.
That Congress generally requires the Executive to take
custody of criminal aliens casts considerable doubt on the
Court’s concern that §6 is an obstacle to the Federal Government’s exercise of discretion. The Court claims that
the authority conferred by §6 “could be exercised without
any input from the Federal Government about whether
an arrest is warranted in a particular case” and that this
“would allow the State to achieve its own immigration
policy,” resulting in the “unnecessary harassment of some
aliens . . . whom federal officials determine should not be
removed.” Ante, at 17. But §1226(c)(1) belies the Court’s
fear. In many, if not most, cases involving aliens who are
removable for having committed criminal offenses, Congress has left the Executive no discretion but to take the
alien into custody. State and local officers do not frustrate the removal process by arresting criminal aliens.
The Executive retains complete discretion over whether
those aliens are ultimately removed. And once the Federal Government makes a determination that a particular
criminal alien will not be removed, then Arizona officers
are presumably no longer authorized under §6 to arrest
the alien.
To be sure, not all offenses for which officers have authority to arrest under §6 are covered by §1226(c)(1). As
for aliens who have committed those offenses, Congress
has given the Executive discretion under §1226(a) over
whether to arrest and detain them pending a decision on
removal. But the mere fact that the Executive has enforcement discretion cannot mean that the exercise of
state police powers in support of federal law is automatically pre-empted. If that were true, then state and local
officers could never make arrests to enforce any federal
statute because the Executive always has at least some
general discretion over the enforcement of federal law as a
practical matter. But even assuming that the express

