14

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of ALITO, J.

regulate the employee side of the equation. At the very
least, it raises serious doubts about whether Congress
intended to pre-empt such authority.
The Court dismisses any inferences that might be
drawn from the express pre-emption provision. See ante,
at 14. But even though the existence of that provision
“does not bar the ordinary working of conflict pre-emption
principles” or impose a “ ‘special burden’ ” against preemption, Geier v. American Honda Motor Co., 529 U. S.
861, 869–870 (2000), it is still probative of congressional
intent. And it is the intent of Congress that is the “ultimate touchstone.” Retail Clerks v. Schermerhorn, 375
U. S. 96, 103 (1963).
The Court infers from Congress’ decision not to impose
federal criminal penalties that Congress intended to preempt state criminal penalties. But given that the express
pre-emption provision covers only state and local laws
regulating employers, one could just as well infer that
Congress did not intend to pre-empt state or local laws
aimed at alien employees who unlawfully seek or obtain
work. Surely Congress’ decision not to extend its express
pre-emption provision to state or local laws like §5(C) is
more probative of its intent on the subject of pre-emption
than its decision not to impose federal criminal penalties
for unauthorized work. In any event, the point I wish
to emphasize is that inferences can be drawn either way.
There are no necessary inferences that point decisively for
or against pre-emption. Therefore, if we take seriously
that state employment regulation is a traditional state
concern and can be pre-empted only on a showing of
“clear and manifest” congressional intent as required by De
Canas, then §5(C) must survive. “Our precedents establish that a high threshold must be met if a state law is to
be pre-empted for conflicting with the purposes of a federal Act.” Chamber of Commerce of United States of America
v. Whiting, 563 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (plurality opinion)

