4

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

extensive and complex. Congress has specified catego­
ries of aliens who may not be admitted to the United
States. See 8 U. S. C. §1182. Unlawful entry and unlawful
reentry into the country are federal offenses. §§1325,
1326. Once here, aliens are required to register with the
Federal Government and to carry proof of status on their
person. See §§1301–1306. Failure to do so is a federal
misdemeanor. §§1304(e), 1306(a). Federal law also au­
thorizes States to deny noncitizens a range of public bene­
fits, §1622; and it imposes sanctions on employers who
hire unauthorized workers, §1324a.
Congress has specified which aliens may be removed
from the United States and the procedures for doing so.
Aliens may be removed if they were inadmissible at the
time of entry, have been convicted of certain crimes, or
meet other criteria set by federal law. See §1227. Re­
moval is a civil, not criminal, matter. A principal feature of
the removal system is the broad discretion exercised by
immigration officials. See Brief for Former Commission­
ers of the United States Immigration and Naturalization
Service as Amici Curiae 8–13 (hereinafter Brief for For­
mer INS Commissioners). Federal officials, as an initial
matter, must decide whether it makes sense to pursue
removal at all. If removal proceedings commence, aliens
may seek asylum and other discretionary relief allowing
them to remain in the country or at least to leave without
formal removal. See §1229a(c)(4); see also, e.g., §§1158
(asylum), 1229b (cancellation of removal), 1229c (volun­
tary departure).
Discretion in the enforcement of immigration law em­
braces immediate human concerns. Unauthorized work­
ers trying to support their families, for example, likely
pose less danger than alien smugglers or aliens who com­
mit a serious crime. The equities of an individual case
may turn on many factors, including whether the alien
has children born in the United States, long ties to the

