22

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

2
Some who support the challenge to §2(B) argue that, in
practice, state officers will be required to delay the release
of some detainees for no reason other than to verify their
immigration status. See, e.g., Brief for Former Arizona
Attorney General Terry Goddard et al. as Amici Curiae 37,
n. 49. Detaining individuals solely to verify their immi­
gration status would raise constitutional concerns. See,
e.g., Arizona v. Johnson, 555 U. S. 323, 333 (2009); Illinois
v. Caballes, 543 U. S. 405, 407 (2005) (“A seizure that is
justified solely by the interest in issuing a warning ticket
to the driver can become unlawful if it is prolonged beyond
the time reasonably required to complete that mission”).
And it would disrupt the federal framework to put state
officers in the position of holding aliens in custody for
possible unlawful presence without federal direction and
supervision. Cf. Part IV–C, supra (concluding that Ari­
zona may not authorize warrantless arrests on the basis of
removability). The program put in place by Congress does
not allow state or local officers to adopt this enforcement
mechanism.
But §2(B) could be read to avoid these concerns. To take
one example, a person might be stopped for jaywalking in
Tucson and be unable to produce identification. The first
sentence of §2(B) instructs officers to make a “reasonable”
attempt to verify his immigration status with ICE if there
is reasonable suspicion that his presence in the United
States is unlawful. The state courts may conclude that,
unless the person continues to be suspected of some crime
for which he may be detained by state officers, it would
not be reasonable to prolong the stop for the immigration
inquiry. See Reply Brief for Petitioners 12, n. 4 (“[Section
2(B)] does not require the verification be completed during
the stop or detention if that is not reasonable or practica­
ble”); cf. Muehler v. Mena, 544 U. S. 93, 101 (2005) (finding
no Fourth Amendment violation where questioning about

