Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
§§1324a(a)(1)(B), (b). It imposes criminal and civil penalties on employers, §§1324a(e)(4), (f), but only civil penalties on aliens who seek,
or engage in, unauthorized employment, e.g., §§1255(c)(2), (c)(8).
IRCA’s express preemption provision, though silent about whether
additional penalties may be imposed against employees, “does not bar
the ordinary working of conflict pre-emption principles” or impose a
“special burden” making it more difficult to establish the preemption
of laws falling outside the clause. Geier v. American Honda Motor
Co., 529 U. S. 861, 869–872. The correct instruction to draw from the
text, structure, and history of IRCA is that Congress decided it would
be inappropriate to impose criminal penalties on unauthorized employees. It follows that a state law to the contrary is an obstacle to
the regulatory system Congress chose. Pp. 12–15.
(c) By authorizing state and local officers to make warrantless
arrests of certain aliens suspected of being removable, §6 too creates
an obstacle to federal law. As a general rule, it is not a crime for a
removable alien to remain in the United States. The federal scheme
instructs when it is appropriate to arrest an alien during the removal
process. The Attorney General in some circumstances will issue a
warrant for trained federal immigration officers to execute. If no federal warrant has been issued, these officers have more limited authority. They may arrest an alien for being “in the United States in
violation of any [immigration] law or regulation,” for example, but only where the alien “is likely to escape before a warrant can be obtained.” §1357(a)(2). Section 6 attempts to provide state officers with
even greater arrest authority, which they could exercise with no instruction from the Federal Government. This is not the system Congress created. Federal law specifies limited circumstances in which
state officers may perform an immigration officer’s functions. This
includes instances where the Attorney General has granted that authority in a formal agreement with a state or local government. See,
e.g., §1357(g)(1). Although federal law permits state officers to “cooperate with the Attorney General in the identification, apprehension,
detention, or removal of aliens not lawfully present in the United
States,” §1357(g)(10)(B), this does not encompass the unilateral decision to detain authorized by §6. Pp. 15–19.
4. It was improper to enjoin §2(B) before the state courts had an
opportunity to construe it and without some showing that §2(B)’s enforcement in fact conflicts with federal immigration law and its objectives. Pp. 19–24.
(a) The state provision has three limitations: A detainee is presumed not to be an illegal alien if he or she provides a valid Arizona
driver’s license or similar identification; officers may not consider
race, color, or national origin “except to the extent permitted by the

