12

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of ALITO, J.

unlawfully present in the United States. The Court explained that the mere fact that “aliens are the subject of a
state statute does not render it a regulation of immigration.” 424 U. S., at 355. The Court emphasized instead
that “States possess broad authority under their police
powers to regulate the employment relationship to protect
workers within the State.” Id., at 356. In light of that
broad authority, the Court declared that “[o]nly a demonstration that complete ouster of state power . . . was ‘the
clear and manifest purpose of Congress’ would justify” the
conclusion that “state regulation designed to protect vital
state interests must give way to paramount federal legislation.” Id., at 357 (some internal quotation marks omitted); see also Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC, 544 U. S.
431, 449 (2005) (“In areas of traditional state regulation,
[the Court] assume[s] that a federal statute has not supplanted state law unless Congress has made such an
intention ‘clear and manifest’ ” (some internal quotation
marks omitted)).
The Court now tells us that times have changed. Since
De Canas, Congress has enacted “a comprehensive framework for combating the employment of illegal aliens,” and
even though aliens who seek or obtain unauthorized work
are not subject to criminal sanctions, they can suffer civil
penalties. Ante, at 12–13 (internal quotation marks omitted). Undoubtedly, federal regulation in this area is
more pervasive today. But our task remains unchanged:
to determine whether the federal scheme discloses a clear
and manifest congressional intent to displace state law.
The Court gives short shrift to our presumption against
pre-emption. Having no express statement of congressional intent to support its analysis, the Court infers from
stale legislative history and from the comprehensiveness
of the federal scheme that “Congress made a deliberate
choice not to impose criminal penalties on aliens who seek,
or engage in, unauthorized employment.” Ante, at 13.

