Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of SCALIA, J.

for the States. As this Court has said, it is an “ ‘accepted
maxim of international law, that every sovereign nation
has the power, as inherent in sovereignty, and essential to
self-preservation, to forbid the entrance of foreigners
within its dominions.’ ” Fong Yue Ting v. United States,
149 U. S. 698, 705 (1893) (quoting Ekiu v. United States,
142 U. S. 651, 659 (1892)). That is why there was no need
to set forth control of immigration as one of the enumer­
ated powers of Congress, although an acknowledgment of
that power (as well as of the States’ similar power, subject
to federal abridgment) was contained in Art. I, §9, which
provided that “[t]he Migration or Importation of such
Persons as any of the States now existing shall think
proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress
prior to the Year one thousand eight hundred and
eight . . . .”
In light of the predominance of federal immigration
restrictions in modern times, it is easy to lose sight of the
States’ traditional role in regulating immigration—and to
overlook their sovereign prerogative to do so. I accept as a
given that State regulation is excluded by the Constitution
when (1) it has been prohibited by a valid federal law, or
(2) it conflicts with federal regulation—when, for example,
it admits those whom federal regulation would exclude, or
excludes those whom federal regulation would admit.
Possibility (1) need not be considered here: there is no
federal law prohibiting the States’ sovereign power to exclude (assuming federal authority to enact such a law).
The mere existence of federal action in the immigration
area—and the so-called field preemption arising from that
action, upon which the Court’s opinion so heavily relies,
ante, at 9–11—cannot be regarded as such a prohibition.
We are not talking here about a federal law prohibiting
the States from regulating bubble-gum advertising, or
even the construction of nuclear plants. We are talking
about a federal law going to the core of state sovereignty:

