Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of ALITO, J.

discretion Congress has vested in the Executive Branch.”
Ibid. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
The underlying premise of the United States’ argument
seems to be that state and local officers, when left to their
own devices, generally take federal enforcement priorities
into account. But there is no reason to think that this
premise is true. And even if it were, it would not follow
that §2(B)’s blanket mandate is at odds with federal law.
Nothing in the relevant federal statutes requires state and
local officers to consider the Federal Government’s priorities before requesting verification of a person’s immigration status. Neither 8 U. S. C. §1357(g)(10) nor §1373(a)
conditions the right of state and local officers to communicate with the Federal Government on their first taking
account of its priorities. Nor does §1373(c) condition the
Federal Government’s obligation to answer requests for information on the sensitivity of state and local officers to
its enforcement discretion. In fact, §1373(c) dictates that
the Federal Government “shall respond” to any inquiry
seeking verification of immigration status, and that command applies whether or not the requesting officer has
bothered to consider federal priorities. Because no federal
statute requires such consideration, §2(B) does not conflict
with federal law.
In any event, it is hard to see how state and local officers could proceed in conformity with the Federal Government’s enforcement priorities without making an inquiry
into a suspected alien’s immigration status. For example,
one of the Federal Government’s highest priorities is the
apprehension and removal of aliens who have failed to
comply with a final order of removal. See App. 108. How
can an officer identify those persons without first inquiring about their status? At bottom, the discretion
that ultimately matters is not whether to verify a person’s
immigration status but whether to act once the person’s
status is known. For that reason, §2(B)’s verification

