Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of ALITO, J.

agree with the Court that §2(B) is not pre-empted.
Section 2(B) quite clearly does not expand the authority
of Arizona officers to make stops or arrests. It is triggered
only when a “lawful stop, detention or arrest [is] made . . .
in the enforcement of any other [state or local] law or
ordinance.” Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §11–1051(B) (emphasis
added). Section 2(B) thus comes into play only when
an officer has reasonable suspicion or probable cause to
believe that a person has committed a nonimmigration
offense. Arizona officers plainly possessed this authority
before §2(B) took effect.
Section 2(B) also does not expand the authority of Arizona officers to inquire about the immigration status of
persons who are lawfully detained. When a person is
stopped or arrested and “reasonable suspicion exists that
the person is an alien and is unlawfully present in the
United States,” §2(B) instructs Arizona officers to make a
“reasonable attempt,” “when practicable,” to ascertain that
person’s immigration status. Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §11–
1051(B). Even before the Arizona Legislature enacted
§2(B), federal law permitted state and local officers to
make such inquiries. In 8 U. S. C. §1357(g)(10)(A), Congress has made clear that state and local governments
need not enter into formal agreements with the Federal
Government in order “to communicate with the [Federal
Government] regarding the immigration status of any
individual.” In addition, Congress has mandated that
neither the Federal Government nor any state or local
government may “prohibit, or in any way restrict, any
government entity or official from sending to, or receiving
from, [the Federal Government] information regarding the
citizenship or immigration status, lawful or unlawful, of
any individual.” §1373(a); see also §1644 (providing that
“no State or local government entity may be prohibited,
or in any way restricted, from sending to or receiving
from [the Federal Government] information regarding the

