10

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of ALITO, J.

thus require probable cause. See Caballes, supra, at 407.
Similarly, if a person is moved from the site of the stop,
probable cause will likely be required. See Hayes v. Florida,
470 U. S. 811, 816 (1985) (holding that the line between detention and arrest is crossed “when the police,
without probable cause or a warrant, forcibly remove a
person from his home or other place in which he is entitled
to be and transport him to the police station, where he is
detained, although briefly, for investigative purposes”).
If properly implemented, §2(B) should not lead to federal constitutional violations, but there is no denying that
enforcement of §2(B) will multiply the occasions on which
sensitive Fourth Amendment issues will crop up. These
civil-liberty concerns, I take it, are at the heart of most
objections to §2(B). Close and difficult questions will inevitably arise as to whether an officer had reasonable
suspicion to believe that a person who is stopped for some
other reason entered the country illegally, and there is a
risk that citizens, lawful permanent residents, and others
who are lawfully present in the country will be detained.
To mitigate this risk, Arizona could issue guidance to
officers detailing the circumstances that typically give
rise to reasonable suspicion of unlawful presence. And in
the spirit of the federal-state cooperation that the United
States champions, the Federal Government could share its
own guidelines. Arizona could also provide officers with a
nonexclusive list containing forms of identification sufficient under §2(B) to dispel any suspicion of unlawful
presence. If Arizona accepts licenses from most States as
proof of legal status, the problem of roadside detentions
will be greatly mitigated.1
——————
1 When the Real ID Act takes effect, the Federal Government will no
longer accept state forms of identification that fail to meet certain
federal requirements. §202(a)(1), 119 Stat. 312. One requirement is
that any identification be issued only on proof that the applicant
is lawfully present in the United States. §202(c)(2)(B), id., at 313. I

