Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of SCALIA, J.

ation had provided that “the free inhabitants of each of
these States, paupers, vagabonds and fugitives from jus­
tice excepted, shall be entitled to all privileges and im­
munities of free citizens in the several States.” Articles of
Confederation, Art. IV. This meant that an unwelcome
alien could obtain all the rights of a citizen of one State
simply by first becoming an inhabitant of another. To
remedy this, the Constitution’s Privileges and Immunities
Clause provided that “[t]he Citizens of each State shall be
entitled to all Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in the
several States.” Art. IV, §2, cl. 1 (emphasis added). But
if one State had particularly lax citizenship standards, it
might still serve as a gateway for the entry of “obnoxious
aliens” into other States. This problem was solved “by
authorizing the general government to establish a uniform
rule of naturalization throughout the United States.” The
Federalist No. 42, supra, at 271; see Art. I, §8, cl. 4. In
other words, the naturalization power was given to Con­
gress not to abrogate States’ power to exclude those they
did not want, but to vindicate it.
Two other provisions of the Constitution are an ac­
knowledgment of the States’ sovereign interest in protect­
ing their borders. Article I provides that “[n]o State shall,
without the Consent of the Congress, lay any Imposts or
Duties on Imports or Exports, except what may be abso­
lutely necessary for executing it’s inspection Laws.” Art. I,
§10, cl. 2 (emphasis added). This assumed what everyone
assumed: that the States could exclude from their territory
dangerous or unwholesome goods. A later portion of the
same section provides that “[n]o State shall, without the
Consent of Congress, . . . engage in War, unless actually
invaded, or in such imminent Danger as will not admit of
delay.” Art. I, §10, cl. 3 (emphasis added). This limits the
States’ sovereignty (in a way not relevant here) but leaves
intact their inherent power to protect their territory.
Notwithstanding “[t]he myth of an era of unrestricted

