8

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

the power to exclude. Like elimination of the States’ other
inherent sovereign power, immunity from suit, elimination of the States’ sovereign power to exclude requires that
“Congress . . . unequivocally expres[s] its intent to abro­
gate,” Seminole Tribe of Fla. v. Florida, 517 U. S. 44, 55
(1996) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
Implicit “field preemption” will not do.
Nor can federal power over illegal immigration be
deemed exclusive because of what the Court’s opinion
solicitously calls “foreign countries[ ’] concern[s] about the
status, safety, and security of their nationals in the United
States,” ante, at 3. The Constitution gives all those on our
shores the protections of the Bill of Rights—but just as
those rights are not expanded for foreign nationals be­
cause of their countries’ views (some countries, for exam­
ple, have recently discovered the death penalty to be
barbaric), neither are the fundamental sovereign powers
of the States abridged to accommodate foreign countries’
views. Even in its international relations, the Federal
Government must live with the inconvenient fact that it is
a Union of independent States, who have their own sover­
eign powers. This is not the first time it has found that a
nuisance and a bother in the conduct of foreign policy.
Four years ago, for example, the Government importuned
us to interfere with thoroughly constitutional state judicial
procedures in the criminal trial of foreign nationals be­
cause the international community, and even an opinion of
the International Court of Justice, disapproved them. See
Medellín v. Texas, 552 U. S. 491 (2008). We rejected that
request, as we should reject the Executive’s invocation of
foreign-affairs considerations here. Though it may upset
foreign powers—and even when the Federal Government
desperately wants to avoid upsetting foreign powers—the
States have the right to protect their borders against
foreign nationals, just as they have the right to execute
foreign nationals for murder.

