18

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

that the specification of pre-emption for laws punishing
“those who employ” implies the lack of pre-emption for
other laws, including laws punishing “those who seek or
accept employment.”
The Court has no credible response to this. It quotes
our jurisprudence to the effect that an “express pre­
emption provisio[n] does not bar the ordinary working of
conflict pre-emption principles.” Ante, at 14 (quoting Geier
v. American Honda Motor Co., 529 U. S. 861, 869
(2000) (internal quotation marks omitted)). True enough—
conflict preemption principles. It then goes on say that
since “Congress decided it would be inappropriate to im­
pose criminal penalties on aliens who seek or engage in
unauthorized employment,” “[i]t follows that a state law to
the contrary is an obstacle to the regulatory system Con­
gress chose.” Ante, at 15. For “ ‘[w]here a comprehensive
federal scheme intentionally leaves a portion of the regu­
lated field without controls, then the pre-emptive inference
can be drawn.’ ” Ibid. (quoting Puerto Rico Dept. of Con­
sumer Affairs v. ISLA Petroleum Corp., 485 U.S. 495, 503
(1988)). All that is a classic description not of conflict
pre-emption but of field pre-emption, which (concededly)
does not occur beyond the terms of an express pre-emption
provision.
The Court concludes that §5(C) “would interfere with
the careful balance struck by Congress,” ante, at 15, (an­
other field pre-emption notion, by the way) but that is easy
to say and impossible to demonstrate. The Court relies
primarily on the fact that “[p]roposals to make unauthor­
ized work a criminal offense were debated and discussed
during the long process of drafting [the Immigration Re­
form and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA)],” “[b]ut Congress
rejected them.” Ante, at 14. There is no more reason to
believe that this rejection was expressive of a desire that
there be no sanctions on employees, than expressive of a
desire that such sanctions be left to the States. To tell the

