4

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of ALITO, J.

immigration status, lawful or unlawful, of an alien in the
United States”). And while these provisions preserve the
authority of state and local officers to seek immigrationstatus information from the Federal Government, another
federal statute, §1373(c), requires that the Federal Government respond to any such inquiries “by providing the
requested verification or status information.” It comes
as no surprise, therefore, that many States and localities
permit their law enforcement officers to make the kinds of
inquiries that §2(B) prescribes. See App. 294–298 (reporting that officers in 59 surveyed state and local jurisdictions “generally” ask arrestees about their immigration
status while 34 do not and that officers in 78 jurisdictions
“generally” inform Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) when they believe an arrestee to be an undocumented
alien while only 17 do not). Congress has invited state
and local governments to make immigration-related inquiries and has even obligated the Federal Government to
respond. Through §2(B), Arizona has taken Congress up
on that invitation.
The United States does not deny that officers may, at
their own discretion, inquire about the immigration status
of persons whom they lawfully detain. Instead, the United
States argues that §2(B) is pre-empted because it impedes
federal-state cooperation by mandating that officers verify
the immigration status of every detained person if there is
reason to believe that the person is unlawfully present in
the country. The United States claims that §2(B)’s mandate runs contrary to federal law in that it “precludes
officers from taking [the Federal Government’s] priorities
and discretion into account.” Brief for United States
50. “[B]y interposing a mandatory state law between state
and local officers and their federal counterparts,” writes
the United States, §2(B) “stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment of the federal requirement of cooperation
and the full effectuation of the enforcement judgment and

