12

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

contact federal immigration authorities, and follow their
lead on what to do next. And it is an assault on logic to
say that identifying a removable alien and holding him for
federal determination of whether he should be removed
“violates the principle that the removal process is entrusted
to the discretion of the Federal Government,” ante, at
18. The State’s detention does not represent commence­
ment of the removal process unless the Federal Govern­
ment makes it so.
But that is not the most important point. The most
important point is that, as we have discussed, Arizona is
entitled to have “its own immigration policy”—including a
more rigorous enforcement policy—so long as that does not
conflict with federal law. The Court says, as though the
point is utterly dispositive, that “it is not a crime for a
removable alien to remain present in the United States,”
ante, at 15. It is not a federal crime, to be sure. But there
is no reason Arizona cannot make it a state crime for a
removable alien (or any illegal alien, for that matter) to
remain present in Arizona.
The Court quotes 8 U. S. C. §1226(a), which provides
that, “[o]n a warrant issued by the Attorney General, an
alien may be arrested and detained pending a decision on
whether the alien is to be removed from the United
States.” Section 1357(a)(2) also provides that a federal
immigration official “shall have power without warrant . . .
to arrest any alien in the United States, if he has reason to
believe that the alien so arrested is in the United States in
violation of any [federal immigration] law or regulation
and is likely to escape before a warrant can be obtained for
his arrest.” But statutory limitations upon the actions of
federal officers in enforcing the United States’ power to
protect its borders do not on their face apply to the actions
of state officers in enforcing the State’s power to protect its
borders. There is no more reason to read these provisions
as implying that state officials are subject to similar limi­

