(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION ET AL. v. 

COOPER 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–1024. Argued November 30, 2011—Decided March 28, 2012
Respondent Cooper, a licensed pilot, failed to disclose his human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) diagnosis to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) at a time when the agency did not issue medical certificates, which are required to operate an aircraft, to persons with
HIV. Subsequently, respondent applied to the Social Security Administration (SSA) and received long-term disability benefits on the
basis of his HIV status. Thereafter, he renewed his certificate with
the FAA on several occasions, each time intentionally withholding information about his condition. The Department of Transportation
(DOT), the FAA’s parent agency, launched a joint criminal investigation with the SSA to identify medically unfit individuals who had obtained FAA certifications. The DOT provided the SSA with the
names of licensed pilots, and the SSA, in turn, provided the DOT
with a spreadsheet containing information on those pilots who had
also received disability benefits. Respondent’s name appeared on the
spreadsheet, and an investigation led to his admission that he had
intentionally withheld information about his HIV status from the
FAA. His pilot certificate was revoked, and he was indicted for making false statements to a Government agency. He pleaded guilty and
was fined and sentenced to probation. He then filed suit, alleging
that the FAA, DOT, and SSA violated the Privacy Act of 1974, which
contains a detailed set of requirements for the management of records held by Executive Branch agencies. The Act allows an aggrieved
individual to sue for “actual damages,” 5 U. S. C. §552a(g)(4)(A), if
the Government intentionally or willfully violates the Act’s requirements in such a way as to adversely affect the individual. Specifically, respondent claimed that the unlawful disclosure to the DOT of his

