Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

2005 that the FAA would not have issued a medical certificate to respondent had it known his true medical
condition.
When investigators confronted respondent with what
had been discovered, he admitted that he had intentionally withheld from the FAA information about his HIV
status and other relevant medical information. Because of
these fraudulent omissions, the FAA revoked respondent’s
pilot certificate, and he was indicted on three counts of
making false statements to a Government agency, in
violation of 18 U. S. C. §1001. Respondent ultimately
pleaded guilty to one count of making and delivering a
false official writing, in violation of §1018. He was sen­
tenced to two years of probation and fined $1,000.1
Claiming that the FAA, DOT, and SSA (hereinafter
Government) violated the Privacy Act by sharing his
records with one another, respondent filed suit in the
United States District Court for the Northern District of
California. He alleged that the unlawful disclosure to the
DOT of his confidential medical information, including his
HIV status, had caused him “humiliation, embarrassment,
mental anguish, fear of social ostracism, and other severe
emotional distress.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 120a. Notably,
he did not allege any pecuniary or economic loss.
The District Court granted summary judgment against
respondent. 816 F. Supp. 2d 778, 781 (2008). The court
concluded that the Government had violated the Privacy
Act and that there was a triable issue of fact as to whether
the violation was intentional or willful.2 But the court
——————
1 Respondent eventually applied for recertification as a pilot. After
reviewing respondent’s medical records, including information about
his HIV diagnosis and treatment, the FAA reissued his pilot certificate
and medical certificate. Brief for Respondent 5, n. 1.
2 With certain exceptions, it is unlawful for an agency to disclose a
record to another agency without the written consent of the person to
whom the record pertains. 5 U. S. C. §552a(b). One exception to this

