Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

brought under §552a(g)(4); no other provision speaks to a
civil suit based on “willful or intentional” agency misconduct. It signals unmistakably congressional recognition
that the civil-remedies provision is integral to realizing
the Act’s purposes.
Reading “actual damages” to permit recovery for any
injury established by competent evidence in the record—
pecuniary or not—best effectuates the statute’s basic
purpose. Although some privacy invasions no doubt result
in economic loss, we have recognized time and again that
the primary form of injuries is nonpecuniary, and includes
mental distress and personal humiliation. See Time, Inc.
v. Hill, 385 U. S. 374, 385, n. 9 (1967) (“In the ‘right of
privacy’ cases the primary damage is the mental distress”); see also Gertz, 418 U. S., at 350 (“[A]ctual injury”
in defamatory falsehood cases “is not limited to out-ofpocket loss. Indeed, the more customary types of actual
harm inflicted by defamatory falsehood include impairment of reputation and standing in the community, personal humiliation, and mental anguish and suffering”).
Accord, 2 Dobbs §7.1.(1), at 259 (2d ed. 1993) (privacy is a
dignitary interest, and “in a great many of the cases” in
which the interest is invaded “the only harm is the affront
to the plaintiff ’s dignity as a human being, the damage to
his self-image, and the resulting mental distress”). That
accords with common sense.
In interpreting the civil-remedies provision, we must not
forget Congress enacted the Privacy Act to protect privacy. The majority’s reading of “actual damages” renders
the remedial provision impotent in the face of concededly
unlawful agency action whenever the injury is solely
nonpecuniary. That result is patently at odds with Congress’ stated purpose. The majority, however, does not
grapple with the ramifications of its opinion. It acknowledges the suggestion that its holding leads to absurd
results as it allows individuals suffering relatively minor

