2

FAA v. COOPER
Syllabus
confidential medical information had caused him mental and emotional distress. The District Court concluded that the Government
had violated the Act. But, finding the term “actual damages” ambiguous, the court relied on the sovereign immunity canon, which provides that sovereign immunity waivers must be strictly construed in
the Government’s favor, to hold that the Act does not authorize the
recovery of nonpecuniary damages. Reversing the District Court, the
Ninth Circuit concluded that “actual damages” in the Act is not ambiguous and includes damages for mental and emotional distress.

Held: The Privacy Act does not unequivocally authorize damages for
mental or emotional distress and therefore does not waive the Government’s sovereign immunity from liability for such harms. Pp. 4–
19.
(a) A waiver of sovereign immunity must be unequivocally expressed in statutory text, see e.g., Lane v. Peña, 518 U. S. 187, 192,
and any ambiguities are to be construed in favor of immunity, United
States v. Williams, 514 U. S. 527, 531. Ambiguity exists if there is a
plausible interpretation of the statute that would not allow money
damages against the Government. United States v. Nordic Village,
Inc., 503 U. S. 30, 37. Pp. 5–6.
(b) The term “actual damages” in the Privacy Act is a legal term of
art, and Congress, when it employs a term of art, “ ‘presumably
knows and adopts the cluster of ideas that were attached to each borrowed word in the body of learning from which it was taken,’ ” Molzof
v. United States, 502 U. S. 301, 307. Even as a legal term, the precise
meaning of “actual damages” is far from clear. Although the term is
sometimes understood to include nonpecuniary harm, it has also been
used or construed more narrowly to cover damages for only pecuniary
harm. Because of the term’s chameleon-like quality, it must be considered in the particular context in which it appears. Pp. 6–9.
(c) The Privacy Act serves interests similar to those protected by
defamation and privacy torts. Its remedial provision, under which
plaintiffs can recover a minimum award of $1,000 if they first prove
at least some “actual damages,” “parallels” the common-law torts of
libel per quod and slander, under which plaintiffs can recover “general damages” if they first prove “special damages.” Doe v. Chao, 540
U. S. 614, 625. “Special damages” are limited to actual pecuniary
loss, which must be specially pleaded and proved. “General damages” cover nonpecuniary loss and need not be pleaded or proved. This
parallel suggests the possibility that Congress intended the term “actual damages” to mean “special damages,” thus barring Privacy Act
victims from any recovery unless they can first show some actual pecuniary harm. That Congress would choose “actual damages” instead
of “special damages” is not without precedent, as the terms have oc-

