Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

the phrase that is at odds with the statute’s plain text.7
C
An uncodified provision of the Act, tied to the Act’s
drafting history, also reinforces the ordinary meaning of
“actual damages.” As the majority notes, prior to reconciliation, the Senate and House bills contained civil-remedies
provisions that were different in a critical respect: The
Senate bill allowed for the recovery of “actual and general
damages,” whereas the House bill allowed for the recovery
of “actual damages” alone.8 In the reconciliation process,
the provision for “general damages” was dropped and an
uncodified section of the Act was amended to require the
newly established Privacy Protection Study Commission to
consider, among its other jobs, “whether the Federal Government should be liable for general damages incurred by
an individual as the result of a willful or intentional violation of the provisions of sections 552a(g)(1)(C) or (D).”
§5(c)(2)(B)(iii), 88 Stat. 1907; see also Doe, 540 U. S.,
at 622.
As the Court explained in Doe, “[t]he deletion of ‘general
damages’ from the bill is fairly seen . . . as a deliberate
elimination of any possibility of imputing harm and
awarding presumed damages.” Id., at 623; see also id., at
——————
7 There is yet another flaw in the majority’s reasoning. At common
law a plaintiff who successfully established “special damages” in an
action for defamation per quod could proceed to recover damages for
emotional and mental distress. See ante, at 10; n. 5, supra. If “Congress intended the term ‘actual damages’ in the Act to mean special
damages,” ante, at 11, then an individual who successfully establishes
some pecuniary loss from a violation of the Act—presumably as trivial
as the cost of a bottle of Tylenol—should be permitted to recover for
emotional and mental distress. The majority, of course, does not accept
that result, and its piecemeal embrace of the common law undermines
its assertion that Congress intended “special damages” in place of
“actual damages.”
8 See S. 3418, 93d Cong., 2d Sess., §303(c)(1) (1974); H. R. 16373, 93d
Cong., 2d Sess., §3 (1974).

