2

FAA v. COOPER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

tory interpretation. And it candidly acknowledges that a
contrary reading is not “inconceivable.” Ante, at 14. Yet because it considers its reading of “actual damages” to be
“plausible,” the majority contends that the canon of sovereign immunity requires adoption of an interpretation most
favorable to the Government. Ibid.
The canon simply cannot bear the weight the majority
ascribes it. “The sovereign immunity canon is just that—a
canon of construction. It is a tool for interpreting the law,
and we have never held that it displaces the other traditional tools of statutory construction.” Richlin Security
Service Co. v. Chertoff, 553 U. S. 571, 589 (2008) (opinion
of ALITO, J.). Here, traditional tools of statutory construction—the statute’s text, structure, drafting history, and
purpose—provide a clear answer: The term “actual damages” permits recovery for all injuries established by
competent evidence in the record, whether pecuniary or
nonpecuniary, and so encompasses damages for mental
and emotional distress. There is no need to seek refuge in
a canon of construction, see id., at 589–590 (declining to
rely on canon as there is “no ambiguity left for us to construe” after application of “traditional tools of statutory
interpretation and considerations of stare decisis”), much
less one that has been used so haphazardly in the Court’s
history, see United States v. Nordic Village, Inc., 503 U. S.
30, 42 (1992) (Stevens, J., dissenting) (canon is “nothing
but a judge-made rule that is sometimes favored and
sometimes disfavored”) (collecting cases).
It bears emphasis that we have said repeatedly that,
while “we should not take it upon ourselves to extend
the waiver [of sovereign immunity] beyond that which
Congress intended,” “[n]either . . . should we assume the
authority to narrow the waiver that Congress intended.”
United States v. Kubrick, 444 U. S. 111, 117–118 (1979)
(emphasis added). See also, e.g., Block v. Neal, 460 U. S.
289, 298 (1983) (“The exemption of the sovereign from suit

