12

FAA v. COOPER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

the words of th[e] statut[e] in light of the purposes Congress sought to serve.” Chapman v. Houston Welfare
Rights Organization, 441 U. S. 600, 608 (1979); see also
Dolan v. Postal Service, 546 U. S. 481, 486 (2006) (“Interpretation of a word or phrase depends upon reading the
whole statutory text, considering the purpose and context
of the statute, and consulting any precedents or authorities that inform the analysis”). The purposes of the Privacy Act could not be more explicit, and they are consistent
with interpreting “actual damages” according to its ordinary meaning.
“The historical context of the Act is important to an
understanding of its remedial purposes. In 1974, Congress was concerned with curbing the illegal surveillance
and investigation of individuals by federal agencies that
had been exposed during the Watergate scandal.” Dept.
of Justice, Office of Privacy and Civil Liberties, Overview of
the Privacy Act 4 (2010). In particular, Congress recognized that “the increasing use of computers and sophisticated information technology . . . has greatly magnified
the harm to individual privacy that can occur from any
collection, maintenance, use, or dissemination of personal
information.” §2(a), 88 Stat. 1896. Identifying the right to
privacy as “a personal and fundamental right,” Congress
found it “necessary and proper” to enact the Privacy Act
“in order to protect the privacy of individuals identified in
information systems maintained by Federal agencies.”
Ibid.
Congress explained that the “purpose of this Act is to
provide certain safeguards for an individual against an
invasion of personal privacy by requiring Federal agencies, except as otherwise provided by law, to,” inter alia,
“be subject to civil suit for any damages which occur as a
result of willful or intentional action which violates any
individual’s rights under this Act.” §2(b)(6), ibid. (emphasis added). That statement is an explicit reference to suits

