4

FAA v. COOPER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

loss caused by the wrong or injury”).1 There is nothing
circular about that definition.2 It is the definition this
Court adopted more than a century ago when we recognized that “[c]ompensatory damages and actual damages
mean the same thing; that is, that the damages shall be
the result of the injury alleged and proved, and that the
amount awarded shall be precisely commensurate with
the injury suffered.” Birdsall v. Coolidge, 93 U. S. 64
(1876). It is the definition embraced in current legal
dictionaries. See Black’s 445 (9th ed. 2009) (defining
“actual damages” as “[a]n amount awarded to a complainant to compensate for a proven injury or loss; damages
that repay actual losses.—Also termed compensatory
damages; tangible damages; real damages” (italics omitted)). And it is the definition that accords with the plain
and ordinary meaning of the term. See Webster’s Third
New International Dictionary 22, 571 (2002) (defining
“actual” as “existing in fact or reality” and “damages” as
“compensation or satisfaction imposed by law for a wrong
or injury caused by a violation of a legal right”). Thus,
both as a term of art and in its plain meaning, “actual
damages” connotes compensation for proven injuries or
——————
1 Black’s Law Dictionary also defined “actual damages” as synonymous with “general damages.” Black’s 467. While “general damages”
has a specialized meaning of presumed damages in libel and slander
cases, see n. 4, infra, it more generally can mean damages that “did in
fact result from the wrong, directly and proximately.” Black’s 468.
2 The majority declares the definition circular because “defining ‘actual’ damages by reference to ‘actual’ injury is hardly helpful when our
task is to determine what Congress meant by ‘actual.’ ” Ante, at 9, n. 4.
“Actual injury,” however, is far from an unhelpful reference. This
Court already has recognized in the defamation context that “actual
injury is not limited to out-of-pocket loss.” Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc.,
418 U. S. 323, 350 (1974). That accords with the definitions of the
terms. See Black’s 53, 924 (defining “actual” as “[r]eal; substantial;
existing presently in act, having a valid objective existence as opposed
to that which is merely theoretical or possible,” and “injury” as “[a]ny
wrong or damage done to another”).

