Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
casionally been used interchangeably. Furthermore, any doubt about
the plausibility of construing “actual damages” as special damages in
the Privacy Act is put to rest by Congress’ deliberate refusal to allow
recovery for “general damages.” In common-law defamation and privacy cases, special damages is the only category of compensatory
damages other than general damages. Because Congress declined to
authorize general damages, it is reasonable to infer that Congress intended the term “actual damages” in the Act to mean special damages for proven pecuniary loss. Pp. 9–14.
(d) Although the contrary reading of the Privacy Act accepted by
the Ninth Circuit and advanced by respondent is not inconceivable, it
is plausible to read the Act as authorizing only damages for economic
loss. Because Congress did not speak unequivocally, the Court
adopts an interpretation of “actual damages” limited to proven pecuniary harm. To do otherwise would expand the scope of Congress’
sovereign immunity waiver beyond what the statutory text clearly
requires. P. 14.
(e) Respondent raises several counterarguments: (1) common-law
cases often define “actual damages” to mean all compensatory damages; (2) the elimination of “general damages” from the Privacy Act
means that there can be no recovery for presumed damages, but
plaintiffs can still recover for proven mental and emotional distress;
(3) because some courts have construed “actual damages” in similar
statutes to include mental and emotional distress, Congress must
have intended “actual damages” in the Act to include mental and
emotional distress as well; and (4) precluding nonpecuniary damages
would lead to absurd results, thereby frustrating the Act’s remedial
purpose. None of these arguments overcomes the sovereign immunity canon. Pp. 14–19.
622 F. 3d 1016, reversed and remanded.
ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
and SCALIA, KENNEDY, and THOMAS, JJ., joined. SOTOMAYOR, J., filed a
dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG and BREYER, JJ., joined. KAGAN,
J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.

