10

FAA v. COOPER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

622, n. 5 (“Congress explicitly rejected the proposal to
make presumed damages available for Privacy Act violations”). The elimination of presumed damages from the
bill can only reasonably imply that what Congress left
behind—“actual damages”—comprised damages that are
not presumed, i.e., damages proven by competent evidence
in the record. See Gertz v. Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U. S.
323, 349–350 (1974) (distinguishing in defamation context
between presumed damages and damages for actual injuries sustained by competent evidence in the record, which
include “impairment of reputation and standing in the
community, personal humiliation, and mental anguish
and suffering”); Carey v. Piphus, 435 U. S. 247, 262–264
(1978) (distinguishing between presumed damages and
proven damages for mental and emotional distress).
Rather than view the deletion of general damages (presumed damages) as leaving the converse (proven damages), the majority supposes that the deletion leaves only a
subset of proven damages—those of an economic nature,
i.e., “special damages.” Once again, however, the majority’s insistence that “Congress intended ‘actual damages’ in
the Privacy Act to mean special damages for proven pecuniary loss,” ante, at 13, finds no basis in the statutory text,
see supra, at 8. And its response to the conclusion that
Congress retained recovery for proven damages when it
eliminated presumed damages is singularly unsatisfying.
The majority declares such a conclusion “flawed” because
“general damages” “includes compensation for proven
injuries as well,” so that “what distinguishes [general]
damages, whether proved or not, from the only other
category of compensatory damages available in the relevant common-law suits is the type of harm” the term
encompasses—which the majority takes to be emotional
harm alone. Ante, at 15–16. That assertion is defective on
two scores. First, a plaintiff ’s ability to present proof of
injury in a defamation per se action (and to recover for

