Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

appears.4
C
The Privacy Act directs agencies to establish safeguards
to protect individuals against the disclosure of confiden­
tial records “which could result in substantial harm, em­
barrassment, inconvenience, or unfairness to any individual on whom information is maintained.” 5 U. S. C.
§552a(e)(10); see also §2(b), 88 Stat. 1896 (stating that the
“purpose of this Act is to provide certain safeguards for
an individual against an invasion of personal privacy”).
Because the Act serves interests similar to those protected
by defamation and privacy torts, there is good reason to
infer that Congress relied upon those torts in drafting the
Act.
In Doe v. Chao, 540 U. S. 614 (2004), we held that the
Privacy Act’s remedial provision authorizes plaintiffs to
recover a guaranteed minimum award of $1,000 for viola­
——————
4 The

dissent criticizes us for noting that the dictionary definition
contains an element of circularity. The dissent says that the defini­
tion—“ ‘[a]ctual damages’ compensate for actual injury”—is “plain
enough.” Post, at 3 (opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.). But defining “actual”
damages by reference to “actual” injury is hardly helpful when our task
is to determine what Congress meant by “actual.” The dissent’s refer­
ence to the current version of Black’s Law Dictionary, which provides
that “actual damages” can mean “tangible damages,” only highlights
the term’s ambiguity. See Black’s Law Dictionary 445 (9th ed. 2009).
If “actual damages” can mean “tangible damages,” then it can be
construed not to include intangible harm, like mental and emotional
distress. Similarly unhelpful is the dissent’s citation to a general­
purpose dictionary that defines “actual” as “existing in fact or reality”
and “damages” as “compensation or satisfaction imposed by law for a
wrong or injury.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 22,
571 (2002) (emphasis added). Combining these two lay definitions says
nothing about whether compensation for mental and emotional distress
is in fact imposed by law. The definitions merely beg the question we
are trying to answer. It comes as little surprise, therefore, that “actual
damages” has taken on different meanings in different statutes, as our
examples amply illustrate.

