18

FAA v. COOPER
Opinion of the Court

D
Finally, respondent argues that excluding damages for
mental and emotional harm would lead to absurd results.
Persons suffering relatively minor pecuniary loss would
be entitled to recover $1,000, while others suffering only
severe and debilitating mental or emotional distress would
get nothing. See Brief for Respondent 33–35.
Contrary to respondent’s suggestion, however, there is
nothing absurd about a scheme that limits the Govern­
ment’s Privacy Act liability to harm that can be substanti­
ated by proof of tangible economic loss. Respondent in­
sists that such a scheme would frustrate the Privacy Act’s
remedial purpose, but that ignores the fact that, by delib­
erately refusing to authorize general damages, Congress
intended to cabin relief, not to maximize it.12
——————
12 Despite its rhetoric, the dissent does not dispute most of the steps
in our analysis. For example, although the dissent belittles the sover­
eign immunity canon, the dissent does not call for its abandonment.
See post, at 2–3. Nor does the dissent point out any error in our under­
standing of the canon’s meaning. See ibid. The dissent acknowledges
that statutes and judicial opinions sometimes use the term “actual
damages” to mean pecuniary harm, see post, at 5, and that determining
its meaning in a particular statute requires consideration of context,
see ibid. In addition, the dissent concedes—as it must in light of our
reasoning in Doe v. Chao, 540 U. S. 614 (2004)—that the common law
of defamation has relevance in construing the term “actual damages” in
the Privacy Act. See post, at 7–9.
The dissent’s argument thus boils down to this: The text and purpose
of the Privacy Act make it clear beyond any reasonable dispute that the
term “actual damages,” as used in the Act, means compensatory dam­
ages for all proven harm and not just damages for pecuniary harm.
The dissent reasons that, because the Act seeks to prevent pecuniary
and nonpecuniary harm, Congress must have intended to authorize the
recovery of money damages from the Federal Government for both
types of harm. This inference is plausible, but it surely is not unavoid­
able. The Act deters violations of its substantive provisions in other
ways—for instance, by permitting recovery for economic injury; by
imposing criminal sanctions for some violations, see 5 U. S. C. §552a(i);
and possibly by allowing for injunctive relief under the Administrative

