8

FAA v. COOPER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

case was the question whether the Act’s civil-suit provision authorized recovery of a guaranteed minimum award
of $1,000 absent proof of some “actual damages.” The
Court answered in the negative, and in the course of doing
so replied to petitioner’s argument that there was “something peculiar in offering some guaranteed damages . . .
only to those plaintiffs who can demonstrate actual damages.” 540 U. S., at 625. Although the Court cited the
Act’s parallels to defamation per quod actions in noting
that nothing was “peculiar” about the Act’s remedial
scheme, Doe did not take the further step of deciding that
“actual damages” means economic loss alone. Indeed, it
expressly reserved that question. Id., at 627, n. 12.
The majority, moreover, is wrong to conclude that the
Act’s parallels with defamation per quod actions suggest
Congress intended “actual damages” to mean “special
damages.” Quite the opposite. The fact that Congress
“would probably have known about” defamation per quod
actions, id., at 625, makes it all the more significant that
Congress did not write “special damages” in the civilremedies provision. This Court is typically not in the
business of substituting words we think Congress intended to use for words Congress in fact used. Yet that is
precisely what the majority does when it rewrites “actual
damages” to mean “special damages.”6 In sum, the statutory context, and in particular the Act’s substantive provisions, confirms the ordinary meaning of “actual damages.”
Although the Act shares parallels with common-law defamation torts, such analogies do not warrant a reading of
——————
6 The majority cites a collection of lower court opinions that have used
“actual damages” in place of “special damages” to note that Congress
would not have been alone in using the former term to refer to the
latter. Ante, at 11–12. But that a handful of lower courts on occasion
have been imprecise in their terminology provides no basis to assume
the Legislature has been equally careless in the text of a statute.

