Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of the Court

rors the Privacy Act.11 In neither of those statutes did
Congress specifically decline to authorize recovery for
general damages as it did in the Privacy Act. Supra, at
12–13. And most importantly, none of the lower court
cases interpreting the statutes, which respondent has
cited, see Brief for Respondent 29–31, involves the sover­
eign immunity canon.
Respondent also points to the FTCA, but the FTCA’s
general liability provision does not even use the term
“actual damages.” It instead provides that the “United
States shall be liable” for certain tort claims “in the same
manner and to the same extent as a private individual”
under relevant state law. 28 U. S. C. §2674, ¶1. For that
reason alone, the FTCA’s general liability provision is not
a reliable source for interpreting the term “actual damages”
in the Privacy Act. Nor does the FTCA’s wrongful­
death provision—which authorizes “actual or compensatory damages, measured by the pecuniary injuries resulting
from such death,” §2674, ¶2—prove that Congress under­
stood the term “actual damages” in the Privacy Act to
include nonpecuniary mental and emotional harm. To the
contrary, it proves that actual damages can be understood
to entail only pecuniary harm depending on the context.
Because the FTCA, like the FHA and FCRA, does not
share the same text or design as the Privacy Act, it is not
a fitting analog for construing the Act.
——————
11 Compare

42 U. S. C. §3613(c)(1) (stating that “the court may award
to the plaintiff actual and punitive damages”); 15 U. S. C. §1681n(a)(1)
(authorizing “(A) any actual damages sustained by the consumer as a
result of the failure or damages of not less than $100 and not more than
$1,000; or (B) . . . actual damages sustained by the consumer as a result
of the failure or $1,000, whichever is greater”); §1681o(a)(1) (authoriz­
ing “any actual damages sustained by the consumer as a result of the
failure”) with 5 U. S. C. §552a(g)(4)(A) (authorizing “actual damages
sustained by the individual as a result of the refusal or failure, but in
no case shall a person entitled to recovery receive less than the sum of
$1,000”).

