Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Per Curiam

opinion contained no hint that it thought the violation of
Indiana law it had unearthed also entailed the infringe
ment of any federal right. Not only did the court frame
respondent’s claim as whether “the Indiana trial court
considered non-statutory aggravating circumstances . . . in
contravention of state law,” 593 F. 3d, at 551 (emphasis
added), it also explicitly acknowledged that “[n]othing in
[its] opinion prevents Indiana from adopting a rule per
mitting the use of non-statutory aggravators in the death
sentence selection process. See Zant v. Stephens, 462 U. S.
862, 878 (1983) (permitting their use under federal law),”
id., at 551–552 (citations omitted).
Nor did it suffice for the Court of Appeals to find an
unreasonable determination of the facts under 28 U. S. C.
§2254(d)(2). That provision allows habeas petitioners to
avoid the bar to habeas relief imposed with respect to
federal claims adjudicated on the merits in state court by
showing that the state court’s decision was “based on an
unreasonable determination of the facts in light of the
evidence presented in the State court proceeding.” It does
not repeal the command of §2254(a) that habeas relief may
be afforded to a state prisoner “only on the ground” that
his custody violates federal law.
In response to the Seventh Circuit’s opinion, the State
filed a petition for rehearing and rehearing en banc. The
State’s petition argued that the Seventh Circuit had erred
by granting relief in the absence of a federal violation. It
also contended, on the authority of our opinion in Wain
wright v. Goode, 464 U. S. 78 (1983) (per curiam), that the
Court of Appeals erred by second-guessing the Indiana
Supreme Court’s factual determination that its own trial
court complied with Indiana law.
The Seventh Circuit denied rehearing, but amended its
opinion to include this language:
“This [remand for resentencing] will cure the state
trial court’s ‘unreasonable determination of the facts.’

