(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1394. Argued March 1, 2010—Decided June 24, 2010
Founded in 1985, Enron Corporation grew from its headquarters in
Houston, Texas, into the seventh highest-revenue-grossing company
in America. Petitioner Jeffrey Skilling, a longtime Enron officer, was
Enron’s chief executive officer from February until August 2001,
when he resigned. Less than four months later, Enron crashed into
bankruptcy, and its stock plummeted in value. After an investigation
uncovered an elaborate conspiracy to prop up Enron’s stock prices by
overstating the company’s financial well-being, the Government
prosecuted dozens of Enron employees who participated in the
scheme. In time, the Government worked its way up the chain of
command, indicting Skilling and two other top Enron executives.
These three defendants, the indictment charged, engaged in a scheme
to deceive investors about Enron’s true financial performance by ma
nipulating its publicly reported financial results and making false
and misleading statements. Count 1 of the indictment charged Skill
ing with, inter alia, conspiracy to commit “honest-services” wire
fraud, 18 U. S. C. §§371, 1343, 1346, by depriving Enron and its
shareholders of the intangible right of his honest services. Skilling
was also charged with over 25 substantive counts of securities fraud,
wire fraud, making false representations to Enron’s auditors, and in
sider trading.
In November 2004, Skilling moved for a change of venue, contend
ing that hostility toward him in Houston, coupled with extensive pre
trial publicity, had poisoned potential jurors. He submitted hundreds
of news reports detailing Enron’s downfall, as well as affidavits from
experts he engaged portraying community attitudes in Houston in
comparison to other potential venues. The District Court denied the
motion, concluding that pretrial publicity did not warrant a presump


2

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
tion that Skilling would be unable to obtain a fair trial in Houston.
Despite incidents of intemperate commentary, the court observed,
media coverage, on the whole, had been objective and unemotional,
and the facts of the case were neither heinous nor sensational. More
over, the court asserted, effective voir dire would detect juror bias.
In the months before the trial, the court asked the parties for ques
tions it might use to screen prospective jurors. Rejecting the Gov
ernment’s sparer inquiries in favor of Skilling’s more probing and
specific questions, the court converted Skilling’s submission, with
slight modifications, into a 77-question, 14-page document. The
questionnaire asked prospective jurors about their sources of news
and exposure to Enron-related publicity, beliefs concerning Enron
and what caused its collapse, opinions regarding the defendants and
their possible guilt or innocence, and relationships to the company
and to anyone affected by its demise. The court then mailed the
questionnaire to 400 prospective jurors and received responses from
nearly all of them. It granted hardship exemptions to about 90 indi
viduals, and the parties, with the court’s approval, further winnowed
the pool by excusing another 119 for cause, hardship, or physical dis
ability. The parties agreed to exclude, in particular, every prospec
tive juror who said that a preexisting opinion about Enron or the de
fendants would prevent her from being impartial.
In December 2005, three weeks before the trial date, one of Skill
ing’s co-defendants, Richard Causey, pleaded guilty. Skilling re
newed his change-of-venue motion, arguing that the juror question
naires revealed pervasive bias and that news accounts of Causey’s
guilty plea further tainted the jury pool. The court again declined to
move the trial, ruling that the questionnaires and voir dire provided
safeguards adequate to ensure an impartial jury. The court also de
nied Skilling’s request for attorney-led voir dire on the ground that
potential jurors were more forthcoming with judges than with law
yers. But the court promised to give counsel an opportunity to ask
follow-up questions, agreed that venire members should be examined
individually about pretrial publicity, and allotted the defendants
jointly two extra peremptory challenges.
Voir dire began in January 2006. After questioning the venire as a
group, the court examined prospective jurors individually, asking
each about her exposure to Enron-related news, the content of any
stories that stood out in her mind, and any questionnaire answers
that raised a red flag signaling possible bias. The court then permit
ted each side to pose follow-up questions and ruled on the parties’
challenges for cause. Ultimately, the court qualified 38 prospective
jurors, a number sufficient, allowing for peremptory challenges, to
empanel 12 jurors and 4 alternates. After a 4-month trial, the jury


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
found Skilling guilty of 19 counts, including the honest-services-fraud
conspiracy charge, and not guilty of 9 insider-trading counts.
On appeal, Skilling raised two arguments relevant here. First, he
contended that pretrial publicity and community prejudice prevented
him from obtaining a fair trial. Second, he alleged that the jury im
properly convicted him of conspiracy to commit honest-services wire
fraud. As to the former, the Fifth Circuit initially determined that
the volume and negative tone of media coverage generated by Enron’s
collapse created a presumption of juror prejudice. Stating, however,
that the presumption is rebuttable, the court examined the voir dire,
found it “proper and thorough,” and held that the District Court had
empaneled an impartial jury. The Court of Appeals also rejected
Skilling’s claim that his conduct did not indicate any conspiracy to
commit honest-services fraud. It did not address Skilling’s argument
that the honest-services statute, if not interpreted to exclude his ac
tions, should be invalidated as unconstitutionally vague.
Held:
1. Pretrial publicity and community prejudice did not prevent Skill
ing from obtaining a fair trial. He did not establish that a presump
tion of juror prejudice arose or that actual bias infected the jury that
tried him. Pp. 11–34.
(a) The District Court did not err in denying Skilling’s requests
for a venue transfer. Pp. 11–19.
(1) Although the Sixth Amendment and Art. III, §2, cl. 3, pro
vide for criminal trials in the State and district where the crime was
committed, these place-of-trial prescriptions do not impede transfer
of a proceeding to a different district if extraordinary local prejudice
will prevent a fair trial. Pp. 11–12.
(2) The foundation precedent for the presumption of prejudice
from which the Fifth Circuit’s analysis proceeded is Rideau v. Louisi
ana, 373 U. S. 723. Wilbert Rideau robbed a small-town bank, kid
naped three bank employees, and killed one of them. Police interro
gated Rideau in jail without counsel present and obtained his
confession, which, without his knowledge, was filmed and televised
three times to large local audiences shortly before trial. After the
Louisiana trial court denied Rideau’s change-of-venue motion, he was
convicted, and the conviction was upheld on direct appeal. This
Court reversed. “[T]o the tens of thousands of people who saw and
heard it,” the Court explained, the interrogation “in a very real sense
was Rideau’s trial—at which he pleaded guilty.”
Id., at 726.
“[W]ithout pausing to examine . . . the voir dire,” the Court held that
the “kangaroo court proceedings” trailing the televised confession vio
lated due process. Id., at 726–727. The Court followed Rideau in two
other cases in which media coverage manifestly tainted criminal


4

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
prosecutions. However, it later explained that those decisions “can
not be made to stand for the proposition that juror exposure to . . .
news accounts of the crime . . . alone presumptively deprives the de
fendant of due process.” Murphy v. Florida, 421 U. S. 794, 798–799.
Thus, prominence does not necessarily produce prejudice, and juror
impartiality does not require ignorance. See, e.g., Irvin v. Dowd, 366
U. S. 717, 722. A presumption of prejudice attends only the extreme
case. Pp. 12–16.
(3) Important differences separate Skilling’s prosecution from
those in which the Court has presumed juror prejudice. First, the
Court has emphasized the size and characteristics of the community
in which the crime occurred. In contrast to the small-town setting in
Rideau, for example, the record shows that Houston is the Nation’s
fourth most populous city. Given the large, diverse pool of residents
eligible for jury duty, any suggestion that 12 impartial individuals
could not be empaneled in Houston is hard to sustain. Second, al
though news stories about Skilling were not kind, they contained no
blatantly prejudicial information such as Rideau’s dramatically
staged admission of guilt. Third, unlike Rideau and other cases in
which trial swiftly followed a widely reported crime, over four years
elapsed between Enron’s bankruptcy and Skilling’s trial. Although
reporters covered Enron-related news throughout this period, the
decibel level of media attention diminished somewhat in the years
following Enron’s collapse. Finally, and of prime significance, Skill
ing’s jury acquitted him of nine insider-trading counts. Similarly,
earlier instituted Enron-related prosecutions yielded no overwhelm
ing victory for the Government. It would be odd for an appellate
court to presume prejudice in a case in which jurors’ actions run
counter to that presumption. Pp. 16–18.
(4) The Fifth Circuit presumed juror prejudice based primarily
on the magnitude and negative tone of the media attention directed
at Enron. But “pretrial publicity—even pervasive, adverse public
ity—does not inevitably lead to an unfair trial.” Nebraska Press
Assn. v. Stuart, 427 U. S. 539, 554. Here, news stories about Enron
did not present the kind of vivid, unforgettable information the Court
has recognized as particularly likely to produce prejudice, and Hous
ton’s size and diversity diluted the media’s impact. Nor did Enron’s
sheer number of victims trigger a presumption. Although the wide
spread community impact necessitated careful identification and in
spection of prospective jurors’ connections to Enron, the extensive
screening questionnaire and follow-up voir dire yielded jurors whose
links to Enron were either nonexistent or attenuated. Finally, while
Causey’s well publicized decision to plead guilty shortly before trial
created a danger of juror prejudice, the District Court took appropri


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Syllabus
ate steps to mitigate that risk. Pp. 18–19.
(b) No actual prejudice contaminated Skilling’s jury. The Court
rejects Skilling’s assertions that voir dire did not adequately detect
and defuse juror prejudice and that several seated jurors were biased.
Pp. 20–34.
(1) No hard-and-fast formula dictates the necessary depth or
breadth of voir dire. Jury selection is “particularly within the prov
ince of the trial judge.” Ristaino v. Ross, 424 U. S. 589, 594–595.
When pretrial publicity is at issue, moreover, “primary reliance on
the judgment of the trial court makes [especially] good sense” be
cause the judge “sits in the locale where the publicity is said to have
had its effect” and may base her evaluation on her “own perception of
the depth and extent of news stories that might influence a juror.”
Mu’Min v. Virginia, 500 U. S. 415, 427. The Court considers the ade
quacy of jury selection in Skilling’s case attentive to the respect due
to district-court determinations of juror impartiality and of the
measures necessary to ensure that impartiality. Pp. 20–21.
(2) Skilling failed to show that his voir dire fell short of consti
tutional requirements. The jury-selection process was insufficient,
Skilling maintains, because voir dire lasted only five hours, most of
the District Court’s questions were conclusory and failed adequately
to probe jurors’ true feelings, and the court consistently took prospec
tive jurors at their word once they claimed they could be fair, no mat
ter any other indications of bias. This Court’s review of the record,
however, yields a different appraisal. The District Court initially
screened venire members by eliciting their responses to a comprehen
sive questionnaire drafted in large part by Skilling. That survey
helped to identify prospective jurors excusable for cause and served
as a springboard for further questions; voir dire thus was the culmi
nation of a lengthy process. Moreover, inspection of the question
naires and voir dire of the seated jurors reveals that, notwithstand
ing the flaws Skilling lists, the selection process secured jurors
largely uninterested in publicity about Enron and untouched by the
corporation’s collapse. Whatever community prejudice existed in
Houston generally, Skilling’s jurors were not under its sway. Relying
on Irvin v. Dowd, 366 U. S., at 727–728, Skilling asserts the District
Court should not have accepted jurors’ promises of fairness. But a
number of factors show that the District Court had far less reason
than the trial court in Irvin to discredit jurors’ assurances of imparti
ality: News stories about Enron contained nothing resembling the
horrifying information rife in reports about Leslie Irvin’s rampage of
robberies and murders; Houston shares little in common with the ru
ral community in which Irvin’s trial proceeded; circulation figures for
Houston media sources were far lower than the 95% saturation level


6

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
recorded in Irvin; and Skilling’s seated jurors exhibited nothing like
the display of bias shown in Irvin. In any event, the District Court
did not simply take venire members at their word. It questioned
each juror individually to uncover concealed bias. This face-to-face
opportunity to gauge demeanor and credibility, coupled with informa
tion from the questionnaires regarding jurors’ backgrounds, opinions,
and news sources, gave the court a sturdy foundation to assess fit
ness for jury service. Pp. 22–30.
(3) Skilling’s allegation that several jurors were openly biased
also fails. In reviewing such claims, the deference due to district
courts is at its pinnacle: “ ‘A trial court’s findings of juror impartiality
may be overturned only for manifest error.’ ” Mu’Min, 500 U. S., at
428. Skilling, moreover, unsuccessfully challenged only one of the
seated jurors for cause, “strong evidence that he was convinced the
[other] jurors were not biased and had not formed any opinions as to
his guilt.” Beck v. Washington, 369 U. S. 541, 557–558. A review of
the record reveals no manifest error regarding the empaneling of Ju
rors 11, 20, and 63, each of whom indicated, inter alia, that he or she
would be fair to Skilling and would require the Government to prove
its case. Four other jurors Skilling claims he would have excluded
with extra peremptory strikes, Jurors 38, 67, 78, and 84, exhibited no
signs of prejudice this Court can discern. Pp. 31–34.
2. Section 1346, which proscribes fraudulent deprivations of “the
intangible right of honest services,” is properly confined to cover only
bribery and kickback schemes. Because Skilling’s alleged misconduct
entailed no bribe or kickback, it does not fall within the Court’s con
finement of §1346’s proscription. Pp. 34–51.
(a) To place Skilling’s claim that §1346 is unconstitutionally
vague in context, the Court reviews the origin and subsequent appli
cation of the honest-services doctrine. Pp. 34–38.
(1) In a series of decisions beginning in the 1940s, the Courts
of Appeals, one after another, interpreted the mail-fraud statute’s
prohibition of “any scheme or artifice to defraud” to include depriva
tions not only of money or property, but also of intangible rights.
See, e.g., Shushan v. United States, 117 F. 2d 110, which stimulated
the development of the “honest-services” doctrine. Unlike traditional
fraud, in which the victim’s loss of money or property supplied the de
fendant’s gain, with one the mirror image of the other, the honest
services doctrine targeted corruption that lacked similar symmetry.
While the offender profited, the betrayed party suffered no depriva
tion of money or property; instead, a third party, who had not been
deceived, provided the enrichment. Even if the scheme occasioned a
money or property gain for the betrayed party, courts reasoned, ac
tionable harm lay in the denial of that party’s right to the offender’s


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Syllabus
“honest services.” Most often these cases involved bribery of public
officials, but over time, the courts increasingly recognized that the
doctrine applied to a private employee who breached his allegiance to
his employer, often by accepting bribes or kickbacks. By 1982, all
Courts of Appeals had embraced the honest-services theory of fraud.
Pp. 34–37.
(2) In 1987, this Court halted the development of the intangi
ble-rights doctrine in McNally v. United States, 483 U. S. 350, 360,
which held that the mail-fraud statute was “limited in scope to the
protection of property rights.” “If Congress desires to go further,” the
Court stated, “it must speak more clearly.” Ibid. P. 37.
(3) Congress responded the next year by enacting §1346, which
provides: “For the purposes of th[e] chapter [of the U. S. Code that
prohibits, inter alia, mail fraud, §1341, and wire fraud, §1343], the
term ‘scheme or artifice to defraud’ includes a scheme or artifice to
deprive another of the intangible right of honest services.” Pp 37–38.
(b) Section 1346, properly confined to core cases, is not unconsti
tutionally vague. Pp. 38–51.
(1) To satisfy due process, “a penal statute [must] define the
criminal offense [1] with sufficient definiteness that ordinary people
can understand what conduct is prohibited and [2] in a manner that
does not encourage arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement.”
Kolender v. Lawson, 461 U. S. 352, 357. The void-for-vagueness doc
trine embraces these requirements. Skilling contends that §1346
meets neither of the two due-process essentials. But this Court must,
if possible, construe, not condemn, Congress’ enactments. See, e.g.,
Civil Service Comm’n v. Letter Carriers, 413 U. S. 548, 571. Alert to
§1346’s potential breadth, the Courts of Appeals have divided on how
best to interpret the statute. Uniformly, however, they have declined
to throw out the statute as irremediably vague. This Court agrees
that §1346 should be construed rather than invalidated. P. 38–39.
(2) The Court looks to the doctrine developed in pre-McNally
cases in an endeavor to ascertain the meaning of the phrase “the in
tangible right of honest services.” There is no doubt that Congress
intended §1346 to refer to and incorporate the honest-services doc
trine recognized in Courts of Appeals’ decisions before McNally de
railed the intangible-rights theory of fraud. Congress, it bears em
phasis, enacted §1346 on the heels of McNally and drafted the
statute using that decision’s terminology. See 483 U. S., at 355, 362.
Pp. 39–40.
(3) To preserve what Congress certainly intended §1346 to
cover, the Court pares the pre-McNally body of precedent down to its
core: In the main, the pre-McNally cases involved fraudulent schemes
to deprive another of honest services through bribes or kickbacks


8

SKILLING v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
supplied by a third party who had not been deceived. In parsing the
various pre-McNally decisions, the Court acknowledges that Skill
ing’s vagueness challenge has force, for honest-services decisions
were not models of clarity or consistency. It has long been the
Court’s practice, however, before striking a federal statute as imper
missibly vague, to consider whether the prescription is amenable to a
limiting construction. See, e.g., Hooper v. California, 155 U. S. 648,
657. Arguing against any limiting construction, Skilling contends
that it is impossible to identify a salvageable honest-services core be
cause the pre-McNally cases are inconsistent and hopelessly unclear.
This Court rejected an argument of the same tenor in Letter Carriers,
413 U. S., at 571–572. Although some applications of the preMcNally honest-services doctrine occasioned disagreement among the
Courts of Appeals, these decisions do not cloud the fact that the vast
majority of cases involved offenders who, in violation of a fiduciary
duty, participated in bribery or kickback schemes. Indeed, McNally
itself presented a paradigmatic kickback fact pattern. 483 U. S., at
352–353, 360. In view of this history, there is no doubt that Congress
intended §1346 to reach at least bribes and kickbacks. Because read
ing the statute to proscribe a wider range of offensive conduct would
raise vagueness concerns, the Court holds that §1346 criminalizes
only the bribe-and-kickback core of the pre-McNally case law.
Pp. 41–45.
(4) The Government urges the Court to go further by reading
§1346 to proscribe another category of conduct: undisclosed self
dealing by a public official or private employee. Neither of the Gov
ernment’s arguments in support of this position withstands close in
spection. Contrary to the first, McNally itself did not center on non
disclosure of a conflicting financial interest, but rather involved a
classic kickback scheme. See 483 U. S., at 352–353, 360. Reading
§1346 to proscribe bribes and kickbacks—and nothing more—
satisfies Congress’ undoubted aim to reverse McNally on its facts.
Nor is the Court persuaded by the Government’s argument that the
pre-McNally conflict-of-interest cases constitute core applications of
the honest-services doctrine. Although the Courts of Appeals upheld
honest-services convictions for some conflict-of-interest schemes, they
reached no consensus on which schemes qualified. Given the relative
infrequency of those prosecutions and the intercircuit inconsistencies
they produced, the Court concludes that a reasonable limiting con
struction of §1346 must exclude this amorphous category of cases.
Further dispelling doubt on this point is the principle that “ambigu
ity concerning the ambit of criminal statutes should be resolved in
favor of lenity.” Cleveland v. United States, 531 U. S. 12, 25. The
Court therefore resists the Government’s less constrained construc


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Syllabus
tion of §1346 absent Congress’ clear instruction otherwise. “If Con
gress desires to go further,” the Court reiterates, “it must speak more
clearly than it has.” McNally, 483 U. S., at 360. Pp. 45–47.
(5) Interpreted to encompass only bribery and kickback
schemes, §1346 is not unconstitutionally vague. A prohibition on
fraudulently depriving another of one’s honest services by accepting
bribes or kickbacks presents neither a fair-notice nor an arbitrary
prosecution problem. See Kolender, 461 U. S., at 357. As to fair no
tice, it has always been clear that bribes and kickbacks constitute
honest-services fraud, Williams v. United States, 341 U. S. 97, 101,
and the statute’s mens rea requirement further blunts any notice
concern, see, e.g., Screws v. United States, 325 U. S. 91, 101–104. As
to arbitrary prosecutions, the Court perceives no significant risk that
the honest-services statute, as here interpreted, will be stretched out
of shape. Its prohibition on bribes and kickbacks draws content not
only from the pre-McNally case law, but also from federal statutes
proscribing and defining similar crimes. Pp. 48–49.
(c) Skilling did not violate §1346, as the Court interprets the
statute. The Government charged Skilling with conspiring to de
fraud Enron’s shareholders by misrepresenting the company’s fiscal
health to his own profit, but the Government never alleged that he
solicited or accepted side payments from a third party in exchange for
making these misrepresentations. Because the indictment alleged
three objects of the conspiracy—honest-services wire fraud, money
or-property wire fraud, and securities fraud—Skilling’s conviction is
flawed. See Yates v. United States, 354 U. S. 298. This determina
tion, however, does not necessarily require reversal of the conspiracy
conviction, for errors of the Yates variety are subject to harmless
error analysis. The Court leaves the parties’ dispute about whether
the error here was harmless for resolution on remand, along with the
question whether reversal on the conspiracy count would touch any of
Skilling’s other convictions. Pp. 49–50.
554 F. 3d 529, affirmed in part, vacated in part, and remanded.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, Part I of which was
joined by ROBERTS, C. J., and STEVENS, SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and
ALITO, JJ., Part II of which was joined by ROBERTS, C. J., and SCALIA,
KENNEDY, and THOMAS, JJ., and Part III of which was joined by ROBERTS, C. J., and STEVENS, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ. SCALIA,
J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment,
in which THOMAS, J., joined, and KENNEDY, J., joined except as to Part
III. ALITO, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the
judgment. SOTOMAYOR, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and dis
senting in part, in which STEVENS and BREYER, JJ., joined.

