Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

lence was gang related or a domestic dispute. Indeed,
we have warned courts against asking “whether another
reasonable, or more reasonable, interpretation of the
events can be constructed five years after the fact.”
Hunter v. Bryant, 502 U. S. 224, 228 (1991) (per curiam).
The inquiry our precedents demand is not whether different conclusions might conceivably be drawn from the
crime scene. Rather, it is whether “a reasonably welltrained officer in petitioner’s position would have known
that his affidavit failed to establish probable cause.”
Malley, 475 U. S., at 345. The operative question in this
case, therefore, is whether—given that, as petitioners
comprehended, the crime itself was not gang related—a
reasonable officer nonetheless could have believed he had
probable cause to seek a warrant to search the suspect’s
residence for all evidence of affiliation not only with the
suspect’s street gang, but “any Street Gang.” He could
not.
The Court offers two secondary explanations for why a
search for gang-related items might have been justified,
but they are equally unpersuasive. First, the majority
suggests that such evidence hypothetically “might prove
helpful in impeaching Bowen or rebutting various defenses he could raise at trial.” Ante, at 15. That is a nonstarter. The Fourth Amendment does not permit the police
to search for evidence solely because it could be admissible
for impeachment or rebuttal purposes. If it did, the police
would be equally entitled to obtain warrants to rifle
through the papers of anyone reasonably suspected of a
crime for all evidence of his bad character, Fed. Rule Evid.
404(a)(2)(B)(i), or any evidence of any “crime, wrong, or
other act” that might prove the defendant’s “motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,
absence of mistake, or lack of accident,” Fed. Rule Evid.
404(b)(2). Indeed, the majority’s rationale presumably
would authorize the police to search the residence of every

