Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

In addition, a reasonable officer could believe that evidence demonstrating Bowen’s membership in a gang
might prove helpful in impeaching Bowen or rebutting
various defenses he could raise at trial. For example,
evidence that Bowen had ties to a gang that uses guns
such as the one he used to assault Kelly would certainly be
relevant to establish that he had familiarity with or access
to this type of weapon.
Moreover, even if this were merely a domestic dispute, a
reasonable officer could still conclude that gang paraphernalia found at the Millenders’ residence would aid in
the prosecution of Bowen by, for example, demonstrating
Bowen’s connection to other evidence found there. The
warrant authorized a search for “any gang indicia that
would establish the persons being sought in this warrant,”
and “[a]rticles of personal property tending to establish
the identity of [the] person in control of the premise or
premises.” App. 52. Before the District Court, the Millenders “acknowledge[d] that evidence of who controlled the
premises would be relevant if incriminating evidence were
found and it became necessary to tie that evidence to a
person, ” and the District Court approved that aspect of
the warrant on this basis. App. to Pet. for Cert. 158–159
(internal quotation marks omitted). Given Bowen’s known
gang affiliation, a reasonable officer could conclude that
gang paraphernalia found at the residence would be an
effective means of demonstrating Bowen’s control over the
premises or his connection to evidence found there.7
——————
unreasonable for an officer to have reached a different conclusion from
the facts in the affidavit. See n. 2, supra.
7 The Fourth Amendment does not require probable cause to believe
evidence will conclusively establish a fact before permitting a search,
but only “probable cause . . . to believe the evidence sought will aid in a
particular apprehension or conviction.” Warden, Md. Penitentiary v.
Hayden, 387 U. S. 294, 307 (1967) (emphasis added). Even if gang
evidence might have turned out not to be conclusive because other

