18

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
Opinion of the Court

review also cannot be regarded as dispositive. But by
holding in Malley that a magistrate’s approval does not
automatically render an officer’s conduct reasonable, we
did not suggest that approval by a magistrate or review
by others is irrelevant to the objective reasonableness of
the officers’ determination that the warrant was valid.
Indeed, we expressly noted that we were not deciding
“whether [the officer’s] conduct in [that] case was in fact
objectively reasonable.” Id., at 345, n. 8. The fact that the
officers secured these approvals is certainly pertinent in
assessing whether they could have held a reasonable belief
that the warrant was supported by probable cause.
C
In holding that the warrant in this case was so obviously defective that no reasonable officer could have believed
it was valid, the court below relied heavily on our decision
in Groh v. Ramirez, 540 U. S. 551 (2004), but that precedent is far afield. There, we held that officers who carried
out a warrant-approved search were not entitled to qualified immunity because the warrant in question failed to
describe the items to be seized at all. Id., at 557. We
explained that “[i]n the portion of the form that called for
a description of the ‘person or property’ to be seized, [the
applicant] typed a description of [the target’s] two-story
blue house rather than the alleged stockpile of firearms.”
Id., at 554. Thus, the warrant stated nonsensically that
“ ‘there is now concealed [on the specified premises] a
certain person or property, namely [a] single dwelling
residence two story in height which is blue in color and
has two additions attached to the east.’ ” Id., at 554–555,
n. 2 (bracketed material in original). Because “even a
cursory reading of the warrant in [that] case—perhaps
just a simple glance—would have revealed a glaring deficiency that any reasonable police officer would have
known was constitutionally fatal,” id., at 564, we held that

