8

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

member of Bowen’s street gang for similar weapons—
which likewise “might [have] prove[d] helpful in impeaching Bowen or rebutting various defenses he could raise at
trial.” Ante, at 15. It has long been the case, however,
that such general searches, detached from probable cause,
are impermissible. See, e.g., Go-Bart Importing Co., 282
U. S., at 357. By their own admission, however, the officers were not searching for gang-related indicia to bolster
some hypothetical impeachment theory, but for other
reasons: because “photos sought re gang membership
could be linked with other gang members, evidencing
criminal activity as gang affiliation is an enhancement to
criminal charges.” App. 181; see also id., at 145. That
kind of fishing expedition for evidence of unidentified
criminal activity committed by unspecified persons was
the very evil the Fourth Amendment was intended to
prevent.
Finally, the Court concludes that “even if this were
merely a domestic dispute, a reasonable officer could still
conclude that gang paraphernalia found at the Millenders’
residence would aid in the prosecution of Bowen by, for
example, demonstrating Bowen’s connection to other
[unspecified] evidence found there.” Ante, at 15. That is
difficult to understand. The police were well aware before
obtaining a warrant that “other persons associated with
the home, the Millender family members, were active
Mona Park Crip gang members.” App. 28. Simply finding
gang-related paraphernalia, therefore, would have done
little to establish probable cause that particular evidence
found in the home was connected to Bowen, rather than
any of the several other active gang members who resided
full time at the Millender home.6 Moreover, it would have
——————
6 The Court suggests that even if gang-related evidence would be
inconclusive generally, evidence bearing Bowen’s particular gang moniker could have demonstrated Bowen’s connection to the residence.

