2

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
Opinion of KAGAN, J.

police officer could have found the warrant adequately
supported by “indicia of probable cause.” Malley v. Briggs,
475 U. S. 335, 345 (1986). So Messerschmidt and his
fellow officers should receive qualified immunity for their
search for firearms.
The Court, however, goes astray when it holds that a
reasonable officer could have thought the warrant valid in
approving a search for evidence of “street gang membership,” App. 52. Membership in even the worst gang does
not violate California law, so the officers could not search
for gang paraphernalia just to establish Bowen’s ties to
the Crips. Instead, the police needed probable cause to
believe that such items would provide evidence of an
actual crime—and as the Court acknowledges, see ante, at
12–14, the only crime mentioned in the warrant application was the assault on Kelly. The problem for the Court
is that nothing in the application supports a link between
Bowen’s gang membership and that shooting. Contra the
Court’s elaborate theory-spinning, see ante, at 12–16,
Messerschmidt’s affidavit in fact characterized the violent
assault only as a domestic dispute, not as a gang-related
one, see App. 55 (describing the crime as a “spousal assault and an assault with a deadly weapon”). And that
description is consistent with the most natural understanding of the events. The warrant application thus had
a hole at its very center: It lacked any explanation of how
gang items would (or even might) provide evidence of the
domestic assault the police were investigating.
To fill this vacuum, the Court proposes an alternative,
but similarly inadequate justification—that gang paraphernalia could have demonstrated Bowen’s connection to
the Millender residence and to any evidence of the assault
found there. The dissent rightly notes one difficulty with
this argument: The discovery of gang items would not
have established that Bowen was staying at the house,
given that several other gang members regularly did so.

