10

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

By justifying the officers’ actions on reasons of its own
invention, the Court ignores the reasons the officers actually gave, as well as the facts upon which this case was
decided below. The majority’s analysis—akin to a rationalbasis test—is thus far removed from what qualified
immunity analysis demands. Even if the police had
searched for the reasons the Court proposes, however, I
still would find it inappropriate to afford them qualified
immunity.
The Court correctly recognizes that to satisfy the Fourth
Amendment the police were required to demonstrate
probable cause that (1) other firearms could be found at
the Millenders’ residence; and (2) such weapons were
illegal or were “ ‘possess[ed] . . . with the intent to use
them as a means of committing a public offense.’ ” Ante, at
12 (quoting Cal. Penal Code Ann. §1524(a)(3) (West
2011)). The warrant failed to establish either.
The majority has little difficulty concluding that because
Bowen fired one firearm, it was reasonable for the police
to conclude not only that Bowen must have possessed
others, but that he must be storing these other weapons
at his 73-year-old former foster mother’s home.9 Again,
however, this is not what the police actually concluded, as
Detective Messerschmidt’s deposition makes clear.
“Q: Did you have any reason to believe there would be
——————
Texas, 378 U. S. 108, 109, n. 1 (1964); see also United States v. Jacobsen, 466 U. S. 109, 112 (1984). Likewise, a police officer cannot obtain
qualified immunity for searching pursuant to a warrant by relying
upon facts outside that warrant, as evinced by Malley’s focus on
“whether a reasonably well-trained officer in petitioner’s position would
have known that his affidavit failed to establish probable cause.”
Malley v. Briggs, 475 U. S. 335, 345 (1986) (emphasis added).
9 The majority ignores that Bowen retrieved the shotgun that he fired
from the apartment he shared with Kelly, not the Millenders’ home.
Kelly provided no indication that Bowen possessed other guns or that
he stored them at his former foster mother’s home.

