6

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Unlike the Members of this Court, Detective Messerschmidt alone had 14 years of experience as a peace officer, “hundreds of hours of instruction on the dynamics of
gangs and gang trends,” received “specialized training in
the field of gang related crimes,” and had been “involved
in hundreds of gang related incidents, contacts, and or
arrests.” App. 53–54. The Court provides no justification
for sweeping aside the conclusions he reached on the basis
of his far greater expertise, let alone the facts found by the
District Court. We have repeatedly and recently warned
appellate courts, “far removed from the scene,” against
second-guessing the judgments made by the police or
reweighing the facts as they stood before the district court.
Ryburn v. Huff, 565 U. S. —, — (2012) (per curiam) (slip
op., at 6–8). The majority’s decision today is totally inconsistent with those principles.
Qualified immunity analysis does not direct courts to
play the role of crime scene investigators, second-guessing
police officers’ determinations as to whether a crime was
committed with a handgun or a shotgun, or whether vio——————
to murder” Kelly “on the asserted ground that she had ‘call[ed] the cops’
on him”); see also ante, at 1, 13. Bowen, however, never made that
statement. Though it appears in the warrant application, the words
are Messerschmidt’s—taken from his own inaccurate notes of Kelly’s
account of the crime. What Kelly actually said during her interview
was that as soon as the police deputies left, Bowen “came out of nowhere talking about, ‘Did you call the police on me? You called the
police on me,’ ” to which Kelly responded “no one called the police on
you . . . . [I]nstead of arguing and fighting with you I just want to get
my shit done.” Kelly Interview 7; compare ibid. with Record, Doc. 51
(Exh. B), p. 3 (Messerschmidt’s narrative of interview with Kelly). Only
after Kelly started to leave did Bowen exclaim “oh it’s like that. It’s
like that,” retrieve a gun, and threaten to shoot her if she left. Kelly
Interview 7–8. That Bowen was “ ‘angry,’ ” ante, at 14, n. 5, because she
had called the sheriff's department for assistance reflected exactly what
Kelly and the police expected at the outset—that Bowen “would give
her a hard time about moving out.” App. 38 (sheriff’s department
incident report).

