Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

assault’ that ensued after Kelly decided to end her ‘on
going dating relationship’ with Bowen” and “[n]othing in
that description suggests that the crime was gangrelated.” Ibid. (quoting App. 55).
This effort to characterize the case solely as a domestic dispute, however, is misleading.
Cf. post, at 5
(SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting); post, at 2 (KAGAN, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). Messerschmidt began
his affidavit in support of the warrant by explaining that
he “has been investigating an assault with a deadly weapon incident” and elaborated that the crime was a “spousal
assault and an assault with a deadly weapon.” App. 55
(emphasis added). The affidavit also stated that Bowen
was “a known Mona Park Crip gang member” “based on
information provided by the victim and the cal-gang database,”4 and that he had attempted to murder Kelly after
becoming enraged that she had “call[ed] the cops on
[him].” Id., at 56, 58–59. A reasonable officer could certainly view Bowen’s attack as motivated not by the souring of his romantic relationship with Kelly but instead by
a desire to prevent her from disclosing details of his gang
activity to the police. She was, after all, no longer linked
with him as a girlfriend; he had assaulted her in the past;
and she had indeed called the cops on him. And, as the
affidavit supporting the warrant made clear, Kelly had in
fact given the police information about Bowen’s gang ties.
Id., at 59.5
——————
4 Although the cal-gang database states that information contained
therein cannot be used to establish probable cause, see App. 64, the
affidavit makes clear that Kelly also provided this information to
Messerschmidt, id., at 59, as she did to the deputies who initially
responded to the attack, id., at 39 (describing Kelly’s statement that
Bowen was “an active member of the ‘Mona Park Crips’ ”). We therefore need not decide whether the cal-gang database’s disclaimer is
relevant to Fourth Amendment analysis.
5 Contrary to the dissent’s suggestion, see post, at 5–6, n. 5 (opinion
of SOTOMAYOR, J.), the affidavit’s account of Bowen’s statements is

