Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

The Court also makes much of the fact that Detective
Messerschmidt sent his proposed warrant application to
two superior police officers and a district attorney for
review. Giving weight to that fact would turn the Fourth
Amendment on its head. This Court made clear in Malley
that a police officer acting unreasonably cannot obtain
qualified immunity on the basis of a neutral magistrate’s
approval. It would be passing strange, therefore, to immunize an officer’s conduct instead based upon the approval of other police officers and prosecutors.14 See Johnson v. United States, 333 U. S. 10, 14 (1948) (opinion of
Jackson, J.) (“When the right of privacy must reasonably
yield to the right of search is, as a rule, to be decided by a
judicial officer, not by a policeman or government enforcement agent”). The effect of the Court’s rule, however,
is to hold blameless the “plainly incompetent” action of the
police officer seeking a warrant because of the “plainly
incompetent” approval of his superiors and the district
attorney. See ante, at 16–18; see also ante, at 3–4 (opinion
of KAGAN, J.). Under the majority’s test, four wrongs
apparently make a right. I cannot agree, however, that
the “objective legal reasonableness of an official’s acts,”
Harlow, 457 U. S., at 819, turns on the number of police
officers or prosecutors who improperly sanction a search
that violates the Fourth Amendment.
III
Police officers perform a difficult and essential service to
society, frequently at substantial risk to their personal
——————
14 In the famous case of Wilkes v. Wood, Lofft 1, 98 Eng. Rep. 489
(C. P. 1763), one of the seminal events informing the Framers’ development
of the Fourth Amendment, the Undersecretary of State who searched
the home of John Wilkes pursuant to a general warrant was subjected
to monetary damages notwithstanding that his superior, Lord Halifax,
issued the warrant. See Boyd v. United States, 116 U. S. 616, 626
(1886).

