Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
bility to determine whether the officer’s allegations establish probable cause and, if so, to issue a warrant comporting in form with the
requirements of the Fourth Amendment.” Leon, supra, at 921. Pp.
8−10.
(b) This case does not fall within that narrow exception. It would
not be entirely unreasonable for an officer to believe that there was
probable cause to search for all firearms and firearm-related materials. Under the circumstances set forth in the warrant, an officer
could reasonably conclude that there was a “fair probability” that the
sawed-off shotgun was not the only firearm Bowen owned, Illinois v.
Gates, 462 U. S. 213, 238, and that Bowen’s sawed-off shotgun was illegal. Cf. 26 U. S. C. §§ 5845(a), 5861(d). Given Bowen’s possession
of one illegal gun, his gang membership, willingness to use the gun to
kill someone, and concern about the police, it would not be unreasonable for an officer to conclude that Bowen owned other illegal guns.
An officer also could reasonably believe that seizure of firearms was
necessary to prevent further assaults on Kelly. California law allows
a magistrate to issue a search warrant for items “in the possession of
any person with the intent to use them as a means of committing a
public offense,” Cal. Penal Code Ann. §1524(a)(3), and the warrant
application submitted by the officers specifically referenced this provision as a basis for the search. Pp. 10–12.
(c) Regarding the warrant’s authorization to search for gangrelated materials, a reasonable officer could view Bowen’s attack as
motivated not by the souring of his romantic relationship with Kelly
but by a desire to prevent her from disclosing details of his gang activity to the police. It would therefore not be unreasonable—based on
the facts set out in the affidavit—for an officer to believe that evidence of Bowen’s gang affiliation would prove helpful in prosecuting
him for the attack on Kelly, in supporting additional, related charges
against Bowen for the assault, or in impeaching Bowen or rebutting
his defenses. Moreover, even if this were merely a domestic dispute,
a reasonable officer could still conclude that gang paraphernalia
found at the Millenders’ residence could demonstrate Bowen’s control
over the premises or his connection to other evidence found there.
Pp. 12−16.
(d) The fact that the officers sought and obtained approval of the
warrant application from a superior and a deputy district attorney
before submitting it to the magistrate provides further support for
the conclusion that an officer could reasonably have believed that the
scope of the warrant was supported by probable cause. A contrary
conclusion would mean not only that Messerschmidt and Lawrence
were “plainly incompetent” in concluding that the warrant was supported by probable cause, Malley, supra, at 341, but that their super-

