2

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
Syllabus
plained why Messerschmidt believed there was probable cause for the
search. It also requested that the warrant be endorsed for night service because of Bowen’s gang ties. Before submitting the application
to a magistrate for approval, Messerschmidt had it reviewed by his
supervisor, Sergeant Robert Lawrence, as well as a police lieutenant
and a deputy district attorney. Messerschmidt then submitted the
application to a magistrate, who issued the warrant. The ensuing
search uncovered only Millender’s shotgun, a California Social Services letter addressed to Bowen, and a box of .45-caliber ammunition.
The Millenders filed an action under 42 U. S. C. §1983 against petitioners Messerschmidt and Lawrence, alleging that the officers had
subjected them to an unreasonable search in violation of the Fourth
Amendment. The District Court granted summary judgment to the
Millenders, concluding that the firearm and gang-material aspects of
the search warrant were overbroad and that the officers were not entitled to qualified immunity from damages. The Ninth Circuit, sitting en banc, affirmed the denial of qualified immunity. The court
held that the warrant’s authorization was unconstitutionally overbroad because the affidavits and warrant failed to establish probable
cause that the broad categories of firearms, firearm-related material,
and gang-related material were contraband or evidence of a crime,
and that a reasonable officer would have been aware of the warrant’s
deficiency.

Held: The officers are entitled to qualified immunity. Pp. 8−19.
(a) Qualified immunity “protects government officials ‘from liability
for civil damages insofar as their conduct does not violate clearly established statutory or constitutional rights of which a reasonable
person would have known.’ ” Pearson v. Callahan, 555 U. S. 223, 231.
Where the alleged Fourth Amendment violation involves a search or
seizure pursuant to a warrant, the fact that a neutral magistrate has
issued a warrant is the clearest indication that the officers acted in
an objectively reasonable manner, or in “objective good faith.” United
States v. Leon, 468 U. S. 897, 922–923. Nonetheless, that fact does
not end the inquiry into objective reasonableness. The Court has recognized an exception allowing suit when “it is obvious that no reasonably competent officer would have concluded that a warrant
should issue.” Malley v. Briggs, 475 U. S. 335, 341. The “shield of
immunity” otherwise conferred by the warrant, id., at 345, will be
lost, for example, where the warrant was “based on an affidavit so
lacking in indicia of probable cause as to render official belief in its
existence entirely unreasonable.” Leon, 468 U. S., at 923. The
threshold for establishing this exception is high. “[I]n the ordinary
case, an officer cannot be expected to question the magistrate’s probable-cause determination” because “[i]t is the magistrate’s responsi-

