Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

wise identified Bowen as a “Mona Park Crip” gang member, but did not check off “gang-related” as a motive for the
attack. See App. 41, 44 (Crime Analysis Supplemental
Form–M. O. Factors). And the District Court noted it was
undisputed that Detective Messerschmidt “had no reason
to believe Bowen’s crime was a ‘gang’ crime.” App. to Pet.
for Cert. 115.4
The police’s conclusions matched the victim’s own account of the attack. Kelly asked police officers to help her
move out because Bowen “ha[d] a domestic violence on his
record,” had “hit [her] once or twice” already, had repeatedly threatened her “You’ll never leave me. I’ll kill you
if you leave me,” and she was “planning on breaking up”
with him. Record, Doc. 51 (Exh. C), pp. 5–6 (hereinafter
Kelly Interview). As Kelly described the confrontation, it
was only after she fled to her car in order to leave that
Bowen reemerged from their shared apartment with the
shotgun and told her “I’m gonna kill your ass right here if
you take off,” consistent with his prior threats. Id., at 7–8.
Every piece of information, therefore, accorded with Detective Messerschmidt’s conclusion: The crime was domestic
violence that was not gang related.5
——————
4 The Court is wrong to imply that courts should not consider “facts
outside the affidavit,” but within the officers’ possession, when assessing qualified immunity. Ante, at 10, n. 2. Our precedents make
clear that the objective reasonableness of an officer’s conduct is judged
“in light of clearly established law and the information the officers
possessed.” Wilson v. Layne, 526 U. S. 603, 615 (1999). If an officer
possesses information indicating that he lacks probable cause to search,
and that information was not presented to the neutral magistrate when
he approved the search, it is particularly likely that “a reasonably well
trained officer would have known that the search was illegal despite
the magistrate’s authorization.” United States v. Leon, 468 U. S. 897,
922, n. 23 (1984).
5 To support its theory that Bowen attacked Kelly to keep her silent
about his gang activity, the majority relies principally on its claim that
Bowen yelled, “ ‘I told you never to call the cops on me bitch!’ ” ante, at
2, citing it no less than five times. See, ante, at 11 (Bowen “attempt[ed]

