Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

dreds of gang related incidents, contacts, and or arrests”
during his time on the force, and that he had “received
specialized training in the field of gang related crimes”
and training in “gang related shootings.” Id., at 53–54.
The second affidavit—expressly incorporated into the
search warrant—explained why Messerschmidt believed
there was sufficient probable cause to support the warrant. That affidavit described the facts of the incident
involving Kelly and Bowen in great detail, including the
weapon used in the assault. The affidavit recounted that
Kelly had identified Bowen as the assailant and that she
thought Bowen might be found at 2234 East 120th Street.
It also reported that Messerschmidt had “conducted an
extensive background search on the suspect by utilizing
departmental records, state computer records, and other
police agency records,” and that from that information he
had concluded that Bowen resided at 2234 East 120th
Street. Id., at 58.
The affidavit requested that the search warrant be
endorsed for night service because “information provided
by the victim and the cal-gang data base” indicated that
Bowen had “gang ties to the Mona Park Crip gang” and
that “night service would provide an added element of
safety to the community as well as for the deputy personnel serving the warrant.” Id., at 59. The affidavit concluded by noting that Messerschmidt “believe[d] that the
items sought” would be in Bowen’s possession and that
“recovery of the weapon could be invaluable in the successful prosecution of the suspect involved in this case, and
the curtailment of further crimes being committed.” Ibid.
Messerschmidt submitted the warrants to his supervisors—Sergeant Lawrence and Lieutenant Ornales—for
review. Deputy District Attorney Janet Wilson also reviewed the materials and initialed the search warrant,
indicating that she agreed with Messerschmidt’s assessment of probable cause. Id., at 27, 47. Finally, Messer-

