(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MESSERSCHMIDT ET AL. v. MILLENDER, EXECUTOR OF
ESTATE OF MILLENDER, DECEASED, ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–704.

Argued December 5, 2011—Decided February 22, 2012

Shelly Kelly was afraid that she would be attacked by her boyfriend,
Jerry Ray Bowen, while she moved out of her apartment. She therefore requested police protection. Two officers arrived, but they were
called away to an emergency. As soon as the officers left, Bowen
showed up at the apartment, yelled “I told you never to call the cops
on me bitch!” and attacked Kelly, attempting to throw her over a second-story landing. After Kelly escaped to her car, Bowen pointed a
sawed-off shotgun at her and threatened to kill her if she tried to
leave. Kelly nonetheless sped away as Bowen fired five shots at the
car, blowing out one of its tires.
Kelly later met with Detective Curt Messerschmidt to discuss the
incident. She described the attack in detail, mentioned that Bowen
had previously assaulted her, that he had ties to the Mona Park
Crips gang, and that he might be staying at the home of his former
foster mother, Augusta Millender. Following this conversation, Messerschmidt conducted a detailed investigation, during which he confirmed Bowen’s connection to the Millenders’ home, verified his
membership in two gangs, and learned that Bowen had been arrested
and convicted for numerous violent and firearm-related offenses.
Based on this investigation, Messerschmidt drafted an application
for a warrant authorizing a search of the Millenders’ home for all
firearms and ammunition, as well as evidence indicating gang
membership.
Messerschmidt included two affidavits in the warrant application.
The first detailed his extensive law enforcement experience and his
specialized training in gang-related crimes. The second, expressly incorporated into the search warrant, described the incident and ex-

