Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

done nothing to establish that Bowen had committed the
non-gang-related crime specified in the warrant.7
B
The Court also errs by concluding that petitioners could
have reasonably concluded that they had probable cause
to search for all firearms. Notably absent from the Court’s
discussion is any acknowledgment of the actual basis for
petitioners’ search. The police officers searched for all
firearms not for the reasons hypothesized by the majority,
but because they determined that “[v]alid warrants commonly allow police to search for ‘firearms and ammunition,’ ” and that “[h]ere, any caliber of shotgun or receipts
would show possession of and/or purchase of guns.” Id., at
144, 180–181; see also Brief for Appellant in No. 07–55518
(CA9), p. 41 (hereinafter CA9 Brief). It is small wonder
that the District Court found these arguments “nonsensical and unpersuasive.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 157. It bears
repeating that the Founders adopted the Fourth Amendment to protect against searches for evidence of unspecified crimes. And merely possessing other firearms is not a
crime at all. See generally District of Columbia v. Heller,
554 U. S. 570 (2008).8
——————
But the warrant did not authorize a search for items bearing Bowen’s
moniker, but rather for items related to “any Street Gang,” including
countless street gangs of which Bowen was not a member. App. 52.
Even under the Court’s interpretation, therefore, the warrant was
hopelessly overbroad and invalid.
7 The police also could not search for gang-related evidence for its own
sake. Mere membership in a gang is not a crime under California law.
See People v. Gardeley, 14 Cal. 4th 605, 623, 927 P. 2d 713, 725 (1996).
8 Although the Court recites additional facts about Bowen’s background and arrest record, ante, at 2–3, none of these facts were disclosed to the magistrate. The police cannot rationalize a search post
hoc on the basis of information they failed to set forth in their warrant
application to a neutral magistrate. Rather, “[i]t is elementary that in
passing on the validity of a warrant, the reviewing court may consider
only information brought to the magistrate’s attention.” Aguilar v.

