Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

crimes being committed” (emphasis added)).
II
The Court also finds error in the Court of Appeals’
failure to find “pertinent” the fact that the officer sought
approval of his warrant from a magistrate.11 Ante, at 18.
Whether Detective Messerschmidt presented his warrant
application to a magistrate surely would be “pertinent” to
demonstrating his subjective good faith.12 But qualified
immunity does not turn on whether an officer is motivated
by good intentions or malice, but rather on the “objective
reasonableness of an official’s conduct.” Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U. S. 800, 818 (1982).
The majority asserts, without citation, that the magistrate’s approval is relevant to objective reasonableness.
That view, however, is expressly contradicted by our holding in Malley v. Briggs, 475 U. S. 335. There, we found
that a police officer is not “entitled to rely on the judgment
of a judicial officer in finding that probable cause exists
and hence issuing the warrant,” and explained that “[that]
view of objective reasonableness is at odds with our development of that concept in Harlow and [United States v.
Leon, 468 U. S. 897 (1984)].” Id., at 345. The appropriate
qualified immunity analysis, we held, was not whether an
——————
11 Under California law, magistrates are the officials responsible for
issuing search warrants. Cal. Penal Code Ann. §1523 (West 2011).
12 To be clear, no one suggests petitioners acted with malice or intended to be “misleading in omitting . . . facts,” ante, at 10, n. 2, that
illustrate why it would have been objectively unreasonable to search for
the reasons the Court proposes. It is hardly surprising, for instance,
that Detective Messerschmidt did not include in his affidavit further
facts affirming that the crime was not gang related, given that he did
not believe the crime was gang related and did not search for gangrelated material for that reason. See supra, at 7–8. The affidavit and
warrant were perfectly consistent with the officers’ stated reasons for
their search—just not with the Court’s own theories.

