14

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
Opinion of the Court

It would therefore not have been unreasonable—based
on the facts set out in the affidavit—for an officer to believe that evidence regarding Bowen’s gang affiliation
would prove helpful in prosecuting him for the attack on
Kelly. See Warden, Md. Penitentiary v. Hayden, 387 U. S.
294, 307 (1967) (holding that the Fourth Amendment
allows a search for evidence when there is “probable cause
. . . to believe that the evidence sought will aid in a particular apprehension or conviction”). Not only would such
evidence help to establish motive, either apart from or in
addition to any domestic dispute, it would also support the
bringing of additional, related charges against Bowen for
the assault. See, e.g., Cal. Penal Code Ann. §136.1(b)(1)
(West 1999) (It is a crime to “attempt[ ] to prevent or
dissuade another person who has been the victim of a
crime or who is witness to a crime from . . . [m]aking any
report of that victimization to any . . . law enforcement
officer”).6
——————
consistent with other accounts of the confrontation, in particular the
report prepared by the officers who spoke with Kelly immediately after
the attack. See App. 39 (stating that when Bowen “appeared at the
base of the stairs and began yelling at [Kelly,] [h]e was angry because
she had called the Sheriff ’s Department”). And at no point during this
litigation has the accuracy of the affidavit’s account of the attack been
called into question.
6 The dissent relies heavily on Messerschmidt’s deposition, in which
he stated that Bowen’s crime was not a “gang crime.” See post, at 4–7.
Messerschmidt’s belief about the nature of the crime, however, is not
information he possessed but a conclusion he reached based on information known to him. See Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U. S. 635, 641
(1987). We have “eschew[ed] inquiries into the subjective beliefs of law
enforcement officers who seize evidence pursuant to a subsequently
invalidated warrant.” United States v. Leon, 468 U. S. 897, 922, n. 23
(1984); see also Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U. S. 800, 815–819 (1982). In
any event, as the dissent recognizes, the inquiry under our precedents
is whether “a reasonably well-trained officer in petitioner’s position
would have known that his affidavit failed to establish probable cause.”
Malley, 475 U. S., at 345 (emphasis added). Messerschmidt’s own
evaluation does not answer the question whether it would have been

