Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of the Court

out the pertinent facts. The only facts omitted—the officers’ knowledge of Bowen’s arrest and conviction records,
see supra, at 3—would only have strengthened the warrant. Messerschmidt then submitted the warrant application for review by Lawrence, another superior officer, and
a deputy district attorney, all of whom approved the application without any apparent misgivings. Only after this
did Messerschmidt seek the approval of a neutral magistrate, who issued the requested warrant. The officers thus
“took every step that could reasonably be expected of
them.” Massachusetts v. Sheppard, 468 U. S. 981, 989
(1984). In light of the foregoing, it cannot be said that “no
officer of reasonable competence would have requested the
warrant.” Malley, 475 U. S., at 346, n. 9. Indeed, a contrary conclusion would mean not only that Messerschmidt
and Lawrence were “plainly incompetent,” id., at 341, but
that their supervisor, the deputy district attorney, and the
magistrate were as well.
The Court of Appeals, however, gave no weight to the
fact that the warrant had been reviewed and approved
by the officers’ superiors, a deputy district attorney, and a
neutral magistrate. Relying on Malley, the court held that
the officers had an “independent responsibility to ensure
there [was] at least a colorable argument for probable
cause.” 620 F. 3d, at 1034. It explained that “[t]he deputies here had a responsibility to exercise their reasonable
professional judgment,” and that “in circumstances such
as these a neutral magistrate’s approval (and, a fortiori,
a non-neutral prosecutor’s) cannot absolve an officer of
liability.” Ibid. (citation omitted).
We rejected in Malley the contention that an officer is
automatically entitled to qualified immunity for seeking a
warrant unsupported by probable cause, simply because
a magistrate had approved the application. 475 U. S., at
345. And because the officers’ superior and the deputy
district attorney are part of the prosecution team, their

