Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of KAGAN, J.

See post, at 8–9 (opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.). And even
setting that issue aside, the Court’s reasoning proves far
too much: It would sanction equally well a search for any
of Bowen’s possessions on the premises—a result impossible to square with the Fourth Amendment. See, e.g.,
Andresen v. Maryland, 427 U. S. 463, 480 (1976) (disapproving “ ‘a general, exploratory rummaging in a person’s
belongings’ ” (quoting Coolidge v. New Hampshire, 403
U. S. 443, 467 (1971))). In authorizing a search for all
gang-related items, the warrant far outstripped the officers’ probable cause. Because a reasonable officer would
have recognized that defect, I would not award qualified
immunity to Messerschmidt and his colleagues for this
aspect of their search.
Still more fundamentally, the Court errs in scolding the
Court of Appeals for failing to give “weight to the fact that
the warrant had been reviewed and approved by the officers’ superiors, a deputy district attorney, and a neutral
magistrate.” Ante, at 17. As the dissent points out,
see post, at 13–15, this Court’s holding in Malley is to
the opposite effect: An officer is not “entitled to rely on the
judgment of a judicial officer in finding that probable
cause exists and hence issuing the warrant.” 475 U. S., at
345. Malley made clear that qualified immunity turned
on the officer’s own “professional judgment,” considered
separately from the mistake of the magistrate. Id., at 346;
see ibid., n. 9 (“The officer . . . cannot excuse his own
default by pointing to the greater incompetence of the
magistrate”); id., at 350 (Powell, J., concurring in part and
dissenting in part) (objecting to the Court’s decision to
“give little evidentiary weight to the finding of probable
cause by a magistrate”). And what we said in Malley
about a magistrate’s authorization applies still more
strongly to the approval of other police officers or state
attorneys. All those individuals, as the Court puts it, are
“part of the prosecution team.” Ante, at 18. To make their

