10

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
Opinion of the Court

ence entirely unreasonable.” Leon, 468 U. S., at 923 (internal quotation marks omitted).2
Our precedents make clear, however, that the threshold
for establishing this exception is a high one, and it should
be. As we explained in Leon, “[i]n the ordinary case, an
officer cannot be expected to question the magistrate’s
probable-cause determination” because “[i]t is the magistrate’s responsibility to determine whether the officer’s
allegations establish probable cause and, if so, to issue a
warrant comporting in form with the requirements of the
Fourth Amendment.” Id., at 921; see also Malley, supra,
at 346, n. 9 (“It is a sound presumption that the magistrate is more qualified than the police officer to make a
probable cause determination, and it goes without saying
that where a magistrate acts mistakenly in issuing a
warrant but within the range of professional competence
of a magistrate, the officer who requested the warrant
cannot be held liable” (internal quotation marks and
citation omitted)).
III
The Millenders contend, and the Court of Appeals held,
that their case falls into this narrow exception. According
to the Millenders, the officers “failed to provide any facts
or circumstances from which a magistrate could properly
conclude that there was probable cause to seize the broad
classes of items being sought,” and “[n]o reasonable officer
——————
2 The dissent relies almost entirely on facts outside the affidavit,
including Messerschmidt’s deposition testimony, post, at 4, 11 (opinion
of SOTOMAYOR, J.), crime analysis forms, post, at 5, Kelly’s interview,
post, at 5–6, and n. 5, Messerschmidt’s notes regarding Kelly’s interview, post, at 5–6, n. 5, and even several briefs filed in the District
Court and the Court of Appeals, post, at 8–9, 12. In contrast, the
dissent cites the probable cause affidavit itself only twice. See post, at
12. There is no contention before us that the affidavit was misleading
in omitting any of the facts on which the dissent relies. Cf. Leon, 468
U. S., at 923.

