12

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
Opinion of the Court

owned.3
A reasonable officer also could believe that seizure of the
firearms was necessary to prevent further assaults on
Kelly. California law allows a magistrate to issue a search
warrant for items “in the possession of any person with
the intent to use them as a means of committing a public
offense,” Cal. Penal Code Ann. §1524(a)(3) (West 2011),
and the warrant application submitted by the officers
specifically referenced this provision as a basis for the
search. App. 48. Bowen had already attempted to murder
Kelly once with a firearm, and had yelled “I’ll kill you” as
she tried to escape from him. Id., at 56–57. A reasonable
officer could conclude that Bowen would make another
attempt on Kelly’s life and that he possessed other firearms “with the intent to use them” to that end. Cal. Penal
Code Ann. §1524(a)(3).
Given the foregoing, it would not have been “entirely
unreasonable” for an officer to believe, in the particular
circumstances of this case, that there was probable cause
to search for all firearms and firearm-related materials.
Leon, supra, at 923 (internal quotation marks omitted).
With respect to the warrant’s authorization to search for
evidence of gang membership, the Millenders contend that
“no reasonable officer could have believed that the affidavit presented to the magistrate contained a sufficient basis
to conclude that the gang paraphernalia sought was contraband or evidence of a crime.” Brief for Respondents 28.
They argue that “the magistrate [could not] have reasonably concluded, based on the affidavit, that Bowen’s gang
membership had anything to do with the crime under
investigation” because “[t]he affidavit described a ‘spousal
——————
3 The dissent caricatures our analysis as being that “because Bowen
fired one firearm, it was reasonable for the police to conclude . . . that
[he] must have possessed others,” post, at 10 (opinion of SOTOMAYOR,
J.). This simply avoids coming to grips with the facts of the crime at
issue.

