14

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

officer reasonably relied on a magistrate’s probable cause
determination, but rather “whether a reasonably welltrained officer in petitioner’s position would have known
that his affidavit failed to establish probable cause and
that he should not have applied for the warrant.” Ibid.
(emphasis added).13 In such a case, “the officer’s application for a warrant [would] not [be] objectively reasonable,
because it create[s] the unnecessary danger of an unlawful
arrest.” Ibid. When “no officer of reasonable competence
would have requested the warrant,” a “magistrate [who]
issues the warrant [makes] not just a reasonable mistake,
but an unacceptable error indicating gross incompetence
or neglect of duty.” Id., at 346, n. 9. In such cases, “[t]he
officer . . . cannot excuse his own default by pointing to the
greater incompetence of the magistrate.” Ibid.
In cases in which it would be not only wrong but unreasonable for any well-trained officer to seek a warrant,
allowing a magistrate’s approval to immunize the police
officer’s unreasonable action retrospectively makes little
sense. By motivating an officer “to reflect, before submitting a request for a warrant, upon whether he has a reasonable basis for believing that his affidavit establishes
probable cause,” we recognized that our qualified immunity precedents had the “desirable” effect of “reduc[ing] the
likelihood that the officer’s request for a warrant will be
premature,” leading to “a waste of judicial resources” or
“premature arrests.” Id., at 343. To the extent it proposes
to cut back upon Malley, the majority will promote the
opposite result—encouraging sloppy police work and exacerbating the risk that searches will not comport with
the requirements of the Fourth Amendment.
——————
13 Two

Justices wrote separately, disagreeing with the majority because they believed that “substantial weight should be accorded the
judge’s finding of probable cause.” Malley, 475 U. S., at 346 (Powell, J.,
joined by Rehnquist, C. J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).

