4

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

The police flatly rejected that hypothesis, however, concluding that the crime was a domestic dispute that was
not in any way gang related. Detective Messerschmidt’s
deposition is illustrative.
“Q: So as far as you knew, it was just sort of a spousalabuse-type case where the perpetrator happened to be
in a gang, right?
“A: Correct.
“Q: So you didn’t have any reason to believe that the
assault on Kelly was any sort of gang crime, did you?
“A: No.” Record in No. CV 05–2298 DDP (RZx) (CD
Cal.) (hereinafter Record), Doc. 51, (Exh. X), p. 120
(hereinafter Deposition).3
The “Crime Analysis” forms prepared by the police like——————
Battered Women, 94 Am. J. Pub. Health 1412, 1413 (2004) (noting
more than one-third of female domestic violence shelter residents in
California reported having been threatened or harmed with a firearm).
That was the case here. In any event, the Court’s reading of Detective
Messerschmidt’s affidavit is incompatible with his testimony that the
crime was “just sort of a spousal-abuse-type case,” not a “gang crime.”
See supra this page.
3 By suggesting that courts assessing qualified immunity should ignore police officers’ testimony about the information they possessed at
the time of the search, ante, at 14–15, n. 6, the Court misreads Harlow
v. Fitzgerald, 457 U. S. 800, 815–819 (1982), and Anderson v.
Creighton, 483 U. S. 635, 645 (1987). In Harlow, we adopted a qualified
immunity test focusing on an officer’s objective good faith, rather than
whether the officer searched “with the malicious intention to cause a
deprivation of constitutional rights or other injury.” 457 U. S., at 815.
As we have explained, “examination of the information possessed by the
searching officials . . . does not reintroduce into qualified immunity
analysis the inquiry into officials’ subjective intent that Harlow sought
to minimize.” Anderson, 483 U. S., at 641. It is therefore highly
relevant that Detective Messerschmidt testified that he lacked “any
reason” to consider the crime gang related, supra this page, and possessed no “information” that there were handguns in the Millenders’
home, infra, at 11. Courts cannot ignore information in crime analysis
forms, ballistic reports, or victim interviews by labeling such information “conclusions.”

