Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

Mall Partnership, 513 U. S. 18, 25 (1994). The equitable
remedy of vacatur ensures that “those who have been
prevented from obtaining the review to which they are
entitled [are] not . . . treated as if there had been a re
view.” Munsingwear, 340 U. S., at 39.10
S. G. contends that vacatur is inappropriate in the
qualified immunity context because that disposition would
“undermine” the Court of Appeals’ choice to “decide [a]
constitutional questio[n]” to govern future cases. Brief for
Respondent 41–42; Tr. of Oral Arg. 47. Far from counsel
ing against vacatur, S. G.’s argument reveals the necessity
of that procedural course. The point of vacatur is to pre
vent an unreviewable decision “from spawning any legal
consequences,” so that no party is harmed by what we
have called a “preliminary” adjudication. Munsingwear,
340 U. S., at 40–41. As we have just explained, a consti
——————
10 Our analysis of the proper disposition of this case follows from our
conclusion that government officials who secure a favorable judgment
on immunity grounds may obtain our review of an adverse constitu
tional holding. See supra, at 12. As just noted, Munsingwear justified
vacatur to protect a litigant who had the right to appeal but lost that
opportunity due to happenstance. 340 U. S., at 39, 41. We have there
fore left lower court decisions intact when mootness did not deprive the
appealing party of any review to which he was entitled. See, e.g., U. S.
Bancorp Mortgage Co., 513 U. S., at 25 (holding that the appealing
party had “surrender[ed] his claim to the equitable remedy of vacatur”
by settling the case and thus “voluntarily forfeit[ing] his legal remedy
by the ordinary processes of appeal”); Karcher v. May, 484 U. S. 72, 83
(1987) (holding that vacatur in light of mootness was not warranted
when the losing party declined to file an appeal). So if immunized
officials could not challenge an appellate decision in this Court, we
would choose not to exercise our equitable authority to vacate that
decision, even if the case later became moot. But here, as we have just
explained, the theory that underlies our prior cases applying Munsing
wear is satisfied: Vacatur expunges an adverse decision that would be
reviewable had this case not become moot. See Arizonans, 520 U. S., at
74 (finding vacatur proper because, “when the mooting event occurred,”
the Arizona Attorney General was pursuing his “right to present
argument on appeal”).

