8

CAMRETA v. GREENE
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

munity cases tend to produce decisions that are in ten
sion with conventional principles of case-or-controversy
adjudication. This Court has given the Courts of Appeals
“permission” to find constitutional violations when order
ing dismissal or summary judgment based on qualified
immunity. Ante, at 9; see Pearson, supra. This invitation,
as the Court is correct to note, was intended to produce
binding constitutional holdings on the merits. Ante, at
10–11. The goal was to make dictum precedent, in order
to hasten the gradual process of constitutional interpreta
tion and alter the behavior of government defendants.
Ibid. The present case brings the difficulties of that objec
tive into perspective. In express reliance on the permis
sion granted in Pearson, the Court of Appeals went out of
its way to announce what may be an erroneous interpreta
tion of the Constitution; and, under our case law, the
Ninth Circuit must give that dictum legal effect as prece
dent in future cases.
In this way unnecessary merits decisions in qualified
immunity cases could come to resemble declaratory judg
ments or injunctions. Indeed the United States as amicus
curiae contends that the merits decision below “has an
effect similar to an injunction or a declaratory judgment
against the government as a whole.” Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 13. Today’s opinion adopts that
view, providing as relief the vacatur of “part of the Ninth
Circuit’s opinion”—namely, the part of the opinion that
rules on the constitutional merits. Ante, at 2. For the first
time, obiter dictum is treated not just as precedent for
future cases but as a judgment in its own right.
The Court of Appeals in this case did not in fact issue a
declaratory judgment or injunction embodying a determi
nation on the merits, and it does not appear that a judg
ment of that kind could have issued. Plaintiffs must
establish standing as to each form of relief they request,
yet the plaintiff in this case had no separate interest in

