Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

can no longer claim the plaintiff’s usual stake in preserv
ing the court’s holding because she is no longer in need
of any protection from the challenged practice. After we
granted certiorari, we discovered that S. G. has “moved to
Florida, and ha[s] no intention of relocating back to Ore
gon.” Brief for Respondent 13, n. 13. What is more, S. G.
is now only months away from her 18th birthday—and,
presumably, from her high school graduation. See id.,
at 31. S. G. therefore cannot be affected by the Court of
Appeals’ ruling; she faces not the slightest possibility of
being seized in a school in the Ninth Circuit’s jurisdiction
as part of a child abuse investigation. When “subsequent
events ma[ke] it absolutely clear that the allegedly wrong
ful behavior could not reasonably be expected to recur,” we
have no live controversy to review. United States v. Con
centrated Phosphate Export Assn., Inc., 393 U. S. 199, 203
(1968); see, e.g., Atherton Mills v. Johnston, 259 U. S. 13,
15–16 (1922) (suit contesting the validity of a child labor
statute mooted when plaintiff-child was “[no longer]
within the ages affected by the act”); DeFunis v. Ode
gaard, 416 U. S. 312 (1974) (per curiam) (suit challenging
law school admissions policy mooted when plaintiff neared
graduation). Time and distance combined have stymied
our ability to consider this petition.
Camreta makes only one counterargument: He avers
that S. G. has a continuing interest in the Ninth Circuit’s
constitutional ruling because it may help her establish a
——————
County or in law enforcement. See Brief for Respondent 1, n. 2; Reply
Brief for Petitioner in No. 09–1478. Because Alford will not again
participate in a child abuse investigation, he has lost his interest in the
Fourth Amendment ruling. See supra, at 6–7; cf. Arizonans for Official
English v. Arizona, 520 U. S. 43, 67 (1997) (holding that the plaintiff’s
challenge to a state law affecting the performance of her job duties was
mooted when she left state employment). But in light of Camreta’s
continuing stake, Alford’s altered circumstances are immaterial to our
resolution of this dispute, and we do not decide any questions that
would arise if he were the only defendant.

