Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

tary school and interviewed her about the allegations. Cam
reta and Alford did not have a warrant, nor had they
obtained parental consent to conduct the interview. Al
though S. G. at first denied that her father had molested
her, she eventually stated that she had been abused.
Greene was indicted and stood trial for sexually abusing
S. G., but the jury failed to reach a verdict and the charges
were later dismissed.
Respondent Sarah Greene, S. G.’s mother, subsequently
sued Camreta and Alford on S. G.’s behalf 1 for damages
under 42 U. S. C. §1983, which authorizes suits against
state officials for violations of constitutional rights. S. G.
alleged that the officials’ in-school interview had breached
the Fourth Amendment’s proscription on unreasonable
seizures.2
The District Court granted summary judgment to Cam
reta and Alford, and the Ninth Circuit affirmed. The
Court of Appeals first ruled that the interview violated
S. G.’s rights because Camreta and Alford had “seize[d]
and interrogate[d] S. G. in the absence of a warrant, a
court order, exigent circumstances, or parental consent.”
588 F. 3d 1011, 1030 (2009) (footnote omitted). But the
court further held that the officials were entitled to quali
fied immunity from damages liability because no clearly
established law had warned them of the illegality of their
conduct. Id., at 1031–1033.
The Ninth Circuit explained why it had chosen to rule
on the merits of the constitutional claim, rather than
merely hold that the officials were immune from suit. By
addressing the legality of the interview, the court said, it
——————
1 Because Greene filed suit as next friend for her minor daughter, we
will refer to respondent as S. G. throughout this opinion.
2 S. G. also sued Deschutes County, alleging that it has a policy of
unconstitutionally seizing children in public schools. See 588 F. 3d
1011, 1020, n. 4 (CA9 2009). The District Court rejected this claim, and
S. G. did not appeal that ruling to the Ninth Circuit. Ibid.

