6

CAMRETA v. GREENE
Opinion of the Court

We have previously recognized that an appeal brought
by a prevailing party may satisfy Article III’s case-or
controversy requirement. See Deposit Guaranty Nat.
Bank v. Roper, 445 U. S. 326, 332–336 (1980). Indeed, we
have twice before allowed a party for whom judgment was
entered to challenge an unfavorable lower court ruling.
See ibid.; Electrical Fittings Corp. v. Thomas & Betts Co.,
307 U. S. 241 (1939).3 In that context as in others, we
stated, the critical question under Article III is whether
the litigant retains the necessary personal stake in the
appeal. Deposit Guaranty, 445 U. S., at 334. As we will
explain, a court will usually invoke rules of “federal appel
late practice” to decline review of a prevailing party’s
challenge even when he has the requisite stake. Id., at
333; see infra, at 8. But in such a case, Article III is not
what poses the bar; these rules of practice “d[o] not have
[their] source in the jurisdictional limitations” of the Con
stitution. Deposit Guaranty, 445 U. S., at 333–334. So
long as the litigants possess the personal stake discussed
above, an appeal presents a case or controversy, no matter
that the appealing party was the prevailing party below.
This Article III standard often will be met when immu
nized officials seek to challenge a ruling that their conduct
violated the Constitution. That is not because a court has
made a retrospective judgment about the lawfulness of the
officials’ behavior, for that judgment is unaccompanied by
any personal liability. Rather, it is because the judgment
may have prospective effect on the parties. The court in
——————
3 The

dissent discusses Deposit Guaranty and Electrical Fittings at
length in an effort to distinguish them from this suit. See post, at 4–7
(opinion of KENNEDY, J.). But we do not say those cases are foursquare
with this one on their facts; we rely on them only for the proposition
that this Court has previously identified no special Article III bar on
review of appeals brought by parties who obtained a judgment in their
favor below. The dissent does not, because it cannot, dispute that
simple point.

