Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

“the petitioners were entitled to have this portion of the
decree eliminated.” Ibid. The sole relief provided was
an order for the “reformation of the decree.” Ibid. That
result accords with, indeed flows from, the settled rule
that this Court reviews only judgments, not statements in
opinions.
The second case is Deposit Guaranty Nat. Bank v.
Roper, 445 U. S. 326 (1980). In that case plaintiffs at
tempted to bring a class action against a bank. After the
District Court denied class certification, the defendant
tendered to the plaintiffs the maximum value that they
could recover as individuals. Of course, that offer did
not amount to “all that ha[d] been requested in the
complaint”—namely, “relief for the class.” Id., at 341
(Rehnquist, J., concurring). It is therefore no surprise
that the plaintiffs responded with “a counteroffer of judg
ment in which they attempted to reserve the right to
appeal the adverse class certification ruling.” Id., at 329
(opinion of the Court). But that proposal was denied.
“Based on the bank’s offer, the District Court entered
judgment in respondents’ favor, over their objection.” Id.,
at 330. The District Court thus issued a judgment other
than the one the plaintiffs had sought. The would-be class
plaintiffs appealed, and this Court later granted certiorari.
The Court held that appeal was not barred by the prevailing
party rule: “We view the denial of class certification as
an example of a procedural ruling, collateral to the merits
of a litigation, that is appealable after the entry of final
judgment.” Id., at 336. As the Court explained, the plain
tiffs had obtained only a judgment in their individual
capacities. Yet the plaintiffs had “asserted as their per
sonal stake in the appeal their desire to shift to successful
class litigants a portion of those fees and expenses that
have been incurred in this litigation.” Id., at 334, n. 6; see
also id., at 336. Because the purported prevailing parties
were injured by their failure to obtain the class-based

