18

CAMRETA v. GREENE
Opinion of the Court

tutional ruling in a qualified immunity case is a legally
consequential decision; that is the very reason we think it
appropriate for review even at the behest of a prevailing
party. See supra, at 8–12. When happenstance prevents
that review from occurring, the normal rule should ap
ply: Vacatur then rightly “strips the decision below of its
binding effect,” Deakins v. Monaghan, 484 U. S. 193,
200 (1988), and “clears the path for future relitigation,”
Munsingwear, 340 U. S., at 40.
In this case, the happenstance of S. G.’s moving across
country and becoming an adult has deprived Camreta of
his appeal rights. Mootness has frustrated his ability to
challenge the Court of Appeals’ ruling that he must obtain
a warrant before interviewing a suspected child abuse
victim at school. We therefore vacate the part of the Ninth
Circuit’s opinion that addressed that issue, and remand
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.11 See,
e.g., Arave v. Hoffman, 552 U. S. 117, 118–119 (2008) (per
curiam); Selig v. Pediatric Specialty Care, Inc., 551 U. S.
1142 (2007).
It is so ordered.
——————
11 Our disposition of this case differs slightly from the normal
Munsingwear order vacating the lower court’s judgment and remanding
the case with instructions to dismiss the relevant claim. We leave
untouched the Court of Appeals’ ruling on qualified immunity and its
corresponding dismissal of S. G.’s claim because S. G. chose not to
challenge that ruling. We vacate the Ninth Circuit’s ruling addressing
the merits of the Fourth Amendment issue because, as we have ex
plained, supra, at 11–12, that is the part of the decision that mootness
prevents us from reviewing but that has prospective effects on Cam
reta. See Walling v. James V. Reuter, Inc., 321 U. S. 671, 677 (1944)
(observing that when a suit becomes moot, “this Court . . . may make
such disposition of the whole case as justice may require”). But we
emphasize that this unique disposition follows from the unique posture
of this case and signals no endorsement of deviations from the usual
Munsingwear order in other situations.

