10

CAMRETA v. GREENE
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

Under today’s decision, it appears that the Court’s ability
to review merits determinations in qualified immunity
cases is contingent on the defendant who has been sued.
A defendant who has left the government’s employ or
otherwise lacks an interest in disputing the merits will
be unable to obtain further review. See ante, at 14, n. 9
(discussing Article III limits on relief in this Court); ante,
at 17, n. 10 (discussing limitations on this Court’s equita
ble vacatur authority).
The Court today avoids this difficulty by concluding that
petitioner Camreta has suffered an Article III injury.
Ante, at 7; cf. ante, at 15, n. 9 (“[W]e do not decide any
questions that would arise if [Alford] were the only defen
dant”). But the Court can reach that conclusion only
because, “as part of his job,” Camreta “regularly engages”
in conduct made unlawful by the reasoning of the Court of
Appeals. Ante, at 7. As discussed below, this conclusion is
doubtful. See infra, at 11–13. In any event the Court’s
standing analysis will be inapplicable in most qualified
immunity cases. Cf. ante, at 6 (asserting that the “Article
III standard often will be met”). When an officer is sued
for taking an extraordinary action, such as using excessive
force during a high-speed car chase, there is little possibil
ity that a constitutional decision on the merits will again
influence that officer’s conduct. The officer, like petitioner
Alford or the petitioner in Bunting, would have no interest
in litigating the merits in the Court of Appeals and, under
the Court’s rule, would seem unable to obtain review of a
merits ruling by petitioning for certiorari. See ante, at 5–
7; ante, at 14, n. 9, ante, at 17, n. 10; see also Lyons, supra,
at 103–105. This problem will arise with great frequency
in qualified immunity cases. Once again, the decision
today allows plaintiffs to obtain binding constitutional
determinations on the merits that lie beyond this Court’s
jurisdiction to review. The Court thus fails to solve the
problem it identifies.

