2

CAMRETA v. GREENE
Syllabus
lated the Fourth Amendment. S. G. declined to cross-petition for re
view of the decision that the officials have immunity.

Held:
1. This Court generally may review a lower court’s constitutional
ruling at the behest of government officials who have won final
judgment on qualified immunity grounds. Pp. 4–14.
(a) The relevant statute confers unqualified power on this Court
to grant certiorari “upon the petition of any party.” 28 U. S. C.
§1254(1). That language covers petitions brought by litigants who
have prevailed, as well as those who have lost, in the courts below.
Pp. 4–5.
(b) An appeal brought by a prevailing party may satisfy Article
III’s case-or-controversy requirement. To comply with that require
ment, litigants must demonstrate a “personal stake” in the suit.
Summers v. Earth Island Institute, 555 U. S. 488, ___. The petitioner
has such a stake when he has “suffered an ‘injury in fact’ ” that is
caused by “the conduct complained of” and that “will be ‘redressed by
a favorable decision.’ ” Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U. S. 555,
560–561. And the opposing party also must have an ongoing interest
in the dispute, so that the case features “ ‘that concrete adverseness
which sharpens the presentation of issues.’ ” Los Angeles v. Lyons,
461 U. S. 95, 101. The parties must have the necessary stake not
only at the outset of litigation, but throughout its course. Arizonans
for Official English v. Arizona, 520 U. S. 43, 67. So long as the liti
gants possess the requisite personal stake, an appeal presents a case
or controversy, no matter that the appealing party was the prevailing
party below. See Deposit Guaranty Nat. Bank v. Roper, 445 U. S.
326, 332–336; Electrical Fittings Corp. v. Thomas & Betts Co., 307
U. S. 241.
This Article III standard often will be met when immunized offi
cials seek to challenge a determination that their conduct violated
the Constitution because that ruling may have prospective effect on
the parties. So long as it remains good law, an official who regularly
engages in the challenged conduct as part of his job (as Camreta
does) must either change the way he performs his duties or risk a
meritorious damages action. The official thus can demonstrate in
jury, causation, and redressability. And conversely, if the person who
initially brought the suit may again be subject to the challenged con
duct, she has a stake in preserving the court’s holding so that she will
have ongoing protection from the practice. Pp. 5–7.
(c) This Court’s prudential practice of declining to hear appeals
by prevailing parties does not bar consideration of immunized offi
cials’ petitions. The Court has recognized exceptions to this pruden
tial rule when there has been a “policy reaso[n] . . . of sufficient im

