4

CAMRETA v. GREENE
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

late court”). After today, however, it will be common for
prevailing parties to seek certiorari based on the Court’s
newfound exception. And that will be so even though the
“admonition” against reviewing mere statements in opin
ions “has special force when the statements raise consti
tutional questions, for it is our settled practice to avoid
the unnecessary decision of such issues.” FCC v. Pacifica
Foundation, 438 U. S. 726, 734 (1978).
The Court defends its holding with citations to just two
of our cases. Ante, at 6. Neither provides support for the
Court’s result.
The first case is Electrical Fittings Corp. v. Thomas &
Betts Co., 307 U. S. 241 (1939). There, a plaintiff alleged
the infringement of two patent claims. The District Court
found the plaintiff’s first claim valid but not infringed and
the second claim invalid. Rather than issuing a judgment
“dismissing the bill without more,” the District Court
instead “entered a decree adjudging claim 1 valid” and
“dismissing the bill for failure to prove infringement.” Id.,
at 241–242. The District Court thus issued a formal judg
ment regarding the validity of the first claim. The defen
dant appealed to dispute that claim’s validity. This Court
noted, without qualification, that a party “may not appeal
from a judgment or decree in his favor, for the purpose of
obtaining a review of findings he deems erroneous which
are not necessary to support the decree.” Id., at 242.
“But,” this Court went on to explain, “here the decree itself
purports to adjudge the validity of claim 1, and though
the adjudication was immaterial to the disposition of the
cause, it stands as an adjudication of one of the issues
litigated.” Ibid. In other words, the District Court had
entered an unnecessary legal conclusion into the terms of
the judgment itself, making it possible, for example, that
the decree would have estoppel effect as to an issue whose
resolution was unnecessary to the proper judgment of
dismissal. Electrical Fittings therefore concluded that

