Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

We emphasize, however, two limits of today’s holding.
First, it addresses only our own authority to review cases
in this procedural posture. The Ninth Circuit had no oc
casion to consider whether it could hear an appeal from
an immunized official: In that court, after all, S. G. ap
pealed the judgment in the officials’ favor. We therefore
need not and do not decide if an appellate court, too, can
entertain an appeal from a party who has prevailed on
immunity grounds.7 Second, our holding concerns only
what this Court may review; what we actually will choose
to review is a different matter. That choice will be gov
erned by the ordinary principles informing our decision
whether to grant certiorari—a “power [we] . . . sparingly
exercis[e].” Forsyth v. Hammond, 166 U. S. 506, 514
(1897); see also id., at 514–515 (this Court grants review
“only when the circumstances of the case satisfy us that
the importance of the question involved, the necessity of
avoiding conflict [in the lower courts], or some matter
affecting the interests of this nation . . . , demands such
——————
is not this decision but our prior precedents that allow lower courts to
issue “binding constitutional determinations” in qualified immunity
cases even when the plaintiff is not entitled to money damages. And it
is not our decision but the dissent that would insulate these rulings
from this Court’s power to review.
7 We note, however, that the considerations persuading us to permit
review of petitions in this posture may not have the same force as
applied to a district court decision. “A decision of a federal district
court judge is not binding precedent in either a different judicial
district, the same judicial district, or even upon the same judge in
a different case.”
18 J. Moore et al., Moore’s Federal Practice
§134.02[1][d], p. 134–26 (3d ed. 2011). Many Courts of Appeals there
fore decline to consider district court precedent when determining if
constitutional rights are clearly established for purposes of qualified
immunity. See, e.g., Kalka v. Hawk, 215 F. 3d 90, 100 (CADC 2000)
(Tatel, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (collecting
cases). Otherwise said, district court decisions—unlike those from the
courts of appeals—do not necessarily settle constitutional standards or
prevent repeated claims of qualified immunity.

