12

CAMRETA v. GREENE
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

deem to create a genuine controversy within the meaning
of Article III of the Constitution. Judgments are appeal
able; opinions are not” (citations omitted)); Sea-Land
Serv., Inc. v. Department of Transp., 137 F. 3d 640, 648
(CADC 1998) (Williams, J.) (“[M]ere precedential effect
within an agency is not, alone, enough to create Article III
standing, no matter how foreseeable the future litigation”
(citing Radiofone, Inc. v. FCC, 759 F. 2d 936, 938 (CADC
1985) (opinion of Scalia, J.))); id., at 939 (explaining that
standing must “arise from the particular activity which
the agency adjudication has approved . . . and not from the
mere precedential effect of the agency’s rationale in later
adjudications”); Oxford Shipping Co., v. New Hampshire
Trading Corp., 697 F. 2d 1, 7 (CA1 1982) (Breyer, J.)
(“Since the judgment appealed from was in [a party’s]
favor, and since the statement made was in no sense
necessary to that judgment, the statement was dictum.
There is no known basis for an appeal from a dictum”). It
is revealing that the Court creates an exception to the
prevailing party rule while making clear that the Courts
of Appeals are not to follow suit, in any context. See ante,
at 13–14.
The conclusion that precedent of general applicability
cannot in itself create standing to sue or appeal flows from
basic principles. Camreta’s asserted injury is caused not
by the Court of Appeals or by respondent but rather by
“the independent action of some third party not before the
court”—that is, by the still-unidentified private plaintiffs
whose lawsuits Camreta hopes to avoid. Lujan v. Defend
ers of Wildlife, 504 U. S. 555, 560–561 (1992) (internal
quotation marks omitted).
This circumstance distin
guishes the present case from requests for declaratory or
injunctive relief filed against officeholders who threaten
legal enforcement. An inert rule of law does not cause
particular, concrete injury; only the specific threat of its
enforcement can do so. That is why the proper defendant

