Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
portance to allow an appeal” by the winner below. Deposit Guaranty,
445 U. S., at 336, n. 7. Just such a reason exists in qualified immu
nity cases. The constitutional rulings that prevailing parties ask the
Court to consider in these cases have a significant future effect on the
conduct of public officials and the policies of the government units to
which they belong. The rulings are self-consciously designed to pro
duce this effect by establishing controlling law and preventing invo
cations of immunity in later cases. Moreover, they are so designed
with this Court’s permission, to promote clarity—and observance—of
constitutional rules. Taken together, these features of qualified im
munity cases support bending the usual rule to permit consideration
of immunized officials’ petitions.
To begin with the nature of these suits: Under §1983 and Bivens v.
Six Unknown Fed. Narcotics Agents, 403 U. S. 388, a plaintiff may
seek money damages from government officials who have violated her
constitutional or statutory rights. But if those officials are entitled to
qualified immunity, a court can dismiss the damages claim without
ever deciding its merits—and so the qualified immunity situation
threatens to leave standards of official conduct permanently in limbo.
To prevent that problem, this Court has permitted lower courts to de
termine whether a right exists before examining whether it was
clearly established. See, e.g., Pearson v. Callahan, 555 U. S. 223,
237. Here, the Ninth Circuit followed exactly this two-step process so
that it could settle a question of constitutional law and thereby guide
the future conduct of officials.
Given its purpose and effect, such a decision is reviewable in this
Court at an immunized official’s behest. If the Court’s usual prevail
ing party rule applied, the official would either have to acquiesce in a
ruling he had no opportunity to contest in this Court, or defy the
lower court’s view, adhere to what has been declared an illegal prac
tice, and invite further law suits and possible punitive damages. Id.,
at 240–241. And applying this Court’s usual bar on review would
undermine the purpose of the two-step process, “which is to clarify
constitutional rights without undue delay.” Bunting v. Mellen, 541
U. S. 1019, 1024 (SCALIA, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari).
Just as that purpose may justify an appellate court in reaching be
yond an immunity defense to decide a constitutional issue, so too may
it support this Court in reviewing the correctness of the lower court’s
decision.
This holding is limited in two respects. First, it addresses only this
Court’s authority to review cases in this procedural posture. The
Court need not decide if an appellate court can also entertain an ap
peal from a party who has prevailed on immunity grounds. Second,
the holding concerns only what the Court may review, not what the

