4

CAMRETA v. GREENE
Syllabus
Court actually will choose to review. Going forward, the Court will
consider prevailing parties’ petitions one by one in accord with its
usual standards for granting certiorari. Pp. 7–14.
2. A separate jurisdictional problem requires the Court to dismiss
this case at the threshold: The case is moot. In a dispute of this kind,
both the plaintiff and the defendant ordinarily retain a stake in the
outcome. That is true of Camreta, who remains employed as a child
protective services worker, and so has an interest in challenging the
Ninth Circuit’s ruling requiring him to obtain a warrant before con
ducting an in-school interview. But S. G. can no longer claim the
plaintiff’s usual stake in preserving the court’s holding because she
no longer needs protection from the challenged practice. She has
moved to Florida and is only months away from her 18th birthday
and, presumably, from her high school graduation. When “subse
quent events ma[ke] it absolutely clear that the allegedly wrongful
behavior could not reasonably be expected to recur,” there is no live
controversy to review. United States v. Concentrated Phosphate Ex
port Assn., Inc., 393 U. S. 199, 203.
When a civil suit becomes moot pending appeal, this Court has au
thority to “direct the entry of such appropriate judgment, decree, or
order, or require such further proceedings . . . as may be just under
the circumstances.” 28 U. S. C. §2106. The Court’s “established”
practice is to vacate the judgment below, see, e.g., United States v.
Munsingwear, Inc., 340 U. S. 36, 39, to ensure that “those who have
been prevented from obtaining the review to which they are entitled
[are] not . . . treated as if there had been a review,” ibid. The point of
vacatur is to prevent an unreviewable decision “from spawning any
legal consequences.” Id., at 40–41. A constitutional ruling in a quali
fied immunity case is a legally consequential decision. When hap
penstance prevents this Court’s review of that ruling, the normal rule
should apply: Vacatur rightly “strips the decision below of its binding
effect,” Deakins v. Monaghan, 484 U. S. 193, 200, and clears “the
path for future relitigation,” Munsingwear, 340 U. S., at 40. Because
mootness has frustrated Camreta’s ability to challenge the Ninth
Circuit’s ruling that he must obtain a warrant before interviewing a
suspected child abuse victim at school, that part of the Ninth Cir
cuit’s decision must be vacated. Pp. 14–18.

588 F. 3d 1011, vacated in part and remanded.
KAGAN, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, GINSBURG, and ALITO, JJ., joined. SCALIA, J., filed a
concurring opinion. SOTOMAYOR, J., filed an opinion concurring in the
judgment, in which BREYER, J., joined. KENNEDY, J., filed a dissenting
opinion, in which THOMAS, J., joined.

