6

CAMRETA v. GREENE
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

judgment they had sought, the Court held there was “ju
risdiction to entertain the appeal only to review the as
serted procedural error, not for the purpose of passing on
the merits.” Ibid. The Court was clear that the District
Court’s denial of class certification had a direct effect on
the judgment: “As in Electrical Fittings,” the purported
prevailing parties “were entitled to have [a] portion of the
District Court’s judgment reviewed.” Ibid.
Neither Electrical Fittings nor Deposit Guaranty pro
vides support for the rule adopted today. Those decisions
instead held that, in the unusual circumstances presented,
particular parties who at first appeared to have prevailed
below had in fact failed to obtain the judgments they had
sought. This Court therefore had jurisdiction, including of
course jurisdiction under Article III, to provide relief for
the harm caused by the adverse judgments entered below.
The parties seeking appeal in Electrical Fittings and
Deposit Guaranty might be compared with plaintiffs who
have requested $1,000 in relief but obtained only $500.
Such parties have prevailed in part, but have not “re
ceive[d] all that [they] ha[d] sought.” Deposit Guaranty,
supra, at 333. In contrast the Court appears to assume
that the petitioners in the present case are true prevailing
parties. They have obtained from the Court of Appeals the
only formal judgment they requested: denial of respon
dent’s claim for damages.
The Court points to policy concerns as the basis for its
willingness to hear appeals by prevailing parties. Ante, at
8–10. But those concerns are unwarranted. In only one
dissenting opinion has it been suggested that certiorari
should be granted to reach a merits determination “locked
inside” a favorable qualified immunity ruling. Bunting v.
Mellen, 541 U. S. 1019, 1024 (2004) (SCALIA, J., dissenting
from denial of certiorari). That dissenting opinion was
issued in response to the rule that constitutional issues
should be decided in every case involving qualified immu

