Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

such a case says: “Although this official is immune from
damages today, what he did violates the Constitution and
he or anyone else who does that thing again will be per
sonally liable.” If the official regularly engages in that
conduct as part of his job (as Camreta does), he suffers
injury caused by the adverse constitutional ruling. So
long as it continues in effect, he must either change the
way he performs his duties or risk a meritorious damages
action. Cf. id., at 337–338 (discussing prevailing party’s
stake in a ruling’s prospective effects). Only by overturn
ing the ruling on appeal can the official gain clearance to
engage in the conduct in the future. He thus can demon
strate, as we demand, injury, causation, and redressabil
ity.4 And conversely, if the person who initially brought
the suit may again be subject to the challenged conduct,
she has a stake in preserving the court’s holding. See Erie
v. Pap’s A. M., 529 U. S. 277, 287–289 (2000); Honig v.
Doe, 484 U. S. 305, 318–323 (1988); cf. Lyons, 461 U. S., at
111 (examining whether the plaintiff had shown “a suffi
cient likelihood that he will again be wronged in a similar
way”). Only if the ruling remains good law will she have
ongoing protection from the practice.
We therefore reject S. G.’s view that Article III bars
us from adjudicating any and all challenges brought by
government officials who have received immunity below.
That the victor has filed the appeal does not deprive us
of jurisdiction. The parties in such cases may yet have
a sufficient “interest in the outcome of [a litigated] issue”
to present a case or controversy. Deposit Guaranty, 445
U. S., at 336, n. 7.
——————
4 Contrary

to the dissent’s view, see post, at 12, the injury to the offi
cial thus occurs independent of any future suit brought by a third
party. Indeed, no such suit is likely to arise because the prospect of
damages liability will force the official to change his conduct.

