(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CAMRETA v. GREENE, PERSONALLY AND AS NEXT FRIEND
OF S. G., A MINOR, ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–1454. Argued March 1, 2011—Decided May 26, 2011*
Nearly a decade ago, petitioner Camreta, a state child protective ser
vices worker, and petitioner Alford, a county deputy sheriff, inter
viewed then 9-year-old S. G. at her Oregon elementary school about
allegations that her father had sexually abused her. They did not
have a warrant or parental consent to conduct the interview. S. G.
eventually stated that she had been abused. Her father stood trial
for that abuse, but the jury failed to reach a verdict and the charges
were later dismissed. S. G.’s mother, respondent here (hereinafter
S. G.), subsequently sued Camreta and Alford on S G.’s behalf for
damages under 42 U. S. C. §1983, alleging that the in-school inter
view breached the Fourth Amendment’s proscription on unreasonable
seizures. The District Court granted summary judgment to the offi
cials. The Ninth Circuit affirmed. The Court of Appeals first ruled
that seizing S. G. absent a warrant, court order, parental consent, or
exigent circumstances violated the Constitution. But the court fur
ther held that the officials were entitled to qualified immunity from
damages liability because no clearly established law had warned
them of the illegality of their conduct. The court explained that it
had chosen to rule on the merits of the constitutional claim so that of
ficials would be on notice that they could not dispense with tradi
tional Fourth Amendment protections in this context. Although the
judgment entered was in their favor, Camreta and Alford petitioned
this Court to review the Ninth Circuit’s ruling that their conduct vio
——————
* Together with No. 09–1478, Alford, Deputy Sheriff, Deschutes
County, Oregon v. Greene, Personally and as Next Friend of S. G., a
Minor, et al., also on certiorari to the same court.

