Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

They are rulings that have a significant future effect on
the conduct of public officials—both the prevailing parties
and their co-workers—and the policies of the government
units to which they belong. See supra, at 6–7. And more:
they are rulings self-consciously designed to produce this
effect, by establishing controlling law and preventing
invocations of immunity in later cases. And still more:
they are rulings designed this way with this Court’s
permission, to promote clarity—and observance—of consti
tutional rules. We describe in more detail below these fea
tures of the qualified immunity world and why they came
to be. We hold that taken together, they support bending
our usual rule to permit consideration of immunized offi
cials’ petitions.
To begin, then, with the nature of these suits: Under
§1983 (invoked in this case) and Bivens v. Six Unknown
Fed. Narcotics Agents, 403 U. S. 388 (1971), a plaintiff
may seek money damages from government officials who
have violated her constitutional or statutory rights. But to
ensure that fear of liability will not “unduly inhibit offi
cials in the discharge of their duties,” Anderson v. Creigh
ton, 483 U. S. 635, 638 (1987), the officials may claim
qualified immunity; so long as they have not violated a
“clearly established” right, they are shielded from personal
liability, Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U. S. 800, 818 (1982).
That means a court can often avoid ruling on the plain
tiff’s claim that a particular right exists. If prior case law
has not clearly settled the right, and so given officials fair
notice of it, the court can simply dismiss the claim for
money damages. The court need never decide whether the
plaintiff’s claim, even though novel or otherwise unsettled,
in fact has merit.
And indeed, our usual adjudicatory rules suggest that
a court should forbear resolving this issue. After all, a
“longstanding principle of judicial restraint requires that
courts avoid reaching constitutional questions in advance

