12

CAMRETA v. GREENE
Opinion of the Court

thus clearly established, officials who conduct this kind of
interview will not receive immunity in the Ninth Circuit.
And the State of Oregon has done just what we would
expect in the wake of the court’s decision: It has provided
revised legal advice, consonant with the Ninth Circuit’s
ruling, to child protective services workers wishing to
interview children in schools. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 14. The
court thus accomplished what it set out to do: settle a
question of constitutional law and thereby guide the con
duct of officials.
Given its purpose and effect, such a decision is review
able in this Court at the behest of an immunized official.
No mere dictum, a constitutional ruling preparatory to a
grant of immunity creates law that governs the official’s
behavior. If our usual rule pertaining to prevailing parties
applied, the official would “fac[e] an unenviable choice”:
He must either acquiesce in a ruling he had no opportu
nity to contest in this Court, or “defy the views of the
lower court, adhere to practices that have been declared
illegal, and thus invite new suits and potential punitive
damages.” Pearson, 555 U. S., at 240–241 (internal quota
tion marks and brackets omitted). And if our usual bar on
review applied, it would undermine the very purpose
served by the two-step process, “which is to clarify consti
tutional rights without undue delay.” Bunting, 541 U. S.,
at 1024 (SCALIA, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari).
This Court, needless to say, also plays a role in clarifying
rights. Just as that purpose may justify an appellate court
in reaching beyond an immunity defense to decide a con
stitutional issue, so too that purpose may support this
Court in reviewing the correctness of the lower court’s
decision.6
——————
6 The dissent complains that our decision “allows plaintiffs to obtain
binding constitutional determinations on the merits that lie beyond this
Court’s jurisdiction to review.” Post, at 10. But that is not the case. It

