(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MAGWOOD v. PATTERSON, WARDEN, ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–158.

Argued March 24, 2010—Decided June 24, 2010

Petitioner Magwood was sentenced to death for murder. After the Ala
bama courts denied relief on direct appeal and in postconviction pro
ceedings, he sought federal habeas relief. The District Court condi
tionally granted the writ as to his sentence, mandating that he be
released or resentenced. The state trial court sentenced him to death
a second time. He filed another federal habeas application, challeng
ing this new sentence on the grounds that he did not have fair warn
ing at the time of his offense that his conduct would permit a death
sentence under Alabama law, and that his attorney rendered ineffec
tive assistance during the resentencing proceeding. The District
Court once again conditionally granted the writ. The Eleventh Cir
cuit reversed, holding in relevant part that Magwood’s challenge to
his new death sentence was an unreviewable “second or successive”
challenge under 28 U. S. C. §2244(b) because he could have raised his
fair-warning claim in his earlier habeas application.
Held: The judgment is reversed and the case is remanded.
555 F. 3d 968, reversed and remanded.
JUSTICE THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to
Part IV–B, concluding that because Magwood’s habeas application
challenges a new judgment for the first time, it is not “second or suc
cessive” under §2244(b). Pp. 8–15, 17–22.
(a) This case turns on when a claim should be deemed to arise in a
“second or successive habeas corpus application.” §§2244(b)(1), (2).
The State contends that §2244(b), as amended by the Antiterrorism
and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), should be read to
bar claims that a prisoner had a prior opportunity to present. Under
this “one opportunity” rule, Magwood’s fair-warning claim was “sec


2

MAGWOOD v. PATTERSON
Syllabus
ond and successive” because he had an opportunity to raise it in his
first application but did not. Magwood counters that §2244(b) should
not apply to a first application challenging a new judgment interven
ing between habeas applications. This Court agrees. The phrase
“second or successive” is not defined by AEDPA and it is a “term of
art.” Slack v. McDaniel, 529 U. S. 473, 486. To determine its mean
ing, the Court looks first to the statutory context. Section 2244(b)’s
limitations apply only to a “habeas corpus application under §2254,”
i.e., an application on “behalf of a person in custody pursuant to the
judgment of a State court,” §2254(b)(1). Both §2254(b)’s text and the
relief it provides indicate that “second or successive” must be inter
preted with respect to the judgment challenged. A §2254 petitioner
“seeks invalidation . . . of the judgment authorizing [his] confine
ment,” Wilkinson v. Dotson, 544 U. S. 74, 83. If a conditional writ is
granted, “the State may seek a new judgment (through a new trial or
a new sentencing proceeding).” Ibid. The State errs in contending
that, if §2254 is relevant at all, “custody” and not “judgment,” is the
proper reference because unlawful “custody” is the “substance” re
quirement for habeas relief. This argument is unpersuasive. Section
2254 articulates the kind of custody that may be challenged under
§2254. Because §2254 applies only to custody pursuant to a state
court judgment, that “judgment” is inextricable and essential to re
lief. It is a requirement that distinguishes §2254 from other statutes
permitting constitutional relief. See, e.g., §§2255, 2241. The State’s
“custody”-based rule is also difficult to justify because applying “sec
ond or successive” to any subsequent application filed before a pris
oner’s release would require a prisoner who remains in continuous
custody for an unrelated conviction to satisfy §2244(b)’s strict rules to
challenge the unrelated conviction for the first time. Nothing in the
statutory text or context supports such an anomalous result. Pp. 8–
13.
(b) This Court is also not convinced by the State’s argument that a
“one opportunity” rule would be consistent with the statute and
should be adopted because it better reflects AEDPA’s purpose of pre
venting piecemeal litigation and gamesmanship. AEDPA uses “sec
ond or successive” to modify “application,” not “claim” as the State
contends, and this Court has refused to adopt an interpretation of
§2244(b) that would “elid[e] the difference between an ‘application’
and a ‘claim,’ ” Artuz v. Bennett, 531 U. S. 4, 9. The State’s reading
also reflects a more fundamental error. It would undermine or ren
der superfluous much of §2244(b)(2). In some circumstances, it would
increase the restrictions on review by applying pre-AEDPA abuse-of
the-writ rules where §2244(b)(2) imposes no restrictions. In others, it
would decrease the restrictions on review by applying more lenient


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
pre-AEDPA abuse-of-the-writ rules where §2244(b) mandates stricter
requirements. Pp. 13–15.
(c) This Court’s interpretation of §2244(b) is consistent with its
precedents. Because none of the pre-AEDPA cases that the State in
vokes, e.g., Wong Doo v. United States, 265 U. S. 239, applies “second
or successive” to an application challenging a new judgment, these
cases shed no light on the question presented here. Nor do postAEDPA cases contradict the approach adopted here. Only Burton v.
Stewart, 549 U. S. 147, comes close to addressing the threshold ques
tion whether an application is “second or successive” if it challenges a
new judgment, and that decision confirms that the existence of a new
judgment is dispositive. In holding that both of the petitioner’s ha
beas petitions had challenged the same judgment, this Court in Bur
ton expressly recognized that had there been a new judgment inter
vening between the habeas petitions, the result might have been
different. Here, there is such an intervening judgment. This is Mag
wood’s first application challenging that intervening judgment.
Magwood challenges not the trial court’s error in his first sentencing,
but the court’s new error when it conducted a full resentencing and
reviewed the aggravating evidence afresh. Pp. 15, 17–21.
(d) Because Magwood has not attempted to challenge his underly
ing conviction, the Court has no occasion to address the State’s objec
tion that this reading of §2244(b) allows a petitioner who obtains a
conditional writ as to his sentence to file a subsequent application
challenging not only his resulting, new sentence, but also his original,
undisturbed conviction. Nor does the Court address whether Mag
wood’s fair-warning claim is procedurally defaulted or whether the
Eleventh Circuit erred in rejecting his ineffective-assistance-of
counsel claim. Pp. 21–22.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to Part IV–
B. SCALIA, J., joined in full, and STEVENS, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR,
JJ., joined, except as to Part IV–B. BREYER, J., filed an opinion concur
ring in part and concurring in the judgment, in which STEVENS and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. KENNEDY, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which
ROBERTS, C. J., and GINSBURG and ALITO, JJ., joined.

