(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SKINNER v. SWITZER, DISTRICT ATTORNEY FOR
31ST JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF TEXAS
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–9000. Argued October 13, 2010—Decided March 7, 2011
District Attorney’s Office for Third Judicial Dist. v. Osborne, 557 U. S.
___, ___, left unresolved the question whether a convicted state pris
oner seeking DNA testing of crime-scene evidence may assert that
claim in a civil rights action under 42 U. S. C. §1983 or may assert
the claim in federal court only in a petition for a writ of habeas cor
pus under 28 U. S. C. §2254.
A Texas jury convicted petitioner Skinner and sentenced him to
death for murdering his girlfriend and her sons. He claimed that a
potent alcohol and drug mix rendered him physically unable to com
mit the brutal murders, and he identified his girlfriend’s uncle as the
likely perpetrator. In preparation for trial, the State tested some of
the physical evidence, but left untested several items, including
knives found on the premises, an axe handle, vaginal swabs, finger
nail clippings, and certain hair samples. More than six years later,
Texas enacted Article 64, which allows prisoners to gain postconvic
tion DNA testing in limited circumstances. Invoking Article 64,
Skinner twice moved in state court for DNA testing of the untested
biological evidence. Both motions were denied. The Texas Court of
Criminal Appeals (CCA) affirmed the first denial of relief on the
ground that Skinner had not shown, as required by Article
64.03(a)(2), that he “would not have been convicted if exculpatory re
sults had been obtained through DNA testing.” The CCA affirmed
the second denial of relief on the ground that Skinner had not shown,
as required by Article 64.01(b)(1)(B), that the evidence was not previ
ously tested “through no fault” on his part.
Skinner next filed the instant federal action for injunctive relief
under §1983, naming as defendant respondent Switzer, the District


2

SKINNER v. SWITZER
Syllabus
Attorney who has custody of the evidence that Skinner would like to
have tested. Skinner alleged that Texas violated his Fourteenth
Amendment right to due process by refusing to provide for the DNA
testing he requested. The Magistrate Judge recommended dismissal
of the complaint for failure to state a claim, reasoning that postcon
viction requests for DNA evidence are cognizable only in habeas cor
pus, not under §1983. Adopting that recommendation, the District
Court dismissed Skinner’s suit. The Fifth Circuit affirmed.

Held: There is federal-court subject-matter jurisdiction over Skinner’s
complaint, and the claim he presses is cognizable under §1983.
Pp. 7–15.
(a) Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 8(a)(2) generally requires only a
plausible “short and plain” statement of the plaintiff’s claim, not an
exposition of his legal argument. Skinner stated his due process
claim in a paragraph alleging that the State’s refusal “to release the
biological evidence for testing . . . deprived [him] of his liberty inter
ests in utilizing state procedures to obtain reversal of his conviction
and/or to obtain a pardon or reduction of his sentence . . . .” His coun
sel has clarified that Skinner does not challenge the prosecutor’s con
duct or the CCA’s decisions; instead, he challenges Texas’ postconvic
tion DNA statute “as construed” by the Texas courts. Pp. 7–8.
(b) The Rooker-Feldman doctrine does not bar Skinner’s suit. This
Court has applied the doctrine only in the two cases from which it
takes its name, Rooker v. Fidelity Trust Co., 263 U. S. 413, District of
Columbia Court of Appeals v. Feldman, 460 U. S. 462. See Exxon
Mobil Corp. v. Saudi Basic Industries Corp., 544 U. S. 280. Given
“the narrow ground” the doctrine occupies, id., at 284, the Court has
confined Rooker-Feldman “to cases . . . brought by state-court losers
. . . inviting district court review and rejection of [a state court’s]
judgments.” Ibid. Skinner’s complaint encounters no RookerFeldman shoal. “If a federal plaintiff ‘present[s] [an] independent
claim,’ ” it is not an impediment to the exercise of federal jurisdiction
that the “same or a related question” was earlier aired between the
parties in state court. Id., at 292–293. A state-court decision is not
reviewable by lower federal courts, but a statute or rule governing
the decision may be challenged in a federal action. See, e.g.,
Feldman, 460 U. S., at 487. Because Skinner’s federal case—which
challenges not the adverse state-court decisions but the Texas statute
they authoritatively construed—falls within the latter category, there
was no lack of subject-matter jurisdiction over his federal suit.
Pp. 8–10.
(c) Measured against this Court’s prior holdings, Skinner has prop
erly invoked §1983. This Court has several times considered when a
state prisoner, complaining of unconstitutional state action, may pur


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
sue a civil rights claim under §1983, and when habeas corpus is the
prisoner’s sole remedy. The pathmarking decision, Heck v. Hum
phrey, 512 U. S. 477, concerned a state prisoner who brought a §1983
action for damages, alleging that he had been unlawfully investi
gated, arrested, tried, and convicted. This Court held that §1983 was
not an available remedy because any award in the plaintiff’s favor
would “necessarily imply” the invalidity of his conviction. See id., at
487. In contrast, in Wilkinson v. Dotson, 544 U. S. 74, the Court held
that prisoners who challenged the constitutionality of administrative
decisions denying them parole eligibility, could proceed under §1983,
for they sought no “injunction ordering . . . immediate or speedier re
lease into the community,” id., at 82, and “a favorable judgment
[would] not ‘necessarily imply’ the invalidity of [their] conviction[s] or
sentence[s],” ibid. Here, success in Skinner’s suit for DNA testing
would not “necessarily imply” the invalidity of his conviction. Test
results might prove exculpatory, but that outcome is hardly inevita
ble, for those results could also prove inconclusive or incriminating.
Switzer argues that, although Skinner’s immediate aim is DNA test
ing, his ultimate aim is to use the test results as a platform for at
tacking his conviction. But she has found no case in which the Court
has recognized habeas as the sole remedy where the relief sought
would not terminate custody, accelerate the date of release, or reduce
the custody level. Contrary to the fears of Switzer and her amici, in
the Circuits that currently allow §1983 claims for DNA testing, there
has been no flood of litigation seeking postconviction discovery of evi
dence associated with the questions of guilt or punishment. The pro
jected toll on federal courts is all the more implausible regarding
DNA testing claims, for Osborne has rejected substantive due process
as a basis for such claims. More generally, in the Prison Litigation
Reform Act of 1995, Congress has placed constraints on prisoner suits
in order to prevent sportive federal-court filings. Nor is there cause
for concern that the instant ruling will spill over to claims relying on
Brady v. Maryland, 373 U. S. 83. Brady, which announced a consti
tutional requirement addressed to the prosecution’s conduct pretrial,
proscribes withholding evidence “favorable to an accused” and “mate
rial to [his] guilt or to punishment.” Cone v. Bell, 556 U. S. ___, ___.
Unlike DNA testing, which may yield exculpatory, incriminating, or
inconclusive results, a successful Brady claim necessarily yields evi
dence undermining a conviction: Brady claims therefore rank within
the traditional core of habeas corpus and outside the province of
§1983. Pp. 10–14.
(d) Switzer’s several arguments why Skinner’s complaint should
fail for lack of merit, unaddressed by the courts below, are ripe for
consideration on remand. P. 14.


4

SKINNER v. SWITZER
Syllabus

363 Fed. Appx. 302, reversed and remanded.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, BREYER, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. THOMAS, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which KENNEDY and ALITO, JJ.,
joined.

