(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MORRISON ET AL. v. NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK

LTD. ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 08–1191. Argued March 29, 2010—Decided June 24, 2010
In 1998, respondent National Australia Bank (National), a foreign bank
whose “ordinary shares” are not traded on any exchange in this coun
try, purchased respondent HomeSide Lending, a company headquar
tered in Florida that was in the business of servicing mortgages—
seeing to collection of the monthly payments, etc. In 2001, National
had to write down the value of HomeSide’s assets, causing National’s
share prices to fall. Petitioners, Australians who purchased Na
tional’s shares before the write-downs, sued respondents—National,
HomeSide, and officers of both companies—in Federal District Court
for violation of §§10(b) and 20(a) of the Securities and Exchange Act
of 1934 and SEC Rule 10b–5. They claimed that HomeSide and its
officers had manipulated financial models to make the company’s
mortgage-servicing rights appear more valuable than they really
were; and that National and its chief executive officer were aware of
this deception. Respondents moved to dismiss for lack of subject
matter jurisdiction under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1)
and for failure to state a claim under Rule 12(b)(6). The District
Court granted the former motion, finding no jurisdiction because the
domestic acts were, at most, a link in a securities fraud that con
cluded abroad. The Second Circuit affirmed.
Held:
1. The Second Circuit erred in considering §10(b)’s extraterritorial
reach to raise a question of subject-matter jurisdiction, thus allowing
dismissal under Rule 12(b)(1). What conduct §10(b) reaches is a mer
its question, while subject-matter jurisdiction “refers to a tribunal’s
power to hear a case.” Union Pacific R. Co. v. Brotherhood of Loco
motive Engineers and Trainmen Gen. Comm. of Adjustment, Central

