Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
General also fails to account for §30(a), which explicitly provides for a
specific extraterritorial application. That provision would be quite
superfluous if the rest of the Exchange Act already applied to trans
actions on foreign exchanges—and its limitation of that application to
securities of domestic issuers would be inoperative. There being no
affirmative indication in the Exchange Act that §10(b) applies extra
territorially, it does not. Pp. 12–16.
(c) The domestic activity in this case—Florida is where HomeSide and its executives engaged in the alleged deceptive conduct and
where some misleading public statements were made—does not
mean petitioners only seek domestic application of the Act. It is a
rare case of prohibited extraterritorial application that lacks all con
tact with United States territory. In Aramco, for example, where the
plaintiff had been hired in Houston and was an American citizen, see
499 U. S., at 247, this Court concluded that the “focus” of congres
sional concern in Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was neither
that territorial event nor that relationship, but domestic employ
ment. Applying that analysis here: The Exchange Act’s focus is not
on the place where the deception originated, but on purchases and
sales of securities in the United States. Section 10(b) applies only to
transactions in securities listed on domestic exchanges and domestic
transactions in other securities. The primacy of the domestic ex
change is suggested by the Exchange Act’s prologue, see 48 Stat. 881,
and by the fact that the Act’s registration requirements apply only to
securities listed on national securities exchanges, §78l(a). This focus
is also strongly confirmed by §30(a) and (b). Moreover, the Court re
jects the notion that the Exchange Act reaches conduct in this coun
try affecting exchanges or transactions abroad for the same reason
that Aramco rejected overseas application of Title VII: The probabil
ity of incompatibility with other countries’ laws is so obvious that if
Congress intended such foreign application “it would have addressed
the subject of conflicts with foreign laws and procedures.” 499 U. S.,
at 256. Neither the Government nor petitioners provide any textual
support for their proposed alternative test, which would find a viola
tion where the fraud involves significant and material conduct in the
United States. Pp. 17–24.
547 F. 3d 167, affirmed.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., joined. BREYER, J., filed
an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment. STEVENS, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which GINSBURG, J., joined. SOTOMAYOR, J., took no part in the consideration or
decision of the case.

