Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

foreign law, on the other.11 547 F. 3d, at 175.
Thus, while §10(b) may not give any “clear indication”
on its face as to how it should apply to transnational
securities frauds, ante, at 6, 16, it does give strong clues
that it should cover at least some of them, see n. 9, supra.
And in my view, the Second Circuit has done the best job
of discerning what sorts of transnational frauds Congress
meant in 1934—and still means today—to regulate. I do
not take issue with the Court for beginning its inquiry
with the statutory text, rather than the doctrine in the
Courts of Appeals. Cf. ante, at 18, n. 9. I take issue with
the Court for beginning and ending its inquiry with the
statutory text, when the text does not speak with geo­
graphic precision, and for dismissing the long pedigree of,
and the persuasive account of congressional intent embod­
ied in, the Second Circuit’s rule.
Repudiating the Second Circuit’s approach in its en­
tirety, the Court establishes a novel rule that will foreclose
private parties from bringing §10(b) actions whenever the
relevant securities were purchased or sold abroad and are
not listed on a domestic exchange.12 The real motor of the
——————
11 Given its focus on “domestic conditions,” Foley Bros., Inc. v. Filardo,
336 U. S. 281, 285 (1949), I expect that virtually all “ ‘foreign-cubed’ ”
actions—actions in which “(1) foreign plaintiffs [are] suing (2) a foreign
issuer in an American court for violations of American securities laws
based on securities transactions in (3) foreign countries,” 547 F. 3d, at
172—would fail the Second Circuit’s test. As they generally should.
Under these circumstances, the odds of the fraud having a substantial
connection to the United States are low. In recognition of the Exchange
Act’s focus on American investors and the novelty of foreign-cubed
lawsuits, and in the interest of promoting clarity, it might have been
appropriate to incorporate one bright line into the Second Circuit’s test,
by categorically excluding such lawsuits from §10(b)’s ambit.
12 The Court’s opinion does not, however, foreclose the Commission
from bringing enforcement actions in additional circumstances, as no
issue concerning the Commission’s authority is presented by this case.
The Commission’s enforcement proceedings not only differ from private
§10(b) actions in numerous potentially relevant respects, see Brief for

