2

MORRISON v. NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK LTD.
Syllabus
Region, 558 U. S. ___, ___ (internal quotation marks omitted). The
District Court had jurisdiction under 15 U. S. C. §78aa to adjudicate
the §10(b) question. However, it is unnecessary to remand in view of
that error because the same analysis justifies dismissal under Rule
12(b)(6). Pp. 4–5.
2. Section 10(b) does not provide a cause of action to foreign plain
tiffs suing foreign and American defendants for misconduct in con
nection with securities traded on foreign exchanges. Pp. 5–24.
(a) It is a “longstanding principle of American law ‘that legisla
tion of Congress, unless a contrary intent appears, is meant to apply
only within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States.’ ” EEOC
v. Arabian American Oil Co., 499 U. S. 244, 248 (Aramco). When a
statute gives no clear indication of an extraterritorial application, it
has none. Nonetheless, the Second Circuit believed the Exchange
Act’s silence about §10(b)’s extraterritorial application permitted the
court to “discern” whether Congress would have wanted the statute
to apply. This disregard of the presumption against extraterritorial
ity has occurred over many decades in many courts of appeals and
has produced a collection of tests for divining congressional intent
that are complex in formulation and unpredictable in application.
The results demonstrate the wisdom of the presumption against ex
traterritoriality. Rather than guess anew in each case, this Court
applies the presumption in all cases, preserving a stable background
against which Congress can legislate with predictable effects. Pp. 5–
12.
(b) Because Rule 10b–5 was promulgated under §10(b), it “does
not extend beyond conduct encompassed by §10(b)’s prohibition.”
United States v. O’Hagan, 521 U. S. 642, 651. Thus, if §10(b) is not
extraterritorial, neither is Rule 10b–5. On its face, §10(b) contains
nothing to suggest that it applies abroad. Contrary to the argument
of petitioners and the Solicitor General, a general reference to foreign
commerce in the definition of “interstate commerce,” see 15 U. S. C.
§78c(a)(17), does not defeat the presumption against extraterritorial
ity, Aramco, supra, at 251. Nor does a fleeting reference, in §78b(2)’s
description of the Exchange Act’s purposes, to the dissemination and
quotation abroad of prices of domestically traded securities. Nor does
Exchange Act §30(b), which says that the Act does not apply “to any
person insofar as he transacts a business in securities without the ju
risdiction of the United States,” unless he does so in violation of regu
lations promulgated by the SEC “to prevent . . . evasion of [the Act].”
This would be an odd way of indicating that the Act always has ex
traterritorial application; the Commission’s enabling regulations pre
venting “evasion” seem directed at actions abroad that might conceal
a domestic violation. The argument of petitioners and the Solicitor

