14

MORRISON v. NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK LTD.
Opinion of the Court

toriality.7
Petitioners and the Solicitor General next point out that
Congress, in describing the purposes of the Exchange Act,
observed that the “prices established and offered in such
transactions are generally disseminated and quoted
throughout the United States and foreign countries.” 15
U. S. C. §78b(2). The antecedent of “such transactions,”
however, is found in the first sentence of the section,
which declares that “transactions in securities as com­
monly conducted upon securities exchanges and over-the­
counter markets are affected with a national public inter­
est.” §78b. Nothing suggests that this national public
interest pertains to transactions conducted upon foreign
exchanges and markets. The fleeting reference to the
dissemination and quotation abroad of the prices of securi­
ties traded in domestic exchanges and markets cannot
overcome the presumption against extraterritoriality.
Finally, there is §30(b) of the Exchange Act, 15 U. S. C.
§78dd(b), which does mention the Act’s extraterritorial
application: “The provisions of [the Exchange Act] or of
any rule or regulation thereunder shall not apply to any
person insofar as he transacts a business in securities
without the jurisdiction of the United States,” unless he
does so in violation of regulations promulgated by the
Securities and Exchange Commission “to prevent . . .
evasion of [the Act].” (The parties have pointed us to no
regulation promulgated pursuant to §30(b).) The Solicitor
General argues that “[this] exemption would have no
——————
7 This

conclusion does not render meaningless the inclusion of “trade,
commerce, transportation, or communication . . . between any foreign
country and any State” in the definition of “interstate commerce.” 15
U. S. C. §78c(a)(17). For example, an issuer based abroad, whose
executives approve the publication in the United States of misleading
information affecting the price of the issuer’s securities traded on the
New York Stock Exchange, probably will make use of some instrumen­
tality of “communication . . . between [a] foreign country and [a] State.”

