6

MORRISON v. NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK LTD.
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

has “disregard[ed]” the presumption against extraterrito­
riality. Ante, at 6. It is the Court, however, that misap­
plies the presumption, in two main respects.
First, the Court seeks to transform the presumption
from a flexible rule of thumb into something more like a
clear statement rule. We have been here before. In the
case on which the Court primarily relies, EEOC v. Ara
bian American Oil Co., 499 U. S. 244 (1991) (Aramco),
Chief Justice Rehnquist’s majority opinion included a
sentence that appeared to make the same move. See id.,
at 258 (“Congress’ awareness of the need to make a clear
statement that a statute applies overseas is amply demon­
strated by the numerous occasions on which it has ex­
pressly legislated the extraterritorial application of a
statute”). Justice Marshall, in dissent, vigorously ob­
jected. See id., at 261 (“[C]ontrary to what one would
conclude from the majority’s analysis, this canon is not a
‘clear statement’ rule, the application of which relieves a
court of the duty to give effect to all available indicia of the
legislative will”).
Yet even Aramco—surely the most extreme application
of the presumption against extraterritoriality in my time
on the Court6—contained numerous passages suggesting
that the presumption may be overcome without a clear
directive. See id., at 248–255 (majority opinion) (repeat­
edly identifying congressional “intent” as the touchstone of
the presumption). And our cases both before and after
Aramco make perfectly clear that the Court continues to
give effect to “all available evidence about the meaning” of
a provision when considering its extraterritorial applica­
tion, lest we defy Congress’ will. Sale v. Haitian Centers
Council, Inc., 509 U. S. 155, 177 (1993) (emphasis added).7
——————
6 And also one of the most short lived. See Civil Rights Act of 1991,
§109, 105 Stat. 1077 (repudiating Aramco).
7 See also, e.g., Hartford Fire Ins. Co. v. California, 509 U. S. 764

