Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

Opinion of the Court

that case we concluded that the wire-fraud statute, 18
U. S. C. §1343 (2009 ed., Supp. II), was violated by defen­
dants who ordered liquor over the phone from a store in
Maryland with the intent to smuggle it into Canada and
deprive the Canadian Government of revenue. 544 U. S.,
at 353, 371. Section 1343 prohibits “any scheme or artifice
to defraud,”—fraud simpliciter, without any requirement
that it be “in connection with” any particular transaction
or event. The Pasquantino Court said that the petitioners’
“offense was complete the moment they executed the
scheme inside the United States,” and that it was “[t]his
domestic element of petitioners’ conduct [that] the Gov­
ernment is punishing.” 544 U. S., at 371. Section 10(b),
by contrast, punishes not all acts of deception, but only
such acts “in connection with the purchase or sale of any
security registered on a national securities exchange or
any security not so registered.” Not deception alone, but
deception with respect to certain purchases or sales is
necessary for a violation of the statute.
The Solicitor General points out that the “significant
and material conduct” test is in accord with prevailing
notions of international comity. If so, that proves that if
the United States asserted prescriptive jurisdiction pursu­
ant to the “significant and material conduct” test it would
not violate customary international law; but it in no way
tends to prove that that is what Congress has done.
Finally, the Solicitor General argues that the Commis­
sion has adopted an interpretation similar to the “signifi­
cant and material conduct” test, and that we should defer
to that. In the two adjudications the Solicitor General
cites, however, the Commission did not purport to be
providing its own interpretation of the statute, but relied
on decisions of federal courts—mainly Court of Appeals
decisions that in turn relied on the Schoenbaum and
Leasco decisions of the Second Circuit that we discussed
earlier. See In re United Securities Clearing Corp., 52

