Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of the Court

With regard to securities not registered on domestic
exchanges, the exclusive focus on domestic purchases and
sales10 is strongly confirmed by §30(a) and (b), discussed
earlier. The former extends the normal scope of the Ex­
change Act’s prohibitions to acts effecting, in violation of
rules prescribed by the Commission, a “transaction” in a
United States security “on an exchange not within or
subject to the jurisdiction of the United States.” §78dd(a).
And the latter specifies that the Act does not apply to “any
person insofar as he transacts a business in securities
without the jurisdiction of the United States,” unless he
does so in violation of regulations promulgated by the
Commission “to prevent evasion [of the Act].” §78dd(b).
Under both provisions it is the foreign location of the
transaction that establishes (or reflects the presumption
of) the Act’s inapplicability, absent regulations by the
Commission.
The same focus on domestic transactions is evident in
the Securities Act of 1933, 48 Stat. 74, enacted by the
same Congress as the Exchange Act, and forming part of
the same comprehensive regulation of securities trading.
See Central Bank of Denver, N. A. v. First Interstate Bank
of Denver, N. A., 511 U. S. 164, 170–171 (1994). That
legislation makes it unlawful to sell a security, through a
prospectus or otherwise, making use of “any means or
instruments of transportation or communication in inter­
——————
10 That

is in our view the meaning which the presumption against
extraterritorial application requires for the words “purchase or sale, of
. . . any security not so registered” in §10(b)’s phrase “in connection with
the purchase or sale of any security registered on a national securities
exchange or any security not so registered” (emphasis added). Even
without the presumption against extraterritorial application, the only
alternative to that reading makes nonsense of the phrase, causing it to
cover all purchases and sales of registered securities, and all purchases
and sales of nonregistered securities—a thought which, if intended,
would surely have been expressed by the simpler phrase “all purchases
and sales of securities.”

