18

MORRISON v. NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK LTD.
Opinion of the Court

535 U. S. 813, 820 (2002). Those purchase-and-sale trans­
actions are the objects of the statute’s solicitude. It is
those transactions that the statute seeks to “regulate,” see
Superintendent of Ins. of N. Y. v. Bankers Life & Casualty
Co., 404 U. S. 6, 12 (1971); it is parties or prospective
parties to those transactions that the statute seeks to
“protec[t],” id., at 10.
See also Ernst & Ernst v.
Hochfelder, 425 U. S. 185, 195 (1976). And it is in our
view only transactions in securities listed on domestic
exchanges, and domestic transactions in other securities,
to which §10(b) applies.9
The primacy of the domestic exchange is suggested by
the very prologue of the Exchange Act, which sets forth as
its object “[t]o provide for the regulation of securities
exchanges . . . operating in interstate and foreign com­
merce and through the mails, to prevent inequitable and
unfair practices on such exchanges . . . .” 48 Stat. 881. We
know of no one who thought that the Act was intended to
“regulat[e]” foreign securities exchanges—or indeed who
even believed that under established principles of interna­
tional law Congress had the power to do so. The Act’s
registration requirements apply only to securities listed on
national securities exchanges. 15 U. S. C. §78l(a).
——————
9 The

concurrence seems to think this test has little to do with our
conclusion in Part III, supra, that §10(b) does not apply extraterritori­
ally. See post, at 11–12. That is not so. If §10(b) did apply abroad, we
would not need to determine which transnational frauds it applied to; it
would apply to all of them (barring some other limitation). Thus,
although it is true, as we have said, that our threshold conclusion that
§10(b) has no extraterritorial effect does not resolve this case, it is a
necessary first step in the analysis.
The concurrence also makes the curious criticism that our evaluation
of where a putative violation occurs is based on the text of §10(b) rather
than the doctrine in the Courts of Appeals. Post, at 1–2. Although it
concedes that our test is textually plausible, post, at 1, it does not (and
cannot) make the same claim for the Court-of-Appeals doctrine it
endorses. That is enough to make our test the better one.

