20

MORRISON v. NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK LTD.
Opinion of the Court

state commerce or of the mails,” unless a registration
statement is in effect. 15 U. S. C. §77e(a)(1). The Com­
mission has interpreted that requirement “not to include
. . . sales that occur outside the United States.” 17 CFR
§230.901 (2009).
Finally, we reject the notion that the Exchange Act
reaches conduct in this country affecting exchanges or
transactions abroad for the same reason that Aramco
rejected overseas application of Title VII to all domesti­
cally concluded employment contracts or all employment
contracts with American employers: The probability of
incompatibility with the applicable laws of other countries
is so obvious that if Congress intended such foreign appli­
cation “it would have addressed the subject of conflicts
with foreign laws and procedures.” 499 U. S., at 256. Like
the United States, foreign countries regulate their domes­
tic securities exchanges and securities transactions occur­
ring within their territorial jurisdiction. And the regula­
tion of other countries often differs from ours as to what
constitutes fraud, what disclosures must be made, what
damages are recoverable, what discovery is available in
litigation, what individual actions may be joined in a
single suit, what attorney’s fees are recoverable, and many
other matters. See, e.g., Brief for United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland as Amicus Curiae 16–
21. The Commonwealth of Australia, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the Republic of
France have filed amicus briefs in this case. So have
(separately or jointly) such international and foreign
organizations as the International Chamber of Commerce,
the Swiss Bankers Association, the Federation of German
Industries, the French Business Confederation, the Insti­
tute of International Bankers, the European Banking
Federation, the Australian Bankers’ Association, and the
Association Française des Entreprises Privées. They all
complain of the interference with foreign securities regula­

