8

MORRISON v. NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK LTD.
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

ambiguous statutes to avoid unreasonable interference
with the sovereign authority of other nations,”
F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd v. Empagran S. A., 542 U. S.
155, 164 (2004), and that, absent contrary evidence, we
presume “Congress is primarily concerned with domestic
conditions,” Foley Bros., Inc. v. Filardo, 336 U. S. 281, 285
(1949). Accordingly, the presumption against extraterrito­
riality “provides a sound basis for concluding that Section
10(b) does not apply when a securities fraud with no ef­
fects in the United States is hatched and executed entirely
outside this country.” Brief for United States as Amicus
Curiae 22. But that is just about all it provides a sound
basis for concluding. And the conclusion is not very illu­
minating, because no party to the litigation disputes it.
No one contends that §10(b) applies to wholly foreign
frauds.
Rather, the real question in this case is how much, and
what kinds of, domestic contacts are sufficient to trigger
application of §10(b).8 In developing its conduct-and­
effects test, the Second Circuit endeavored to derive a
solution from the Exchange Act’s text, structure, history,
and purpose. Judge Friendly and his colleagues were well
aware that United States courts “cannot and should not
expend [their] resources resolving cases that do not affect
Americans or involve fraud emanating from America.”
547 F. 3d, at 175; see also id., at 171 (overriding concern is
“ ‘whether there is sufficient United States involvement’ ”
(quoting Itoba Ltd. v. Lep Group PLC, 54 F. 3d 118, 122
(CA2 1995))).
The question just stated does not admit of an easy an­
——————
8 Cf. Dodge, 16 Berkeley J. Int’l L., at 88, n. 25 (regardless whether
one frames question as “whether the presumption against extraterrito­
riality should apply [or] whether the regulation is extraterritorial,” “one
must ultimately grapple with the basic issue of what connection to the
United States is sufficient to justify the assumption that Congress
would want its laws to be applied”).

