(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

GONZALEZ v. THALER, DIRECTOR, TEXAS 

DEPARTMENT OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE, 

CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTIONS DIVISION

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–895.

Argued November 2, 2011—Decided January 10, 2012

After the intermediate state appellate court affirmed his state-court
conviction, petitioner Gonzalez allowed his time for seeking discretionary review with the State’s highest court for criminal appeals to
expire. Roughly six weeks later, the intermediate state appellate
court issued its mandate. When Gonzalez subsequently sought federal habeas relief, the District Court dismissed Gonzalez’s petition as
time barred by the 1-year statute of limitations in the Antiterrorism
and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA). Under 28 U. S. C.
§2244(d)(1)(A), state prisoners have one year to file federal habeas
petitions running from “the date on which the judgment became final
by the conclusion of direct review or the expiration of the time for
seeking such review.” The District Court held that Gonzalez’s judgment had become “final” when his time for seeking discretionary review in the State’s highest court expired, and that running the limitations period from that date, his petition was untimely.
Under AEDPA, a habeas petitioner must obtain a certificate of appealability (COA) to appeal a district court’s final order in a habeas
proceeding. 28 U. S. C. §2253(c)(1). The COA may issue only if the
petitioner has made a “substantial showing of the denial of a constitutional right,” §2253(c)(2), and “shall indicate which specific issue”
satisfies that showing, §2253(c)(3). A Fifth Circuit judge granted
Gonzalez a COA on the question whether his petition was timely.
The issued COA, however, failed to “indicate” a constitutional issue.
The Fifth Circuit affirmed, holding that Gonzalez’s petition was
untimely because the limitations period begins to run for petitioners
who fail to appeal to a State’s highest court when the time for seeking

