4

GONZALEZ v. THALER
SCALIA, J., dissenting

termination that a COA is warranted and resources are
deployed in briefing and argument, . . . the COA has fulfilled [its] gatekeeping function.” Ante, at 10. But of
course it has not done so—it has performed no gatekeeping
function whatever—if “the determination that a COA is
warranted” has not been accompanied by the issuing
judge’s opinion required to support the determination:
that there is an issue as to which the applicant has made
a “substantial showing of the denial of a constitutional
right,” §2253(c)(2). As the very next sentence of today’s
opinion discloses, what the Court means by “has fulfilled
[its] gatekeeping function” is simply that it will not be
worth the trouble of going back, since that would “not
outweigh the costs of further delay,” ante, at 9.
That is doubtless true, and it demonstrates the hollowness of the Court’s assurance that “calling a rule nonjurisdictional does not mean that it is not mandatory or that a
timely objection can be ignored,” ante, at 10. That statement is true enough as a general proposition: Calling the
numerosity requirement in Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp., 546
U. S. 500 (2006), nonjurisdictional, for example, did not
eliminate it, where protest was made, as a continuing
mandatory requirement for relief on the merits, id., at
516. Even the time-of-filing requirement in Eberhart v.
United States, 546 U. S. 12 (2005) (per curiam), continued
to have “bite” even though it was held nonjurisdictional: It
prevented relief when the failure to observe it was properly challenged, id., at 19. But the Court has managed to
create today a “mandatory” requirement which—precisely
because it will not be worth the trouble of going back—has
no practical, real-world effect.1 What is the consequence
——————
1 The Court suggests that I “ignor[e] the real world,” ante, at 11, n. 7,
in which litigants and courts have taken steps to correct a defective
COA. But these actions are unsurprising in a world in which there was
the possibility that this Court would treat §2253(c)(3) as a jurisdictional
requirement and a court of appeals had already done so. The New

