Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

SCALIA, J., dissenting

(quoting Torres, supra, at 318), which according to the
Court’s analysis “ ‘clearly state[d],’ ” ante, at 6 (quoting
Arbaugh, 546 U. S., at 515), that Rule 3(c) is jurisdictional.
But the legislature there did precisely what it did here:
made a particular document necessary to jurisdiction and
then specified what that document must contain.6 I certainly agree that that is a clear statement that a document with the requisite content is necessary to jurisdiction. But the Court does not. So to distinguish Torres it
has to find something else in Rule 3(c) that provided a
“clear statement” of what “Congress intended,” ante, at 6–
7. The best it can come up with, ante, at 12, is an unclear
statement, and that not from Congress but from Advisory
Committee Notes referred to in the Torres opinion. Such
Notes are (of course) “the product of the Advisory Committee, and not Congress,” and “they are transmitted to Congress before the rule is enacted into law.” United States v.
Vonn, 535 U. S. 55, 64, n. 6 (2002). They are, in other
words, a species of legislative history. I know of no precedent for the proposition that legislative history can satisfy
a clear-statement requirement imposed by this Court’s
opinions. Does today’s distinguishing of Torres mean that
legislative history can waive the sovereign immunity of
the United States? See United States v. Nordic Village,
——————
6 The Court’s claim that “Torres involved . . . a different textual, contextual, and historical backdrop,” ante, at 13, n. 8, does not withstand
scrutiny. First, consider the “textual backdrop.” The Court cannot
really believe that Rule 3(c)(1)’s statement that a notice of appeal “must
. . . specify” the appealing party is “ ‘clear’ jurisdictional language,” ante,
at 7, while §2253(c)(3)’s “shall indicate” the issue or issues is not. If it
did, it would say as much, since that would readily distinguish Torres.
And then consider the “contextual” (whatever that means) and “historical backdrop.” Each provision, in mandatory-but-not-jurisdictional
language, specifies what another document, itself jurisdictional in light
of statutory text and history, must contain. The two cases are, of
course, literally “different,” ante, at 13, n. 8, but not in any legally
relevant way.

