Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
man, 555 U. S. 113, the Court adopted Clay’s “most natural reading
of the statutory text” in construing “the similar language of
§2244(d)(1)(A).” Id., at 119. The Court made no mention of when
Jimenez’s appeal concluded and held that his judgment became final
when his time for seeking certiorari expired. Section 2244(d)(1)(A)
thus consists of two prongs corresponding to two categories of petitioners. For petitioners pursuing direct review all the way to this
Court, the judgment becomes final at the “conclusion of direct review,” when this Court affirms a conviction on the merits or denies
certiorari. For all other petitioners, the judgment becomes final at
the “expiration of the time for seeking such review,” when the time
for pursuing direct review in this Court, or in state court, expires.
Because Gonzalez did not appeal to the State’s highest court, his
judgment became final when his time for seeking review with that
court expired. Pp. 13–15.
(b) Gonzalez argues that courts should determine both prongs for
every petitioner who does not seek certiorari, then start the 1-year
clock from the latest of the two dates. Gonzalez further contends that
when a petitioner does not seek certiorari, state law should define the
“conclusion of direct review.” The words “latest of,” however, appear
in §2244(d)(1), not §2244(d)(1)(A). Nothing in §2244(d)(1)(A) contemplates any conflict between the two prongs or instructs that the later
of the two shall prevail. Gonzalez’s approach of scouring each State’s
laws and cases to determine how the State defines finality, moreover,
would contradict the uniform meaning of “conclusion of direct review”
that Clay and Jimenez accepted. It will be a rare situation in which a
delay in the mandate’s issuance is so severe as to prevent a petitioner
from filing a federal habeas petition within a year or requesting a
stay and abeyance. Finally, the Court rejects Gonzalez’s alternative
argument that his petition is timely because it was filed within a
year of when his time for seeking certiorari review expired. Pp.
15−19.
623 F. 3d 222, affirmed.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, THOMAS, GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, and KAGAN,
JJ., joined. SCALIA, J., filed a dissenting opinion.

