Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of the Court

the expiration of time for seeking review in state court,
and the out-of-time appeal final at the expiration of time
for seeking certiorari in this Court, we reinforced Clay’s
suggestion that the “expiration” prong governs all petitioners who do not pursue direct review all the way to this
Court.10
Third, Gonzalez argues that AEDPA’s federalism concerns and respect for state-law procedures mean that we
should not read §2244(d)(1)(A) to disregard state law. We
agree. That is why a state court’s reopening of direct
review will reset the limitations period. 555 U. S., at 121.
That is also why, just as we determine the “expiration of
the time for seeking [direct] review” from this Court’s
filing deadlines when petitioners forgo certiorari, we look
to state-court filing deadlines when petitioners forgo statecourt appeals. Referring to state-law procedures in that
context makes sense because such deadlines are inherently court specific. There is no risk of relying on “state-law
rules that may differ from the general federal rule.” Clay,
537 U. S., at 531.
By contrast, Gonzalez urges us to scour each State’s
laws and cases to determine how it defines finality for
every petitioner who forgoes a state-court appeal. That approach would usher in state-by-state definitions of the conclusion of direct review. It would be at odds with the
uniform definition we adopted in Clay and accepted in the
§2244(d)(1)(A) context in Jimenez. And it would pose
serious administrability concerns. Even if roughly “half of
the States define the conclusion of direct review as the
issuance of the mandate or similar process,” Brief for
——————
10 Gonzalez also argues that Lawrence v. Florida, 549 U. S. 327
(2007), supports his focus on the state court’s issuance of the mandate
because it referred to a mandate in determining when state postconviction proceedings were no longer pending. Lawrence, however, is inapposite. The case involved a different provision, 28 U. S. C. §2244(d)(2),
which by its terms refers to “State” procedures.

