Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

Gonzalez applied to the U. S. Court of Appeals for the
Fifth Circuit for a COA on two grounds: (1) his habeas
petition was timely, and (2) his Sixth Amendment speedytrial right was violated. A Court of Appeals judge granted
a COA on the question “whether the habeas application
was timely filed because Gonzalez’s conviction became
final, and thus the limitations period commenced, on the
date the intermediate state appellate court issued its
mandate.” App. 347. The COA did not mention the Sixth
Amendment question.
The Court of Appeals affirmed. 623 F. 3d 222 (2010).
Acknowledging that a sister Circuit had run the limitations period from the date of a state court’s issuance of a
mandate, the Court of Appeals deemed the mandate’s
issuance “irrelevant” to determining finality under
§2244(d)(1)(A). Id., at 224, 226 (disagreeing with Riddle v.
Kemna, 523 F. 3d 850 (CA8 2008) (en banc)). The Court of
Appeals held that because a judgment becomes final at
“the conclusion of direct review or the expiration of the
time for seeking such review,” §2244(d)(1)(A), the limitations period begins to run for petitioners who fail to appeal
to a State’s highest court when the time for seeking further direct review in the state court expires. The Court of
Appeals therefore concluded that Gonzalez’s conviction
became final on August 11, 2006, and his habeas petition
was time barred.
The Court of Appeals did not address Gonzalez’s Sixth
Amendment claim or discuss whether the COA had been
improperly issued. Nor did the State allege any defect in
the COA or move to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction.
Gonzalez petitioned this Court for a writ of certiorari.
In its brief in opposition, the State argued for the first
time that the Court of Appeals lacked jurisdiction to adjudicate Gonzalez’s appeal because the COA identified only
a procedural issue, without also “indicat[ing]” a constitutional issue as required by §2253(c)(3). We granted certio-

