8

GONZALEZ v. THALER
Opinion of the Court

peals] courts.” Arbaugh, 546 U. S., at 515 (internal quotation marks omitted). The unambiguous jurisdictional
terms of §§2253(a), (b), and (c)(1) show that Congress
would have spoken in clearer terms if it intended
§2253(c)(3) to have similar jurisdictional force. Instead,
the contrast underscores that the failure to obtain a COA
is jurisdictional, while a COA’s failure to indicate an issue
is not. A defective COA is not equivalent to the lack of any
COA.
It is telling, moreover, that Congress placed the power
to issue COAs in the hands of a “circuit justice or judge.”5
It would seem somewhat counterintuitive to render a
panel of court of appeals judges powerless to act on appeals based on COAs that Congress specifically empowered one court of appeals judge to grant. Indeed, whereas
§2253(c)(2)’s substantial-showing requirement at least describes a burden that “the applicant” seeking a COA
bears, §2253(c)(3)’s indication requirement binds only the
judge issuing the COA. Notably, Gonzalez advanced both
the timeliness and Sixth Amendment issues in his application for a COA. A petitioner, having successfully obtained a COA, has no control over how the judge drafts the
COA and, as in Gonzalez’s case, may have done everything
required of him by law. That fact would only compound
the “unfai[r] prejudice” resulting from the sua sponte
dismissals and remands that jurisdictional treatment
would entail. Henderson, 562 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 5).6
——————
5 The courts of appeals uniformly interpret “circuit justice or judge” to
encompass district judges. See United States v. Mitchell, 216 F. 3d
1126, 1129 (CADC 2000) (collecting cases); Fed. Rule App. Proc. 22(b).
Habeas Corpus Rule 11(a) requires district judges to decide whether to
grant or deny a COA in the first instance.
6 That fact also distinguishes the indication requirement from every
“ ‘similar provisio[n]’ ” that the dissent claims we have deemed jurisdictional. Post, at 5–6. None of our cases addressing those provisions,
moreover, recognized or relied on the sweeping “rule” that the dissent
now invokes, whereby this Court should enforce as jurisdictional all

