Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

when the issuing judge, over properly preserved objection,
produces a COA like the one here, which does not contain
the required opinion? None whatever. The habeas petitioner already has what he wants, argument before the
court of appeals. The government, for its part, is either
confident in its view that there has been no substantial
showing of denial of a constitutional right—in which case
it is just as easy (if not easier) to win before three judges
as it is before one; or else it is not—in which case a crusade to enforce §2253(c) is likely to yield nothing but
additional litigation expenses. As for the three-judge
panel of the court of appeals, it remains free, as always, to
choose whichever mandatory-but-not-jurisdictional basis it
wishes for resolving the case. Cf. Steel Co. v. Citizens for
Better Environment, 523 U. S. 83, 93–94 (1998). Why not
choose the one that is sure to be final and that might avoid
embarrassing a colleague? No one has any interest in
enforcing the “mandatory” requirement. Which is perhaps
why, as I proceed to discuss, mandatory requirements for
court-to-court appeal are always made jurisdictional.
Past Treatment of Similar Provisions
As the Court acknowledges, “ ‘context, including this
Court’s interpretation of similar provisions in many years
past, is relevant to whether a statute ranks a requirement
as jurisdictional.’ ” Ante, at 6, n. 3 (quoting Reed Elsevier,
Inc. v. Muchnick, 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 13)).
Thus, we have said that a requirement prescribed as a
condition to obtaining judicial review of agency action
is quite different (nonjurisdictional) from a requirement
prescribed as a condition to appeal from one court to another (jurisdictional). See Henderson, 562 U. S., at ___ –
___ (slip op., at 7–8). We have always—always, without
——————
World of the Court’s making, in which it is certain that an issuing
judge’s failure to identify any issue justifying a COA will not have
jurisdictional consequences, is yet unexplored.

