Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

Treating §2253(c)(3) as jurisdictional also would thwart
Congress’ intent in AEDPA “to eliminate delays in the
federal habeas review process.” Holland v. Florida, 560
U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 16). The COA process
screens out issues unworthy of judicial time and attention
and ensures that frivolous claims are not assigned to
merits panels. Once a judge has made the determination
that a COA is warranted and resources are deployed in
briefing and argument, however, the COA has fulfilled
that gatekeeping function. Even if additional screening of
already-issued COAs for §2253(c)(3) defects could further
winnow the cases before the courts of appeals, that would
not outweigh the costs of further delay from the extra
layer of review. This case, in which the alleged defect
would be dispositive, exemplifies those inefficiencies; the
State requests that we vacate and remand with instructions to dismiss the appeal based on a §2253(c)(3) defect
that it raised for the first time in response to a petition for
certiorari. And delay would be particularly fruitless in the
numerous cases where, as here, the district court dismissed the petition on procedural grounds and the court of
appeals affirms, without having to address the omitted
constitutional issue at all.
——————
“procedural conditions for appealing a case from one Article III court to
another.” Ibid.; but see, e.g., post, at 6–7, n. 2 (conceding that the “rule”
does not apply to criminal appeals); Becker v. Montgomery, 532 U. S.
757, 763 (2001) (failure to sign notice of appeal is a nonjurisdictional
omission). All the cases, meanwhile, involved time limits (save one
involving Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 3(c)(1), which we address
infra). In Bowles v. Russell, 551 U. S. 205 (2007), we emphasized our
“century’s worth of precedent” for treating statutory time limits on
appeals as jurisdictional, id., at 209, n. 2, but even “Bowles did not hold
. . . that all statutory conditions imposing a time limit should be considered jurisdictional,” Reed Elsevier, 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op.,
at 12). This case, in any event, involves a different type of procedural
condition.

