Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

SCALIA, J., dissenting

The Court is not willing to say that Torres is no longer
good law, but I doubt whether future litigants will be so
coy. They know that in the past, to avoid the uncongenial
rigidity of the rule that procedures attending court-tocourt appeals are jurisdictional, we have performed wondrous contortions to find compliance with those rules. For
example, in Smith v. Barry, 502 U. S. 244, 248 (1992), we
held that an “informal brief” filed after a defective notice
of appeal counted as a valid notice of appeal. In Foman v.
Davis, 371 U. S. 178, 181 (1962), we held that a notice of
appeal from the denial of a motion to vacate the judgment
was also a notice of appeal from the underlying judgment.
And in Houston v. Lack, 487 U. S. 266, 270 (1988), we held
that a prisoner’s notice of appeal was “filed” when it was
delivered to prison authorities for forwarding to the district court. These (shall we say) creative interpretations of
the procedural requirements were made necessary by the
background principle that is centuries old: “[I]f the mode
prescribed for removing cases by writ of error or appeal
be too strict and technical, and likely to produce inconvenience or injustice, it is for Congress to provide a remedy
by altering the existing laws; not for the court.” United
States v. Curry, 6 How. 106, 113 (1848). But if we have
been willing to expose ourselves to ridicule in order to
approve implausible compliance with procedural prerequisites to appeal, surely we may be willing to continue and
expand the process of simply converting those obnoxious
prerequisites into the now favored “claims processing
rules,” enabling us to avoid unseemly contortions by simp——————
ship,” ante, at 13, from that presented here. I fail to see the relevance
of that happenstance. The premise of the Court’s opinion is that the
question of jurisdiction vel non is governed by a “clear-statement
principle,” ante, at 6. The statement here is precisely as clear as the
statement in Torres. Do we enforce clear statements only when there is
a “possibility of gamesmanship”? The Court’s free-wheeling purposivism defies textual analysis.

