Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

SCALIA, J., dissenting

same paragraph as the procedural requirement, there is
no doubt that under this statute a judge’s certification that
there was probable cause for an appeal was jurisdictional.
See, e.g., Ex parte Patrick, 212 U. S. 555 (1908) (per curiam); Bilik v. Strassheim, 212 U. S. 551 (1908) (per curiam). There is no reason whatever to think that Congress
rendered the statement of opinion unnecessary for jurisdiction by (1) extending the requirement for it to §2255
proceedings; (2) requiring the opinion to address a more
specific point (not just probable cause for an appeal but
presence of an issue presenting a “substantial showing of
the denial of a constitutional right”)4; and (3) giving the
document in which the judge is required to express the
opinion a name (“certificate of appealability”)—so that
now a “certificate of appealability” without opinion will
suffice. Neither any one of these steps, nor all of them
combined, suggest elimination of jurisdictional status for
the required expression of opinion.5 It would be an entirely strange way of achieving that result. It was not a
strange way, however, of dividing the now more complex
——————
4 The

Court believes that the fact that this “new requirement . . . has
no predecessor provision” suggests that it is nonjurisdictional. Ante, at
6, n. 3. To begin with, it is not that new, and it has a predecessor
provision; it merely adds detail to the jurisdictional opinion that was
previously required. But even if the requirement were entirely unprecedented, when it appears within a textual structure that makes it
jurisdictional (as our opinion in Torres v. Oakland Scavenger Co., 487
U. S. 312 (1988), held, see infra, at 10–12), it would be an entirely
unprecedented jurisdictional provision.
5 The Court’s opinion suggests that “[i]t would seem somewhat counterintuitive to render a panel of court of appeals judges powerless to act
on appeals based on COAs that Congress specifically empowered one
court of appeals judge to grant.” Ante, at 8. To begin with, we do not
think that an anomaly. It makes entire sense to enable a single circuit
judge to nip improper appeals in the bud, sparing parties the trouble of
an appeal, and courts the expenditure of three times as much judicial
energy. But if it were an anomaly, it would be one that existed as well
under the prior statute, which was held to be jurisdictional.

