Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

named in a notice of appeal gives absolutely no “notice of
[his or her] appeal,” a judge’s issuance of a COA reflects
his or her judgment that the appeal should proceed and
supplies the State with notice that the habeas litigation
will continue.
Because we conclude that §2253(c)(3) is a nonjurisdictional rule, the Court of Appeals had jurisdiction to adjudicate Gonzalez’s appeal.
III
We next consider whether Gonzalez’s habeas petition
was time barred. AEDPA establishes a 1-year limitations
period for state prisoners to file for federal habeas relief,
which “run[s] from the latest of ” four specified dates.9
§2244(d)(1). This case concerns the first of those dates:
“the date on which the judgment became final by the
conclusion of direct review or the expiration of the time for
seeking such review.” §2244(d)(1)(A). The question before
——————
Federal Rule featuring a different textual, contextual, and historical
backdrop, the dissent notably fails to grapple with—indeed, its opinion
is bereft of quotation to—any supporting reasoning in that opinion.
That reasoning is simply not applicable here.
9 Title 28 U. S. C. §2244(d)(1) provides:
“A 1-year period of limitation shall apply to an application for a writ
of habeas corpus by a person in custody pursuant to the judgment of a
State court. The limitation period shall run from the latest of—
“(A) the date on which the judgment became final by the conclusion of
direct review or the expiration of the time for seeking such review;
“(B) the date on which the impediment to filing an application created by State action in violation of the Constitution or laws of the United
States is removed, if the applicant was prevented from filing by such
State action;
“(C) the date on which the constitutional right asserted was initially
recognized by the Supreme Court, if the right has been newly recognized by the Supreme Court and made retroactively applicable to cases
on collateral review; or
“(D) the date on which the factual predicate of the claim or claims
presented could have been discovered through the exercise of due
diligence.”

