16

GONZALEZ v. THALER
SCALIA, J., dissenting

the long term, the time saved to judges and lawyers by an
enforceable requirement that appeals be screened by a
single judge may vastly outweigh the time wasted by the
occasional need for enforcement. That, it seems to me, is
what Congress believed.
*
*
*
Terminology is destiny. Today’s holding, and the erosion of our prior jurisprudence that will perhaps follow
upon it, is foreshadowed and facilitated by the unfortunate
terminology with which we have chosen to accompany our
campaign to “bring some discipline” to determinations of
jurisdiction. We have said that the universe of rules
placing limitations upon the courts is divided into (1)
“claims processing rules,” and (2) jurisdiction-removing
rules. Unless our prior jurisprudence is to be repudiated,
that is a false dichotomy. The requirement that the unsuccessful litigant file a timely notice of appeal, for example, is (if the term is to have any meaning) a claimsprocessing rule, ordering the process by which claims are
adjudicated. Yet as discussed above, that, and all procedures that must be followed to proceed from one court to
another, have always been deemed jurisdictional. The
proper dichotomy is between claims processing rules that
are jurisdictional, and those that are not. To put it otherwise suggests a test for jurisdiction that is not to be found
in our cases.9
——————
9 It may well be that what I have called a false dichotomy was indeed
meant to revise our jurisprudence. In Kontrick v. Ryan, 540 U. S. 443,
455 (2004), we said by way of dictum the following: “Clarity would be
facilitated if courts and litigants used the label ‘jurisdictional’ not for
claim-processing rules, but only for prescriptions delineating the
classes of cases (subject-matter jurisdiction) and the persons (personal
jurisdiction) falling within a court’s adjudicatory authority.” Unless an
appeal lacking a timely filing of a notice of appeal can be considered one
that falls outside the appellate court’s “subject-matter jurisdiction”
(which would be an odd usage), Kontrick’s dictum effectively announced

