6

GONZALEZ v. THALER
Opinion of the Court

waived or forfeited. The objections may be resurrected at
any point in the litigation, and a valid objection may lead
a court midway through briefing to dismiss a complaint in
its entirety. “[M]any months of work on the part of the
attorneys and the court may be wasted.” Henderson, 562
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 5). Courts, we have said, should
not lightly attach those “drastic” consequences to limits
Congress has enacted. Ibid.
We accordingly have applied the following principle: A
rule is jurisdictional “[i]f the Legislature clearly states
that a threshold limitation on a statute’s scope shall count
as jurisdictional.” Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp., 546 U. S. 500,
515 (2006). But if “Congress does not rank a statutory
limitation on coverage as jurisdictional, courts should
treat the restriction as nonjurisdictional.” Id., at 516.3
That clear-statement principle makes particular sense in
this statute, as we consider—against the backdrop of
§2253(a)’s clear jurisdictional grant to the courts of ap——————
3 We

have also held that “context, including this Court’s interpretation of similar provisions in many years past, is relevant to whether a
statute ranks a requirement as jurisdictional.” Reed Elsevier, Inc. v.
Muchnick, 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 13). Here, however,
even though the requirement of a COA (or its predecessor, the certificate of probable cause (CPC)) dates back to 1908, Congress did not
enact the indication requirement until 1996. There is thus no “long line
of this Court’s decisions left undisturbed by Congress” on which to rely.
Union Pacific R. Co. v. Locomotive Engineers and Trainmen Gen.
Comm. of Adjustment, Central Region, 558 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip
op., at 13).
The issuance of a CPC, like the issuance of a COA, was jurisdictional.
Contrary to the dissent’s assertions, post, at 8–10 (opinion of SCALIA,
J.), that fact does not suggest that the indication requirement is jurisdictional as well. If anything, the inference runs the other way. For
nearly a century, a judge’s granting or withholding of a CPC, absent
any indication of issues, was the fully effective “expression of opinion,”
post, at 8, required for an appeal to proceed. AEDPA’s new requirement that judges indicate the specific issues to be raised on appeal has
no predecessor provision—indeed, it is the primary difference between
a CPC and COA.

