Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

classes of cases from that appellate jurisdiction; and subsection (c) imposes a procedural hurdle to the exercise of that
appellate jurisdiction—a judge’s issuance of a certificate of
appealability, see Miller-El v. Cockrell, 537 U. S. 322, 336
(2003).
Paragraph 2253(c)(3) says that a certificate of appealability must “indicate” which issue or issues in the case
involve a substantial showing of a constitutional violation.
Everyone agrees that the certificate issued below contains
no such indication. See ante, at 5. It appears, in fact, that
the issuing judge never considered whether any of Gonzalez’s constitutional claims satisfied paragraph (2). As far
as we know, no federal judge has ever determined that
Gonzalez “has made a substantial showing of the denial of
a constitutional right.” §2253(c)(2). The Court does not
even suggest that he has—but it goes on to decide the
statute-of-limitations issue in the case.
Its basis for proceeding in this fashion is the remarkable
statement that “[a] defective COA is not equivalent to the
lack of any COA.” Ante, at 8. That is simply not true with
respect to a significant defect in a legal document. Would
one say that a deed which lacks the words of conveyance is
not equivalent to the lack of a deed? Or that a passport
which lacks the Secretary of State’s affirmance of the
bearer’s citizenship is not equivalent to the lack of a passport? Minor technical defects are one thing, but a defect
that goes to the whole purpose of the instrument is something else. And the whole purpose of the certificate-ofappealability procedure is to make sure that, before a case
can proceed to the court of appeals, a judge has made the
determination that it presents a substantial showing of
the denial of a constitutional right. To call something a
valid certificate of appealability which does not contain
the central finding that is the whole purpose of a certificate of appealability is quite absurd.
The Court says that “[o]nce a judge has made the de-

