Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

SCALIA, J., dissenting

that the certification created.8 The two issues are quite
separate: what the judge must find, and what the COA (or
certification) must contain.
The Court points out that Gonzalez raised the Sixth
Amendment issue in his application for a COA, that “[a]
petitioner, having successfully obtained a COA, has no
control over how the judge drafts the COA,” and that the
petitioner, “as in Gonzalez’s case, may have done everything required of him by law.” Ante, at 8. Perhaps it is
true that the defective COA was not at all Gonzalez’s
fault—though he could have promptly moved to amend it.
But no-fault elimination of jurisdiction is not forbidden.
In Bowles v. Russell, 551 U. S. 205 (2007), we enforced a
time limit on notice of appeal where the district court had
purported to extend the time to file and the appellant had
complied with the court’s order. Id., at 207, 213–214. It
did not matter that the fault lay with the court.
Finally, the Court points out that treating §2253(c)(3) as
jurisdictional would waste a lot of time. “Even if additional screening of already-issued COAs for §2253(c)(3) defects
could further winnow the cases before the courts of appeals, that would not outweigh the costs of further delay
from the extra layer of review.” Ante, at 9. But that is not
an argument directed to the statute before us; it is an
argument directed against enforcement of all jurisdictional requirements (all of which, I suspect, are the object of
the Court’s mounting disfavor). And the argument may
not even be true, except in the (presumably rare) case
where the jurisdictional prescription is disregarded. Over
——————
8 We held in Nowakowski v. Maroney, 386 U. S. 542, 543 (1967) (per
curiam), that “when a district judge grants [a certificate of probable
cause], the court of appeals must grant an appeal . . . and proceed to a
disposition of the appeal in accord with its ordinary procedure.” See
also Carafas v. LaVallee, 391 U. S. 234, 242 (1968) (Nowakowski
requires “that the appeal [be] considered on its merits . . . in cases
where a certificate of probable cause has been granted”).

