12

GONZALEZ v. THALER
Opinion of the Court

We reject this analogy. We construed the content requirements for notices of appeal as jurisdictional because
we were “convinced that the harshness of our construction
[wa]s ‘imposed by the legislature.’ ” Torres v. Oakland
Scavenger Co., 487 U. S. 312, 318 (1988). Rule 4, we
noted, establishes mandatory time limits for filing a notice
of appeal. Excusing a failure to name a party in a notice
of appeal, in violation of Rule 3, would be “equivalent to
permitting courts to extend the time for filing a notice of
appeal,” in violation of Rule 4. Id., at 315. And “time
limits for filing a notice of appeal have been treated as
jurisdictional in American law for well over a century.”
Bowles v. Russell, 551 U. S. 205, 209, n. 2 (2007). Accordingly, the Advisory Committee Note “makes no distinction
among the various requirements of Rule 3 and Rule 4,”
treating them “as a single jurisdictional threshold.”
Torres, 487 U. S., at 315; see also id., at 316 (“the Advisory
Committee viewed the requirements of Rule 3 as jurisdictional in nature”). Here, we find no similar basis for treating the paragraphs of §2253(c) as a single jurisdictional
threshold.
Moreover, in explaining why the naming requirement
was jurisdictional in Torres, we reasoned that an unnamed
party leaves the notice’s “intended recipient[s]”—the
appellee and court—“unable to determine with certitude
whether [that party] should be bound by an adverse judgment or held liable for costs or sanctions.” Id., at 318.
The party could sit on the fence, await the outcome, and
opt to participate only if it was favorable. That possibility
of gamesmanship is not present here. Unlike the party
who fails to submit a compliant notice of appeal, the habeas petitioner who obtains a COA cannot control how that
COA is drafted.8 And whereas a party’s failure to be
——————
8 The dissent claims that we fail to give stare decisis effect to Torres.
Post, at 10. Setting aside the fact that Torres involved an unrelated

