(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

WILLIAMSON ET AL. v. MAZDA MOTOR OF AMERICA,
INC., ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA,

FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT, DIVISION THREE

No. 08–1314. Argued November 3, 2010—Decided February 23, 2011
The 1989 version of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208
(FMVSS 208) requires, as relevant here, auto manufacturers to in
stall seatbelts on the rear seats of passenger vehicles. They must in
stall lap-and-shoulder belts on seats next to a vehicle’s doors or
frames, but may install either those belts or simple lap belts on rear
inner seats, e.g., those next to a minivan’s aisle.
The Williamson family and Thanh Williamson’s estate brought this
California tort suit, claiming that Thanh died in an accident because
the rear aisle seat of the Mazda minivan in which she was riding had
a lap belt instead of lap-and-shoulder belts. The state trial court
dismissed their claim on the pleadings. The State Court of Appeal af
firmed, relying on Geier v. American Honda Motor Co., 529 U. S. 861,
in which this Court found that an earlier (1984) version of FMVSS
208—which required installation of passive restraint devices—pre
empted a state tort suit against an auto manufacturer on a failure to
install airbags.
Held: FMVSS 208 does not pre-empt state tort suits claiming that
manufacturers should have installed lap-and-shoulder belts, instead
of lap belts, on rear inner seats. Pp. 3–12.
(a) Because this case involves (1) the same statute as Geier, (2) a
later version of the same regulation, and (3) a somewhat similar
claim that a state tort action conflicts with the federal regulation, the
answers to two of the subsidiary questions posed in Geier apply di
rectly here. Thus, the statute’s express pre-emption clause cannot
pre-empt the common-law tort action here; but neither can its saving
clause foreclose or limit the operation of ordinary conflict pre-emption
principles. The Court consequently turns to Geier’s third subsidiary

