2

WILLIAMSON v. MAZDA MOTOR OF AMERICA, INC.
Syllabus
question, whether, in fact, the state tort action conflicts with the fed
eral regulation. Pp. 3–5.
(b) Under ordinary conflict pre-emption principles a state law that
“stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment” of a federal law is pre
empted. Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U. S. 52, 67. In Geier, the state
law stood as an obstacle to the accomplishment of a significant fed
eral regulatory objective, namely, giving manufacturers a choice
among different kinds of passive restraint systems. This conclusion
was supported by the regulation’s history, the agency’s contempora
neous explanation, and the Government’s current understanding of
the regulation. The history showed that the Department of Trans
portation (DOT) had long thought it important to leave manufactur
ers with a choice of systems. DOT’s contemporaneous explanation of
the regulation made clear that manufacturer choice was an impor
tant means for achieving DOT’s basic objectives. It phased in passive
restraint requirements to give manufacturers time to improve airbag
technology and develop better systems; it worried that requiring air
bags would cause a public backlash; and it was concerned about air
bag safety and cost. Finally, the Government’s current understand
ing was that a tort suit insisting upon airbag use would “ ‘ “stan[d] as
an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of these objec
tives.” ’ ” 529 U. S., at 883. Pp. 5–8.
(c) Like the regulation in Geier, the instant regulation leaves the
manufacturer with a choice, and the tort suit here would restrict that
choice. But in contrast to Geier, the choice here is not a significant
regulatory objective. The regulation’s history resembles the history
of airbags to some degree. DOT rejected a regulation requiring lap
and-shoulder belts in rear seats in 1984. But by 1989, changed cir
cumstances led DOT to require manufacturers to install lap-and
shoulder belts for rear outer seats but to retain a manufacturer
choice for rear inner seats. Its reasons for doing so differed consid
erably from its 1984 reasons for permitting a choice of passive re
straint. It was not concerned about consumer acceptance; it thought
that lap-and-shoulder belts would increase safety and did not pose
additional safety risks; and it was not seeking to use the regulation to
spur development of alternative safety devices. Instead, DOT
thought that the requirement would not be cost effective. That fact
alone cannot show that DOT sought to forbid common-law tort suits.
For one thing, DOT did not believe that costs would remain frozen.
For another, many federal safety regulations embody a cost
effectiveness judgment. To infer pre-emptive intent from the mere
existence of such a cost-effectiveness judgment would eliminate the
possibility that the agency seeks only to set forth a minimum stan
dard. Finally, the Solicitor General represents that DOT’s regulation

