4

WILLIAMSON v. MAZDA MOTOR OF AMERICA, INC.
THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

more plainly, the question is whether the regulators really
wanted manufacturers to have a choice or did not really
want them to have a choice but gave them one anyway.
To answer that question, the majority engages in a
“freewheeling, extratextual, and broad evaluatio[n] of the
‘purposes and objectives’ ” of FMVSS 208. Wyeth, supra, at
___ (slip op., at 23) (opinion of THOMAS, J.). The Court
wades into a sea of agency musings and Government
litigating positions and fishes for what the agency may
have been thinking 20 years ago when it drafted the rele
vant provision. After scrutinizing the 1989 Federal Regis
ter, a letter written in 1994, and the Solicitor General’s
present-day assurances, the Court finds that Department
of Transportation liked the idea of lap-and-shoulder seat
belts in all seats, but did not require them, primarily for
cost-efficiency reasons and also because of some concern
for ingress-egress around the belt mounts. Ante, at 8–11.
From all of this, the majority determines that although
the regulators specifically and intentionally gave manu
facturers a choice between types of seatbelts, that choice
was not a “significant regulatory objective” and so does not
pre-empt state tort lawsuits.
That the Court in Geier reached an opposite conclusion
reveals the utterly unconstrained nature of purposes-and
objectives pre-emption. There is certainly “considerable
similarity between this case and Geier.” Ante, at 2. Just
as in this case, Geier involved a choice offered to car
manufacturers in FMVSS 208: whether to install airbags.
Ante, at 8. And just as in this case, the Court in Geier
relied on “history, the agency’s contemporaneous explana
tion, and the Government’s current understanding” to
determine the significance of that choice. Ante, at 7–8.
Yet the Geier Court concluded that “giving auto manufac
turers a choice among different kinds of passive restraint
devices was a significant objective of the federal regula
tion,” ante, at 6, and thus found the Geiers’ lawsuit pre

