4

WILLIAMSON v. MAZDA MOTOR OF AMERICA, INC.
Opinion of the Court

federal statutes”).
We divided this basic pre-emption question into three
subsidiary questions. 529 U. S., at 867. First, we asked
whether the statute’s express pre-emption provision pre
empted the state tort suit. That statutory clause says that
“no State” may “establish, or . . . continue in effect . . . any
safety standard applicable to the same aspect of perform
ance” of a motor vehicle or item of equipment “which is not
identical to the Federal standard.” 15 U. S. C. §1392(d)
(1988 ed.) (emphasis added). We had previously held that
a word somewhat similar to “standard,” namely, “require
ments” (found in a similar statute) included within its
scope state “common-law duties,” such as duties created by
state tort law. Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr, 518 U. S. 470, 502–
503 (1996) (plurality opinion); id., at 503–505 (BREYER, J.,
concurring in part and concurring in judgment); id., at
509–512 (O’Connor, J., concurring in part and dissenting
in part). But we nonetheless held that the state tort suit
in question fell outside the scope of this particular pre
emption clause. That is primarily because the statute also
contains a saving clause, which says that “[c]ompliance
with” a federal safety standard “does not exempt any
person from any liability under common law.” 15 U. S. C.
§1397(k) (emphasis added). Since tort law is ordinarily
“common law,” we held that “the presence of the saving
clause,” makes clear that Congress intended state tort
suits to fall outside the scope of the express pre-emption
clause. Geier, 529 U. S., at 868.
Second, we asked the converse question: The saving
clause at least removes tort actions from the scope of the
express pre-emption clause. Id., at 869. But does it do
more? Does it foreclose or limit “the operation of ordinary
pre-emption principles insofar as those principles instruct
us to read” federal statutes as pre-empting state laws
(including state common-law standards) that “actually
conflict” with the federal statutes (or related regulations)?

