Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

explained that it intended its phasing period partly to give
manufacturers time to improve airbag technology and to
develop “other, better” passive restraint systems. Geier,
529 U. S., at 879. DOT further explained that it had
rejected an “ ‘all airbag’ ” system. Ibid. It was worried
that requiring airbags in most or all vehicles would cause
a public backlash, like the backlash against interlock
devices. Ibid. DOT also had concerns about the safety of
airbags, for they could injure out-of-place occupants, par
ticularly children. Id., at 877–878. And, given the cost of
airbags, vehicle owners might not replace them when
necessary, leaving occupants without passive protection.
Ibid. The regulation therefore “deliberately sought vari
ety—a mix of several different passive restraint systems.”
Id., at 878. DOT hoped that this mix would lead to better
information about the devices’ comparative effectiveness
and to the eventual development of “alternative, cheaper,
and safer passive restraint systems.” Id., at 879.
Finally, the Solicitor General told us that a tort suit that
insisted upon use of airbags, as opposed to other federally
permissible passive restraint systems, would “stan[d] as
an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of these
objectives.” Id., at 883 (quoting Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae in Geier v. American Honda Motor Co.,
O. T. 1999, No. 98–1811, pp. 25–26 (hereinafter United
States Brief in Geier) (internal quotation marks omitted)).
And we gave weight to the Solicitor General’s view in light
of the fact that it “ ‘embodie[d] the Secretary’s policy judg
ment that safety would best be promoted if manufacturers
installed alternative protection systems in their fleets
rather than one particular system in every car.’ ” 529
U. S., at 881 (quoting United States Brief in Geier 25–26).
Taken together, this history, the agency’s contempora
neous explanation, and the Government’s current under
standing of the regulation convinced us that manufacturer
choice was an important regulatory objective. And since

