8

BOBBY v. DIXON
Per Curiam

ing a confession, a suspect would hardly think he had a
genuine right to remain silent, let alone persist in so
believing once the police began to lead him over the same
ground again.” 542 U. S., at 613; see also id., at 615 (de­
tailing a “series of relevant facts that bear on whether
Miranda warnings delivered midstream could be effective
enough to accomplish their object”). JUSTICE KENNEDY
concurred in the judgment, noting he “would apply a
narrower test applicable only in the infrequent case . . . in
which the two-step interrogation technique was used in a
calculated way to undermine the Miranda warning.” Id.,
at 622.
In this case, no two-step interrogation technique of the
type that concerned the Court in Seibert undermined the
Miranda warnings Dixon received. In Seibert, the sus­
pect’s first, unwarned interrogation left “little, if anything,
of incriminating potential left unsaid,” making it “unnatu­
ral” not to “repeat at the second stage what had been said
before.” 542 U. S., at 616–617 (plurality opinion). But in
this case Dixon steadfastly maintained during his first,
unwarned interrogation that he had “[n]othing whatso­
ever” to do with Hammer’s disappearance. App. to Pet. for
Cert. 186a. Thus, unlike in Seibert, there is no concern
here that police gave Dixon Miranda warnings and then
led him to repeat an earlier murder confession, because
there was no earlier confession to repeat. Indeed, Dixon
contradicted his prior unwarned statements when he
confessed to Hammer’s murder. Nor is there any evidence
that police used Dixon’s earlier admission to forgery to
induce him to waive his right to silence later: Dixon de­
clared his desire to tell police what happened to Hammer
before the second interrogation session even began. As the
Ohio Supreme Court reasonably concluded, there was
simply “no nexus” between Dixon’s unwarned admission to
forgery and his later, warned confession to murder. 101
Ohio St. 3d, at 333, 805 N. E. 2d, at 1051.

