Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Per Curiam

Although “it is undisputed that the testing” Dr. Dudley
recommended “could have easily been performed,” 490
F. Supp. 2d, at 1322, and that Jefferson’s attorneys pos
sessed police reports and hospital records recounting his
head injury, id., at 1323, the attorneys did not have Jef
ferson tested. At sentencing, they presented only testi
mony from two prison guards, who stated that Jefferson
was an unproblematic inmate, and from three members of
Jefferson’s family, who testified that he is a “responsible,
generous, gentle, and kind” person and “a good father.”
570 F. 3d, at 1290–1291. And while Jefferson’s mother
briefly mentioned the car accident, “she was not ques
tioned and did not offer any testimony regarding the
impact, if any, that the accident had on him.” Id., at 1291.
Thus, “[a]s far as the jury knew, Jefferson did not suffer
from brain damage or neurological impairment; he had no
organic disorders”; and “his emotional stability, impulse
control, and judgment were perfectly normal.” Id., at 1311
(Carnes, J., dissenting).
Jefferson sought habeas relief in state court, arguing
that his two trial attorneys unreasonably failed to pursue
brain-damage testing. In response, the trial attorneys
testified that they did not pursue such testing because,
after delivering his formal written report, Dr. Dudley later
told them that further investigation “ ‘may be a waste of
time because the rest of [his] report’ ” had “ ‘said that
[Jefferson] was non psychotic.’ ” 570 F. 3d, at 1295 (quot
ing testimony). Dr. Dudley did not testify in person at the
hearing, but he submitted a sworn affidavit denying that
he had ever made such statements. He said “it had al
ways been his expert opinion ‘that neuropsychological
testing was necessary’ ” and that when he wrote as much
in his formal report “he ‘meant it.’ ” Id., at 1312 (Carnes,
J., dissenting) (quoting affidavit). He added, “ ‘I never,
before or after that report, suggested to [Jefferson’s attor
neys] that such an evaluation was not necessary or that it

