2

JEFFERSON v. UPTON
Per Curiam

that, as a result of his head injury, Jefferson has “perma
nent brain damage” that “causes abnormal behavior” over
which he “has no or substantially limited control.” 490
F. Supp. 2d, at 1321–1322. According to these experts,
Jefferson’s condition causes “ ‘emotional dullness,’ ” “ ‘rest
less or aggressive characteristics,’ ” “ ‘impulsiveness,’ ”
“ ‘temper outbursts,’ ” “ ‘markedly diminished impulse
control,’ ” “ ‘impaired social judgment,’ ” and “ ‘transient
outbursts of rage which are totally inconsistent with his
normal behavioral pattern.’ ” Id., at 1322, 1327.
The experts further testified that Jefferson’s “ ‘severe
cognitive disabilities’ ” “ ‘profoundly alter’ ” his “ ‘ability to
plan and coordinate his actions, to be aware of the conse
quences of his behavior, and to engage in premeditated or
intentional acts.’ ” Id., at 1327. But they testified he is
neither psychotic nor retarded. Id., at 1319. Thus, they
said, to a lay observer or even to a professional psycholo
gist, Jefferson does not outwardly appear mentally im
paired. Indeed, according to the experts, “ ‘the behavior
that may result from’ ” his condition “ ‘could, without the
administration of proper testing, be mistaken for voli
tional.’ ” Id., at 1322.
Jefferson faced a death sentence for killing his co
worker while the two men were fishing. Id., at 1271–1272.
Prior to trial, he was examined by a psychologist named
Dr. Gary Dudley, who prepared a formal report in which
he concluded that Jefferson’s mental deficiencies do not
impair “ ‘his judgment or decision-making capacity.’ ” 570
F. 3d, at 1294 (quoting report). But Dr. Dudley’s report
included a caveat: “ ‘One possibility that could not be
explored because of [Jefferson’s] incarceration has to do
with the sequelae,’ ” i.e., pathologies, related to a “ ‘head
injury experienced during childhood.’ ” Ibid. “ ‘In my
opinion,’ ” he wrote, “ ‘it would be worthwhile to conduct
neuropsychological evaluation of this individual to rule out
an organic etiology,’ ” i.e., to rule out brain damage. Ibid.

