4

WETZEL v. LAMBERT
Per Curiam

(2011). The Third Circuit concluded that it was “patently
unreasonable” for the Pennsylvania Supreme Court to
presume that whenever a witness is impeached in one
manner, any other impeachment evidence would be immaterial. Id., at 134. According to the Third Circuit, the
notation that Jackson had identified Woodlock as a “codefendant” would have “opened an entirely new line of
impeachment” because the prosecutor at trial had relied
on the fact that Jackson had consistently named Lambert
as the third participant in the robbery. Id., at 135. The
Commonwealth petitioned for certiorari.
The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of
1996 (AEDPA) precludes a federal court from granting a
writ of habeas corpus to a state prisoner unless the state
court’s adjudication of his claim “resulted in a decision
that was contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application of, clearly established Federal law, as determined by
the Supreme Court of the United States.” 28 U. S. C.
§2254(d)(1). “Under §2254(d), a habeas court must determine what arguments or theories supported . . . the state
court’s decision; and then it must ask whether it is possible fairminded jurists could disagree that those arguments
or theories are inconsistent with the holding in a prior
decision of this Court.” Harrington v. Richter, 562 U. S.
___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 12).
In this case, however, the Third Circuit overlooked the
determination of the state courts that the notations were,
as the District Court put it, “not exculpatory or impeaching” but instead “entirely ambiguous.” App. to Pet. for
Cert. 34, 36. Instead, the Third Circuit focused solely on
the alternative ground that any impeachment value that
might have been obtained from the notations would have
been cumulative. If the conclusion in the state courts
about the content of the document was reasonable—not
necessarily correct, but reasonable—whatever those courts
had to say about cumulative impeachment evidence would

