Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Per Curiam

be beside the point. The failure of the Third Circuit even
to address the “ambiguous” nature of the notations, and
the “speculat[ive]” nature of Lambert’s reading of them, is
especially surprising, given that this was the basis of the
District Court ruling. Id., at 36.*
The Court of Appeals ordered that Lambert, convicted of
capital murder nearly 30 years ago, be set free unless the
Commonwealth retried him within 120 days. It did so
because of a police activity sheet noting that Jackson had
identified Woodlock as a “co-defendant,” and bearing other
information associating the sheet with the Prince’s Lounge
robbery. The Court of Appeals, however, failed to address
the state court ruling that the reference to Woodlock was
ambiguous and any connection to the Prince’s Lounge
robbery speculative. That ruling—on which we do not now
opine—may well be reasonable, given that (1) the activity
sheet did not explicitly link Woodlock to the Prince’s
Lounge robbery, (2) Jackson had committed a dozen other
such robberies, (3) Jackson was being held on several
——————
* The dissent emphasizes that the activity sheet was prepared for the
investigation into the Prince’s Lounge crime. Post, at 1 (opinion of
BREYER, J.). No one disputes that. The ambiguity at issue concerns
whether Jackson’s statement referred to that crime, or one of his many
others. The dissent also finds “no suggestion” that the state courts
believed Jackson’s reference to Woodlock “contained the argued ambiguity.” Post, at 3. The Pennsylvania Supreme Court, however, recognized the Commonwealth’s argument that Jackson could have named
Woodlock as a codefendant in some other robbery, and concluded that
“the Commonwealth accurately notes that the police must not have had
reason to consider Woodlock a potential codefendant in this case as his
name is not mentioned anywhere else in the police investigation files.”
Commonwealth v. Lambert, 584 Pa. 461, 473, 884 A. 2d 848, 855 (2005).
The only state court ruling the Third Circuit addressed—the conclusion
that any impeachment evidence would have been cumulative—was one
the state court introduced with “[m]oreover,” confirming that it was an
alternative basis for its decision. Ibid. And the District Court certainly
understood the state court decisions to have considered the reference
ambiguous. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 36.

