Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

BREYER, J., dissenting

files.” Ibid. There is no suggestion that the notation
contained the argued ambiguity.
Finally, the Circuit questioned the strength of the case
against Lambert. See Lambert v. Beard, 633 F. 3d 126,
135–136 (CA3 2011). It pointed out that the case against
Lambert was largely based on Jackson’s testimony, explaining that “without Jackson’s statements to the police,
the Commonwealth could not have indicted Lambert on
these charges.” Id., at 131. Yet Jackson had made “four
prior inconsistent statements to the police about who did
what and who said what on the night in question,” and he
had admitted that his goal in testifying was “to save himself from a death sentence.” Ibid. The Circuit could not
“help but observe that the evidence is very strong that
Reese, not Lambert, was the shooter, even assuming that
Lambert (and not Jackson, as two of the barmaids testified) was in the Prince’s Lounge that night.” Id., at 135.
The Circuit stated: “One wonders how the Commonwealth
could have based this case of first-degree murder on a
Bernard Jackson.” Id., at 131. These statements suggest
that the Commonwealth’s case against Lambert was
unusually weak. If the Commonwealth was wrong, an
innocent man has spent almost 30 years in prison under
sentence of death for a crime he did not commit.
We do not normally consider questions of the type presented here, namely fact-specific questions about whether
a lower court properly applied the well-established legal
principles that it sets forth in its opinion. See Kyles v.
Whitley, 514 U. S. 419, 460 (1995) (SCALIA, J., dissenting)
(An “intensely fact-specific case in which the court below
unquestionably applied the correct rule of law and did not
unquestionably err” is “precisely the type of case in which
we are most inclined to deny certiorari”). And, for the
reasons I have stated, I believe the Court is ill advised to
grant certiorari in this case.
I would deny the Commonwealth’s petition for a writ of
certiorari.

