2

WETZEL v. LAMBERT
BREYER, J., dissenting

. . . ‘ambiguous.’ ” Ante, at 4 (quoting the Federal District
Court, App. to Pet. for Cert. 34, 36 (emphasis added)).
There were no such state court “determination[s].” Ante,
at 4. Rather, the state trial court wrote that the notation
was not material for Brady purposes only because “Jackson was comprehensively impeached” at trial and “it is not
reasonable to believe that Jackson’s further inconsistency
found only in a police activity sheet and not in any of his
statements to police would have caused the jury to discredit him.” Record 228 (emphasis added). As the italicized words make clear, if the trial court expressed any
view about ambiguity, it thought that the police notation
was not ambiguous.
The Pennsylvania Supreme Court did point out that the
Commonwealth argued that the document was “ ‘ambiguously worded.’ ” Commonwealth v. Lambert, 584 Pa.
461, 472, 884 A. 2d 848, 855 (2005). But the court did
not adopt this rationale. Rather, it found the document
not material with respect to impeachment because “[a]ny
additional impeachment of Jackson arising from a police
notation would have been cumulative.” Id., at 473, 884
A. 2d, at 856. The Third Circuit disagreed with the state
courts in respect to this last-mentioned holding. But this
Court does not take issue with the Third Circuit on this
point. The Court points out, instead, that the Pennsylvania Supreme Court used the word “ ‘speculative.’ ” Ante, at
3. But in context it is clear that the court used that word
to refer to Lambert’s claim that the notation showed that
he was innocent. With respect to that claim (not at issue
here), the court wrote: “[Lambert’s] claim that Jackson’s
reference to Woodlock automatically means that someone
other than himself committed the shootings and robbery
is purely speculative at best.” 584 Pa., at 473, 884 A. 2d,
at 855. And it supported the “speculative” nature of the
innocence claim by pointing out that Woodlock’s name “is
not mentioned anywhere else in the police investigation

