Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

B
The “broader context of the statute as a whole,” specifi
cally the adjacent definition of “violent felony,” confirms
this interpretation. Robinson, supra, at 341. ACCA de
fines “violent felony” in part as a crime that “has as an
element the use, attempted use, or threatened use of
physical force against the person of another” or “is bur
glary, arson, or extortion, involves the use of explosives, or
otherwise involves conduct that presents a serious poten
tial risk of physical injury to another.” §924(e)(2)(B) (em
phasis added).
Despite Congress’ use of present tense in that definition,
when determining whether a defendant was convicted of a
“violent felony,” we have turned to the version of state law
that the defendant was actually convicted of violating. In
Taylor v. United States, 495 U. S. 575 (1990), the Court
held that whether Taylor’s 1963 and 1971 convictions were
for a crime that “is burglary” depended on the “former
Missouri statutes defining second-degree burglary” that
“were the bases for Taylor’s prior convictions.” Id., at 602;
see id., at 578, n. 1 (noting a subsequent change in state
law, but relying on the burglary statutes in force “[i]n
those years” in which Taylor was convicted). Similarly, in
James v. United States, 550 U. S. 192 (2007), this Court
looked to the versions of Florida’s burglary and criminal
attempt statutes that were in effect “at the time of James’
[1993 state] conviction.” Id., at 197; see ibid. (quoting the
1993 versions of the Florida statutes). The present-tense
verbs in the definition of “violent felony” did not persuade
us to look anywhere other than the law under which the
defendants were actually convicted to determine the ele
ments of their offenses.
Having repeatedly looked to the historical statute of
conviction in the context of violent felonies, we see no
reason to interpret “serious drug offenses” in the adjacent
section of the same statute any differently. In both defini

