(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MCNEILL v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–5258. Argued April 25, 2011—Decided June 6, 2011
Under the Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA), a felon unlawfully in
possession of a firearm, 18 U. S. C. §922(g)(1), is subject to a 15-year
minimum prison sentence if he has three prior convictions for a “vio
lent felony” or “serious drug offense.” As relevant here, a “serious
drug offense” is defined as “an offense under State law . . . , for which
a maximum term of imprisonment of ten years or more is prescribed
by law,” §924(e)(2)(A)(ii). In sentencing petitioner McNeill for violat
ing §922(g), the District Court determined that he qualified for
ACCA’s sentencing enhancement based in part on six prior North
Carolina drug trafficking convictions. When McNeill committed
those crimes, each carried a 10-year maximum sentence, which
McNeill in fact received. However, because the State later reduced
the maximum sentence for those offenses to fewer than 10 years,
McNeill argued that none of his six prior convictions were for “serious
drug offenses” within the meaning of §924(e)(2)(A)(ii). The District
Court rejected McNeill’s request that it look to current state law and
instead relied on the 10-year maximum sentence that applied at the
time he committed his state offenses. The Fourth Circuit affirmed.
Held:
1. A federal sentencing court must determine whether “an offense
under State law” is a “serious drug offense” by consulting the “maxi
mum term of imprisonment” applicable to a defendant’s prior state
drug offense at the time of the defendant’s conviction for that offense.
§924(e)(2)(A)(ii). Pp. 3–7.
(a) ACCA’s plain text requires this result by mandating that the
court determine whether a “previous conviction” was for a serious
drug offense. The only way to answer this backward-looking question
is to consult the law that applied at the time of that conviction.

