2

PHILIP MORRIS USA INC. v. SCOTT
Opinion in Chambers

A single Justice has authority to enter such a stay, 28
U. S. C. §2101(f), but the applicant bears a heavy burden.
It is our settled practice to grant a stay only when three
conditions are met: First, there must be a reasonable
probability that certiorari will be granted (or probable
jurisdiction noted). Second, there must be a significant
possibility that the judgment below will be reversed. And
third, assuming the applicant’s position on the merits is
correct, there must be a likelihood of irreparable harm if
the judgment is not stayed. Barnes v. E-Systems, Inc.
Group Hospital Medical & Surgical Ins. Plan, 501 U. S.
1301, 1302 (1991) (SCALIA, J., in chambers). I conclude
that this standard is met.
Applicants complain of many violations of due process,
including (among others) denial of the opportunity to
cross-examine the named representatives of the class,
factually unsupported estimations of the number of class
members entitled to relief, and constant revision of the
legal basis for the plaintiffs’ claim during the course of
litigation. Even though the judgment that is the alleged
consequence of these claimed errors is massive—more
than $250 million—I would not be inclined to believe that
this Court would grant certiorari to consider these fact
bound contentions that may have no effect on other cases.
But one asserted error in particular (and perhaps some
of the others as well) implicates constitutional constraints
on the allowable alteration of normal process in class
actions. This is a fraud case, and in Louisiana the tort of
fraud normally requires proof that the plaintiff detrimen
tally relied on the defendant’s misrepresentations. 949
So. 2d, at 1277. Accordingly, the Court of Appeal indi
cated that members of the plaintiff class who wish to seek
individual damages, rather than just access to smoking
cessation measures, would have to establish their own
reliance on the alleged distortions. Ibid. But the Court of
Appeal held that this element need not be proved insofar

