Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion in Chambers

as the class seeks payment into a fund that will benefit
individual plaintiffs, since the defendants are guilty of a
“distort[ion of] the entire body of public knowledge” on
which the “class as a whole” has relied. Id., at 1277–1278.
Thus, the court eliminated any need for plaintiffs to prove,
and denied any opportunity for applicants to contest, that
any particular plaintiff who benefits from the judgment
(much less all of them) believed applicants’ distortions and
continued to smoke as a result.
Applicants allege that this violates their due-process
right to “an opportunity to present every available de
fense.” Lindsey v. Normet, 405 U. S. 56, 66 (1972) (inter
nal quotation marks omitted) (quoting American Surety
Co. v. Baldwin, 287 U. S. 156, 168 (1932)). Respondents
concede that due process requires such an opportunity, but
they contend that the intermediate state court’s pro
nouncement means that, as a matter of Louisiana’s sub
stantive law, applicants have no nonreliance defense.
That response may ultimately prove persuasive, but at
this stage it serves to describe the issue rather than re
solve it. The apparent consequence of the Court of Ap
peal’s holding is that individual plaintiffs who could not
recover had they sued separately can recover only because
their claims were aggregated with others’ through the
procedural device of the class action.
The extent to which class treatment may constitution
ally reduce the normal requirements of due process is an
important question. National concern over abuse of the
class-action device induced Congress to permit removal of
most major class actions to federal court, see 28 U. S. C.
§1332(d), where they will be subject to the significant
limitations of the Federal Rules. Federal removal jurisdic
tion has not been accorded, however, over many class
actions in which more than two-thirds of the plaintiff class
are citizens of the forum State. See §1332(d)(4). Because
the class here was drawn to include only residents of

