4

PHILIP MORRIS USA INC. v. SCOTT
Opinion in Chambers

Louisiana, this suit typifies the sort of major class action
that often will not be removable, and in which the con
straints of the Due Process Clause will be the only federal
protection. There is no conflict between federal courts of
appeals or between state supreme courts on the principal
issue I have described; but the former seems impossible,
since by definition only state class actions are at issue;
and the latter seems implausible, unless one posits the
unlikely case where the novel approach to class-action
liability is a legislative rather than judicial creation, or the
creation of a lower state court disapproved by the state
supreme court on federal constitutional grounds. This
constitutional issue ought not to be permanently beyond
our review.
Given those considerations, I conclude applicants have
satisfied the prerequisites for a stay. I think it reasonably
probable that four Justices will vote to grant certiorari,
and significantly possible that the judgment below will be
reversed. As for irreparable harm: Normally the mere
payment of money is not considered irreparable, see
Sampson v. Murray, 415 U. S. 61, 90 (1974), but that is
because money can usually be recovered from the person
to whom it is paid. If expenditures cannot be recouped,
the resulting loss may be irreparable. See, e.g., Mori v.
Boilermakers, 454 U. S. 1301, 1303 (1981) (Rehnquist,
J., in chambers). Here it appears that, before this Court
will be able to consider and resolve applicants’ claims, a
substantial portion of the fund established by their pay
ment will be irrevocably expended. Funds spent to pro
vide anti-smoking counseling and devices will not likely be
recoverable; nor, it seems, will the $11,501,928 fee imme
diately payable toward administrative expenses in setting
up the funded program.
That does not end the matter. A stay will not issue
simply because the necessary conditions are satisfied.
Rather, “sound equitable discretion will deny the stay

