12

RANSOM v. FIA CARD SERVICES, N. A.
Opinion of the Court

debtor to the correct box (and associated dollar amount of
deduction) within every table.
This alternative reading of “applicable” fails to comport
with the statute’s text, context, or purpose. As intimated
earlier, supra, at 7–8, Ransom’s interpretation would
render the term “applicable” superfluous. Assume Con
gress had omitted that word and simply authorized a
deduction of “the debtor’s monthly expense amounts”
specified in the Standards. That language, most naturally
read, would direct each debtor to locate the box in every
table corresponding to his location, income, family size, or
number of cars and to deduct the amount stated. In other
words, the language would instruct the debtor to use the
exact approach Ransom urges. The word “applicable” is
not necessary to accomplish that result; it is necessary
only for the different purpose of dividing debtors eligible to
make use of the tables from those who are not. Further,
Ransom’s reading of “applicable” would sever the connec
tion between the means test and the statutory provision it
is meant to implement—the authorization of an allowance
for (but only for) “reasonably necessary” expenses. Ex
penses that are wholly fictional are not easily thought of
as reasonably necessary. And finally, Ransom’s interpre
tation would run counter to the statute’s overall purpose of
ensuring that debtors repay creditors to the extent they
can—here, by shielding some $28,000 that he does not in
fact need for loan or lease payments.
As against all this, Ransom argues that his reading
is necessary to account for the means test’s distinction
between “applicable” and “actual” expenses—more fully
stated, between the phrase “applicable monthly expense
amounts” specified in the Standards and the phrase “ac
tual monthly expenses for . . . Other Necessary Expenses.”
§707(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I) (emphasis added). The latter phrase
enables a debtor to deduct his actual expenses in particu
lar categories that the IRS designates relating mainly to

