4

RANSOM v. FIA CARD SERVICES, N. A.
SCALIA, J., dissenting

§707(b)(2)(A)(ii)(V). Given the clarity of those limitations
to actual outlays, it seems strange for Congress to limit
the car-ownership deduction to the somewhat peculiar
category “cars subject to any amount whatever of out
standing indebtedness” by the mere word “applicable,”
meant as incorporation of a limitation that appears in
instructions to IRS agents.*
I do not find the normal meaning of the text undermined
by the fact that it produces a situation in which a
debtor who owes no payments on his car nonetheless gets
the operating-expense allowance. For the Court’s more
strained interpretation still produces a situation in which
a debtor who owes only a single remaining payment on his
car gets the full allowance. As for the Court’s imagined
horrible in which “a debtor entering bankruptcy might
purchase for a song a junkyard car,” ante, at 17: That is
fairly matched by the imagined horrible that, under the
Court’s scheme, a debtor entering bankruptcy might pur
chase a junkyard car for a song plus a $10 promissory note
payable over several years. He would get the full owner
ship expense deduction.
Thus, the Court’s interpretation does not, as promised,
——————
* The Court protests that I misunderstand its use of the Collection
Financial Standards. Its opinion does not, it says, find them to be
incorporated by the Bankruptcy Code; they simply “reinforc[e] our
conclusion that . . . a debtor seeking to claim this deduction must make
some loan or lease payments.” Ante, at 10. True enough, the opinion
says that the Bankruptcy Code “does not incorporate the IRS’s guide
lines,” but it immediately continues that “courts may consult this
material in interpreting the National and Local Standards” so long as it
is not “at odds with the statutory language.” Ibid. In the present
context, the real-world difference between finding the guidelines
incorporated and finding it appropriate to consult them escapes me,
since I can imagine no basis for consulting them unless Congress meant
them to be consulted, which would mean they are incorporated. And
without incorporation, they are at odds with the statutory language,
which otherwise contains no hint that eligibility for a Car Ownership
deduction requires anything other than ownership of a car.

