8

RANSOM v. FIA CARD SERVICES, N. A.
Opinion of the Court

debtors who qualify for an allowance from those who do
not, it could have omitted the term “applicable” altogether.
Without that word, all debtors would be eligible to claim a
deduction for each category listed in the Standards. Con
gress presumably included “applicable” to achieve a differ
ent result. See Leocal v. Ashcroft, 543 U. S. 1, 12 (2004)
(“[W]e must give effect to every word of a statute wherever
possible”). Interpreting the statute to require a threshold
determination of eligibility ensures that the term “appli
cable” carries meaning, as each word in a statute should.
This reading of “applicable” also draws support from the
statutory context. The Code initially defines a debtor’s
disposable income as his “current monthly income . . . less
amounts reasonably necessary to be expended.” §1325(b)(2)
(emphasis added).
The statute then instructs that
“[a]mounts reasonably necessary to be expended . . . shall
be determined in accordance with” the means test.
§1325(b)(3). Because Congress intended the means test to
approximate the debtor’s reasonable expenditures on
essential items, a debtor should be required to qualify for
a deduction by actually incurring an expense in the rele
vant category. If a debtor will not have a particular kind
of expense during his plan, an allowance to cover that cost
is not “reasonably necessary” within the meaning of the
statute.5
Finally, consideration of BAPCPA’s purpose strengthens
our reading of the term “applicable.” Congress designed
——————
5 This interpretation also avoids the anomalous result of granting
preferential treatment to individuals with above-median income.
Because the means test does not apply to Chapter 13 debtors whose
incomes are below the median, those debtors must prove on a case-by
case basis that each claimed expense is reasonably necessary. See
§§1325(b)(2) and (3). If a below-median-income debtor cannot take a
deduction for a nonexistent expense, we doubt Congress meant to
provide such an allowance to an above-median-income debtor—the very
kind of debtor whose perceived abuse of the bankruptcy system in
spired Congress to enact the means test.

