(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

RANSOM v. FIA CARD SERVICES, N. A., FKA MBNA 

AMERICA BANK, N. A. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–907.

Argued October 4, 2010—Decided January 11, 2011

Chapter 13 of the Bankruptcy Code uses a statutory formula known as
the “means test” to help ensure that debtors who can pay creditors do
pay them. The means test instructs a debtor to determine his “dis
posable income”—the amount he has available to reimburse credi
tors—by deducting from his current monthly income “amounts rea
sonably necessary to be expended” for, inter alia, “maintenance or
support.” 11 U. S. C. §1325(b)(2)(A)(i). For a debtor whose income is
above the median for his State, the means test indentifies which ex
penses qualify as “amounts reasonably necessary to be expended.” As
relevant here, the statute provides that “[t]he debtor’s monthly ex
penses shall be the debtor’s applicable monthly expense amounts
specified under the National Standards and Local Standards, and the
debtor’s actual monthly expenses for the categories specified as Other
Necessary Expenses issued by the Internal Revenue Service [IRS] for
the area in which the debtor resides.” §707(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I).
The Standards are tables listing standardized expense amounts for
basic necessities, which the IRS prepares to help calculate taxpayers’
ability to pay overdue taxes. The IRS also creates supplemental
guidelines known as the “Collection Financial Standards,” which de
scribe how to use the tables and what the amounts listed in them
mean. The Local Standards include an allowance for transportation
expenses, divided into vehicle “Ownership Costs” and vehicle “Oper
ating Costs.” The Collection Financial Standards explain that “Own
ership Costs” cover monthly loan or lease payments on an automo
bile; the expense amounts listed are based on nationwide car
financing data. The Collection Financial Standards further state
that a taxpayer who has no car payment may not claim an allowance

