2

RANSOM v. FIA CARD SERVICES, N. A.
Syllabus
for ownership costs.
When petitioner Ransom filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief, he
listed respondent (FIA) as an unsecured creditor. Among his assets,
Ransom reported a car that he owns free of any debt. In determining
his monthly expenses, he nonetheless claimed a car-ownership deduc
tion of $471, the full amount specified in the “Ownership Costs” table,
as well as a separate $388 deduction for car-operating costs. Based
on his means-test calculations, Ransom proposed a bankruptcy plan
that would result in repayment of approximately 25% of his unse
cured debt. FIA objected on the ground that the plan did not direct
all of Ransom’s disposable income to unsecured creditors. FIA con
tended that Ransom should not have claimed the car-ownership al
lowance because he does not make loan or lease payments on his car.
Agreeing, the Bankruptcy Court denied confirmation of the plan.
The Ninth Circuit Bankruptcy Appellate Panel and the Ninth Circuit
affirmed.

Held: A debtor who does not make loan or lease payments may not take
the car-ownership deduction. Pp. 6–18.
(a) This Court’s interpretation begins with the language of the
Bankruptcy Code, which provides that a debtor may claim only “ap
plicable” expense amounts listed in the Standards. Because the Code
does not define the key word “applicable,” the term carries its ordi
nary meaning of appropriate, relevant, suitable, or fit. What makes
an expense amount “applicable” in this sense is most naturally un
derstood to be its correspondence to an individual debtor’s financial
circumstances. Congress established a filter, permitting a debtor to
claim a deduction from a National or Local Standard table only if
that deduction is appropriate for him. And a deduction is so appro
priate only if the debtor will incur the kind of expense covered by the
table during the life of the plan. Had Congress not wanted to sepa
rate debtors who qualify for an allowance from those who do not, it
could have omitted the term “applicable” altogether. Without that
word, all debtors would be eligible to claim a deduction for each cate
gory listed in the Standards. Interpreting the statute to require a
threshold eligibility determination thus ensures that “applicable”
carries meaning, as each word in a statute should.
This reading draws support from the statute’s context and purpose.
The Code initially defines a debtor’s disposable income as his “cur
rent monthly income . . . less amounts reasonably necessary to be ex
pended.” §1325(b)(2). It then instructs that such reasonably neces
sary amounts “shall be determined in accordance with” the means
test. §1325(b)(3). Because Congress intended the means test to ap
proximate the debtor’s reasonable expenditures on essential items, a
debtor should be required to qualify for a deduction by actually incur

