Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

the means test to measure debtors’ disposable income and,
in that way, “to ensure that [they] repay creditors the
maximum they can afford.” H. R. Rep., at 2. This purpose
is best achieved by interpreting the means test, consistent
with the statutory text, to reflect a debtor’s ability to
afford repayment. Cf. Hamilton, 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op.,
at 14) (rejecting an interpretation of the Bankruptcy Code
that “would produce [the] senseless resul[t]” of “deny[ing]
creditors payments that the debtor could easily make”).
Requiring a debtor to incur the kind of expenses for which
he claims a means-test deduction thus advances
BAPCPA’s objectives.
Because we conclude that a person cannot claim an
allowance for vehicle-ownership costs unless he has some
expense falling within that category, the question in this
case becomes: What expenses does the vehicle-ownership
category cover? If it covers loan and lease payments alone,
Ransom does not qualify, because he has no such expense.
Only if that category also covers other costs associ
ated with having a car would Ransom be entitled to this
deduction.
The less inclusive understanding is the right one: The
ownership category encompasses the costs of a car loan or
lease and nothing more. As noted earlier, the numerical
amounts listed in the “Ownership Costs” table are “base[d]
. . . on the five-year average of new and used car financing
data compiled by the Federal Reserve Board.” App. to
Brief for Respondent 3a. In other words, the sum $471 is
the average monthly payment for loans and leases na
tionwide; it is not intended to estimate other conceivable
expenses associated with maintaining a car. The Stan
dards do account for those additional expenses, but in a
different way: They are mainly the province of the sepa
rate deduction for vehicle “Operating Costs,” which in
clude payments for “[v]ehicle insurance, . . . maintenance,
fuel, state and local registration, required inspection,

