Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

costs. On Ransom’s view, for example, a debtor entering
bankruptcy might purchase for a song a junkyard car—“an
old, rusted pile of scrap metal [that would] si[t] on cinder
blocks in his backyard,” In re Brown, 376 B. R. 601, 607
(Bkrtcy. Ct. SD Tex. 2007)—in order to deduct the $471
car-ownership expense and reduce his payment to credi
tors by that amount. We do not see why Congress would
have preferred that result to the one that worries Ransom.
That is especially so because creditors may well be able to
remedy Ransom’s “one payment left” problem. If car
payments cease during the life of the plan, just as if other
financial circumstances change, an unsecured creditor
may move to modify the plan to increase the amount the
debtor must repay. See 11 U. S. C. §1329(a)(1).
Ransom next contends that denying the ownership
allowance to debtors in his position “sends entirely the
wrong message, namely, that it is advantageous to be
deeply in debt on motor vehicle loans, rather than to pay
them off.” Brief for Petitioner 55. But the choice here is
not between thrifty savers and profligate borrowers, as
Ransom would have it. Money is fungible: The $14,000
that Ransom spent to purchase his Camry outright was
money he did not devote to paying down his credit card
debt, and Congress did not express a preference for one
use of these funds over the other. Further, Ransom’s
argument mistakes what the deductions in the means test
are meant to accomplish. Rather than effecting any broad
federal policy as to saving or borrowing, the deductions
serve merely to ensure that debtors in bankruptcy can
afford essential items. The car-ownership allowance thus
safeguards a debtor’s ability to retain a car throughout the
plan period. If the debtor already owns a car outright, he
has no need for this protection.
Ransom finally argues that a debtor who owns his car
free and clear may need to replace it during the life of the
plan; “[g]ranting the ownership cost deduction to a vehicle

