Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

public transportation.) The Court claims that the tables
“are not self-defining,” and that “[s]ome amount of inter
pretation” is necessary in choosing whether to claim a
deduction at all, for one car, or for two. Ante, at 14–15.
But this problem seems to me more metaphysical than
practical. The point of the statutory language is to entitle
debtors who own cars to an ownership deduction, and I
have little doubt that debtors will be able to choose cor
rectly whether to claim a deduction for one car or for two.
If the meaning attributed to the word by the Court were
intended, it would have been most precise to say “monthly
expense amounts specified under the National Standards
and Local Standards, if applicable for IRS collection pur
poses.” And even if utter precision was too much to ex
pect, it would at least have been more natural to say
“monthly expense amounts specified under the National
Standards and Local Standards, if applicable.” That
would make it clear that amounts specified under those
Standards may nonetheless not be applicable, justifying
(perhaps) resort to some source other than the Standards
themselves to give meaning to the condition. The very
next paragraph of the Bankruptcy Code uses that formu
lation (“if applicable”) to limit to actual expenses the
deduction for care of an elderly or chronically ill household
member: “[T]he debtor’s monthly expenses may include, if
applicable, the continuation of actual expenses paid by the
debtor that are reasonable and necessary” for that pur
pose. 11 U. S. C. §707(b)(2)(A)(ii)(II) (emphasis added).
Elsewhere as well, the Code makes it very clear when
prescribed deductions are limited to actual expenditures.
Section 707(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I) itself authorizes deductions for a
host of expenses—health and disability insurance, for
example—only to the extent that they are “actual . . .
expenses” that are “reasonably necessary.” Additional
deductions for energy are allowed, but again only if they
are “actual expenses” that are “reasonable and necessary.”

