10

RANSOM v. FIA CARD SERVICES, N. A.
Opinion of the Court

parking fees, tolls, [and] driver’s license.” Internal Revenue Manual §§5.15.1.7 and 5.15.1.8 (May 1, 2004),
reprinted in App. to Brief for Respondent 16a, 20a; see
also IRS, Collection Financial Standards (Feb. 19, 2010),
http://www.irs.gov/individuals/article/0,,id=96543,00.html.6
A person who owns a car free and clear is entitled to claim
the “Operating Costs” deduction for all these expenses of
driving—and Ransom in fact did so, to the tune of $338.
But such a person is not entitled to claim the “Ownership
Costs” deduction, because that allowance is for the sepa
rate costs of a car loan or lease.
The Collection Financial Standards—the IRS’s explana
tory guidelines to the National and Local Standards—
explicitly recognize this distinction between ownership
and operating costs, making clear that individuals who
have a car but make no loan or lease payments may claim
only the operating allowance. App. to Brief for Respon
dent 3a; see supra, at 4. Although the statute does not
incorporate the IRS’s guidelines, courts may consult this
material in interpreting the National and Local Stan
dards; after all, the IRS uses those tables for a similar
purpose—to determine how much money a delinquent
taxpayer can afford to pay the Government. The guide
lines of course cannot control if they are at odds with the
statutory language. But here, the Collection Financial
Standards’ treatment of the car-ownership deduction
reinforces our conclusion that, under the statute, a debtor
seeking to claim this deduction must make some loan or
lease payments.7
——————
6 In addition, the IRS has categorized taxes, including those associ
ated with car ownership, as an “Other Necessary Expens[e],” for which
a debtor may take a deduction. See App. to Brief for Respondent 26a;
Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 16, n. 4.
7 Because the dissent appears to misunderstand our use of the Collec
tion Financial Standards, and because it may be important for future
cases to be clear on this point, we emphasize again that the statute

