Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

taxpayers’ health and welfare. Internal Revenue Manual
§5.15.1.10(1), http://www.irs.gov/irm/part5/ irm_05-015
001.html#d0e1381. According to Ransom, “applicable”
cannot mean the same thing as “actual.” Brief for Peti
tioner 40. He thus concludes that “an ‘applicable’ expense
can be claimed [under the means test] even if no ‘actual’
expense was incurred.” Ibid.
Our interpretation of the statute, however, equally
avoids conflating “applicable” with “actual” costs. Al
though the expense amounts in the Standards apply only
if the debtor incurs the relevant expense, the debtor’s out
of-pocket cost may well not control the amount of the
deduction. If a debtor’s actual expenses exceed the
amounts listed in the tables, for example, the debtor may
claim an allowance only for the specified sum, rather than
for his real expenditures.8 For the Other Necessary Ex
pense categories, by contrast, the debtor may deduct his
actual expenses, no matter how high they are.9 Our read
——————
8 The parties and the Solicitor General as amicus curiae dispute the
proper deduction for a debtor who has expenses that are lower than the
amounts listed in the Local Standards. Ransom argues that a debtor
may claim the specified expense amount in full regardless of his out-of
pocket costs. Brief for Petitioner 24–27. The Government concurs with
this view, provided (as we require) that a debtor has some expense
relating to the deduction. See Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae
19–21. FIA, relying on the IRS’s practice, contends to the contrary that
a debtor may claim only his actual expenditures in this circumstance.
Brief for Respondent 12, 45–46 (arguing that the Local Standards
function as caps). We decline to resolve this issue. Because Ransom
incurs no ownership expense at all, the car-ownership allowance is not
applicable to him in the first instance. Ransom is therefore not entitled
to a deduction under either approach.
9 For the same reason, the allowance for “applicable monthly expense
amounts” at issue here differs from the additional allowances that the
dissent cites for the deduction of actual expenditures. See post, at 3–4
(noting allowances for “actual expenses” for care of an elderly or chroni
cally ill household member, §707(b)(2)(A)(ii)(II), and for home energy
costs, §707(b)(2)(A)(ii)(V)).

