14

RANSOM v. FIA CARD SERVICES, N. A.
Opinion of the Court

ing of the means test thus gives full effect to “the distinc
tion between ‘applicable’ and ‘actual’ without taking a
further step to conclude that ‘applicable’ means ‘nonexis
tent.’ ” In re Ross-Tousey, 368 B. R. 762, 765 (Bkrtcy. Ct.
ED Wis. 2007), rev’d, 549 F. 3d 1148 (CA7 2008).
Finally, Ransom’s reading of “applicable” may not even
answer the essential question: whether a debtor may
claim a deduction. “[C]onsult[ing] the table[s] alone” to
determine a debtor’s deduction, as Ransom urges us to do,
Reply Brief for Petitioner 16, often will not be sufficient
because the tables are not self-defining. This case pro
vides a prime example. The “Ownership Costs” table
features two columns labeled “First Car” and “Second
Car.” See supra, at 4. Standing alone, the table does not
specify whether it refers to the first and second cars owned
(as Ransom avers), or the first and second cars for which
the debtor incurs ownership costs (as FIA maintains)—and
so the table does not resolve the issue in dispute.10 See
In re Kimbro, 389 B. R. 518, 533 (Bkrtcy. App. Panel CA6
2008) (Fulton, J., dissenting) (“[O]ne cannot really ‘just
——————
10 The

interpretive problem is not, as the dissent suggests, “whether
to claim a deduction for one car or for two,” post, at 3, but rather
whether to claim a deduction for any car that is owned if the debtor has
no ownership costs. Indeed, if we had to decide this question on the
basis of the table alone, we might well decide that a debtor who does
not make loan or lease payments cannot claim an allowance. The table,
after all, is titled “Ownership Costs”—suggesting that it applies to
those debtors who incur such costs. And as noted earlier, the dollar
amounts in the table represent average automobile loan and lease
payments nationwide (with all other car-related expenses approxi
mated in the separate “Operating Costs” table). See supra, at 9–10.
Ransom himself concedes that not every debtor falls within the terms of
this table; he would exclude, and thus prohibit from taking a deduction,
a person who does not own a car. Brief for Petitioner 33. In like
manner, the four corners of the table appear to exclude an additional
group—debtors like Ransom who own their cars free and clear and so
do not make the loan or lease payments that constitute “Ownership
Costs.”

