Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

listed in the Standards. Whether Ransom may claim the
$471 car-ownership deduction accordingly turns on
whether that expense amount is “applicable” to him.
Because the Code does not define “applicable,” we look
to the ordinary meaning of the term. See, e.g., Hamilton
v. Lanning, 560 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 6). “Ap
plicable” means “capable of being applied: having rele
vance” or “fit, suitable, or right to be applied: appropriate.”
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 105 (2002).
See also New Oxford American Dictionary 74 (2d ed. 2005)
(“relevant or appropriate”); 1 Oxford English Dictionary
575 (2d ed. 1989) (“[c]apable of being applied” or “[f]it or
suitable for its purpose, appropriate”). So an expense
amount is “applicable” within the plain meaning of the
statute when it is appropriate, relevant, suitable, or fit.
What makes an expense amount “applicable” in this
sense (appropriate, relevant, suitable, or fit) is most natu
rally understood to be its correspondence to an individual
debtor’s financial circumstances. Rather than authorizing
all debtors to take deductions in all listed categories,
Congress established a filter: A debtor may claim a deduc
tion from a National or Local Standard table (like “[Car]
Ownership Costs”) if but only if that deduction is appro
priate for him. And a deduction is so appropriate only if
the debtor has costs corresponding to the category covered
by the table—that is, only if the debtor will incur that kind
of expense during the life of the plan. The statute under
scores the necessity of making such an individualized
determination by referring to “the debtor’s applicable
monthly expense amounts,” §707(b)(2)(A)(ii)(I) (emphasis
added)—in other words, the expense amounts applicable
(appropriate, etc.) to each particular debtor. Identifying
these amounts requires looking at the financial situation
of the debtor and asking whether a National or Local
Standard table is relevant to him.
If Congress had not wanted to separate in this way

