2

RANSOM v. FIA CARD SERVICES, N. A.
SCALIA, J., dissenting

collection purposes says nothing about whether they are to
be disregarded for purposes of Chapter 13 of the Bank
ruptcy Code. The Court believes, however, that unless the
IRS’s Collection Financial Standards are imported into the
Local Standards, the word “applicable” would do no work,
violating the principle that “ ‘we must give effect to every
word of a statute wherever possible.’ ” Ante, at 8 (quoting
Leocal v. Ashcroft, 543 U. S. 1, 12 (2004)). I disagree. The
canon against superfluity is not a canon against verbosity.
When a thought could have been expressed more con
cisely, one does not always have to cast about for some
additional meaning to the word or phrase that could have
been dispensed with. This has always been understood. A
House of Lords opinion holds, for example, that in the
phrase “ ‘in addition to and not in derogation of ’ ” the last
part adds nothing but emphasis. Davies v. Powell Duffryn
Associated Collieries, Ltd., [1942] A. C. 601, 607.
It seems to me that is the situation here. To be sure,
one can say “according to the attached table”; but it is
acceptable (and indeed I think more common) to say “ac
cording to the applicable provisions of the attached table.”
That seems to me the fairest reading of “applicable
monthly expense amounts specified under the National
Standards and Local Standards.” That is especially so for
the Ownership Costs portion of the Local Standards,
which had no column titled “No Car.” Here the expense
amount would be that shown for one car (which is all the
debtor here owned) rather than that shown for two cars;
and it would be no expense amount if the debtor owned no
car, since there is no “applicable” provision for that on the
table. For operating and public transportation costs, the
“applicable” amount would similarly be the amount pro
vided by the Local Standards for the geographic region in
which the debtor resides. (The debtor would not first be
required to prove that he actually operates the cars that
he owns, or, if does not own a car, that he actually uses

