Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

by-sovereign, analysis. The question is whether a de
fendant has followed a course of conduct directed at the
society or economy existing within the jurisdiction of a
given sovereign, so that the sovereign has the power to
subject the defendant to judgment concerning that con
duct. Personal jurisdiction, of course, restricts “judicial
power not as a matter of sovereignty, but as a matter of
individual liberty,” for due process protects the individ
ual’s right to be subject only to lawful power. Insurance
Corp., 456 U. S., at 702. But whether a judicial judgment
is lawful depends on whether the sovereign has authority
to render it.
The second principle is a corollary of the first. Because
the United States is a distinct sovereign, a defendant may
in principle be subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of
the United States but not of any particular State. This is
consistent with the premises and unique genius of our
Constitution. Ours is “a legal system unprecedented in
form and design, establishing two orders of government,
each with its own direct relationship, its own privity, its
own set of mutual rights and obligations to the people who
sustain it and are governed by it.” U. S. Term Limits,
Inc. v. Thornton, 514 U. S. 779, 838 (1995) (KENNEDY, J.,
concurring). For jurisdiction, a litigant may have the
requisite relationship with the United States Government
but not with the government of any individual State. That
would be an exceptional case, however. If the defendant is
a domestic domiciliary, the courts of its home State are
available and can exercise general jurisdiction. And if
another State were to assert jurisdiction in an inappropri
ate case, it would upset the federal balance, which posits
that each State has a sovereignty that is not subject to
unlawful intrusion by other States. Furthermore, foreign
corporations will often target or concentrate on particular
States, subjecting them to specific jurisdiction in those
forums.

