8

J. MCINTYRE MACHINERY, LTD. v. NICASTRO
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

That opinion stated: “The ‘substantial connection’ between
the defendant and the forum State necessary for a finding
of minimum contacts must come about by an action of the
defendant purposefully directed toward the forum State.
The placement of a product into the stream of commerce,
without more, is not an act of the defendant purposefully
directed toward the forum State.” Id., at 112 (emphasis
deleted; citations omitted).
Since Asahi was decided, the courts have sought to rec
oncile the competing opinions. But Justice Brennan’s con
currence, advocating a rule based on general notions of
fairness and foreseeability, is inconsistent with the prem
ises of lawful judicial power. This Court’s precedents
make clear that it is the defendant’s actions, not his expec
tations, that empower a State’s courts to subject him to
judgment.
The conclusion that jurisdiction is in the first instance
a question of authority rather than fairness explains, for
example, why the principal opinion in Burnham “con
ducted no independent inquiry into the desirability or
fairness” of the rule that service of process within a State
suffices to establish jurisdiction over an otherwise foreign
defendant. 495 U. S., at 621. As that opinion explained,
“[t]he view developed early that each State had the power
to hale before its courts any individual who could be found
within its borders.” Id., at 610. Furthermore, were gen
eral fairness considerations the touchstone of jurisdiction,
a lack of purposeful availment might be excused where
carefully crafted judicial procedures could otherwise pro
tect the defendant’s interests, or where the plaintiff would
suffer substantial hardship if forced to litigate in a foreign
forum. That such considerations have not been deemed
controlling is instructive. See, e.g., World-Wide Volks
wagen, supra, at 294.
Two principles are implicit in the foregoing. First, per
sonal jurisdiction requires a forum-by-forum, or sovereign

