Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

forum—itself an unexceptional proposition—as where man
ufacturers or distributors “seek to serve” a given State’s
market. Id., at 295. The principal inquiry in cases of
this sort is whether the defendant’s activities manifest
an intention to submit to the power of a sovereign. In
other words, the defendant must “purposefully avai[l] it
self of the privilege of conducting activities within the
forum State, thus invoking the benefits and protections of
its laws.” Hanson, supra, at 253; Insurance Corp., supra,
at 704–705 (“[A]ctions of the defendant may amount to a
legal submission to the jurisdiction of the court”). Some
times a defendant does so by sending its goods rather than
its agents. The defendant’s transmission of goods permits
the exercise of jurisdiction only where the defendant can
be said to have targeted the forum; as a general rule, it is
not enough that the defendant might have predicted that
its goods will reach the forum State.
In Asahi, an opinion by Justice Brennan for four Jus
tices outlined a different approach. It discarded the cen
tral concept of sovereign authority in favor of considera
tions of fairness and foreseeability. As that concurrence
contended, “jurisdiction premised on the placement of a
product into the stream of commerce [without more] is
consistent with the Due Process Clause,” for “[a]s long as a
participant in this process is aware that the final product
is being marketed in the forum State, the possibility of a
lawsuit there cannot come as a surprise.” 480 U. S., at
117 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judg
ment). It was the premise of the concurring opinion that
the defendant’s ability to anticipate suit renders the asser
tion of jurisdiction fair. In this way, the opinion made
foreseeability the touchstone of jurisdiction.
The standard set forth in Justice Brennan’s concurrence
was rejected in an opinion written by Justice O’Connor;
but the relevant part of that opinion, too, commanded the
assent of only four Justices, not a majority of the Court.

