10

J. MCINTYRE MACHINERY, LTD. v. NICASTRO
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

Co., 355 U. S. 220, 222 (1957) (“[T]his Court [has] aban
doned ‘consent,’ ‘doing business,’ and ‘presence’ as the
standard for measuring the extent of state judicial power
over [out-of-state] corporations.”).5
III
This case is illustrative of marketing arrangements for
sales in the United States common in today’s commercial
world.6 A foreign-country manufacturer engages a U. S.
company to promote and distribute the manufacturer’s
products, not in any particular State, but anywhere and
everywhere in the United States the distributor can at
tract purchasers. The product proves defective and in
jures a user in the State where the user lives or works.
Often, as here, the manufacturer will have liability insur
ance covering personal injuries caused by its products.
See Cupp, Redesigning Successor Liability, 1999 U. Ill.
L. Rev. 845, 870–871 (noting the ready availability of
products liability insurance for manufacturers and citing a
study showing, “between 1986 and 1996, [such] insurance
——————
5 But

see ante, at 4–8 (plurality opinion) (maintaining that a forum
may be fair and reasonable, based on its links to the episode in suit, yet
off limits because the defendant has not submitted to the State’s
authority). The plurality’s notion that jurisdiction over foreign corpora
tions depends upon the defendant’s “submission,” ante, at 6, seems
scarcely different from the long-discredited fiction of implied consent.
It bears emphasis that a majority of this Court’s members do not share
the plurality’s view.
6 Last year, the United States imported nearly 2 trillion dollars in
foreign goods. Census Bureau, U. S. International Trade in Goods and
Services (Apr. 2011), p. 1, http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/PressRelease/current_press_release/ft900.pdf (as visited June 24, 2011, and
in Clerk of Court’s case file). Capital goods, such as the metal shear
machine that injured Nicastro, accounted for almost 450 billion dollars
in imports for 2010. Id., at 6. New Jersey is the fourth-largest destina
tion for manufactured commodities imported into the United States,
after California, Texas, and New York. Id., FT–900 Supplement, p. 3.

