Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

BREYER, J., concurring in judgment

Industry Co. v. Superior Court of Cal., Solano Cty., 480
U. S. 102, 111, 112 (1987) (opinion of O’Connor, J.) (requir
ing “something more” than simply placing “a product
into the stream of commerce,” even if defendant is “awar[e]”
that the stream “may or will sweep the product into the
forum State”); id., at 117 (Brennan, J., concurring in part
and concurring in judgment) (jurisdiction should lie where
a sale in a State is part of “the regular and anticipated
flow” of commerce into the State, but not where that sale
is only an “edd[y],” i.e., an isolated occurrence); id., at 122
(Stevens, J., concurring in part and concurring in judg
ment) (indicating that “the volume, the value, and the
hazardous character” of a good may affect the jurisdic
tional inquiry and emphasizing Asahi’s “regular course of
dealing”).
Here, the relevant facts found by the New Jersey Su
preme Court show no “regular . . . flow” or “regular course”
of sales in New Jersey; and there is no “something more,”
such as special state-related design, advertising, advice,
marketing, or anything else. Mr. Nicastro, who here bears
the burden of proving jurisdiction, has shown no specific
effort by the British Manufacturer to sell in New Jersey.
He has introduced no list of potential New Jersey custom
ers who might, for example, have regularly attended trade
shows. And he has not otherwise shown that the British
Manufacturer “purposefully avail[ed] itself of the privilege
of conducting activities” within New Jersey, or that it de
livered its goods in the stream of commerce “with the
expectation that they will be purchased” by New Jersey
users. World-Wide Volkswagen, supra, at 297–298 (inter
nal quotation marks omitted).
There may well have been other facts that Mr. Nicastro
could have demonstrated in support of jurisdiction. And
the dissent considers some of those facts. See post, at 3
(opinion of GINSBURG, J.) (describing the size and scope
of New Jersey’s scrap-metal business). But the plaintiff

