6

J. MCINTYRE MACHINERY, LTD. v. NICASTRO
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

for direction and guidance. Ibid. To achieve McIntyre
UK’s objective, i.e., “to sell [its] machines to customers
throughout the United States,” 399 N. J. Super., at 548,
945 A. 2d, at 97, “the two companies [were acting] closely
in concert with each other,” ibid. McIntyre UK never
instructed its distributor to avoid certain States or regions
of the country; rather, as just noted, the manufacturer
engaged McIntyre America to attract customers “from
anywhere in the United States.” App. 161a.
In sum, McIntyre UK’s regular attendance and exhibi
tions at ISRI conventions was surely a purposeful step to
reach customers for its products “anywhere in the United
States.” At least as purposeful was McIntyre UK’s en
gagement of McIntyre America as the conduit for sales of
McIntyre UK’s machines to buyers “throughout the United
States.” Given McIntyre UK’s endeavors to reach and
profit from the United States market as a whole, Nicas
tro’s suit, I would hold, has been brought in a forum en
tirely appropriate for the adjudication of his claim. He
alleges that McIntyre UK’s shear machine was defectively
designed or manufactured and, as a result, caused injury
to him at his workplace. The machine arrived in Nicas
tro’s New Jersey workplace not randomly or fortuitously,
but as a result of the U. S. connections and distribution
system that McIntyre UK deliberately arranged.3 On
——————
3 McIntyre UK resisted Nicastro’s efforts to determine whether other
McIntyre machines had been sold to New Jersey customers. See id., at
100a–101a. McIntyre did allow that McIntyre America “may have
resold products it purchased from [McIntyre UK] to a buyer in New
Jersey,” id., at 117a, but said it kept no record of the ultimate destina
tion of machines it shipped to its distributor, ibid. A private investiga
tor engaged by Nicastro found at least one McIntyre UK machine, of
unspecified type, in use in New Jersey. Id., at 140a–144a. But McIn
tyre UK objected that the investigator’s report was “unsworn and based
upon hearsay.” Reply Brief 10. Moreover, McIntyre UK maintained, no
evidence showed that the machine the investigator found in New Jersey
had been “sold into [that State].” Ibid.

