6

J. MCINTYRE MACHINERY, LTD. v. NICASTRO
BREYER, J., concurring in judgment

cers) exclusively to a large distributor, who resells a single
item (a coffee mug) to a buyer from a distant State (Ha
waii). I know too little about the range of these or in
between possibilities to abandon in favor of the more
absolute rule what has previously been this Court’s less
absolute approach.
Further, the fact that the defendant is a foreign, rather
than a domestic, manufacturer makes the basic fairness
of an absolute rule yet more uncertain. I am again less
certain than is the New Jersey Supreme Court that the
nature of international commerce has changed so significantly as to require a new approach to personal
jurisdiction.
It may be that a larger firm can readily “alleviate the
risk of burdensome litigation by procuring insurance,
passing the expected costs on to customers, or, if the risks
are too great, severing its connection with the State.”
World-Wide Volkswagen, supra, at 297. But manufactur
ers come in many shapes and sizes. It may be fundamen
tally unfair to require a small Egyptian shirt maker, a
Brazilian manufacturing cooperative, or a Kenyan coffee
farmer, selling its products through international distribu
tors, to respond to products-liability tort suits in virtually
every State in the United States, even those in respect to
which the foreign firm has no connection at all but the sale
of a single (allegedly defective) good. And a rule like the
New Jersey Supreme Court suggests would require every
product manufacturer, large or small, selling to American
distributors to understand not only the tort law of every
State, but also the wide variance in the way courts within
different States apply that law. See, e.g., Dept. of Justice,
Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin, Tort Trials and
Verdicts in Large Counties, 2001, p. 11 (reporting percent
age of plaintiff winners in tort trials among 46 populous
counties, ranging from 17.9% (Worcester, Mass.) to 69.1%
(Milwaukee, Wis.)).

