2

J. MCINTYRE MACHINERY, LTD. v. NICASTRO
Syllabus
gaged in any activities in New Jersey that revealed an intent to in
voke or benefit from the protection of the State’s laws, New Jersey is
without power to adjudge the company’s rights and liabilities, and its
exercise of jurisdiction would violate due process. Pp. 4–12.
(a) Due process protects the defendant’s right not to be coerced ex
cept by lawful judicial power. A court may subject a defendant to
judgment only when the defendant has sufficient contacts with the
sovereign “such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend ‘tra
ditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.’ ” International
Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U. S. 310, 316. Freeform fundamental
fairness notions divorced from traditional practice cannot transform a
judgment rendered without authority into law. As a general rule, the
sovereign’s exercise of power requires some act by which the defen
dant “purposefully avails itself of the privilege of conducting activi
ties within the forum State, thus invoking the benefits and protec
tions of its laws.” Hanson v. Denckla, 357 U. S. 235, 253. In cases
like this one, it is the defendant’s purposeful availment that makes
jurisdiction consistent with “fair play and substantial justice” no
tions. No “stream-of-commerce” doctrine can displace that general
rule for products-liability cases.
The rules and standards for determining state jurisdiction over an
absent party have been unclear because of decades-old questions left
open in Asahi. The imprecision arising from Asahi, for the most part,
results from its statement of the relation between jurisdiction and
the “stream of commerce.” That concept, like other metaphors, has
its deficiencies as well as its utilities. It refers to the movement of
goods from manufacturers through distributors to consumers, yet be
yond that descriptive purpose its meaning is far from exact. A defen
dant’s placement of goods into commerce “with the expectation that
they will be purchased by consumers within the forum State” may
indicate purposeful availment. World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v.
Woodson, 444 U. S. 286, 298. But that does not amend the general
rule of personal jurisdiction. The principal inquiry in cases of this
sort is whether the defendant’s activities manifest an intention to
submit to the power of a sovereign. See, e.g., Hanson, supra, at 253.
In Asahi, Justice Brennan’s concurrence (joined by three other Jus
tices) discarded the central concept of sovereign authority in favor of
fairness and foreseeability considerations on the theory that the de
fendant’s ability to anticipate suit is the touchstone of jurisdiction.
480 U. S., at 117. However, Justice O’Connor’s lead opinion (also for
four Justices) stated that “[t]he ‘substantial connection’ between the
defendant and the forum State necessary for a finding of minimum
contacts must come about by an action of the defendant purposefully
directed toward the forum State.” Id., at 112. Since Asahi, the courts

