6

J. MCINTYRE MACHINERY, LTD. v. NICASTRO
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

teros Nacionales de Colombia, S. A. v. Hall, 466 U. S. 408,
414, and n. 9 (1984). By contrast, those who live or oper
ate primarily outside a State have a due process right not
to be subjected to judgment in its courts as a general
matter.
There is also a more limited form of submission to a
State’s authority for disputes that “arise out of or are con
nected with the activities within the state.” International
Shoe Co., supra, at 319. Where a defendant “purposefully
avails itself of the privilege of conducting activities within
the forum State, thus invoking the benefits and
protections of its laws,” Hanson, supra, at 253, it submits
to the judicial power of an otherwise foreign sovereign to
the extent that power is exercised in connection with the
defendant’s activities touching on the State. In other
words, submission through contact with and activity
directed at a sovereign may justify specific jurisdiction “in
a suit arising out of or related to the defendant’s contacts
with the forum.” Helicopteros, supra, at 414, n. 8; see also
Goodyear, post, at 2.
The imprecision arising from Asahi, for the most part,
results from its statement of the relation between jurisdic
tion and the “stream of commerce.” The stream of com
merce, like other metaphors, has its deficiencies as well as
its utility. It refers to the movement of goods from manu
facturers through distributors to consumers, yet beyond
that descriptive purpose its meaning is far from exact.
This Court has stated that a defendant’s placing goods
into the stream of commerce “with the expectation that
they will be purchased by consumers within the forum
State” may indicate purposeful availment. World-Wide
Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U. S. 286, 298 (1980)
(finding that expectation lacking). But that statement
does not amend the general rule of personal jurisdiction.
It merely observes that a defendant may in an appropriate
case be subject to jurisdiction without entering the

