Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

choice of law”). A sovereign’s legislative authority to
regulate conduct may present considerations different
from those presented by its authority to subject a defen
dant to judgment in its courts. Here the question concerns
the authority of a New Jersey state court to exercise ju
risdiction, so it is petitioner’s purposeful contacts with
New Jersey, not with the United States, that alone are
relevant.
Respondent has not established that J. McIntyre en
gaged in conduct purposefully directed at New Jersey.
Recall that respondent’s claim of jurisdiction centers on
three facts: The distributor agreed to sell J. McIntyre’s
machines in the United States; J. McIntyre officials at
tended trade shows in several States but not in New Jer
sey; and up to four machines ended up in New Jersey. The
British manufacturer had no office in New Jersey; it nei
ther paid taxes nor owned property there; and it neither
advertised in, nor sent any employees to, the State. In
deed, after discovery the trial court found that the “defen
dant does not have a single contact with New Jersey short
of the machine in question ending up in this state.” App.
to Pet. for Cert. 130a. These facts may reveal an intent to
serve the U. S. market, but they do not show that J. McIn
tyre purposefully availed itself of the New Jersey market.
It is notable that the New Jersey Supreme Court ap
pears to agree, for it could “not find that J. McIntyre had a
presence or minimum contacts in this State—in any juris
prudential sense—that would justify a New Jersey court
to exercise jurisdiction in this case.” 201 N. J., at 61, 987
A. 2d, at 582. The court nonetheless held that petitioner
could be sued in New Jersey based on a “stream-of
commerce theory of jurisdiction.” Ibid. As discussed,
however, the stream-of-commerce metaphor cannot super
sede either the mandate of the Due Process Clause or the
limits on judicial authority that Clause ensures. The New
Jersey Supreme Court also cited “significant policy rea

