Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
have sought to reconcile the competing opinions. But Justice Bren
nan’s rule based on general notions of fairness and foreseeability is
inconsistent with the premises of lawful judicial power under this
Court’s precedents. Today’s conclusion that the authority to subject a
defendant to judgment depends on purposeful availment is consistent
with Justice O’Connor’s Asahi opinion. Pp. 4–10.
(b) Nicastro has not established that J. McIntyre engaged in con
duct purposefully directed at New Jersey. The company had no office
in New Jersey; it neither paid taxes nor owned property there; and it
neither advertised in, nor sent any employees to, the State. Indeed,
the trial court found that petitioner did not have a single contact with
the State apart from the fact that the machine in question ended up
there. Neither these facts, nor the three on which Nicastro centered
his jurisdictional claim, show that J. McIntyre purposefully availed
itself of the New Jersey market. Pp. 10–12.
JUSTICE BREYER, joined by JUSTICE ALITO, agreed that the New Jer
sey Supreme Court’s judgment must be reversed, but concluded that
because this case does not present issues arising from recent changes
in commerce and communication, it is unwise to announce a rule of
broad applicability without fully considering modern-day conse
quences. Rather, the outcome of the case is determined by the
Court’s precedents. Pp. 2–7.
(a) Based on the record, respondent Nicastro failed to meet his
burden to demonstrate that it was constitutionally proper to exercise
jurisdiction over petitioner J. McIntyre Machinery, Ltd. (British
Manufacturer). The three primary facts the state high court relied
on do not satisfy due process. None of the Court’s precedents finds
that a single isolated sale, even if accompanied by the kind of sales
effort indicated here, is sufficient. See World-Wide Volkswagen Corp.
v. Woodson, 444 U. S. 286; Asahi Metal Industry Co. v. Superior
Court of Cal., Solano Cty., 480 U. S. 102. Here, the relevant facts
show no “regular . . . flow” or “regular course” of sales in New Jersey,
id., at 117 (Brennan, J., concurring in part and concurring in judg
ment); id., at 122 (Stevens, J., concurring in part and concurring in
judgment); and there is no “something more,” such as special state
related design, advertising, advice, or marketing, id., at 111, 112
(opinion of O’Connor, J.), that would warrant the assertion of juris
diction. Nicastro has shown no specific effort by the British Manu
facturer to sell in New Jersey. And he has not otherwise shown that
the British Manufacturer “ ‘purposefully avail[ed] itself of the privi
lege of conducting activities’ ” within New Jersey, or that it delivered
its goods in the stream of commerce “with the expectation that they
will be purchased” by New Jersey users. World-Wide Volkswagen,
supra, at 297–298. Pp. 2–4.

