Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

“such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend
‘traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.’ ”
International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U. S. 310, 316
(1945) (quoting Milliken v. Meyer, 311 U. S. 457, 463
(1940)). Freeform notions of fundamental fairness di
vorced from traditional practice cannot transform a judg
ment rendered in the absence of authority into law. As a
general rule, the sovereign’s exercise of power requires
some act by which the defendant “purposefully avails itself
of the privilege of conducting activities within the forum
State, thus invoking the benefits and protections of its
laws,” Hanson, 357 U. S., at 253, though in some cases, as
with an intentional tort, the defendant might well fall
within the State’s authority by reason of his attempt to
obstruct its laws. In products-liability cases like this one,
it is the defendant’s purposeful availment that makes
jurisdiction consistent with “traditional notions of fair play
and substantial justice.”
A person may submit to a State’s authority in a number
of ways. There is, of course, explicit consent. E.g., In
surance Corp. of Ireland v. Compagnie des Bauxites de
Guinee, 456 U. S. 694, 703 (1982). Presence within a State
at the time suit commences through service of process is
another example. See Burnham, supra. Citizenship or
domicile—or, by analogy, incorporation or principal place
of business for corporations—also indicates general sub
mission to a State’s powers. Goodyear Dunlop Tires Op
erations, S. A. v. Brown, post, p. __. Each of these exam
ples reveals circumstances, or a course of conduct, from
which it is proper to infer an intention to benefit from and
thus an intention to submit to the laws of the forum State.
Cf. Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz, 471 U. S. 462, 476
(1985). These examples support exercise of the general
jurisdiction of the State’s courts and allow the State to
resolve both matters that originate within the State and
those based on activities and events elsewhere. Helicop

