12

J. MCINTYRE MACHINERY, LTD. v. NICASTRO
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

an example, to require the international seller to defend at
the place its products cause injury?9 Do not litigational
convenience10 and choice-of-law considerations 11 point in
that direction? On what measure of reason and fairness
can it be considered undue to require McIntyre UK to
defend in New Jersey as an incident of its efforts to de
velop a market for its industrial machines anywhere and
everywhere in the United States? 12 Is not the burden on
McIntyre UK to defend in New Jersey fair, i.e., a reason
able cost of transacting business internationally, in com
parison to the burden on Nicastro to go to Nottingham,
England to gain recompense for an injury he sustained
using McIntyre’s product at his workplace in Saddle
Brook, New Jersey?
——————
9 The

plurality objects to a jurisdictional approach “divorced from
traditional practice.” Ante, at 5. But “the fundamental transformation
of our national economy,” this Court has recognized, warrants enlarge
ment of “the permissible scope of state jurisdiction over foreign corpora
tions and other nonresidents.” McGee v. International Life Ins. Co., 355
U. S. 220, 222–223 (1957).
10 See von Mehren & Trautman 1167 (“[C]onsiderations of litigational
convenience, particularly with respect to the taking of evidence, tend
in accident cases to point insistently to the community in which the
accident occurred.”).
11 Historically, “tort cases were governed by the place where the last
act giving rise to a claim occurred—that is, the place of injury.” Bril
mayer 1291–1292. Even as many jurisdictions have modified the
traditional rule of lex loci delicti, the location of injury continues to hold
sway in choice-of-law analysis in tort cases. See generally Whytock,
Myth of Mess? International Choice of Law in Action, 84 N. Y. U.
L. Rev. 719 (2009).
12 The plurality suggests that the Due Process Clause might permit a
federal district court in New Jersey, sitting in diversity and applying
New Jersey law, to adjudicate McIntyre UK’s liability to Nicastro. See
ante, at 10–11. In other words, McIntyre UK might be compelled to
bear the burden of traveling to New Jersey and defending itself there
under New Jersey’s products liability law, but would be entitled to
federal adjudication of Nicastro’s state-law claim. I see no basis in the
Due Process Clause for such a curious limitation.

