Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

country manufacturer enlisting a U. S. distributor to de
velop a market in the United States for the manufac
turer’s products—none of the Court’s decisions tug against
the judgment made by the New Jersey Supreme Court.
McIntyre contends otherwise, citing World-Wide Volks
wagen, and Asahi Metal Industry Co. v. Superior Court of
Cal., Solano Cty., 480 U. S. 102 (1987).
World-Wide Volkswagen concerned a New York car
dealership that sold solely in the New York market, and
a New York distributor who supplied retailers in three
States only: New York, Connecticut, and New Jersey. 444
U. S., at 289. New York residents had purchased an Audi
from the New York dealer and were driving the new vehi
cle through Oklahoma en route to Arizona. On the road in
Oklahoma, another car struck the Audi in the rear, caus
ing a fire which severely burned the Audi’s occupants. Id.,
at 288. Rejecting the Oklahoma courts’ assertion of juris
diction over the New York dealer and distributor, this
Court observed that the defendants had done nothing to
serve the market for cars in Oklahoma. Id., at 295–298.
Jurisdiction, the Court held, could not be based on the
customer’s unilateral act of driving the vehicle to Okla
homa. Id., at 298; see Asahi, 480 U. S., at 109 (opinion of
O’Connor, J.) (World-Wide Volkswagen “rejected the assertion that a consumer’s unilateral act of bringing the
defendant’s product into the forum State was a sufficient
constitutional basis for personal jurisdiction over the
defendant”).
Notably, the foreign manufacturer of the Audi in WorldWide Volkswagen did not object to the jurisdiction of the
Oklahoma courts and the U. S. importer abandoned its
initially stated objection. 444 U. S., at 288, and n. 3. And
most relevant here, the Court’s opinion indicates that an
objection to jurisdiction by the manufacturer or national
distributor would have been unavailing. To reiterate, the
Court said in World-Wide Volkswagen that, when a manu

