Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

BREYER, J., concurring in judgment

Court and urged by respondent and his amici. Under that
view, a producer is subject to jurisdiction for a products
liability action so long as it “knows or reasonably should
know that its products are distributed through a nation
wide distribution system that might lead to those products
being sold in any of the fifty states.” 201 N. J., at 76–77,
987 A. 2d, at 592 (emphasis added). In the context of this
case, I cannot agree.
For one thing, to adopt this view would abandon the
heretofore accepted inquiry of whether, focusing upon the
relationship between “the defendant, the forum, and the
litigation,” it is fair, in light of the defendant’s contacts
with that forum, to subject the defendant to suit there.
Shaffer v. Heitner, 433 U. S. 186, 204 (1977) (emphasis
added). It would ordinarily rest jurisdiction instead upon
no more than the occurrence of a product-based accident in
the forum State. But this Court has rejected the notion
that a defendant’s amenability to suit “travel[s] with the
chattel.” World-Wide Volkswagen, 444 U. S., at 296.
For another, I cannot reconcile so automatic a rule
with the constitutional demand for “minimum contacts”
and “purposefu[l] avail[ment],” each of which rest upon a
particular notion of defendant-focused fairness. Id., at
291, 297 (internal quotation marks omitted). A rule like
the New Jersey Supreme Court’s would permit every State
to assert jurisdiction in a products-liability suit against
any domestic manufacturer who sells its products (made
anywhere in the United States) to a national distributor,
no matter how large or small the manufacturer, no matter
how distant the forum, and no matter how few the number
of items that end up in the particular forum at issue.
What might appear fair in the case of a large manufac
turer which specifically seeks, or expects, an equal-sized
distributor to sell its product in a distant State might
seem unfair in the case of a small manufacturer (say, an
Appalachian potter) who sells his product (cups and sau

