16

J. MCINTYRE MACHINERY, LTD. v. NICASTRO
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

facturer or distributor aims to sell its product to customers
in several States, it is reasonable “to subject it to suit in
[any] one of those States if its allegedly defective [product]
has there been the source of injury.” Id., at 297.
Asahi arose out of a motorcycle accident in California.
Plaintiff, a California resident injured in the accident,
sued the Taiwanese manufacturer of the motorcycle’s tire
tubes, claiming that defects in its product caused the
accident. The tube manufacturer cross-claimed against
Asahi, the Japanese maker of the valve assembly, and
Asahi contested the California courts’ jurisdiction. By the
time the case reached this Court, the injured plaintiff
had settled his case and only the indemnity claim by the
Taiwanese company against the Japanese valve-assembly
manufacturer remained.
The decision was not a close call. The Court had before
it a foreign plaintiff, the Taiwanese manufacturer, and
a foreign defendant, the Japanese valve-assembly maker,
and the indemnification dispute concerned a transaction
between those parties that occurred abroad. All agreed on
the bottom line: The Japanese valve-assembly manufac
turer was not reasonably brought into the California
courts to litigate a dispute with another foreign party over
a transaction that took place outside the United States.
Given the confines of the controversy, the dueling opin
ions of Justice Brennan and Justice O’Connor were hardly
necessary. How the Court would have “estimate[d] . . . the
inconveniences,” see International Shoe, 326 U. S., at 317
(internal quotation marks omitted), had the injured Cali
fornian originally sued Asahi is a debatable question.
Would this Court have given the same weight to the bur
dens on the foreign defendant had those been counterbal
anced by the burdens litigating in Japan imposed on the
local California plaintiff? Cf. Calder v. Jones, 465 U. S.
783, 788 (1984) (a plaintiff’s contacts with the forum “may
be so manifold as to permit jurisdiction when it would not

