Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

STEVENS, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–497
_________________

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC., PETITIONER v.

ANTONIO JACKSON

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[June 21, 2010] 


JUSTICE STEVENS, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG,
JUSTICE BREYER, and JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR join, dissent
ing.
Neither petitioner nor respondent has urged us to adopt
the rule the Court does today: Even when a litigant has
specifically challenged the validity of an agreement to
arbitrate he must submit that challenge to the arbitrator
unless he has lodged an objection to the particular line in
the agreement that purports to assign such challenges to
the arbitrator—the so-called “delegation clause.”
The Court asserts that its holding flows logically from
Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & Conklin Mfg. Co., 388 U. S.
395 (1967), in which the Court held that consideration of a
contract revocation defense is generally a matter for the
arbitrator, unless the defense is specifically directed at the
arbitration clause, id., at 404. We have treated this hold
ing as a severability rule: When a party challenges a
contract, “but not specifically its arbitration provisions,
those provisions are enforceable apart from the remainder
of the contract.”
Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v.
Cardegna, 546 U. S. 440, 446 (2006). The Court’s decision
today goes beyond Prima Paint. Its breezy assertion that
the subject matter of the contract at issue—in this case, an
arbitration agreement and nothing more—“makes no
difference,” ante, at 7, is simply wrong. This written


2

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
STEVENS, J., dissenting

arbitration agreement is but one part of a broader em
ployment agreement between the parties, just as the
arbitration clause in Prima Paint was but one part of a
broader contract for services between those parties. Thus,
that the subject matter of the agreement is exclusively
arbitration makes all the difference in the Prima Paint
analysis.
I
Under the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA), 9 U. S. C.
§§1–16, parties generally have substantial leeway to
define the terms and scope of their agreement to settle
disputes in an arbitral forum. “[A]rbitration is,” after all,
“simply a matter of contract between the parties; it is a
way to resolve those disputes—but only those disputes—
that the parties have agreed to submit to arbitration.”
First Options of Chicago, Inc. v. Kaplan, 514 U. S. 938,
943 (1995). The FAA, therefore, envisions a limited role
for courts asked to stay litigation and refer disputes to
arbitration.
Certain issues—the kind that “contracting parties would
likely have expected a court to have decided”—remain
within the province of judicial review. Howsam v. Dean
Witter Reynolds, Inc., 537 U. S. 79, 83 (2002); see also
Green Tree Financial Corp. v. Bazzle, 539 U. S. 444, 452
(2003) (plurality opinion); AT&T Technologies, Inc. v.
Communications Workers, 475 U. S. 643, 649 (1986).
These issues are “gateway matter[s]” because they are
necessary antecedents to enforcement of an arbitration
agreement; they raise questions the parties “are not likely
to have thought that they had agreed that an arbitrator
would” decide. Howsam, 537 U. S., at 83. Quintessential
gateway matters include “whether the parties have a valid
arbitration agreement at all,” Bazzle, 539 U. S., at 452
(plurality opinion); “whether the parties are bound by a
given arbitration clause,” Howsam, 537 U. S., at 84; and


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., dissenting

“whether an arbitration clause in a concededly binding
contract applies to a particular type of controversy,” ibid.
It would be bizarre to send these types of gateway matters
to the arbitrator as a matter of course, because they raise
a “ ‘question of arbitrability.’ ”1 See, e.g., ibid.; First Op
tions, 514 U. S., at 947.
“[Q]uestion[s] of arbitrability” thus include questions
regarding the existence of a legally binding and valid
arbitration agreement, as well as questions regarding the
scope of a concededly binding arbitration agreement. In
this case we are concerned with the first of these catego
ries: whether the parties have a valid arbitration agree
ment. This is an issue the FAA assigns to the courts.2
Section 2 of the FAA dictates that covered arbitration
agreements “shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable,
save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the
revocation of any contract.” 9 U. S. C. §2. “[S]uch
grounds,” which relate to contract validity and formation,
include the claim at issue in this case, unconscionability.
See Doctor’s Associates, Inc. v. Casarotto, 517 U. S. 681,
687 (1996).
Two different lines of cases bear on the issue of who
decides a question of arbitrability respecting validity, such
as whether an arbitration agreement is unconscionable.
Although this issue, as a gateway matter, is typically for
the court, we have explained that such an issue can be
delegated to the arbitrator in some circumstances. When
——————
1 Although it is not clear from our precedents, I understand “gateway
matters” and “questions of arbitrability” to be roughly synonymous, if
not exactly so. At the very least, the former includes all of the latter.
2 Gateway issues involving the scope of an otherwise valid arbitration
agreement also have a statutory origin. Section 3 of the FAA provides
that “upon being satisfied that the issue involved in such suit . . . is
referable to arbitration under such an agreement,” a court “shall . . .
stay the trial of the action until such arbitration has been had.” 9
U. S. C. §3.


4

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
STEVENS, J., dissenting

the parties have purportedly done so, courts must examine
two distinct rules to decide whether the delegation is
valid.
The first line of cases looks to the parties’ intent. In
AT&T Technologies, we stated that “question[s] of arbi
trability” may be delegated to the arbitrator, so long as the
delegation is clear and unmistakable. 475 U. S., at 649.
We reaffirmed this rule, and added some nuance, in First
Options. Against the background presumption that ques
tions of arbitrability go to the court, we stated that federal
courts should “generally” apply “ordinary state-law princi
ples that govern the formation of contracts” to assess
“whether the parties agreed to arbitrate a certain matter
(including arbitrability).” 514 U. S., at 944. But, we
added, a more rigorous standard applies when the inquiry
is whether the parties have “agreed to arbitrate arbitrabil
ity”: “Courts should not assume that the parties agreed to
arbitrate arbitrability unless there is clear and unmistak
able evidence that they did so.”3 Ibid. (internal quotation
marks and brackets omitted). JUSTICE BREYER’s unani
mous opinion for the Court described this standard as a
type of “revers[e]” “presumption”4—one in favor of a judi
cial, rather than an arbitral, forum. Id., at 945. Clear and
unmistakable “evidence” of agreement to arbitrate arbi
trability might include, as was urged in First Options, a
course of conduct demonstrating assent,5 id., at 946, or, as
——————
3 We

have not expressly decided whether the First Options delegation
principle would apply to questions of arbitrability that implicate §2
concerns, i.e., grounds for contract revocation. I do not need to weigh in
on this issue in order to resolve the present case.
4 It is a “revers[e]” presumption because it is counter to the presump
tion we usually apply in favor of arbitration when the question con
cerns whether a particular dispute falls within the scope of a conced
edly binding arbitration agreement. First Options, 514 U. S., at 944–
945.
5 In First Options we found no clear and unmistakable assent to dele
gate to the arbitrator questions of arbitrability, given the parties’


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., dissenting

is urged in this case, an express agreement to do so. In
any event, whether such evidence exists is a matter for the
court to determine.
The second line of cases bearing on who decides the
validity of an arbitration agreement, as the Court ex
plains, involves the Prima Paint rule. See ante, at 6. That
rule recognizes two types of validity challenges. One type
challenges the validity of the arbitration agreement itself,
on a ground arising from an infirmity in that agreement.
The other challenges the validity of the arbitration agree
ment tangentially—via a claim that the entire contract (of
which the arbitration agreement is but a part) is invalid
for some reason. See Buckeye, 546 U. S., at 444. Under
Prima Paint, a challenge of the first type goes to the court;
a challenge of the second type goes to the arbitrator. See
388 U. S., at 403–404; see also Buckeye, 546 U. S., at 444–
445. The Prima Paint rule is akin to a pleading standard,
whereby a party seeking to challenge the validity of an
arbitration agreement must expressly say so in order to
get his dispute into court.
In sum, questions related to the validity of an arbitra
tion agreement are usually matters for a court to resolve
before it refers a dispute to arbitration. But questions of
arbitrability may go to the arbitrator in two instances: (1)
when the parties have demonstrated, clearly and unmis
takably, that it is their intent to do so; or (2) when the
validity of an arbitration agreement depends exclusively
on the validity of the substantive contract of which it is a
part.
II
We might have resolved this case by simply applying the
——————
conduct. Respondents in that case had participated in the arbitration,
but only to object to proceeding in arbitration and to challenge the
arbitrators’ jurisdiction. That kind of participation—in protest, to
preserve legal claims—did not constitute unmistakable assent to be
bound by the result. Id., at 946–947.


6

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
STEVENS, J., dissenting

First Options rule: Does the arbitration agreement at
issue “clearly and unmistakably” evince petitioner’s and
respondent’s intent to submit questions of arbitrability to
the arbitrator?6 The answer to that question is no. Re
spondent’s claim that the arbitration agreement is uncon
scionable undermines any suggestion that he “clearly” and
“unmistakably” assented to submit questions of arbitrabil
ity to the arbitrator. See Restatement (Second) of Con
tracts §208, Comment d (1979) (“[G]ross inequality of
bargaining power, together with terms unreasonably
favorable to the stronger party, may confirm indications
that the transaction involved elements of deception or
compulsion, or may show that the weaker party had no
meaningful choice, no real alternative, or did not in fact
assent or appear to assent to the unfair terms”); American
Airlines, Inc. v. Wolens, 513 U. S. 219, 249 (1995)
(O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment and dissenting in
part) (“[A] determination that a contract is ‘unconscion
able’ may in fact be a determination that one party did not
intend to agree to the terms of the contract”).7 The fact
——————
6 Respondent

has challenged whether he “meaningfully agreed to the
terms of the form Agreement to Arbitrate, which he contends is proce
durally and substantively unconscionable.” 581 F. 3d 912, 917 (CA9
2009). Even if First Options relates only to “manifestations of intent,”
as the Court states, see ante, at 5–6, n. 1 (emphasis deleted), whether
there has been meaningful agreement surely bears some relation to
whether one party has manifested intent to be bound to an agreement.
7 The question of unconscionability in this case is one of state law.
See, e.g., Perry v. Thomas, 482 U. S. 483, 492, n. 9 (1987). Under
Nevada law, unconscionability requires a showing of “ ‘both procedural
and substantive unconscionability,’ ” but “less evidence of substantive
unconscionability is required in cases involving great procedural
unconscionability.” D. R. Horton, Inc. v. Green, 120 Nev. 549, 553–554,
96 P. 3d 1159, 1162 (2004). I understand respondent to have claimed,
in accord with Nevada law, that the arbitration agreement contained
substantively unconscionable provisions, and was also the product of
procedural unconscionability as a whole. See Brief for Respondent 3
(“[Respondent] argued that the clause is procedurally unconscionable


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

STEVENS, J., dissenting

that the agreement’s “delegation” provision suggests
assent is beside the point, because the gravamen of re
spondent’s claim is that he never consented to the terms in
his agreement.
In other words, when a party raises a good-faith validity
challenge to the arbitration agreement itself, that issue
must be resolved before a court can say that he clearly and
unmistakably intended to arbitrate that very validity
question. This case well illustrates the point: If respon
dent’s unconscionability claim is correct—i.e., if the terms
of the agreement are so one-sided and the process of its
making so unfair—it would contravene the existence of
clear and unmistakable assent to arbitrate the very ques
tion petitioner now seeks to arbitrate. Accordingly, it is
necessary for the court to resolve the merits of respon
dent’s unconscionability claim in order to decide whether
the parties have a valid arbitration agreement under §2.
Otherwise, that section’s preservation of revocation issues
for the Court would be meaningless.
This is, in essence, how I understand the Court of Ap
peals to have decided the issue below. See 581 F. 3d 912,
917 (CA9 2009) (“[W]e hold that where, as here, a party
challenges an arbitration agreement as unconscionable,
and thus asserts that he could not meaningfully assent to
——————
because he was in a position of unequal bargaining power when it was
imposed as a condition of employment”); id., at 3–4 (identifying three
distinct provisions of the agreement that were substantively uncon
scionable); accord, 581 F. 3d, at 917.
Some of respondent’s arguments, however, could be understood as
attacks not on the enforceability of the agreement as a whole but
merely on the fairness of individual contract terms. Such term-specific
challenges would generally be for the arbitrator to resolve (at least so
long as they do not go to the identity of the arbitrator or the ability of a
party to initiate arbitration). Cf. Restatement (Second) of Contracts
§208 (1979) (providing that “a contract or term thereof [may be] uncon
scionable” and that in the latter case “the remainder of the contract
without the unconscionable term” may be enforced).


8

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
STEVENS, J., dissenting

the agreement, the threshold question of unconscionability
is for the court”). I would therefore affirm its judgment,
leaving, as it did, the merits of respondent’s unconscion
ability claim for the District Court to resolve on remand.
III
Rather than apply First Options, the Court takes us
down a different path, one neither briefed by the parties
nor relied upon by the Court of Appeals. In applying
Prima Paint, the Court has unwisely extended a “fantas
tic” and likely erroneous decision. 388 U. S., at 407
(Black, J., dissenting).8
As explained at the outset, see supra, at 3–7, this case
lies at a seeming crossroads in our arbitration jurispru
dence. It implicates cases such as First Options, which
address whether the parties intended to delegate ques
tions of arbitrability, and also those cases, such as Prima
Paint, which address the severability of a presumptively
valid arbitration agreement from a potentially invalid
contract. The question of “Who decides?”—arbitrator or
court—animates both lines of cases, but they are driven by
different concerns. In cases like First Options, we are
concerned with the parties’ intentions. In cases like Prima
Paint, we are concerned with how the parties challenge
the validity of the agreement.
Under the Prima Paint inquiry, recall, we consider
whether the parties are actually challenging the validity
of the arbitration agreement, or whether they are chal
——————
8 Justice Black quite reasonably characterized the Court’s holding in
Prima Paint as “fantastic,” id., at 407 (dissenting opinion), because the
holding was, in his view, inconsistent with the text of §2 of the FAA,
388 U. S., at 412, as well as the intent of the draftsmen of the legisla
tion, id., at 413–416. Nevertheless, the narrow holding in that case has
been followed numerous times, see Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v.
Cardegna, 546 U. S. 440 (2006), and Preston v. Ferrer, 552 U. S. 346
(2008), and, as the Court correctly notes today, neither party has asked
us to revisit those cases, ante, at 6.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

STEVENS, J., dissenting

lenging, more generally, the contract within which an
arbitration clause is nested. In the latter circumstance,
we assume there is no infirmity per se with the arbitration
agreement, i.e., there are no grounds for revocation of the
arbitration agreement itself under §2 of the FAA. Accord
ingly, we commit the parties’ general contract dispute to
the arbitrator, as agreed.
The claim in Prima Paint was that one party would not
have agreed to contract with the other for services had it
known the second party was insolvent (a fact known but
not disclosed at the time of contracting). 388 U. S., at 398.
There was, therefore, allegedly fraud in the inducement of
the contract—a contract which also delegated disputes to
an arbitrator. Despite the fact that the claim raised would
have, if successful, rendered the embedded arbitration
clause void, the Court held that the merits of the dispute
were for the arbitrator, so long as the claim of “fraud in
the inducement” did not go to validity of “the arbitration
clause itself.” Id., at 403 (emphasis added). Because, in
Prima Paint, “no claim ha[d] been advanced by Prima
Paint that [respondent] fraudulently induced it to enter
into the agreement to arbitrate,” and because the arbitra
tion agreement was broad enough to cover the dispute, the
arbitration agreement was enforceable with respect to the
controversy at hand. Id., at 406.
The Prima Paint rule has been denominated as one
related to severability. Our opinion in Buckeye, set out
these guidelines:
“First, as a matter of substantive federal arbitration
law, an arbitration provision is severable from the
remainder of the contract. Second, unless the chal
lenge is to the arbitration clause itself, the issue of the
contract’s validity is considered by the arbitrator in
the first instance.” 546 U. S., at 445–446.
Whether the general contract defense renders the entire


10

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
STEVENS, J., dissenting

agreement void or voidable is irrelevant. Id., at 446. All
that matters is whether the party seeking to present the
issue to a court has brought a “discrete challenge,” Preston
v. Ferrer, 552 U. S. 346, 354 (2008), “to the validity of the
. . . arbitration clause.” Buckeye, 546 U. S., at 449.
Prima Paint and its progeny allow a court to pluck from
a potentially invalid contract a potentially valid arbitra
tion agreement. Today the Court adds a new layer of
severability—something akin to Russian nesting dolls—
into the mix: Courts may now pluck from a potentially
invalid arbitration agreement even narrower provisions
that refer particular arbitrability disputes to an arbitra
tor. See ante, at 6–7. I do not think an agreement to
arbitrate can ever manifest a clear and unmistakable
intent to arbitrate its own validity. But even assuming
otherwise, I certainly would not hold that the Prima Paint
rule extends this far.
In my view, a general revocation challenge to a stand
alone arbitration agreement is, invariably, a challenge to
the “ ‘making’ ” of the arbitration agreement itself, Prima
Paint, 388 U. S., at 403, and therefore, under Prima Paint,
must be decided by the court. A claim of procedural un
conscionability aims to undermine the formation of the
arbitration agreement, much like a claim of unconscion
ability aims to undermine the clear-and-unmistakable
intent requirement necessary for a valid delegation of a
“discrete” challenge to the validity of the arbitration agree
ment itself, Preston, 552 U. S., at 354. Moreover, because
we are dealing in this case with a challenge to an inde
pendently executed arbitration agreement—rather than a
clause contained in a contract related to another subject
matter—any challenge to the contract itself is also, neces
sarily, a challenge to the arbitration agreement.9 They are
——————
9 As respondent asserted in his opposition to petitioner’s motion to
compel arbitration, “the lack of mutuality regarding the type of claims


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

STEVENS, J., dissenting

one and the same.
The Court, however, reads the delegation clause as a
distinct mini-arbitration agreement divisible from the
contract in which it resides—which just so happens also to
be an arbitration agreement. Ante, at 6–7. Although the
Court simply declares that it “makes no difference” that
the underlying subject matter of the agreement is itself an
arbitration agreement, ante, at 7, that proposition does not
follow from—rather it is at odds with—Prima Paint’s
severability rule.
Had the parties in this case executed only one contract,
on two sheets of paper—one sheet with employment
terms, and a second with arbitration terms—the contract
would look much like the one in Buckeye. There would be
some substantive terms, followed by some arbitration
terms, including what we now call a delegation clause—
i.e., a sentence or two assigning to the arbitrator any
disputes related to the validity of the arbitration provi
sion. See Buckeye, 546 U. S., at 442. If respondent then
came into court claiming that the contract was illegal as a
whole for some reason unrelated to the arbitration provi
sion, the Prima Paint rule would apply, and such a gen
eral challenge to the subject matter of the contract would
go to the arbitrator. Such a challenge would not call into
question the making of the arbitration agreement or its
invalidity per se.
Before today, however, if respondent instead raised a
challenge specific to “the validity of the agreement to
arbitrate”—for example, that the agreement to arbitrate
was void under state law—the challenge would have gone
to the court. That is what Buckeye says. See 546 U. S., at
444. But the Court now declares that Prima Paint’s plead
—————— 

that must be arbitrated, the fee provision, and the discovery provision, 

so permeate the Defendant’s arbitration agreement that it would be

impossible to sever the offending provisions.” App. 45. 



12

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
STEVENS, J., dissenting

ing rule requires more: A party must lodge a challenge
with even greater specificity than what would have satis
fied the Prima Paint Court. A claim that an entire arbi
tration agreement is invalid will not go to the court unless
the party challenges the particular sentences that delegate
such claims to the arbitrator, on some contract ground
that is particular and unique to those sentences. See ante,
at 8–10.
It would seem the Court reads Prima Paint to require,
as a matter of course, infinite layers of severability: We
must always pluck from an arbitration agreement the
specific delegation mechanism that would—but for present
judicial review—commend the matter to arbitration, even
if this delegation clause is but one sentence within one
paragraph within a standalone agreement. And, most
importantly, the party must identify this one sentence and
lodge a specific challenge to its validity. Otherwise, he
will be bound to pursue his validity claim in arbitration.
Even if limited to separately executed arbitration
agreements, however, such an infinite severability rule is
divorced from the underlying rationale of Prima Paint.
The notion that a party may be bound by an arbitration
clause in a contract that is nevertheless invalid may be
difficult for any lawyer—or any person—to accept, but this
is the law of Prima Paint. It reflects a judgment that the
“ ‘national policy favoring arbitration,’ ” Preston, 552 U. S.,
at 353, outweighs the interest in preserving a judicial
forum for questions of arbitrability—but only when ques
tions of arbitrability are bound up in an underlying dis
pute. Prima Paint, 388 U. S., at 404. When the two are so
bound up, there is actually no gateway matter at all: The
question “Who decides” is the entire ball game. Were a
court to decide the fraudulent inducement question in
Prima Paint, in order to decide the antecedent question of
the validity of the included arbitration agreement, then it
would also, necessarily, decide the merits of the underly


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

STEVENS, J., dissenting

ing dispute. Same, too, for the question of illegality in
Buckeye; on its way to deciding the arbitration agree
ment’s validity, the court would have to decide whether
the contract was illegal, and in so doing, it would decide
the merits of the entire dispute.
In this case, however, resolution of the unconscionability
question will have no bearing on the merits of the underly
ing employment dispute. It will only, as a preliminary
matter, resolve who should decide the merits of that dis
pute. Resolution of the unconscionability question will,
however, decide whether the arbitration agreement itself
is “valid” under “such grounds as exist at law or in equity
for the revocation of any contract.” 9 U. S. C. §2. As
Prima Paint recognizes, the FAA commits those gateway
matters, specific to the arbitration agreement, to the
court. 388 U. S., at 403–404. Indeed, it is clear that the
present controversy over whether the arbitration agree
ment is unconscionable is itself severable from the merits
of the underlying dispute, which involves a claim of em
ployment discrimination. This is true for all gateway
matters, and for this reason Prima Paint has no applica
tion in this case.
IV
While I may have to accept the “fantastic” holding in
Prima Paint, id., at 407 (Black, J., dissenting), I most
certainly do not accept the Court’s even more fantastic
reasoning today. I would affirm the judgment of the Court
of Appeals, and therefore respectfully dissent.

