(Slip Opinion) OCTOBER TERM, 2009 Syllabus NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. Syllabus No. 09–497. Argued April 26, 2010—Decided June 21, 2010 Respondent Jackson filed an employment-discrimination suit against petitioner Rent-A-Center, his former employer, in a Nevada Federal District Court. Rent-A-Center filed a motion, under the Federal Ar bitration Act (FAA), to dismiss or stay the proceedings, 9 U. S. C. §3, and to compel arbitration, §4, based on the arbitration agreement (Agreement) Jackson signed as a condition of his employment. Jack son opposed the motion on the ground that the Agreement was unen forceable in that it was unconscionable under Nevada law. The Dis trict Court granted Rent-A-Center’s motion. The Ninth Circuit reversed in relevant part. Held: Under the FAA, where an agreement to arbitrate includes an agreement that the arbitrator will determine the enforceability of the agreement, if a party challenges specifically the enforceability of that particular agreement, the district court considers the challenge, but if a party challenges the enforceability of the agreement as a whole, the challenge is for the arbitrator. Pp. 3–12. (a) Section 2 of the FAA places arbitration agreements on an equal Cardegna, 546 U. S. 440, 443, and requires courts to enforce them ac upon such grounds as exist under law or in equity for the revocation of any contract,” §2. Here, the Agreement included two relevant arbi tration provisions: it provided for arbitration of all disputes arising out of Jackson’s employment, including discrimination claims, and it gave the “Arbitrator . . . exclusive authority to resolve any dispute re lating to the [Agreement’s] enforceability . . . including . . . any claim
Syllabus that all or any part of this Agreement is void or voidable.” Rent-ACenter seeks enforcement of the second provision, which delegates to the arbitrator the “gateway” question of enforceability. See, e.g., court must enforce the delegation provision under §§3 and 4 unless it is unenforceable under §2. Pp. 3–6. (b) There are two types of validity challenges under §2: one “chal lenges specifically the validity of the agreement to arbitrate,” and “[t]he other challenges the contract as a whole,” Buckeye, supra, at 444. Only the first is relevant to a court’s determination of an arbi Flood & Conklin Mfg. Co., 388 U. S. 395, 403–404, because under §2 “an arbitration provision is severable from the remainder of the con tract,” Buckeye, supra, at 445. That does not mean that agreements to arbitrate are unassailable. If a party challenges the validity under §2 of the precise agreement to arbitrate at issue, the federal court must consider the challenge before ordering compliance with the agreement under §4. That is no less true when the precise agree ment to arbitrate is itself part of a larger arbitration agreement. Be cause here the agreement to arbitrate enforceability (the delegation provision) is severable from the remainder of the Agreement, unless Jackson challenged the delegation provision specifically, it must be treated as valid under §2 and enforced under §§3 and 4. Pp. 6–9. (c) The District Court correctly concluded that Jackson challenged only the validity of the contract as a whole. In his brief to this Court he raised a challenge to the delegation provision for the first time, but that is too late and will not be considered. See 14 Penn Plaza 581 F. 3d 912, reversed. SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J., and KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., joined. STEVENS, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.