Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–497
_________________

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC., PETITIONER v.

ANTONIO JACKSON

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[June 21, 2010] 


JUSTICE SCALIA delivered the opinion of the Court.
We consider whether, under the Federal Arbitration Act
(FAA or Act), 9 U. S. C. §§1–16, a district court may decide
a claim that an arbitration agreement is unconscionable,
where the agreement explicitly assigns that decision to the
arbitrator.
I
On February 1, 2007, the respondent here, Antonio
Jackson, filed an employment-discrimination suit under
Rev. Stat. §1977, 42 U. S. C. §1981, against his former
employer in the United States District Court for the Dis
trict of Nevada. The defendant and petitioner here, RentA-Center, West, Inc., filed a motion under the FAA to
dismiss or stay the proceedings, 9 U. S. C. §3, and to com
pel arbitration, §4. Rent-A-Center argued that the Mutual
Agreement to Arbitrate Claims (Agreement), which Jack
son signed on February 24, 2003 as a condition of his
employment there, precluded Jackson from pursuing his
claims in court. The Agreement provided for arbitration of
all “past, present or future” disputes arising out of Jack
son’s employment with Rent-A-Center, including “claims


2

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
Opinion of the Court

for discrimination” and “claims for violation of any federal
. . . law.” App. 29–30. It also provided that “[t]he Arbitra
tor, and not any federal, state, or local court or agency,
shall have exclusive authority to resolve any dispute
relating to the interpretation, applicability, enforceability
or formation of this Agreement including, but not limited
to any claim that all or any part of this Agreement is void
or voidable.” Id., at 34.
Jackson opposed the motion on the ground that “the
arbitration agreement in question is clearly unenforceable
in that it is unconscionable” under Nevada law. Id., at 40.
Rent-A-Center responded that Jackson’s unconscionability
claim was not properly before the court because Jackson
had expressly agreed that the arbitrator would have ex
clusive authority to resolve any dispute about the enforce
ability of the Agreement. It also disputed the merits of
Jackson’s unconscionability claims.
The District Court granted Rent-A-Center’s motion to
dismiss the proceedings and to compel arbitration. The
court found that the Agreement “ ‘ “clearly and unmistak
enly [sic]” ’ ” gives the arbitrator exclusive authority to
decide whether the Agreement is enforceable, App. to Pet.
for Cert. 4a. (quoting Howsam v. Dean Witter Reynolds,
Inc., 537 U. S. 79, 83 (2002)), and, because Jackson chal
lenged the validity of the Agreement as a whole, the issue
was for the arbitrator, App. to Pet. for Cert. 4a (citing
Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v. Cardegna, 546 U. S. 440,
444–445 (2006)). The court noted that even if it were to
examine the merits of Jackson’s unconscionability claims,
it would have rejected the claim that the agreement to
split arbitration fees was substantively unconscionable
under Nevada law. It did not address Jackson’s proce
dural or other substantive unconscionability arguments.
Without oral argument, a divided panel of the Court of
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed in part, affirmed in
part, and remanded. 581 F. 3d 912 (2009). The court


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

reversed on the question of who (the court or arbitrator)
had the authority to decide whether the Agreement is
enforceable. It noted that “Jackson does not dispute that
the language of the Agreement clearly assigns the arbitra
bility determination to the arbitrator,” but held that where
“a party challenges an arbitration agreement as uncon
scionable, and thus asserts that he could not meaningfully
assent to the agreement, the threshold question of uncon
scionability is for the court.” Id., at 917. The Ninth Cir
cuit affirmed the District Court’s alternative conclusion
that the fee-sharing provision was not substantively un
conscionable and remanded for consideration of Jackson’s
other unconscionability arguments. Id., at 919–920, and
n. 3. Judge Hall dissented on the ground that “the ques
tion of the arbitration agreement’s validity should have
gone to the arbitrator, as the parties ‘clearly and unmis
takably provide[d]’ in their agreement.” Id., at 921.
We granted certiorari, 558 U. S. ___ (2010).
II 

A

The FAA reflects the fundamental principle that arbi
tration is a matter of contract. Section 2, the “primary
substantive provision of the Act,” Moses H. Cone Memorial
Hospital v. Mercury Constr. Corp., 460 U. S. 1, 24 (1983),
provides:
“A written provision in . . . a contract evidencing a
transaction involving commerce to settle by arbitra
tion a controversy thereafter arising out of such con
tract . . . shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable,
save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for
the revocation of any contract.” 9 U. S. C. §2.
The FAA thereby places arbitration agreements on an
equal footing with other contracts, Buckeye, supra, at 443,
and requires courts to enforce them according to their


4

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
Opinion of the Court

terms, Volt Information Sciences, Inc. v. Board of Trustees
of Leland Stanford Junior Univ., 489 U. S. 468, 478
(1989). Like other contracts, however, they may be invali
dated by “generally applicable contract defenses, such as
fraud, duress, or unconscionability.” Doctor’s Associates,
Inc. v. Casarotto, 517 U. S. 681, 687 (1996).
The Act also establishes procedures by which federal
courts implement §2’s substantive rule. Under §3, a party
may apply to a federal court for a stay of the trial of an
action “upon any issue referable to arbitration under an
agreement in writing for such arbitration.” Under §4, a
party “aggrieved” by the failure of another party “to arbi
trate under a written agreement for arbitration” may
petition a federal court “for an order directing that such
arbitration proceed in the manner provided for in such
agreement.” The court “shall” order arbitration “upon
being satisfied that the making of the agreement for arbi
tration or the failure to comply therewith is not in issue.”
Ibid.
The Agreement here contains multiple “written provi
sion[s]” to “settle by arbitration a controversy,” §2. Two
are relevant to our discussion. First, the section titled
“Claims Covered By The Agreement” provides for arbitra
tion of all “past, present or future” disputes arising out of
Jackson’s employment with Rent-A-Center. App. 29.
Second, the section titled “Arbitration Procedures” pro
vides that “[t]he Arbitrator . . . shall have exclusive au
thority to resolve any dispute relating to the . . . enforce
ability . . . of this Agreement including, but not limited to
any claim that all or any part of this Agreement is void or
voidable.” Id., at 32, 34. The current “controversy” be
tween the parties is whether the Agreement is uncon
scionable. It is the second provision, which delegates
resolution of that controversy to the arbitrator, that RentA-Center seeks to enforce. Adopting the terminology used
by the parties, we will refer to it as the delegation provi


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

sion.
The delegation provision is an agreement to arbitrate
threshold issues concerning the arbitration agreement.
We have recognized that parties can agree to arbitrate
“gateway” questions of “arbitrability,” such as whether the
parties have agreed to arbitrate or whether their agree
ment covers a particular controversy. See, e.g., Howsam,
537 U. S., at 83–85; Green Tree Financial Corp. v. Bazzle,
539 U. S. 444, 452 (2003) (plurality opinion). This line of
cases merely reflects the principle that arbitration is a
matter of contract.1 See First Options of Chicago, Inc. v.
——————
1 There is one caveat. First Options of Chicago, Inc. v. Kaplan, 514
U. S. 938, 944 (1995), held that “[c]ourts should not assume that the
parties agreed to arbitrate arbitrability unless there is ‘clea[r] and
unmistakabl[e]’ evidence that they did so.” The parties agree the
heightened standard applies here. See Brief for Petitioner 21; Brief for
Respondent 54. The District Court concluded the “Agreement to
Arbitrate clearly and unmistakenly [sic] provides the arbitrator with
the exclusive authority to decide whether the Agreement to Arbitrate is
enforceable.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 4a. The Ninth Circuit noted that
Jackson did not dispute that the text of the Agreement was clear and
unmistakable on this point. 581 F. 3d 912, 917 (2009). He also does
not dispute it here. What he argues now, however, is that it is not
“clear and unmistakable” that his agreement to that text was valid,
because of the unconscionability claims he raises. See Brief for Re
spondent 54–55. The dissent makes the same argument. See post, at
5–8 (opinion of STEVENS, J.).
This mistakes the subject of the First Options “clear and unmistak
able” requirement. It pertains to the parties’ manifestation of intent,
not the agreement’s validity. As explained in Howsam v. Dean Witter
Reynolds, Inc., 537 U. S. 79, 83 (2002), it is an “interpretive rule,” based
on an assumption about the parties’ expectations. In “circumstance[s]
where contracting parties would likely have expected a court to have
decided the gateway matter,” ibid., we assume that is what they agreed
to. Thus, “[u]nless the parties clearly and unmistakably provide
otherwise, the question of whether the parties agreed to arbitrate is to
be decided by the court, not the arbitrator.” AT&T Technologies, Inc. v.
Communications Workers, 475 U. S. 643, 649 (1986).
The validity of a written agreement to arbitrate (whether it is legally
binding, as opposed to whether it was in fact agreed to—including, of


6

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
Opinion of the Court

Kaplan, 514 U. S. 938, 943 (1995). An agreement to arbi
trate a gateway issue is simply an additional, antecedent
agreement the party seeking arbitration asks the federal
court to enforce, and the FAA operates on this additional
arbitration agreement just as it does on any other. The
additional agreement is valid under §2 “save upon such
grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of
any contract,” and federal courts can enforce the agree
ment by staying federal litigation under §3 and compelling
arbitration under §4. The question before us, then, is
whether the delegation provision is valid under §2.
B
There are two types of validity challenges under §2:
“One type challenges specifically the validity of the
agreement to arbitrate,” and “[t]he other challenges the
contract as a whole, either on a ground that directly af
fects the entire agreement (e.g., the agreement was
fraudulently induced), or on the ground that the illegality
of one of the contract’s provisions renders the whole con
tract invalid.” Buckeye, 546 U. S., at 444. In a line of
cases neither party has asked us to overrule, we held that
only the first type of challenge is relevant to a court’s
determination whether the arbitration agreement at issue
is enforceable.2 See Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & Conklin
Mfg. Co., 388 U. S. 395, 403–404 (1967); Buckeye, supra, at
——————
course, whether it was void for unconscionability) is governed by §2’s
provision that it shall be valid “save upon such grounds as exist at law
or equity for the revocation of any contract.” Those grounds do not
include, of course, any requirement that its lack of unconscionability
must be “clear and unmistakable.” And they are not grounds that First
Options added for agreements to arbitrate gateway issues; §2 applies to
all written agreements to arbitrate.
2 The issue of the agreement’s “validity” is different from the issue
whether any agreement between the parties “was ever concluded,” and,
as in Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v. Cardegna, 546 U. S. 440 (2006),
we address only the former. Id., at 444, n. 1.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

444–446; Preston v. Ferrer, 552 U. S. 346, 353–354 (2008).
That is because §2 states that a “written provision” “to
settle by arbitration a controversy” is “valid, irrevocable,
and enforceable” without mention of the validity of the
contract in which it is contained. Thus, a party’s chal
lenge to another provision of the contract, or to the con
tract as a whole, does not prevent a court from enforcing a
specific agreement to arbitrate. “[A]s a matter of substan
tive federal arbitration law, an arbitration provision is
severable from the remainder of the contract.” Buckeye,
546 U. S., at 445; see also id., at 447 (the severability rule
is based on §2).
But that agreements to arbitrate are severable does not
mean that they are unassailable. If a party challenges the
validity under §2 of the precise agreement to arbitrate at
issue, the federal court must consider the challenge before
ordering compliance with that agreement under §4. In
Prima Paint, for example, if the claim had been “fraud in
the inducement of the arbitration clause itself,” then the
court would have considered it. 388 U. S., at 403–404.
“To immunize an arbitration agreement from judicial
challenge on the ground of fraud in the inducement would
be to elevate it over other forms of contract,” id., at 404,
n. 12. In some cases the claimed basis of invalidity for the
contract as a whole will be much easier to establish than
the same basis as applied only to the severable agreement
to arbitrate. Thus, in an employment contract many
elements of alleged unconscionability applicable to the
entire contract (outrageously low wages, for example)
would not affect the agreement to arbitrate alone. But
even where that is not the case—as in Prima Paint itself,
where the alleged fraud that induced the whole contract
equally induced the agreement to arbitrate which was part
of that contract—we nonetheless require the basis of
challenge to be directed specifically to the agreement to
arbitrate before the court will intervene.


8

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
Opinion of the Court

Here, the “written provision . . . to settle by arbitration a
controversy,” 9 U. S. C. §2, that Rent-A-Center asks us to
enforce is the delegation provision—the provision that
gave the arbitrator “exclusive authority to resolve any
dispute relating to the . . . enforceability . . . of this
Agreement,” App. 34. The “remainder of the contract,”
Buckeye, supra, at 445, is the rest of the agreement to
arbitrate claims arising out of Jackson’s employment with
Rent-A-Center. To be sure this case differs from Prima
Paint, Buckeye, and Preston, in that the arbitration provi
sions sought to be enforced in those cases were contained
in contracts unrelated to arbitration—contracts for con
sulting services, see Prima Paint, supra, at 397, check
cashing services, see Buckeye, supra, at 442, and “personal
management” or “talent agent” services, see Preston,
supra, at 352. In this case, the underlying contract is
itself an arbitration agreement. But that makes no differ
ence.3 Application of the severability rule does not depend
on the substance of the remainder of the contract. Section
2 operates on the specific “written provision” to “settle by
arbitration a controversy” that the party seeks to enforce.
Accordingly, unless Jackson challenged the delegation
provision specifically, we must treat it as valid under §2,
——————
3 The

dissent calls this a “breezy assertion,” post, at 1, but it seems to
us self-evident. When the dissent comes to discussing the point, post,
at 11, it gives no logical reason why an agreement to arbitrate one
controversy (an employment-discrimination claim) is not severable from
an agreement to arbitrate a different controversy (enforceability).
There is none. Since the dissent accepts that the invalidity of one
provision within an arbitration agreement does not necessarily invali
date its other provisions, post, at 7, n. 7, it cannot believe in some sort
of magic bond between arbitration provisions that prevents them from
being severed from each other. According to the dissent, it is fine to
sever an invalid provision within an arbitration agreement when
severability is a matter of state law, but severability is not allowed
when it comes to applying Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & Conklin Mfg.
Co., 388 U. S. 395 (1967).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

and must enforce it under §§3 and 4, leaving any chal
lenge to the validity of the Agreement as a whole for the
arbitrator.
C
The District Court correctly concluded that Jackson
challenged only the validity of the contract as a whole.
Nowhere in his opposition to Rent-A-Center’s motion to
compel arbitration did he even mention the delegation
provision. See App. 39–47. Rent-A-Center noted this fact
in its reply: “[Jackson’s response] fails to rebut or other
wise address in any way [Rent-A-Center’s] argument that
the Arbitrator must decide [Jackson’s] challenge to
the enforceability of the Agreement. Thus, [Rent-ACenter’s] argument is uncontested.” Id., at 50 (emphasis in
original).
The arguments Jackson made in his response to Rent-ACenter’s motion to compel arbitration support this conclu
sion. Jackson stated that “the entire agreement seems
drawn to provide [Rent-A-Center] with undue advantages
should an employment-related dispute arise.” Id., at 44
(emphasis added). At one point, he argued that the limita
tions on discovery “further suppor[t] [his] contention that
the arbitration agreement as a whole is substantively
unconscionable.” Ibid. (emphasis added). And before this
Court, Jackson describes his challenge in the District
Court as follows: He “opposed the motion to compel on the
ground that the entire arbitration agreement, including the
delegation clause, was unconscionable.” Brief for Respon
dent 55 (emphasis added). That is an accurate description
of his filings.
As required to make out a claim of unconscionability
under Nevada law, see 581 F. 3d, at 919, he contended
that the Agreement was both procedurally and substan
tively unconscionable. It was procedurally unconscion
able, he argued, because it “was imposed as a condition of


10

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
Opinion of the Court

employment and was non-negotiable.” App. 41. But we
need not consider that claim because none of Jackson’s
substantive unconscionability challenges was specific to
the delegation provision. First, he argued that the Agree
ment’s coverage was one sided in that it required arbitra
tion of claims an employee was likely to bring—contract,
tort, discrimination, and statutory claims—but did not
require arbitration of claims Rent-A-Center was likely to
bring—intellectual property, unfair competition, and trade
secrets claims. Id., at 42–43. This one-sided-coverage
argument clearly did not go to the validity of the delega
tion provision.
Jackson’s other two substantive unconscionability ar
guments assailed arbitration procedures called for by the
contract—the fee-splitting arrangement and the limita
tions on discovery—procedures that were to be used dur
ing arbitration under both the agreement to arbitrate
employment-related disputes and the delegation provision.
It may be that had Jackson challenged the delegation
provision by arguing that these common procedures as
applied to the delegation provision rendered that provision
unconscionable, the challenge should have been consid
ered by the court. To make such a claim based on the
discovery procedures, Jackson would have had to argue
that the limitation upon the number of depositions causes
the arbitration of his claim that the Agreement is unen
forceable to be unconscionable. That would be, of course, a
much more difficult argument to sustain than the argu
ment that the same limitation renders arbitration of his
factbound employment-discrimination claim unconscion
able. Likewise, the unfairness of the fee-splitting ar
rangement may be more difficult to establish for the arbi
tration of enforceability than for arbitration of more
complex and fact-related aspects of the alleged employ
ment discrimination. Jackson, however, did not make any
arguments specific to the delegation provision; he argued


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

that the fee-sharing and discovery procedures rendered
the entire Agreement invalid.
Jackson’s appeal to the Ninth Circuit confirms that he
did not contest the validity of the delegation provision in
particular. His brief noted the existence of the delegation
provision, Brief for Appellant in No. 07–16164, p. 3, but
his unconscionability arguments made no mention of it,
id., at 3–7. He also repeated the arguments he had made
before the District Court, see supra, at 9, that the “entire
agreement” favors Rent-A-Center and that the limitations
on discovery further his “contention that the arbitration
agreement as a whole is substantively unconscionable,”
Brief for Appellant 7–8. Finally, he repeated the argu
ment made in his District Court filings, that under state
law the unconscionable clauses could not be severed from
the arbitration agreement, see id., at 8–9.4 The point of
this argument, of course, is that the Agreement as a whole
is unconscionable under state law.
Jackson repeated that argument before this Court. At
oral argument, counsel stated: “There are certain elements
of the arbitration agreement that are unconscionable and,
under Nevada law, which would render the entire arbitra
tion agreement unconscionable.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 43 (em
phasis added). And again, he stated, “we’ve got both
certain provisions that are unconscionable, that under
Nevada law render the entire agreement unconscionable
. . . , and that’s what the Court is to rely on.” Id., at 43–44
——————
4 Jackson’s argument fails. The severability rule is a “matter of sub
stantive federal arbitration law,” and we have repeatedly “rejected the
view that the question of ‘severability’ was one of state law, so that if
state law held the arbitration provision not to be severable a challenge
to the contract as a whole would be decided by the court.” Buckeye, 546
U. S., at 445 (citing Prima Paint, 388 U. S., at 400, 402–403; Southland
Corp. v. Keating, 465 U. S. 1, 10–14 (1984); Allied-Bruce Terminix Cos.
v. Dobson, 513 U. S. 265, 270–273 (1995)). For the same reason, the
Agreement’s statement that its provisions are severable, see App. 37,
does not affect our analysis.


12

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
Opinion of the Court

(emphasis added).
In his brief to this Court, Jackson made the contention,
not mentioned below, that the delegation provision itself is
substantively unconscionable because the quid pro quo he
was supposed to receive for it—that “in exchange for ini
tially allowing an arbitrator to decide certain gateway
questions,” he would receive “plenary post-arbitration
judicial review”—was eliminated by the Court’s subse
quent holding in Hall Street Associates, L. L. C. v. Mattel,
Inc., 552 U. S. 576 (2008), that the nonplenary grounds for
judicial review in §10 of the FAA are exclusive. Brief for
Respondent 59–60. He brought this challenge to the
delegation provision too late, and we will not consider it.5
See 14 Penn Plaza LLC v. Pyett, 556 U. S. ___, ___ (2009)
(slip op., at 24).
*
*
*
We reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals for the
Ninth Circuit.
It is so ordered.

——————
5 Hall

Street Associates, L. L. C. v. Mattel, Inc., 552 U. S. 576 (2008),
was decided after Jackson submitted his brief to the Ninth Circuit, but
that does not change our conclusion that he forfeited the argument.
Jackson could have submitted a supplemental brief during the year and
a half between this Court’s decision of Hall Street on March 25, 2008
and the Ninth Circuit’s judgment on September 9, 2009. Moreover,
Hall Street affirmed a rule that had been in place in the Ninth Circuit
since 2003. Id., at 583–584, and n. 5.

