6

NASA v. NELSON
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

First Amendment case protecting private possession of
obscenity; the deservedly infamous dictum in Griswold v.
Connecticut, 381 U. S. 479 (1965), concerning the “penum
bra” of the First Amendment; and three concurring or
dissenting opinions, none of which remotely intimated
that there might be such a thing as a substantive due
process right to informational privacy. 429 U. S., at 599,
n. 25. Nixon provided even less support. After citing the
observation in Whalen that “[o]ne element of privacy has
been characterized as the individual interest in avoiding
disclosure of personal matters,” Nixon, supra, at 457
(quoting Whalen, supra, at 599; internal quotation marks
omitted), it proceeded to conduct a straightforward Fourth
Amendment analysis. It “assume[d]” that there was a
“legitimate expectation of privacy” in the materials, and
rejected the appellant’s argument that the statute at issue
was “precisely the kind of abuse that the Fourth Amend
ment was intended to prevent.” Nixon, supra, at 457–458,
460. It is unfathomable why these cases’ passing, barely
explained reference to a right separate from the Fourth
Amendment—an unenumerated right that they held to be
not applicable—should be afforded stare decisis weight.
At this point the reader may be wondering: “What, after
all, is the harm in being ‘minimalist’ and simply refusing
to say that violation of a constitutional right of informa
tional privacy can never exist? The outcome in this case is
the same, so long as the Court holds that any such hypo
thetical right was not violated.” Well, there is harm. The
Court’s never-say-never disposition does damage for sev
eral reasons.
1. It is in an important sense not actually minimalist.
By substituting for one real constitutional question
(whether there exists a constitutional right to informa
tional privacy) a different constitutional question (whether
NASA’s background checks would contravene a right to
informational privacy if such a right existed), the Court

