2

NASA v. NELSON
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

federal and state statutes, Rules of Evidence from four
states, two Executive Orders, a House Report, and even
more exotic sources of law, such as two reports of the
Government Accountability Office and an EEOC document
concerning “Enforcement Guidance.” And yet it contains
not a single citation of the sole document we are called
upon to construe: the Constitution of the United States.
The body of the brief includes a single, fleeting reference
to the Due Process Clause, buried in a citation of the
assuredly inapposite Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U. S. 558
(2003), Brief for Respondents 42; but no further attempt is
made to argue that NASA’s actions deprived respondents
of liberty without due process of law. And this legal strat
egy was not limited to respondents’ filing in this Court; in
the Ninth Circuit respondents asserted in a footnote that
“courts have grounded the right to informational privacy
in various provisions of the Constitution,” Brief for Appel
lants in No. 07–56424, p. 25, n. 18, but declined to identify
which ones applied here.
To tell the truth, I found this approach refreshingly
honest. One who asks us to invent a constitutional right
out of whole cloth should spare himself and us the pre
tense of tying it to some words of the Constitution. Re
grettably, this Lincolnesque honesty evaporated at oral
argument, when counsel asserted, apparently for the first
time in this litigation, that the right to informational
privacy emerged from the Due Process Clause of the Fifth
Amendment. Tr. of Oral Arg. 28–29. That counsel in
voked the infinitely plastic concept of “substantive” due
process does not make this constitutional theory any less
invented.
This case is easily resolved on the simple ground that
the Due Process Clause does not “guarante[e] certain
(unspecified) liberties”; rather, it “merely guarantees
certain procedures as a prerequisite to deprivation of
liberty.” Albright v. Oliver, 510 U. S. 266, 275 (1994)

