Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

federal facilities.13
This is a reasonable, and indeed a humane, approach,
and respondents do not dispute the legitimacy of the
Government’s decision to use drug treatment as a mitigat
ing factor in its contractor credentialing decisions. Re
spondents’ argument is that, if drug treatment is only
used to mitigate, then the Government should change the
mandatory phrasing of SF–85—“Include [in your answer]
any treatment or counseling received”—so as to make a
response optional. App. 94. As it stands, the mandatory
“treatment or counseling” question is unconstitutional, in
respondents’ view, because it is “more intrusive than
necessary to satisfy the government’s objective.” Brief for
Respondents 26; 530 F. 3d, at 879 (holding that “treat
ment or counseling” question should be enjoined because
the form “appears to compel disclosure”).
We reject the argument that the Government, when it
requests job-related personal information in an employ
ment background check, has a constitutional burden to
demonstrate that its questions are “necessary” or the least
restrictive means of furthering its interests. So exacting a
standard runs directly contrary to Whalen. The patients
in Whalen, much like respondents here, argued that New
York’s statute was unconstitutional because the State
could not “demonstrate the necessity” of its program. 429
U. S., at 596. The Court quickly rejected that argument,
concluding that New York’s collection of patients’ prescrip
tion information could “not be held unconstitutional sim
ply because” a court viewed it as “unnecessary, in whole or
——————
13 Asking about treatment or counseling could also help the Govern
ment identify chronic drug abusers for whom, “despite counseling and
rehabilitation programs, there is little chance for effective rehabilita
tion.” 38 Fed. Reg. 33315 (1973). At oral argument, however, the
Acting Solicitor General explained that NASA views treatment or
counseling solely as a “mitigat[ing]” factor that ameliorates concerns
about recent illegal drug use. Tr. of Oral Arg. 19.

