Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
“internal operation,” Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers v. McElroy, 367
U. S. 886, 896, it has a much freer hand than when it regulates as to
citizens generally. The questions respondents challenge are part of a
standard background check of the sort used by millions of private
employers. The Government has been conducting employment inves
tigations since the Republic’s earliest days, and the President has
had statutory authority to assess an applicant’s fitness for the civil
service since 1871. Standard background investigations similar to
those at issue became mandatory for federal civil-service candidates
in 1953, and the investigations challenged here arose from a decision
to extend that requirement to federal contract employees. This his
tory shows that the Government has an interest in conducting basic
background checks in order to ensure the security of its facilities and
to employ a competent, reliable workforce to carry out the people’s
business. The interest is not diminished by the fact that respondents
are contract employees. There are no meaningful distinctions in the
duties of NASA’s civil-service and contractor employees, especially at
JPL, where contract employees do work that is critical to NASA’s
mission and that is funded with a multibillion dollar taxpayer in
vestment. Pp. 12–15.
(2) The challenged questions on SF–85 and Form 42 are rea
sonable, employment-related inquiries that further the Government’s
interests in managing its internal operations. SF–85’s “treatment or
counseling” question is a followup question to a reasonable inquiry
about illegal-drug use. In context, the drug-treatment inquiry is also
a reasonable, employment-related inquiry. The Government, recog
nizing that illegal-drug use is both a criminal and medical issue,
seeks to separate out those drug users who are taking steps to ad
dress and overcome their problems. Thus, it uses responses to the
drug-treatment question as a mitigating factor in its contractor cre
dentialing decisions. The Court rejects the argument that the Gov
ernment has a constitutional burden to demonstrate that its em
ployment background questions are “necessary” or the least
restrictive means of furthering its interests. So exacting a standard
runs directly contrary to Whalen. See 429 U. S., at 596–597. Pp. 16–
18.
(3) Like SF–85’s drug-treatment question, Form 42’s open
ended questions are reasonably aimed at identifying capable employ
ees who will faithfully conduct the Government’s business. Asking
an applicant’s designated references broad questions about job suit
ability is an appropriate tool for separating strong candidates from
weak ones. The reasonableness of such questions is illustrated by
their pervasiveness in the public and private sectors. Pp. 18–19.
(b) In addition to being reasonable in light of the Government in

