Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

Once a completed SF–85 is on file, the “agency check”
and “inquiries” begin. 75 Fed. Reg. 5359 (2010). The
Government runs the information provided by the em
ployee through FBI and other federal-agency databases.
It also sends out form questionnaires to the former em
ployers, schools, landlords, and references listed on SF–85.
The particular form at issue in this case—the Investiga
tive Request for Personal Information, Form 42—goes to
the employee’s former landlords and references. Ibid.3
Form 42 is a two-page document that takes about five
minutes to complete. See ibid. It explains to the reference
that “[y]our name has been provided by” a particular
employee or applicant to help the Government determine
that person’s “suitability for employment or a security
clearance.” App. 96–97. After several preliminary ques
tions about the extent of the reference’s associations with
the employee, the form asks if the reference has “any
reason to question” the employee’s “honesty or trustwor
thiness.” Id., at 97. It also asks if the reference knows of
any “adverse information” concerning the employee’s
“violations of the law,” “financial integrity,” “abuse of
alcohol and/or drugs,” “mental or emotional stability,”
“general behavior or conduct,” or “other matters.” Ibid. If
“yes” is checked for any of these categories, the form calls
for an explanation in the space below. That space is also
available for providing “additional information” (“deroga
tory” or “favorable”) that may bear on “suitability for
government employment or a security clearance.” Ibid.
All responses to SF–85 and Form 42 are subject to the
protections of the Privacy Act. The Act authorizes the
Government to keep records pertaining to an individual
——————
3 The

Government sends separate forms to employers (Form 41), edu
cational institutions (Form 43), record repositories (Form 40), and law
enforcement agencies (Form 44). 75 Fed. Reg. 5359. None of these
forms are at issue here.

