Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

gets to pontificate upon a matter that is none of its
business: the appropriate balance between security and
privacy. If I am correct that there exists no right to in
formational privacy, all that discussion is an exercise in
judicial maximalism. Better simply to state and apply
the law forthrightly than to hold our view of the law in
pectore, so that we can inquire into matters beyond our
charter, and probably beyond our ken.
If, on the other hand, the Court believes that there is a
constitutional right to informational privacy, then I fail to
see the minimalist virtues in delivering a lengthy opinion
analyzing that right while coyly noting that the right is
“assumed” rather than “decided.” Thirty-three years have
passed since the Court first suggested that the right may,
or may not, exist. It is past time for the Court to abandon
this Alfred Hitchcock line of our jurisprudence.
2. It harms our image, if not our self-respect, because it
makes no sense. The Court decides that the Government
did not violate the right to informational privacy without
deciding whether there is a right to informational privacy,
and without even describing what hypothetical standard
should be used to assess whether the hypothetical right
has been violated. As I explained last Term in objecting to
another of the Court’s never-say-never dispositions:
“[The Court] cannot decide that [respondents’] claim
fails without first deciding what a valid claim would
consist of. . . . [A]greeing to or crafting a hypothetical
standard for a hypothetical constitutional right is suf
ficiently unappealing . . . that [the Court] might as
well acknowledge the right as well. Or [it] could avoid
the need to agree with or craft a hypothetical stan
dard by denying the right. But embracing a standard
while being coy about the right is, well, odd; and de
ciding this case while addressing neither the standard
nor the right is quite impossible.” Stop the Beach Re

