(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINI-

STRATION ET AL. v. NELSON ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–530.

Argued October 5, 2010—Decided January 19, 2011

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has a
workforce of both federal civil servants and Government contract em
ployees. Respondents are contract employees at NASA’s Jet Propul
sion Laboratory (JPL), which is operated by the California Institute
of Technology (Cal Tech). Respondents were not subject to Govern
ment background checks at the time they were hired, but that
changed when the President ordered the adoption of uniform identifi
cation standards for both federal civil servants and contractor em
ployees. The Department of Commerce mandated that contract em
ployees with long-term access to federal facilities complete a standard
background check, typically the National Agency Check with Inquir
ies (NACI), by October 2007. NASA modified its contract with Cal
Tech to reflect the new requirement, and JPL announced that em
ployees who did not complete the NACI process in time would be de
nied access to JPL and face termination by Cal Tech.
The NACI process, long used for prospective civil servants, begins
with the employee filling out a standard form (here, Standard Form
85, the Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive Positions (SF–85)). SF–85
asks whether an employee has “used, possessed, supplied, or manu
factured illegal drugs” in the last year. If so, the employee must pro
vide details, including information about “treatment or counseling re
ceived.” The employee must also sign a release authorizing the
Government to obtain personal information from schools, employers,
and others during its investigation. Once SF–85 is completed, the
Government sends the employee’s references a questionnaire (Form
42) that asks open-ended questions about whether they have “any
reason to question” the employee’s “honesty or trustworthiness,” or

