Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

(SCALIA, J., concurring). Respondents make no claim that
the State has deprived them of liberty without the requi
site procedures, and their due process claim therefore
must fail. Even under the formula we have adopted for
identifying liberties entitled to protection under the faux
“substantive” component of the Due Process Clause—that
“the Due Process Clause specially protects those funda
mental rights and liberties which are, objectively, deeply
rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition,” Washington
v. Glucksberg, 521 U. S. 702, 720–721 (1997) (internal
quotation marks omitted)—respondents’ claim would fail.
Respondents do not even attempt to argue that the claim
at issue in this case passes that test, perhaps recognizing
the farcical nature of a contention that a right deeply
rooted in our history and tradition bars the Government
from ensuring that the Hubble Telescope is not used by
recovering drug addicts.
The absurdity of respondents’ position in this case
should not, however, obscure the broader point: Our due
process precedents, even our “substantive due process”
precedents, do not support any right to informational
privacy. First, we have held that the government’s act of
defamation does not deprive a person “of any ‘liberty’
protected by the procedural guarantees of the Fourteenth
Amendment.” Paul v. Davis, 424 U. S. 693, 709 (1976).
We reasoned that stigma, standing alone, does not “sig
nificantly alte[r]” a person’s legal status so as to “justif[y]
the invocation of procedural safeguards.” Id., at 708–709.
If outright defamation does not qualify, it is unimaginable
that the mere disclosure of private information does.
Second, respondents challenge the Government’s collec
tion of their private information. But the Government’s
collection of private information is regulated by the Fourth
Amendment, and “[w]here a particular Amendment pro
vides an explicit textual source of constitutional protection
against a particular sort of government behavior, that

