12

NASA v. NELSON
Opinion of the Court

that, whatever the scope of this interest, it does not pre
vent the Government from asking reasonable questions of
the sort included on SF–85 and Form 42 in an employ
ment background investigation that is subject to the Pri
vacy Act’s safeguards against public disclosure.
A
1
As an initial matter, judicial review of the Government’s
challenged inquiries must take into account the context in
which they arise. When the Government asks respon
dents and their references to fill out SF–85 and Form 42,
it does not exercise its sovereign power “to regulate or
license.” Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers v. McElroy, 367
U. S. 886, 896 (1961). Rather, the Government conducts
the challenged background checks in its capacity “as pro
prietor” and manager of its “internal operation.” Ibid.
Time and again our cases have recognized that the Gov
ernment has a much freer hand in dealing “with citizen
employees than it does when it brings its sovereign power
to bear on citizens at large.” Engquist v. Oregon Dept. of
Agriculture, 553 U. S. 591, 598 (2008); Waters v. Churchill,
511 U. S. 661, 674 (1994) (plurality opinion). This distinc
tion is grounded on the “common-sense realization” that if
——————
92 (1978) (same); see also New York State Club Assn., Inc. v. City of
New York, 487 U. S. 1, 20 (1988) (SCALIA, J., concurring in part and
concurring in judgment) (joining the Court’s opinion on the understand
ing that it “assumes for purposes of its analysis, but does not hold, the
existence of a constitutional right of private association for other than
expressive or religious purposes”).
Justice SCALIA provides no support for his claim that our approach in
this case will “dramatically increase the number of lawsuits claiming
violations of the right to informational privacy,” post, at 9, and will
leave the lower courts at sea. We take the same approach here that the
Court took more than three decades ago in Whalen and Nixon, and
there is no evidence that those decisions have caused the sky to fall.
We therefore decide the case before us and leave broader issues for
another day.

