Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

decisis is simply irrelevant when the pertinent precedent
assumed, without deciding, the existence of a constitu
tional right. “Stare decisis reflects a policy judgment that
in most matters it is more important that the applicable
rule of law be settled than that it be settled right.” State
Oil Co. v. Khan, 522 U. S. 3, 20 (1997) (internal quotation
marks omitted). “It is the preferred course because it
promotes the evenhanded, predictable, and consistent
development of legal principles.” Ibid. (internal quotation
marks omitted). Here, however, there is no applicable rule
of law that is settled. To the contrary, Whalen and Nixon
created an uncertainty that the text of the Constitution
did not contain and that today’s opinion perpetuates.
A further reason Whalen and Nixon are not entitled to
stare decisis effect is that neither opinion supplied any
coherent reason why a constitutional right to informa
tional privacy might exist. As supporting authority,
Whalen cited Stanley v. Georgia, 394 U. S. 557 (1969), a
——————
failure to address whether there is a right to informational privacy
cannot be blamed upon the Government’s concession that such a right
exists, and indeed the Government’s startling assertion that Whalen
and Nixon (which decided nothing on the constitutional point, and have
not been so much as cited in our later opinions) were “seminal”—
seminal!—decisions. Reply Brief for Petitioner 22. We are not bound
by a litigant’s concession on an issue of law. See, e.g., Grove City
College v. Bell, 465 U. S. 555, 562, n. 10 (1984). And it should not be
thought that the concession by the United States is an entirely self
denying act. To be sure, it subjects the Executive Branch to constitu
tional limitations on the collection and use of information; but the
Privacy Act, 5 U. S. C. §552a (2006 ed. and Supp. III), already contains
extensive limitations not likely to be surpassed by constitutional
improvisation. And because Congress’s power under §5 of the Four
teenth Amendment extends to the full scope of the Due Process Clause,
see City of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U. S. 507 (1997), the United States
has an incentive to give that Clause a broad reading, thus expanding
the scope of federal legislation that it justifies. Federal laws prevent
ing state disregard of “informational privacy” may be a twinkle in the
Solicitor General’s eye.

