Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

disclosure of drug “treatment or counseling” furthered no
legitimate interest and was thus likely to be held uncon
stitutional. Ibid.
Form 42, in the Court of Appeals’ estimation, was even
“more problematic.” Ibid. The form’s “open-ended and
highly private” questions, the court concluded, were not
“narrowly tailored” to meet the Government’s interests in
verifying contractors’ identities and “ensuring the security
of the JPL.” Id., at 881, 880. As a result, the court held,
these “open-ended” questions, like the drug-treatment
question on SF–85, likely violate respondents’ informa
tional-privacy rights.5
Over the dissents of five judges, the Ninth Circuit
denied rehearing en banc. 568 F. 3d 1028 (2009). We
granted certiorari. 559 U. S. ___ (2010).
——————
5 In the Ninth Circuit, respondents also challenged the criteria that
they believe the Government will use to determine their “suitability”
for employment at JPL. Respondents relied on a document, which had
been temporarily posted on the JPL intranet, that listed factors pur
portedly bearing on suitability for federal employment. App. 98–104.
Among the listed factors were a failure to “mee[t] financial obligations,”
“health issues,” and “mental, emotional, psychological, or psychiatric
issues.” Id., at 98, 102. Other factors, which were listed under the
heading “Criminal or Immoral Conduct,” included “indecent exposure,”
“voyeurism,” “indecent proposal[s],” and “carnal knowledge.” Id., at 98.
The document also stated that while “homosexuality,” “adultery,” and
“illegitimate children” were not “suitability” issues in and of them
selves, they might pose “security issue[s]” if circumstances indicated a
“susceptibility to coercion or blackmail.” Id., at 102. The Court of
Appeals rejected respondents’ “challenges to . . . suitability determina
tion[s]” as unripe. 530 F. 3d, at 873. Although respondents did not file
a cross-petition from that portion of the Ninth Circuit’s judgment, they
nonetheless discuss these suitability criteria at some length in their
brief before this Court. Respondents’ challenge to these criteria is not
before us. We note, however, the Acting Solicitor General’s statement
at oral argument that “NASA will not and does not use” the document
to which respondents object “to make contractor credentialing deci
sions.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 22.

