Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

formed by NASA’s civil-service workforce and its contrac
tor workforce. App. 221. The two classes of employees
perform “functionally equivalent duties,” and the extent of
employees’ “access to NASA . . . facilities” turns not on
formal status but on the nature of “the jobs they perform.”
Ibid.
At JPL, in particular, the work that contract employees
perform is critical to NASA’s mission. Respondents in this
case include “the lead trouble-shooter for . . . th[e] $568
[million]” Kepler space observatory, 7 Record 396; the
leader of the program that “tests . . . all new technology
that NASA will use in space,” App. 60; and one of the lead
“trajectory designers for . . . the Galileo Project and the
Apollo Moon landings,” id., at 62. This is important work,
and all of it is funded with a multibillion dollar investment
from the American taxpayer. See NASA, Jet Propulsion
Laboratory Annual Report 09, p. 35 (2010), online at
http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/annualreport/2009-report.pdf. The
Government has a strong interest in conducting basic
background checks into the contract employees minding
the store at JPL.12
——————
12 In their brief, respondents also rely on the fact that many of them
have been working at JPL for years and that Cal Tech previously
vetted them through standard “employment reference checks.” Brief
for Respondents 52–53. The record indicates that this may be wrong as
a factual matter. E.g., 7 Record 391 (“I have not been required to
undergo any type of background investigation to maintain my position
with JPL”); id., at 397 (“I have never been required to undergo any type
of background investigation to maintain my position with JPL other
than . . . [one] which required that I provide my name, social security
number, and current address” to facilitate a “check for outstanding
warrants, arrests, or convictions”); id., at 356, 367, 386–387 (similar).
Even if it were correct, the fact that Cal Tech once conducted a back
ground check on respondents does not diminish the Government’s
interests in conducting its own standard background check to satisfy
itself that contract employees should be granted continued access to the
Government’s facility. In any event, counsel abandoned this position at
oral argument. Tr. of Oral Arg. 38.

