2

NASA v. NELSON
Syllabus
have “adverse information” concerning a variety of other matters. All
SF–85 and Form 42 responses are subject to the protections of the
Privacy Act.
With the deadline for completing the NACI process drawing near,
respondents brought suit, claiming, as relevant here, that the back
ground-check process violates a constitutional right to informational
privacy. The District Court declined to issue a preliminary injunc
tion, but the Ninth Circuit reversed. It held that SF–85’s inquiries
into recent drug involvement furthered the Government’s interest in
combating illegal-drug use, but that the drug “treatment or counsel
ing” question furthered no legitimate interest and was thus likely to
be held unconstitutional. It also held that Form 42’s open-ended
questions were not narrowly tailored to meet the Government’s inter
ests in verifying contractors’ identities and ensuring JPL’s security,
and thus also likely violated respondents’ informational-privacy
rights.

Held:
1. In two cases decided over 30 years ago, this Court referred
broadly to a constitutional privacy “interest in avoiding disclosure of
personal matters.” Whalen v. Roe, 429 U. S. 589, 599–600; Nixon v.
Administrator of General Services, 433 U. S. 425, 457. In Whalen, the
Court upheld a New York law permitting the collection of names and
addresses of persons prescribed dangerous drugs, finding that the
statute’s “security provisions,” which protected against “public disclo
sure” of patient information, 462 U. S., at 600–601, were sufficient to
protect a privacy interest “arguably . . . root[ed] in the Constitution,”
id., at 605. In Nixon, the Court upheld a law requiring the former
President to turn over his presidential papers and tape recordings for
archival review and screening, concluding that the federal Act at is
sue, like the statute in Whalen, had protections against “undue dis
semination of private materials.” 433 U. S, at 458. Since Nixon, the
Court has said little else on the subject of a constitutional right to in
formational privacy. Pp. 8–10.
2. Assuming, without deciding, that the Government’s challenged
inquiries implicate a privacy interest of constitutional significance,
that interest, whatever its scope, does not prevent the Government
from asking reasonable questions of the sort included on SF–85 and
Form 42 in an employment background investigation that is subject
to the Privacy Act’s safeguards against public disclosure. Pp. 10–24.
(a) The forms are reasonable in light of the Government interests
at stake. Pp. 11–19.
(1) Judicial review of the forms must take into account the con
text in which the Government’s challenged inquiries arise. When the
Government acts in its capacity “as proprietor” and manager of its

