(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
CERTIORARI TO THE COURT OF APPEALS OF MARYLAND
No. 08–680.

Argued October 5, 2009—Decided February 24, 2010

In 2003, a police detective tried to question respondent Shatzer, who
was incarcerated at a Maryland prison pursuant to a prior conviction,
about allegations that he had sexually abused his son. Shatzer in
voked his Miranda right to have counsel present during interroga
tion, so the detective terminated the interview. Shatzer was released
back into the general prison population, and the investigation was
closed. Another detective reopened the investigation in 2006 and at
tempted to interrogate Shatzer, who was still incarcerated. Shatzer
waived his Miranda rights and made inculpatory statements. The
trial court refused to suppress those statements, reasoning that Ed
wards v. Arizona, 451 U. S. 477, did not apply because Shatzer had
experienced a break in Miranda custody prior to the 2006 interroga
tion. Shatzer was convicted of sexual child abuse. The Court of Ap
peals of Maryland reversed, holding that the mere passage of time
does not end the Edwards protections, and that, assuming, arguendo,
a break-in-custody exception to Edwards existed, Shatzer’s release
back into the general prison population did not constitute such a
break.
Held: Because Shatzer experienced a break in Miranda custody lasting
more than two weeks between the first and second attempts at inter
rogation, Edwards does not mandate suppression of his 2006 state
ments. Pp. 4–18.
(a) Edwards created a presumption that once a suspect invokes the
Miranda right to the presence of counsel, any waiver of that right in
response to a subsequent police attempt at custodial interrogation is
involuntary. Edwards’ fundamental purpose is to “[p]reserv[e] the
integrity of an accused’s choice to communicate with police only
through counsel,” Patterson v. Illinois, 487 U. S. 285, 291, by “pre
vent[ing] police from badgering [him] into waiving his previously as


2

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
Syllabus
serted Miranda rights,” Michigan v. Harvey, 494 U. S. 344, 350. It is
easy to believe that a suspect’s later waiver was coerced or badgered
when he has been held in uninterrupted Miranda custody since his
first refusal to waive. He remains cut off from his normal life and
isolated in a “police-dominated atmosphere,” Miranda v. Arizona, 384
U. S. 436, 456, where his captors “appear to control [his] fate,” Illi
nois v. Perkins, 496 U. S. 292, 297. But where a suspect has been re
leased from custody and returned to his normal life for some time be
fore the later attempted interrogation, there is little reason to think
that his change of heart has been coerced. Because the Edwards pre
sumption has been established by opinion of this Court, it is appro
priate for this Court to specify the period of release from custody that
will terminate its application. See County of Riverside v. McLaugh
lin, 500 U. S. 44. The Court concludes that the appropriate period is
14 days, which provides ample time for the suspect to get reaccli
mated to his normal life, consult with friends and counsel, and shake
off any residual coercive effects of prior custody. Pp. 4–13.
(b) Shatzer’s release back into the general prison population consti
tutes a break in Miranda custody. Lawful imprisonment imposed
upon conviction does not create the coercive pressures produced by
investigative custody that justify Edwards. When previously incar
cerated suspects are released back into the general prison population,
they return to their accustomed surroundings and daily routine—
they regain the degree of control they had over their lives before the
attempted interrogation. Their continued detention is relatively dis
connected from their prior unwillingness to cooperate in an investiga
tion. The “inherently compelling pressures” of custodial interrogation
ended when Shatzer returned to his normal life. Pp. 13–16.

405 Md. 585, 954 A. 2d 1118, reversed and remanded.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined, and in which THOMAS, J., joined as to Part III. THOMAS, J., filed
an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment. STEVENS, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment.

