Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash­
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–680
_________________

MARYLAND, PETITIONER v. MICHAEL BLAINE

SHATZER, SR. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE COURT OF APPEALS OF

MARYLAND

[February 24, 2010] 


JUSTICE SCALIA delivered the opinion of the Court.
We consider whether a break in custody ends the pre­
sumption of involuntariness established in Edwards v.
Arizona, 451 U. S. 477 (1981).
I
In August 2003, a social worker assigned to the Child
Advocacy Center in the Criminal Investigation Division of
the Hagerstown Police Department referred to the de­
partment allegations that respondent Michael Shatzer,
Sr., had sexually abused his 3-year-old son. At that time,
Shatzer was incarcerated at the Maryland Correctional
Institution-Hagerstown, serving a sentence for an unre­
lated child-sexual-abuse offense. Detective Shane Blank­
enship was assigned to the investigation and interviewed
Shatzer at the correctional institution on August 7, 2003.
Before asking any questions, Blankenship reviewed
Shatzer’s Miranda rights with him, and obtained a writ­
ten waiver of those rights. When Blankenship explained
that he was there to question Shatzer about sexually
abusing his son, Shatzer expressed confusion—he had
thought Blankenship was an attorney there to discuss the


2

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
Opinion of the Court

prior crime for which he was incarcerated. Blankenship
clarified the purpose of his visit, and Shatzer declined to
speak without an attorney. Accordingly, Blankenship
ended the interview, and Shatzer was released back into
the general prison population.
Shortly thereafter,
Blankenship closed the investigation.
Two years and six months later, the same social worker
referred more specific allegations to the department about
the same incident involving Shatzer. Detective Paul
Hoover, from the same division, was assigned to the inves­
tigation. He and the social worker interviewed the victim,
then eight years old, who described the incident in more
detail. With this new information in hand, on March 2,
2006, they went to the Roxbury Correctional Institute, to
which Shatzer had since been transferred, and inter­
viewed Shatzer in a maintenance room outfitted with a
desk and three chairs. Hoover explained that he wanted
to ask Shatzer about the alleged incident involving
Shatzer’s son. Shatzer was surprised because he thought
that the investigation had been closed, but Hoover ex­
plained they had opened a new file. Hoover then read
Shatzer his Miranda rights and obtained a written waiver
on a standard department form.
Hoover interrogated Shatzer about the incident for
approximately 30 minutes. Shatzer denied ordering his
son to perform fellatio on him, but admitted to masturbat­
ing in front of his son from a distance of less than three
feet. Before the interview ended, Shatzer agreed to Hoo­
ver’s request that he submit to a polygraph examination.
At no point during the interrogation did Shatzer request
to speak with an attorney or refer to his prior refusal to
answer questions without one.
Five days later, on March 7, 2006, Hoover and another
detective met with Shatzer at the correctional facility to
administer the polygraph examination. After reading
Shatzer his Miranda rights and obtaining a written


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

waiver, the other detective administered the test and
concluded that Shatzer had failed. When the detectives
then questioned Shatzer, he became upset, started to cry,
and incriminated himself by saying, “ ‘I didn’t force him. I
didn’t force him.’ ” 405 Md. 585, 590, 954 A. 2d 1118, 1121
(2008). After making this inculpatory statement, Shatzer
requested an attorney, and Hoover promptly ended the
interrogation.
The State’s Attorney for Washington County charged
Shatzer with second-degree sexual offense, sexual child
abuse, second-degree assault, and contributing to condi­
tions rendering a child in need of assistance. Shatzer
moved to suppress his March 2006 statements pursuant to
Edwards. The trial court held a suppression hearing and
later denied Shatzer’s motion. The Edwards protections
did not apply, it reasoned, because Shatzer had experi­
enced a break in custody for Miranda purposes between
the 2003 and 2006 interrogations. No. 21–K–06–37799
(Cir. Ct. Washington Cty., Md., Sept. 14, 2006), App. 55.
Shatzer pleaded not guilty, waived his right to a jury trial,
and proceeded to a bench trial based on an agreed state­
ment of facts. In accordance with the agreement, the
State described the interview with the victim and
Shatzer’s 2006 statements to the detectives. Based on the
proffered testimony of the victim and the “admission of the
defendant as to the act of masturbation,” the trial court
found Shatzer guilty of sexual child abuse of his son.1 No.
21–K–06–37799 (Cir. Ct. Washington Cty., Md., Sept. 21,
2006), id., at 70, 79.
Over the dissent of two judges, the Court of Appeals of
Maryland reversed and remanded. The court held that
“the passage of time alone is insufficient to [end] the pro­
——————
1 The State filed a nolle prosequi to the second-degree sexual offense
charge, and consented to dismissal of the misdemeanor charges as
barred by the statute of limitations.


4

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
Opinion of the Court

tections afforded by Edwards,” and that, assuming, ar
guendo, a break-in-custody exception to Edwards existed,
Shatzer’s release back into the general prison population
between interrogations did not constitute a break in cus­
tody. 405 Md., at 606–607, 954 A. 2d, at 1131. We
granted certiorari, 555 U. S. ___ (2009).
II
The Fifth Amendment, which applies to the States by
virtue of the Fourteenth Amendment, Malloy v. Hogan,
378 U. S. 1, 6 (1964), provides that “[n]o person . . . shall
be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against
himself.” U. S. Const., Amdt. 5. In Miranda v. Arizona,
384 U. S. 436 (1966), the Court adopted a set of prophylac­
tic measures to protect a suspect’s Fifth Amendment right
from the “inherently compelling pressures” of custodial
interrogation. Id., at 467. The Court observed that “in­
communicado interrogation” in an “unfamiliar,” “police­
dominated atmosphere,” id., at 456–457, involves psycho­
logical pressures “which work to undermine the individ­
ual’s will to resist and to compel him to speak where he
would not otherwise do so freely,” id., at 467. Conse­
quently, it reasoned, “[u]nless adequate protective devices
are employed to dispel the compulsion inherent in custo­
dial surroundings, no statement obtained from the defen­
dant can truly be the product of his free choice.” Id., at
458.
To counteract the coercive pressure, Miranda an­
nounced that police officers must warn a suspect prior to
questioning that he has a right to remain silent, and a
right to the presence of an attorney. Id., at 444. After the
warnings are given, if the suspect indicates that he wishes
to remain silent, the interrogation must cease. Id., at
473–474. Similarly, if the suspect states that he wants an
attorney, the interrogation must cease until an attorney is
present. Id., at 474. Critically, however, a suspect can


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

waive these rights. Id., at 475. To establish a valid
waiver, the State must show that the waiver was knowing,
intelligent, and voluntary under the “high standar[d] of
proof for the waiver of constitutional rights [set forth in]
Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U. S. 458 (1938).” Id., at 475.
In Edwards, the Court determined that Zerbst’s tradi­
tional standard for waiver was not sufficient to protect a
suspect’s right to have counsel present at a subsequent
interrogation if he had previously requested counsel;
“additional safeguards” were necessary. 451 U. S., at 484.
The Court therefore superimposed a “second layer of
prophylaxis,” McNeil v. Wisconsin, 501 U. S. 171, 176
(1991). Edwards held:
“[W]hen an accused has invoked his right to have
counsel present during custodial interrogation, a valid
waiver of that right cannot be established by showing
only that he responded to further police-initiated cus­
todial interrogation even if he has been advised of his
rights. . . . [He] is not subject to further interrogation
by the authorities until counsel has been made avail­
able to him, unless the accused himself initiates fur­
ther communication, exchanges, or conversations with
the police.” 451 U. S., at 484–485.
The rationale of Edwards is that once a suspect indicates
that “he is not capable of undergoing [custodial] question­
ing without advice of counsel,” “any subsequent waiver
that has come at the authorities’ behest, and not at the
suspect’s own instigation, is itself the product of the ‘in­
herently compelling pressures’ and not the purely volun­
tary choice of the suspect.” Arizona v. Roberson, 486 U. S.
675, 681 (1988). Under this rule, a voluntary Miranda
waiver is sufficient at the time of an initial attempted
interrogation to protect a suspect’s right to have counsel
present, but it is not sufficient at the time of subsequent
attempts if the suspect initially requested the presence of


6

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
Opinion of the Court

counsel. The implicit assumption, of course, is that the
subsequent requests for interrogation pose a significantly
greater risk of coercion. That increased risk results not
only from the police’s persistence in trying to get the sus­
pect to talk, but also from the continued pressure that
begins when the individual is taken into custody as a
suspect and sought to be interrogated—pressure likely to
“increase as custody is prolonged,” Minnick v. Mississippi,
498 U. S. 146, 153 (1990). The Edwards presumption of
involuntariness ensures that police will not take advan­
tage of the mounting coercive pressures of “prolonged
police custody,” Roberson, 486 U. S., at 686, by repeatedly
attempting to question a suspect who previously requested
counsel until the suspect is “badgered into submission,”
id., at 690 (KENNEDY, J., dissenting).
We have frequently emphasized that the Edwards rule
is not a constitutional mandate, but judicially prescribed
prophylaxis. See, e.g., Montejo v. Louisiana, 556 U. S. ___,
___ (2009) (slip op., at 7–8); Michigan v. Harvey, 494 U. S.
344, 349 (1990); Solem v. Stumes, 465 U. S. 638, 644, n. 4
(1984). Because Edwards is “our rule, not a constitutional
command,” “it is our obligation to justify its expansion.”
Roberson, supra, at 688 (KENNEDY, J., dissenting). Lower
courts have uniformly held that a break in custody ends
the Edwards presumption, see, e.g., People v. Storm, 28
Cal. 4th 1007, 1023–1024, and n. 6, 52 P. 3d 52, 61–62,
and n. 6 (2002) (collecting state and federal cases), but we
have previously addressed the issue only in dicta, see
McNeil, supra, at 177 (Edwards applies “assuming there
has been no break in custody”).
A judicially crafted rule is “justified only by reference to
its prophylactic purpose,” Davis v. United States, 512 U. S.
452, 458 (1994) (internal quotation marks omitted), and
applies only where its benefits outweigh its costs, Montejo,
supra, at ___ (slip op., at 14). We begin with the benefits.
Edwards’ presumption of involuntariness has the inciden­


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

tal effect of “conserv[ing] judicial resources which would
otherwise be expended in making difficult determinations
of voluntariness.” Minnick, supra, at 151. Its fundamen­
tal purpose, however, is to “[p]reserv[e] the integrity of an
accused’s choice to communicate with police only through
counsel,” Patterson v. Illinois, 487 U. S. 285, 291 (1988), by
“prevent[ing] police from badgering a defendant into waiv­
ing his previously asserted Miranda rights,” Harvey,
supra, at 350. Thus, the benefits of the rule are measured
by the number of coerced confessions it suppresses that
otherwise would have been admitted. See Montejo, supra,
at ___ (slip op., at 14).
It is easy to believe that a suspect may be coerced or
badgered into abandoning his earlier refusal to be ques­
tioned without counsel in the paradigm Edwards case.
That is a case in which the suspect has been arrested for a
particular crime and is held in uninterrupted pretrial
custody while that crime is being actively investigated.
After the initial interrogation, and up to and including the
second one, he remains cut off from his normal life and
companions, “thrust into” and isolated in an “unfamiliar,”
“police-dominated atmosphere,” Miranda, 384 U. S., at
456–457, where his captors “appear to control [his] fate,”
Illinois v. Perkins, 496 U. S. 292, 297 (1990). That was the
situation confronted by the suspects in Edwards,
Roberson, and Minnick, the three cases in which we have
held the Edwards rule applicable. Edwards was arrested
pursuant to a warrant and taken to a police station, where
he was interrogated until he requested counsel. Edwards,
451 U. S., at 478–479. The officer ended the interrogation
and took him to the county jail,2 but at 9:15 the next
——————
2 Jail

is a “local government’s detention center where persons await­
ing trial or those convicted of misdemeanors are confined.” Black’s Law
Dictionary 910 (9th ed. 2009). Prison, by contrast, is a “state or federal
facility of confinement for convicted criminals, esp. felons.” Id., at 1314.


8

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
Opinion of the Court

morning, two of the officer’s colleagues reinterrogated
Edwards at the jail. Id., at 479. Roberson was arrested
“at the scene of a just-completed burglary” and interro­
gated there until he requested a lawyer. Roberson, 486
U. S., at 678. A different officer interrogated him three
days later while he “was still in custody pursuant to the
arrest.” Ibid. Minnick was arrested by local police and
taken to the San Diego jail, where two FBI agents interro­
gated him the next morning until he requested counsel.
Minnick, 498 U. S., at 148–149. Two days later a Missis­
sippi Deputy Sheriff reinterrogated him at the jail. Id., at
149. None of these suspects regained a sense of control or
normalcy after they were initially taken into custody for
the crime under investigation.
When, unlike what happened in these three cases, a
suspect has been released from his pretrial custody and
has returned to his normal life for some time before the
later attempted interrogation, there is little reason to
think that his change of heart regarding interrogation
without counsel has been coerced. He has no longer been
isolated. He has likely been able to seek advice from an
attorney, family members, and friends.3 And he knows
from his earlier experience that he need only demand
counsel to bring the interrogation to a halt; and that in­
vestigative custody does not last indefinitely. In these
circumstances, it is far fetched to think that a police offi­
cer’s asking the suspect whether he would like to waive
his Miranda rights will any more “wear down the ac­
——————
3 JUSTICE

STEVENS points out, post, at 7 (opinion concurring in judg­
ment), that in Minnick, actual pre-reinterrogation consultation with an
attorney during continued custody did not suffice to avoid application of
Edwards. That does not mean that the ability to consult freely with
attorneys and others does not reduce the level of coercion at all, or that
it is “only questionably relevant,” post, at 7, to whether termination of
custody reduces the coercive pressure that is the basis for Edwards’
super-prophylactic rule.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

cused,” Smith v. Illinois, 469 U. S. 91, 98 (1984) (per cu
riam), than did the first such request at the original at­
tempted interrogation—which is of course not deemed
coercive. His change of heart is less likely attributable to
“badgering” than it is to the fact that further deliberation
in familiar surroundings has caused him to believe
(rightly or wrongly) that cooperating with the investiga­
tion is in his interest. Uncritical extension of Edwards to
this situation would not significantly increase the number
of genuinely coerced confessions excluded. The “justifica­
tion for a conclusive presumption disappears when appli­
cation of the presumption will not reach the correct result
most of the time.” Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722,
737 (1991).
At the same time that extending the Edwards rule
yields diminished benefits, extending the rule also in­
creases its costs: the in-fact voluntary confessions it ex­
cludes from trial, and the voluntary confessions it deters
law enforcement officers from even trying to obtain. Vol­
untary confessions are not merely “a proper element in
law enforcement,” Miranda, supra, at 478, they are an
“unmitigated good,” McNeil, 501 U. S., at 181, “ ‘essential
to society’s compelling interest in finding, convicting, and
punishing those who violate the law,’ ” ibid. (quoting
Moran v. Burbine, 475 U. S. 412, 426 (1986)).
The only logical endpoint of Edwards disability is ter­
mination of Miranda custody and any of its lingering
effects. Without that limitation—and barring some purely
arbitrary time-limit4—every Edwards prohibition of cus­
todial interrogation of a particular suspect would be eter­
——————
4 The

State’s alternative argument in the present case is that the
substantial lapse in time between the 2003 and 2006 attempts at
interrogation independently ended the Edwards presumption. Our
disposition makes it unnecessary to address that argument.


10

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
Opinion of the Court

nal. The prohibition applies, of course, when the subse­
quent interrogation pertains to a different crime,
Roberson, supra, when it is conducted by a different law
enforcement authority, Minnick, 498 U. S. 146, and even
when the suspect has met with an attorney after the first
interrogation, ibid. And it not only prevents questioning
ex ante; it would render invalid ex post, confessions invited
and obtained from suspects who (unbeknownst to the
interrogators) have acquired Edwards immunity previ­
ously in connection with any offense in any jurisdiction.5
In a country that harbors a large number of repeat offend­
ers,6 this consequence is disastrous.
We conclude that such an extension of Edwards is not
justified; we have opened its “protective umbrella,” Solem,
465 U. S., at 644, n. 4, far enough. The protections offered
by Miranda, which we have deemed sufficient to ensure
that the police respect the suspect’s desire to have an
attorney present the first time police interrogate him,
adequately ensure that result when a suspect who initially
requested counsel is reinterrogated after a break in cus­
——————
5 This assumes that Roberson’s extension of Edwards to subsequent
interrogation for a different crime, and Minnick’s extension of Edwards
to subsequent interrogation by a different law enforcement agency
would apply even when the place of custody and the identity of the
custodial agency are not the same (as they were in Roberson and
Minnick) as those of the original interrogation. That assumption would
seem reasonable if the Edwards-suspending effect of a termination of
custody is rejected. Reinterrogation in different custody or by a differ­
ent interrogating agency would seem, if anything, less likely than
termination of custody to reduce coercive pressures. At the original
site, and with respect to the original interrogating agency, the suspect
has already experienced cessation of interrogation when he demands
counsel—which he may have no reason to expect elsewhere.
6 According to a recent study, 67.5% of prisoners released from 15
States in 1994 were rearrested within three years. See Dept. of Justice,
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Special Report, Recidivism of Prisoners
Released in 1994 (NCJ 193427, 2002).


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

tody that is of sufficient duration to dissipate its coercive
effects.
If Shatzer’s return to the general prison population
qualified as a break in custody (a question we address in
Part III, infra), there is no doubt that it lasted long
enough (2½ years) to meet that durational requirement.
But what about a break that has lasted only one year? Or
only one week? It is impractical to leave the answer to
that question for clarification in future case-by-case adju­
dication; law enforcement officers need to know, with
certainty and beforehand, when renewed interrogation is
lawful. And while it is certainly unusual for this Court to
set forth precise time limits governing police action, it is
not unheard-of. In County of Riverside v. McLaughlin,
500 U. S. 44 (1991), we specified 48 hours as the time
within which the police must comply with the requirement
of Gerstein v. Pugh, 420 U. S. 103 (1975), that a person
arrested without a warrant be brought before a magistrate
to establish probable cause for continued detention.
Like McLaughlin, this is a case in which the requisite
police action (there, presentation to a magistrate; here,
abstention from further interrogation) has not been pre­
scribed by statute but has been established by opinion of
this Court. We think it appropriate to specify a period of
time to avoid the consequence that continuation of the
Edwards presumption “will not reach the correct result
most of the time.” Coleman, supra, at 737. It seems to us
that period is 14 days. That provides plenty of time for
the suspect to get reacclimated to his normal life, to con­
sult with friends and counsel, and to shake off any resid­
ual coercive effects of his prior custody.
The 14-day limitation meets Shatzer’s concern that a
break-in-custody rule lends itself to police abuse. He
envisions that once a suspect invokes his Miranda right to
counsel, the police will release the suspect briefly (to end
the Edwards presumption) and then promptly bring him


12

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
Opinion of the Court

back into custody for reinterrogation. But once the sus­
pect has been out of custody long enough (14 days) to
eliminate its coercive effect, there will be nothing to gain
by such gamesmanship—nothing, that is, except the en­
tirely appropriate gain of being able to interrogate a sus­
pect who has made a valid waiver of his Miranda rights.7
Shatzer argues that ending the Edwards protections at
a break in custody will undermine Edwards’ purpose to
conserve judicial resources. To be sure, we have said that
“[t]he merit of the Edwards decision lies in the clarity of
its command and the certainty of its application.”
Minnick, 498 U. S., at 151. But clarity and certainty are
not goals in themselves. They are valuable only when
they reasonably further the achievement of some substan­
tive end—here, the exclusion of compelled confessions.
Confessions obtained after a 2-week break in custody and
a waiver of Miranda rights are most unlikely to be com­
pelled, and hence are unreasonably excluded. In any case,
a break-in-custody exception will dim only marginally, if
at all, the bright-line nature of Edwards. In every case
involving Edwards, the courts must determine whether
the suspect was in custody when he requested counsel and
when he later made the statements he seeks to suppress.
Now, in cases where there is an alleged break in custody,
they simply have to repeat the inquiry for the time be­
tween the initial invocation and reinterrogation. In most
cases that determination will be easy. And when it is
——————
7 A defendant who experiences a 14-day break in custody after invok­
ing the Miranda right to counsel is not left without protection. Ed
wards establishes a presumption that a suspect’s waiver of Miranda
rights is involuntary. See Arizona v. Roberson, 486 U. S. 675, 681
(1988). Even without this “second layer of prophylaxis,” McNeil v.
Wisconsin, 501 U. S. 171, 176 (1991), a defendant is still free to claim
the prophylactic protection of Miranda—arguing that his waiver of
Miranda rights was in fact involuntary under Johnson v. Zerbst, 304
U. S. 458 (1938). See Miranda, 384 U. S., at 475.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

determined that the defendant pleading Edwards has
been out of custody for two weeks before the contested
interrogation, the court is spared the fact-intensive in­
quiry into whether he ever, anywhere, asserted his
Miranda right to counsel.
III
The facts of this case present an additional issue. No
one questions that Shatzer was in custody for Miranda
purposes during the interviews with Detective
Blankenship in 2003 and Detective Hoover in 2006. Like­
wise, no one questions that Shatzer triggered the Edwards
protections when, according to Detective Blankenship’s
notes of the 2003 interview, he stated that “ ‘he would not
talk about this case without having an attorney present,’ ”
405 Md., at 589, 954 A. 2d, at 1120. After the 2003 inter­
view, Shatzer was released back into the general prison
population where he was serving an unrelated sentence.
The issue is whether that constitutes a break in Miranda
custody.
We have never decided whether incarceration consti­
tutes custody for Miranda purposes, and have indeed
explicitly declined to address the issue. See Perkins, 496
U. S., at 299. See also Bradley v. Ohio, 497 U. S. 1011,
1013 (1990) (Marshall, J., dissenting from denial of certio­
rari). Whether it does depends upon whether it exerts the
coercive pressure that Miranda was designed to guard
against—the “danger of coercion [that] results from the
interaction of custody and official interrogation.” Perkins,
supra, at 297 (emphasis added). To determine whether a
suspect was in Miranda custody we have asked whether
“there is a ‘formal arrest or restraint on freedom of move­
ment’ of the degree associated with a formal arrest.” New
York v. Quarles, 467 U. S. 649, 655 (1984); see also Stans
bury v. California, 511 U. S. 318, 322 (1994) (per curiam).
This test, no doubt, is satisfied by all forms of incarcera­


14

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
Opinion of the Court

tion. Our cases make clear, however, that the freedom-of­
movement test identifies only a necessary and not a suffi­
cient condition for Miranda custody. We have declined to
accord it “talismanic power,” because Miranda is to be
enforced “only in those types of situations in which the
concerns that powered the decision are implicated.”
Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U. S. 420, 437 (1984). Thus, the
temporary and relatively nonthreatening detention in­
volved in a traffic stop or Terry stop, see Terry v. Ohio, 392
U. S. 1 (1968), does not constitute Miranda custody.
McCarty, supra, at 439–440. See also Perkins, supra, at
296.
Here, we are addressing the interim period during
which a suspect was not interrogated, but was subject to a
baseline set of restraints imposed pursuant to a prior
conviction. Without minimizing the harsh realities of
incarceration, we think lawful imprisonment imposed
upon conviction of a crime does not create the coercive
pressures identified in Miranda.
Interrogated suspects who have previously been con­
victed of crime live in prison. When they are released
back into the general prison population, they return to
their accustomed surroundings and daily routine—they
regain the degree of control they had over their lives prior
to the interrogation. Sentenced prisoners, in contrast to
the Miranda paradigm, are not isolated with their accus­
ers. They live among other inmates, guards, and workers,
and often can receive visitors and communicate with
people on the outside by mail or telephone.
Their detention, moreover, is relatively disconnected
from their prior unwillingness to cooperate in an investi­
gation. The former interrogator has no power to increase
the duration of incarceration, which was determined at
sentencing.8 And even where the possibility of parole
——————
8 We

distinguish the duration of incarceration from the duration of


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

exists, the former interrogator has no apparent power to
decrease the time served. This is in stark contrast to the
circumstances faced by the defendants in Edwards,
Roberson, and Minnick, whose continued detention as
suspects rested with those controlling their interrogation,
and who confronted the uncertainties of what final
charges they would face, whether they would be convicted,
and what sentence they would receive.
Shatzer’s experience illustrates the vast differences
between Miranda custody and incarceration pursuant to
conviction. At the time of the 2003 attempted interroga­
tion, Shatzer was already serving a sentence for a prior
conviction. After that, he returned to the general prison
population in the Maryland Correctional InstitutionHagerstown and was later transferred, for unrelated
reasons, down the street to the Roxbury Correctional
Institute. Both are medium-security state correctional
facilities. See Maryland Div. of Correction Inmate Hand­
book 7 (2007), online at http://dpscs.md.gov/rehabservs/
doc/pdfs/2007_Inmate_Handbook.pdf (all Internet materi­
als as visited Feb. 22, 2010, and available in Clerk of
Court’s case file). Inmates in these facilities generally can
visit the library each week, id., at 28; have regular exer­
cise and recreation periods, id., at 17; can participate
in basic adult education and occupational training, id.,
at 26, 7; are able to send and receive mail, id., at 21–22,
16; and are allowed to receive visitors twice a week,
see http://dpscs.md.gov/locations/mcih.shtml; http://www.
dpscs.state.md.us/locations/rci.shtml. His continued de­
——————
what might be termed interrogative custody. When a prisoner is
removed from the general prison population and taken to a separate
location for questioning, the duration of that separation is assuredly
dependent upon his interrogators. For which reason once he has
asserted a refusal to speak without assistance of counsel Edwards
prevents any efforts to get him to change his mind during that inter­
rogative custody.


16

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
Opinion of the Court

tention after the 2003 interrogation did not depend on
what he said (or did not say) to Detective Blankenship,
and he has not alleged that he was placed in a higher level
of security or faced any continuing restraints as a result of
the 2003 interrogation. The “inherently compelling pres­
sures” of custodial interrogation ended when he returned
to his normal life.
IV
A few words in response to JUSTICE STEVENS’ concur­
rence: It claims we ignore that “[w]hen police tell an indi­
gent suspect that he has the right to an attorney” and
then “reinterrogate” him without providing a lawyer, “the
suspect is likely to feel that the police lied to him and that
he really does not have any right to a lawyer.” Post, at 2
(opinion concurring in judgment) (hereinafter concur­
rence). See also post, at 4, 7, n. 11, 11, n. 16. The fallacy
here is that we are not talking about “reinterrogating” the
suspect; we are talking about asking his permission to be
interrogated. An officer has in no sense lied to a suspect
when, after advising, as Miranda requires, “You have the
right to remain silent, and if you choose to speak you have
the right to the presence of an attorney,” he promptly ends
the attempted interrogation because the suspect declines
to speak without counsel present, and then, two weeks
later, reapproaches the suspect and asks, “Are you now
willing to speak without a lawyer present?”
The “concer[n] that motivated the Edwards line of
cases,” post, at 2–3, n. 2, is that the suspect will be coerced
into saying yes. That concern guides our decision today.
Contrary to the concurrence’s conclusion, post, at 3, 5–6,
there is no reason to believe a suspect will view confession
as “ ‘the only way to end his interrogation’ ” when, before
the interrogation begins, he is told that he can avoid it by
simply requesting that he not be interrogated without
counsel present—an option that worked before. If, as the


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

concurrence argues will often be the case, post, at 5, a
break in custody does not change the suspect’s mind, he
need only say so.
The concurrence also accuses the Court of “ignor[ing]
that when a suspect asks for counsel, until his request is
answered, there are still the same ‘inherently compelling’
pressures of custodial interrogation on which the Miranda
line of cases is based.” Post, at 4. We do not ignore these
pressures; nor do we suggest that they disappear when
custody is recommenced after a break, see post, at 5. But
if those pressures are merely “the same” as before, then
Miranda provides sufficient protection—as it did before.
The Edwards presumption of involuntariness is justified
only in circumstances where the coercive pressures have
increased so much that suspects’ waivers of Miranda
rights are likely to be involuntary most of the time. Con­
trary to the concurrence’s suggestion, post, at 3, it is only
in those narrow circumstances—when custody is unbro­
ken—that the Court has concluded a “fresh se[t] of
Miranda warnings” is not sufficient. See Roberson, 486
U. S., at 686.
In the last analysis, it turns out that the concurrence
accepts our principal points. It agrees that Edwards
prophylaxis is not perpetual; it agrees that a break in
custody reduces the inherently compelling pressure upon
which Edwards was based; it agrees that Shatzer’s release
back into the general prison population constituted a
break in custody; and it agrees that in this case the break
was long enough to render Edwards inapplicable. Post, at
10–12. We differ in two respects: Instead of terminating
Edwards protection when the custodial pressures that
were the basis for that protection dissipate, the concur­
rence would terminate it when the suspect would no
longer “feel that he has ‘been denied the counsel he has
clearly requested,’ ” post, at 11. This is entirely unrelated
to the rationale of Edwards. If confidence in the police’s


18

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
Opinion of the Court

promise to provide counsel were the touchstone, Edwards
would not have applied in Minnick, where the suspect in
continuing custody actually met with appointed counsel.
The concurrence’s rule is also entirely unrelated to the
existence of a break in custody. While that may relieve
the accumulated coercive pressures of custody that are the
foundation for Edwards, it is hard to see how it bolsters
the suspect’s confidence that if he asks for counsel he will
get one.
And secondly, the concurrence differs from us in declin­
ing to say how long after a break in custody the termina­
tion of Edwards protection occurs. Two and one-half
years, it says, is clearly enough—but it gives law enforce­
ment authorities no further guidance. The concurrence
criticizes our use of 14 days as arbitrary and unexplained,
post, at 5, and n. 7. But in fact that rests upon the same
basis as the concurrence’s own approval of a 21⁄2-year
break in custody: how much time will justify “treating the
second interrogation as no more coercive than the first,”
post, at 10. Failure to say where the line falls short of 21⁄2
years, and leaving that for future case-by-case determina­
tion, is certainly less helpful, but not at all less arbitrary.
*
*
*
Because Shatzer experienced a break in Miranda cus­
tody lasting more than two weeks between the first and
second attempts at interrogation, Edwards does not man­
date suppression of his March 2006 statements. Accord­
ingly, we reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals of
Maryland, and remand the case for further proceedings
not inconsistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

