(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

STERN, EXECUTOR OF THE ESTATE OF MARSHALL
v. MARSHALL, EXECUTRIX OF THE ESTATE OF
MARSHALL
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–179.

Argued January 18, 2011—Decided June 23, 2011

Article III, §1, of the Constitution mandates that “[t]he judicial Power
of the United States, shall be vested in one supreme Court, and in
such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain
and establish,” and provides that the judges of those constitutional
courts “shall hold their Offices during good Behaviour” and “receive
for their Services[ ] a Compensation[ ] [that] shall not be diminished”
during their tenure. The questions presented in this case are
whether a bankruptcy court judge who did not enjoy such tenure and
salary protections had the authority under 28 U. S. C. §157 and Arti
cle III to enter final judgment on a counterclaim filed by Vickie Lynn
Marshall (whose estate is the petitioner) against Pierce Marshall
(whose estate is the respondent) in Vickie’s bankruptcy proceedings.
Vickie married J. Howard Marshall II, Pierce’s father, approxi
mately a year before his death. Shortly before J. Howard died, Vickie
filed a suit against Pierce in Texas state court, asserting that J.
Howard meant to provide for Vickie through a trust, and Pierce tor
tiously interfered with that gift. After J. Howard died, Vickie filed
for bankruptcy in federal court. Pierce filed a proof of claim in that
proceeding, asserting that he should be able to recover damages from
Vickie’s bankruptcy estate because Vickie had defamed him by induc
ing her lawyers to tell the press that he had engaged in fraud in con
trolling his father’s assets. Vickie responded by filing a counterclaim
for tortious interference with the gift she expected from J. Howard.
The Bankruptcy Court granted Vickie summary judgment on the
defamation claim and eventually awarded her hundreds of millions of
dollars in damages on her counterclaim. Pierce objected that the


2

STERN v. MARSHALL
Syllabus
Bankruptcy Court lacked jurisdiction to enter a final judgment on
that counterclaim because it was not a “core proceeding” as defined
by 28 U. S. C. §157(b)(2)(C). As set forth in §157(a), Congress has di
vided bankruptcy proceedings into three categories: those that
“aris[e] under title 11”; those that “aris[e] in” a Title 11 case; and
those that are “related to a case under title 11.” District courts may
refer all such proceedings to the bankruptcy judges of their district,
and bankruptcy courts may enter final judgments in “all core pro
ceedings arising under title 11, or arising in a case under title 11.”
§§157(a), (b)(1). In non-core proceedings, by contrast, a bankruptcy
judge may only “submit proposed findings of fact and conclusions of
law to the district court.” §157(c)(1). Section 157(b)(2) lists 16 cate
gories of core proceedings, including “counterclaims by the estate
against persons filing claims against the estate.” §157(b)(2)(C).
The Bankruptcy Court concluded that Vickie’s counterclaim was a
core proceeding. The District Court reversed, reading this Court’s
precedent in Northern Pipeline Constr. Co. v. Marathon Pipe Line
Co., 458 U. S. 50, to “suggest[ ] that it would be unconstitutional to
hold that any and all counterclaims are core.” The court held that
Vickie’s counterclaim was not core because it was only somewhat re
lated to Pierce’s claim, and it accordingly treated the Bankruptcy
Court’s judgment as proposed, not final. Although the Texas state
court had by that time conducted a jury trial on the merits of the par
ties’ dispute and entered a judgment in Pierce’s favor, the District
Court went on to decide the matter itself, in Vickie’s favor. The
Court of Appeals ultimately reversed. It held that the Bankruptcy
Court lacked authority to enter final judgment on Vickie’s counter
claim because the claim was not “so closely related to [Pierce’s] proof
of claim that the resolution of the counterclaim is necessary to re
solve the allowance or disallowance of the claim itself.” Because that
holding made the Texas probate court’s judgment the earliest final
judgment on matters relevant to the case, the Court of Appeals held
that the District Court should have given the state judgment preclu
sive effect.

Held: Although the Bankruptcy Court had the statutory authority to
enter judgment on Vickie’s counterclaim, it lacked the constitutional
authority to do so. Pp. 6–38.
1. Section 157(b) authorized the Bankruptcy Court to enter final
judgment on Vickie’s counterclaim. Pp. 8–16.
(a) The Bankruptcy Court had the statutory authority to enter
final judgment on Vickie’s counterclaim as a core proceeding under
§157(b)(2)(C). Pierce argues that §157(b) authorizes bankruptcy
courts to enter final judgments only in those proceedings that are
both core and either arise in a Title 11 case or arise under Title 11 it


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
self. But that reading necessarily assumes that there is a category of
core proceedings that do not arise in a bankruptcy case or under
bankruptcy law, and the structure of §157 makes clear that no such
category exists. Pp. 8–11.
(b) In the alternative, Pierce argues that the Bankruptcy Court
lacked jurisdiction to resolve Vickie’s counterclaim because his defa
mation claim is a “personal injury tort” that the Bankruptcy Court
lacked jurisdiction to hear under §157(b)(5). The Court agrees with
Vickie that §157(b)(5) is not jurisdictional, and Pierce consented to
the Bankruptcy Court’s resolution of the defamation claim. The
Court is not inclined to interpret statutes as creating a jurisdictional
bar when they are not framed as such. See generally Henderson v.
Shinseki, 562 U. S. ___; Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp., 546 U. S. 500. Sec
tion 157(b)(5) does not have the hallmarks of a jurisdictional decree,
and the statutory context belies Pierce’s claim that it is jurisdictional.
Pierce consented to the Bankruptcy Court’s resolution of the defama
tion claim by repeatedly advising that court that he was happy to
litigate his claim there. Pp. 12–16.
2. Although §157 allowed the Bankruptcy Court to enter final judg
ment on Vickie’s counterclaim, Article III of the Constitution did not.
Pp. 16–38.
(a) Article III is “an inseparable element of the constitutional
system of checks and balances” that “both defines the power and pro
tects the independence of the Judicial Branch.” Northern Pipeline,
458 U. S., at 58 (plurality opinion). Article III protects liberty not
only through its role in implementing the separation of powers, but
also by specifying the defining characteristics of Article III judges to
protect the integrity of judicial decisionmaking.
This is not the first time the Court has faced an Article III chal
lenge to a bankruptcy court’s resolution of a debtor’s suit. In North
ern Pipeline, the Court considered whether bankruptcy judges serv
ing under the Bankruptcy Act of 1978—who also lacked the tenure
and salary guarantees of Article III—could “constitutionally be
vested with jurisdiction to decide [a] state-law contract claim” against
an entity that was not otherwise part of the bankruptcy proceedings.
Id., at 53, 87, n. 40 (plurality opinion). The plurality in Northern
Pipeline recognized that there was a category of cases involving “pub
lic rights” that Congress could constitutionally assign to “legislative”
courts for resolution. A full majority of the Court, while not agreeing
on the scope of that exception, concluded that the doctrine did not en
compass adjudication of the state law claim at issue in that case, and
rejected the debtor’s argument that the Bankruptcy Court’s exercise
of jurisdiction was constitutional because the bankruptcy judge was
acting merely as an adjunct of the district court or court of appeals.


4

STERN v. MARSHALL
Syllabus
Id., at 69–72; see id., at 90–91 (Rehnquist, J., concurring in judg
ment). After the decision in Northern Pipeline, Congress revised the
statutes governing bankruptcy jurisdiction and bankruptcy judges.
With respect to the “core” proceedings listed in §157(b)(2), however,
the bankruptcy courts under the Bankruptcy Amendments and Fed
eral Judgeship Act of 1984 exercise the same powers they wielded
under the 1978 Act. The authority exercised by the newly consti
tuted courts over a counterclaim such as Vickie’s exceeds the bounds
of Article III. Pp. 16–22.
(b) Vickie’s counterclaim does not fall within the public rights ex
ception, however defined. The Court has long recognized that, in
general, Congress may not “withdraw from judicial cognizance any
matter which, from its nature, is the subject of a suit at the common
law, or in equity, or admiralty.” Murray’s Lessee v. Hoboken Land &
Improvement Co., 18 How. 272, 284. The Court has also recognized
that “[a]t the same time there are matters, involving public rights,
. . . which are susceptible of judicial determination, but which con
gress may or may not bring within the cognizance of the courts of the
United States, as it may deem proper.” Ibid. Several previous deci
sions have contrasted cases within the reach of the public rights ex
ception—those arising “between the Government and persons subject
to its authority in connection with the performance of the constitu
tional functions of the executive or legislative departments”—and
those that are instead matters “of private right, that is, of the liabil
ity of one individual to another under the law as defined.” Crowell v.
Benson, 285 U. S. 22, 50, 51.
Shortly after Northern Pipeline, the Court rejected the limitation of
the public rights exception to actions involving the Government as a
party. The Court has continued, however, to limit the exception to
cases in which the claim at issue derives from a federal regulatory
scheme, or in which resolution of the claim by an expert Government
agency is deemed essential to a limited regulatory objective within
the agency’s authority. In other words, it is still the case that what
makes a right “public” rather than private is that the right is inte
grally related to particular Federal Government action. See United
States v. Jicarilla Apache Nation, 564 U. S. ___, ___–___ (slip op., at
10–11); Thomas v. Union Carbide Agricultural Products Co., 473
U. S. 568, 584; Commodity Futures Trading Commission v. Schor,
478 U. S. 833, 844, 856.
In Granfinanciera, S. A. v. Nordberg, 492 U. S. 33, the most recent
case considering the public rights exception, the Court rejected a
bankruptcy trustee’s argument that a fraudulent conveyance action
filed on behalf of a bankruptcy estate against a noncreditor in a
bankruptcy proceeding fell within the exception. Vickie’s counter


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Syllabus
claim is similar. It is not a matter that can be pursued only by grace
of the other branches, as in Murray’s Lessee, 18 How., at 284; it does
not flow from a federal statutory scheme, as in Thomas, 473 U. S., at
584–585; and it is not “completely dependent upon” adjudication of a
claim created by federal law, as in Schor, 478 U. S., at 856. This case
involves the most prototypical exercise of judicial power: the entry of
a final, binding judgment by a court with broad substantive jurisdic
tion, on a common law cause of action, when the action neither de
rives from nor depends upon any agency regulatory regime. If such
an exercise of judicial power may nonetheless be taken from the Arti
cle III Judiciary simply by deeming it part of some amorphous “public
right,” then Article III would be transformed from the guardian of in
dividual liberty and separation of powers the Court has long recog
nized into mere wishful thinking. Pp. 22–29.
(c) The fact that Pierce filed a proof of claim in the bankruptcy
proceedings did not give the Bankruptcy Court the authority to adju
dicate Vickie’s counterclaim. Initially, Pierce’s defamation claim does
not affect the nature of Vickie’s tortious interference counterclaim as
one at common law that simply attempts to augment the bankruptcy
estate—the type of claim that, under Northern Pipeline and Granfi
nanciera, must be decided by an Article III court. The cases on which
Vickie relies, Katchen v. Landy, 382 U. S. 323, and Langenkamp v.
Culp, 498 U. S. 42 (per curiam), are inapposite. Katchen permitted a
bankruptcy referee to exercise jurisdiction over a trustee’s voidable
preference claim against a creditor only where there was no question
that the referee was required to decide whether there had been a
voidable preference in determining whether and to what extent to al
low the creditor’s claim. The Katchen Court “intimate[d] no opinion
concerning whether” the bankruptcy referee would have had “sum
mary jurisdiction to adjudicate a demand by the [bankruptcy] trustee
for affirmative relief, all of the substantial factual and legal bases for
which ha[d] not been disposed of in passing on objections to the
[creditor’s proof of ] claim.” 382 U. S., at 333, n. 9. The per curiam
opinion in Langenkamp is to the same effect. In this case, by con
trast, the Bankruptcy Court—in order to resolve Vickie’s counter
claim—was required to and did make several factual and legal de
terminations that were not “disposed of in passing on objections” to
Pierce’s proof of claim. In both Katchen and Langenkamp, moreover,
the trustee bringing the preference action was asserting a right of re
covery created by federal bankruptcy law. Vickie’s claim is instead a
state tort action that exists without regard to any bankruptcy pro
ceeding. Pp. 29–34.
(d) The bankruptcy courts under the 1984 Act are not “adjuncts”
of the district courts. The new bankruptcy courts, like the courts


6

STERN v. MARSHALL
Syllabus
considered in Northern Pipeline, do not “ma[k]e only specialized, nar
rowly confined factual determinations regarding a particularized
area of law” or engage in “statutorily channeled factfinding func
tions.” 458 U. S., at 85 (plurality opinion). Whereas the adjunct
agency in Crowell v. Benson “possessed only a limited power to issue
compensation orders . . . [that] could be enforced only by order of the
district court,” ibid., a bankruptcy court resolving a counterclaim un
der §157(b)(2)(C) has the power to enter “appropriate orders and
judgments”—including final judgments—subject to review only if a
party chooses to appeal, see §§157(b)(1), 158(a)–(b). Such a court is
an adjunct of no one. Pp. 34–36.
(e) Finally, Vickie and her amici predict that restrictions on a
bankruptcy court’s ability to hear and finally resolve compulsory
counterclaims will create significant delays and impose additional
costs on the bankruptcy process. It goes without saying that “the fact
that a given law or procedure is efficient, convenient, and useful in
facilitating functions of government, standing alone, will not save it if
it is contrary to the Constitution.” INS v. Chadha, 462 U. S. 919,
944. In addition, the Court is not convinced that the practical conse
quences of such limitations are as significant as Vickie suggests. The
framework Congress adopted in the 1984 Act already contemplates
that certain state law matters in bankruptcy cases will be resolved by
state courts and district courts, see §§157(c), 1334(c), and the Court
does not think the removal of counterclaims such as Vickie’s from
core bankruptcy jurisdiction meaningfully changes the division of la
bor in the statute. Pp. 36–38.

600 F. 3d 1037, affirmed.
ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which SCALIA,
KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., joined. SCALIA, J., filed a concurring
opinion. BREYER, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined.

