2

FELKNER v. JACKSON
Per Curiam

she had a master’s degree in social work, and had interned
at the county jail, “probably in the psych unit as a sociolo
gist of some sort.” The prosecutor explained that he dis
missed her “based on her educational background,” stating
that he does not “like to keep social workers.” Document
7, at 78–79; Document 10, at 188–189; App. to Pet. for
Cert. 49.
Jackson’s counsel expressly disagreed only with the
prosecutor’s explanation for the strike of Juror J, see App.
to Pet. for Cert. 22–23, 47, arguing that removing her on
the basis of her educational background was “itself invidi
ous discrimination.” The prosecutor responded that he
was not aware that social workers were a “protected
class.” As for Juror S, Jackson’s counsel explained that he
“let [Juror S] slide” because he anticipated the prosecutor’s
response and, in any event, he “only need[ed] one to estab
lish the grounds for” a Batson motion. After listening to
each side’s arguments, the trial court denied Jackson’s
motion. Document 7, at 78–80.
Jackson renewed his Batson claim on direct appeal,
arguing that a comparative juror analysis revealed that
the prosecutor’s explanations were pretextual.
With
respect to Juror S, Jackson argued that a non-black ju
ror—Juror 8—also had negative experiences with law
enforcement but remained on the jury. App. to Pet. for
Cert. 47–48. Juror 8 stated during jury selection that he
had been stopped while driving in Illinois several years
earlier as part of what he believed to be a “scam” by Illi
nois police targeting drivers with California license plates.
Juror 8 also complained that he had been disappointed by
the failure of law enforcement officers to investigate the
burglary of his car. Document 10, at 26–27, 56–57, 95–97.
With respect to Juror J, Jackson claimed that the prose
cutor asked follow-up questions of several white jurors
when he was concerned about their educational back
grounds, but struck Juror J without asking her any ques

