Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–525
_________________

JANUS CAPITAL GROUP, INC., ET AL., PETITIONERS
v. FIRST DERIVATIVE TRADERS
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT

[June 13, 2011] 


JUSTICE THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court.
This case requires us to determine whether Janus Capi
tal Management LLC (JCM), a mutual fund investment
adviser, can be held liable in a private action under Secu
rities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Rule 10b–5 for
false statements included in its client mutual funds’ pro
spectuses. Rule 10b–5 prohibits “mak[ing] any untrue
statement of a material fact” in connection with the pur
chase or sale of securities. 17 CFR §240.10b–5 (2010). We
conclude that JCM cannot be held liable because it did not
make the statements in the prospectuses.
I
Janus Capital Group, Inc. (JCG), is a publicly traded
company that created the Janus family of mutual funds.
These mutual funds are organized in a Massachusetts
business trust, the Janus Investment Fund. Janus In
vestment Fund retained JCG’s wholly owned subsidiary,
JCM, to be its investment adviser and administrator. JCG
and JCM are the petitioners here.
Although JCG created Janus Investment Fund, Janus
Investment Fund is a separate legal entity owned entirely


2

JANUS CAPITAL GROUP, INC. v. FIRST DERIVATIVE 

TRADERS
Opinion of the Court 





by mutual fund investors. Janus Investment Fund has no
assets apart from those owned by the investors. JCM
provides Janus Investment Fund with investment advi
sory services, which include “the management and admin
istrative services necessary for the operation of [Janus]
Fun[d],” App. 225a, but the two entities maintain legal
independence. At all times relevant to this case, all of
the officers of Janus Investment Fund were also officers of
JCM, but only one member of Janus Investment Fund’s
board of trustees was associated with JCM. This is more
independence than is required: By statute, up to 60 per
cent of the board of a mutual fund may be composed of
“interested persons.” See 54 Stat. 806, as amended, 15
U. S. C. §80a–10(a); see also 15 U. S. C. A. §80a–2(a)(19)
(2009 ed. and Feb. 2011 Supp.) (defining “interested
person”).
As the securities laws require, Janus Investment Fund
issued prospectuses describing the investment strategy
and operations of its mutual funds to investors. See 15
U. S. C. §§77b(a)(10), 77e(b)(2), 80a–8(b), 80a–2(a)(31),
80a–29(a)–(b). The prospectuses for several funds repre
sented that the funds were not suitable for market timing
and can be read to suggest that JCM would implement
policies to curb the practice.1 For example, the Janus
——————
1 Market timing is a trading strategy that exploits time delay in mu
tual funds’ daily valuation system. The price for buying or selling
shares of a mutual fund is ordinarily determined by the next net asset
value (NAV) calculation after the order is placed. The NAV calculation
usually happens once a day, at the close of the major U. S. markets.
Because of certain time delays, however, the values used in these
calculations do not always accurately reflect the true value of the
underlying assets. For example, a fund may value its foreign securities
based on the price at the close of the foreign market, which may have
occurred several hours before the calculation. But events might have
taken place after the close of the foreign market that could be expected
to affect their price. If the event were expected to increase the price of
the foreign securities, a market-timing investor could buy shares of a


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

Mercury Fund prospectus dated February 25, 2002, stated
that the fund was “not intended for market timing or
excessive trading” and represented that it “may reject any
purchase request . . . if it believes that any combination of
trading activity is attributable to market timing or is
otherwise excessive or potentially disruptive to the Fund.”
App. 141a. Although market timing is legal, it harms
other investors in the mutual fund.
In September 2003, the Attorney General of the State of
New York filed a complaint against JCG and JCM alleging
that JCG entered into secret arrangements to permit
market timing in several funds run by JCM. After the
complaint’s allegations became public, investors withdrew
significant amounts of money from the Janus Investment
Fund mutual funds.2 Because Janus Investment Fund
compensated JCM based on the total value of the funds
and JCM’s management fees comprised a significant
percentage of JCG’s income, Janus Investment Fund’s loss
of value affected JCG’s value as well. JCG’s stock price
fell nearly 25 percent, from $17.68 on September 2 to
$13.50 on September 26.
Respondent First Derivative Traders (First Derivative)
represents a class of plaintiffs who owned JCG stock as of
September 3, 2003. Its complaint asserts claims against
JCG and JCM for violations of Rule 10b–5 and §10(b) of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 48 Stat. 891, as
amended, 15 U. S. C. §78j(b). First Derivative alleges that
JCG and JCM “caused mutual fund prospectuses to be
issued for Janus mutual funds and made them available to
——————
mutual fund at the artificially low NAV and sell the next day when the
NAV corrects itself upward. See Disclosure Regarding Market Timing
and Selective Disclosure of Portfolio Holdings, 68 Fed. Reg. 70402
(proposed Dec. 17, 2003).
2 In 2004, JCG and JCM settled these allegations and agreed to re
duce their fees by $125 million and pay $50 million in civil penalties
and $50 million in disgorgement to the mutual fund investors.


4

JANUS CAPITAL GROUP, INC. v. FIRST DERIVATIVE 

TRADERS
Opinion of the Court 


the investing public, which created the misleading impres
sion that [JCG and JCM] would implement measures to
curb market timing in the Janus [mutual funds].” App. to
Pet. for Cert. 60a. “Had the truth been known, Janus
[mutual funds] would have been less attractive to inves
tors, and consequently, [JCG] would have realized lower
revenues, so [JCG’s] stock would have traded at lower
prices.” Id., at 72a.
First Derivative contends that JCG and JCM “materi
ally misled the investing public” and that class members
relied “upon the integrity of the market price of [JCG]
securities and market information relating to [JCG and
JCM].” Id., at 109a. The complaint also alleges that JCG
should be held liable for the acts of JCM as a “controlling
person” under 15 U. S. C. A. §78t(a) (Feb. 2011 Supp.)
(§20(a) of the Act).
The District Court dismissed the complaint for failure to
state a claim.3 In re Mutual Funds Inv. Litigation, 487
F. Supp. 2d 618, 620 (D Md. 2007). The Court of Appeals
for the Fourth Circuit reversed, holding that First Deriva
tive had sufficiently alleged that “JCG and JCM, by par
ticipating in the writing and dissemination of the prospec
tuses, made the misleading statements contained in the
documents.” In re Mutual Funds Inv. Litigation, 566 F. 3d
111, 121 (2009) (emphasis in original). With respect to the
element of reliance, the court found that investors would
infer that JCM “played a role in preparing or approving
the content of the Janus fund prospectuses,” id., at 127,
but that investors would not infer the same about JCG,
——————
3 The elements of a private action under Rule 10b–5 are “(1) a mate
rial misrepresentation or omission by the defendant; (2) scienter; (3) a
connection between the misrepresentation or omission and the pur
chase or sale of a security; (4) reliance upon the misrepresentation or
omission; (5) economic loss; and (6) loss causation.” Stoneridge Invest
ment Partners, LLC v. Scientific-Atlanta, Inc., 552 U. S. 148, 157
(2008).





Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

which could be liable only as a “control person” of JCM
under §20(a). Id., at 128, 129–130.
II
We granted certiorari to address whether JCM can be
held liable in a private action under Rule 10b–5 for false
statements included in Janus Investment Fund’s pro
spectuses. 561 U. S. ___ (2010). Under Rule 10b–5, it is
unlawful for “any person, directly or indirectly, . . . [t]o
make any untrue statement of a material fact” in connec
tion with the purchase or sale of securities. 17 CFR
§240.10b–5(b).4 To be liable, therefore, JCM must have
“made” the material misstatements in the prospectuses.
We hold that it did not.5
A
The SEC promulgated Rule 10b–5 pursuant to authority
granted under §10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, 15 U. S. C. §78j(b). Although neither Rule 10b–5
nor §10(b) expressly creates a private right of action, this
Court has held that “a private right of action is implied
under §10(b).” Superintendent of Ins. of N. Y. v. Bankers
Life & Casualty Co., 404 U. S. 6, 13, n. 9 (1971). That
holding “remains the law,” Stoneridge Investment Part
——————
4 Rule

10b–5 makes it “unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly,
by the use of any means or instrumentality of interstate commerce, or
of the mails or of any facility of any national securities exchange, . . .
[t]o make any untrue statement of a material fact or to omit to state a
material fact necessary in order to make the statements made, in the
light of the circumstances under which they were made, not misleading
. . . .” 17 CFR §240.10b–5(b).
5 Although First Derivative argued below that JCG violated Rule
10b–5 by making the statements in the prospectuses, it now seeks to
hold JCG liable solely as a control person of JCM under §20(a). The
only question we must answer, therefore, is whether JCM made the
misstatements. Whether First Derivative has stated a claim against
JCG as a control person depends on whether it has stated a claim
against JCM.


6

JANUS CAPITAL GROUP, INC. v. FIRST DERIVATIVE 

TRADERS
Opinion of the Court 


ners, LLC v. Scientific-Atlanta, Inc., 552 U. S. 148, 165
(2008), but “[c]oncerns with the judicial creation of a pri
vate cause of action caution against its expansion,” ibid.
Thus, in analyzing whether JCM “made” the statements
for purposes of Rule 10b–5, we are mindful that we must
give “narrow dimensions . . . to a right of action Congress
did not authorize when it first enacted the statute and did
not expand when it revisited the law.” Id., at 167.
1
One “makes” a statement by stating it. When “make” is
paired with a noun expressing the action of a verb, the
resulting phrase is “approximately equivalent in sense” to
that verb. 6 Oxford English Dictionary 66 (def. 59) (1933)
(hereinafter OED); accord, Webster’s New International
Dictionary 1485 (def. 43) (2d ed. 1934) (“Make followed by
a noun with the indefinite article is often nearly equiva
lent to the verb intransitive corresponding to that noun”).
For instance, “to make a proclamation” is the approximate
equivalent of “to proclaim,” and “to make a promise” ap
proximates “to promise.” See 6 OED 66 (def. 59). The
phrase at issue in Rule 10b–5, “[t]o make any . . . state
ment,” is thus the approximate equivalent of “to state.”
For purposes of Rule 10b–5, the maker of a statement is
the person or entity with ultimate authority over the
statement, including its content and whether and how to
communicate it. Without control, a person or entity can
merely suggest what to say, not “make” a statement in its
own right. One who prepares or publishes a statement on
behalf of another is not its maker. And in the ordinary
case, attribution within a statement or implicit from sur
rounding circumstances is strong evidence that a state
ment was made by—and only by—the party to whom it is
attributed. This rule might best be exemplified by the
relationship between a speechwriter and a speaker. Even
when a speechwriter drafts a speech, the content is en





Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

tirely within the control of the person who delivers it. And
it is the speaker who takes credit—or blame—for what is
ultimately said.
This rule follows from Central Bank of Denver, N. A. v.
First Interstate Bank of Denver, N. A., 511 U. S. 164
(1994), in which we held that Rule 10b–5’s private right of
action does not include suits against aiders and abettors.
See id., at 180. Such suits—against entities that contrib
ute “substantial assistance” to the making of a statement
but do not actually make it—may be brought by the SEC,
see 15 U. S. C. A. §78t(e), but not by private parties. A
broader reading of “make,” including persons or entities
without ultimate control over the content of a statement,
would substantially undermine Central Bank. If persons
or entities without control over the content of a statement
could be considered primary violators who “made” the
statement, then aiders and abettors would be almost
nonexistent.6
This interpretation is further supported by our recent
decision in Stoneridge. There, investors sued “entities
who, acting both as customers and suppliers, agreed to
arrangements that allowed the investors’ company to
mislead its auditor and issue a misleading financial
statement.” 552 U. S., at 152–153. We held that dis
missal of the complaint was proper because the public
——————
6 The dissent correctly notes that Central Bank involved secondary,
not primary, liability. Post, at 4 (opinion of BREYER, J.). But for Cen
tral Bank to have any meaning, there must be some distinction be
tween those who are primarily liable (and thus may be pursued in
private suits) and those who are secondarily liable (and thus may not
be pursued in private suits).
We draw a clean line between the two—the maker is the person or
entity with ultimate authority over a statement and others are not. In
contrast, the dissent’s only limit on primary liability is not much of a
limit at all. It would allow for primary liability whenever “[t]he specific
relationships alleged . . . warrant [that] conclusion”—whatever that
may mean. Post, at 11.


8

JANUS CAPITAL GROUP, INC. v. FIRST DERIVATIVE 

TRADERS
Opinion of the Court 





could not have relied on the entities’ undisclosed deceptive
acts. Id., at 166–167. Significantly, in reaching that
conclusion we emphasized that “nothing [the defendants]
did made it necessary or inevitable for [the company] to
record the transactions as it did.” Id., at 161.7 This em
phasis suggests the rule we adopt today: that the maker of
a statement is the entity with authority over the content
of the statement and whether and how to communicate it.
Without such authority, it is not “necessary or inevitable”
that any falsehood will be contained in the statement.
Our holding also accords with the narrow scope that we
must give the implied private right of action. Id., at 167.
Although the existence of the private right is now settled,
we will not expand liability beyond the person or entity
that ultimately has authority over a false statement.
2
The Government contends that “make” should be de
fined as “create.” Brief for United States as Amicus Cu
riae 14–15 (citing Webster’s New International Dictionary
1485 (2d ed. 1958) (defining “make” as “[t]o cause to exist,
appear, or occur”)). This definition, although perhaps
appropriate when “make” is directed at an object unasso
ciated with a verb (e.g., “to make a chair”), fails to capture
its meaning when directed at an object expressing the
action of a verb.
Adopting the Government’s definition of “make” would
also lead to results inconsistent with our precedent. The
Government’s definition would permit private plaintiffs to
sue a person who “provides the false or misleading infor
mation that another person then puts into the statement.”
——————
7 We agree that “no one in Stoneridge contended that the equipment
suppliers were, in fact, the makers of the cable company’s misstate
ments.” Post, at 8. If Stoneridge had addressed whether the equipment
suppliers were “makers,” today’s decision would be unnecessary. The
point is that Stoneridge’s analysis suggests that they were not.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 13.8 But in
Stoneridge, we rejected a private Rule 10b–5 suit against
companies involved in deceptive transactions, even when
information about those transactions was later incorpo
rated into false public statements. 552 U. S., at 161. We
see no reason to treat participating in the drafting of a
false statement differently from engaging in deceptive
transactions, when each is merely an undisclosed act
preceding the decision of an independent entity to make a
public statement.
For its part, First Derivative suggests that the “well
recognized and uniquely close relationship between a
mutual fund and its investment adviser” should inform
our decision. Brief for Respondent 21. It suggests that an
investment adviser should generally be understood to be
the “maker” of statements by its client mutual fund, like
a playwright whose lines are delivered by an actor. We
decline this invitation to disregard the corporate form.
Although First Derivative and its amici persuasively
argue that investment advisers exercise significant influ
——————
8 Because

we do not find the meaning of “make” in Rule 10b–5 to be
ambiguous, we need not consider the Government’s assertion that we
should defer to the SEC’s interpretation of the word elsewhere. Brief
for United States as Amicus Curiae 13 (citing Brief for SEC as Amicus
Curiae in Pacific Inv. Mgmt. Co. LLC v. Mayer Brown LLP, No. 09–
1619 (CA2), p. 7); see Christensen v. Harris County, 529 U. S. 576, 588
(2000). We note, however, that we have previously expressed skepti
cism over the degree to which the SEC should receive deference regard
ing the private right of action. See Piper v. Chris-Craft Industries, Inc.,
430 U. S. 1, 41, n. 27 (1977) (noting that the SEC’s presumed expertise
“is of limited value” when analyzing “whether a cause of action should
be implied by judicial interpretation in favor of a particular class of
litigants”). This also is not the first time this Court has disagreed with
the SEC’s broad view of §10(b) or Rule 10b–5. See, e.g., Central Bank of
Denver, N. A. v. First Interstate Bank of Denver, N. A., 511 U. S. 164,
188–191 (1994); Dirks v. SEC, 463 U. S. 646, 666, n. 27 (1983); Ernst &
Ernst v. Hochfelder, 425 U. S. 185, 207 (1976); Blue Chip Stamps v.
Manor Drug Stores, 421 U. S. 723, 746, n. 10 (1975).


10

JANUS CAPITAL GROUP, INC. v. FIRST DERIVATIVE
TRADERS
Opinion of the Court

ence over their client funds, see Jones v. Harris Associates
L. P., 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 1–2), it is un
disputed that the corporate formalities were observed
here. JCM and Janus Investment Fund remain legally
separate entities, and Janus Investment Fund’s board of
trustees was more independent than the statute requires.
15 U. S. C. §80a–10.9 Any reapportionment of liability in
the securities industry in light of the close relationship
between investment advisers and mutual funds is properly
the responsibility of Congress and not the courts. More
over, just as with the Government’s theory, First Deriva
tive’s rule would create the broad liability that we rejected
in Stoneridge.
Congress also has established liability in §20(a) for
“[e]very person who, directly or indirectly, controls any
person liable” for violations of the securities laws. 15
U. S. C. A. §78t(a). First Derivative’s theory of liability
based on a relationship of influence resembles the liability
imposed by Congress for control. To adopt First Deriva
tive’s theory would read into Rule 10b–5 a theory of liabil
ity similar to—but broader in application than, see post, at
9—what Congress has already created expressly else
where.10 We decline to do so.
B
Under this rule, JCM did not “make” any of the state
——————
9 Nor

does First Derivative contend that any statements made by
JCM to Janus Investment Fund were “public statements” for the
purposes of Basic Inc. v. Levinson, 485 U. S. 224, 227–228 (1988). We
do not address whether and in what circumstances statements would
qualify as “public.” Cf. post, at 12–13 (citing cases involving liability for
statements made to analysts); In re Aetna, Inc. Securities Litigation,
617 F. 3d 272, 275–277 (CA3 2010) (involving allegations that defen
dants “publicly tout[ed]” falsities on analyst conference calls).
10 We do not address whether Congress created liability for entities
that act through innocent intermediaries in 15 U. S. C. A. §78t(b). See
Tr. of Oral Arg. 6, 61.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

ments in the Janus Investment Fund prospectuses; Janus
Investment Fund did. Only Janus Investment Fund—not
JCM—bears the statutory obligation to file the prospec
tuses with the SEC. 15 U. S. C. §§77e(b)(2), 80a–8(b),
80a–29(a)–(b); see also 17 CFR §230.497 (imposing re
quirements on “investment companies”). The SEC has
recorded that Janus Investment Fund filed the prospec
tuses. See JIF Group1 Standalone Prospectuses (Feb. 25,
2002), online at http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/
277751 / 000027775102000049 / 0000277751-02-000049.txt
(as visited June 10, 2011, and available in Clerk of Court’s
case file) (recording the “Filer” of the Janus Mercury Fund
prospectus as “Janus Investment Fund”). There is no
allegation that JCM in fact filed the prospectuses and
falsely attributed them to Janus Investment Fund. Nor
did anything on the face of the prospectuses indicate that
any statements therein came from JCM rather than Janus
Investment Fund—a legally independent entity with its
own board of trustees.11
——————
11 First Derivative suggests that “indirectly” in Rule 10b–5 may
broaden the meaning of “make.” We disagree. The phrase “directly or
indirectly” is set off by itself in Rule 10b–5 and modifies not just “to
make,” but also “to employ” and “to engage.” We think the phrase
merely clarifies that as long as a statement is made, it does not matter
whether the statement was communicated directly or indirectly to the
recipient. A different understanding of “indirectly” would, like a broad
definition of “make,” threaten to erase the line between primary viola
tors and aiders and abettors established by Central Bank.
In this case, we need not define precisely what it means to communi
cate a “made” statement indirectly because none of the statements in
the prospectuses were attributed, explicitly or implicitly, to JCM.
Without attribution, there is no indication that Janus Investment Fund
was quoting or otherwise repeating a statement originally “made” by
JCM. Cf. Anixter v. Home-Stake Production Co., 77 F. 3d 1215, 1220, and
n. 4 (CA10 1996) (quoting a signed “ ‘Auditor’s Report’ ” included in a pro
spectus); Basic, supra, at 227, n. 4 (quoting a news item reporting a state
ment by Basic’s president). More may be required to find that a person
or entity made a statement indirectly, but attribution is necessary.


12

JANUS CAPITAL GROUP, INC. v. FIRST DERIVATIVE
TRADERS
Opinion of the Court 





First Derivative suggests that both JCM and Janus
Investment Fund might have “made” the misleading
statements within the meaning of Rule 10b–5 because
JCM was significantly involved in preparing the prospec
tuses. But this assistance, subject to the ultimate control
of Janus Investment Fund, does not mean that JCM
“made” any statements in the prospectuses. Although
JCM, like a speechwriter, may have assisted Janus In
vestment Fund with crafting what Janus Investment
Fund said in the prospectuses, JCM itself did not “make”
those statements for purposes of Rule 10b–5.12
*
*
*
The statements in the Janus Investment Fund prospec
tuses were made by Janus Investment Fund, not by JCM.
Accordingly, First Derivative has not stated a claim
against JCM under Rule 10b–5. The judgment of the
United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit is
reversed.
It is so ordered.

——————
12 That JCM provided access to Janus Investment Fund’s prospec
tuses on its Web site is also not a basis for liability. Merely hosting a
document on a Web site does not indicate that the hosting entity adopts
the document as its own statement or exercises control over its content.
Cf. United States v. Ware, 577 F. 3d 442, 448 (CA2 2009) (involving the
issuance of false press releases through innocent companies). In doing
so, we do not think JCM made any of the statements in Janus Invest
ment Fund’s prospectuses for purposes of Rule 10b–5 liability, just as
we do not think that the SEC “makes” the statements in the many
prospectuses available on its Web site.

