Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–699
_________________

MENACHEM BINYAMIN ZIVOTOFSKY, BY HIS PARENTS





AND GUARDIANS, ARI Z. AND NAOMI SIEGMAN

ZIVOTOFSKY, PETITIONER v. HILLARY



RODHAM CLINTON, SECRETARY 

OF STATE



ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT



[March 26, 2012]




JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, with whom JUSTICE BREYER joins
as to Part I, concurring in part and concurring in the
judgment.
As this case illustrates, the proper application of Baker’s
six factors has generated substantial confusion in the
lower courts. I concur in the Court’s conclusion that this
case does not present a political question. I write separately, however, because I understand the inquiry required by the political question doctrine to be more demanding than that suggested by the Court.
I
The political question doctrine speaks to an amalgam of
circumstances in which courts properly examine whether
a particular suit is justiciable—that is, whether the dispute is appropriate for resolution by courts. The doctrine
is “essentially a function of the separation of powers,”
Baker v. Carr, 369 U. S. 186, 217 (1962), which recognizes
the limits that Article III imposes upon courts and accords
appropriate respect to the other branches’ exercise of their
own constitutional powers.
In Baker, this Court identified six circumstances in


2

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

which an issue might present a political question: (1) “a
textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the
issue to a coordinate political department”; (2) “a lack of
judicially discoverable and manageable standards for
resolving it”; (3) “the impossibility of deciding without an
initial policy determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion”; (4) “the impossibility of a court’s undertaking independent resolution without expressing lack of the
respect due coordinate branches of government”; (5) “an
unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political
decision already made”; or (6) “the potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious pronouncements by various
departments on one question.” Id., at 217. Baker established that “[u]nless one of these formulations is inextricable from the case at bar, there should be no dismissal for
nonjusticiability.” Ibid. But Baker left unanswered when
the presence of one or more factors warrants dismissal,
as well as the interrelationship of the six factors and the
relative importance of each in determining whether a case
is suitable for adjudication.
In my view, the Baker factors reflect three distinct
justifications for withholding judgment on the merits of a
dispute. When a case would require a court to decide an
issue whose resolution is textually committed to a coordinate political department, as envisioned by Baker’s first
factor, abstention is warranted because the court lacks
authority to resolve that issue. See, e.g., Nixon v. United
States, 506 U. S. 224, 229 (1993) (holding nonjusticiable
the Senate’s impeachment procedures in light of Article I’s
commitment to the Senate of the “ ‘sole Power to try all
Impeachments’ ”); see also Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch
137, 165–166 (1803) (“By the constitution of the United
States, the president is invested with certain important
political powers, in the exercise of which he is to use
his own discretion, and is accountable only to his country
in his political character, and to his own conscience”). In


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

such cases, the Constitution itself requires that another
branch resolve the question presented.
The second and third Baker factors reflect circumstances in which a dispute calls for decisionmaking beyond
courts’ competence. “ ‘The judicial Power’ created by Article III, §1, of the Constitution is not whatever judges
choose to do,” but rather the power “to act in the manner
traditional for English and American courts.” Vieth v.
Jubelirer, 541 U. S. 267, 278 (2004) (plurality opinion).
That traditional role involves the application of some
manageable and cognizable standard within the competence of the Judiciary to ascertain and employ to the facts
of a concrete case. When a court is given no standard by
which to adjudicate a dispute, or cannot resolve a dispute
in the absence of a yet-unmade policy determination
charged to a political branch, resolution of the suit is beyond the judicial role envisioned by Article III. See, e.g.,
Gilligan v. Morgan, 413 U. S. 1, 10 (1973) (“[I]t is difficult
to conceive of an area of governmental activity in which
the courts have less competence” than “[t]he complex,
subtle, and professional decisions as to the composition,
training, equipping, and control of a military force”); Vieth,
541 U. S., at 278 (“One of the most obvious limitations
imposed by [Article III] is that judicial action must be
governed by standard . . . ”). This is not to say, of course,
that courts are incapable of interpreting or applying
somewhat ambiguous standards using familiar tools of
statutory or constitutional interpretation. But where an
issue leaves courts truly rudderless, there can be “no
doubt of [the] validity” of a court’s decision to abstain from
judgment. Ibid.
The final three Baker factors address circumstances in
which prudence may counsel against a court’s resolution of
an issue presented. Courts should be particularly cautious
before forgoing adjudication of a dispute on the basis that
judicial intervention risks “embarrassment from multifar-


4

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

ious pronouncements by various departments on one
question,” would express a “lack of the respect due coordinate branches of government,” or because there exists an
“unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political
decision already made.” 369 U. S., at 217. We have repeatedly rejected the view that these thresholds are met
whenever a court is called upon to resolve the constitutionality or propriety of the act of another branch of Government. See, e.g., United States v. Munoz-Flores, 495
U. S. 385, 390–391 (1990); Powell v. McCormack, 395 U. S.
486, 548, 549 (1969). A court may not refuse to adjudicate
a dispute merely because a decision “may have significant
political overtones” or affect “the conduct of this Nation’s
foreign relations,” Japan Whaling Assn. v. American
Cetacean Soc., 478 U. S. 221, 230 (1986). Nor may courts
decline to resolve a controversy within their traditional
competence and proper jurisdiction simply because the
question is difficult, the consequences weighty, or the
potential real for conflict with the policy preferences of
the political branches. The exercise of such authority is
among the “gravest and most delicate dut[ies] that this
Court is called on to perform,” Blodgett v. Holden, 275
U. S. 142, 148 (1927) (Holmes, J., concurring), but it is
the role assigned to courts by the Constitution. “Questions
may occur which we would gladly avoid; but we cannot
avoid them. All we can do is, to exercise our best judgment, and conscientiously to perform our duty.” Cohens v.
Virginia, 6 Wheat. 264, 404 (1821).
Rare occasions implicating Baker’s final factors, however, may present an “ ‘unusual case’ ” unfit for judicial
disposition. 369 U. S., at 218 (quoting the argument of
Daniel Webster in Luther v. Borden, 7 How. 1, 29 (1849)).
Because of the respect due to a coequal and independent
department, for instance, courts properly resist calls to
question the good faith with which another branch attests
to the authenticity of its internal acts. See, e.g., Field v.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

Clark, 143 U. S. 649, 672–673 (1892) (deeming “forbidden
by the respect due to a coordinate branch of the government” “[j]udicial action” requiring a belief in a “deliberate
conspiracy” by the Senate and House of Representatives
“to defeat an expression of the popular will”); see also
Munoz-Flores, 495 U. S., at 409–410 (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment) (“Mutual regard between the coordinate
branches, and the interest of certainty, both demand that
official representations regarding . . . matters of internal
process be accepted at face value”). Likewise, we have
long acknowledged that courts are particularly ill suited
to intervening in exigent disputes necessitating unusual
need for “attributing finality to the action of the political
departments,” Coleman v. Miller, 307 U. S. 433, 454
(1939), or creating acute “risk [of] embarrassment of our
government abroad, or grave disturbance at home,” Baker,
369 U. S., at 226. See, e.g., Luther, 7 How., at 43 (“After
the President has acted and called out the militia, is a
Circuit Court of the United States authorized to inquire
whether his decision was right? . . . If the judicial power
extends so far, the guarantee contained in the Constitution of the United States is a guarantee of anarchy, and
not of order”).1 Finally, it may be appropriate for courts to
stay their hand in cases implicating delicate questions
concerning the distribution of political authority between
coordinate branches until a dispute is ripe, intractable,
and incapable of resolution by the political process. See
——————
1 See also Martin v. Mott, 12 Wheat. 19, 29–30 (1827) (Story, J.) (declining to review the President’s determination that an “exigency has
arisen,” necessitating the “call [of] the militia into actual service,”
recognizing need for “[a] prompt and unhesitating obedience to orders is
indispensable”); Ware v. Hylton, 3 Dall. 199, 260 (1796) (Iredell, J.,
concurring) (to declare treaty with Great Britain void would turn on
“considerations of policy, considerations of extreme magnitude, [which
are] certainly entirely incompetent to the examination and decision of a
Court of Justice”).


6

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

Goldwater v. Carter, 444 U. S. 996, 997 (1979) (Powell, J.,
concurring in judgment). Abstention merely reflects that
judicial intervention in such cases is “legitimate only in
the last resort,” Chicago & Grand Trunk R. Co. v. Wellman, 143 U. S. 339, 345 (1892), and is disfavored relative
to the prospect of accommodation between the political
branches.
When such unusual cases arise, abstention accommodates considerations inherent in the separation of powers
and the limitations envisioned by Article III, which conferred authority to federal courts against a common-law
backdrop that recognized the propriety of abstention in
exceptional cases. New Orleans Public Service, Inc. v.
Council of City of New Orleans, 491 U. S. 350, 359 (1989);
see generally Shapiro, Jurisdiction and Discretion, 60
N. Y. U. L. Rev. 543 (1985) (hereinafter Shapiro). The
political questions envisioned by Baker’s final categories
find common ground, therefore, with many longstanding
doctrines under which considerations of justiciability or
comity lead courts to abstain from deciding questions
whose initial resolution is better suited to another time,
see, e.g., National Park Hospitality Assn. v. Department of
Interior, 538 U. S. 803, 808 (2003) (ripeness); United
States Parole Comm’n v. Geraghty, 445 U. S. 388, 397
(1980) (mootness); or another forum, see, e.g., Gulf Oil
Corp. v. Gilbert, 330 U. S. 501, 507 (1947) (forum non
conveniens); Railroad Comm’n of Tex. v. Pullman Co., 312
U. S. 496, 498–500 (1941); Louisiana Power & Light Co. v.
City of Thibodaux, 360 U. S. 25, 25–30 (1959); Burford v.
Sun Oil Co., 319 U. S. 315, 333–334 (1943) (abstention in
favor of a state forum); United States v. Western Pacific R. Co., 352 U. S. 59, 63–64 (1956) (primary jurisdiction doctrine). See also DaimlerChrysler Corp. v. Cuno, 547
U. S. 332, 352 (2006) (“The doctrines of mootness, ripeness, and political question all originate in Article III’s
‘case’ or ‘controversy’ language”); Shapiro 550–557, 580–


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

587 (describing practices of judicial abstention sounding in
justiciability, comity, forum non conveniens, and separation of powers).
To be sure, it will be the rare case in which Baker’s final
factors alone render a case nonjusticiable.2 But our long
historical tradition recognizes that such exceptional cases
arise, and due regard for the separation of powers and the
judicial role envisioned by Article III confirms that abstention may be an appropriate response.
II
The court below held that this case presented a political
question because it thought petitioner’s suit asked the
court to decide an issue “textually committed” to a coordinate branch—namely, “to review a policy of the State
Department implementing the President’s decision” to
keep the United States out of the debate over the status of
Jersualem. 571 F. 3d 1227, 1231–1232 (CADC 2009).
Largely for the reasons set out by the Court, I agree that
the Court of Appeals misapprehended the nature of its
task. In two respects, however, my understanding of the
political question doctrine might require a court to engage
in further analysis beyond that relied upon by the Court.
First, the Court appropriately recognizes that petitioner’s claim to a statutory right is “relevant” to the justiciability inquiry required in this case. Ante, at 6. In order to
evaluate whether a case presents a political question, a
court must first identify with precision the issue it is being
——————
2 Often when such factors are implicated in a case presenting a political question, other factors identified in Baker will likewise be apparent.
See, e.g., Nixon v. United States, 506 U. S. 224, 236 (1993) (“[i]n addition to the textual commitment argument,” finding persuasive that
“opening the door of judicial review” of impeachment procedures would
“ ‘expose the political life of the country to months, or perhaps years, of
chaos’ ”); Baker, 369 U. S., at 222 (explaining that the Court in Luther
v. Borden, 7 How. 1 (1849), found present features associated with each
of the three rationales underlying Baker’s factors).


8

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

asked to decide. Here, petitioner’s suit claims that a
federal statute provides him with a right to have “Israel”
listed as his place of birth on his passport and other related documents. App. 15–18. To decide that question, a
court must determine whether the statute is constitutional, and therefore mandates the Secretary of State to
issue petitioner’s desired passport, or unconstitutional, in
which case his suit is at an end. Resolution of that issue is
not one “textually committed” to another branch; to the
contrary, it is committed to this one. In no fashion does the
question require a court to review the wisdom of the President’s policy toward Jerusalem or any other decision
committed to the discretion of a coordinate department.
For that reason, I agree that the decision below should be
reversed.
That is not to say, however, that no statute could give
rise to a political question. It is not impossible to imagine
a case involving the application or even the constitutionality of an enactment that would present a nonjusticiable
issue. Indeed, this Court refused to determine whether an
Ohio state constitutional provision offended the Republican Guarantee Clause, Art. IV, §4, holding that “the
question of whether that guarantee of the Constitution
has been disregarded presents no justiciable controversy.”
Ohio ex rel. Davis v. Hildebrant, 241 U. S. 565, 569 (1916).
A similar result would follow if Congress passed a statute,
for instance, purporting to award financial relief to those
improperly “tried” of impeachment offenses. To adjudicate
claims under such a statute would require a court to resolve the very same issue we found nonjusticiable in
Nixon. Such examples are atypical, but they suffice to show
that the foreclosure altogether of political question analysis in statutory cases is unwarranted.
Second, the Court suggests that this case does not implicate the political question doctrine’s concern with issues
exhibiting “ ‘a lack of judicially discoverable and managea-


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

ble standards,’ ” ante, at 8, because the parties’ arguments
rely on textual, structural, and historical evidence of the
kind that courts routinely consider. But that was equally
true in Nixon, a case in which we found that “the use of
the word ‘try’ in the first sentence of the Impeachment
Trial Clause lacks sufficient precision to afford any judicially manageable standard of review of the Senate’s
actions.” 506 U. S., at 230. We reached that conclusion
even though the parties’ briefs focused upon the text of the
Impeachment Trial Clause, “the Constitution’s drafting
history,” “contemporaneous commentary,” “the unbroken
practice of the Senate for 150 years,” contemporary dictionary meanings, “Hamilton’s Federalist essays,” and the
practice in the House of Lords prior to ratification. Such
evidence was no more or less unfamiliar to courts than
that on which the parties rely here.
In my view, it is not whether the evidence upon which
litigants rely is common to judicial consideration that
determines whether a case lacks judicially discoverable
and manageable standards. Rather, it is whether that
evidence in fact provides a court a basis to adjudicate
meaningfully the issue with which it is presented. The
answer will almost always be yes, but if the parties’ textual, structural, and historical evidence is inapposite or
wholly unilluminating, rendering judicial decision no more
than guesswork, a case relying on the ordinary kinds of
arguments offered to courts might well still present justiciability concerns.
In this case, however, the Court of Appeals majority
found a political question solely on the basis that this case
required resolution of an issue “textually committed” to
the Executive Branch. Because there was no such textual
commitment, I respectfully concur in the Court’s decision
to reverse the Court of Appeals.

