(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ZIVOTOFSKY, BY HIS PARENTS AND GUARDIANS,



ZIVOTOFSKY ET UX. v. CLINTON, SECRETARY 



OF STATE

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT
No. 10–699.

Argued November 7, 2011—Decided March 26, 2012

Petitioner Menachem Binyamin Zivotofsky was born in Jerusalem. His
mother requested that Zivotofsky’s place of birth be listed as “Israel”
on a consular report of birth abroad and on his passport, pursuant to
§214(d) of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Year 2003.
That provision states: “For purposes of the registration of birth, certification of nationality, or issuance of a passport of a United States citizen born in the city of Jerusalem, the Secretary shall, upon the request of the citizen or the citizen’s legal guardian, record the place of
birth as Israel.” U. S. officials refused the request, citing a State Department policy that prohibits recording “Israel” as the place of birth
for those born in Jerusalem. Zivotofsky’s parents filed a suit on his
behalf against the Secretary of State. The District Court dismissed
the case, holding that it presented a nonjusticiable political question
regarding Jerusalem’s political status. The D. C. Circuit affirmed,
reasoning that the Constitution gives the Executive the exclusive
power to recognize foreign sovereigns, and that the exercise of that
power cannot be reviewed by the courts.
Held: The political question doctrine does not bar judicial review of Zivotofsky’s claim. Pp. 5−12.
(a) This Court has said that a controversy “involves a political
question . . . where there is ‘a textually demonstrable constitutional
commitment of the issue to a coordinate political department; or a
lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for resolving it.’ ” Nixon v. United States, 506 U. S. 224, 228. The lower courts
ruled that this case presents such a political question because they


2

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Syllabus
misunderstood the issue, assuming resolution of Zivotofsky’s claim
would require the Judiciary to define U. S. policy regarding the status of Jerusalem. In fact, this case asks the courts to determine only
whether Zivotofsky can vindicate his statutory right under §214(d) to
choose to have Israel recorded as his place of birth on his passport.
Making such determinations is a familiar judicial exercise. Moreover, because the parties do not dispute the interpretation of §214(d),
the only real question for the courts is whether the statute is constitutional. There is no “textually demonstrable constitutional commitment” of that question to another branch: At least since Marbury
v. Madison, 1 Cranch 137, this Court has recognized that it is “emphatically the province and duty” of the Judiciary to determine the
constitutionality of a statute. Nor is there “a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for resolving” the question: Both
parties offer detailed legal arguments concerning whether the textual, structural, and historical evidence supports a determination that
§214(d) is constitutional. Pp. 5–12.
(b) Because the lower courts erroneously concluded that the case
presents a political question, they did not reach the merits of Zivotofsky’s claim. This Court is “a court of final review and not first
view,” Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Mineta, 534 U. S. 103, 110, and
ordinarily “do[es] not decide in the first instance issues not decided
below,” National Collegiate Athletic Assn. v. Smith, 525 U. S. 459,
470. The merits of this case are therefore left to the lower courts to
consider in the first instance. P. 12.

571 F. 3d 1227, vacated and remanded.
ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which SCALIA,
KENNEDY, THOMAS, GINSBURG, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. SOTOMAYOR, J.,
filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment, in
which BREYER, J., joined as to Part I. ALITO, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment. BREYER, J., filed a dissenting opinion.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–699
_________________

MENACHEM BINYAMIN ZIVOTOFSKY, BY HIS PARENTS





AND GUARDIANS, ARI Z. AND NAOMI SIEGMAN

ZIVOTOFSKY, PETITIONER v. HILLARY



RODHAM CLINTON, SECRETARY 

OF STATE



ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT



[March 26, 2012]




CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS delivered the opinion of the
Court.
Congress enacted a statute providing that Americans
born in Jerusalem may elect to have “Israel” listed as the
place of birth on their passports. The State Department
declined to follow that law, citing its longstanding policy of
not taking a position on the political status of Jerusalem.
When sued by an American who invoked the statute, the
Secretary of State argued that the courts lacked authority
to decide the case because it presented a political question.
The Court of Appeals so held.
We disagree. The courts are fully capable of determining whether this statute may be given effect, or instead
must be struck down in light of authority conferred on the
Executive by the Constitution.
I
A
In 2002, Congress enacted the Foreign Relations Au-


2

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Opinion of the Court

thorization Act, Fiscal Year 2003, 116 Stat. 1350. Section
214 of the Act is entitled “United States Policy with Respect to Jerusalem as the Capital of Israel.” Id., at 1365.
The first two subsections express Congress’s “commitment” to relocating the United States Embassy in Israel to
Jerusalem. Id., at 1365–1366. The third bars funding for
the publication of official Government documents that do
not list Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. Id., at 1366.
The fourth and final provision, §214(d), is the only one at
stake in this case. Entitled “Record of Place of Birth as
Israel for Passport Purposes,” it provides that “[f]or purposes of the registration of birth, certification of nationality, or issuance of a passport of a United States citizen born
in the city of Jerusalem, the Secretary shall, upon the request of the citizen or the citizen’s legal guardian, record
the place of birth as Israel.” Ibid.
The State Department’s Foreign Affairs Manual states
that “[w]here the birthplace of the applicant is located
in territory disputed by another country, the city or area
of birth may be written in the passport.” 7 Foreign Affairs
Manual §1383.5–2, App. 108. The manual specifically
directs that passport officials should enter “JERUSALEM”
and should “not write Israel or Jordan” when recording
the birthplace of a person born in Jerusalem on a passport. Id., §1383, Exh. 1383.1, App. 127; see also id.,
§§1383.1, 1383.5–4, .5–5, .5–6, App. 106, 108–110.
Section 214(d) sought to override this instruction by
allowing citizens born in Jerusalem to have “Israel” recorded on their passports if they wish. In signing the Foreign Relations Authorization Act into law, President
George W. Bush stated his belief that §214 “impermissibly
interferes with the President’s constitutional authority to
conduct the Nation’s foreign affairs and to supervise the
unitary executive branch.” Statement on Signing the
Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Year 2003,
Public Papers of the Presidents, George W. Bush, Vol. 2,


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

Sept. 30, 2002, p. 1698 (2005). He added that if the section is “construed as mandatory,” then it would “interfere
with the President’s constitutional authority to formulate
the position of the United States, speak for the Nation in
international affairs, and determine the terms on which
recognition is given to foreign states.” Ibid. He concluded
by emphasizing that “U. S. policy regarding Jerusalem has
not changed.” Ibid. The President made no specific reference to the passport mandate in §214(d).
B
Petitioner Menachem Binyamin Zivotofsky was born in
Jerusalem on October 17, 2002, shortly after §214(d) was
enacted. Zivotofsky’s parents were American citizens and
he accordingly was as well, by virtue of congressional
enactment. 8 U. S. C. §1401(c); see Rogers v. Bellei, 401
U. S. 815, 835 (1971) (foreign-born children of American
citizens acquire citizenship at birth through “congressional generosity”). Zivotofsky’s mother filed an application
for a consular report of birth abroad and a United States
passport. She requested that his place of birth be listed as
“Jerusalem, Israel” on both documents. U. S. officials
informed Zivotofsky’s mother that State Department
policy prohibits recording “Israel” as Zivotofsky’s place of
birth. Pursuant to that policy, Zivotofsky was issued a
passport and consular report of birth abroad listing only
“Jerusalem.” App. 19–20.
Zivotofsky’s parents filed a complaint on his behalf
against the Secretary of State. Zivotofsky sought a declaratory judgment and a permanent injunction ordering
the Secretary to identify his place of birth as “Jerusalem,
Israel” in the official documents. Id., at 17–18. The District Court granted the Secretary’s motion to dismiss the
complaint on the grounds that Zivotofsky lacked standing
and that his complaint presented a nonjusticiable political
question.


4

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Opinion of the Court

The Court of Appeals for the D. C. Circuit reversed,
concluding that Zivotofsky did have standing. It then
observed that while Zivotofsky had originally asked that
“Jerusalem, Israel” be recorded on his passport, “[b]oth
sides agree that the question now is whether §214(d)
entitles [him] to have just ‘Israel’ listed as his place of
birth.” 444 F. 3d 614, 619 (2006). The D. C. Circuit determined that additional factual development might be
helpful in deciding whether this question was justiciable,
as the parties disagreed about the foreign policy implications of listing “Israel” alone as a birthplace on the passport. Id., at 619–620. It therefore remanded the case to
the District Court.
The District Court again found that the case was not
justiciable. It explained that “[r]esolving [Zivotofsky’s]
claim on the merits would necessarily require the Court to
decide the political status of Jerusalem.” 511 F. Supp. 2d
97, 103 (2007). Concluding that the claim therefore presented a political question, the District Court dismissed
the case for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
The D. C. Circuit affirmed. It reasoned that the Constitution gives the Executive the exclusive power to recognize
foreign sovereigns, and that the exercise of this power
cannot be reviewed by the courts. Therefore, “deciding
whether the Secretary of State must mark a passport . . .
as Zivotofsky requests would necessarily draw [the court]
into an area of decisionmaking the Constitution leaves to
the Executive alone.” 571 F. 3d 1227, 1232–1233 (2009).
The D. C. Circuit held that the political question doctrine
prohibits such an intrusion by the courts, and rejected any
suggestion that Congress’s decision to take “a position on
the status of Jerusalem” could change the analysis. Id., at
1233.
Judge Edwards concurred in the judgment, but wrote
separately to express his view that the political question
doctrine has no application to this case. He explained that


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

the issue before the court was whether §214(d) “impermissibly intrude[s] on the President’s exclusive power to
recognize foreign sovereigns.” Id., at 1234. That question,
he observed, involves “commonplace issues of statutory
and constitutional interpretation” plainly within the constitutional authority of the Judiciary to decide. Id., at
1235. Reaching the merits, Judge Edwards determined
that designating Israel as a place of birth on a passport is
a policy “in furtherance of the recognition power.” Id., at
1243. Because in his view the Constitution gives that
power exclusively to the President, Judge Edwards found
§214(d) unconstitutional. For this reason, he concluded
that Zivotofsky had no viable cause of action, and concurred in affirming the dismissal of the complaint.
Zivotofsky petitioned for certiorari, and we granted
review. 563 U. S. ___ (2011).
II
The lower courts concluded that Zivotofsky’s claim
presents a political question and therefore cannot be adjudicated. We disagree.
In general, the Judiciary has a responsibility to decide
cases properly before it, even those it “would gladly avoid.”
Cohens v. Virginia, 6 Wheat. 264, 404 (1821). Our precedents have identified a narrow exception to that rule,
known as the “political question” doctrine. See, e.g., Japan Whaling Assn. v. American Cetacean Soc., 478 U. S.
221, 230 (1986). We have explained that a controversy
“involves a political question . . . where there is ‘a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue
to a coordinate political department; or a lack of judicially
discoverable and manageable standards for resolving it.’ ”
Nixon v. United States, 506 U. S. 224, 228 (1993) (quoting
Baker v. Carr, 369 U. S. 186, 217 (1962)). In such a case,
we have held that a court lacks the authority to decide the
dispute before it.


6

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Opinion of the Court

The lower courts ruled that this case involves a political
question because deciding Zivotofsky’s claim would force
the Judicial Branch to interfere with the President’s exercise of constitutional power committed to him alone. The
District Court understood Zivotofsky to ask the courts to
“decide the political status of Jerusalem.” 511 F. Supp. 2d,
at 103. This misunderstands the issue presented. Zivotofsky does not ask the courts to determine whether Jerusalem is the capital of Israel. He instead seeks to determine whether he may vindicate his statutory right, under
§214(d), to choose to have Israel recorded on his passport
as his place of birth.
For its part, the D. C. Circuit treated the two questions
as one and the same. That court concluded that “[o]nly
the Executive—not Congress and not the courts—has the
power to define U. S. policy regarding Israel’s sovereignty
over Jerusalem,” and also to “decide how best to implement that policy.” 571 F. 3d, at 1232. Because the Department’s passport rule was adopted to implement the
President’s “exclusive and unreviewable constitutional
power to keep the United States out of the debate over the
status of Jerusalem,” the validity of that rule was itself a
“nonjusticiable political question” that “the Constitution
leaves to the Executive alone.” Id., at 1231–1233. Indeed,
the D. C. Circuit’s opinion does not even mention §214(d)
until the fifth of its six paragraphs of analysis, and then
only to dismiss it as irrelevant: “That Congress took a
position on the status of Jerusalem and gave Zivotofsky a
statutory cause of action . . . is of no moment to whether
the judiciary has [the] authority to resolve this dispute
. . . .” Id., at 1233.
The existence of a statutory right, however, is certainly
relevant to the Judiciary’s power to decide Zivotofsky’s
claim. The federal courts are not being asked to supplant
a foreign policy decision of the political branches with the
courts’ own unmoored determination of what United


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

States policy toward Jerusalem should be. Instead, Zivotofsky requests that the courts enforce a specific statutory
right. To resolve his claim, the Judiciary must decide if
Zivotofsky’s interpretation of the statute is correct, and
whether the statute is constitutional. This is a familiar
judicial exercise.
Moreover, because the parties do not dispute the interpretation of §214(d), the only real question for the courts is
whether the statute is constitutional. At least since Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch 137 (1803), we have recognized
that when an Act of Congress is alleged to conflict with the
Constitution, “[i]t is emphatically the province and duty of
the judicial department to say what the law is.” Id., at
177. That duty will sometimes involve the “[r]esolution of
litigation challenging the constitutional authority of one of
the three branches,” but courts cannot avoid their responsibility merely “because the issues have political implications.” INS v. Chadha, 462 U. S. 919, 943 (1983).
In this case, determining the constitutionality of §214(d)
involves deciding whether the statute impermissibly
intrudes upon Presidential powers under the Constitution.
If so, the law must be invalidated and Zivotofsky’s case
should be dismissed for failure to state a claim. If, on the
other hand, the statute does not trench on the President’s
powers, then the Secretary must be ordered to issue Zivotofsky a passport that complies with §214(d). Either way,
the political question doctrine is not implicated. “No
policy underlying the political question doctrine suggests
that Congress or the Executive . . . can decide the constitutionality of a statute; that is a decision for the courts.” Id.,
at 941–942.
The Secretary contends that “there is ‘a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment’ ” to the President
of the sole power to recognize foreign sovereigns and, as
a corollary, to determine whether an American born in
Jerusalem may choose to have Israel listed as his place of


8

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Opinion of the Court

birth on his passport. Nixon, 506 U. S., at 228 (quoting
Baker, 369 U. S., at 217); see Brief for Respondent 49–50.
Perhaps. But there is, of course, no exclusive commitment
to the Executive of the power to determine the constitutionality of a statute. The Judicial Branch appropriately
exercises that authority, including in a case such as this,
where the question is whether Congress or the Executive
is “aggrandizing its power at the expense of another
branch.” Freytag v. Commissioner, 501 U. S. 868, 878
(1991); see, e.g., Myers v. United States, 272 U. S. 52, 176
(1926) (finding a statute unconstitutional because it encroached upon the President’s removal power); Bowsher v.
Synar, 478 U. S. 714, 734 (1986) (finding a statute unconstitutional because it “intruded into the executive
function”); Morrison v. Olson, 487 U. S. 654, 685 (1988)
(upholding a statute’s constitutionality against a charge
that it “impermissibly interfere[d] with the President’s
exercise of his constitutionally appointed functions”).
Our precedents have also found the political question
doctrine implicated when there is “ ‘a lack of judicially
discoverable and manageable standards for resolving’ ” the
question before the court. Nixon, supra, at 228 (quoting
Baker, supra, at 217). Framing the issue as the lower
courts did, in terms of whether the Judiciary may decide
the political status of Jerusalem, certainly raises those
concerns. They dissipate, however, when the issue is
recognized to be the more focused one of the constitutionality of §214(d). Indeed, both sides offer detailed legal
arguments regarding whether §214(d) is constitutional in
light of powers committed to the Executive, and whether
Congress’s own powers with respect to passports must be
weighed in analyzing this question.
For example, the Secretary reprises on the merits her
argument on the political question issue, claiming that the
Constitution gives the Executive the exclusive power to
formulate recognition policy. She roots her claim in the


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

Constitution’s declaration that the President shall “receive
Ambassadors and other public Ministers.” U. S. Const.,
Art. II, §3. According to the Secretary, “[c]enturies-long
Executive Branch practice, congressional acquiescence,
and decisions by this Court” confirm that the “receive
Ambassadors” clause confers upon the Executive the
exclusive power of recognition. Brief for Respondent 18.
The Secretary observes that “President Washington and
his cabinet unanimously decided that the President could
receive the ambassador from the new government of
France without first consulting Congress.” Id., at 19
(citing Letter from George Washington to the Cabinet
(Apr. 18, 1793), reprinted in 25 Papers of Thomas Jefferson 568–569 (J. Catanzariti ed. 1992); Thomas Jefferson,
Notes on Washington’s Questions on Neutrality and the
Alliance with France (May 6, 1793), reprinted in id., at
665–666). She notes, too, that early attempts by the Legislature to affect recognition policy were regularly “rejected in Congress as inappropriate incursions into the
Executive Branch’s constitutional authority.” Brief for
Respondent 21. And she cites precedents from this Court
stating that “[p]olitical recognition is exclusively a function of the Executive.” Banco Nacional de Cuba v. Sabbatino, 376 U. S. 398, 410 (1964); see Brief for Respondent
24–27 (citing, e.g., United States v. Pink, 315 U. S. 203
(1942)).
The Secretary further contends that §214(d) constitutes
an impermissible exercise of the recognition power because “the decision as to how to describe the place of birth
. . . operates as an official statement of whether the United
States recognizes a state’s sovereignty over a territorial
area.” Brief for Respondent 38. The Secretary will not
“list[] as a place of birth a country whose sovereignty over
the relevant territory the United States does not recognize.” Id., at 39. Therefore, she claims, “listing ‘Israel’ as
the place of birth would constitute an official decision by


10

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Opinion of the Court

the United States to begin to treat Jerusalem as a city
located within Israel. ” Id., at 38–39 (some internal quotation marks omitted).
For his part, Zivotofsky argues that, far from being an
exercise of the recognition power, §214(d) is instead a
“legitimate and permissible” exercise of Congress’s “authority to legislate on the form and content of a passport.”
Brief for Petitioner 53. He points the Court to Professor
Louis Henkin’s observation that “ ‘in the competition for
power in foreign relations,’ Congress has ‘an impressive
array of powers expressly enumerated in the Constitution.’ ” Id., at 45 (quoting L. Henkin, Foreign Affairs and
the United States Constitution 63 (2d ed. 1996)). Zivotofsky suggests that Congress’s authority to enact §214(d)
derives specifically from its powers over naturalization,
U. S. Const., Art. I, §8, cl. 4, and foreign commerce, id., §8,
cl. 3. According to Zivotofsky, Congress has used these
powers to pass laws regulating the content and issuance of
passports since 1856. See Brief for Petitioner 52 (citing
Act of Aug. 18, 1856, §23, 11 Stat. 60).
Zivotofsky contends that §214(d) fits squarely within
this tradition. He notes that the State Department’s
designated representative stated in her deposition for this
litigation that the “place of birth” entry is included only
as “an element of identification.” App. 76 (Deposition of
Catherine Barry, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for
Overseas Citizens Services); see Brief for Petitioner 10.
Moreover, Zivotofsky argues, the “place of birth” entry
cannot be taken as a means for recognizing foreign sovereigns, because the State Department authorizes recording
unrecognized territories—such as the Gaza Strip and the
West Bank—as places of birth. Brief for Petitioner 43
(citing 7 Foreign Affairs Manual §1383.5–5, App. 109–
110).
Further, Zivotofsky claims that even if §214(d) does
implicate the recognition power, that is not a power the


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

Constitution commits exclusively to the Executive. Zivotofsky argues that the Secretary is overreading the authority
granted to the President in the “receive Ambassadors”
clause. He observes that in the Federalist Papers, Alexander
Hamilton described the power conferred by this clause as
“more a matter of dignity than of authority,” and called it “a
circumstance, which will be without consequence in the
administration of the government.” The Federalist No. 69,
p. 468 (J. Cooke ed. 1961); see Brief for Petitioner 37. Zivotofsky also points to other clauses in the Constitution, such
as Congress’s power to declare war, that suggest some congressional role in recognition. Reply Brief for Petitioner 23
(citing U. S. Const., Art. I, §8, cl. 11). He cites, for example,
an 1836 message from President Jackson to Congress, acknowledging that it is unclear who holds the authority to
recognize because it is a power “no where expressly delegated” in the Constitution, and one that is “necessarily
involved in some of the great powers given to Congress.”
Message from the President of the United States Upon the
Subject of the Political, Military, and Civil Condition of
Texas, H. R. Doc. No. 35, 24th Cong., 2d Sess., 2; see Reply
Brief for Petitioner 11–12.
Zivotofsky argues that language from this Court’s precedents suggesting the recognition power belongs exclusively
to the President is inapplicable to his claim, because that
language appeared in cases where the Court was asked to
alter recognition policy developed by the Executive in the
absence of congressional opposition. See Brief for Petitioner
44–46; Reply Brief for Petitioner 18–19. Finally, Zivotofsky
contends that even if the “receive Ambassadors” clause
confers some exclusive recognition power on the President,
simply allowing a choice as to the “place of birth” entry on a
passport does not significantly intrude on that power.
Recitation of these arguments—which sound in familiar
principles of constitutional interpretation—is enough to
establish that this case does not “turn on standards that defy


12

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Opinion of the Court

judicial application.” Baker, 369 U. S., at 211. Resolution of
Zivotofksy’s claim demands careful examination of the textual, structural, and historical evidence put forward by the
parties regarding the nature of the statute and of the passport and recognition powers. This is what courts do. The
political question doctrine poses no bar to judicial review of
this case.
III
To say that Zivotofsky’s claim presents issues the Judiciary is competent to resolve is not to say that reaching a
decision in this case is simple. Because the District Court
and the D. C. Circuit believed that review was barred by
the political question doctrine, we are without the benefit
of thorough lower court opinions to guide our analysis of
the merits. Ours is “a court of final review and not first
view.” Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Mineta, 534 U. S.
103, 110 (2001) (per curiam) (internal quotation marks
omitted). Ordinarily, “we do not decide in the first instance issues not decided below.” National Collegiate
Athletic Assn. v. Smith, 525 U. S. 459, 470 (1999). In
particular, when we reverse on a threshold question, we
typically remand for resolution of any claims the lower
courts’ error prevented them from addressing. See, e.g.,
Bond v. United States, 564 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op.,
at 1–2) (reversing the Court of Appeals’ determination on
standing and remanding because the “merits of petitioner’s challenge to the statute’s validity are to be considered,
in the first instance, by the Court of Appeals”). We see no
reason to depart from this approach in this case. Having
determined that this case is justiciable, we leave it to the
lower courts to consider the merits in the first instance.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals for the D. C.
Circuit is vacated, and the case is remanded for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

