8

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
SCALIA, J., dissenting

admission of “weaker substitute[s] for live testimony at
trial” such as this, id., at 828 (internal quotation marks
omitted), is precisely what motivated the Framers to adopt
the Confrontation Clause and what motivated our deci
sions in Crawford and in Hammon v. Indiana, decided
with Davis. Ex parte examinations raise the same consti
tutional concerns whether they take place in a gas-station
parking lot or in a police interrogation room.
C
Worse still for the repute of today’s opinion, this is an
absurdly easy case even if one (erroneously) takes the
interrogating officers’ purpose into account. The five
officers interrogated Covington primarily to investigate
past criminal events. None—absolutely none—of their
actions indicated that they perceived an imminent threat.
They did not draw their weapons, and indeed did not
immediately search the gas station for potential shooters.3
To the contrary, all five testified that they questioned
Covington before conducting any investigation at the scene.
Would this have made any sense if they feared the pres
ence of a shooter? Most tellingly, none of the officers
started his interrogation by asking what would have been
the obvious first question if any hint of such a fear existed:
Where is the shooter?
But do not rely solely on my word about the officers’
primary purpose. Listen to Sergeant Wenturine, who
candidly admitted that he interrogated Covington because
he “ha[d] a man here that [he] believe[d] [was] dying [so
——————
3 The

Court cites Officer Stuglin’s testimony that “I think [Brown and
Pellerito] did a little bit of both” joining the interrogation and helping
to secure the scene. Id., at 135–136. But the point is not whether they
did both; it is whether they moved to secure the area first. No officer’s
testimony suggests this. Pellerito testified that he, Stuglin, and Brown
arrived at the scene at roughly the same time and all three immedi
ately went to Covington. See id., at 17–18. The testimony of Brown
and McCallister corroborate that account. See id., at 34–36, 79–82.

