Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

25

Opinion of the Court

ing emergency determination.
In contrast, Michigan and the Solicitor General explain
that when the police responded to the call that a man had
been shot and found Covington bleeding on the gas station
parking lot, “they did not know who Covington was,
whether the shooting had occurred at the gas station or at
a different location, who the assailant was, or whether the
assailant posed a continuing threat to Covington or oth
ers.” Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 15; Brief
for Petitioner 16; see also id., at 15 (“[W]hen an officer
arrives on the scene and does not know where the perpe
trator is, whether he is armed, whether he might have
other targets, and whether the violence might continue
at the scene or elsewhere, interrogation that has the pri
mary purpose of establishing those facts to assess the situ
ation is designed to meet the ongoing emergency and is
nontestimonial”).
The Michigan Supreme Court stated that the police
asked Covington, “what had happened, who had shot him,
and where the shooting had occurred.” 483 Mich., at 143,
768 N. W. 2d, at 71. The joint appendix contains the
transcripts of the preliminary examination, suppression
hearing, and trial testimony of five officers who responded
to the scene and found Covington. The officers’ testimony
is essentially consistent but, at the same time, not specific.
The officers basically agree on what information they
learned from Covington, but not on the order in which
they learned it or on whether Covington’s statements were
in response to general or detailed questions. They all
agree that the first question was “what happened?” The
answer was either “I was shot” or “Rick shot me.”14
——————
14 See App. 76 (testimony of Officer McCallister); id., at 101, 113–114
(testimony of Sgt. Wenturine); id., at 127, 131–133 (testimony of Officer
Stuglin). Covington told them that Rick had shot him through the back
door of Rick’s house, id., at 127–128 (testimony of Officer Stuglin),
located at the corner of Pennsylvania and Laura, id., at 102 (testimony

