26

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Opinion of the Court

As explained above, the scope of an emergency in terms
of its threat to individuals other than the initial assailant
and victim will often depend on the type of dispute in
volved. Nothing Covington said to the police indicated
that the cause of the shooting was a purely private dispute
or that the threat from the shooter had ended. The record
reveals little about the motive for the shooting. The police
officers who spoke with Covington at the gas station testi
fied that Covington did not tell them what words Coving
ton and Rick had exchanged prior to the shooting.15 What
Covington did tell the officers was that he fled Bryant’s
back porch, indicating that he perceived an ongoing
threat.16 The police did not know, and Covington did not
tell them, whether the threat was limited to him. The
——————
of Sgt. Wenturine), and that Covington recognized Rick by his voice, id.,
at 128 (testimony of Officer Stuglin). Covington also gave them a
physical description of Rick. Id., at 84–85, 93–94 (testimony of Officer
McAllister); id., at 103, 115 (testimony of Sgt. Wenturine); id., at 134
(testimony of Officer Stuglin).
15 See id., at 114 (“Q Did he tell you what Rick said? A He said they
were having a conversation. Q Did he tell you what Rick said? A He
did not” (testimony of Sgt. Wenturine) (paragraph breaks omitted)); see
also id., at 79 (testimony of Officer McAllister); id., at 128 (testimony of
Officer Stuglin).
16 See id., at 127–128 (“A He said he’d went up, he went up to the
back door of a house; that a person he said he knew, and he was knock
ing and he was knocking on the door he said he’d talked to somebody
through the door. He said he recognized the voice. Q Did he say who it
was that he recognized the voice of? A That’s when he told me it was,
he said it was Rick a/k/a Buster. Q And did he say what the conversa
tion was about at the door? A I don’t, I don’t believe so. Q All right.
And did he say what happened there, whether or not they had a con
versation or not, did he say what ended up happening? A He said what
happened was that he heard a shot and then he started to turn to get
off the porch and then another one and then that’s when he was hit by
a gunshot” (testimony of Officer Stuglin) (paragraph breaks omitted)).
Unlike the dissent’s apparent ability to read Covington’s mind, post, at
6 (opinion of SCALIA, J.), we rely on the available evidence, which
suggests that Covington perceived an ongoing threat.

