Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
an emergency’s duration and scope may depend in part on the type of
weapon involved; the court below relied on Davis and Hammon,
where the assailants used their fists, as controlling the scope of an
emergency involving a gun. A victim’s medical condition is important
to the primary purpose inquiry to the extent that it sheds light on the
victim’s ability to have any purpose at all in responding to police
questions and on the likelihood that any such purpose would be a tes
timonial one. It also provides important context for first responders
to judge the existence and magnitude of a continuing threat to the
victim, themselves, and the public. This does not mean that an
emergency lasts the entire time that a perpetrator is on the loose, but
trial courts can determine in the first instance when an interrogation
transitions from nontestimonial to testimonial. Finally, whether an
ongoing emergency exists is simply one factor informing the ultimate
inquiry regarding an interrogation’s “primary purpose.” Another is
the encounter’s informality. Formality suggests the absence of an
emergency, but informality does not necessarily indicate the presence
of an emergency or the lack of testimonial intent. The facts here—
the questioning occurred in an exposed, public area, before emer
gency medical services arrived, and in a disorganized fashion—
distinguish this case from Crawford’s formal station-house interroga
tion. Pp. 14–20.
(3) The statements and actions of both the declarant and interro
gators also provide objective evidence of the interrogation’s primary
purpose. Looking to the contents of both the questions and the an
swers ameliorates problems that could arise from looking solely to
one participant, since both interrogators and declarants may have
mixed motives. Police officers’ dual responsibilities as both first re
sponders and criminal investigators may lead them to act with differ
ent motives simultaneously or in quick succession. And during an
ongoing emergency, victims may want the threat to end, but may not
envision prosecution. Alternatively, a severely injured victim may
have no purpose at all in answering questions. Taking into account
such injuries does not make the inquiry subjective. The inquiry still
focuses on the understanding and purpose of a reasonable victim in
the actual victim’s circumstances, which prominently include the vic
tim’s physical state. Objectively ascertaining the primary purpose of
the interrogation by examining the statements and actions of all par
ticipants is also consistent with this Court’s prior holdings. E.g.,
Davis, 547 U. S., at 822–823, n. 1. Pp. 20–23.
(c) Here, the circumstances of the encounter as well as the state
ments and actions of Covington and the police objectively indicate
that the interrogation’s “primary purpose” was “to enable police as
sistance to meet an ongoing emergency,” 547 U. S., at 822. The cir

