10

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
SCALIA, J., dissenting

dystopian4 view of Detroit, where drug dealers hunt their
shooting victim down and fire into a crowd of police offi
cers to finish him off, see ante, at 30, or where spree kill
ers shoot through a door and then roam the streets leaving
a trail of bodies behind. Because almost 90 percent of
murders involve a single victim,5 it is much more likely—
indeed, I think it certain—that the officers viewed their
encounter with Covington for what it was: an investi
gation into a past crime with no ongoing or immediate
consequences.
The Court’s distorted view creates an expansive excep
tion to the Confrontation Clause for violent crimes. Be
cause Bryant posed a continuing threat to public safety in
the Court’s imagination, the emergency persisted for
confrontation purposes at least until the police learned his
“motive for and location after the shooting.” Ante, at 27.
It may have persisted in this case until the police “secured
the scene of the shooting” two-and-a-half hours later.
Ante, at 28. (The relevance of securing the scene is un
clear so long as the killer is still at large—especially if, as
the Court speculates, he may be a spree-killer.) This is a
dangerous definition of emergency. Many individuals who
testify against a defendant at trial first offer their ac
counts to police in the hours after a violent act. If the
police can plausibly claim that a “potential threat to . . .
the public” persisted through those first few hours, ante,
at 12 (and if the claim is plausible here it is always plau
——————
4 The opposite of utopian. The word was coined by John Stuart Mill
as a caustic description of British policy. See 190 Hansard’s Parlia
mentary Debates, Third Series 1517 (3d Ser. 1868); 5 Oxford English
Dictionary 13 (2d ed. 1989).
5 See Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United States,
2009: Expanded Homicide Data Table 4, Murder by Victim/Offender
Situations, 2009 (Sept. 2010), online at http://www2.fbi.gov/ucr/
cius2009/offenses/expanded_information/data/shrtable_04.html (as visited
Feb. 25, 2011, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file).

