6

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Opinion of the Court

We held that reliability can be established if “the evidence
falls within a firmly rooted hearsay exception,” or if it does
not fall within such an exception, then if it bears “particu
larized guarantees of trustworthiness.” Ibid.
Nearly a quarter century later, we decided Crawford v.
Washington, 541 U. S. 36. Petitioner Michael Crawford
was prosecuted for stabbing a man who had allegedly
attempted to rape his wife, Sylvia. Sylvia witnessed the
stabbing, and later that night, after she and her husband
were both arrested, police interrogated her about the
incident. At trial, Sylvia Crawford claimed spousal privi
lege and did not testify, but the State introduced a tape
recording of Sylvia’s statement to the police in an effort to
prove that the stabbing was not in self-defense, as Michael
Crawford claimed. The Washington Supreme Court af
firmed Crawford’s conviction because it found Sylvia’s
statement to be reliable, as required under Ohio v. Rob
erts. We reversed, overruling Ohio v. Roberts. 541 U. S.,
at 60–68; see also Davis, 547 U. S., at 825, n. 4.
Crawford examined the common-law history of the
confrontation right and explained that “the principal evil
at which the Confrontation Clause was directed was the
civil-law mode of criminal procedure, and particularly its
use of ex parte examinations as evidence against the ac
cused.” 541 U. S., at 50. We noted that in England, pre
trial examinations of suspects and witnesses by govern
ment officials “were sometimes read in court in lieu of live
testimony.” Id., at 43. In light of this history, we empha
sized the word “witnesses” in the Sixth Amendment, defin
ing it as “those who ‘bear testimony.’ ” Id., at 51 (quoting
2 N. Webster, An American Dictionary of the English
Language (1828)). We defined “testimony” as “ ‘ [a] solemn
declaration or affirmation made for the purpose of estab
lishing or proving some fact.’ ” 541 U. S., at 51 (quoting
Webster). We noted that “[a]n accuser who makes a for
mal statement to government officers bears testimony in a

