Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

Opinion of the Court

have become testimonial, as they do, for example, with
unduly prejudicial portions of otherwise admissible evi
dence.” Id., at 829.
Finally, our discussion of the Michigan Supreme Court’s
misunderstanding of what Davis meant by “ongoing emer
gency” should not be taken to imply that the existence vel
non of an ongoing emergency is dispositive of the testimo
nial inquiry. As Davis made clear, whether an ongoing
emergency exists is simply one factor—albeit an important
factor—that informs the ultimate inquiry regarding the
“primary purpose” of an interrogation. Another factor the
Michigan Supreme Court did not sufficiently account for is
the importance of informality in an encounter between a
victim and police. Formality is not the sole touchstone of
our primary purpose inquiry because, although formality
suggests the absence of an emergency and therefore an
increased likelihood that the purpose of the interrogation
is to “establish or prove past events potentially relevant to
later criminal prosecution,” id., at 822, informality does
not necessarily indicate the presence of an emergency or
the lack of testimonial intent. Cf. id., at 826 (explaining
that Confrontation Clause requirements cannot “readily
be evaded” by the parties deliberately keeping the written
product of an interrogation informal “instead of having the
declarant sign a deposition”). The court below, however,
too readily dismissed the informality of the circumstances
in this case in a single brief footnote and in fact seems to
have suggested that the encounter in this case was formal.
483 Mich., at 150, n. 16, 768 N. W. 2d, at 75, n. 16. As we
——————
Davis that “[j]ust as, for Fifth Amendment purposes, ‘police officers can
and will distinguish almost instinctively between questions necessary
to secure their own safety or the safety of the public and questions
designed solely to elicit testimonial evidence from a suspect, . . . trial
courts will recognize the point at which, for Sixth Amendment pur
poses, statements in response to interrogations become testimonial.”
547 U. S., at 829 (quoting New York v. Quarles, 467 U. S., at 658–659).

