8

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Opinion of the Court

law enforcement officers,” Crawford, 541 U. S., at 53, are
subject to the Confrontation Clause.2
Davis and Hammon were both domestic violence cases.
In Davis, Michelle McCottry made the statements at issue
to a 911 operator during a domestic disturbance with
Adrian Davis, her former boyfriend. McCottry told the
operator, “ ‘He’s here jumpin’ on me again,’ ” and, “ ‘He’s
usin’ his fists.’ ” 547 U. S., at 817. The operator then
asked McCottry for Davis’ first and last names and middle
initial, and at that point in the conversation McCottry
reported that Davis had fled in a car. Id., at 818.
McCottry did not appear at Davis’ trial, and the State
introduced the recording of her conversation with the 911
operator. Id., at 819.
In Hammon, decided along with Davis, police responded
to a domestic disturbance call at the home of Amy and
Hershel Hammon, where they found Amy alone on the
front porch. Ibid. She appeared “ ‘somewhat frightened,’ ”
but told them “ ‘nothing was the matter.’ ” Ibid. (quoting
Hammon v. State, 829 N. E. 2d 444, 446–447 (Ind. 2005)).
She gave the police permission to enter the house, where
they saw a gas heating unit with the glass front shattered
on the floor. One officer remained in the kitchen with
Hershel, while another officer talked to Amy in the living
room about what had happened. Hershel tried several
times to participate in Amy’s conversation with the police
and became angry when the police required him to stay
separated from Amy. 547 U. S., at 819–820. The police
asked Amy to fill out and sign a battery affidavit. She
wrote: “ ‘Broke our Furnace & shoved me down on the floor
——————
2 We noted in Crawford that “[w]e use the term ‘interrogation’ in its
colloquial, rather than any technical legal, sense,” and that “[j]ust as
various definitions of ‘testimonial’ exist, one can imagine various
definitions of ‘interrogation,’ and we need not select among them in this
case.” 541 U. S., at 53, n. 4. Davis did not abandon those qualifica
tions; nor do we do so here.

