2

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Syllabus
interrogation under circumstances objectively indicating that the [in
terrogation’s] primary purpose . . . is to enable police assistance to
meet an ongoing emergency,” but they “are testimonial when the cir
cumstances objectively indicate that there is no such ongoing emer
gency, and that the [interrogation’s] primary purpose is to establish
or prove past events potentially relevant to later criminal prosecu
tion.” 547 U. S., at 822. Thus, a recording of a 911 call describing an
ongoing domestic disturbance was nontestimonial in Davis, where
the victim’s “elicited statements were necessary to be able to resolve
[the ongoing] emergency,” and the statements were not formal. Id.,
at 827. But the statements in Hammon were testimonial, where the
victim was interviewed after the event in a room separate from her
husband and “deliberately recounted, in response to police question
ing” the past events. Id., at 830. Here, the context is a nondomestic
dispute, with the “ongoing emergency” extending beyond an initial
victim to a potential threat to the responding police and the public.
This context requires additional clarification of what Davis meant by
“the primary purpose of the interrogation is to enable police assis
tance to meet an ongoing emergency.” Id., at 822. Pp. 5–12.
(b) To make the “primary purpose” determination, the Court must
objectively evaluate the circumstances in which the encounter be
tween the individual and the police occurs and the parties’ state
ments and actions. Pp. 12–23.
(1) The primary purpose inquiry is objective. The circumstances
in which an encounter occurs—e.g., at or near a crime scene versus at
a police station, during an ongoing emergency or afterwards—are
clearly matters of objective fact. And the relevant inquiry into the
parties’ statements and actions is not the subjective or actual purpose
of the particular parties, but the purpose that reasonable partici
pants would have had, as ascertained from the parties’ statements
and actions and the circumstances in which the encounter occurred.
P. 13.
(2) The existence of an “ongoing emergency” at the time of the
encounter is among the most important circumstances informing the
interrogation’s “primary purpose.” See, e.g., Davis, 547 U. S., at 828–
830. An emergency focuses the participants not on “prov[ing] past
events potentially relevant to later criminal prosecution,” id., at 822,
but on “end[ing] a threatening situation,” id., at 832. The Michigan
Supreme Court failed to appreciate that whether an emergency exists
and is ongoing is a highly context-dependent inquiry. An assessment
of whether an emergency threatening the police and public is ongoing
cannot narrowly focus on whether the threat to the first victim has
been neutralized because the threat to the first responders and public
may continue. The State Supreme Court also did not appreciate that

