Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

basic purpose of the Confrontation Clause was to “targe[t]”
the sort of “abuses” exemplified at the notorious treason
trial of Sir Walter Raleigh. Crawford, 541 U. S., at 51.
Thus, the most important instances in which the Clause
restricts the introduction of out-of-court statements are
those in which state actors are involved in a formal, out-of
court interrogation of a witness to obtain evidence for
trial.4 See id., at 43–44. Even where such an interroga
tion is conducted with all good faith, introduction of the
resulting statements at trial can be unfair to the accused
if they are untested by cross-examination. Whether for
mal or informal, out-of-court statements can evade the
basic objective of the Confrontation Clause, which is to
prevent the accused from being deprived of the opportu
nity to cross-examine the declarant about statements
taken for use at trial. When, as in Davis, the primary
purpose of an interrogation is to respond to an “ongoing
emergency,” its purpose is not to create a record for trial
and thus is not within the scope of the Clause. But there
may be other circumstances, aside from ongoing emergen
cies, when a statement is not procured with a primary
purpose of creating an out-of-court substitute for trial
testimony. In making the primary purpose determination,
standard rules of hearsay, designed to identify some state
——————
Brasier for the different proposition that “out-of-court statements made
by someone other than the accused and not taken under oath, unlike ex
parte depositions or affidavits, were generally not considered substan
tive evidence upon which a conviction could be based”).
4 Contrary to the dissent’s excited suggestion, nothing in this opinion
casts “favorable light,” post, at 11 (opinion of SCALIA, J.), on the conduct
of Sir Walter Raleigh’s trial or other 16th- and 17th-century English
treason trials. The dissent is correct that such trials are “unquestiona
bly infamous,” ibid., and our decision here confirms, rather than un
dermines, that assessment. See also n. 17, infra. For all of the
reasons discussed in JUSTICE THOMAS’ opinion concurring in the judg
ment, the situation presented in this case is nothing like the circum
stances presented by Sir Walter Raleigh’s trial. See post, p. __.

