4

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Syllabus
cumstances of the interrogation involved an armed shooter, whose
motive for and location after the shooting were unknown and who
had mortally wounded Covington within a few blocks and a few min
utes of the location where police found Covington. Unlike the emer
gencies in Davis and Hammon, this dispute’s potential scope and
thus the emergency encompassed a potential threat to the police and
the public. And since this case involved a gun, the physical separa
tion that was sufficient to end the emergency in Hammon was not
necessarily sufficient to end the threat here. Informed by the circum
stances of the ongoing emergency, the Court now turns to determin
ing the “primary purpose of the interrogation” as evidenced by the
statements and actions of Covington and the police. The circum
stances of the encounter provide important context for understanding
Covington’s statements to the police. When he responded to their
questions, he was lying in a gas station parking lot bleeding from a
mortal gunshot wound, and his answers were punctuated with ques
tions about when emergency medical services would arrive. Thus,
this Court cannot say that a person in his situation would have had a
“primary purpose” “to establish or prove past events potentially rele
vant to later criminal prosecution.” Ibid. For their part, the police
responded to a call that a man had been shot. They did not know
why, where, or when the shooting had occurred; the shooter’s loca
tion; or anything else about the crime. They asked exactly the type of
questions necessary to enable them “to meet an ongoing emergency.”
Ibid. Nothing in Covington’s responses indicated to the police that
there was no emergency or that the emergency had ended. Finally,
this situation is more similar to the informal, harried 911 call in
Davis than to the structured, station-house interview in Crawford.
The officers all arrived at different times; asked, upon arrival, what
had happened; and generally did not conduct a structured interroga
tion. The informality suggests that their primary purpose was to ad
dress what they considered to be an ongoing emergency, and the cir
cumstances lacked a formality that would have alerted Covington to
or focused him on the possible future prosecutorial use of his state
ments. Pp. 23–32.

483 Mich. 132, 768 N. W. 2d 65, vacated and remanded.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, BREYER, and ALITO, JJ., joined. THOMAS, J., filed
an opinion concurring in the judgment. SCALIA, J., and GINSBURG, J.,
filed dissenting opinions. KAGAN, J., took no part in the consideration
or decision of the case.

