Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

29

Opinion of the Court

as the shooter. App. 76. In response to further questions,
Covington explained that the shooting occurred through
the back door of Bryant’s house and provided a physical
description of the shooter. When he made the statements,
Covington was lying in a gas station parking lot bleeding
from a mortal gunshot wound to his abdomen. His an
swers to the police officers’ questions were punctuated
with questions about when emergency medical services
would arrive. Id., at 56–57 (suppression hearing testi
mony of Officer Brown). He was obviously in considerable
pain and had difficulty breathing and talking. Id., at 75,
83–84 (testimony of Officer McCallister); id., at 101, 110–
111 (testimony of Sgt. Wenturine); id., at 126, 137 (testi
mony of Officer Stuglin). From this description of his
condition and report of his statements, we cannot say that
a person in Covington’s situation would have had a “pri
mary purpose” “to establish or prove past events poten
tially relevant to later criminal prosecution.” Davis, 547
U. S., at 822.
For their part, the police responded to a call that a man
had been shot. As discussed above, they did not know
why, where, or when the shooting had occurred. Nor did
they know the location of the shooter or anything else
about the circumstances in which the crime occurred.19
——————
19 Contrary to the dissent’s suggestion, post, at 8 (opinion of SCALIA,
J.), and despite the fact that the record was developed prior to Davis’
focus on the existence of an “ongoing emergency,” the record contains
some testimony to support the idea that the police officers were con
cerned about the location of the shooter when they arrived on the scene
and thus to suggest that the purpose of the questioning of Covington
was to determine the shooter’s location. See App. 136 (testimony of
Officer Stuglin) (stating that upon arrival officers questioned the gas
station clerk about whether the shooting occurred in the gas station
parking lot and about concern for safety); see also ibid. (testimony of
Officer Stuglin) (“Q . . . So you have some concern, there may be a
person with a gun or somebody, a shooter right there in the immediate
area? A Sure, yes. Q And you want to see that that area gets secured?

