Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

involving threats to public safety. An assessment of
whether an emergency that threatens the police and pub
lic is ongoing cannot narrowly focus on whether the threat
solely to the first victim has been neutralized because the
threat to the first responders and public may continue.
See 483 Mich., at 164, 768 N. W. 2d, at 82 (Corrigan, J.,
dissenting) (examining the threat to the victim, police, and
the public); Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 19–
20 (“An emergency posed by an unknown shooter who
remains at large does not automatically abate just because
the police can provide security to his first victim”).
The Michigan Supreme Court also did not appreciate
that the duration and scope of an emergency may depend
in part on the type of weapon employed. The court relied
on Davis and Hammon, in which the assailants used their
fists, as controlling the scope of the emergency here, which
involved the use of a gun. The problem with that reason
ing is clear when considered in light of the assault on Amy
Hammon. Hershel Hammon was armed only with his fists
when he attacked his wife, so removing Amy to a separate
room was sufficient to end the emergency. 547 U. S., at
830–832. If Hershel had been reported to be armed with a
gun, however, separation by a single household wall might
not have been sufficient to end the emergency. Id., at 819.
The Michigan Supreme Court’s failure to focus on the
context-dependent nature of our Davis decision also led it
to conclude that the medical condition of a declarant is
irrelevant. 483 Mich., at 149, 768 N. W. 2d, at 74 (“The
Court said nothing at all that would remotely suggest that
whether the victim was in need of medical attention was
in any way relevant to whether there was an ‘ongoing
emergency’ ”). But Davis and Hammon did not present
medical emergencies, despite some injuries to the victims.
547 U. S., at 818, 820. Thus, we have not previously
considered, much less ruled out, the relevance of a victim’s
severe injuries to the primary purpose inquiry.

