4

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
SCALIA, J., dissenting

gency plausible, the Court instead adopts a test that looks
to the purposes of both the police and the declarant. It
claims that this is demanded by necessity, fretting that a
domestic-violence victim may want her abuser briefly
arrested—presumably to teach him a lesson—but not
desire prosecution. See ante, at 22. I do not need to probe
the purposes of the police to solve that problem. Even if a
victim speaks to the police “to establish or prove past
events” solely for the purpose of getting her abuser ar
rested, she surely knows her account is “potentially rel
evant to later criminal prosecution” should one ensue.
Davis, supra, at 822.
The Court also wrings its hands over the possibility that
“a severely injured victim” may lack the capacity to form a
purpose, and instead answer questions “reflexive[ly].”
Ante, at 22. How to assess whether a declarant with
diminished capacity bore testimony is a difficult question,
and one I do not need to answer today. But the Court’s
proposed answer—to substitute the intentions of the police
for the missing intentions of the declarant—cannot be the
correct one. When the declarant has diminished capacity,
focusing on the interrogators make less sense, not more.
The inquiry under Crawford turns in part on the actions
and statements of a declarant’s audience only because
they shape the declarant’s perception of why his audience
is listening and therefore influence his purpose in making
the declaration. See 541 U. S., at 51. But a person who
cannot perceive his own purposes certainly cannot per
ceive why a listener might be interested in what he has to
say. As far as I can tell, the Court’s substituted-intent
theory “has nothing to be said for it except that it can
sometimes make our job easier,” Jerman v. Carlisle,
McNellie, Rini, Kramer & Ulrich, L. P. A., 559 U. S. ___,
___ (2010) (SCALIA, J., concurring in part and concurring
in judgment) (slip op., at 2).
The Court claims one affirmative virtue for its focus on

