30

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Opinion of the Court

The questions they asked—“what had happened, who had
shot him, and where the shooting occurred,” 483 Mich., at
143, 768 N. W. 2d, at 71—were the exact type of questions
necessary to allow the police to “ ‘assess the situation, the
threat to their own safety, and possible danger to the
potential victim’ ” and to the public, Davis, 547 U. S., at
832 (quoting Hiibel v. Sixth Judicial Dist. Court of Nev.,
Humboldt Cty., 542 U. S. 177, 186 (2004)), including to
allow them to ascertain “whether they would be encoun
tering a violent felon,”20 Davis, 547 U. S., at 827. In other
words, they solicited the information necessary to enable
them “to meet an ongoing emergency.” Id., at 822.
Nothing in Covington’s responses indicated to the police
that, contrary to their expectation upon responding to a
call reporting a shooting, there was no emergency or that
a prior emergency had ended. Covington did indicate that
he had been shot at another location about 25 minutes
earlier, but he did not know the location of the shooter at
the time the police arrived and, as far as we can tell from
the record, he gave no indication that the shooter, having
shot at him twice, would be satisfied that Covington was
only wounded. In fact, Covington did not indicate any
possible motive for the shooting, and thereby gave no
reason to think that the shooter would not shoot again if
he arrived on the scene. As we noted in Davis, “initial
inquiries” may “often . . . produce nontestimonial state
——————
A Correct. Q For your safety as well as everyone else? A Correct”
(paragraph breaks omitted)); id., at 82 (testimony of Officer McCallis
ter). But see id., at 83 (cross-examination of Officer McAllister) (“Q You
didn’t, you didn’t look around and say, gee, there might be a shooter
around here, I better keep an eye open? A I did not, no. That could
have been my partner I don’t know” (paragraph breaks omitted)).
20 Hiibel, like our post-Crawford Confrontation Clause cases, involved
domestic violence, which explains the Court’s focus on the security of
the victim and the police: they were the only parties potentially threat
ened by the assailant. 542 U. S., at 186 (noting that the case involved a
“domestic assault”).

