24

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Opinion of the Court

requirement of confrontation.13 As the context of this case
brings into sharp relief, the existence and duration of an
emergency depend on the type and scope of danger posed
to the victim, the police, and the public.
Applying this analysis to the facts of this case is more
difficult than in Davis because we do not have the luxury
of reviewing a transcript of the conversation between the
victim and the police officers. Further complicating our
task is the fact that the trial in this case occurred before
our decisions in Crawford and Davis. We therefore review
a record that was not developed to ascertain the “primary
purpose of the interrogation.”
We first examine the circumstances in which the inter
rogation occurred. The parties disagree over whether
there was an emergency when the police arrived at the gas
station. Bryant argues, and the Michigan Supreme Court
accepted, 483 Mich., at 147, 768 N. W. 2d, at 73, that there
was no ongoing emergency because “there . . . was no
criminal conduct occurring. No shots were being fired, no
one was seen in possession of a firearm, nor were any
witnesses seen cowering in fear or running from the
scene.” Brief for Respondent 27. Bryant, while conceding
that “a serious or life-threatening injury creates a medical
emergency for a victim,” id., at 30, further argues that a
declarant’s medical emergency is not relevant to the ongo
——————
13 Of course the Confrontation Clause is not the only bar to admissi
bility of hearsay statements at trial. State and federal rules of evidence
prohibit the introduction of hearsay, subject to exceptions. Consistent
with those rules, the Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments may constitute a further bar to admission of, for example,
unreliable evidence. See Montana v. Egelhoff, 518 U. S. 37, 53 (1996)
(plurality opinion) (“[E]rroneous evidentiary rulings can, in combina
tion, rise to the level of a due process violation”); Dutton v. Evans, 400
U. S. 74, 96–97 (1970) (Harlan, J., concurring in result) (“[T]he Fifth
and Fourteenth Amendments’ commands that federal and state trials,
respectively, must be conducted in accordance with due process of law”
are the “standard” by which to “test federal and state rules of evidence”).

