20

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Opinion of the Court

explain further below, the questioning in this case oc
curred in an exposed, public area, prior to the arrival of
emergency medical services, and in a disorganized fashion.
All of those facts make this case distinguishable from
the formal station-house interrogation in Crawford. See
Davis, 547 U. S., at 827.
C
In addition to the circumstances in which an encounter
occurs, the statements and actions of both the declarant
and interrogators provide objective evidence of the pri
mary purpose of the interrogation. See, e.g., Davis, 547
U. S., at 827 (“[T]he nature of what was asked and an
swered in Davis, again viewed objectively, was such that
the elicited statements were necessary to be able to resolve
the present emergency, rather than simply to learn (as in
Crawford) what had happened in the past” (first emphasis
added)). The Michigan Supreme Court did, at least
briefly, conduct this inquiry. 483 Mich., at 144–147, 768
N. W. 2d, at 71–73.
As the Michigan Supreme Court correctly recognized,
id., at 140, n. 5, 768 N. W. 2d, at 69, n. 5, Davis requires a
combined inquiry that accounts for both the declarant and
the interrogator.11 In many instances, the primary pur
——————
11 Some

portions of Davis, however, have caused confusion about
whether the inquiry prescribes examination of one participant to the
exclusion of the other. Davis’ language indicating that a statement’s
testimonial or nontestimonial nature derives from “the primary pur
pose of the interrogation,” 547 U. S., at 822 (emphasis added), could be
read to suggest that the relevant purpose is that of the interrogator. In
contrast, footnote 1 in Davis explains, “it is in the final analysis the
declarant’s statements, not the interrogator’s questions, that the
Confrontation Clause requires us to evaluate.” Id., at 822–823, n. 1.
Bryant draws on the footnote to argue that the primary purpose inquiry
must be conducted solely from the perspective of the declarant, and
argues against adoption of a purpose-of-the-interrogator perspective.
Brief for Respondent 10–13; see also Brief for Richard D. Friedman as
Amicus Curiae 5–15. But this statement in footnote 1 of Davis merely

