10

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Opinion of the Court

ing, rather than ‘describ[ing] past events,’ ” that there was
an ongoing emergency, that the “elicited statements were
necessary to be able to resolve the present emergency,”
and that the statements were not formal. 547 U. S., at
827. In Hammon, on the other hand, we held that, “[i]t is
entirely clear from the circumstances that the interroga
tion was part of an investigation into possibly criminal
past conduct.” Id., at 829. There was “no emergency in
progress.” Ibid. The officer questioning Amy “was not
seeking to determine . . . ‘what is happening,’ but rather
‘what happened.’ ” Id., at 830. It was “formal enough”
that the police interrogated Amy in a room separate from
her husband where, “some time after the events described
were over,” she “deliberately recounted, in response to
police questioning, how potentially criminal past events
began and progressed.” Ibid. Because her statements
“were neither a cry for help nor the provision of informa
tion enabling officers immediately to end a threatening
situation,” id., at 832, we held that they were testimonial.
Davis did not “attemp[t] to produce an exhaustive classi
fication of all conceivable statements—or even all conceiv
able statements in response to police interrogation—as
either testimonial or nontestimonial.” Id., at 822.3 The
——————
3 Davis

explained that 911 operators “may at least be agents of
law enforcement when they conduct interrogations of 911 callers,” and
therefore “consider[ed] their acts to be acts of the police” for purposes of
the opinion. 547 U. S., at 823, n. 2. Davis explicitly reserved the
question of “whether and when statements made to someone other than
law enforcement personnel are ‘testimonial.’ ” Ibid. We have no need to
decide that question in this case either because Covington’s statements
were made to police officers. The dissent also claims to reserve this
question, see post, at 3, n. 1 (opinion of SCALIA, J.), but supports one of
its arguments by relying on King v. Brasier, 1 Leach 199, 200, 168 Eng.
Rep. 202, 202–203 (K. B. 1779), which involved statements made by a
child to her mother—a private citizen—just after the child had been
sexually assaulted. See also Crawford v. Washington, 541 U. S. 36, 69–
70 (2004) (Rehnquist, C. J., concurring in judgment) (citing King v.

