Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SCALIA, J., dissenting

not have the luxuries of police protection and of time and
space separating her from immediate danger that Coving
ton enjoyed when he made his statements. See id., at 831.
Covington’s pressing medical needs do not suggest that
he was responding to an emergency, but to the contrary
reinforce the testimonial character of his statements. He
understood the police were focused on investigating a past
crime, not his medical needs. None of the officers asked
Covington how he was doing, attempted more than super
ficially to assess the severity of his wounds, or attempted
to administer first aid.2 They instead primarily asked
questions with little, if any, relevance to Covington’s dire
situation. Police, paramedics, and doctors do not need to
know the address where a shooting took place, the name of
the shooter, or the shooter’s height and weight to provide
proper medical care. Underscoring that Covington under
stood the officers’ investigative role, he interrupted their
interrogation to ask “when is EMS coming?” App. 57.
When, in other words, would the focus shift to his medical
needs rather than Bryant’s crime?
Neither Covington’s statements nor the colloquy be
tween him and the officers would have been out of place at
a trial; it would have been a routine direct examination.
See Davis, 547 U. S., at 830. Like a witness, Covington
recounted in detail how a past criminal event began and
progressed, and like a prosecutor, the police elicited that
account through structured questioning. Preventing the
——————
2 Officer Stuglin’s testimony does not undermine my assessment of
the officers’ behavior, although the Court suggests otherwise. See ante,
at 28, n. 18. Officer Stuglin first testified that he “asked something like
what happened or are you okay, something to that line.” App., 131.
When pressed on whether he asked “how are you doing?,” he responded,
“Well, basically . . . what’s wrong.” Ibid. Other officers were not so
equivocal: They admitted they had no need to “ask him how he was
doing. . . . It was very obvious how he was doing.” Id., at 110; see also
id., at 19.

