(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF MICHIGAN
No. 09–150.

Argued October 5, 2010—Decided February 28, 2011

Michigan police dispatched to a gas station parking lot found Anthony
Covington mortally wounded. Covington told them that he had been
shot by respondent Bryant outside Bryant’s house and had then
driven himself to the lot. At trial, which occurred before Crawford v.
Washington, 541 U. S. 36, and Davis v. Washington, 547 U. S. 813,
were decided, the officers testified about what Covington said. Bry
ant was found guilty of, inter alia, second-degree murder. Ulti
mately, the Michigan Supreme Court reversed his conviction, holding
that the Sixth Amendment’s Confrontation Clause, as explained in
Crawford and Davis, rendered Covington’s statements inadmissible
testimonial hearsay.
Held: Covington’s identification and description of the shooter and the
location of the shooting were not testimonial statements because they
had a “primary purpose . . . to enable police assistance to meet an on
going emergency.” Davis, 547 U. S., at 822. Therefore, their admis
sion at Bryant’s trial did not violate the Confrontation Clause. Pp. 5–
32.
(a) In Crawford, this Court held that in order for testimonial evi
dence to be admissible, the Sixth Amendment “demands . . . unavail
ability and a prior opportunity for cross-examination.” 541 U. S., at
68. Crawford did not “spell out a comprehensive definition of ‘testi
monial,’ ” but it noted that testimonial evidence includes, among
other things, “police interrogations.” Ibid. Thus, Sylvia Crawford’s
statements during a station-house interrogation about a stabbing
were testimonial, and their admission when her husband, the ac
cused, had “no opportunity” for cross-examination due to spousal
privilege made out a Sixth Amendment violation. In Davis and
Hammon, both domestic violence cases, the Court explained that
“[s]tatements are nontestimonial when made in the course of police

