16

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
SCALIA, J., dissenting

the crime, see ante, at 28; the formality of the statement,
see ante, at 19; and finally, whether the statement strikes
us as reliable, see ante, at 11–12, 14–15. This is no better
than the nine-factor balancing test we rejected in Craw
ford, 541 U. S., at 63. I do not look forward to resolving
conflicts in the future over whether knives and poison are
more like guns or fists for Confrontation Clause purposes,
or whether rape and armed robbery are more like murder
or domestic violence.
It can be said, of course, that under Crawford analysis
of whether a statement is testimonial requires considera
tion of all the circumstances, and so is also something of a
multifactor balancing test. But the “reliability” test does
not replace that analysis; it supplements it. As I under
stand the Court’s opinion, even when it is determined that
no emergency exists (or perhaps before that determination
is made) the statement would be found admissible as far
as the Confrontation Clause is concerned if it is not
testimonial.
In any case, we did not disavow multifactor balancing
for reliability in Crawford out of a preference for rules
over standards. We did so because it “d[id] violence to” the
Framers’ design. Id., at 68. It was judges’ open-ended
determination of what was reliable that violated the trial
rights of Englishmen in the political trials of the 16th and
17th centuries. See, e.g., Throckmorton’s Case, 1 How. St.
Tr. 869, 875–876 (1554); Raleigh’s Case, 2 How. St. Tr., at
15–16, 24. The Framers placed the Confrontation Clause
in the Bill of Rights to ensure that those abuses (and the
abuses by the Admiralty courts in colonial America) would
not be repeated in this country. Not even the least dan
gerous branch can be trusted to assess the reliability of
uncross-examined testimony in politically charged trials or
trials implicating threats to national security. See Craw
ford, supra, at 67–68; cf. Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 542 U. S.
507, 576–578 (2004) (SCALIA, J., dissenting).

