22

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Opinion of the Court

gency situation and to gather evidence”).
Victims are also likely to have mixed motives when they
make statements to the police. During an ongoing emer
gency, a victim is most likely to want the threat to her and
to other potential victims to end, but that does not neces
sarily mean that the victim wants or envisions prosecution
of the assailant. A victim may want the attacker to be
incapacitated temporarily or rehabilitated. Alternatively,
a severely injured victim may have no purpose at all in
answering questions posed; the answers may be simply
reflexive. The victim’s injuries could be so debilitating
as to prevent her from thinking sufficiently clearly to un
derstand whether her statements are for the purpose of
addressing an ongoing emergency or for the purpose of fu
ture prosecution.12 Taking into account a victim’s injuries
does not transform this objective inquiry into a subjective
one. The inquiry is still objective because it focuses on the
understanding and purpose of a reasonable victim in the
circumstances of the actual victim—circumstances that
prominently include the victim’s physical state.
The dissent suggests, post, at 3–4 (opinion of SCALIA, J.),
that we intend to give controlling weight to the “intentions
of the police,” post, at 4. That is a misreading of our opin
ion. At trial, the declarant’s statements, not the interro
gator’s questions, will be introduced to “establis[h] the
truth of the matter asserted,” Crawford, 541 U. S., at 60,
n. 9, and must therefore pass the Sixth Amendment test.
——————
12 In such a situation, the severe injuries of the victim would un
doubtedly also weigh on the credibility and reliability that the trier of
fact would afford to the statements. Cf. Advisory Committee’s Notes on
Fed. Rule Evid. 803(2), 28 U. S. C. App., p. 371 (noting that although
the “theory” of the excited utterance exception “has been criticized on
the ground that excitement impairs [the] accuracy of observation as
well as eliminating conscious fabrication,” it “finds support in cases
without number” (citing 6 J. Wigmore, Evidence §1750 (J. Chadbourn
rev. 1976))).

