Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

Opinion of the Court

pose of the interrogation will be most accurately ascer
tained by looking to the contents of both the questions and
the answers. To give an extreme example, if the police say
to a victim, “Tell us who did this to you so that we can
arrest and prosecute them,” the victim’s response that
“Rick did it,” appears purely accusatory because by virtue
of the phrasing of the question, the victim necessarily has
prosecution in mind when she answers.
The combined approach also ameliorates problems that
could arise from looking solely to one participant. Pre
dominant among these is the problem of mixed motives
on the part of both interrogators and declarants. Police
officers in our society function as both first responders and
criminal investigators. Their dual responsibilities may
mean that they act with different motives simultaneously
or in quick succession. See New York v. Quarles, 467 U. S.
649, 656 (1984) (“Undoubtedly most police officers [decid
ing whether to give Miranda warnings in a possible emer
gency situation] would act out of a host of different, in
stinctive, and largely unverifiable motives—their own
safety, the safety of others, and perhaps as well the desire
to obtain incriminating evidence from the suspect”); see
also Davis, 547 U. S., at 839 (THOMAS, J., concurring in
judgment in part and dissenting in part) (“In many, if not
most, cases where police respond to a report of a crime,
whether pursuant to a 911 call from the victim or other
wise, the purposes of an interrogation, viewed from the
perspective of the police, are both to respond to the emer
——————
acknowledges that the Confrontation Clause is not implicated when
statements are offered “for purposes other than establishing the truth
of the matter asserted.” Crawford, 541 U. S., at 60, n. 9. An interroga
tor’s questions, unlike a declarant’s answers, do not assert the truth of
any matter. The language in the footnote was not meant to determine
how the courts are to assess the nature of the declarant’s purpose, but
merely to remind readers that it is the statements, and not the ques
tions, that must be evaluated under the Sixth Amendment.

