14

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Opinion of the Court

B
As our recent Confrontation Clause cases have ex
plained, the existence of an “ongoing emergency” at the
time of an encounter between an individual and the police
is among the most important circumstances informing the
“primary purpose” of an interrogation. See Davis, 547
U. S., at 828–830; Crawford, 541 U. S., at 65. The exis
tence of an ongoing emergency is relevant to determining
the primary purpose of the interrogation because an
emergency focuses the participants on something other
than “prov[ing] past events potentially relevant to later
criminal prosecution.”8 Davis, 547 U. S., at 822. Rather,
it focuses them on “end[ing] a threatening situation.” Id.,
at 832. Implicit in Davis is the idea that because the
prospect of fabrication in statements given for the primary
purpose of resolving that emergency is presumably signifi
cantly diminished, the Confrontation Clause does not
require such statements to be subject to the crucible of
cross-examination.
This logic is not unlike that justifying the excited utter
ance exception in hearsay law. Statements “relating to a
startling event or condition made while the declarant was
under the stress of excitement caused by the event or
—————— 

applicability of the public safety exception to Miranda v. Arizona, 384

U. S. 436 (1966)); Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U. S. 291, 301–302 (1980)
(holding that a police officer’s subjective intent to obtain incriminatory
statements is not relevant to determining whether an interrogation has
occurred).
8 The existence of an ongoing emergency must be objectively assessed
from the perspective of the parties to the interrogation at the time, not
with the benefit of hindsight. If the information the parties knew at
the time of the encounter would lead a reasonable person to believe
that there was an emergency, even if that belief was later proved
incorrect, that is sufficient for purposes of the Confrontation Clause.
The emergency is relevant to the “primary purpose of the interrogation”
because of the effect it has on the parties’ purpose, not because of its
actual existence.

