2

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
SCALIA, J., dissenting

the right . . . to be confronted with the witnesses against
him.” In Crawford, we held that this provision guarantees
a defendant his common-law right to confront those “who
‘bear testimony’ ” against him. 541 U. S., at 51. A witness
must deliver his testimony against the defendant in per
son, or the prosecution must prove that the witness is
unavailable to appear at trial and that the defendant
has had a prior opportunity for cross-examination. Id., at
53–54.
Not all hearsay falls within the Confrontation Clause’s
grasp. At trial a witness “bears testimony” by providing
“ ‘[a] solemn declaration or affirmation . . . for the purpose
of establishing or proving some fact.’ ” Id., at 51 (quoting 2
N. Webster, An American Dictionary of the English Lan
guage (1828)). The Confrontation Clause protects defen
dants only from hearsay statements that do the same.
Davis v. Washington, 547 U. S. 813, 823–824 (2006). In
Davis, we explained how to identify testimonial hearsay
prompted by police questioning in the field. A statement
is testimonial “when the circumstances objectively indi
cate . . . that the primary purpose of the interrogation is to
establish or prove past events potentially relevant to later
criminal prosecution.” Id., at 822. When, however, the
circumstances objectively indicate that the declarant’s
statements were “a cry for help [o]r the provision of infor
mation enabling officers immediately to end a threatening
situation,” id., at 832, they bear little resemblance to in
court testimony. “No ‘witness’ goes into court to proclaim
an emergency and seek help.” Id., at 828.
Crawford and Davis did not address whose perspective
matters—the declarant’s, the interrogator’s, or both—
when assessing “the primary purpose of [an] interroga
tion.” In those cases the statements were testimonial from
any perspective. I think the same is true here, but be
cause the Court picks a perspective so will I: The decla
rant’s intent is what counts. In-court testimony is more

