18

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Opinion of the Court

Taking into account the victim’s medical state does not,
as the Michigan Supreme Court below thought, “rende[r]
non-testimonial” “all statements made while the police are
questioning a seriously injured complainant.” 483 Mich.,
at 149, 768 N. W. 2d, at 74. The medical condition of the
victim is important to the primary purpose inquiry to the
extent that it sheds light on the ability of the victim to
have any purpose at all in responding to police questions
and on the likelihood that any purpose formed would
necessarily be a testimonial one. The victim’s medical
state also provides important context for first responders
to judge the existence and magnitude of a continuing
threat to the victim, themselves, and the public.
As the Solicitor General’s brief observes, Brief for
United States as Amicus Curiae 20, and contrary to the
Michigan Supreme Court’s claims, 483 Mich., at 147, 768
N. W. 2d, at 73, none of this suggests that an emergency is
ongoing in every place or even just surrounding the victim
for the entire time that the perpetrator of a violent crime
is on the loose. As we recognized in Davis, “a conversation
which begins as an interrogation to determine the need for
emergency assistance” can “evolve into testimonial state
ments.” 547 U. S., at 828 (internal quotation marks omit
ted). This evolution may occur if, for example, a declarant
provides police with information that makes clear that
what appeared to be an emergency is not or is no longer an
emergency or that what appeared to be a public threat is
actually a private dispute. It could also occur if a perpe
trator is disarmed, surrenders, is apprehended, or, as in
Davis, flees with little prospect of posing a threat to the
public. Trial courts can determine in the first instance
when any transition from nontestimonial to testimonial
occurs,10 and exclude “the portions of any statement that
——————
10 Recognizing the evolutionary potential of a situation in criminal
law is not unique to the Confrontation Clause context. We noted in

