14

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
SCALIA, J., dissenting

2 How. St. Tr. 1, 14, 17, 19–20, 22–23, 29 (1603); that
case remains the canonical example of a Confrontation
Clause violation, not because Raleigh should have won the
debate but because he should have been allowed
cross-examination.
The Court attempts to fit its resurrected interest in
reliability into the Crawford framework, but the result is
incoherent. Reliability, the Court tells us, is a good indi
cator of whether “a statement is . . . an out-of-court substi
tute for trial testimony.” Ante, at 11. That is patently
false. Reliability tells us nothing about whether a state
ment is testimonial. Testimonial and nontestimonial
statements alike come in varying degrees of reliability.
An eyewitness’s statements to the police after a fender
bender, for example, are both reliable and testimonial.
Statements to the police from one driver attempting to
blame the other would be similarly testimonial but rarely
reliable.
The Court suggests otherwise because it “misunder
stands the relationship” between qualification for one of
the standard hearsay exceptions and exemption from the
confrontation requirement. Melendez-Diaz v. Massachu
setts, 557 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 18). That rela
tionship is not a causal one. Hearsay law exempts busi
ness records, for example, because businesses have a
financial incentive to keep reliable records. See Fed. Rule
Evid. 803(6). The Sixth Amendment also generally admits
business records into evidence, but not because the records
are reliable or because hearsay law says so. It admits
them “because—having been created for the administra
tion of an entity’s affairs and not for the purpose of estab
lishing or proving some fact at trial—they are not” weaker
substitutes for live testimony. Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 18). Moreover, the scope of the exemp
tion from confrontation and that of the hearsay exceptions
also are not always coextensive. The reliability logic of the

