28

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Opinion of the Court

This is not to suggest that the emergency continued
until Bryant was arrested in California a year after the
shooting. Id., at 137, 768 N. W. 2d, at 67. We need not
decide precisely when the emergency ended because Cov
ington’s encounter with the police and all of the state
ments he made during that interaction occurred within
the first few minutes of the police officers’ arrival and
well before they secured the scene of the shooting—the
shooter’s last known location.
We reiterate, moreover, that the existence vel non of an
ongoing emergency is not the touchstone of the testimonial
inquiry; rather, the ultimate inquiry is whether the “pri
mary purpose of the interrogation [was] to enable police
assistance to meet [the] ongoing emergency.” Davis, 547
U. S., at 822. We turn now to that inquiry, as informed by
the circumstances of the ongoing emergency just de
scribed. The circumstances of the encounter provide im
portant context for understanding Covington’s statements
to the police. When the police arrived at Covington’s side,
their first question to him was “What happened?”18 Cov
ington’s response was either “Rick shot me” or “I was
shot,” followed very quickly by an identification of “Rick”
——————
scope, aimed at killing or overthrowing the king,” post, at 11, about
which JUSTICE SCALIA’s dissent is quite concerned.
18 Although the dissent claims otherwise, post, at 7 (opinion of
SCALIA, J.), at least one officer asked Covington something akin to “how
was he doing.” App. 131 (testimony of Officer Stuglin) (“A I approached
the subject, the victim, Mr. Covington, on the ground and had asked
something like what happened or are you okay, something to that
line. . . . Q So you asked this man how are you, how are you doing? A
Well, basically it’s, you know, what’s wrong, you know” (paragraph
breaks omitted)). The officers also testified about their assessment of
Covington’s wounds. See id., at 35 (suppression hearing testimony of
Officer Brown) (“[H]e had blood . . . on the front of his body”); id., at 75
(testimony of Officer McCallister) (“It appeared he had a stomach
wound of a gunshot”); id., at 132 (testimony of Officer Stuglin) (“Q Did
you see the wound? A Yes, I did. Q You had to move some clothing to
do that? A Yes” (paragraph breaks omitted)).

