6

WAL-MART STORES, INC. v. DUKES
Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

trolled for factors including, inter alia, job performance,
length of time with the company, and the store where an
employee worked. Id., at 159.5 The results, the District
Court found, were sufficient to raise an “inference of dis
crimination.” Id., at 155–160.
C
The District Court’s identification of a common question,
whether Wal-Mart’s pay and promotions policies gave rise
to unlawful discrimination, was hardly infirm. The prac
tice of delegating to supervisors large discretion to make
personnel decisions, uncontrolled by formal standards, has
long been known to have the potential to produce dispa
rate effects. Managers, like all humankind, may be prey
to biases of which they are unaware.6 The risk of dis
crimination is heightened when those managers are pre
dominantly of one sex, and are steeped in a corporate
culture that perpetuates gender stereotypes.
The plaintiffs’ allegations resemble those in one of the
——————
5 The Court asserts that Drogin showed only average differences at
the “regional and national level” between male and female employees.
Ante, at 16 (internal quotation marks omitted). In fact, his regression
analyses showed there were disparities within stores. The majority’s
contention to the contrary reflects only an arcane disagreement about
statistical method—which the District Court resolved in the plaintiffs’
favor. 222 F. R. D. 137, 157 (ND Cal. 2004). Appellate review is no
occasion to disturb a trial court’s handling of factual disputes of this
order.
6 An example vividly illustrates how subjective decisionmaking can be
a vehicle for discrimination. Performing in symphony orchestras was
long a male preserve. Goldin and Rouse, Orchestrating Impartiality:
The Impact of “Blind” Auditions on Female Musicians, 90 Am. Econ.
Rev. 715, 715–716 (2000). In the 1970’s orchestras began hiring musi
cians through auditions open to all comers. Id., at 716. Reviewers were
to judge applicants solely on their musical abilities, yet subconscious
bias led some reviewers to disfavor women. Orchestras that permitted
reviewers to see the applicants hired far fewer female musicians than
orchestras that conducted blind auditions, in which candidates played
behind opaque screens. Id., at 738.

