Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

27

Opinion of the Court

We have established a procedure for trying pattern-or
practice cases that gives effect to these statutory require
ments. When the plaintiff seeks individual relief such as
reinstatement or backpay after establishing a pattern or
practice of discrimination, “a district court must usually
conduct additional proceedings . . . to determine the scope
of individual relief.” Teamsters, 431 U. S., at 361. At this
phase, the burden of proof will shift to the company, but it
will have the right to raise any individual affirmative
defenses it may have, and to “demonstrate that the indi
vidual applicant was denied an employment opportunity
for lawful reasons.” Id., at 362.
The Court of Appeals believed that it was possible to
replace such proceedings with Trial by Formula. A sample
set of the class members would be selected, as to whom
liability for sex discrimination and the backpay owing as a
result would be determined in depositions supervised by a
master. The percentage of claims determined to be valid
would then be applied to the entire remaining class, and
the number of (presumptively) valid claims thus derived
would be multiplied by the average backpay award in the
sample set to arrive at the entire class recovery—without
further individualized proceedings. 603 F. 3d, at 625–627.
We disapprove that novel project. Because the Rules
Enabling Act forbids interpreting Rule 23 to “abridge,
enlarge or modify any substantive right,” 28 U. S. C.
§2072(b); see Ortiz, 527 U. S., at 845, a class cannot be
certified on the premise that Wal-Mart will not be entitled
to litigate its statutory defenses to individual claims. And
because the necessity of that litigation will prevent back
pay from being “incidental” to the classwide injunction,
respondents’ class could not be certified even assuming,
arguendo, that “incidental” monetary relief can be
awarded to a 23(b)(2) class.
*
*
*
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is
Reversed.

