2

WAL-MART STORES, INC. v. DUKES
Syllabus
prove that the class has common “questions of law or fact.” Their
claims must depend upon a common contention of such a nature that
it is capable of classwide resolution—which means that determina
tion of its truth or falsity will resolve an issue that is central to the
validity of each one of the claims in one stroke. Here, proof of com
monality necessarily overlaps with respondents’ merits contention
that Wal-Mart engages in a pattern or practice of discrimination.
The crux of a Title VII inquiry is “the reason for a particular em
ployment decision,” Cooper v. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 467
U. S. 867, 876, and respondents wish to sue for millions of employ
ment decisions at once. Without some glue holding together the al
leged reasons for those decisions, it will be impossible to say that ex
amination of all the class members’ claims will produce a common
answer to the crucial discrimination question. Pp. 8–12.
(b) General Telephone Co. of Southwest v. Falcon, 457 U. S. 147,
describes the proper approach to commonality. On the facts of this
case, the conceptual gap between an individual’s discrimination claim
and “the existence of a class of persons who have suffered the same
injury,” id., at 157–158, must be bridged by “[s]ignificant proof that
an employer operated under a general policy of discrimination,” id.,
at 159, n. 15. Such proof is absent here. Wal-Mart’s announced pol
icy forbids sex discrimination, and the company has penalties for de
nials of equal opportunity. Respondents’ only evidence of a general
discrimination policy was a sociologist’s analysis asserting that WalMart’s corporate culture made it vulnerable to gender bias. But be
cause he could not estimate what percent of Wal-Mart employment
decisions might be determined by stereotypical thinking, his testi
mony was worlds away from “significant proof” that Wal-Mart “oper
ated under a general policy of discrimination.” Pp. 12–14.
(c) The only corporate policy that the plaintiffs’ evidence convinc
ingly establishes is Wal-Mart’s “policy” of giving local supervisors
discretion over employment matters. While such a policy could be
the basis of a Title VII disparate-impact claim, recognizing that a
claim “can” exist does not mean that every employee in a company
with that policy has a common claim. In a company of Wal-Mart’s
size and geographical scope, it is unlikely that all managers would
exercise their discretion in a common way without some common di
rection. Respondents’ attempt to show such direction by means of
statistical and anecdotal evidence falls well short. Pp. 14–20.
2. Respondents’ backpay claims were improperly certified under
Rule 23(b)(2). Pp. 20–27.
(a) Claims for monetary relief may not be certified under Rule
23(b)(2), at least where the monetary relief is not incidental to the
requested injunctive or declaratory relief. It is unnecessary to decide

