Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

25

Opinion of the Court

by Wal-Mart lack standing to seek injunctive or declara
tory relief against its employment practices. The Court of
Appeals’ response to that difficulty, however, was not to
eliminate all former employees from the certified class,
but to eliminate only those who had left the company’s
employ by the date the complaint was filed. That solution
has no logical connection to the problem, since those who
have left their Wal-Mart jobs since the complaint was filed
have no more need for prospective relief than those who
left beforehand. As a consequence, even though the valid
ity of a (b)(2) class depends on whether “final injunctive
relief or corresponding declaratory relief is appropriate
respecting the class as a whole,” Rule 23(b)(2) (emphasis
added), about half the members of the class approved by
the Ninth Circuit have no claim for injunctive or declara
tory relief at all. Of course, the alternative (and logical)
solution of excising plaintiffs from the class as they leave
their employment may have struck the Court of Appeals
as wasteful of the District Court’s time. Which indeed it
is, since if a backpay action were properly certified for
class treatment under (b)(3), the ability to litigate a plain
tiff ’s backpay claim as part of the class would not turn on
the irrelevant question whether she is still employed at
Wal-Mart. What follows from this, however, is not that
some arbitrary limitation on class membership should be
imposed but that the backpay claims should not be certi
fied under Rule 23(b)(2) at all.
Finally, respondents argue that their backpay claims
are appropriate for a (b)(2) class action because a backpay
award is equitable in nature. The latter may be true, but
it is irrelevant. The Rule does not speak of “equitable”
remedies generally but of injunctions and declaratory
judgments. As Title VII itself makes pellucidly clear,
backpay is neither. See 42 U. S. C. §2000e–5(g)(2)(B)(i)
and (ii) (distinguishing between declaratory and injunc
tive relief and the payment of “backpay,” see §2000e–

