24

WAL-MART STORES, INC. v. DUKES
Opinion of the Court

establish a disposition that has no basis in the Rule’s text,
and that does obvious violence to the Rule’s structural
features. The mere “predominance” of a proper (b)(2)
injunctive claim does nothing to justify elimination of Rule
23(b)(3)’s procedural protections: It neither establishes the
superiority of class adjudication over individual adjudica
tion nor cures the notice and opt-out problems. We fail to
see why the Rule should be read to nullify these protec
tions whenever a plaintiff class, at its option, combines its
monetary claims with a request—even a “predominating
request”—for an injunction.
Respondents’ predominance test, moreover, creates
perverse incentives for class representatives to place at
risk potentially valid claims for monetary relief. In this
case, for example, the named plaintiffs declined to include
employees’ claims for compensatory damages in their
complaint. That strategy of including only backpay claims
made it more likely that monetary relief would not “pre
dominate.” But it also created the possibility (if the pre
dominance test were correct) that individual class mem
bers’ compensatory-damages claims would be precluded by
litigation they had no power to hold themselves apart
from. If it were determined, for example, that a particular
class member is not entitled to backpay because her denial
of increased pay or a promotion was not the product of
discrimination, that employee might be collaterally es
topped from independently seeking compensatory dam
ages based on that same denial. That possibility under
scores the need for plaintiffs with individual monetary
claims to decide for themselves whether to tie their fates to
the class representatives’ or go it alone—a choice Rule
23(b)(2) does not ensure that they have.
The predominance test would also require the District
Court to reevaluate the roster of class members continu
ally. The Ninth Circuit recognized the necessity for this
when it concluded that those plaintiffs no longer employed

