Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
whether monetary claims can ever be certified under the Rule be
cause, at a minimum, claims for individualized relief, like backpay,
are excluded. Rule 23(b)(2) applies only when a single, indivisible
remedy would provide relief to each class member. The Rule’s his
tory and structure indicate that individualized monetary claims be
long instead in Rule 23(b)(3), with its procedural protections of pre
dominance, superiority, mandatory notice, and the right to opt out.
Pp. 20–23.
(b) Respondents nonetheless argue that their backpay claims
were appropriately certified under Rule 23(b)(2) because those claims
do not “predominate” over their injunctive and declaratory relief re
quests. That interpretation has no basis in the Rule’s text and does
obvious violence to the Rule’s structural features. The mere “pre
dominance” of a proper (b)(2) injunctive claim does nothing to justify
eliminating Rule 23(b)(3)’s procedural protections, and creates incen
tives for class representatives to place at risk potentially valid mone
tary relief claims. Moreover, a district court would have to reevalu
ate the roster of class members continuously to excise those who
leave their employment and become ineligible for classwide injunc
tive or declaratory relief. By contrast, in a properly certified (b)(3)
class action for backpay, it would be irrelevant whether the plaintiffs
are still employed at Wal-Mart. It follows that backpay claims
should not be certified under Rule 23(b)(2). Pp. 23–26.
(c) It is unnecessary to decide whether there are any forms of “in
cidental” monetary relief that are consistent with the above interpre
tation of Rule 23(b)(2) and the Due Process Clause because respon
dents’ backpay claims are not incidental to their requested
injunction. Wal-Mart is entitled to individualized determinations of
each employee’s eligibility for backpay. Once a plaintiff establishes a
pattern or practice of discrimination, a district court must usually
conduct “additional proceedings . . . to determine the scope of indi
vidual relief.” Teamsters v. United States, 431 U. S. 324, 361. The
company can then raise individual affirmative defenses and demon
strate that its action was lawful. Id., at 362. The Ninth Circuit erred
in trying to replace such proceedings with Trial by Formula. Because
Rule 23 cannot be interpreted to “abridge, enlarge or modify any sub
stantive right,” 28 U. S. C. §2072(b), a class cannot be certified on the
premise that Wal-Mart will not be entitled to litigate its statutory de
fenses to individual claims. Pp. 26–27.
603 F. 3d 571, reversed.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., joined, and in which GINSBURG, BREYER, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined as to Parts I and III.

