14

WAL-MART STORES, INC. v. DUKES
Opinion of the Court

U. S. 579 (1993).8 The District Court concluded that
Daubert did not apply to expert testimony at the certifica
tion stage of class-action proceedings. 222 F. R. D., at 191.
We doubt that is so, but even if properly considered,
Bielby’s testimony does nothing to advance respondents’
case. “[W]hether 0.5 percent or 95 percent of the employ
ment decisions at Wal-Mart might be determined by
stereotyped thinking” is the essential question on which
respondents’ theory of commonality depends. If Bielby
admittedly has no answer to that question, we can safely
disregard what he has to say. It is worlds away from
“significant proof ” that Wal-Mart “operated under a gen
eral policy of discrimination.”
C
The only corporate policy that the plaintiffs’ evidence
convincingly establishes is Wal-Mart’s “policy” of allowing
discretion by local supervisors over employment matters.
On its face, of course, that is just the opposite of a uniform
employment practice that would provide the commonality
needed for a class action; it is a policy against having
uniform employment practices. It is also a very common
——————
8 Bielby’s conclusions in this case have elicited criticism from the very
scholars on whose conclusions he relies for his social-framework analy
sis. See Monahan, Walker, & Mitchell, Contextual Evidence of Gender
Discrimination: The Ascendance of “Social Frameworks,” 94 Va.
L. Rev. 1715, 1747 (2008) (“[Bielby’s] research into conditions and be
havior at Wal-Mart did not meet the standards expected of social
scientific research into stereotyping and discrimination”); id., at 1745,
1747 (“[A] social framework necessarily contains only general state
ments about reliable patterns of relations among variables . . . and goes
no further. . . . Dr. Bielby claimed to present a social framework, but he
testified about social facts specific to Wal-Mart”); id., at 1747–1748
(“Dr. Bielby’s report provides no verifiable method for measuring and
testing any of the variables that were crucial to his conclusions and
reflects nothing more than Dr. Bielby’s ‘expert judgment’ about how
general stereotyping research applied to all managers across all of WalMart’s stores nationwide for the multi-year class period”).

