4

WAL-MART STORES, INC. v. DUKES
Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

ployees be willing to relocate.” Id., at 56a. Absent in
struction otherwise, there is a risk that managers will act
on the familiar assumption that women, because of their
services to husband and children, are less mobile than
men. See Dept. of Labor, Federal Glass Ceiling Commis
sion, Good for Business: Making Full Use of the Nation’s
Human Capital 151 (1995).
Women fill 70 percent of the hourly jobs in the retailer’s
stores but make up only “33 percent of management em
ployees.” 222 F. R. D., at 146. “[T]he higher one looks in
the organization the lower the percentage of women.” Id.,
at 155. The plaintiffs’ “largely uncontested descriptive
statistics” also show that women working in the company’s
stores “are paid less than men in every region” and “that
the salary gap widens over time even for men and women
hired into the same jobs at the same time.” Ibid.; cf.
Ledbetter v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., 550 U. S. 618,
643 (2007) (GINSBURG, J., dissenting).
The District Court identified “systems for . . . promoting
in-store employees” that were “sufficiently similar across
regions and stores” to conclude that “the manner in which
these systems affect the class raises issues that are com
mon to all class members.” 222 F. R. D., at 149. The
selection of employees for promotion to in-store manage
ment “is fairly characterized as a ‘tap on the shoulder’
process,” in which managers have discretion about whose
shoulders to tap. Id., at 148. Vacancies are not regularly
posted; from among those employees satisfying minimum
qualifications, managers choose whom to promote on the
basis of their own subjective impressions. Ibid.
Wal-Mart’s compensation policies also operate uniformly
across stores, the District Court found. The retailer leaves
open a $2 band for every position’s hourly pay rate. WalMart provides no standards or criteria for setting wages
within that band, and thus does nothing to counter uncon
scious bias on the part of supervisors. See id., at 146–147.

