10

WAL-MART STORES, INC. v. DUKES
Opinion of the Court

erate common answers apt to drive the resolution of
the litigation. Dissimilarities within the proposed
class are what have the potential to impede the gen
eration of common answers.” Nagareda, supra, at 132.
Rule 23 does not set forth a mere pleading standard. A
party seeking class certification must affirmatively dem
onstrate his compliance with the Rule—that is, he must be
prepared to prove that there are in fact sufficiently nu
merous parties, common questions of law or fact, etc. We
recognized in Falcon that “sometimes it may be necessary
for the court to probe behind the pleadings before coming
to rest on the certification question,” 457 U. S., at 160, and
that certification is proper only if “the trial court is satis
fied, after a rigorous analysis, that the prerequisites of
Rule 23(a) have been satisfied,” id., at 161; see id., at 160
(“[A]ctual, not presumed, conformance with Rule 23(a)
remains . . . indispensable”). Frequently that “rigorous
analysis” will entail some overlap with the merits of
the plaintiff ’s underlying claim. That cannot be helped.
“ ‘[T]he class determination generally involves considera
tions that are enmeshed in the factual and legal issues
comprising the plaintiff ’s cause of action.’ ” Falcon, supra,
at 160 (quoting Coopers & Lybrand v. Livesay, 437 U. S.
463, 469 (1978); some internal quotation marks omitted).6
——————
6 A statement in one of our prior cases, Eisen v. Carlisle & Jacquelin,
417 U. S. 156, 177 (1974), is sometimes mistakenly cited to the con
trary: “We find nothing in either the language or history of Rule 23 that
gives a court any authority to conduct a preliminary inquiry into the
merits of a suit in order to determine whether it may be maintained as
a class action.” But in that case, the judge had conducted a preliminary
inquiry into the merits of a suit, not in order to determine the propriety
of certification under Rules 23(a) and (b) (he had already done that, see
id., at 165), but in order to shift the cost of notice required by Rule
23(c)(2) from the plaintiff to the defendants. To the extent the quoted
statement goes beyond the permissibility of a merits inquiry for any
other pretrial purpose, it is the purest dictum and is contradicted by
our other cases.

