Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

fication requires, in addition to the four 23(a) findings, de
terminations that “questions of law or fact common to
class members predominate over any questions affecting
only individual members” and that “a class action is supe
rior to other available methods for . . . adjudicating the
controversy.”8
The Court’s emphasis on differences between class
members mimics the Rule 23(b)(3) inquiry into whether
common questions “predominate” over individual issues.
And by asking whether the individual differences “impede”
common adjudication, ante, at 10 (internal quotation
marks omitted), the Court duplicates 23(b)(3)’s question
whether “a class action is superior” to other modes of
adjudication. Indeed, Professor Nagareda, whose “dissimi
——————
failure to hire Mexican-American applicants. There were “no common
questions of law or fact” between the claims of the lead plaintiff and the
applicant class. 457 U. S., at 162 (Burger, C. J., concurring in part and
dissenting in part) (emphasis added). The plaintiff-employee alleged
that the defendant-employer had discriminated against him intention
ally. The applicant class claims, by contrast, were “advanced under the
‘adverse impact’ theory,” ibid., appropriate for facially neutral prac
tices. “[T]he only commonality [wa]s that respondent is a MexicanAmerican and he seeks to represent a class of Mexican-Americans.”
Ibid. Here the same practices touch and concern all members of the
class.
8 “A class action may be maintained if Rule 23(a) is satisfied and if:
“(1) prosecuting separate actions by or against individual class mem
bers would create a risk of . . . inconsistent or varying adjudications . . .
[or] adjudications with respect to individual class members that, as a
practical matter, would be dispositive of the interests of the other
members . . . ;
“(2) the party opposing the class has acted or refused to act on
grounds that apply generally to the class, so that final injunctive relief
. . . is appropriate respecting the class as a whole; or
“(3) the court finds that the questions of law or fact common to class
members predominate over any questions affecting only individual
members, and that a class action is superior to other available methods
for fairly and efficiently adjudicating the controversy.” Fed. Rule Civ.
Proc. 23(b) (paragraph breaks added).

