Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

breaks added).
Second, the proposed class must satisfy at least one of the
three requirements listed in Rule 23(b). Respondents rely
on Rule 23(b)(2), which applies when “the party opposing
the class has acted or refused to act on grounds that apply
generally to the class, so that final injunctive relief or
corresponding declaratory relief is appropriate respecting
the class as a whole.”2
Invoking these provisions, respondents moved the Dis
trict Court to certify a plaintiff class consisting of “ ‘[a]ll
women employed at any Wal-Mart domestic retail store
at any time since December 26, 1998, who have been or
may be subjected to Wal-Mart’s challenged pay and man
agement track promotions policies and practices.’ ” 222
F. R. D., at 141–142 (quoting Plaintiff ’s Motion for Class
Certification in case No. 3:01–cv–02252–CRB (ND Cal.),
Doc. 99, p. 37). As evidence that there were indeed “ques
tions of law or fact common to” all the women of Wal-Mart,
as Rule 23(a)(2) requires, respondents relied chiefly on
three forms of proof: statistical evidence about pay and
promotion disparities between men and women at the
company, anecdotal reports of discrimination from about
120 of Wal-Mart’s female employees, and the testimony of
a sociologist, Dr. William Bielby, who conducted a “social
——————
2 Rule 23(b)(1) allows a class to be maintained where “prosecuting
separate actions by or against individual class members would create a
risk of ” either “(A) inconsistent or varying adjudications,” or “(B)
adjudications . . . that, as a practical matter, would be dispositive of the
interests of the other members not parties to the individual adjudica
tions or would substantially impair or impeded their ability to protect
their interests.” Rule 23(b)(3) states that a class may be maintained
where “questions of law or fact common to class members predominate
over any questions affecting only individual members,” and a class
action would be “superior to other available methods for fairly and
efficiently adjudicating the controversy.” The applicability of these
provisions to the plaintiff class is not before us.

