Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

easy to misread, since “[a]ny competently crafted class
complaint literally raises common ‘questions.’ ” Nagareda,
Class Certification in the Age of Aggregate Proof, 84
N. Y. U. L. Rev. 97, 131–132 (2009). For example: Do all
of us plaintiffs indeed work for Wal-Mart? Do our manag
ers have discretion over pay? Is that an unlawful em
ployment practice? What remedies should we get? Recit
ing these questions is not sufficient to obtain class
certification. Commonality requires the plaintiff to dem
onstrate that the class members “have suffered the same
injury,” Falcon, supra, at 157. This does not mean merely
that they have all suffered a violation of the same pro
vision of law. Title VII, for example, can be violated in
many ways—by intentional discrimination, or by hiring
and promotion criteria that result in disparate impact,
and by the use of these practices on the part of many
different superiors in a single company. Quite obviously,
the mere claim by employees of the same company that
they have suffered a Title VII injury, or even a disparate
impact Title VII injury, gives no cause to believe that all
their claims can productively be litigated at once. Their
claims must depend upon a common contention—for ex
ample, the assertion of discriminatory bias on the part of
the same supervisor. That common contention, moreover,
must be of such a nature that it is capable of classwide
resolution—which means that determination of its truth
or falsity will resolve an issue that is central to the valid
ity of each one of the claims in one stroke.
“What matters to class certification . . . is not the rais
ing of common ‘questions’—even in droves—but,
rather the capacity of a classwide proceeding to gen
——————
con, 457 U. S. 147, 157–158, n. 13 (1982). In light of our disposition of
the commonality question, however, it is unnecessary to resolve
whether respondents have satisfied the typicality and adequate
representation requirements of Rule 23(a).

