Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

and presumptively reasonable way of doing business—one
that we have said “should itself raise no inference of dis
criminatory conduct,” Watson v. Fort Worth Bank & Trust,
487 U. S. 977, 990 (1988).
To be sure, we have recognized that, “in appropriate
cases,” giving discretion to lower-level supervisors can be
the basis of Title VII liability under a disparate-impact
theory—since “an employer’s undisciplined system of
subjective decisionmaking [can have] precisely the same
effects as a system pervaded by impermissible intentional
discrimination.” Id., at 990–991. But the recognition that
this type of Title VII claim “can” exist does not lead to
the conclusion that every employee in a company using a
system of discretion has such a claim in common. To the
contrary, left to their own devices most managers in any
corporation—and surely most managers in a corporation
that forbids sex discrimination—would select sex-neutral,
performance-based criteria for hiring and promotion that
produce no actionable disparity at all. Others may choose to
reward various attributes that produce disparate impact—
such as scores on general aptitude tests or educational
achievements, see Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 401 U. S.
424, 431–432 (1971). And still other managers may be
guilty of intentional discrimination that produces a sex
based disparity. In such a company, demonstrating the
invalidity of one manager’s use of discretion will do noth
ing to demonstrate the invalidity of another’s. A party
seeking to certify a nationwide class will be unable to
show that all the employees’ Title VII claims will in fact
depend on the answers to common questions.
Respondents have not identified a common mode of exer
cising discretion that pervades the entire company—aside
from their reliance on Dr. Bielby’s social frameworks analy
sis that we have rejected. In a company of Wal-Mart’s size
and geographical scope, it is quite unbelievable that all
managers would exercise their discretion in a common way

