(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

WAL-MART STORES, INC. v. DUKES ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–277.

Argued March 29, 2011—Decided June 20, 2011

Respondents, current or former employees of petitioner Wal-Mart,
sought judgment against the company for injunctive and declaratory
relief, punitive damages, and backpay, on behalf of themselves and a
nationwide class of some 1.5 million female employees, because of
Wal-Mart’s alleged discrimination against women in violation of Title
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. They claim that local managers
exercise their discretion over pay and promotions disproportionately
in favor of men, which has an unlawful disparate impact on female
employees; and that Wal-Mart’s refusal to cabin its managers’ au
thority amounts to disparate treatment. The District Court certified
the class, finding that respondents satisfied Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure 23(a), and Rule 23(b)(2)’s requirement of showing that “the
party opposing the class has acted or refused to act on grounds that
apply generally to the class, so that final injunctive relief or corre
sponding declaratory relief is appropriate respecting the class as a
whole.” The Ninth Circuit substantially affirmed, concluding, inter
alia, that respondents met Rule 23(a)(2)’s commonality requirement
and that their backpay claims could be certified as part of a (b)(2)
class because those claims did not predominate over the declaratory
and injunctive relief requests. It also ruled that the class action
could be manageably tried without depriving Wal-Mart of its right to
present its statutory defenses if the District Court selected a random
set of claims for valuation and then extrapolated the validity and
value of the untested claims from the sample set.
Held:
1. The certification of the plaintiff class was not consistent with
Rule 23(a). Pp. 8–20.
(a) Rule 23(a)(2) requires a party seeking class certification to

