22

WAL-MART STORES, INC. v. DUKES
Opinion of the Court

sought must perforce affect the entire class at once, as in a
(b)(2) class. For that reason these are also mandatory
classes: The Rule provides no opportunity for (b)(1) or
(b)(2) class members to opt out, and does not even oblige
the District Court to afford them notice of the action. Rule
23(b)(3), by contrast, is an “adventuresome innovation” of
the 1966 amendments, Amchem, 521 U. S., at 614 (inter
nal quotation marks omitted), framed for situations “in
which ‘class-action treatment is not as clearly called for’,”
id., at 615 (quoting Advisory Committee’s Notes, 28
U. S. C. App., p. 697 (1994 ed.)). It allows class certifica
tion in a much wider set of circumstances but with greater
procedural protections. Its only prerequisites are that “the
questions of law or fact common to class members pre
dominate over any questions affecting only individual
members, and that a class action is superior to other
available methods for fairly and efficiently adjudicating
the controversy.” Rule 23(b)(3). And unlike (b)(1) and
(b)(2) classes, the (b)(3) class is not mandatory; class
members are entitled to receive “the best notice that is
practicable under the circumstances” and to withdraw
from the class at their option. See Rule 23(c)(2)(B).
Given that structure, we think it clear that individ
ualized monetary claims belong in Rule 23(b)(3). The
procedural protections attending the (b)(3) class—
predominance, superiority, mandatory notice, and the
right to opt out—are missing from (b)(2) not because the
Rule considers them unnecessary, but because it considers
them unnecessary to a (b)(2) class. When a class seeks an
indivisible injunction benefitting all its members at once,
there is no reason to undertake a case-specific inquiry into
——————
individual adjudications or would substantially impair or impede their
ability to protect their interests,” Rule 23(b)(1)(B), such as in “ ‘limited
fund’ cases, . . . in which numerous persons make claims against a fund
insufficient to satisfy all claims,” Amchem, supra, at 614.

