16

WAL-MART STORES, INC. v. DUKES
Opinion of the Court

without some common direction. Respondents attempt to
make that showing by means of statistical and anecdotal
evidence, but their evidence falls well short.
The statistical evidence consists primarily of regression
analyses performed by Dr. Richard Drogin, a statistician,
and Dr. Marc Bendick, a labor economist. Drogin con
ducted his analysis region-by-region, comparing the num
ber of women promoted into management positions with
the percentage of women in the available pool of hourly
workers. After considering regional and national data,
Drogin concluded that “there are statistically significant
disparities between men and women at Wal-Mart . . .
[and] these disparities . . . can be explained only by gender
discrimination.” 603 F. 3d, at 604 (internal quotation
marks omitted). Bendick compared work-force data from
Wal-Mart and competitive retailers and concluded that
Wal-Mart “promotes a lower percentage of women than its
competitors.” Ibid.
Even if they are taken at face value, these studies are
insufficient to establish that respondents’ theory can be
proved on a classwide basis. In Falcon, we held that one
named plaintiff ’s experience of discrimination was insuffi
cient to infer that “discriminatory treatment is typical of
[the employer’s employment] practices.” 457 U. S., at 158.
A similar failure of inference arises here. As Judge Ikuta
observed in her dissent, “[i]nformation about disparities at
the regional and national level does not establish the
existence of disparities at individual stores, let alone raise
the inference that a company-wide policy of discrimination
is implemented by discretionary decisions at the store and
district level.” 603 F. 3d, at 637. A regional pay disparity,
for example, may be attributable to only a small set of
Wal-Mart stores, and cannot by itself establish the uni
form, store-by-store disparity upon which the plaintiffs’
theory of commonality depends.
There is another, more fundamental, respect in which

