Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

respondents’ statistical proof fails. Even if it established
(as it does not) a pay or promotion pattern that differs
from the nationwide figures or the regional figures in all of
Wal-Mart’s 3,400 stores, that would still not demonstrate
that commonality of issue exists. Some managers will
claim that the availability of women, or qualified women,
or interested women, in their stores’ area does not mirror
the national or regional statistics. And almost all of them
will claim to have been applying some sex-neutral,
performance-based criteria—whose nature and effects
will differ from store to store. In the landmark case of
ours which held that giving discretion to lower-level su
pervisors can be the basis of Title VII liability under a
disparate-impact theory, the plurality opinion conditioned
that holding on the corollary that merely proving that the
discretionary system has produced a racial or sexual
disparity is not enough. “[T]he plaintiff must begin by
identifying the specific employment practice that is chal
lenged.” Watson, 487 U. S., at 994; accord, Wards Cove
Packing Co. v. Atonio, 490 U. S. 642, 656 (1989) (approv
ing that statement), superseded by statute on other
grounds, 42 U. S. C. §2000e–2(k). That is all the more
necessary when a class of plaintiffs is sought to be certi
fied. Other than the bare existence of delegated discre
tion, respondents have identified no “specific employment
practice”—much less one that ties all their 1.5 million
claims together. Merely showing that Wal-Mart’s policy of
discretion has produced an overall sex-based disparity
does not suffice.
Respondents’ anecdotal evidence suffers from the same
defects, and in addition is too weak to raise any inference
that all the individual, discretionary personnel decisions
are discriminatory. In Teamsters v. United States, 431
U. S. 324 (1977), in addition to substantial statistical
evidence of company-wide discrimination, the Government
(as plaintiff) produced about 40 specific accounts of racial

