Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

(“In some instances, trust law will offer only a starting
point, after which courts must go on to ask whether, or to
what extent, the language of the statute, its structure, or
its purposes require departing from common-law trust
requirements”); Brief for Respondents 50 (pressing same
view as the dissent but concluding that the dispute over
trust law “need not be resolved”). Here trust law does not
resolve the specific issue before us, but the guiding princi
ples we have identified underlying ERISA do.
Congress enacted ERISA to ensure that employees
would receive the benefits they had earned, but Congress
did not require employers to establish benefit plans in the
first place. Lockheed Corp. v. Spink, 517 U. S. 882, 887
(1996). We have therefore recognized that ERISA repre
sents a “ ‘careful balancing’ between ensuring fair and
prompt enforcement of rights under a plan and the en
couragement of the creation of such plans.” Aetna Health
Inc. v. Davila, 542 U. S. 200, 215 (2004) (quoting Pilot Life
Ins. Co. v. Dedeaux, 481 U. S. 41, 54 (1987)). Congress
sought “to create a system that is [not] so complex that
administrative costs, or litigation expenses, unduly dis
courage employers from offering [ERISA] plans in the first
place.” Varity Corp., supra, at 497. ERISA “induc[es]
employers to offer benefits by assuring a predictable set of
liabilities, under uniform standards of primary conduct
and a uniform regime of ultimate remedial orders and
awards when a violation has occurred.” Rush Prudential
HMO, Inc. v. Moran, 536 U. S. 355, 379 (2002).
Firestone deference protects these interests and, by
permitting an employer to grant primary interpretive
authority over an ERISA plan to the plan administrator,
preserves the “careful balancing” on which ERISA is
based. Deference promotes efficiency by encouraging
resolution of benefits disputes through internal adminis
trative proceedings rather than costly litigation. It also
promotes predictability, as an employer can rely on the

