14

CONKRIGHT v. FROMMERT
BREYER, J., dissenting

570–572 (1985); see also, e.g., Glenn, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip
op., at 4); Davila, 542 U. S., at 218–219; Firestone, 489
U. S., at 111–113. While, as the majority recognizes, ante,
at 8, trust law may “not tell the entire story,” Varity Corp.
v. Howe, 516 U. S. 489, 497 (1996), I am aware of no other
case in which this Court has simply ignored trust law (on
the basis that it was unclear) and crafted a legal rule
based on nothing but “the guiding principles we have
identified underlying ERISA,” ante, at 9. See Varity,
supra, at 497 (“In some instances, trust law will offer only
a starting point, after which courts must go on to ask
whether, or to what extent, the language of the statute, its
structure, or its purposes require departing from common­
law trust requirements” (emphasis added)).
In any event, it is far from clear that the Court’s legal
rule reflects an appropriate analysis of ERISA-based
policy. To the contrary, the majority’s absolute “one free
honest mistake” rule is impractical, for it requires courts
to determine what is “honest,” encourages appeals on the
point, and threatens to delay further proceedings that
already take too long. (Respondents initially filed this
retirement benefits case in 1999.) See Glenn, supra, at ___
(slip op., at 10). It also ignores what we previously have
pointed out—namely, that abuses of discretion “arise in
too many contexts” and “concern too many circumstances”
for this Court “to come up with a one-size-fits-all proce­
dural [approach] that is likely to promote fair and accu­
rate” benefits determinations. Ibid. And, finally, the
majority’s approach creates incentives for administrators
to take “one free shot” at employer-favorable plan inter­
pretations and to draft ambiguous retirement plans in the
first instance with the expectation that they will have
repeated opportunities to interpret (and possibly reinter­
pret) the ambiguous terms. I thus fail to see how the
majority’s “one free honest mistake” approach furthers
ERISA’s core purpose of “promot[ing] the interests of

