Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
This case also demonstrates the harm to predictability and uniform
ity that would result from stripping a plan administrator of Firestone
deference. The District Court’s interpretation does not account for
the time value of money, but respondents’ own actuarial expert testi
fied that fairness required recognizing that principle. Respondents
do not dispute that the District Court’s approach would place them in
a better position than employees who never left the company. If
other courts construed the Plan to account for the time value of
money, moreover, Xerox could be placed in an impossible situation in
which the Plan is subject to different interpretations and obligations
in different States. Pp. 5–13.
(c) Respondents claim that plan administrators will adopt unrea
sonable interpretations of their plans seriatim, receiving deference
each time, thereby undermining the prompt resolution of benefit dis
putes, driving up litigation costs, and discouraging employees from
challenging administrators’ decisions. These concerns are overblown
because there is no reason to think that deference would be required
in the extreme circumstances that respondents foresee. Multiple er
roneous interpretations of the same plan provision, even if issued in
good faith, could support a finding that a plan administrator is too
incompetent to exercise his discretion fairly, cutting short the rounds
of costly litigation that respondents fear. Applying a deferential
standard of review also does not mean that the plan administrator
will always prevail on the merits. It means only that the plan admin
istrator’s interpretation “will not be disturbed if reasonable.” Fire
stone, 489 U. S., at 111. The lower courts should have applied the
standard established in Firestone and Glenn. Pp. 13–14.
535 F. 3d 111, reversed and remanded.
ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which SCALIA,
KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., joined. BREYER, J., filed a dissenting
opinion, in which STEVENS and GINSBURG, JJ., joined. SOTOMAYOR, J.,
took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.

