Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

from the Plan, the District Court on remand considered
other approaches for adjusting respondents’ present bene
fits in light of their past distributions. See 472 F. Supp.
2d 452, 456–458 (WDNY 2007). The Plan Administrator
submitted an affidavit proposing an approach that, like
the phantom account method, accounted for the time value
of the money that respondents had previously received.
But unlike the phantom account method, the Plan Admin
istrator’s new approach did not calculate the present value
of a past distribution based on events that occurred after
the distribution was made. Instead, the new approach
used an interest rate that was fixed at the time of the
distribution, thereby calculating the current value of the
distribution based on information that was known at the
time of the distribution. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 147a–
153a. Petitioners argued that the District Court should
apply a deferential standard of review to this approach,
and accept it as a reasonable interpretation of the Plan.
See Defendants’ Pre-Hearing Brief Addressed to Remedies
in No. 00–CV–6311 (WDNY), pp. 7–8; Defendants’ PreHearing Reply Brief Addressing Remedies in No. 00–CV–
6311 (WDNY), p. 2.
The District Court did not apply a deferential standard
of review. Nor did it accept the Plan Administrator’s
interpretation. Instead, after finding the Plan to be am
biguous, the District Court adopted an approach proposed
by respondents that did not account for the time value of
money. Under that approach, respondents’ present bene
fits were reduced only by the nominal amount of their past
distributions—thereby treating a dollar distributed to
respondents in the 1980’s as equal in value to a dollar
distributed today. See 472 F. Supp. 2d, at 457–458. The
Second Circuit affirmed in relevant part, holding that the
District Court was correct not to apply a deferential stan
dard on remand, and that the District Court’s decision on
the merits was not an abuse of discretion. See 535 F. 3d

