2

CONKRIGHT v. FROMMERT
Syllabus
Bruch, 489 U. S. 101. Firestone looked to “principles of trust law” for
guidance. Id., at 111. Under trust law, the appropriate standard de
pends on the language of the instrument creating the trust. When a
trust instrument gives the trustee “power to construe disputed or
doubtful terms, . . . the trustee’s interpretation will not be disturbed
if reasonable.” Ibid. Under Firestone and the Plan’s terms, the Plan
Administrator here would normally be entitled to deference when in
terpreting the Plan. The Court of Appeals, however, crafted an ex
ception to Firestone deference, holding that a court need not apply a
deferential standard when a plan administrator’s previous construc
tion of the same plan terms was found to violate ERISA. Pp. 4–5.
(b) The Second Circuit’s “one-strike-and-you’re-out” approach has
no basis in Firestone, which set out a broad standard of deference
with no suggestion that it was susceptible to ad hoc exceptions. This
Court held in Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Glenn, 554 U. S. ___, ___,
that a plan administrator operating under a systemic conflict of in
terest is nonetheless still entitled to deferential review. In light of
that ruling, it is difficult to see why a single honest mistake should
require a different result. Nor is the Second Circuit’s decision sup
ported by the considerations on which Firestone and Glenn were
based—the plan’s terms, trust law principles, and ERISA’s purposes.
The Plan grants the Plan Administrator general interpretive author
ity without suggesting that the authority is limited to first efforts to
construe the Plan. An exception to Firestone deference is also not re
quired by trust law principles, which serve as a guide under ERISA
but do not “tell the entire story.” Varity Corp. v. Howe, 516 U. S. 489,
497. Trust law does not resolve the specific question whether courts
may strip a plan administrator of Firestone deference after one good
faith mistake, but the guiding principles underlying ERISA do.
ERISA represents a “ ‘careful balancing’ between ensuring fair and
prompt enforcement of rights under a plan and the encouragement of
the creation of such plans.” Aetna Health Inc. v. Davila, 542 U. S.
200, 215. Firestone deference preserves this “careful balancing” and
protects the statute’s interests in efficiency, predictability, and uni
formity. Respondents claim that deference is less important once a
plan administrator’s interpretation has been found unreasonable, but
the interests in efficiency, predictability, and uniformity do not sud
denly disappear simply because of a single honest mistake, as illus
trated by this case. When the District Court declined to apply a def
erential standard of review on remand, the court made the case more
complicated than necessary. Respondents’ approach threatens to in
terject additional issues into ERISA litigation that “would create fur
ther complexity, adding time and expense to a process that may al
ready be too costly for many [seeking] redress.” Glenn, supra, at ___.

