10

CONKRIGHT v. FROMMERT
Opinion of the Court

expertise of the plan administrator rather than worry
about unexpected and inaccurate plan interpretations that
might result from de novo judicial review. Moreover,
Firestone deference serves the interest of uniformity,
helping to avoid a patchwork of different interpretations of
a plan, like the one here, that covers employees in differ
ent jurisdictions—a result that “would introduce consider
able inefficiencies in benefit program operation, which
might lead those employers with existing plans to reduce
benefits, and those without such plans to refrain from
adopting them.” Fort Halifax Packing Co. v. Coyne, 482
U. S. 1, 11 (1987). Indeed, a group of prominent actuaries
tells us that it is impossible even to determine whether an
ERISA plan is solvent (a duty imposed on actuaries by
federal law, see 29 U. S. C. §§1023(a)(4), (d)) if the plan is
interpreted to mean different things in different places.
See Brief for Chief Actuaries as Amici Curiae 5–11.
Respondents and the United States as amicus curiae do
not question that deference to plan administrators serves
these important purposes. Rather, they argue that defer
ence is less important once a plan administrator has is
sued an interpretation of a plan found to be unreasonable.
But the interests in efficiency, predictability, and uniform
ity—and the manner in which they are promoted by defer
ence to reasonable plan construction by administrators—
do not suddenly disappear simply because a plan adminis
trator has made a single honest mistake.
This case illustrates the point. Consider first the inter
est in efficiency, an interest that Xerox has pursued by
granting the Plan Administrator authority to construe the
Plan. On remand from the Court of Appeals, if the Dis
trict Court had applied a deferential standard of review
under Firestone, the question before it would have been
whether the Plan Administrator’s interpretation of the
Plan was reasonable. After answering that question, the
case might well have been over. Instead, the District

