Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

BREYER, J., dissenting

trustee’s discretion or to craft a remedy. See, e.g., 3 A.
Scott & W. Fratcher, Scott on Trusts §187, pp. 14–15 (4th
ed. 1988) (“This ordinarily means that so long as [the
trustee] acts not only in good faith and from proper mo­
tives, but also within the bounds of reasonable judgment,
the court will not interfere; but the court will interfere when he acts outside the bounds of a reasonable
judgment”).
Nor does anything in the present case suggest that the
District Court abused its remedial authority. The Second
Circuit stated that the interpretive problem on remand
was in essence a remedial problem. See 433 F. 3d, at 268.
It added that the remedial problem was “difficul[t]” and
that “the district court . . . may wish to employ equitable
principles when determining the appropriate calculation
and fashioning the appropriate remedy.” Ibid. The Ad­
ministrator had previously abused his discretionary
power. Id., at 265–268. And the District Court found that
the Administrator’s primary remedial suggestion on re­
mand—adjusting respondents’ previous benefits distribu­
tions by adding interest—probably would have violated
ERISA’s notice provisions. 472 F. Supp. 2d, at 457. Under
these circumstances, the District Court reasonably could
have found a need to use its own remedial judgment,
rather than rely on the Administrator’s—which is just
what the Second Circuit said. 535 F. 3d, at 119.
Moreover, even if the “narrow” trust law “question
before us” were difficult, ante, at 6—which it is not—this
difficulty would not excuse the Court from trying to do its
best to work out a legal solution that nonetheless respects
basic principles of trust law. “Congress invoked the com­
mon law of trusts” in enacting ERISA, and this Court has
thus repeatedly looked to trust law in order to determine
“the particular duties and powers” of ERISA plan adminis­
trators. Central States, Southeast & Southwest Areas
Pension Fund v. Central Transport, Inc., 472 U. S. 559,

