10

CONKRIGHT v. FROMMERT
BREYER, J., dissenting

Nevertheless, the majority reads the Scott treatise as
establishing an absolute requirement that courts defer to
a trustee’s fallback position absent “reason to believe that
[the trustee] will not exercise [his] discretion fairly—for
example, upon a showing that the trustee has already
acted in bad faith.” Ante, at 6. And based on this reading,
the majority further concludes that the existence of the
Scott treatise creates uncertainty as to whether, under
basic trust law principles, a court has the power to craft a
remedy for a trustee’s abuse of discretion. Ante, at 6–9.
It is unclear to me, however, why the majority reads the
passage from Scott as creating a war among treatise writ­
ers, compare ante, at 6 (discussing Scott) with ante, at 8
(discussing Bogert), when the relevant passages can so
easily be read as consistent with one another. I simply
read the Scott treatise language as identifying circum­
stances in which courts typically choose to defer to an
administrator’s fallback position. The treatise does not
suggest that the law forbids a court from acting on its own
in the exercise of its broad remedial authority—authority
that trust law plainly grants to supervising courts. See
supra, at 8–9.
A closer look at the Scott treatise confirms this under­
standing. The treatise cites seven cases in support of the
passage upon which the majority relies. See 3 Scott
§18.2.1, at 1349, n. 4. Three of these cases explicitly state
that a court may exercise its discretion to craft a remedy if
a trustee has previously abused its discretion. See Old
Colony Trust Co. v. Rodd, 356 Mass. 584, 589, 254 N. E.
2d 886, 889 (1970) (“A court of equity may control a trus­
tee in the exercise of a fiduciary discretion if it fails to
observe standards of judgment apparent from the applica­
ble instrument”); In re Marre’s Estate, 18 Cal. 2d 184, 190,
114 P. 2d 586, 590–591 (1941) (“It is well settled that the
courts will not attempt to exercise discretion which has
been confided to a trustee unless it is clear that the trustee

