Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

Court declined to defer, and therefore had to answer the
more complicated question of how best to interpret the
Plan.
The prospect of increased litigation costs inherent in
respondents’ approach does not end there. Under respon
dents’ and the Government’s view, the question whether a
deferential standard of review was required in this case
turns on whether the Plan Administrator was interpreting
the “same terms” or deciding the “same issue” on remand.
See Brief for Respondents 43, 46–48, 53, and n. 13; Brief
for United States as Amicus Curiae 13–15, 23. Whether
that condition is satisfied will not always be clear. Indeed,
petitioners dispute that question here, arguing that the
Plan Administrator confronted an entirely new issue on
remand—how to interpret the Plan, knowing that specific
provisions requiring use of the phantom account method
could not be applied to respondents due to a lack of notice.
See Brief for Petitioners 50–51. Respondents would force
the parties to litigate this potentially complicated “same
issue” or “same terms” question before a district court
could even decide whether deference is owed to a plan
administrator’s view. As we recognized in Glenn, there is
little place in the ERISA context for these sorts of “special
procedural rules [that] would create further complexity,
adding time and expense to a process that may already be
too costly for many of those who seek redress.” 554 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 10).
The position of respondents and the Government could
interject other additional issues into ERISA litigation. For
example, even under their view, the District Court here
could have granted deference to the Plan Administrator;
the court merely was not required to do so. See Brief for
Respondents 43, 49–50, 52–53; Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae 23–24. That raises the question of how a
court is to decide between the two options; respondents’
answer is to weigh an indeterminate number of factors,

