(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CONKRIGHT ET AL. v. FROMMERT ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 08–810.

Argued January 20, 2010—Decided April 21, 2010

Petitioners are Xerox Corporation’s pension plan (Plan) and the Plan’s
current and former administrators (Plan Administrator). Respon
dents are employees who left Xerox in the 1980’s, received lump-sum
distributions of retirement benefits earned up to that point, and were
later rehired. To account for the past distributions when calculating
respondents’ current benefits, the Plan Administrator initially inter
preted the Plan to call for an approach that has come to be known as
the “phantom account” method. Respondents challenged that method
in an action under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 (ERISA). The District Court granted summary judgment for
the Plan, but the Second Circuit vacated and remanded. It held that
the Plan Administrator’s interpretation was unreasonable and that
respondents had not received adequate notice that the phantom ac
count method would be used to calculate their benefits. On remand,
the Plan Administrator proposed a new interpretation of the Plan
that accounted for the time value of the money respondents had pre
viously received. The District Court declined to apply a deferential
standard to this interpretation, and adopted instead an approach
proposed by respondents that did not account for the time value of
money. Affirming in relevant part, the Second Circuit held that the
District Court was correct not to apply a deferential standard on re
mand, and that the District Court’s decision on the merits was not an
abuse of discretion.
Held: The District Court should have applied a deferential standard of
review to the Plan Administrator’s interpretation of the Plan on re
mand. Pp. 4–15.
(a) This Court addressed the standard for reviewing the decisions
of ERISA plan administrators in Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v.

