Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

ALITO, J., concurring

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–1163
_________________

GLEN SCOTT MILNER, PETITIONER v. DEPARTMENT
OF THE NAVY
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[March 7, 2011] 


JUSTICE ALITO, concurring.
I agree with the Court that the text of Exemption 2 of
the Freedom of Information Act of 1966 cannot support
the “High 2” interpretation that courts have adopted and
applied over the years. As the Court explains, however,
the Government may avail itself of numerous other ex
emptions, see ante, at 18—exemptions that may have been
overshadowed in recent years by the broad reach of High
2. I write separately to underscore the alternative argu
ment that the Navy raised below, which rested on Exemp
tion 7(F) and which will remain open on remand. See
ante, at 5, n. 3, 18.
Exemption 7 applies to specific categories of information
“compiled for law enforcement purposes.” 5 U. S. C.
§552(b)(7). In particular, Exemption 7(F) permits with
holding of “records or information compiled for law en
forcement purposes” that, if disclosed, “could reasonably
be expected to endanger the life or physical safety of any
individual.” §552(b)(7)(F). In most cases involving secu
rity information, it is not difficult to show that disclosure
may “endanger the life or physical safety of any individ
ual.” A more difficult question, however, is whether the
information is “compiled for law enforcement purposes.”
See John Doe Agency v. John Doe Corp., 493 U. S. 146, 153
(1989) (“Before it may invoke [Exemption 7], the Govern


2

MILNER v. DEPARTMENT OF NAVY
ALITO, J., concurring

ment has the burden of proving the existence of . . . a
compilation for such a purpose”). In my view, this phrase
reasonably encompasses information used to fulfill official
security and crime prevention duties.
“Law enforcement purposes.” The ordinary understand
ing of law enforcement includes not just the investigation
and prosecution of offenses that have already been com
mitted, but also proactive steps designed to prevent crimi
nal activity and to maintain security. A “law enforcement
officer” is defined as one “whose duty it is to preserve the
peace,” Black’s Law Dictionary 796 (5th ed. 1979), and
fulfilling that duty involves a range of activities. Police on
the beat aim to prevent crime from occurring, and they no
less carry out “law enforcement purposes” than officers
investigating a crime scene. Similarly, a “law-enforcement
agency” is charged with “the apprehension of alleged
offenders as well as crime detection and prevention.” R. De
Sola, Crime Dictionary 82 (1982) (emphasis added).
Crime prevention and security measures are critical to
effective law enforcement as we know it. There can be no
doubt, for example, that the Secret Service acts with a
law enforcement purpose when it protects federal officials
from attack, even though no investigation may be ongoing.
Likewise, steps by law enforcement officers to prevent
terrorism surely fulfill “law enforcement purposes.” Par
ticularly in recent years, terrorism prevention and na
tional security measures have been recognized as vital to
effective law enforcement efforts in our Nation. Indeed,
“[a]fter the September 11th attacks on America,” the
priorities of the Federal Bureau of Investigation “shifted
dramatically,” and the FBI’s “top priority became the
prevention of another terrorist attack.” Hearings before
the Subcommittee on Science, the Departments of State,
Justice, and Commerce, and Related Agencies of the
House Committee on Appropriations, 109th Cong., 2d
Sess., pt. 10, 232 (2006) (testimony of FBI Director Robert


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

ALITO, J., concurring

S. Mueller III). Today, “[t]he FBI’s number one priority
continues to be the prevention of terrorist attacks against
the United States.” Hearings before the Senate Commit
tee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs,
111th Cong., 2d Sess, p. ___ (Sept. 22, 2010) (testimony of
Mueller). If crime prevention and security measures do
not serve “law enforcement purposes,” then those charged
with law enforcement responsibilities have little chance of
fulfilling their duty to preserve the peace.
The context of Exemption 7 confirms that, read natu
rally, “law enforcement purposes” involve more than just
investigation and prosecution. As Exemption 7’s subpara
graphs demonstrate, Congress knew how to refer to these
narrower activities. See, e.g., §552(b)(7)(A) (information
that “could reasonably be expected to interfere with en
forcement proceedings”); §552(b)(7)(E) (information that
“would disclose techniques and procedures for law en
forcement investigations or prosecutions”).
Congress’
decision to use different language to trigger Exemption 7
confirms that the concept of “law enforcement purposes”
sweeps in activities beyond investigation and prosecution.
See Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain, 542 U. S. 692, 711, n. 9
(2004) (applying the “usual rule” that “ when the legis
lature uses certain language in one part of the statute
and different language in another, the court assumes different meanings were intended” (internal quotation marks
omitted)).
“Compiled for law enforcement purposes.” This Court
has given a fairly broad meaning to “compiled” under
§552(b)(7). In John Doe Agency, we held that information
need not have been originally “compiled for law enforce
ment purposes” to satisfy Exemption 7’s threshold re
quirement. Rather, “even though . . . documents were put
together at an earlier time for a different purpose,” they
may fall within Exemption 7 if they are later assembled
for law enforcement purposes. 493 U. S., at 154–155. For


4

MILNER v. DEPARTMENT OF NAVY
ALITO, J., concurring

example, documents originally gathered for routine busi
ness purposes may fall within Exemption 7 if they are
later compiled for use in a criminal investigation. Simi
larly, federal building plans and related information—
which may have been compiled originally for architectural
planning or internal purposes—may fall within Exemption
7 if that information is later compiled and given to law
enforcement officers for security purposes.
Documents compiled for multiple purposes are not necessarily deprived of Exemption 7’s protection. The text
of Exemption 7 does not require that the information
be compiled solely for law enforcement purposes. Cf.
§552(b)(2) (“related solely to the internal personnel rules
and practices of an agency”). Therefore, it may be
enough that law enforcement purposes are a significant
reason for the compilation.
In this case, the Navy has a fair argument that the
Explosive Safety Quantity Distance (ESQD) information
falls within Exemption 7(F). The ESQD information, the
Navy argues, is used “for the purpose of identifying and
addressing security issues” and for the “protection of
people and property on the base, as well as in [the] nearby
community, from the damage, loss, death, or injury that
could occur from an accident or breach of security.” Brief
for Appellee in No. 07–36056 (CA9), pp. 39–40. If, indeed,
the ESQD information was compiled as part of an effort to
prevent crimes of terrorism and to maintain security,
there is a reasonable argument that the information has
been “compiled for law enforcement purposes.” §552(b)(7).
Assuming that this threshold requirement is satisfied, the
ESQD information may fall comfortably within Exemption
7(F).

