(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MILNER v. DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–1163. Argued December 1, 2010—Decided March 7, 2011
The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requires federal agencies to
make Government records available to the public, subject to nine ex
emptions. This case concerns Exemption 2, which protects from dis
closure material “related solely to the internal personnel rules and
practices of an agency.” 5 U. S. C.§552(b)(2). This provision replaced
an Administrative Procedure Act (APA) exemption for “any matter
relating solely to the internal management of an agency,” 5 U. S. C.
§1002 (1964 ed.). Congress believed that the “sweep” of the phrase
“internal management” had led to excessive withholding, and drafted
Exemption 2 “to have a narrower reach.” Department of Air Force v.
Rose, 425 U. S. 352, 362–363.
In Rose, the Court found that Exemption 2 could not be invoked to
withhold Air Force Academy honor and ethics hearing summaries.
The exemption, the Court suggested, primarily targets material con
cerning employee relations or human resources. But the Court stated
a possible caveat: That understanding of the provision’s coverage
governed “at least where the situation is not one where disclosure
may risk circumvention of agency regulation.” Id., at 369. The D. C.
Circuit subsequently converted this caveat into a new definition of
Exemption 2’s scope, finding that the exemption also covered any
“predominantly internal” materials whose disclosure would “signifi
cantly ris[k] circumvention of agency regulation or statutes.” Crooker
v. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco & Firearms, 670 F. 2d 1051, 1056–
1057, 1074. Courts now use the term “Low 2” for human resources
and employee relations records and “High 2” for records whose disclo
sure would risk circumvention of the law.
Petitioner Milner submitted FOIA requests for explosives data and
maps used by respondent Department of the Navy (Navy or Govern


2

MILNER v. DEPARTMENT OF NAVY
Syllabus
ment) in storing munitions at a naval base in Washington State.
Stating that disclosure would threaten the security of the base and
surrounding community, the Navy invoked Exemption 2 and refused
to release the data. The District Court granted the Navy summary
judgment, and the Court of Appeals affirmed, relying on the High 2
interpretation.

Held: Because Exemption 2 encompasses only records relating to em
ployee relations and human resources issues, the explosives maps
and data requested here do not qualify for withholding under that
exemption. Pp. 6–19.
(a) Exemption 2 shields only those records relating to “personnel
rules and practices.” When used as an adjective in this manner, the
key statutory word “personnel” refers to human resources matters.
For example, a “personnel department” deals with employee prob
lems and interviews applicants for jobs. FOIA Exemption 6 provides
another example, protecting certain “personnel . . . files” from disclo
sure. §552(b)(6). “[T]he common and congressional meaning of . . .
‘personnel file’ ” is a file maintained by a human resources office col
lecting personal information about employees, such as examination
results and work performance evaluations. Rose, supra, at 377. Ex
emption 2 uses “personnel” in the exact same way. An agency’s “per
sonnel rules and practices” all share a critical feature: They concern
conditions of employment in federal agencies—such matters as hiring
and firing, work rules and discipline, compensation and benefits.
These items currently fall within the so-called Low 2 exemption. And
under this Court’s construction of the statutory language, Low 2 is all
of 2.
FOIA’s purpose reinforces this reading. The statute’s goal is
“broad disclosure,” and the exemptions must be “given a narrow com
pass.” Department of Justice v. Tax Analysts, 492 U. S. 136, 151. A
narrow construction stands on especially firm footing with respect to
Exemption 2, which was intended to hem in the expansive withhold
ing that occurred under the prior APA exemption for “internal man
agement” records.
Exemption 2, as interpreted here, does not reach the requested ex
plosives information. The data and maps, which calculate and visu
ally portray the magnitude of hypothetical detonations, in no way re
late to “personnel rules and practices,” as that term is most naturally
understood. Pp. 6–10.
(b) The Government’s two alternative readings of Exemption 2
cannot be squared with the statute. Pp. 10–17.
(c) While the Navy has a strong security interest in shielding the
explosives data and maps from public disclosure, the Government
has other tools at hand to protect such information: FOIA Exemption


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
1 prevents access to classified documents; Exemption 3 applies to records that any other statute exempts from disclosure; and Exemption
7 protects “information compiled for law enforcement purposes” if its
release, inter alia, “could reasonably be expected to endanger the life
or physical safety of any individual,” §552(b)(7)(F). The Navy’s argument that the explosives information is exempt under Exemption 7
remains open for the Ninth Circuit to address on remand. And if
these or other exemptions do not cover records whose release would
threaten the Nation’s vital interests, the Government may of course
seek relief from Congress. Pp. 17–18.
575 F. 3d 959, reversed and remanded.
KAGAN, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, GINSBURG, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR,
JJ., joined. ALITO, J., filed a concurring opinion. BREYER, J., filed a
dissenting opinion.

