NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press. No. 09–1163 [March 7, 2011] JUSTICE KAGAN delivered the opinion of the Court. The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 5 U. S. C. §552, requires federal agencies to make Government records available to the public, subject to nine exemptions for specific categories of material. This case concerns the scope of Exemption 2, which protects from disclosure material that is “related solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of an agency.” §552(b)(2). Respondent Department of the Navy (Navy or Government) invoked Exemption 2 to deny a FOIA request for data and maps used to help store explosives at a naval base in Washing ton State. We hold that Exemption 2 does not stretch so far. Congress enacted FOIA to overhaul the public disclosure section of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 5 U. S. C. §1002 (1964 ed.). That section of the APA “was plagued with vague phrases” and gradually became more “a withholding statute than a disclosure intended FOIA to “permit access to official information
long shielded unnecessarily from public view.” Id., at 80. FOIA thus mandates that an agency disclose records on request, unless they fall within one of nine exemptions. These exemptions are “explicitly made exclusive,” id., at 456 U. S. 615, 630 (1982). At issue here is Exemption 2, which shields from com pelled disclosure documents “related solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of an agency.” §552(b)(2). Congress enacted Exemption 2 to replace the APA’s ex emption for “any matter relating solely to the internal management of an agency,” 5 U. S. C. §1002 (1964 ed.). Believing that the “sweep” of the phrase “internal man agement” had led to excessive withholding, Congress drafted Exemption 2 “to have a narrower reach.” Depart We considered the extent of that reach in Department of invocation of Exemption 2 to withhold case summaries of honor and ethics hearings at the United States Air Force Academy. The exemption, we suggested, primarily targets material concerning employee relations or human re sources: “use of parking facilities or regulations of lunch hours, statements of policy as to sick leave, and the like.” Id., at 363 (quoting S. Rep. No. 813, 89th Cong., 1st Sess., 8 (1965) (hereinafter S. Rep.)); see Rose, 425 U. S., at 367. “[T]he general thrust” of Exemption 2, we explained, “is simply to relieve agencies of the burden of assembling and maintaining [such information] for public inspection.” Id., at 369. We concluded that the case summaries did not fall within the exemption because they “d[id] not concern only routine matters” of “merely internal significance.” Id., at 370. But we stated a possible caveat to our interpretation of Exemption 2: That understanding of the provision’s coverage governed, we wrote, “at least where the situation
is not one where disclosure may risk circumvention of agency regulation.” Id., at 369. 670 F. 2d 1051 (1981), the D. C. Circuit converted this caveat into a new definition of Exemption 2’s scope. Crooker approved the use of Exemption 2 to shield a man ual designed to train Government agents in law enforce ment surveillance techniques. The D. C. Circuit noted that it previously had understood Exemption 2 to “refe[r] only to ‘pay, pensions, vacations, hours of work, lunch Department of Justice, 591 F. 2d 753, 763 (1978)). But the court now thought Exemption 2 should also cover any “predominantly internal” materials,1 Crooker, 670 F. 2d, at 1056–1057, whose disclosure would “significantly ris[k] circumvention of agency regulations or statutes,” id., at 1074. This construction of Exemption 2, the court rea soned, flowed from FOIA’s “overall design,” its legislative history, “and even common sense,” because Congress could not have meant to “enac[t] a statute whose provisions undermined . . . the effectiveness of law enforcement agencies.” Ibid. In the ensuing years, three Courts of Appeals adopted the D. C. Circuit’s interpretation of Exemption 2. See 575 884, 889 (CA7 1988).2 And that interpretation spawned a
new terminology: Courts applying the Crooker approach now refer to the “Low 2” exemption when discussing mate rials concerning human resources and employee relations, and to the “High 2” exemption when assessing records whose disclosure would risk circumvention of the law. 1205, 1208 (CADC 1992). Congress, as well, took notice of the D. C. Circuit’s decision, borrowing language from Crooker to amend Exemption 7(E) when next enacting revisions to FOIA. The amended version of Exemption 7(E) shields certain “records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes” if their disclosure “could rea sonably be expected to risk circumvention of the law.” §552(b)(7)(E); see Freedom of Information Reform Act of 1986, §1802(a), 100 Stat. 3207–49. The FOIA request at issue here arises from the Navy’s operations at Naval Magazine Indian Island, a base in Puget Sound, Washington. The Navy keeps weapons, ammunition, and explosives on the island. To aid in the storage and transport of these munitions, the Navy uses data known as Explosive Safety Quantity Distance (ESQD) information. 575 F. 3d, at 962. ESQD informa tion prescribes “minimum separation distances” for explo sives and helps the Navy design and construct storage
facilities to prevent chain reactions in case of detonation. Ibid. The ESQD calculations are often incorporated into specialized maps depicting the effects of hypothetical explosions. See, e.g., App. 52. In 2003 and 2004, petitioner Glen Milner, a Puget Sound resident, submitted FOIA requests for all ESQD information relating to Indian Island. 575 F. 3d, at 962. The Navy refused to release the data, stating that disclo sure would threaten the security of the base and surround ing community. In support of its decision to withhold the records, the Navy invoked Exemption 2. Ibid.3 The District Court granted summary judgment to the Navy, and the Court of Appeals affirmed, relying on the High 2 interpretation developed in Crooker. 575 F. 3d, at 963. The Court of Appeals explained that the ESQD information “is predominantly used for the internal pur pose of instructing agency personnel on how to do their jobs.” Id., at 968. And disclosure of the material, the court determined, “would risk circumvention of the law” by “point[ing] out the best targets for those bent on wreak ing havoc”—for example, “[a] terrorist who wished to hit the most damaging target.” Id., at 971. The ESQD infor mation, the court concluded, therefore qualified for a High 2 exemption. 575 F. 3d, at 971. We granted certiorari in light of the Circuit split re specting Exemption 2’s meaning, 561 U. S. ___ (2010), and we now reverse.
Our consideration of Exemption 2’s scope starts with its 469 U. S. 189, 194 (1985) (“Statutory construction must begin with the language employed by Congress and the assumption that the ordinary meaning of that language accurately expresses the legislative purpose”). Judicial decisions since FOIA’s enactment have analyzed and reanalyzed the meaning of the exemption. But compara tively little attention has focused on the provision’s 12 simple words: “related solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of an agency.” The key word in that dozen—the one that most clearly marks the provision’s boundaries—is “personnel.” When used as an adjective, as it is here to modify “rules and practices,” that term refers to human resources matters. “Personnel,” in this common parlance, means “the selec tion, placement, and training of employees and . . . the formulation of policies, procedures, and relations with [or involving] employees or their representatives.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1687 (1966) (hereinaf ter Webster’s). So, for example, a “personnel department” is “the department of a business firm that deals with problems affecting the employees of the firm and that usually interviews applicants for jobs.” Random House Dictionary 1075 (1966) (hereinafter Random House). “Personnel management” is similarly “the phase of man agement concerned with the engagement and effective utilization of manpower to obtain optimum efficiency of human resources.” Webster’s 1687. And a “personnel agency” is “an agency for placing employable persons in jobs; employment agency.” Random House 1075. FOIA itself provides an additional example in Exemp (1994) (“A term appearing in several places in a statutory
text is generally read the same way each time it appears”). That exemption, just a few short paragraphs down from Exemption 2, protects from disclosure “personnel and medical files and similar files the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of per sonal privacy.” §552(b)(6). Here too, the statute uses the term “personnel” as a modifier meaning “human re sources.” See Tr. of Oral Arg. 32 (“[The Court:] It’s [an] H. R. file, right? [The Government:] That’s generally true”). As we recognized in Rose, “the common and con gressional meaning of . . . ‘personnel file’ ” is the file “show ing, for example, where [an employee] was born, the names of his parents, where he has lived from time to time, his . . . school records, results of examinations, [and] evaluations of his work performance.” 425 U. S., at 377. It is the file typically maintained in the human resources office—otherwise known (to recall an example offered above) as the “personnel department.” Ibid. Exemption 2 uses “personnel” in the exact same way. An agency’s “personnel rules and practices” are its rules and practices dealing with employee relations or human resources. The D. C. Circuit, in a pre-Crooker decision, gave as examples “matters relating to pay, pensions, vacations, hours of work, lunch hours, parking, etc.” Jordan, 591 F. 2d, at 763; see supra, at 3. That “etc.” is important; we doubt any court could know enough about the Federal Government’s operations to formulate a com prehensive list. But all the rules and practices referenced in Exemption 2 share a critical feature: They concern the conditions of employment in federal agencies—such mat ters as hiring and firing, work rules and discipline, com pensation and benefits.4 Courts in practice have had little
difficulty identifying the records that qualify for withhold ing under this reading: They are what now commonly fall within the Low 2 exemption. Our construction of the statutory language simply makes clear that Low 2 is all of 2 (and that High 2 is not 2 at all, see infra, at 10–14). The statute’s purpose reinforces this understanding of the exemption. We have often noted “the Act’s goal of broad disclosure” and insisted that the exemptions be Analysts, 492 U. S. 136, 151 (1989); see Department of 1, 7–8 (2001).5 This practice of “constru[ing] FOIA exemp U. S. 165, 181 (1993), stands on especially firm footing with respect to Exemption 2. As described earlier, Con gress worded that provision to hem in the prior APA ex emption for “any matter relating solely to the internal management of an agency,” which agencies had used to prevent access to masses of documents. See Rose, 425 U. S., at 362. We would ill-serve Congress’s purpose by
construing Exemption 2 to reauthorize the expansive withholding that Congress wanted to halt. Our reading instead gives the exemption the “narrower reach” Con gress intended, id., at 363, through the simple device of confining the provision’s meaning to its words. The Government resists giving “personnel” its plain meaning on the ground that Congress, when drafting Exemption 2, considered but chose not to enact language exempting “internal employment rules and practices.” Brief for Respondent 30–34, and n. 11. This drafting history, the Navy maintains, proves that Congress did not wish “to limit the Exemption to employment-related mat ters,” id., at 31, even if the adjective “personnel” conveys that meaning in other contexts, id., at 41. But we think the Navy’s evidence insufficient: The scant history con cerning this word change as easily supports the inference that Congress merely swapped one synonym for another. with respect to the “unexplained disappearance of one word from an unenacted bill” that “mute intermediate legislative maneuvers are not reliable” aids to statutory interpretation (internal quotation marks omitted)). Those of us who make use of legislative history believe that clear evidence of congressional intent may illuminate ambigu ous text. We will not take the opposite tack of allowing ambiguous legislative history to muddy clear statutory language. Exemption 2, as we have construed it, does not reach the ESQD information at issue here. These data and maps calculate and visually portray the magnitude of hypothetical detonations. By no stretch of imagination do they relate to “personnel rules and practices,” as that term is most naturally understood. They concern the physical rules governing explosives, not the workplace rules gov erning sailors; they address the handling of dangerous
materials, not the treatment of employees. The Navy therefore may not use Exemption 2, interpreted in accord with its plain meaning to cover human resources matters, to prevent disclosure of the requested maps and data. The Government offers two alternative readings of Exemption 2 to support withholding the ESQD informa tion. We cannot square either with the statute. The Navy first encourages us to adopt the construction of Exemption 2 pioneered by Crooker, which shields mate rial not only if it meets the criteria set out above (Low 2), but also if it is “predominant[ly] interna[l]” and its “disclo sure would significantly risk[] circumvention of federal agency functions” (High 2). Brief for Respondent 41 (in ternal quotation marks omitted). The dissent, too, favors this reading of the statute. Post, at 1. But the Crooker interpretation, as already suggested, suffers from a patent flaw: It is disconnected from Exemption 2’s text. The High 2 test (in addition to substituting the word “predomi nantly” for “solely,” see n. 1, supra) ignores the plain meaning of the adjective “personnel,” see supra, at 6–9, and adopts a circumvention requirement with no basis or referent in Exemption 2’s language. Indeed, the only way to arrive at High 2 is by taking a red pen to the statute— “cutting out some” words and “pasting in others” until ment of Agriculture, 596 F. 3d 842, 845 (CADC 2010). Because this is so, High 2 is better labeled “Non 2” (and Low 2 . . . just 2). In support of its text-light approach to the statute, the Government relies primarily on legislative history, placing particular emphasis on the House Report concerning FOIA. See Brief for Respondent 33–38. A statement in that Report buttresses the High 2 understanding of the
exemption and, indeed, specifically rejects the Low 2 construction. According to the Report: “Operating rules, guidelines, and manuals of procedure for Government investigators or examiners would be exempt from disclo sure [under Exemption 2], but this exemption would not cover . . . employee relations and working conditions and routine administrative procedures.” H. R. Rep. No. 1497, 89th Cong., 2d Sess., 10 (1966). But the Senate Report says exactly the opposite, explaining in support of a Low 2 interpretation that the phrase “internal personnel rules and practices of an agency” means “rules as to personnel’s use of parking facilities or regulation of lunch hours, statements of policy as to sick leave, and the like.” S. Rep., at 8.6 In Rose, we gave reasons for thinking the Senate Report the more reliable of the two. See 425 U. S., at 366. But the more fundamental point is what we said before: Legislative history, for those who take it into ac count, is meant to clear up ambiguity, not create it. See (1950) (declining to consult legislative history when that “history is more conflicting than the text is ambiguous”). When presented, on the one hand, with clear statutory language and, on the other, with dueling committee re ports, we must choose the language. The Government also advances, in support of Crooker’s High 2 approach, an argument based on subsequent legis lative action. Congress, the Government notes, amended Exemption 7(E) in 1986 to cover law enforcement records whose production “would disclose techniques and proce dures for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions,
or would disclose guidelines for law enforcement investi gations or prosecutions if such disclosure could reason ably be expected to risk circumvention of the law.” §552(b)(7)(E). That amendment, the Government con tends, codified Crooker’s “circumvention of the law” stan dard and, in so doing, ratified Crooker’s holding. Brief for Respondent 42–43. The dissent likewise counts as signifi cant that Congress “t[ook] note” of Crooker in revising FOIA. Post, at 9; see post, at 2. But the Government and the dissent neglect the key feature of the 1986 amendment: Congress modified not Exemption 2 (the subject of Crooker), but instead Exemp tion 7(E). And the Crooker construction of Exemption 2 renders Exemption 7(E) superfluous and so deprives that 534 U. S. 19, 31 (2001) (noting canon that statutes should be read to avoid making any provision “superfluous, void, or insignificant” (internal quotation marks omitted)). We cannot think of any document eligible for withholding under Exemption 7(E) that the High 2 reading does not capture: The circumvention standard is the same, and the law enforcement records listed in Exemption 7(E) are “predominantly internal.” So if Congress had agreed with Crooker’s reading of Exemption 2, it would have had no reason to alter Exemption 7(E). In that event, Congress would either have left the statute alone (on the theory that Crooker would do the necessary work) or would have amended Exemption 2 specifically to ratify Crooker. The decision instead to amend Exemption 7(E) suggests that Congress approved the circumvention standard only as to law enforcement materials, and not as to the wider set of records High 2 covers. Perhaps this legislative action does not show that Congress affirmatively disagreed with Crooker; maybe Congress was agnostic about whether the circumvention standard should apply to other records. But one thing is clear: The 1986 amendment does not
ratify, approve, or otherwise signal agreement with Crooker’s interpretation of Exemption 2. This argument therefore cannot save the High 2 construction. The dissent offers one last reason to embrace High 2, and indeed stakes most of its wager on this argument. Crooker, the dissent asserts, “has been consistently relied upon and followed for 30 years” by other lower courts. Post, at 9; see post, at 1–2. But this claim, too, trips at the starting gate. It would be immaterial even if true, because we have no warrant to ignore clear statutory language on the ground that other courts have done so. And in any event, it is not true. Prior to Crooker, three Circuits adopted the reading of Exemption 2 we think right, and they have not changed their minds. See n. 2, supra.7
Since Crooker, three other Circuits have accepted the High 2 reading. See supra, at 3. One Circuit has reserved judgment on the High 2-Low 2 debate. See Audubon 1997). And the rest have not considered the matter. (No one should think Crooker has been extensively discussed or debated in the Courts of Appeals. In the past three decades, Crooker’s analysis of Exemption 2 has been cited a sum total of five times in federal appellate decisions outside the D. C. Circuit—on average, once every six years.) The result is a 4 to 3 split among the Circuits.8 We will not flout all usual rules of statutory interpretation to take the side of the bare majority. Presumably because Crooker so departs from Exemption 2’s language, the Government also offers another con struction, which it says we might adopt “on a clean slate,” “based on the plain text . . . alone.” Brief for Respondent 15. On this reading, the exemption “encompasses records concerning an agency’s internal rules and practices for its personnel to follow in the discharge of their governmental functions.” Id., at 20; see also id., at 13–14 (Exemption 2 “applies generally to matters concerning internal rules and practices to guide agency personnel in performing
their duties”). According to the Government, this inter pretation makes sense because “the phrase ‘personnel rules and practices of an agency’ is logically understood to mean an agency’s rules and practices for its personnel.” Id., at 20 (emphasis added). But the purported logic in the Government’s definition eludes us. We would not say, in ordinary parlance, that a “personnel file” is any file an employee uses, or that a “personnel department” is any department in which an employee serves. No more would we say that a “personnel rule or practice” is any rule or practice that assists an employee in doing her job. The use of the term “personnel” in each of these phrases connotes not that the file or de partment or practice/rule is for personnel, but rather that the file or department or practice/rule is about personnel— i.e., that it relates to employee relations or human re sources. This case well illustrates the point. The records requested, as earlier noted, are explosives data and maps showing the distances that potential blasts travel. This information no doubt assists Navy personnel in storing munitions. But that is not to say that the data and maps relate to “personnel rules and practices.” No one staring at these charts of explosions and using ordinary language would describe them in this manner. Indeed, the Government’s “clean slate” construction reaches such documents only by stripping the word “per sonnel” of any real meaning. Under this interpretation, an agency’s “internal personnel rules and practices” ap pears to mean all its internal rules and practices. That is because agencies necessarily operate through personnel, and so all their internal rules and practices are for per sonnel. The modifier “personnel,” then, does no modifying work; it does not limit the class of internal rules and practices that Exemption 2 covers. What is most naturally viewed as the provision’s key word—the term that ought
to define its scope—does nothing more than state the truism that in an agency it is “personnel” who follow internal rules and practices. And this odd reading would produce a sweeping exemp tion, posing the risk that FOIA would become less a dis closure than “a withholding statute.” Mink, 410 U. S., at 79. Many documents an agency generates in some way aid employees in carrying out their responsibilities. If Exemption 2 were to reach all these records, it would tend to engulf other FOIA exemptions, rendering ineffective the limitations Congress placed on their application. Exemp tion 7, for example, shields records compiled for law en forcement purposes, but only if one of six specified criteria is met. §552(b)(7). Yet on the Government’s view, an agency could bypass these restrictions by invoking Exemp tion 2 whenever law enforcement records guide personnel in performing their duties. Indeed, an agency could use Exemption 2 as an all-purpose back-up provision to with hold sensitive records that do not fall within any of FOIA’s more targeted exemptions.9
Interpreted in this way, Exemption 2—call it “Super 2” now—would extend, rather than narrow, the APA’s former exemption for records relating to the “internal manage ment of an agency.” 5 U. S. C. §1002 (1964 ed.). We doubt that even the “internal management” provision, which Congress thought allowed too much withholding, see supra, at 2, would have protected all information that guides employees in the discharge of their duties, includ ing the explosives data and maps in this case. And per haps needless to say, this reading of Exemption 2 violates the rule favoring narrow construction of FOIA exemptions. See, e.g., Abramson, 456 U. S., at 630; Rose, 425 U. S., at 361. Super 2 in fact has no basis in the text, context, or purpose of FOIA, and we accordingly reject it. Although we cannot interpret Exemption 2 as the Gov ernment proposes, we recognize the strength of the Navy’s interest in protecting the ESQD data and maps and other similar information. The Government has informed us that “[p]ublicly disclosing the [ESQD] information would significantly risk undermining the Navy’s ability to safely and securely store military ordnance,” Brief for Respon dent 47, and we have no reason to doubt that representa tion. The Ninth Circuit similarly cautioned that disclo sure of this information could be used to “wrea[k] havoc” and “make catastrophe more likely.” 575 F. 3d, at 971. Concerns of this kind—a sense that certain sensitive information should be exempt from disclosure—in part led the Crooker court to formulate the High 2 standard. See 670 F. 2d, at 1074 (contending that “common sense” sup ported the High 2 interpretation because Congress would not have wanted FOIA to “undermin[e] . . . the effective
ness of law enforcement agencies”). And we acknowledge that our decision today upsets three decades of agency practice relying on Crooker, and therefore may force con siderable adjustments. We also note, however, that the Government has other tools at hand to shield national security information and other sensitive materials. Most notably, Exemption 1 of FOIA prevents access to classified documents. §552(b)(1); see 575 F. 3d, at 980 (W. Fletcher, J., dissenting) (Exemp tion 1 is “specifically designed to allow government agen cies to withhold information that might jeopardize our national security”). The Government generally may clas sify material even after receiving a FOIA request, see Exec. Order No. 13526, §1.7(d), 75 Fed. Reg. 711 (2009); an agency therefore may wait until that time to decide whether the dangers of disclosure outweigh the costs of classification. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 29–30. Exemption 3 also may mitigate the Government’s security concerns. That provision applies to records that any other statute exempts from disclosure, §552(b)(3), thus offering Con gress an established, streamlined method to authorize the withholding of specific records that FOIA would not oth erwise protect. And Exemption 7, as already noted, pro tects “information compiled for law enforcement purposes” that meets one of six criteria, including if its release “could reasonably be expected to endanger the life or physical safety of any individual.” §552(b)(7)(F). The Navy argued below that the ESQD data and maps fall within Exemp tion 7(F), see n. 3, supra, and that claim remains open for the Ninth Circuit to address on remand. If these or other exemptions do not cover records whose release would threaten the Nation’s vital interests, the Government may of course seek relief from Congress. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 48. All we hold today is that Congress has not enacted the FOIA exemption the Government desires.
We leave to Congress, as is appropriate, the question whether it should do so. Exemption 2, consistent with the plain meaning of the term “personnel rules and practices,” encompasses only records relating to issues of employee relations and human resources. The explosives maps and data requested here do not qualify for withholding under that exemption. We therefore reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals and remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this opinion. It is so ordered.
——————
1 The court adopted the “predominantly internal” standard as a way
of implementing the exemption’s requirement that materials “relat[e]
solely to” an agency’s internal personnel rules and practices. The
word “solely,” the court reasoned, “has to be given the construction,
consonant with reasonableness, of ‘predominantly’ ” because otherwise
“solely” would conflict with the expansive term “related.” 670 F. 2d, at
1056 (some internal quotation marks omitted).
2 Three other Courts of Appeals had previously taken a narrower view
of Exemption 2’s scope, consistent with the interpretation adopted in


——————
Rose. See Cox v. Department of Justice, 576 F. 2d 1302, 1309–1310
(CA8 1978) (concluding that Exemption 2 covers only an agency’s
internal “housekeeping matters” (internal quotation marks omitted));
Stokes v. Brennan, 476 F. 2d 699, 703 (CA5 1973) (holding that Exemp
tion 2 “must not be read so broadly as to exempt” an Occupational
Safety and Health Administration manual for training compliance
officers); Hawkes v. IRS, 467 F. 2d 787, 797 (CA6 1972) (“[T]he internal
practices and policies referred to in [Exemption 2] relate only to . . .
employee-employer type concerns”). These Circuits have never revised
their understandings of the exemption. See infra, at 13, n. 7.


——————
3 The

Navy also invoked Exemption 7(F), which applies to “records or
information compiled for law enforcement purposes, but only to the
extent that the production of such . . . records . . . could reasonably be
expected to endanger the life or physical safety of any individual.” 5
U. S. C. §552(b)(7)(F). The courts below did not decide whether the
Navy could withhold the ESQD data under that exemption. 575 F. 3d
959, 971, n. 8 (CA9 2009); No. CV–06–01301 (WD Wash., Oct. 30, 2007),
App. to Pet. for Cert. 4, 25, 2007 WL 3228049, *8.


——————
4 Government records also must satisfy the other requirements of
Exemption 2 to be exempt from disclosure. Information must “relat[e]
solely”—meaning, as usual, “exclusively or only,” Random House 1354


——————
—to the agency’s “personnel rules and practices.” And the information
must be “internal”; that is, the agency must typically keep the records
to itself for its own use. See Webster’s 1180 (“internal” means “existing
or situated within the limits . . . of something”). An agency’s human
resources documents will often meet these conditions.
5 The dissent would reject this longstanding rule of construction in
favor of an approach asking courts “to turn Congress’ public informa
tion objectives into workable agency practice.” Post, at 8–9 (opinion of
BREYER, J.). But nothing in FOIA either explicitly or implicitly grants
courts discretion to expand (or contract) an exemption on this basis. In
enacting FOIA, Congress struck the balance it thought right—generally
favoring disclosure, subject only to a handful of specified exemptions—
and did so across the length and breadth of the Federal Government.
See, e.g., John Doe Agency v. John Doe Corp., 493 U. S. 146, 152–153
(1989). The judicial role is to enforce that congressionally determined
balance rather than, as the dissent suggests, post, at 4–6, to assess case
by case, department by department, and task by task whether disclo
sure interferes with good government.


——————
6 We are perplexed that the dissent takes seriously Crooker’s notion
that the reports are “reconcilable.” Post, at 4. To strip the matter to its
essentials, the House Report says: “Exemption 2 means A, but not B.”
The Senate Report says: “Exemption 2 means B.” That is the very
definition of “irreconcilable.”


——————
7 The

dissent’s view that “two of th[ese] Circuits [have] not adher[ed]
to their early positions” is incorrect. Post, at 2. In Abraham & Rose,
P.L.C. v. United States, cited by the dissent, the Sixth Circuit rejected
the Government’s claim that Exemption 2 shielded records of federal
tax lien filings. 138 F. 3d 1075, 1082 (1998). The court nowhere
discussed the High 2 versus Low 2 question at issue here. Its only
reference to Crooker concerned the part of that decision interpreting
“solely” to mean “predominantly.” See 138 F.3d, at 1080; see also n. 1,
supra. Subsequently, the Sixth Circuit once again held, in Rugiero v.
Department of Justice, that Exemption 2 applies to “routine matters of
merely internal significance.” 257 F. 3d 534, 549 (2001). In Sladek v.
Bensinger, which the dissent also cites, the Fifth Circuit insisted that
the Government disclose a Drug Enforcement Administration agent’s
manual because it “is not the type of trivial rule, such as allocation of
parking facilities, that is covered by Exemption 2.” 605 F. 2d 899, 902
(1979). In confirming this Low 2 interpretation of the statute, the court
acknowledged that another Circuit had embraced the High 2 standard.
The court, however, declined to consider this alternative interpretation
because it would not have changed the case’s outcome. See ibid.
Finally, the Eighth Circuit’s last word on Exemption 2 is clear, and the
dissent does not say otherwise. The exemption, according to that most
recent Eighth Circuit decision, applies “only [to an agency’s] housekeep
ing matters.” Cox, 576 F. 2d, at 1309–1310 (internal quotation marks
omitted). The dissent is surely right to say, post at 2, that Crooker “has
guided nearly every FOIA case decided over the last 30 years” in


——————
Circuits applying Crooker; but that statement does not hold in the
Circuits using the Low 2 approach.
8 Notably, even those courts approving Crooker have disagreed about
how to apply High 2. Fault lines include whether the risk of circum
vention must be significant, see, e.g., Hidalgo v. FBI, 541 F. Supp. 2d
250, 253 (DC 2008); Pet. for Cert. 15–16; whether courts should con
sider the public interest in disclosure when calculating that risk, see,
e.g., Department of Justice, Guide to the Freedom of Information Act,
p. 185 (2009); and whether an agency must regulate the person or
entity threatening circumvention; compare, e.g., 575 F. 3d, at 971, with,
e.g., id., at 978 (W. Fletcher, J., dissenting). The disagreement is not
surprising. Because High 2 is nowhere evident in the statute, courts
lack the normal guideposts for ascertaining its coverage.


——————
9 The

dissent asserts that “30 years of experience” with a more expan
sive interpretation of the exemption suggests no “seriou[s] inter
fere[nce] with . . . FOIA’s informational objectives.” Post, at 6. But
those objectives suffer any time an agency denies a FOIA request based
on an improper interpretation of the statute. To give just one example,
the U. S. Forest Service has wrongly invoked Exemption 2 on multiple
occasions to withhold information about (of all things) bird nesting
sites. See Audubon Society v. Forest Serv., 104 F. 3d 1201, 1203 (CA10
1997); Maricopa Audubon Soc. v. Forest Serv., 108 F. 3d 1082, 1084
(CA9 1997). And recent statistics raise a concern that federal agencies
may too readily use Exemption 2 to refuse disclosure. According to
amicus Public Citizen, “while reliance on exemptions overall rose 83%
from 1998 to 2006, reliance on Exemption 2 rose 344% during that
same time period.” Brief for Public Citizen et al. as Amici Curiae 24.
In 2009 alone, federal departments cited Exemption 2 more than 72,000
times to prevent access to records. See Brief for Allied Daily Newspa
pers of Washington et al. as Amici Curiae 3. We do not doubt that
many of these FOIA denials were appropriate. But we are unable to


——————
accept the dissent’s unsupported declaration that a sweeping construc
tion of Exemption 2 has not interfered with Congress’s goal of broad
disclosure.

