(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ERICA P. JOHN FUND, INC., FKA ARCHDIOCESE OF 

MILWAUKEE SUPPORTING FUND, INC. v. 

HALLIBURTON CO. ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–1403. Argued April 25, 2011—Decided June 6, 2011
Petitioner Erica P. John Fund, Inc. (EPJ Fund), is the lead plaintiff in a
putative securities fraud class action filed against Halliburton Co.
and one of its executives (collectively Halliburton). EPJ Fund alleges
that Halliburton made various misrepresentations designed to inflate
the company’s stock price, in violation of §10(b) of the Securities Ex
change Act of 1934 and Securities and Exchange Commission Rule
10b–5. EPJ Fund also contends that Halliburton later made a num
ber of corrective disclosures that caused the stock price to drop and,
consequently, investors to lose money. EPJ Fund sought to have its
proposed class certified pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure
23. The District Court found that the suit could proceed as a class
action under Rule 23(b)(3), but for one problem: Fifth Circuit prece
dent required securities fraud plaintiffs to prove “loss causation”—
i.e., that the defendant’s deceptive conduct caused the investors’
claimed economic loss—in order to obtain class certification. The
District Court concluded that EPJ Fund had failed to satisfy that re
quirement. The Court of Appeals agreed and affirmed the denial of
class certification.
Held: Securities fraud plaintiffs need not prove loss causation in order
to obtain class certification. Pp. 3–10.
(a) In order to certify a class under Rule 23(b)(3), a court must find
“that the questions of law or fact common to class members predomi
nate over any questions affecting only individual members, and that
a class action is superior to other available methods for fairly and ef
ficiently adjudicating the controversy.” Considering whether “ques

