8

ERICA P. JOHN FUND, INC. v. HALLIBURTON CO.
Opinion of the Court

facts necessary to establish the efficient market predicate
to the fraud-on-the-market theory.
The Court of Appeals erred by requiring EPJ Fund
to show loss causation as a condition of obtaining class
certification.
C
Halliburton concedes that securities fraud plaintiffs
should not be required to prove loss causation in order to
invoke Basic’s presumption of reliance or otherwise
achieve class certification. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 26–29.
Halliburton nonetheless defends the judgment below on
the ground that the Court of Appeals did not actually
require plaintiffs to prove “loss causation” as we have used
that term. See id., at 27 (“it’s not loss causation as this
Court knows it in Dura”). According to Halliburton, “loss
causation” was merely “shorthand” for a different analysis.
Brief for Respondents 18. The lower court’s actual in
quiry, Halliburton insists, was whether EPJ Fund had
demonstrated “price impact”—that is, whether the alleged
misrepresentations affected the market price in the first
place. See, e.g., id., at 16–19, 24–27, 50–51; see also Tr. of
Oral Arg. 27 (stating that the Court of Appeals’ “test is
simply price impact” and that EPJ Fund’s “only burden
under the Fifth Circuit case law was to show price
impact”).*
“Price impact” simply refers to the effect of a misrepre
sentation on a stock price. Halliburton’s theory is that if a
——————
* Halliburton further concedes that, even if its conception of what the
Court of Appeals meant by “loss causation” is correct, the Court of
Appeals erred by placing the initial burden on EPJ Fund. See Tr. of
Oral Arg. 29 (“We agree . . . that the Fifth Circuit put the initial burden
of production on the plaintiff, and that’s contrary to Basic”). According
to Halliburton, a plaintiff must prove price impact only after Basic’s
presumption has been successfully rebutted by the defendant. Tr. of
Oral Arg. 28, 38–40. We express no views on the merits of such a
framework.

