Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

the transaction. See Dura Pharmaceuticals, supra, at
342. Under Basic’s fraud-on-the-market doctrine, an in
vestor presumptively relies on a defendant’s misrepre
sentation if that “information is reflected in [the] market
price” of the stock at the time of the relevant transaction.
See Basic, 485 U. S., at 247.
Loss causation, by contrast, requires a plaintiff to show
that a misrepresentation that affected the integrity of the
market price also caused a subsequent economic loss. As
we made clear in Dura Pharmaceuticals, the fact that a
stock’s “price on the date of purchase was inflated because
of [a] misrepresentation” does not necessarily mean that
the misstatement is the cause of a later decline in value.
544 U. S., at 342 (emphasis deleted; internal quotation
marks omitted). We observed that the drop could instead
be the result of other intervening causes, such as “changed
economic circumstances, changed investor expectations,
new industry-specific or firm-specific facts, conditions, or
other events.” Id., at 342–343. If one of those factors were
responsible for the loss or part of it, a plaintiff would not
be able to prove loss causation to that extent. This is true
even if the investor purchased the stock at a distorted
price, and thereby presumptively relied on the misrepre
sentation reflected in that price.
According to the Court of Appeals, however, an inability
to prove loss causation would prevent a plaintiff from
invoking the rebuttable presumption of reliance. Such a
rule contravenes Basic’s fundamental premise—that an
investor presumptively relies on a misrepresentation so
long as it was reflected in the market price at the time of
his transaction. The fact that a subsequent loss may have
been caused by factors other than the revelation of a mis
representation has nothing to do with whether an investor
relied on the misrepresentation in the first place, either
directly or presumptively through the fraud-on-the-market
theory. Loss causation has no logical connection to the

