2

ERICA P. JOHN FUND, INC. v. HALLIBURTON CO.
Syllabus
tions of law or fact common to class members predominate” begins, of
course, with the elements of the underlying cause of action. The ele
ments of a private securities fraud claim based on violations of §10(b)
and Rule 10b–5 are: “(1) a material misrepresentation or omission by
the defendant; (2) scienter; (3) a connection between the misrepresen
tation or omission and the purchase or sale of a security; (4) reliance
upon the misrepresentation or omission; (5) economic loss; and (6)
loss causation.” Matrixx Initiatives, Inc. v. Siracusano, 563 U. S. ___,
___.
Whether common questions of law or fact predominate in such an
action often turns on the element of reliance. The traditional way a
plaintiff can demonstrate reliance is by showing that he was aware of
a company’s statement and engaged in a relevant transaction—e.g.,
purchasing common stock—based on that specific misrepresentation.
The Court recognized in Basic Inc. v. Levinson, 485 U. S. 224, how
ever, that “[r]equiring proof of individualized reliance from each
member of the proposed plaintiff class effectively would” prevent such
plaintiffs “from proceeding with a class action, since individual is
sues” would “overwhelm[ ] the common ones.” Id., at 242. The Court
in Basic sought to alleviate that concern by permitting plaintiffs to
invoke a rebuttable presumption of reliance based on what is known
as the “fraud-on-the-market” theory. According to that theory, “the
market price of shares traded on well-developed markets reflects all
publicly available information, and, hence, any material misrepre
sentations.” Id., at 246. Under that doctrine, the Court explained,
one can assume an investor relies on public misstatements whenever
he “buys or sells stock at the price set by the market.” Id., at 247.
The Court also made clear that the presumption could be rebutted by
appropriate evidence. Pp. 3–5.
(b) It is undisputed that securities fraud plaintiffs must prove cer
tain things in order to invoke Basic’s rebuttable presumption of reli
ance. According to the Court of Appeals, EPJ Fund had to prove the
separate element of loss causation in order to trigger the presump
tion. That requirement is not justified by Basic or its logic. This
Court has never mentioned loss causation as a precondition for invok
ing Basic’s rebuttable presumption. Loss causation addresses a mat
ter different from whether an investor relied on a misrepresentation,
presumptively or otherwise, when buying or selling a stock.
The Court has referred to the element of reliance in a private Rule
10b–5 action as “transaction causation,” not loss causation. Dura
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. v. Broudo, 544 U. S. 336, 341–342. Consistent
with that description, when considering whether a plaintiff has relied
on a misrepresentation, the Court has typically focused on facts sur
rounding the investor’s decision to engage in the transaction. Loss

