4

ERICA P. JOHN FUND, INC. v. HALLIBURTON CO.
Opinion of the Court

members, and that a class action is superior to other
available methods for fairly and efficiently adjudicating
the controversy.” Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 23(b)(3). Consider
ing whether “questions of law or fact common to class
members predominate” begins, of course, with the ele
ments of the underlying cause of action. The elements of a
private securities fraud claim based on violations of §10(b)
and Rule 10b–5 are: “ ‘(1) a material misrepresentation or
omission by the defendant; (2) scienter; (3) a connection
between the misrepresentation or omission and the pur
chase or sale of a security; (4) reliance upon the misrepresentation or omission; (5) economic loss; and (6) loss
causation.’ ” Matrixx Initiatives, Inc. v. Siracusano, 563
U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 9) (quoting Stoneridge
Investment Partners, LLC v. Scientific-Atlanta, Inc., 552
U. S. 148, 157 (2008)).
Whether common questions of law or fact predominate
in a securities fraud action often turns on the element of
reliance. The courts below determined that EPJ Fund had
to prove the separate element of loss causation in order to
establish that reliance was capable of resolution on a
common, classwide basis.
“Reliance by the plaintiff upon the defendant’s deceptive
acts is an essential element of the §10(b) private cause of
action.” Stoneridge, supra, at 159. This is because proof of
reliance ensures that there is a proper “connection be
tween a defendant’s misrepresentation and a plaintiff’s
injury.” Basic Inc. v. Levinson, 485 U. S. 224, 243 (1988).
The traditional (and most direct) way a plaintiff can
demonstrate reliance is by showing that he was aware
of a company’s statement and engaged in a relevant
transaction—e.g., purchasing common stock—based on
that specific misrepresentation. In that situation, the
plaintiff plainly would have relied on the company’s decep
tive conduct. A plaintiff unaware of the relevant state
ment, on the other hand, could not establish reliance on

