2

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

proximately 1.6 million acres in southeastern California.
The Preserve is nestled within the Mojave Desert, whose
picturesque but rugged territory comprises 25,000 square
miles, exceeding in size the combined area of the Nation’s
five smallest States. See Merriam-Webster’s Geographical
Dictionary 755, 1228–1230 (3d ed. 1997). Just over 90
percent of the land in the Preserve is federally owned,
with the rest owned either by the State of California or by
private parties. The National Park Service, a division of
the Department of the Interior, administers the Preserve
as part of the National Park System.
16 U. S. C.
§§410aaa–41 and 410aaa–46.
Sunrise Rock is a granite outcropping located within the
Preserve. Sunrise Rock and the area in its immediate
vicinity are federal land, but two private ranches are
located less than two miles away. The record does not
indicate whether fencing is used to mark the boundary of
these ranches. In 1934, members of the Veterans of For
eign Wars (VFW) mounted a Latin cross on the rock as a
memorial to soldiers who died in World War I. A Latin
cross consists of two bars—a vertical one and a shorter,
horizontal one. The cross has been replaced or repaired at
various times over the years, most recently in 1998 by
Henry Sandoz. Sandoz is a private citizen who owns land
elsewhere in the Preserve, a portion of which he is pre
pared to transfer to the Government in return for its
conveyance to the VFW of the land on which the cross
stands, all pursuant to the statute now under review.
The cross, as built by Sandoz, consists of 4-inch diame
ter metal pipes painted white. The vertical bar is less
than eight feet tall. It cannot be seen from the nearest
highway, which lies more than 10 miles away. It is visi
ble, however, from Cima Road, a narrow stretch of black
top that comes within 100 feet of Sunrise Rock.
The cross has been a gathering place for Easter services
since it was first put in place; and Sunrise Rock and its

