Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

he reiterated that although the “presence of the cross on
federally owned land in the Preserve deeply offends [him]
and impairs [his] enjoyment of the Preserve,” he “ha[s] no
objection to Christian symbols on private property.” Id., at
64–65. In short, even assuming that being “deeply of
fended” by a religious display (and taking steps to avoid
seeing it) constitutes a cognizable injury, Buono has made
clear that he will not be offended.5
These same considerations bear upon the plurality’s
assertion that Buono has standing to “prevent the Gov
ernment from frustrating or evading” the original injunc
tion, ante, at 8. If this refers to frustration or evasion in a
narrow sense, the injunction is in no need of—indeed, is
insusceptible of—protection. It was issued to remedy the
sole complaint that Buono had brought forward: erection
of a cross on public land. And it was entirely effective in
remedying that complaint, having induced Congress to
abandon public ownership of the land. If meant in this
narrow sense, the plurality’s assertion of a need to prevent
frustration or evasion by the Government ignores the
reality that the District Court’s 2005 order awarded new
relief beyond the scope of the original injunction. The
revised injunction is directed at Buono’s new complaint
that the manner of abandoning public ownership and the
——————
5 The principal dissent argues that despite these disclaimers in
Buono’s complaint, deposition, and declaration, his real injury is his
inability “to freely use the area of the Preserve around the cross be
cause the Government’s unconstitutional endorsement of the cross will
induce him to avoid the Sunrise Rock area.” Post, at 4–5, n. 2 (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted). But the only “endorsement” of
which Buono complained was “[t]he placement of the Cross on feder
ally-owned land,” App. 59, which “offend[s]” him only because the
property “is not open to groups and individuals to erect other freestand
ing, permanent displays,” App. 50. Nothing in Buono’s complaint,
deposition, or declaration establishes that he will be unable “to freely
use the area of the Preserve” if Sunrise Rock is made private property
and its new proprietor displays the cross.

