14

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

litigation denies that the cross bears that social meaning.
Making a plain, unadorned Latin cross a war memorial
does not make the cross secular. It makes the war memo­
rial sectarian.7
More fundamentally, however, the message conveyed by
the cross is not open to reconsideration given the posture
of this case. The plurality employs a revealing turn of
phrase when it characterizes the cross as “a symbol that,
while challenged under the Establishment Clause, has
complex meaning beyond the expression of religious
views.” Ante, at 13. The days of considering the cross
itself as challenged under the Establishment Clause are
over; it is settled that the Government is not permitted to
endorse the cross. However complex the meaning of the
cross, the Court of Appeals in 2004 considered and re­
jected the argument that its dual symbolism as a war
memorial meant that government endorsement of the
cross did not amount to endorsement of religion. See
Buono II, 371 F. 3d, at 549, n. 5. All we are debating at
——————
permit the permanent erection of a large Latin cross on the roof of city
hall . . . because such an obtrusive year-round religious display would
place the government’s weight behind an obvious effort to proselytize
on behalf of a particular religion”).
7 Context is critical to the Establishment Clause inquiry, and not
every use of a religious symbol in a war memorial would indicate
government endorsement of a religious message. See, e.g., Van Orden
v. Perry, 545 U. S. 677, 701 (2005) (BREYER, J., concurring in judgment)
(“[T]o determine the message that the text here conveys, we must
examine how the text is used. And that inquiry requires us to consider
the context of the display”); County of Allegheny, 492 U. S., at 598
(“[T]he effect of a crèche display turns on its setting”); Lynch v. Don
nelly, 465 U. S. 668, 694 (1984) (O’Connor, J., concurring) (“Every
government practice must be judged in its unique circumstances to
determine whether it constitutes an endorsement or disapproval of
religion”). But this cross is not merely one part of a more elaborate
monument that, taken as a whole, may be understood to convey a
primarily nonreligious message. Rather, the cross is the only symbol
conveying any message at all.

