Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

STEVENS, J., dissenting

the relevant standard provides that the Establishment
Clause is violated whenever “the State’s own actions . . . ,
and their relationship to the private speech at issue, actu
ally convey a message of endorsement.” Id., at 777
(O’Connor, J., concurring in part and concurring in judg­
ment). Moreover, the Establishment Clause “imposes
affirmative obligations that may require a State, in some
situations, to take steps to avoid being perceived as sup­
porting or endorsing a private religious message.” Ibid. It
is particularly appropriate in this context—when the issue
is whether the transfer cures an already identified Estab­
lishment Clause violation—for the District Court to con­
sider whether the Government, by complying with §8121,
would have taken sufficient steps to avoid being perceived
as endorsing the cross.
As I explained at the outset of this section, the answer
to that inquiry is surely no. The reasonable observer “who
knows all of the pertinent facts and circumstances sur­
rounding the symbol and its placement,” ante, at 17, would
perceive that the Government has endorsed the cross: It
prohibited the use of federal funds to take down the cross,
designated the cross as a national memorial, and engaged
in “herculean efforts to preserve the Latin cross” following
the District Court’s initial injunction, Buono III, 364
F. Supp. 2d, at 1182. Those efforts include a transfer
statute designed to keep the cross in place. Changing the
ownership status of the underlying land in the manner
required by §8121 would not change the fact that the cross
conveys a message of government endorsement of religion.
Purpose in Enacting the Transfer Statute
Even setting aside that the effect of the post-transfer
cross would still be to convey a message of government
endorsement of religion, the District Court was correct to
conclude that §8121 would not cure the Establishment
Clause violation because the very purpose of the transfer

