2

SALAZAR v. BUONO
BREYER, J., dissenting

“the presence of the cross on federal land conveys a mes
sage” to a “reasonable observer” of governmental “en
dorsement of religion.” Buono v. Norton, 212 F. Supp. 2d
1202, 1216–1217 (CD Cal. 2002). See Travelers Indemnity
Co. v. Bailey, 557 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 14)
(once orders become final on direct review, they are res
judicata to the parties). For the same reason, we must
here assume that the plaintiff originally had standing to
bring the lawsuit. Ante, at 7; see also ante, at 1 (SCALIA,
J., concurring in judgment); Travelers, supra, at ___ (slip
op., at 14) (orders are no less preclusive when the collat
eral attack is jurisdictional). And, as the plurality also
points out, the plaintiff consequently has standing now to
seek enforcement of the injunction. Ante, at 8–9; see also
Allen v. Wright, 468 U. S. 737, 763 (1984).
Moreover, we are not faced with the question whether
changed circumstances require modification of the injunc
tion. The Government did not ask the District Court to
modify it. In fact, the Government did not ask the District
Court for any relief at all. Rather, it was the plaintiff who
asked the District Court either (1) to “ ‘hold that the [land]
transfer violates the current injunction,’ ” or (2) to “ ‘modify
that injunction to prohibit the land transfer because it
violates the Establishment Clause.’ ” 364 F. Supp. 2d, at
1177 (quoting plaintiff’s motion). The District Court did
the former, i.e., it interpreted the injunction as prohibiting
the Government from transferring the land for purposes of
displaying the cross. And having granted the plaintiff’s
request to enforce the injunction, it dismissed the plain
tiff’s alternative request to modify the injunction as moot.
Thus, as I said at the outset, the only question before us
is whether the law permits the District Court to hold that
the land transfer (presumably along with the subsequent
public display of the cross) falls within the scope of its
original injunctive order, an order that says the Govern
ment must not “permi[t] the display of the Latin cross in

