Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

STEVENS, J., dissenting

server.” Buono II, 371 F. 3d, at 549. The determination
that the Government had endorsed religion necessarily
rested on two premises: first, that the Government en­
dorsed the cross, and second, that the cross “take[s] a
position on questions of religious belief” or “ ‘mak[es] ad­
herence to religion relevant . . . to a person’s standing in
the political community,’ ” County of Allegheny, 492 U. S.,
at 594. Taking the District Court’s 2002 finding of an
Establishment Clause violation as res judicata, as we
must, the land transfer has the potential to dislodge only
the first of those premises, in that the transfer might
change the Government’s endorsing relationship with the
cross. As I explain below, I disagree that the transfer
ordered by §8121 would in fact have this result. But it is
also worth noting at the outset that the transfer statute
could not (and does not) dislodge the second premise—that
the cross conveys a religious message. Continuing gov­
ernment endorsement of the cross is thus continuing
government endorsement of religion.
In my view, the transfer ordered by §8121 would not end
government endorsement of the cross for two independ­
ently sufficient reasons. First, after the transfer it would
continue to appear to any reasonable observer that the
Government has endorsed the cross, notwithstanding that
the name has changed on the title to a small patch of
underlying land. This is particularly true because the
Government has designated the cross as a national memo­
rial, and that endorsement continues regardless of
whether the cross sits on public or private land. Second,
the transfer continues the existing government endorse­
ment of the cross because the purpose of the transfer is to
preserve its display. Congress’ intent to preserve the
display of the cross maintains the Government’s endorse­
ment of the cross.
The plurality does not conclude to the contrary; that is,
it does not decide that the transfer would end government

