10

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

endorsement of the cross and the religious message it
conveys. Rather, the plurality concludes that the District
Court did not conduct an appropriate analysis, and it
remands the case for a do-over. I take up each of the
purported faults the plurality finds in the District Court’s
analysis in my examination of the reasons why the trans­
fer does not cure the existing Establishment Clause
violation.
Perception of the Cross Post-Transfer
The 2002 injunction was based upon a finding of im­
permissible effect: The “Sunrise Rock cross . . . project[s] a
message of government endorsement [of religion] to a
reasonable observer.” Buono II, 371 F. 3d, at 549. The
transfer would not end that impermissible state of affairs
because the cross, post-transfer, would still have “the
effect of communicating a message of government en­
dorsement . . . of religion.” Lynch, 465 U. S., at 692
(O’Connor, J., concurring). As the Court of Appeals cor­
rectly found, “[n]othing in the present posture of the case
alters” the conclusion that a “reasonable observer would
perceive governmental endorsement of the message” the
cross conveys. Buono v. Kempthorne, 527 F. 3d 758, 783
(CA9 2008) (Buono IV).3
——————
3 The

plurality faults the District Court for not engaging in this
analysis, but the District Court did implicitly consider how a reason­
able observer would perceive the cross post-transfer when it analyzed
the terms of the transfer, the Government’s continuing property rights
in the conveyed land, and the history of the Government’s efforts to
preserve the cross. Furthermore, the Court of Appeals affirmed the
District Court’s order on the express ground that a reasonable observer
would still perceive government endorsement of the cross. See Buono
IV, 527 F. 3d, at 782–783.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE suggests this is much ado about nothing because
respondent’s counsel conceded that the injunction would not be violated
were the Government to have gone through an “empty ritual” of taking
down the cross before transferring the land. Ante, at 1 (concurring
opinion). But in the colloquy to which THE CHIEF JUSTICE refers,

