Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

change in circumstances bearing on the propriety of the
requested relief. The court, however, did not acknowledge
the statute’s significance. It examined the events that led
to the statute’s enactment and found an intent to prevent
removal of the cross. Deeming this intent illegitimate, the
court concluded that nothing of moment had changed.
This was error. Even assuming that the land-transfer
statute was an attempt to prevent removal of the cross, it
does not follow that an injunction against its implementa
tion was appropriate.
By dismissing Congress’s motives as illicit, the District
Court took insufficient account of the context in which the
statute was enacted and the reasons for its passage.
Private citizens put the cross on Sunrise Rock to com
memorate American servicemen who had died in World
War I. Although certainly a Christian symbol, the cross
was not emplaced on Sunrise Rock to promote a Christian
message. Cf. County of Allegheny v. American Civil Liber
ties Union, Greater Pittsburgh Chapter, 492 U. S. 573, 661
(1989) (KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment in part and
dissenting in part) (“[T]he [Establishment] Clause forbids
a city to permit the permanent erection of a large Latin
cross on the roof of city hall . . . because such an obtrusive
year-round religious display would place the government’s
weight behind an obvious effort to proselytize on behalf of
a particular religion”). Placement of the cross on Govern
ment-owned land was not an attempt to set the imprima
tur of the state on a particular creed. Rather, those who
erected the cross intended simply to honor our Nation’s
fallen soldiers. See Brief for Veterans of Foreign Wars of
the United States et al. as Amici Curiae 15 (noting that
the plaque accompanying the cross “was decorated with
VFW decals”).
Time also has played its role. The cross had stood on
Sunrise Rock for nearly seven decades before the statute
was enacted. By then, the cross and the cause it com

