Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

tal support for sectarian beliefs. The Constitution does
not oblige government to avoid any public acknowledg
ment of religion’s role in society. See Lee v. Weisman, 505
U. S. 577, 598 (1992) (“A relentless and all-pervasive
attempt to exclude religion from every aspect of public life
could itself become inconsistent with the Constitution”).
See also Corporation of Presiding Bishop of Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints v. Amos, 483 U. S. 327,
334 (1987) (“This Court has long recognized that the gov
ernment may (and sometimes must) accommodate reli
gious practices and that it may do so without violating the
Establishment Clause” (internal quotation marks omit
ted)). Rather, it leaves room to accommodate divergent
values within a constitutionally permissible framework.
Even assuming the propriety of the original relief,
however, the question before the District Court in Buono
III was whether to invalidate the land transfer. Given the
sole reliance on perception as a basis for the 2002 injunc
tion, one would expect that any relief grounded on that
decree would have rested on the same basis. But the
District Court enjoined the land transfer on an entirely
different basis: its suspicion of an illicit governmental
purpose. See Buono III, 364 F. Supp. 2d, at 1182. The
court made no inquiry into the effect that knowledge of the
transfer of the land to private ownership would have had
on any perceived governmental endorsement of religion,
the harm to which the 2002 injunction was addressed.
The District Court thus used an injunction granted for one
reason as the basis for enjoining conduct that was alleged
to be objectionable for a different reason. Ordering relief
under such circumstances was improper—absent a finding
that the relief was necessary to address an independent
wrong. See ibid., n. 8 (noting that the court “need not
consider [Buono’s] other contention that the land transfer
itself is an independent violation of the Establishment
Clause”).

