Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

STEVENS, J., dissenting

The plurality would have the District Court revise its
entire analysis of whether the transfer would end govern­
ment endorsement, in light of the plurality’s view of the
land-transfer statute’s putative second-order purpose.
That analysis ignores the procedural posture of the case.
If the question before the Court were whether §8121 itself
violated the Establishment Clause, then this argument
might have merit. But we are instead examining whether
action taken with the purpose of preserving the display of
the cross cures or continues government endorsement. In
my view, that purpose continues the impermissible en­
dorsement of—indeed, favoritism toward—the cross,
regardless of why Congress chose to intervene as it did.
In any event, Congress’ second-order purpose does little
for the plurality’s position. Without relying on any legisla­
tive history or findings—there are none—the plurality
opines that Congress wanted to keep the cross in place in
order to accommodate those who might view removal as
“conveying disrespect for those the cross was seen as
honoring,” ante, at 12, and it suggests that this decision
was an acceptable method of “balanc[ing] opposing inter­
ests” because the cross “has complex meaning beyond the
expression of religious views,” ante, at 13. As I have al­
ready explained, the meaning of the cross (complex or
otherwise) is no longer before us, and the plurality’s reli­
ance on a “congressional statement of policy,” ibid., as
negating any government endorsement of religion finds no
support in logic or precedent. The cross cannot take on a
nonsectarian character by congressional (or judicial) fiat,
and the plurality’s evaluation of Congress’ actions is di­
vorced from the methodology prescribed by our doctrine.11
——————
11 JUSTICE ALITO similarly affords great weight to Congress’ purported
interest in “avoiding the disturbing symbolism associated with the
destruction of the historic monument.” Ante, at 5 (opinion concurring
in part and concurring in judgment). But we surely all can agree that
once the government has violated the Establishment Clause, as has

