Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

Pinette, 515 U. S. 753 763–768 (1995) (plurality opinion)
(criticizing reliance on “perceived endorsement”), it is not
clear that Buono’s claim is meritorious. That test requires
the hypothetical construct of an objective observer who
knows all of the pertinent facts and circumstances sur
rounding the symbol and its placement. See id., at 780
(O’Connor, J., concurring in part and concurring in judg
ment). But see id., at 767–768 (plurality opinion) (doubt
ing the workability of the reasonable observer test). Ap
plying this test here, the message conveyed by the cross
would be assessed in the context of all relevant factors.
See Van Orden, 545 U. S., at 700 (BREYER, J., concurring
in judgment) (the Establishment Clause inquiry “must
take account of context and consequences”); Lee, supra, at
597 (“Our Establishment Clause jurisprudence remains a
delicate and fact-sensitive one”).
The District Court did not attempt to reassess the find
ings in Buono I in light of the policy of accommodation
that Congress had embraced. Rather, the District Court
concentrated solely on the religious aspects of the cross,
divorced from its background and context. But a Latin
cross is not merely a reaffirmation of Christian beliefs. It
is a symbol often used to honor and respect those whose
heroic acts, noble contributions, and patient striving help
secure an honored place in history for this Nation and its
people. Here, one Latin cross in the desert evokes far
more than religion. It evokes thousands of small crosses
in foreign fields marking the graves of Americans who fell
in battles, battles whose tragedies are compounded if the
fallen are forgotten.
Respect for a coordinate branch of Government forbids
striking down an Act of Congress except upon a clear
showing of unconstitutionality. See United States v. Mor
rison, 529 U. S. 598, 607 (2000); El Paso & Northeastern
R. Co. v. Gutierrez, 215 U. S. 87, 96 (1909). The same
respect requires that a congressional command be given

