16

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

The District Court should have evaluated Buono’s modi
fication request in light of the objectives of the 2002 in
junction. The injunction was issued to address the im
pression conveyed by the cross on federal, not private,
land. Even if its purpose were characterized more gener
ally as avoiding the perception of governmental endorse
ment, that purpose would favor—or at least not oppose—
ownership of the cross by a private party rather than by
the Government. Cf. Pleasant Grove City v. Summum,
555 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 8) (“[P]ersons who
observe donated monuments routinely—and reasonably—
interpret them as conveying some message on the property
owner’s behalf”).
Buono argues that the cross would continue to stand on
Sunrise Rock, which has no visual differentiation from the
rest of the primarily federally owned Preserve. He also
points to the reversionary clause in the land-transfer
statute requiring that the land be returned to the Gov
ernment if not maintained as a World War I memorial.
Finally, he notes that the cross remains designated a
national memorial by an Act of Congress, which arguably
would prevent the VFW from dismantling the cross even if
it wanted to do so. Brief for Respondent 37–48.
The District Court failed to consider whether, in light of
the change in law and circumstances effected by the land
transfer statute, the “reasonable observer” standard con
tinued to be the appropriate framework through which to
consider the Establishment Clause concerns invoked to
justify the requested relief. As a general matter, courts
considering Establishment Clause challenges do not in
quire into “reasonable observer” perceptions with respect
to objects on private land. Even if, however, this standard
were the appropriate one, but see County of Allegheny, 492
U. S., at 668 (KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment in part
and dissenting in part) (criticizing the “reasonable ob
server” test); Capitol Square Review and Advisory Bd. v.

