18

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

was to preserve the display of the cross. That evident
purpose maintains government endorsement of the cross.
The plurality does not really contest that this was Con­
gress’ purpose, ante, at 11, so I need not review the evi­
dence in great detail. Suffice it to say that the record
provides ample support. The land-transfer statute author­
izes a conveyance to the particular recipient that has
expressed an intent to preserve the cross. See Brief for
Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States et al. as
Amici Curiae 4 (transfer recipient “intends to maintain
and preserve the Veterans Memorial”); id., at 7 (identify­
ing Veterans Memorial as the “cross and plaque”). And it
conveys the particular land that has already been desig­
nated “as a national memorial” commemorating the veter­
ans of World War I, §8121(a), 117 Stat. 1100, subject to a
reversionary clause requiring that a memorial “commemo­
rating United States participation in World War I and
honoring the American veterans of that war” be main­
tained, §8121(e). If it does not categorically require the
new owner of the property to display the existing memo­
rial meeting that description (the cross), see §8137, 115
Stat. 2278, the statute most certainly encourages this
result. Indeed, the Government concedes that Congress
sought to “preserve a longstanding war memorial” at the
site, Brief for Petitioners 28 (emphasis added), and the
only memorial that could be “preserved” at Sunrise Rock is
the cross itself.
The plurality insists, however, that even assuming the
purpose of the land transfer was to preserve the display of
the cross, enjoining the transfer was not necessarily ap­
propriate. It contends the District Court failed to give
adequate consideration to “the context in which the [land­
transfer] statute was enacted and the reasons for its pas­
sage,” ante, at 11, and it directs the District Court’s atten­
tion to three factors: the message intended by the private
citizens who first erected the cross, ibid.; the time the

