6

SALAZAR v. BUONO
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

nature of the new private ownership violate the Estab
lishment Clause. Now it may be that a court has subject
matter jurisdiction to prevent frustration or evasion of its
prior injunction in a broader sense—that is, to eliminate
an unconstitutional manner of satisfying that prior injunc
tion. But it surely cannot do so unless it has before it
someone who has standing to complain of that unconstitu
tional manner. If preventing frustration or evasion of an
injunction includes expanding it to cover additional ac
tions that produce no concrete harm to the original plain
tiff, our standing law in this area will make no sense.
It is no answer that a district court has discretion to
expand an injunction it has issued if it finds the existing
terms are not fulfilling the original purpose. Doubtless it
can do that, and is in that sense the master of its own
injunctions. But whether the District Court abused that
discretion by enlarging the injunction is beside the point.
What matters is that it granted relief beyond the existing
order, and that Buono must have had standing to seek the
extension.
It also makes no difference that the District Court said
it was merely enforcing its original injunction. The ques
tion is whether in fact the new order goes beyond the old
one. If so, the court must satisfy itself of jurisdiction to
award the additional relief—which includes making cer
tain the plaintiff has standing. See Steel Co., 523 U. S., at
94. That is true whether the court revisits the injunction
at a party’s request or on its own initiative; Article III’s
case-or-controversy requirement is not merely a prerequi
site to relief, but a restraint on judicial power. See Sum
mers, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 4).6
——————
6 I agree with JUSTICE BREYER that in interpreting an ambiguous
injunction we should give great weight to the interpretation of the
judge who issued it. Post, at 3 (dissenting opinion). But that does not
mean we must accept any construction a district court places upon an
order it has issued. Here there is no reasonable reading of the original

