22

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

Our precedent provides that we evaluate purpose based
upon what the objective indicia of intent would reveal to a
reasonable observer. See McCreary County v. American
Civil Liberties Union of Ky., 545 U. S. 844, 862 (2005)
(“The eyes that look to purpose belong to an objective
observer, one who takes account of the traditional external
signs that show up in the text, legislative history, and
implementation of the statute, or comparable official act”
(internal quotation marks omitted)). “[R]easonable ob­
servers have reasonable memories, and our precedents
sensibly forbid an observer ‘to turn a blind eye to the
context in which [the] policy arose.’ ” Id., at 866 (quoting
Santa Fe Independent School Dist. v. Doe, 530 U. S. 290,
315 (2000)). The plurality nowhere engages with how a
reasonable observer would view Congress’ “policy of ac­
commodation” for this cross. Instead, the plurality insists
that deference is owed because of “Congress’s prerogative
to balance opposing interests and its institutional compe­
tence to do so.” Ante, at 13.
The proper remedy for an Establishment Clause viola­
tion is a legal judgment, which is not the sort of issue for
which Congress “ ‘has both wisdom and experience . . . that
——————
been adjudged in this case and is now beyond question, a plaintiff must
be afforded a complete remedy. That remedy may sometimes require
removing a religious symbol, and regrettably some number of people
may perceive the remedy as evidence that the government “is bent on
eliminating from all public places and symbols any trace of our coun­
try’s religious heritage,” ante, at 4. But it does not follow that the
government can decline to cure an Establishment Clause violation in
order to avoid offense. It may be the case that taking down the symbol
is not the only remedy. The proper remedy, like the determination of
the violation itself, is necessarily context specific, and even if it involves
moving the cross, it need not involve the “demolition” or “destruction” of
the cross, see ante, at 4, 5. Regardless, in this case the only question
before us is whether this particular transfer provided a complete
remedy. We have no way of knowing whether Congress’ motivation
was to minimize offense, but in any event that interest does not amelio­
rate the remedial ineffectiveness of §8121.

