2

SALAZAR v. BUONO
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

Nor is Buono’s standing to request enforcement of the
original injunction at issue. If he sought only to compel
compliance with the existing order, Article III would not
stand in his way.
As the plurality all but admits, however, the relief
Buono requests and the District Court awarded in this
proceeding is not enforcement of the original injunction
but expansion of it. See ante, at 15. The only reasonable
reading of the original injunction, in context, is that it
proscribed the cross’s display on federal land. Buono’s
alleged injuries arose from the cross’s presence on public
property, see App. 50, 59, and the injunction accordingly
prohibited the Government, its “employees, agents, and
those in active concert with [them] . . . from permitting the
display of the Latin cross in the area of Sunrise Rock in
the Mojave National Preserve.” App. to Pet. for Cert.
146a. Barring the Government from “permitting” the
cross’s display at a particular location makes sense only if
the Government owns the location. As the proprietor, it
can remove the cross that private parties have erected and
deny permission to erect another. But if the land is pri
vately owned, the Government can prevent the cross’s
display only by making it illegal. Prohibitory legislation
does not consist of a mere refusal to “permi[t],” nor is the
enactment of legislation what the injunction commanded
(a command that would raise serious First Amendment
and separation-of-powers questions).2
——————
Moreover, Buono failed to raise the issue in his brief in opposition to
certiorari, and we may deem it waived. See this Court’s Rule 15.2; cf.
Knowles v. Iowa, 525 U. S. 113, 116, n. 2 (1998).
2 The principal dissent does not dispute that the original injunction
did not require the Government to ban the cross’s display on private
land, yet it insists that the injunction nonetheless forbade transferring
the land to a private party who could keep the cross in place. Post, at
6–7 (opinion of STEVENS, J.). But there is no basis in the injunction’s
text for treating a sale of the land to a private purchaser who does not
promise to take the cross down as “permitting” the cross’s display,

