Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

STEVENS, J., dissenting

In its original judgment, the Court of Appeals found
that a well-informed reasonable observer would perceive
government endorsement of religion, notwithstanding the
cross’ initial “placement by private individuals,” based
upon the following facts: “that the cross rests on public
land[,] . . . that Congress has designated the cross as a war
memorial and prohibited the use of funds to remove it, and
that the Park Service has denied similar access for expres­
sion by an adherent of the . . . Buddhist faith.” Buono II,
371 F. 3d, at 550. After the transfer, a well-informed
observer would know that the cross was no longer on
public land, but would additionally be aware of the follow­
ing facts: The cross was once on public land, the Govern­
ment was enjoined from permitting its display, Congress
transferred it to a specific purchaser in order to preserve
its display in the same location, and the Government
maintained a reversionary interest in the land. From this
chain of events, in addition to the factors that remain the
same after the transfer, he would perceive government
endorsement of the cross.4
——————
counsel assumed that the Government would not retain a reversionary
interest in the land, and that the cross would not retain its designation
as a national memorial. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 44–45. Even under THE
CHIEF JUSTICE’s revised version of the hypothetical, I would not so
quickly decide that taking down the cross makes no material difference.
And counsel’s statement takes no position as to whether the hypotheti­
cal poses any constitutional problem independent of the injunction.
Regardless, we must deal with the substance of the case before us,
which involves much more than Congress directing the Government to
execute a simple land transfer.
4 A less informed reasonable observer, see Capitol Square Review and
Advisory Bd. v. Pinette, 515 U. S. 753, 807 (1995) (STEVENS, J., dissent­
ing), would reach the same conclusion because the cross would still
appear to stand on Government property. The transfer merely “carv[es]
out a tiny parcel of property in the midst of this vast Preserve—like a
donut hole with the cross atop it.” Buono v. Kempthorne, 527 F. 3d
758, 783 (CA9 2008). For any reasonable observer, then, the transfer
simply would not change the effect of the cross.

