Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

The District Court’s 2005 order purporting to “enforce”
the earlier injunction went well beyond barring the dis
play of the cross on public property. Id., at 98a. At
Buono’s request, the court enjoined certain Government
officials and “anyone acting in concert with them . . . from
implementing the provisions of Section 8121 of Public Law
108–87,” the statutory provision enacted after the original
injunction that directs the Executive Branch to transfer
the memorial to the VFW. Id., at 99a.
Because Buono seeks new relief, he must show (and the
District Court should have ensured) that he has standing
to pursue it. As the party invoking federal-court jurisdic
tion, Buono “bears the burden of showing that he has
standing for each type of relief sought,” Summers v. Earth
Island Institute, 555 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 4);
see Los Angeles v. Lyons, 461 U. S. 95, 105 (1983). A
plaintiff cannot sidestep Article III’s requirements by
combining a request for injunctive relief for which he has
standing with a request for injunctive relief for which he
lacks standing. And for the same reason, a plaintiff can
not ask a court to expand an existing injunction unless he
has standing to seek the additional relief.
Buono must therefore demonstrate that the additional
relief he sought—blocking the transfer of the memorial to
a private party—will “redress or prevent actual or immi
nently threatened injury to [him] caused by private or
——————
when failing to forbid the cross’s presence on already-private land
within the Mojave National Preserve would not be treated as such. The
latter no less involves “allow[ing] the act or existence of” or “tol
erat[ing]” the display of the cross. Webster’s New International Dic
tionary 1824 (2d ed. 1957). The principal dissent responds that in
determining whether the transfer complies with the original injunction
we “cannot start from a baseline in which the cross has already been
transferred.” Post, at 7. But the effect of transferring the land to a
private party free to keep the cross standing is identical, so far as the
original injunction is concerned, to allowing a party who already owned
the land to leave the cross in place.

