8

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

dants if the purposes of the litigation . . . have not been
fully achieved.” Id., at 248 (emphasis deleted). And con­
trary to the Government’s position, the changed circum­
stances in this case support, rather than count against,
the District Court’s enforcement decision.
The objective of the 2002 judgment, as the plurality
grudgingly allows, was to “avoi[d] the perception of gov­
ernmental endorsement” of religion. Ante, at 16; see
Buono III, 364 F. Supp. 2d, at 1178 (analyzing “ ‘whether
government action endorsing religion has actually ceased’ ”
in light of the transfer). The parties do not disagree on
this point; rather, they dispute whether the transfer would
end government endorsement of the cross. Compare Brief
for Petitioners 21 (“Congress’s transfer of the land . . .
ends any governmental endorsement of the cross”) with
Brief for Respondent 34 (“[T]he government’s endorsement
of the Christian cross is not remedied” by the land trans­
fer). The District Court rightly found that the transfer
would not end government endorsement of the cross.
A government practice violates the Establishment
Clause if it “either has the purpose or effect of ‘endorsing’
religion.” County of Allegheny v. American Civil Liberties
Union, Greater Pittsburgh Chapter, 492 U. S. 573, 592
(1989). “Whether the key word is ‘endorsement,’ ‘favorit­
ism,’ or ‘promotion,’ the essential principle remains the
same. The Establishment Clause, at the very least, pro­
hibits government from appearing to take a position on
questions of religious belief or from ‘making adherence to
a religion relevant in any way to a person’s standing
in the political community.’ ” Id., at 593–594 (quoting
Lynch v. Donnelly, 465 U. S. 668, 687 (1984) (O’Connor, J.,
concurring)).
The 2002 injunction was based on a finding that display
of the cross had the effect of endorsing religion. That is,
“the Sunrise Rock cross . . . project[s] a message of gov­
ernment endorsement [of religion] to a reasonable ob­

