4

SALAZAR v. BUONO
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

official violation of law.” Summers, supra, at ___ (slip op.,
at 4). He has failed, however, to allege any actual or
imminent injury. To begin with, the predicate for any
injury he might assert—that the VFW, after taking pos
session of the land, will continue to display the cross—is at
this stage merely speculative.3 Nothing in the statutes
compels the VFW (or any future proprietor) to keep it up.
The land reverts to the Government only if “the
conveyed property is no longer being maintained as a war
memorial,” Pub. L. 108–87, §8121(e), 117 Stat. 1100,
which does not depend on whether the cross remains.4
Moreover, Buono has not alleged, much less established,
that he will be harmed if the VFW does decide to keep the
cross. To the contrary, his amended complaint averred
that “he is deeply offended by the display of a Latin Cross
on government-owned property” but “has no objection to
Christian symbols on private property.” App. 50. In a
subsequent deposition he agreed with the statement that
“[t]he only thing that’s offensive about this cross is that
[he has] discovered that it’s located on federal land.” Id.,
at 85. And in a signed declaration several months later,
——————
3 Buono argues that the Government’s continued supervision of the
site, its reversionary interest in the property, and the memorial’s
ongoing designation as a national memorial add to the Establishment
Clause violation. Brief for Respondent 37–48. But those aspects would
be irrelevant if the cross were no longer displayed.
4 The principal dissent insists, post, at 4–5, n. 2, that it is clear the
cross will remain because the VFW asserted in an amicus brief that it
“intends to maintain and preserve the Veterans Memorial as a memo
rial to United States veterans,” and elsewhere referred to “the seven
foot-tall cross and plaque that comprise the Veterans Memorial,” Brief
for VFW of the United States et al. as Amici Curiae 4, 7. But the
group’s stated intentions do not prove that the cross will stay put. The
VFW might not follow through on its plans (this VFW post already
became “defunct” once during this litigation, id., at 34); it might move
the cross to another private parcel and substitute a different monument
on Sunrise Rock; or it might sell the land to someone else who decides
to honor the dead without the cross.

