4

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

party seeks to enforce or modify an injunction, the only
circumstances that matter are changed circumstances.
See Swift, 286 U. S., at 119 (“The injunction, whether
right or wrong, is not subject to impeachment in its appli­
cation to the conditions that existed at its making”).
I further accept that the District Court’s task was to
evaluate the changed circumstances “in light of the objec­
tives of the 2002 injunction.” Ante, at 16. This case does
not simply pit a plaintiff’s “prior showing of illegality”
against a defendant’s claim that “changed circumstances
have rendered prospective relief inappropriate.” Ante, at
14. That formulation implies that the changed circum­
stances all cut in one direction, against prospective relief,
and that the defendant has asked the court to alleviate its
obligations. But it is important to note that in this case,
the Government did not move to “alleviate or eliminate
conditions or restrictions imposed by the original decree”
so as to permit the transfer. Wright & Miller §2961, at
397. Rather, it was the beneficiary of the original injunc­
tion who went back into court seeking its enforcement or
modification in light of the transfer. Plainly, respondent
had standing to seek enforcement of a decree in his favor.2
——————
effect of the legislative action in this case is different from its effect in
our cases espousing that principle, which stand for the proposition that
if a statutory “right has been modified by the competent authority”
since the decree, then an injunction enforcing the prior version of that
right must be modified to conform to the change in the law. Pennsyl
vania v. Wheeling & Belmont Bridge Co., 18 How. 421, 432 (1856); see
also Railway Employees v. Wright, 364 U. S. 642, 651 (1961) (“In a case
like this the District Court’s authority to adopt a consent decree comes
only from the statute which the decree is intended to enforce. . . . [I]t
[must] be free to modify the terms of a consent decree when a change in
law brings those terms in conflict with statutory objectives”). In a
constitutional case such as this, legislative action may modify the facts,
but it cannot change the applicable law.
2 To the extent the Government challenges respondent’s standing to
seek the initial injunction, that issue is not before the Court for the
reasons the plurality states. See ante, at 7. Moreover, in my view

