12

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

memorated had become entwined in the public conscious
ness. See ibid. Members of the public gathered regularly
at Sunrise Rock to pay their respects. Rather than let the
cross deteriorate, community members repeatedly took it
upon themselves to replace it. Congress ultimately desig
nated the cross as a national memorial, ranking it among
those monuments honoring the noble sacrifices that con
stitute our national heritage. See note following 16
U. S. C. §431 (listing officially designated national memo
rials, including the National D-Day Memorial and the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial). Research discloses no other
national memorial honoring American soldiers—more
than 300,000 of them—who were killed or wounded in
World War I. See generally A. Leland & M. Oboroceanu,
Congressional Research Service Report for Congress,
American War and Military Operations Casualties: Lists
and Statistics 2 (2009). It is reasonable to interpret the
congressional designation as giving recognition to the
historical meaning that the cross had attained. Cf. Van
Orden v. Perry, 545 U. S. 677, 702–703 (2005) (BREYER, J.,
concurring in judgment) (“40 years” without legal chal
lenge to a Ten Commandments display “suggest that the
public visiting the [surrounding] grounds has considered
the religious aspect of the tablets’ message as part of what
is a broader moral and historical message reflective of a
cultural heritage”).
The 2002 injunction thus presented the Government
with a dilemma. It could not maintain the cross without
violating the injunction, but it could not remove the cross
without conveying disrespect for those the cross was seen
as honoring. Cf. id., at 704 (to invalidate a longstanding
Ten Commandments display might “create the very kind
of religiously based divisiveness that the Establishment
Clause seeks to avoid”). Deeming neither alternative to be
satisfactory, Congress enacted the statute here at issue.
Congress, of course, may not use its legislative powers to

