Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
account of the context in which the statute was enacted and the rea
sons for its passage. Placement of the cross on federal land by pri
vate persons was not an attempt to set the state’s imprimatur on a
particular creed. Rather, the intent was simply to honor fallen sol
diers. Moreover, the cross stood for nearly seven decades before the
statute was enacted, by which time the cross and the cause it com
memorated had become entwined in the public consciousness. The
2002 injunction thus presented the Government with a dilemma. It
could not maintain the cross without violating the injunction, but it
could not remove the cross without conveying disrespect for those the
cross was seen as honoring. Deeming neither alternative satisfac
tory, Congress enacted the land-transfer statute. The statute embod
ied a legislative judgment that this dispute is best resolved through a
framework and policy of accommodation. The statute should not
have been dismissed as an evasion, for it brought about a change of
law and a congressional statement of policy applicable to the case.
Pp. 9–13.
(b) Where legislative action undermines the basis for previous re
lief, the relevant question is whether an ongoing exercise of the
court’s equitable authority is supported by the prior showing of ille
gality, judged against the claim that changed circumstances render
prospective relief inappropriate. The District Court granted the 2002
injunction based solely on its conclusion that the presence of the cross
on federal land conveyed an impression of governmental endorsement
of religion, and the Ninth Circuit affirmed on the same grounds. Nei
ther court considered whether the Government had acted based on an
improper purpose. Given this sole reliance on perception, any further
relief grounded on the injunction should have rested on the same ba
sis. But the District Court used an injunction granted for one reason
(perceived governmental endorsement) as the basis for enjoining con
duct that was alleged to be objectionable for a different reason (an il
licit governmental purpose). Ordering relief under such circum
stances was improper. The court failed to consider whether the
change in law and circumstances effected by the land-transfer statute
had rendered the “reasonable observer” standard inappropriate to re
solve the dispute. Nor did the court attempt to reassess Buono I’s
findings in light of the accommodation policy embraced by Congress.
Rather, it concentrated solely on the religious aspects of the cross, di
vorced from its background and context. Pp. 13–17.
(c) The same respect for a coordinate branch of Government that
forbids striking down an Act of Congress except upon a clear showing
of unconstitutionality, see, e.g., United States v. Morrison, 529 U. S.
598, 607, requires that a congressional command be given effect
unless no legal alternative exists. Even if, contrary to the congres

