Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

STEVENS, J., dissenting

cross stood on Sunrise Rock and its historical meaning,
ante, at 11–12; and Congress’ balancing of “opposing inter­
ests” and selection of a “policy of accommodation,” ante, at
13; see also ante, at 17.
The first two of these factors are red herrings. The
District Court, in its enforcement decision, had no occasion
to consider anew either the private message intended by
those who erected the cross or how long the cross had
stood atop Sunrise Rock. Neither of these factors consti­
tuted a novel or changed circumstance since the entry of
the 2002 injunction. Whatever message those who ini­
tially erected the cross intended—and I think we have to
presume it was a Christian one, at least in part, for the
simple reason that those who erected the cross chose to
commemorate American veterans in an explicitly Chris­
tian manner—that historical fact did not change between
2002 and 2005. I grant that the amount of time the cross
had stood on Sunrise Rock did change, from 68 years to 71
years, but no one can seriously maintain that “the histori­
cal meaning that the cross had attained,” ante, at 12, was
materially transformed in that 3-year increment.9
——————
9 I also disagree with the plurality’s factual premise that “the cross
and the cause it commemorated had become entwined in the public
consciousness” in a secular manner, ante, at 11–12. Although some
members of the community knew that the cross had been originally
erected as a war memorial, there is no support in the record for the idea
that members of the public “gathered regularly at Sunrise Rock to pay
their respects,” ibid., to the fallen of World War I or any other veterans.
The study conducted by a National Park Service historian indicates
that a group of veterans gathered at the cross as early as 1935 for
Easter sunrise services. Memorandum from Mark Luellen to Superin­
tendent, Mojave National Preserve (Jan. 31, 2000), Decl. of Peter J.
Eliasberg in Buono v. Norton, No. EDCV 01–216–RT (CD Cal., Mar. 13,
2002), p. 20 (Exh. 7). But there is no evidence that gatherings were
ever held for Armistice Day or Veterans Day. The study further reveals
that a local club organized social events for the community at the cross
from 1950 to 1975 and that after a local veteran passed away in 1984,
the “memory and associations of the white cross . . . as a war memorial”

