16

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

ring in judgment), respondent’s objection to the transfer
easily meets that test for two reasons. First, he is cur­
rently challenging official legislation, taken in response to
an identified Establishment Clause violation. That legis­
lation would transfer public land to a particular private
party, with the proviso that the transferee must use the
land to fulfill a specific public function or else the land
reverts back to the Government. Second, even once the
transfer is complete, the cross would remain a national
memorial. The cross is therefore not a purely “private”
object in any meaningful sense.
Notwithstanding these facts, the plurality appears to
conclude that the transfer might render the cross purely
private speech. It relies in part on the plurality opinion in
Pinette for its suggestion that the reasonable observer
standard may not be apposite, and Pinette addressed a
privately owned cross displayed in a public forum. The
Pinette plurality would have rejected the idea that “a
neutrally behaving government” can ever endorse “private
religious expression,” id., at 764, even if a reasonable
observer would perceive government endorsement, id., at
768. But the Pinette plurality acknowledged that govern­
ment favoritism of private religious speech is unconstitu­
tional, as when a government “giv[es] sectarian religious
speech preferential access to a forum close to the seat of
government (or anywhere else for that matter).” Id., at
766. And in this case, the Government is not acting neu­
trally: The transfer statute and the government actions
preceding it have all favored the cross.
Furthermore, even assuming (wrongly) that the cross
would be purely private speech after the transfer, and
even assuming (quite implausibly) that the transfer stat­
ute is neutral with respect to the cross, it would still be
appropriate for the District Court to apply the reasonable
observer standard. The majority of the Pinette Court
rejected the per se rule proposed by the plurality. Instead,

