4

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Opinion of ALITO, J.

this case, an employee of the National Park Service who
sometimes viewed the cross during the performance of his
duties and claims to have been offended by its presence on
federally owned land, brought this suit and obtained an
injunction restraining the Federal Government from
“permitting the display of the Latin cross in the area of
Sunrise Rock.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 146a. After the
Ninth Circuit affirmed that decision, and the Government
elected not to seek review by this Court, Congress faced a
problem.
If Congress had done nothing, the Government would
have been required to take down the cross, which had
stood on Sunrise Rock for nearly 70 years, and this re
moval would have been viewed by many as a sign of disre
spect for the brave soldiers whom the cross was meant to
honor. The demolition of this venerable if unsophisticated,
monument would also have been interpreted by some as an
arresting symbol of a Government that is not neutral but
hostile on matters of religion and is bent on eliminating
from all public places and symbols any trace of our coun
try’s religious heritage. Cf. Van Orden v. Perry, 545 U. S.
677, 704 (2005) (BREYER, J., concurring in judgment).
One possible solution would have been to supplement
the monument on Sunrise Rock so that it appropriately
recognized the religious diversity of the American soldiers
who gave their lives in the First World War. In American
military cemeteries overseas, the graves of soldiers who
perished in that war were marked with either a white
cross or a white Star of David.9 More than 3,500 Jewish
——————
9 See D. Holt, American Military Cemeteries 473, 474 (1992); see
also American Battle Monuments Commission, http://www.abmc.gov/
cemeteries / cemeteries.php (containing photographs of the two
types of markers). This policy presumably reflected the relig
ious makeup of the Armed Forces at the time of the First World
War. Today, veterans and their families may select any of 39
types of headstones. See U. S. Dept. of Veterans Affairs, Available

