24

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

may genuinely wish to combat juvenile delinquency, and
may rightly want to honor the Eagles for their efforts, it
cannot effectuate these admirable purposes through an
explicitly religious medium”). It is odd that the plurality
ignores all of these well-settled principles in exalting this
particular legislative determination.
A reasonable observer, considering the nature of this
symbol, the timing and the substance of Congress’ efforts,
and the history of the Sunrise Rock site, could conclude
that Congress chose to preserve the cross primarily be­
cause of its salience as a cross. Cf. McCreary County, 545
U. S., at 873 (“If the observer had not thrown up his
hands, he would probably suspect that the Counties were
simply reaching for any way to keep a religious document
on the walls . . .”). But no such conclusion is necessary to
find for respondent.12 The religious meaning of the cross
was settled by the 2002 judgment; the only question before
us is whether the Government has sufficiently distanced
itself from the cross to end government endorsement of it.
At the least, I stress again, a reasonable observer would
conclude that the Government’s purpose in transferring
the underlying land did not sufficiently distance the Gov­
ernment from the cross. Indeed, §8121 evidenced concern
for whether the cross would be displayed. The District
Court was therefore correct to find that the transfer would
——————
12 I have not “jump[ed] to the conclusion that Congress’ aim in enact­
ing the land transfer law was to embrace the religious message of the
cross.” Ante, at 7 (opinion of ALITO, J.). I think a reasonable observer
could come to that conclusion, but my point is that so long as we agree
that Congress’ aim was to preserve the cross (which JUSTICE ALITO does
not dispute), Congress’ reason for preserving the cross does not matter.
But if we were debating whether Congress had a religious purpose in
passing the transfer statute, I would contest the relevance of the vote
count to that inquiry, see ante, at 6, and particularly so in this case.
One cannot infer much of anything about the land-transfer provision
from the fact that an appropriations bill passed by an overwhelming
majority.

