Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

STEVENS, J., dissenting

Once that momentous step was taken, changing the iden­
tity of the owner of the underlying land could no longer
change the public or private character of the cross. The
Government has expressly adopted the cross as its own.5
Even though Congress recognized this cross for its
military associations, the solitary cross conveys an ines­
capably sectarian message. See Separation of Church and
State Comm. v. Eugene, 93 F. 3d 617, 626 (CA9 1996)
(O’Scannlain, J., concurring in result) (“[T]he City’s use of
a cross to memorialize the war dead may lead observers to
believe that the City has chosen to honor only Christian
veterans”). As the District Court observed, it is undis­
puted that the “[L]atin cross is the preeminent symbol of
Christianity. It is exclusively a Christian symbol, and not
a symbol of any other religion.” Buono I, 212 F. Supp. 2d,
at 1205. We have recognized the significance of the Latin
cross as a sectarian symbol,6 and no participant in this
——————
5 The plurality barely mentions this designation, except to assert that
the designation gave recognition to the historical meaning of the cross.
See ante, at 12. But the plurality does not acknowledge that when the
Ninth Circuit affirmed the 2002 judgment, it concluded that the desig­
nation is one of the factors that would lead a reasonable observer to
perceive government endorsement of religion. See Buono II, 371 F. 3d,
at 550. Nor does the plurality address the effect of that designation on
a reasonable observer’s perception of the cross, regardless of whether
the cross sits on private land. See ante, at 16.
6 See, e.g., Pinette, 515 U. S., at 760 (characterizing Ku Klux Klan­
sponsored cross as religious speech); id., at 776 (O’Connor, J., concur­
ring in part and concurring in judgment) (“[T]he cross is an especially
potent sectarian symbol”); id., at 792 (Souter, J., concurring in part and
concurring in judgment) (“[T]he Latin cross . . . is the principal symbol
of Christianity around the world, and display of the cross alone could
not reasonably be taken to have any secular point”); id., at 798, n. 3
(STEVENS, J., dissenting) (“[T]he Latin cross is identifiable as a symbol
of a particular religion, that of Christianity; and, further, as a symbol of
particular denominations within Christianity”); County of Allegheny v.
American Civil Liberties Union, Greater Pittsburgh Chapter, 492 U. S.
573, 661 (1989) (KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment in part and
dissenting in part) (“[T]he [Establishment] Clause forbids a city to

