20

SALAZAR v. BUONO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

This brings us to the final factor identified by the plural­
ity: Congress’ “policy of accommodation” for the cross.10 Of
course, the District Court did consider Congress’ “policy”
in the sense that it considered the result Congress was
trying to achieve with respect to the cross, i.e., to keep it in
place. See Buono III, 364 F. Supp. 2d, at 1182 (“[T]he
proposed transfer of the subject property can only be
viewed as an attempt to keep the Latin cross atop Sunrise
Rock without actually curing the continuing Establish­
ment Clause violation”). But I understand the plurality to
be faulting the District Court for failing to inquire into a
deeper level of motivation: If the purpose of the transfer
was to keep the cross in place, what was the purpose of
keeping the cross in place?
I do not see why it was incumbent upon the District
Court to examine this second-order purpose when deter­
mining whether the transfer violated the 2002 injunction.
As discussed in Part II, supra, the injunction barred the
Government from permitting the display of the cross,
which fairly encompasses any act providing an opportu­
nity for the cross’ display. It was entirely appropriate for
the District Court to characterize a transfer with the
purpose of preserving the cross as an attempt to evade
that injunction, and to find that the Government’s purpose
to preserve the cross maintains government endorsement
of the cross.
——————
faded but locals were “inspired . . . to reinstate the Easter sunrise
services” at the cross. Ibid.
10 Although the plurality uses the term “accommodation,” I do not
read its opinion to suggest that Congress’ policy vis-à-vis the cross has
anything to do with accommodating any individual’s religious practice.
Cf. County of Allegheny, 492 U. S., at 601, n. 51 (“Nor can the display of
the crèche be justified as an ‘accommodation’ of religion. . . . To be sure,
prohibiting the display . . . deprives Christians of the satisfaction of
seeing the government adopt their religious message as their own, but
this kind of government affiliation with particular religious messages is
precisely what the Establishment Clause precludes”).

