4

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Syllabus
sional judgment, the land transfer were thought an insufficient ac
commodation in light of the earlier endorsement finding, it was in
cumbent upon the District Court to consider less drastic relief than
complete invalidation of the statute. See, e.g., Ayotte v. Planned Par
enthood of Northern New Eng., 546 U. S. 320, 329. On remand, that
court should conduct a proper inquiry into the continued necessity for
injunctive relief in light of the statute. Pp. 17–18.
JUSTICE ALITO concluded that this case should not be remanded for
the lower courts to decide whether implementation of the land
transfer statute would violate the District Court’s injunction or the
Establishment Clause. Rather, because the factual record has been
sufficiently developed to permit resolution of these questions, he
would decide them and hold that the statute may be implemented.
The case’s singular circumstances presented Congress with a delicate
problem. Its solution was an approach designed to eliminate any
perception of religious sponsorship stemming from the location of the
cross on federally owned land, while avoiding the disturbing symbol
ism that some would associate with the destruction of this historic
monument. The mechanism Congress selected is quite common in
the West, a “land exchange,” whereby ownership of the land on which
the cross is located would be transferred to the VFW in exchange for
another nearby parcel of equal value. The land transfer would not
violate the District Court injunction, the obvious meaning of which
was simply that the Government could not allow the cross to remain
on federal land. Nor would the statute’s implementation constitute
an endorsement of religion in violation of the Establishment Clause.
The so-called “endorsement test” views a challenged religious display
through the eyes of a hypothetical reasonable observer aware of the
history and all other pertinent facts relating to the display. Here,
therefore, this observer would be familiar with the monument’s origin
and history and thereby appreciate that the transfer represents an
effort by Congress to address a unique situation and to find a solution
that best accommodates conflicting concerns. Finally, the statute
was not enacted for the illicit purpose of embracing the monument’s
religious message but to commemorate the Nation’s war dead and to
avoid the disturbing symbolism that would have been created by the
monument’s destruction. Pp. 1–7.
JUSTICE SCALIA, joined by JUSTICE THOMAS, concluded that this
Court need not—indeed, cannot—decide this case’s merits because
Buono lacks Article III standing to pursue the relief he seeks, which
is not enforcement of the original injunction but expansion of it. By
enjoining the Government from implementing the statute at issue,
the District Court’s 2005 order went well beyond the original injunc
tion’s proscription of the cross’s display on public property. Because

