2

SALAZAR v. BUONO
Syllabus
the transfer was a bona fide attempt to comply with the injunction,
concluding, instead, that it was actually an invalid attempt to keep
the cross on display. The court granted Buono’s motion to enforce the
2002 injunction; denied as moot his motion to amend it; and perma
nently enjoined the Government from implementing the land
transfer statute (Buono III). The Ninth Circuit again affirmed,
largely following the District Court’s reasoning.

Held: The judgment is reversed, and the case is remanded.
502 F. 3d 1069 and 527 F. 3d 758, reversed and remanded.
JUSTICE KENNEDY, joined in full by THE CHIEF JUSTICE and in part
by JUSTICE ALITO, concluded:
1. Buono has standing to maintain this action. Whatever the valid
ity of the Government’s argument that Buono’s asserted injury—
offense at a religious symbol’s presence on federal land—is not per
sonal to him and so does not confer Article III standing, that argu
ment is not available at this stage of the litigation. The District
Court rejected the argument in Buono I, the Ninth Circuit affirmed
in Buono II, and the Court of Appeals’ judgment became final and
unreviewable upon the expiration of the 90-day deadline for filing a
certiorari petition, 28 U. S. C. §2101(c). Moreover, Buono had stand
ing in Buono III to seek application of the injunction against the
land-transfer statute. A party that obtains a judgment in its favor
acquires a “judicially cognizable” interest in ensuring compliance
with that judgment. See Allen v. Wright, 468 U. S. 737. Buono’s en
titlement to an injunction having been established in Buono I and II,
he sought in Buono III to prevent the Government from frustrating or
evading that injunction. His interests in doing so were sufficiently
personal and concrete to support his standing, given the rights he ob
tained under the earlier decree against the same party as to the same
cross and the same land. The Government’s contention that Buono
sought to extend, rather than to enforce, the 2002 injunction is not an
argument about standing, but about the merits of the District Court’s
order. Pp. 7–9.
2. The District Court erred in enjoining the Government from im
plementing the land-transfer statute on the premise that the relief
was necessary to protect Buono’s rights under the 2002 injunction.
Pp. 9–18.
(a) A court may order an injunction only after taking into account
all the circumstances bearing on the need for prospective relief. See,
e.g., United States v. Swift & Co., 286 U. S. 106, 114. Here, the Dis
trict Court did not engage in the appropriate inquiry. The land
transfer statute was a substantial change in circumstances bearing
on the propriety of the requested relief. By dismissing as illicit the
motives of Congress in passing it, the District Court took insufficient

