(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SALAZAR, SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR, ET AL. v. 

BUONO 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–472.

Argued October 7, 2009—Decided April 28, 2010

In 1934, members of the Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW) placed a
Latin cross on federal land in the Mojave National Preserve (Pre
serve) to honor American soldiers who died in World War I. Claiming
to be offended by a religious symbol’s presence on federal land, re
spondent Buono, a regular visitor to the Preserve, filed this suit al
leging a violation of the First Amendment’s Establishment Clause
and seeking an injunction requiring the Government to remove the
cross. In the litigation’s first stage (Buono I), the District Court
found that Buono had standing to sue and, concluding that the pres
ence of the cross on federal land conveyed an impression of govern
mental endorsement of religion, see Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U. S.
602, 612–613, it granted Buono’s requested injunctive relief (2002 in
junction). The District Court did not consider whether the Govern
ment’s actions regarding the cross had a secular purpose or caused
entanglement with religion. While the Government’s appeal was
pending, Congress passed the Department of Defense Appropriations
Act, 2004, §8121(a) of which directed the Secretary of the Interior to
transfer the cross and the land on which it stands to the VFW in ex
change for privately owned land elsewhere in the Preserve (land
transfer statute). Affirming the District Court’s judgment both as to
standing and on the merits, the Ninth Circuit declined to address the
statute’s effect on Buono’s suit or the statute’s constitutionality
(Buono II). Because the Government did not seek review by this
Court, the Court of Appeals’ judgment became final. Buono then re
turned to the District Court seeking injunctive relief against the land
transfer, either through enforcement or modification of the 2002 in
junction. In 2005, that court rejected the Government’s claim that

