Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

STEVENS, J., dissenting

this juncture is whether the shift from public to private
ownership of the land sufficiently distanced the Govern­
ment from the cross; we are no longer debating the mes­
sage the cross conveys to a reasonable observer. In argu­
ing that Congress can legitimately favor the cross because
of its purported double meaning, the plurality implicitly
tries to reopen what is closed.8
The plurality also poses a different objection to consid­
eration of whether the transfer would change a reasonable
observer’s perception of the cross. The plurality suggests
that the “ ‘reasonable observer’ standard” may not “be the
appropriate framework” because “courts considering Es­
tablishment Clause challenges do not,” as a general mat­
ter, “inquire into ‘reasonable observer’ perceptions with
respect to objects on private land.” Ante, at 16. Once
again, the plurality’s approach fails to pay heed to the
posture of this case.
At the risk of stating the obvious, respondent is not
simply challenging a private object on private land. Al­
though “an Establishment Clause violation must be
moored in government action of some sort,” Pinette, 515
U. S., at 779 (O’Connor, J., concurring in part and concur­
——————
8 The plurality’s assertions regarding the meaning of the cross are
therefore beside the point. For the record, however, I cannot agree that
a bare cross such as this conveys a nonsectarian meaning simply
because crosses are often used to commemorate “heroic acts, noble
contributions, and patient striving” and to honor fallen soldiers. Ante,
at 17. The cross is not a universal symbol of sacrifice. It is the symbol
of one particular sacrifice, and that sacrifice carries deeply significant
meaning for those who adhere to the Christian faith. The cross has
sometimes been used, it is true, to represent the sacrifice of an individ­
ual, as when it marks the grave of a fallen soldier or recognizes a state
trooper who perished in the line of duty. Even then, the cross carries a
religious meaning. But the use of the cross in such circumstances is
linked to, and shows respects for, the individual honoree’s faith and
beliefs. I, too, would consider it tragic if the Nation’s fallen veterans
were to be forgotten. See ibid. But there are countless different ways,
consistent with the Constitution, that such an outcome may be averted.

