Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., dissenting

Respondent argued that such action was necessary,
either to enforce the plain terms of the 2002 injunction or
to “achieve the purposes of the provisions of the decree,”
United States v. United Shoe Machinery Corp., 391 U. S.
244, 249 (1968); see Wright & Miller §2961, at 393 (“[A]
court must continually be willing to redraft the order at
the request of the party who obtained equitable relief in
order to insure that the decree accomplishes its intended
result”). Only at that point did the Government argue
that changed circumstances made prospective relief un­
necessary. This difference in focus is a subtle one, but it is
important to emphasize that the question that was before
the District Court—and that is now before us—is whether
enjoining the transfer was necessary to effectuate the
letter or logic of the 2002 judgment.
Although I agree with the plurality’s basic framework, I
disagree with its decision to remand the case to the Dis­
trict Court. The District Court already “engage[d] in the
appropriate inquiry,” ante, at 10, and it was well within its
rights to enforce the 2002 judgment. First, the District
——————
respondent has standing even under the analysis that JUSTICE SCALIA
undertakes. It is not at all “speculative,” ante, at 4 (opinion concurring
in judgment), that the VFW will continue to display the cross. VFW
Post 385, the beneficiary of the land transfer, has filed an amici brief in
this case indicating it “intends to maintain and preserve the Veterans
Memorial,” Brief for Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States
et al. as Amici Curiae 4, by which it means the cross, id., at 7 (identify­
ing the Veterans Memorial as the “cross and plaque”). Respondent did,
in his amended complaint, aver that he was offended specifically “by
the display of a Latin Cross on government-owned property.” App. 50.
But his claimed injury is that he is “unable to freely use the area of the
Preserve around the cross,” Buono v. Norton, 371 F. 3d 543, 547 (CA9
2004) (Buono II) (internal quotation marks omitted), because the
Government’s unconstitutional endorsement of the cross will induce
him to avoid the Sunrise Rock area, even though it offers the most
convenient route to the Preserve, App. 65. That endorsement and
respondent’s resulting injury not only persist, but have been aggra­
vated by the Government’s actions since the complaint was filed.

