2

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
Syllabus
(b) Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668, applies to Padilla’s
claim. Before deciding whether to plead guilty, a defendant is enti
tled to “the effective assistance of competent counsel.” McMann v.
Richardson, 397 U. S. 759, 771. The Supreme Court of Kentucky re
jected Padilla’s ineffectiveness claim on the ground that the advice he
sought about deportation concerned only collateral matters. How
ever, this Court has never distinguished between direct and collat
eral consequences in defining the scope of constitutionally “reason
able professional assistance” required under Strickland, 466 U. S., at
689. The question whether that distinction is appropriate need not
be considered in this case because of the unique nature of deporta
tion. Although removal proceedings are civil, deportation is inti
mately related to the criminal process, which makes it uniquely diffi
cult to classify as either a direct or a collateral consequence. Because
that distinction is thus ill-suited to evaluating a Strickland claim
concerning the specific risk of deportation, advice regarding deporta
tion is not categorically removed from the ambit of the Sixth Amend
ment right to counsel. Pp. 7–9.
(c) To satisfy Strickland’s two-prong inquiry, counsel’s representa
tion must fall “below an objective standard of reasonableness,” 466
U. S., at 688, and there must be “a reasonable probability that, but
for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would
have been different,” id., at 694. The first, constitutional deficiency,
is necessarily linked to the legal community’s practice and expecta
tions. Id., at 688. The weight of prevailing professional norms sup
ports the view that counsel must advise her client regarding the de
portation risk. And this Court has recognized the importance to the
client of “ ‘[p]reserving the . . . right to remain in the United States’ ”
and “preserving the possibility of” discretionary relief from deporta
tion. INS v. St. Cyr, 533 U. S. 289, 323. Thus, this is not a hard case
in which to find deficiency: The consequences of Padilla’s plea could
easily be determined from reading the removal statute, his deporta
tion was presumptively mandatory, and his counsel’s advice was in
correct. There will, however, undoubtedly be numerous situations in
which the deportation consequences of a plea are unclear. In those
cases, a criminal defense attorney need do no more than advise a
noncitizen client that pending criminal charges may carry adverse
immigration consequences. But when the deportation consequence is
truly clear, as it was here, the duty to give correct advice is equally
clear. Accepting Padilla’s allegations as true, he has sufficiently al
leged constitutional deficiency to satisfy Strickland’s first prong.
Whether he can satisfy the second prong, prejudice, is left for the
Kentucky courts to consider in the first instance. Pp. 9–12.
(d) The Solicitor General’s proposed rule—that Strickland should

