4

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
SCALIA, J., dissenting

same defect. The same indeterminacy, the same inability
to know what areas of advice are relevant, attaches to
misadvice. And the concurrence’s suggestion that counsel
must warn defendants of potential removal consequences,
see ante, at 14–15—what would come to be known as the
“Padilla warning”—cannot be limited to those conse
quences except by judicial caprice. It is difficult to believe
that the warning requirement would not be extended, for
example, to the risk of heightened sentences in later fed
eral prosecutions pursuant to the Armed Career Criminal
Act, 18 U. S. C. §924(e). We could expect years of elabora
tion upon these new issues in the lower courts, prompted
by the defense bar’s devising of ever-expanding categories
of plea-invalidating misadvice and failures to warn—not to
mention innumerable evidentiary hearings to determine
whether misadvice really occurred or whether the warning
was really given.
The concurrence’s treatment of misadvice seems driven
by concern about the voluntariness of Padilla’s guilty plea.
See ante, at 12. But that concern properly relates to the
Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amend
ments, not to the Sixth Amendment. See McCarthy v.
United States, 394 U. S. 459, 466 (1969); Brady v. United
States, 397 U. S. 742, 748 (1970). Padilla has not argued
before us that his guilty plea was not knowing and volun
tary. If that is, however, the true substance of his claim
(and if he has properly preserved it) the state court can
address it on remand.1 But we should not smuggle the
——————
1I

do not mean to suggest that the Due Process Clause would surely
provide relief. We have indicated that awareness of “direct conse
quences” suffices for the validity of a guilty plea. See Brady, 397 U. S.,
at 755 (internal quotation marks omitted). And the required colloquy
between a federal district court and a defendant required by Federal
Rule of Criminal Procedure 11(b) (formerly Rule 11(c)), which we have
said approximates the due process requirements for a valid plea, see
Libretti v. United States, 516 U. S. 29, 49–50 (1995), does not mention

