(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF KENTUCKY
No. 08–651.

Argued October 13, 2009—Decided March 31, 2010

Petitioner Padilla, a lawful permanent resident of the United States for
over 40 years, faces deportation after pleading guilty to drug
distribution charges in Kentucky. In postconviction proceedings, he
claims that his counsel not only failed to advise him of this conse
quence before he entered the plea, but also told him not to worry
about deportation since he had lived in this country so long. He al
leges that he would have gone to trial had he not received this incor
rect advice. The Kentucky Supreme Court denied Padilla postconvic
tion relief on the ground that the Sixth Amendment’s effective
assistance-of-counsel guarantee does not protect defendants from er
roneous deportation advice because deportation is merely a “collat
eral” consequence of a conviction.
Held: Because counsel must inform a client whether his plea carries a
risk of deportation, Padilla has sufficiently alleged that his counsel
was constitutionally deficient. Whether he is entitled to relief de
pends on whether he has been prejudiced, a matter not addressed
here. Pp. 2–18.
(a) Changes to immigration law have dramatically raised the
stakes of a noncitizen’s criminal conviction. While once there was
only a narrow class of deportable offenses and judges wielded broad
discretionary authority to prevent deportation, immigration reforms
have expanded the class of deportable offenses and limited judges’
authority to alleviate deportation’s harsh consequences. Because the
drastic measure of deportation or removal is now virtually inevitable
for a vast number of noncitizens convicted of crimes, the importance
of accurate legal advice for noncitizens accused of crimes has never
been more important. Thus, as a matter of federal law, deportation is
an integral part of the penalty that may be imposed on noncitizen de
fendants who plead guilty to specified crimes. Pp. 2–6.

