10

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

of Appeals to have considered the issue thus far. See, e.g.,
Gonzalez, 202 F. 3d, at 28; Banda, 1 F. 3d, at 355; Chin &
Holmes 697, 699. The majority appropriately acknowl
edges that the lower courts are “now quite experienced
with applying Strickland,” ante, at 14, but it casually
dismisses the longstanding and unanimous position of
the lower federal courts with respect to the scope of
criminal defense counsel’s duty to advise on collateral
consequences.
The majority seeks to downplay its dramatic expansion
of the scope of criminal defense counsel’s duties under the
Sixth Amendment by claiming that this Court in Hill v.
Lockhart, 474 U. S. 52 (1985), similarly “applied Strick
land to a claim that counsel had failed to advise the client
regarding his parole eligibility before he pleaded guilty.”
Ante, at 14. That characterization of Hill obscures much
more than it reveals. The issue in Hill was whether a
criminal defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to counsel
was violated where counsel misinformed the client about
his eligibility for parole. The Court found it “unnecessary
to determine whether there may be circumstances under
which erroneous advice by counsel as to parole eligibility
may be deemed constitutionally ineffective assistance of
counsel, because in the present case we conclude that
petitioner’s allegations are insufficient to satisfy the
Strickland v. Washington requirement of ‘prejudice.’ ” 474
U. S., at 60. Given that Hill expressly and unambiguously
refused to decide whether criminal defense counsel must
avoid misinforming his or her client as to one consequence
of a criminal conviction (parole eligibility), that case
plainly provides no support whatsoever for the proposition
that counsel must affirmatively advise his or her client as
to another collateral consequence (removal).
By the
Court’s strange logic, Hill would support its decision here
even if the Court had held that misadvice concerning
parole eligibility does not make counsel’s performance

