Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

which immigration law changes; different rules governing
the immigration consequences of juvenile, first-offender,
and foreign convictions; and the relationship between the
“length and type of sentence” and the determination
“whether [an alien] is subject to removal, eligible for relief
from removal, or qualified to become a naturalized citi
zen,” Immigration Law and Crimes §2:1, at 2–2 to 2–3.
In short, the professional organizations and guidebooks
on which the Court so heavily relies are right to say that
“nothing is ever simple with immigration law”—including
the determination whether immigration law clearly makes
a particular offense removable. ABA Guidebook §4.65, at
130; Immigration Law and Crimes §2:1. I therefore can
not agree with the Court’s apparent view that the Sixth
Amendment requires criminal defense attorneys to pro
vide immigration advice.
The Court tries to downplay the severity of the burden it
imposes on defense counsel by suggesting that the scope of
counsel’s duty to offer advice concerning deportation con
sequences may turn on how hard it is to determine those
consequences. Where “the terms of the relevant immigra
tion statute are succinct, clear, and explicit in defining the
removal consequence[s]” of a conviction, the Court says,
counsel has an affirmative duty to advise the client that
he will be subject to deportation as a result of the plea.
Ante, at 11. But “[w]hen the law is not succinct and
straightforward . . . , a criminal defense attorney need do
no more than advise a noncitizen client that pending
criminal charges may carry a risk of adverse immigration
consequences.” Ante, at 11–12. This approach is problem
atic for at least four reasons.
First, it will not always be easy to tell whether a par
ticular statutory provision is “succinct, clear, and explicit.”
How can an attorney who lacks general immigration law
expertise be sure that a seemingly clear statutory provi
sion actually means what it seems to say when read in

