Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

expected that counsel who were unaware of the discre
tionary relief measures would “follo[w] the advice of nu
merous practice guides” to advise themselves of the impor
tance of this particular form of discretionary relief. Ibid.,
n. 50.
In the instant case, the terms of the relevant immigra
tion statute are succinct, clear, and explicit in defining the
removal consequence for Padilla’s conviction.
See 8
U. S. C. §1227(a)(2)(B)(i) (“Any alien who at any time after
admission has been convicted of a violation of (or a con
spiracy or attempt to violate) any law or regulation of a
State, the United States or a foreign country relating to a
controlled substance . . . , other than a single offense in
volving possession for one’s own use of 30 grams or less of
marijuana, is deportable”). Padilla’s counsel could have
easily determined that his plea would make him eligible
for deportation simply from reading the text of the statute,
which addresses not some broad classification of crimes
but specifically commands removal for all controlled sub
stances convictions except for the most trivial of mari
juana possession offenses.
Instead, Padilla’s counsel
provided him false assurance that his conviction would not
result in his removal from this country. This is not a hard
case in which to find deficiency: The consequences of
Padilla’s plea could easily be determined from reading the
removal statute, his deportation was presumptively man
datory, and his counsel’s advice was incorrect.
Immigration law can be complex, and it is a legal spe
cialty of its own. Some members of the bar who represent
clients facing criminal charges, in either state or federal
court or both, may not be well versed in it. There will,
therefore, undoubtedly be numerous situations in which
the deportation consequences of a particular plea are
unclear or uncertain. The duty of the private practitioner
in such cases is more limited. When the law is not suc
cinct and straightforward (as it is in many of the scenarios

