Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

arms, dishonorable discharge from the Armed Forces, and
loss of business or professional licenses. Chin & Holmes
705–706. A criminal conviction may also severely damage
a defendant’s reputation and thus impair the defendant’s
ability to obtain future employment or business opportuni
ties. All of those consequences are “seriou[s],” see ante, at
17, but this Court has never held that a criminal defense
attorney’s Sixth Amendment duties extend to providing
advice about such matters.
The Court tries to justify its dramatic departure from
precedent by pointing to the views of various professional
organizations. See ante, at 9 (“The weight of prevailing
professional norms supports the view that counsel must
advise her client regarding the risk of deportation”).
However, ascertaining the level of professional competence
required by the Sixth Amendment is ultimately a task for
the courts. E.g., Roe v. Flores-Ortega, 528 U. S. 470, 477
(2000). Although we may appropriately consult standards
promulgated by private bar groups, we cannot delegate to
these groups our task of determining what the Constitu
tion commands. See Strickland, supra, at 688 (explaining
that “[p]revailing norms of practice as reflected in Ameri
can Bar Association standards . . . are guides to determin
ing what is reasonable, but they are only guides”). And we
must recognize that such standards may represent only
the aspirations of a bar group rather than an empirical
assessment of actual practice.
Even if the only relevant consideration were “prevailing
professional norms,” it is hard to see how those norms can
support the duty the Court today imposes on defense
counsel. Because many criminal defense attorneys have
little understanding of immigration law, see ante, at 11, it
should follow that a criminal defense attorney who re
frains from providing immigration advice does not violate
prevailing professional norms. But the Court’s opinion
would not just require defense counsel to warn the client

