14

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
Opinion of the Court

concurring in judgment).
We have given serious consideration to the concerns
that the Solicitor General, respondent, and amici have
stressed regarding the importance of protecting the final
ity of convictions obtained through guilty pleas. We con
fronted a similar “floodgates” concern in Hill, see id., at
58, but nevertheless applied Strickland to a claim that
counsel had failed to advise the client regarding his parole
eligibility before he pleaded guilty.12
A flood did not follow in that decision’s wake. Sur
mounting Strickland’s high bar is never an easy task.
See, e.g., 466 U. S., at 689 (“Judicial scrutiny of counsel’s
performance must be highly deferential”); id., at 693
(observing that “[a]ttorney errors . . . are as likely to be
utterly harmless in a particular case as they are to be
prejudicial”). Moreover, to obtain relief on this type of
claim, a petitioner must convince the court that a decision
to reject the plea bargain would have been rational under
the circumstances. See Roe v. Flores-Ortega, 528 U. S.
470, 480, 486 (2000). There is no reason to doubt that
lower courts—now quite experienced with applying Strick
land—can effectively and efficiently use its framework to
——————
12 However, we concluded that, even though Strickland applied to
petitioner’s claim, he had not sufficiently alleged prejudice to satisfy
Strickland’s second prong. Hill, 474 U. S., at 59–60. This disposition
further underscores the fact that it is often quite difficult for petitioners
who have acknowledged their guilt to satisfy Strickland’s prejudice
prong.
JUSTICE ALITO believes that the Court misreads Hill, post, at 10–11.
In Hill, the Court recognized—for the first time—that Strickland
applies to advice respecting a guilty plea. 474 U. S., at 58 (“We hold,
therefore, that the two-part Strickland v. Washington test applies to
challenges to guilty pleas based on ineffective assistance of counsel”).
It is true that Hill does not control the question before us. But its
import is nevertheless clear. Whether Strickland applies to Padilla’s
claim follows from Hill, regardless of the fact that the Hill Court did
not resolve the particular question respecting misadvice that was
before it.

