Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

Defense counsel who consults a guidebook on whether a
particular crime is an “aggravated felony” will often find
that the answer is not ‘‘easily ascertained.” For example,
the ABA Guidebook answers the question “Does simple
possession count as an aggravated felony?” as follows:
“Yes, at least in the Ninth Circuit.” §5.35, at 160 (empha
sis added). After a dizzying paragraph that attempts to
explain the evolution of the Ninth Circuit’s view, the ABA
Guidebook continues: “Adding to the confusion, however,
is that the Ninth Circuit has conflicting opinions depend
ing on the context on whether simple drug possession
constitutes an aggravated felony under 8 U. S. C.
§1101(a)(43).” Id., §5.35, at 161 (citing cases distinguish
ing between whether a simple possession offense is an
aggravated felony “for immigration purposes” or for “sen
tencing purposes”). The ABA Guidebook then proceeds to
explain that “attempted possession,” id., §5.36, at 161
(emphasis added), of a controlled substance is an aggra
vated felony, while “[c]onviction under the federal acces
sory after the fact statute is probably not an aggravated
felony, but a conviction for accessory after the fact to the
manufacture of methamphetamine is an aggravated fel
ony,” id., §537, at 161 (emphasis added). Conspiracy or
attempt to commit drug trafficking are aggravated felo
nies, but “[s]olicitation is not a drug-trafficking offense
because a generic solicitation offense is not an offense
related to a controlled substance and therefore not an
aggravated felony.” Id., §5.41, at 162.
Determining whether a particular crime is one involving
moral turpitude is no easier. See id., at 134 (“Writing bad
checks may or may not be a CIMT” (emphasis added));
ibid. (“[R]eckless assault coupled with an element of in
jury, but not serious injury, is probably not a CIMT” (em
phasis added)); id., at 135 (misdemeanor driving under the
influence is generally not a CIMT, but may be a CIMT if
the DUI results in injury or if the driver knew that his

