8

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

isolation? What if the application of the provision to a
particular case is not clear but a cursory examination of
case law or administrative decisions would provide a
definitive answer? See Immigration Law and Crimes §2:1,
at 2–2 (“Unfortunately, a practitioner or respondent can
not tell easily whether a conviction is for a removable
offense. . . . [T]he cautious practitioner or apprehensive
respondent will not know conclusively the future immigra
tion consequences of a guilty plea”).
Second, if defense counsel must provide advice regard
ing only one of the many collateral consequences of a
criminal conviction, many defendants are likely to be
misled. To take just one example, a conviction for a par
ticular offense may render an alien excludable but not
removable. If an alien charged with such an offense is
advised only that pleading guilty to such an offense will
not result in removal, the alien may be induced to enter a
guilty plea without realizing that a consequence of the
plea is that the alien will be unable to reenter the United
States if the alien returns to his or her home country for
any reason, such as to visit an elderly parent or to attend
a funeral. See ABA Guidebook §4.14, at 111 (“Often the
alien is both excludable and removable. At times, how
ever, the lists are different. Thus, the oddity of an alien
that is inadmissible but not deportable. This alien should
not leave the United States because the government will
not let him back in” (emphasis in original)). Incomplete
legal advice may be worse than no advice at all because it
may mislead and may dissuade the client from seeking
advice from a more knowledgeable source.
Third, the Court’s rigid constitutional rule could inad
vertently head off more promising ways of addressing the
underlying problem—such as statutory or administrative
reforms requiring trial judges to inform a defendant on the
record that a guilty plea may carry adverse immigration
consequences. As amici point out, “28 states and the

