Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

District of Columbia have already adopted rules, plea
forms, or statutes requiring courts to advise criminal
defendants of the possible immigration consequences of
their pleas.” Brief for State of Louisiana et al. 25; accord,
Chin & Holmes 708 (“A growing number of states require
advice about deportation by statute or court rule”). A
nonconstitutional rule requiring trial judges to inform
defendants on the record of the risk of adverse immigra
tion consequences can ensure that a defendant receives
needed information without putting a large number of
criminal convictions at risk; and because such a warning
would be given on the record, courts would not later have
to determine whether the defendant was misrepresenting
the advice of counsel. Likewise, flexible statutory proce
dures for withdrawing guilty pleas might give courts
appropriate discretion to determine whether the interests
of justice would be served by allowing a particular defen
dant to withdraw a plea entered into on the basis of in
complete information. Cf. United States v. Russell, 686
F. 2d 35, 39–40 (CADC 1982) (explaining that a district
court’s discretion to set aside a guilty plea under the Fed
eral Rules of Criminal Procedure should be guided by,
among other considerations, “the possible existence of
prejudice to the government’s case as a result of the de
fendant’s untimely request to stand trial” and “the
strength of the defendant’s reason for withdrawing the
plea, including whether the defendant asserts his inno
cence of the charge”).
Fourth, the Court’s decision marks a major upheaval in
Sixth Amendment law. This Court decided Strickland in
1984, but the majority does not cite a single case, from this
or any other federal court, holding that criminal defense
counsel’s failure to provide advice concerning the removal
consequences of a criminal conviction violates a defen
dant’s Sixth Amendment right to counsel. As noted above,
the Court’s view has been rejected by every Federal Court

