2

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

I
Under Strickland, an attorney provides ineffective
assistance if the attorney’s representation does not meet
reasonable professional standards. 466 U. S., at 688.
Until today, the longstanding and unanimous position of
the federal courts was that reasonable defense counsel
generally need only advise a client about the direct conse
quences of a criminal conviction. See, e.g., United States v.
Gonzalez, 202 F. 3d 20, 28 (CA1 2000) (ineffective
assistance-of-counsel claim fails if “based on an attorney’s
failure to advise a client of his plea’s immigration conse
quences”); United States v. Banda, 1 F. 3d 354, 355 (CA5
1993) (holding that “an attorney’s failure to advise a client
that deportation is a possible consequence of a guilty plea
does not constitute ineffective assistance of counsel”); see
generally Chin & Holmes, Effective Assistance of Counsel
and the Consequences of Guilty Pleas, 87 Cornell L. Rev.
697, 699 (2002) (hereinafter Chin & Holmes) (noting that
“virtually all jurisdictions”—including “eleven federal
circuits, more than thirty states, and the District of Co
lumbia”—“hold that defense counsel need not discuss with
their clients the collateral consequences of a conviction,”
including deportation). While the line between “direct”
and “collateral” consequences is not always clear, see ante,
at 7, n. 8, the collateral-consequences rule expresses an
important truth: Criminal defense attorneys have exper
tise regarding the conduct of criminal proceedings. They
are not expected to possess—and very often do not pos
sess—expertise in other areas of the law, and it is unreal
istic to expect them to provide expert advice on matters
that lie outside their area of training and experience.
This case happens to involve removal, but criminal
convictions can carry a wide variety of consequences other
than conviction and sentencing, including civil commit
ment, civil forfeiture, the loss of the right to vote, disquali
fication from public benefits, ineligibility to possess fire

