4

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

of a general risk of removal; it would also require counsel
in at least some cases, to specify what the removal conse
quences of a conviction would be. See ante, at 11–12.
The Court’s new approach is particularly problematic
because providing advice on whether a conviction for a
particular offense will make an alien removable is often
quite complex. “Most crimes affecting immigration status
are not specifically mentioned by the [Immigration and
Nationality Act (INA)], but instead fall under a broad
category of crimes, such as crimes involving moral turpi
tude or aggravated felonies.” M. Garcia & L. Eig, CRS
Report for Congress, Immigration Consequences of Crimi
nal Activity (Sept. 20, 2006) (summary) (emphasis in
original). As has been widely acknowledged, determining
whether a particular crime is an “aggravated felony” or a
“crime involving moral turpitude [(CIMT)]” is not an easy
task. See R. McWhirter, ABA, The Criminal Lawyer’s
Guide to Immigration Law: Questions and Answers 128
(2d ed. 2006) (hereinafter ABA Guidebook) (“Because of
the increased complexity of aggravated felony law, this
edition devotes a new [30-page] chapter to the subject”);
id., §5.2, at 146 (stating that the aggravated felony list at
8 U. S. C. §1101(a)(43) is not clear with respect to several
of the listed categories, that “the term ‘aggravated felonies’
can include misdemeanors,” and that the determination of
whether a crime is an “aggravated felony” is made “even
more difficult” because “several agencies and courts inter
pret the statute,” including Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA),
and Federal Circuit and district courts considering immi
gration-law and criminal-law issues); ABA Guidebook
§4.65, at 130 (“Because nothing is ever simple with immi
gration law, the terms ‘conviction,’ ‘moral turpitude,’ and
‘single scheme of criminal misconduct’ are terms of art”);
id., §4.67, at 130 (“[T]he term ‘moral turpitude’ evades
precise definition”).

