6

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

license had been suspended or revoked); id., at 136 (“If
there is no element of actual injury, the endangerment
offense may not be a CIMT” (emphasis added)); ibid.
(“Whether [a child abuse] conviction involves moral turpi
tude may depend on the subsection under which the indi
vidual is convicted. Child abuse done with criminal negli
gence probably is not a CIMT” (emphasis added)).
Many other terms of the INA are similarly ambiguous or
may be confusing to practitioners not versed in the intri
cacies of immigration law. To take just a few examples, it
may be hard, in some cases, for defense counsel even to
determine whether a client is an alien,1 or whether a
particular state disposition will result in a “conviction” for
purposes of federal immigration law.2 The task of offering
advice about the immigration consequences of a criminal
conviction is further complicated by other problems, in
cluding significant variations among Circuit interpreta
tions of federal immigration statutes; the frequency with
——————
1 Citizens

are not deportable, but “[q]uestions of citizenship are not
always simple.” ABA Guidebook §4.20, at 113 (explaining that U.S.
citizenship conferred by blood is “ ‘derivative,’ ” and that “[d]erivative
citizenship depends on a number of confusing factors, including
whether the citizen parent was the mother or father, the immigration
laws in effect at the time of the parents’ and/or defendant’s birth, and
the parents’ marital status”).
2 “A disposition that is not a ‘conviction,’ under state law may still be
a ‘conviction’ for immigration purposes.” Id., §4.32, at 117 (citing
Matter of Salazar, 23 I. & N. Dec. 223, 231 (BIA 2002) (en banc)). For
example, state law may define the term “conviction” not to include a
deferred adjudication, but such an adjudication would be deemed a
conviction for purposes of federal immigration law. See ABA Guide
book §4.37; accord, D. Kesselbrenner & L. Rosenberg, Immigration Law
and Crimes §2:1, p. 2–2 (2008) (hereinafter Immigration Law and
Crimes) (“A practitioner or respondent will not even know whether the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) or the Executive Office for
Immigration Review (EOIR) will treat a particular state disposition as
a conviction for immigration purposes. In fact, the [BIA] treats certain
state criminal dispositions as convictions even though the state treats
the same disposition as a dismissal”).

