Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
activity is normally not sufficient to transform an unpatentable law
of nature into a patent-eligible application of such a law. Parker v.
Flook, 437 U. S. 584, 590. Finally, considering the three steps as an
ordered combination adds nothing to the laws of nature that is not
already present when the steps are considered separately. Pp. 8–11.
(b) A more detailed consideration of the controlling precedents reinforces this conclusion. Pp. 11–19.
(1) Diehr and Flook, the cases most directly on point, both addressed processes using mathematical formulas that, like laws of nature, are not themselves patentable. In Diehr, the overall process
was patent eligible because of the way the additional steps of the process integrated the equation into the process as a whole. 450 U. S., at
187. These additional steps transformed the process into an inventive application of the formula. But in Flook, the additional steps
of the process did not limit the claim to a particular application, and
the particular chemical processes at issue were all “well known,” to
the point where, putting the formula to the side, there was no “inventive concept” in the claimed application of the formula. 437 U. S.,
at 594. Here, the claim presents a case for patentability that is
weaker than Diehr’s patent-eligible claim and no stronger than
Flook’s unpatentable one. The three steps add nothing specific to the
laws of nature other than what is well-understood, routine, conventional activity, previously engaged in by those in the field. Pp. 11–13.
(2) Further support for the view that simply appending conventional steps, specified at a high level of generality, to laws of nature,
natural phenomena, and abstract ideas cannot make those laws,
phenomena, and ideas patentable is provided in O’Reilly v. Morse, 15
How. 62, 114–115; Neilson v. Harford, Webster’s Patent Cases 295,
371; Bilski, supra, at ___–___; and Benson, supra, at 64, 65, 67.
Pp. 14–16.
(3) This Court has repeatedly emphasized a concern that patent
law not inhibit future discovery by improperly tying up the use of
laws of nature and the like. See, e.g., Benson, 409 U. S., at 67, 68.
Rewarding with patents those who discover laws of nature might encourage their discovery. But because those laws and principles are
“the basic tools of scientific and technological work,” id., at 67, there
is a danger that granting patents that tie up their use will inhibit future innovation, a danger that becomes acute when a patented process is no more than a general instruction to “apply the natural law,”
or otherwise forecloses more future invention than the underlying
discovery could reasonably justify. The patent claims at issue implicate this concern. In telling a doctor to measure metabolite levels
and to consider the resulting measurements in light of the correlations they describe, they tie up his subsequent treatment decision re-

