2

MAYO COLLABORATIVE SERVICES v. PROMETHEUS 

LABORATORIES, INC.

Syllabus

these thresholds “indicate a need” to decrease or increase (respectively) the drug dosage.
Petitioners Mayo Collaborative Services and Mayo Clinic Rochester
(Mayo) bought and used diagnostic tests based on Prometheus’ patents. But in 2004 Mayo announced that it intended to sell and market its own, somewhat different, diagnostic test. Prometheus sued
Mayo contending that Mayo’s test infringed its patents. The District
Court found that the test infringed the patents but granted summary
judgment to Mayo, reasoning that the processes claimed by the patents effectively claim natural laws or natural phenomena—namely,
the correlations between thiopurine metabolite levels and the toxicity
and efficacy of thiopurine drugs—and therefore are not patentable.
The Federal Circuit reversed, finding the processes to be patent eligible under the Circuit’s “machine or transformation test.” On remand
from this Court for reconsideration in light of Bilski v. Kappos, 561
U. S. ___, which clarified that the “machine or transformation test” is
not a definitive test of patent eligibility, id., at ___–___, the Federal
Circuit reaffirmed its earlier conclusion.

Held: Prometheus’ process is not patent eligible. Pp. 8–24.
(a) Because the laws of nature recited by Prometheus’ patent
claims—the relationships between concentrations of certain metabolites in the blood and the likelihood that a thiopurine drug dosage
will prove ineffective or cause harm—are not themselves patentable,
the claimed processes are not patentable unless they have additional
features that provide practical assurance that the processes are genuine applications of those laws rather than drafting efforts designed to
monopolize the correlations. The three additional steps in the
claimed processes here are not themselves natural laws but neither
are they sufficient to transform the nature of the claims. The “administering” step simply identifies a group of people who will be interested in the correlations, namely, doctors who used thiopurine
drugs to treat patients suffering from autoimmune disorders. Doctors had been using these drugs for this purpose long before these patents existed. And a “prohibition against patenting abstract ideas
‘cannot be circumvented by attempting to limit the use of the formula
to a particular technological environment.’ ” Bilski, supra, at ___.
The “wherein” clauses simply tell a doctor about the relevant natural
laws, adding, at most, a suggestion that they should consider the test
results when making their treatment decisions. The “determining”
step tells a doctor to measure patients’ metabolite levels, through
whatever process the doctor wishes to use. Because methods for
making such determinations were well known in the art, this step
simply tells doctors to engage in well-understood, routine, conventional activity previously engaged in by scientists in the field. Such

