Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

did the [claim] contain any disclosure relating to chemical
processes at work or the means of setting off an alarm or
adjusting the alarm limit.” Diehr, supra, at 192, n. 14; see
also Flook, 437 U. S., at 586. And so the other steps in the
process did not limit the claim to a particular application.
Moreover, “[t]he chemical processes involved in catalytic
conversion of hydrocarbons[,] . . . the practice of monitor­
ing the chemical process variables, the use of alarm limits
to trigger alarms, the notion that alarm limit values must
be recomputed and readjusted, and the use of computers for ‘automatic monitoring-alarming’ ” were all “well
known,” to the point where, putting the formula to the
side, there was no “inventive concept” in the claimed
application of the formula. Id., at 594. “[P]ost-solution
activity” that is purely “conventional or obvious,” the
Court wrote, “can[not] transform an unpatentable princi­
ple into a patentable process.” Id., at 589, 590.
The claim before us presents a case for patentability
that is weaker than the (patent-eligible) claim in Diehr
and no stronger than the (unpatentable) claim in Flook.
Beyond picking out the relevant audience, namely those
who administer doses of thiopurine drugs, the claim simply tells doctors to: (1) measure (somehow) the current level
of the relevant metabolite, (2) use particular (unpatenta­
ble) laws of nature (which the claim sets forth) to calculate
the current toxicity/inefficacy limits, and (3) reconsider the
drug dosage in light of the law. These instructions add
nothing specific to the laws of nature other than what is
well-understood, routine, conventional activity, previously
engaged in by those in the field. And since they are steps
that must be taken in order to apply the laws in question,
the effect is simply to tell doctors to apply the law some­
how when treating their patients. The process in Diehr
was not so characterized; that in Flook was characterized
in roughly this way.

