Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

not limited to instances in which the doctor actually de­
creases (or increases) the dosage level where the test
results suggest that such an adjustment is advisable. Id.,
at 107a–109a; see also Brief for Respondent i (describing
claimed processes as methods “for improving . . . treat­
ment . . . by using individualized metabolite measure­
ments to inform the calibration of . . . dosages of . . .
thiopurines” (emphasis added)).
Nonetheless the District Court ultimately granted
summary judgment in Mayo’s favor. The court reasoned
that the patents effectively claim natural laws or natural
phenomena—namely the correlations between thiopurine
metabolite levels and the toxicity and efficacy of thiopu­
rine drug dosages—and so are not patentable. App. to Pet.
for Cert. 50a–83a.
On appeal, the Federal Circuit reversed. It pointed out
that in addition to these natural correlations, the claimed
processes specify the steps of (1) “administering a [thiopu­
rine] drug” to a patient and (2) “determining the [resulting
metabolite] level.” These steps, it explained, involve the
transformation of the human body or of blood taken from
the body. Thus, the patents satisfied the Circuit’s “ma­
chine or transformation test,” which the court thought
sufficient to “confine the patent monopoly within rather
definite bounds,” thereby bringing the claims into compli­
ance with §101. 581 F. 3d 1336, 1345, 1346–1347 (2009)
(internal quotation marks omitted).
Mayo filed a petition for certiorari. We granted the
petition, vacated the judgment, and remanded the case for
reconsideration in light of Bilski, 561 U. S. ___, which
clarified that the “machine or transformation test” is not a
definitive test of patent eligibility, but only an important
and useful clue. Id., at ___–___ (slip op., at 7–8). On
remand the Federal Circuit reaffirmed its earlier conclu­
sion. It thought that the “machine-or-transformation
test,” understood merely as an important and useful clue,

