10

MAYO COLLABORATIVE SERVICES v. PROMETHEUS
LABORATORIES, INC.
Opinion of the Court

operators about his basic law and then trusting them to
use it where relevant).
Third, the “determining” step tells the doctor to deter­
mine the level of the relevant metabolites in the blood,
through whatever process the doctor or the laboratory
wishes to use. As the patents state, methods for determin­
ing metabolite levels were well known in the art. ’623
patent, col. 9, ll. 12–65, 2 App. 11. Indeed, scientists
routinely measured metabolites as part of their investiga­
tions into the relationships between metabolite levels and
efficacy and toxicity of thiopurine compounds. ’623 patent,
col. 8, ll. 37–40, id., at 10. Thus, this step tells doctors
to engage in well-understood, routine, conventional activity
previously engaged in by scientists who work in the field.
Purely “conventional or obvious” “[pre]-solution activity” is
normally not sufficient to transform an unpatentable law
of nature into a patent-eligible application of such a law.
Flook, 437 U. S., at 590; see also Bilski, 561 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 14) (“[T]he prohibition against patenting ab­
stract ideas ‘cannot be circumvented by’ . . . adding ‘insig­
nificant post-solution activity’ ” (quoting Diehr, supra, at
191–192)).
Fourth, to consider the three steps as an ordered combi­
nation adds nothing to the laws of nature that is not al­
ready present when the steps are considered separately.
See Diehr, supra, at 188 (“[A] new combination of steps in
a process may be patentable even though all the constitu­
ents of the combination were well known and in common
use before the combination was made”). Anyone who
wants to make use of these laws must first administer a
thiopurine drug and measure the resulting metabolite
concentrations, and so the combination amounts to noth­
ing significantly more than an instruction to doctors to
apply the applicable laws when treating their patients.
The upshot is that the three steps simply tell doctors to
gather data from which they may draw an inference in

