12

MAYO COLLABORATIVE SERVICES v. PROMETHEUS
LABORATORIES, INC.
Opinion of the Court

equation into the process as a whole. Those steps included
“installing rubber in a press, closing the mold, constantly
determining the temperature of the mold, constantly recalculating the appropriate cure time through the use of
the formula and a digital computer, and automatically
opening the press at the proper time.” Id., at 187. It
nowhere suggested that all these steps, or at least the
combination of those steps, were in context obvious, al­
ready in use, or purely conventional. And so the patentees
did not “seek to pre-empt the use of [the] equation,” but
sought “only to foreclose from others the use of that equa­
tion in conjunction with all of the other steps in their
claimed process.” Ibid. These other steps apparently
added to the formula something that in terms of patent
law’s objectives had significance—they transformed the
process into an inventive application of the formula.
The process in Flook (held not patentable) provided a
method for adjusting “alarm limits” in the catalytic con­
version of hydrocarbons. Certain operating conditions
(such as temperature, pressure, and flow rates), which are
continuously monitored during the conversion process,
signal inefficiency or danger when they exceed certain
“alarm limits.” The claimed process amounted to an im­
proved system for updating those alarm limits through the
steps of: (1) measuring the current level of the variable,
e.g., the temperature; (2) using an apparently novel math­
ematical algorithm to calculate the current alarm limits;
and (3) adjusting the system to reflect the new alarm-limit
values. 437 U. S., at 585–587.
The Court, as in Diehr, pointed out that the basic math­
ematical equation, like a law of nature, was not patenta­
ble. But it characterized the claimed process as doing
nothing other than “provid[ing] a[n unpatentable] formula
for computing an updated alarm limit.” Flook, supra, at
586. Unlike the process in Diehr, it did not “explain how
the variables used in the formula were to be selected, nor

