(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MAYO COLLABORATIVE SERVICES, DBA MAYO 

MEDICAL LABORATORIES, ET AL. v. PROMETHEUS 

LABORATORIES, INC. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
No. 10–1150. Argued December 7, 2011—Decided March 20, 2012
Although “laws of nature, natural phenomena, and abstract ideas” are
not patentable subject matter under §101 of the Patent Act, Diamond
v. Diehr, 450 U. S. 175, 185, “an application of a law of nature . . . to
a known structure or process may [deserve] patent protection,” id., at
187. But to transform an unpatentable law of nature into a patenteligible application of such a law, a patent must do more than simply
state the law of nature while adding the words “apply it.” See, e.g.,
Gottschalk v. Benson, 409 U. S. 63, 71–72. It must limit its reach to a
particular, inventive application of the law.
Respondent, Prometheus Laboratories, Inc. (Prometheus), is the
sole and exclusive licensee of the two patents at issue, which concern
the use of thiopurine drugs to treat autoimmune diseases. When ingested, the body metabolizes the drugs, producing metabolites in the
bloodstream. Because patients metabolize these drugs differently,
doctors have found it difficult to determine whether a particular patient’s dose is too high, risking harmful side effects, or too low, and so
likely ineffective. The patent claims here set forth processes embodying researchers’ findings that identify correlations between metabolite levels and likely harm or ineffectiveness with precision. Each
claim recites (1) an “administering” step—instructing a doctor to administer the drug to his patient—(2) a “determining” step—telling
the doctor to measure the resulting metabolite levels in the patient’s
blood—and (3) a “wherein” step—describing the metabolite concentrations above which there is a likelihood of harmful side-effects and
below which it is likely that the drug dosage is ineffective, and informing the doctor that metabolite concentrations above or below

