18

MAYO COLLABORATIVE SERVICES v. PROMETHEUS
LABORATORIES, INC.
Opinion of the Court

ture of Intellectual Property Law 305–306 (2003) (The
exclusion from patent law of basic truths reflects “both . . .
the enormous potential for rent seeking that would be
created if property rights could be obtained in them and
. . . the enormous transaction costs that would be imposed
on would-be users [of those truths]”).
The laws of nature at issue here are narrow laws that
may have limited applications, but the patent claims that
embody them nonetheless implicate this concern. They
tell a treating doctor to measure metabolite levels and to
consider the resulting measurements in light of the statis­
tical relationships they describe. In doing so, they tie up
the doctor’s subsequent treatment decision whether that
treatment does, or does not, change in light of the infer­
ence he has drawn using the correlations. And they
threaten to inhibit the development of more refined treat­
ment recommendations (like that embodied in Mayo’s
test), that combine Prometheus’ correlations with later
discovered features of metabolites, human physiology or
individual patient characteristics. The “determining” step
too is set forth in highly general language covering all
processes that make use of the correlations after measur­
ing metabolites, including later discovered processes that
measure metabolite levels in new ways.
We need not, and do not, now decide whether were the
steps at issue here less conventional, these features of
the claims would prove sufficient to invalidate them. For
here, as we have said, the steps add nothing of signifi­
cance to the natural laws themselves. Unlike, say, a
typical patent on a new drug or a new way of using an
existing drug, the patent claims do not confine their reach
to particular applications of those laws. The presence here
of the basic underlying concern that these patents tie up
too much future use of laws of nature simply reinforces
our conclusion that the processes described in the patents
are not patent eligible, while eliminating any temptation

