Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

monopolize the law of nature itself. A patent, for example,
could not simply recite a law of nature and then add the
instruction “apply the law.” Einstein, we assume, could
not have patented his famous law by claiming a process
consisting of simply telling linear accelerator operators to
refer to the law to determine how much energy an amount
of mass has produced (or vice versa). Nor could Archime­
des have secured a patent for his famous principle of
flotation by claiming a process consisting of simply telling
boat builders to refer to that principle in order to deter­
mine whether an object will float.
What else is there in the claims before us? The process
that each claim recites tells doctors interested in the
subject about the correlations that the researchers discov­
ered. In doing so, it recites an “administering” step, a
“determining” step, and a “wherein” step. These addition­
al steps are not themselves natural laws but neither are
they sufficient to transform the nature of the claim.
First, the “administering” step simply refers to the
relevant audience, namely doctors who treat patients with
certain diseases with thiopurine drugs. That audience is
a pre-existing audience; doctors used thiopurine drugs to
treat patients suffering from autoimmune disorders long
before anyone asserted these claims. In any event, the
“prohibition against patenting abstract ideas ‘cannot be
circumvented by attempting to limit the use of the formula
to a particular technological environment.’ ” Bilski, supra,
at ___ (slip op., at 14) (quoting Diehr, 450 U. S., at 191–
192).
Second, the “wherein” clauses simply tell a doctor about
the relevant natural laws, at most adding a suggestion
that he should take those laws into account when treating
his patient. That is to say, these clauses tell the relevant
audience about the laws while trusting them to use those
laws appropriately where they are relevant to their deci­
sionmaking (rather like Einstein telling linear accelerator

