20

MAYO COLLABORATIVE SERVICES v. PROMETHEUS
LABORATORIES, INC.
Opinion of the Court

based on whether or not they will interfere significantly
with innovation in other fields now or in the future. Brief
for Respondent 42–46; see also Lemley 1342–1344 (mak­
ing similar argument).
But the underlying functional concern here is a relative
one: how much future innovation is foreclosed relative to
the contribution of the inventor. See supra, at 17. A
patent upon a narrow law of nature may not inhibit future
research as seriously as would a patent upon Einstein’s
law of relativity, but the creative value of the discovery is
also considerably smaller. And, as we have previously
pointed out, even a narrow law of nature (such as the
one before us) can inhibit future research. See supra, at
17–18.
In any event, our cases have not distinguished among
different laws of nature according to whether or not the
principles they embody are sufficiently narrow. See, e.g.,
Flook, 437 U. S. 584 (holding narrow mathematical formu­
la unpatentable). And this is understandable. Courts and
judges are not institutionally well suited to making the
kinds of judgments needed to distinguish among different laws of nature. And so the cases have endorsed a
bright-line prohibition against patenting laws of nature,
mathematical formulas and the like, which serves as a
somewhat more easily administered proxy for the underlying
“building-block” concern.
Third, the Government argues that virtually any step
beyond a statement of a law of nature itself should trans­
form an unpatentable law of nature into a potentially
patentable application sufficient to satisfy §101’s de­
mands. Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae. The
Government does not necessarily believe that claims that
(like the claims before us) extend just minimally beyond a
law of nature should receive patents. But in its view,
other statutory provisions—those that insist that a
claimed process be novel, 35 U. S. C. §102, that it not be

