Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

23

Opinion of the Court

Respondent 52.
Other medical experts, however, argue strongly against
a legal rule that would make the present claims patent
eligible, invoking policy considerations that point in the
opposite direction. The American Medical Association, the
American College of Medical Genetics, the American
Hospital Association, the American Society of Human
Genetics, the Association of American Medical Colleges,
the Association for Molecular Pathology, and other medi­
cal organizations tell us that if “claims to exclusive rights
over the body’s natural responses to illness and medical
treatment are permitted to stand, the result will be a vast
thicket of exclusive rights over the use of critical scientific
data that must remain widely available if physicians are
to provide sound medical care.” Brief for American Col­
lege of Medical Genetics et al. as Amici Curiae 7; see also
App. to Brief for Association Internationale pour la Protec­
tion de la Propriété Intellectuelle et al. as Amici Curiae
A6, A16 (methods of medical treatment are not patentable
in most of Western Europe).
We do not find this kind of difference of opinion surpris­
ing. Patent protection is, after all, a two-edged sword. On
the one hand, the promise of exclusive rights provides
monetary incentives that lead to creation, invention, and
discovery. On the other hand, that very exclusivity can
impede the flow of information that might permit, indeed
spur, invention, by, for example, raising the price of using
the patented ideas once created, requiring potential users
to conduct costly and time-consuming searches of existing
patents and pending patent applications, and requiring
the negotiation of complex licensing arrangements. At the
same time, patent law’s general rules must govern in­
ventive activity in many different fields of human endeav­
or, with the result that the practical effects of rules that
reflect a general effort to balance these considerations
may differ from one field to another. See Bohannan &

