12

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
ROBERTS, C. J., concurring

2009). But while invoking stare decisis to support this
position, the Government never once even mentions the
compelling interest that Austin relied upon in the first
place: the need to diminish “the corrosive and distorting
effects of immense aggregations of wealth that are accu
mulated with the help of the corporate form and that have
little or no correlation to the public’s support for the corpo
ration’s political ideas.” 494 U. S., at 660.
Instead of endorsing Austin on its own terms, the Gov
ernment urges us to reaffirm Austin’s specific holding on
the basis of two new and potentially expansive interests—
the need to prevent actual or apparent quid pro quo cor
ruption, and the need to protect corporate shareholders.
See Supp. Brief for Appellee 8–10, 12–13. Those interests
may or may not support the result in Austin, but they were
plainly not part of the reasoning on which Austin relied.
To its credit, the Government forthrightly concedes that
Austin did not embrace either of the new rationales it now
urges upon us. See, e.g., Supp. Brief for Appellee 11 (“The
Court did not decide in Austin . . . whether the compelling
interest in preventing actual or apparent corruption pro
vides a constitutionally sufficient justification for prohibit
ing the use of corporate treasury funds for independent
electioneering”); Tr. of Oral Arg. 45 (Sept. 9, 2009) (“Aus­
tin did not articulate what we believe to be the strongest
compelling interest”); id., at 61 (“[The Court:] I take it we
have never accepted your shareholder protection interest.
This is a new argument. [The Government:] I think that
that’s fair”); id., at 64 (“[The Court:] In other words, you
are asking us to uphold Austin on the basis of two argu
ments, two principles, two compelling interests we have
never accepted in [the context of limits on political expen
ditures]. [The Government:] [I]n this particular context,
fair enough”).
To be clear: The Court in Austin nowhere relied upon
the only arguments the Government now raises to support

