82

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

“advantages” in the legal realm, Austin, 494 U. S., at 659,
may translate into special advantages in the market for
legislation. When large numbers of citizens have a com­
mon stake in a measure that is under consideration, it
may be very difficult for them to coordinate resources on
behalf of their position. The corporate form, by contrast,
“provides a simple way to channel rents to only those who
have paid their dues, as it were. If you do not own stock,
you do not benefit from the larger dividends or apprecia­
tion in the stock price caused by the passage of private
interest legislation.” Sitkoff, Corporate Political Speech,
Political Extortion, and the Competition for Corporate
Charters, 69 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1103, 1113 (2002). Corpora­
tions, that is, are uniquely equipped to seek laws that
favor their owners, not simply because they have a lot of
money but because of their legal and organizational struc­
ture. Remove all restrictions on their electioneering, and
the door may be opened to a type of rent seeking that is
“far more destructive” than what noncorporations are
capable of. Ibid. It is for reasons such as these that our
campaign finance jurisprudence has long appreciated that
“the ‘differing structures and purposes’ of different entities
‘may require different forms of regulation in order to
protect the integrity of the electoral process.’ ” NRWC, 459
U. S., at 210 (quoting California Medical Assn., 453 U. S.,
at 201).
The Court’s facile depiction of corporate electioneering
assumes away all of these complexities. Our colleagues
ridicule the idea of regulating expenditures based on
“nothing more” than a fear that corporations have a spe­
cial “ability to persuade,” ante, at 11 (opinion of ROBERTS,
C. J.), as if corporations were our society’s ablest debaters
and viewpoint-neutral laws such as §203 were created to
suppress their best arguments. In their haste to knock
down yet another straw man, our colleagues simply ignore
the fundamental concerns of the Austin Court and the

