2

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
SCALIA, J., concurring

cludes, and therefore it follows (as night the day) that
corporations had no rights of free speech. Of course the
Framers’ personal affection or disaffection for corporations
is relevant only insofar as it can be thought to be reflected
in the understood meaning of the text they enacted—not,
as the dissent suggests, as a freestanding substitute for
that text. But the dissent’s distortion of proper analysis is
even worse than that. Though faced with a constitutional
text that makes no distinction between types of speakers,
the dissent feels no necessity to provide even an isolated
statement from the founding era to the effect that corpora
tions are not covered, but places the burden on petitioners
to bring forward statements showing that they are (“there
is not a scintilla of evidence to support the notion that
anyone believed [the First Amendment] would preclude
regulatory distinctions based on the corporate form,” post,
at 34–35).
Despite the corporation-hating quotations the dissent
has dredged up, it is far from clear that by the end of the
18th century corporations were despised. If so, how came
there to be so many of them? The dissent’s statement that
there were few business corporations during the eight
eenth century—“only a few hundred during all of the 18th
century”—is misleading. Post, at 35, n. 53. There were
approximately 335 charters issued to business corpora
tions in the United States by the end of the 18th century.2
See 2 J. Davis, Essays in the Earlier History of American
Corporations 24 (1917) (reprint 2006) (hereinafter Davis).
This was a “considerable extension of corporate enterprise
——————
2 The dissent protests that 1791 rather than 1800 should be the rele
vant date, and that “[m]ore than half of the century’s total business
charters were issued between 1796 and 1800.” Post, at 35, n. 53. I used
1800 only because the dissent did. But in any case, it is surely fanciful
to think that a consensus of hostility towards corporations was trans
formed into general favor at some magical moment between 1791 and
1796.

