8

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
SCALIA, J., concurring

by the Republican Party or the Democratic Party can be
censored because it is not the speech of “an individual
American.” It is the speech of many individual Americans,
who have associated in a common cause, giving the leader
ship of the party the right to speak on their behalf. The
association of individuals in a business corporation is no
different—or at least it cannot be denied the right to speak
on the simplistic ground that it is not “an individual
American.”7
But to return to, and summarize, my principal point,
which is the conformity of today’s opinion with the original
meaning of the First Amendment. The Amendment is
written in terms of “speech,” not speakers. Its text offers
no foothold for excluding any category of speaker, from
——————
7 The

dissent says that “ ‘speech’ ” refers to oral communications of
human beings, and since corporations are not human beings they
cannot speak. Post, at 37, n. 55. This is sophistry. The authorized
spokesman of a corporation is a human being, who speaks on behalf of
the human beings who have formed that association—just as the
spokesman of an unincorporated association speaks on behalf of its
members. The power to publish thoughts, no less than the power to
speak thoughts, belongs only to human beings, but the dissent sees no
problem with a corporation’s enjoying the freedom of the press.
The same footnote asserts that “it has been ‘claimed that the notion
of institutional speech . . . did not exist in post-revolutionary America.’ ”
This is quoted from a law-review article by a Bigelow Fellow at the
University of Chicago (Fagundes, State Actors as First Amendment
Speakers, 100 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1637, 1654 (2006)), which offers as the
sole support for its statement a treatise dealing with government
speech, M. Yudof, When Government Speaks 42–50 (1983). The cited
pages of that treatise provide no support whatever for the statement—
unless, as seems overwhelmingly likely, the “institutional speech”
referred to was speech by the subject of the law-review article, govern
mental institutions.
The other authority cited in the footnote, a law-review article by a
professor at Washington and Lee Law School, Bezanson, Institutional
Speech, 80 Iowa L. Rev. 735, 775 (1995), in fact contradicts the dissent,
in that it would accord free-speech protection to associations.

