14

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of the Court

claim is properly before us. And “ ‘[o]nce a federal claim is
properly presented, a party can make any argument in
support of that claim; parties are not limited to the precise
arguments they made below.’ ” Lebron, supra, at 379
(quoting Yee v. Escondido, 503 U. S. 519, 534 (1992);
alteration in original). Citizens United’s argument that
Austin should be overruled is “not a new claim.” Lebron,
513 U. S., at 379. Rather, it is—at most—“a new argu
ment to support what has been [a] consistent claim: that
[the FEC] did not accord [Citizens United] the rights it
was obliged to provide by the First Amendment.” Ibid.
Third, the distinction between facial and as-applied
challenges is not so well defined that it has some auto
matic effect or that it must always control the pleadings
and disposition in every case involving a constitutional
challenge. The distinction is both instructive and neces
sary, for it goes to the breadth of the remedy employed by
the Court, not what must be pleaded in a complaint. See
United States v. Treasury Employees, 513 U. S. 454, 477–
478 (1995) (contrasting “a facial challenge” with “a nar
rower remedy”). The parties cannot enter into a stipula
tion that prevents the Court from considering certain
remedies if those remedies are necessary to resolve a claim
that has been preserved. Citizens United has preserved
its First Amendment challenge to §441b as applied to the
facts of its case; and given all the circumstances, we can
not easily address that issue without assuming a prem
ise—the permissibility of restricting corporate political
speech—that is itself in doubt. See Fallon, As-Applied and
Facial Challenges and Third-Party Standing, 113 Harv.
L. Rev. 1321, 1339 (2000) (“[O]nce a case is brought, no
general categorical line bars a court from making broader
pronouncements of invalidity in properly ‘as-applied’
cases”); id., at 1327–1328. As our request for supplemen
tal briefing implied, Citizens United’s claim implicates the
validity of Austin, which in turn implicates the facial

