38

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

(1819) (Marshall, C. J.) (“A corporation is an artificial
being, invisible, intangible, and existing only in contem­
plation of law. Being the mere creature of law, it pos­
sesses only those properties which the charter of its crea­
tion confers upon it”); Eule, Promoting Speaker Diversity:
Austin and Metro Broadcasting, 1990 S. Ct. Rev. 105, 129
(“The framers of the First Amendment could scarcely have
anticipated its application to the corporation form. That,
of course, ought not to be dispositive. What is compelling,
however, is an understanding of who was supposed to be
the beneficiary of the free speech guaranty—the individ­
ual”). In light of these background practices and under­
standings, it seems to me implausible that the Framers
believed “the freedom of speech” would extend equally to
all corporate speakers, much less that it would preclude
legislatures from taking limited measures to guard
against corporate capture of elections.
The Court observes that the Framers drew on diverse
intellectual sources, communicated through newspapers,
and aimed to provide greater freedom of speech than had
existed in England. Ante, at 37. From these (accurate)
observations, the Court concludes that “[t]he First
Amendment was certainly not understood to condone the
suppression of political speech in society’s most salient
media.” Ibid. This conclusion is far from certain, given
that many historians believe the Framers were focused on
prior restraints on publication and did not understand the
First Amendment to “prevent the subsequent punishment
of such [publications] as may be deemed contrary to the
public welfare.” Near v. Minnesota ex rel. Olson, 283 U. S.
697, 714 (1931). Yet, even if the majority’s conclusion
were correct, it would tell us only that the First Amend­
ment was understood to protect political speech in certain
media. It would tell us little about whether the Amend­
ment was understood to protect general treasury election­
eering expenditures by corporations, and to what extent.

