Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

holds out the possibility of ruling for Citizens United on a
narrow ground yet refrains from adopting that position,
the added uncertainty demonstrates the necessity to
address the question of statutory validity.
Second, substantial time would be required to bring
clarity to the application of the statutory provision on
these points in order to avoid any chilling effect caused by
some improper interpretation. See Part II–C, supra. It is
well known that the public begins to concentrate on elec
tions only in the weeks immediately before they are held.
There are short timeframes in which speech can have
influence. The need or relevance of the speech will often
first be apparent at this stage in the campaign. The deci
sion to speak is made in the heat of political campaigns,
when speakers react to messages conveyed by others. A
speaker’s ability to engage in political speech that could
have a chance of persuading voters is stifled if the speaker
must first commence a protracted lawsuit. By the time
the lawsuit concludes, the election will be over and the
litigants in most cases will have neither the incentive nor,
perhaps, the resources to carry on, even if they could
establish that the case is not moot because the issue is
“capable of repetition, yet evading review.” WRTL, supra,
at 462 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.) (citing Los Angeles v.
Lyons, 461 U. S. 95, 109 (1983); Southern Pacific Terminal
Co. v. ICC, 219 U. S. 498, 515 (1911)). Here, Citizens
United decided to litigate its case to the end. Today,
Citizens United finally learns, two years after the fact,
whether it could have spoken during the 2008 Presidential
primary—long after the opportunity to persuade primary
voters has passed.
Third is the primary importance of speech itself to the
integrity of the election process. As additional rules are
created for regulating political speech, any speech argua
bly within their reach is chilled. See Part II–A, supra.
Campaign finance regulations now impose “unique and

