80

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

Roosevelt’s remarks). The distinctive threat to democratic
integrity posed by corporate domination of politics was
recognized at “the inception of the republic” and “has been
a persistent theme in American political life” ever since.
Regan 302. It is only certain Members of this Court, not
the listeners themselves, who have agitated for more cor­
porate electioneering.
Austin recognized that there are substantial reasons
why a legislature might conclude that unregulated general
treasury expenditures will give corporations “unfai[r]
influence” in the electoral process, 494 U. S., at 660, and
distort public debate in ways that undermine rather than
advance the interests of listeners. The legal structure of
corporations allows them to amass and deploy financial
resources on a scale few natural persons can match. The
structure of a business corporation, furthermore, draws a
line between the corporation’s economic interests and the
political preferences of the individuals associated with the
corporation; the corporation must engage the electoral
process with the aim “to enhance the profitability of the
company, no matter how persuasive the arguments for a
broader or conflicting set of priorities,” Brief for American
Independent Business Alliance as Amicus Curiae 11; see
also ALI, Principles of Corporate Governance: Analysis
and Recommendations §2.01(a), p. 55 (1992) (“[A] corpora­
tion . . . should have as its objective the conduct of busi­
ness activities with a view to enhancing corporate profit
and shareholder gain”). In a state election such as the one
at issue in Austin, the interests of nonresident corpora­
tions may be fundamentally adverse to the interests of
local voters. Consequently, when corporations grab up the
prime broadcasting slots on the eve of an election, they can
flood the market with advocacy that bears “little or no
correlation” to the ideas of natural persons or to any
broader notion of the public good, 494 U. S., at 660. The
opinions of real people may be marginalized. “The expen­

