Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

39

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

As a matter of original expectations, then, it seems
absurd to think that the First Amendment prohibits legis­
latures from taking into account the corporate identity of a
sponsor of electoral advocacy. As a matter of original
meaning, it likewise seems baseless—unless one evaluates
the First Amendment’s “principles,” ante, at 1, 48, or its
“purpose,” ante, at 5 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.), at such a
high level of generality that the historical understandings
of the Amendment cease to be a meaningful constraint on
the judicial task. This case sheds a revelatory light on the
assumption of some that an impartial judge’s application
of an originalist methodology is likely to yield more deter­
minate answers, or to play a more decisive role in the
decisional process, than his or her views about sound
policy.
JUSTICE SCALIA criticizes the foregoing discussion for
failing to adduce statements from the founding era show­
ing that corporations were understood to be excluded from
the First Amendment’s free speech guarantee. Ante, at 1–
2, 9. Of course, JUSTICE SCALIA adduces no statements to
suggest the contrary proposition, or even to suggest that
the contrary proposition better reflects the kind of right
that the drafters and ratifiers of the Free Speech Clause
thought they were enshrining. Although JUSTICE SCALIA
makes a perfectly sensible argument that an individual’s
right to speak entails a right to speak with others for a
common cause, cf. MCFL, 479 U. S. 238, he does not ex­
plain why those two rights must be precisely identical, or
why that principle applies to electioneering by corpora­
tions that serve no “common cause.” Ante, at 8. Nothing
in his account dislodges my basic point that members of
the founding generation held a cautious view of corporate
power and a narrow view of corporate rights (not that they
“despised” corporations, ante, at 2), and that they concep­
tualized speech in individualistic terms. If no prominent
Framer bothered to articulate that corporate speech would

