4

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

I
The Court’s ruling threatens to undermine the integrity
of elected institutions across the Nation. The path it has
taken to reach its outcome will, I fear, do damage to this
institution. Before turning to the question whether to
overrule Austin and part of McConnell, it is important
to explain why the Court should not be deciding that
question.
Scope of the Case
The first reason is that the question was not properly
brought before us. In declaring §203 of BCRA facially
unconstitutional on the ground that corporations’ electoral
expenditures may not be regulated any more stringently
than those of individuals, the majority decides this case on
a basis relinquished below, not included in the questions
presented to us by the litigants, and argued here only in
response to the Court’s invitation. This procedure is
unusual and inadvisable for a court.2 Our colleagues’
suggestion that “we are asked to reconsider Austin and, in
effect, McConnell,” ante, at 1, would be more accurate if
rephrased to state that “we have asked ourselves” to re­
consider those cases.
In the District Court, Citizens United initially raised a
facial challenge to the constitutionality of §203. App. 23a–
24a. In its motion for summary judgment, however, Citi­
——————
2 See

Yee v. Escondido, 503 U. S. 519, 535 (1992) (“[U]nder this
Court’s Rule 14.1(a), only questions set forth in the petition, or fairly
included therein, will be considered by the Court” (internal quotation
marks and alteration omitted)); Wood v. Allen, ante, at __ (slip op., at
13) (“[T]he fact that petitioner discussed [an] issue in the text of his
petition for certiorari does not bring it before us. Rule 14.1(a) requires
that a subsidiary question be fairly included in the question presented
for our review” (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted));
Cooper Industries, Inc. v. Aviall Services, Inc., 543 U. S. 157, 168–169
(2004) (“We ordinarily do not decide in the first instance issues not
decided below” (internal quotation marks omitted)).

