Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
chilling effect caused by §441b’s corporate expenditure ban. This
conclusion is further supported by the following: (1) the uncertainty
caused by the Government’s litigating position; (2) substantial time
would be required to clarify §441b’s application on the points raised
by the Government’s position in order to avoid any chilling effect
caused by an improper interpretation; and (3) because speech itself is
of primary importance to the integrity of the election process, any
speech arguably within the reach of rules created for regulating po
litical speech is chilled. The regulatory scheme at issue may not be a
prior restraint in the strict sense. However, given its complexity and
the deference courts show to administrative determinations, a
speaker wishing to avoid criminal liability threats and the heavy
costs of defending against FEC enforcement must ask a governmen
tal agency for prior permission to speak. The restrictions thus func
tion as the equivalent of a prior restraint, giving the FEC power
analogous to the type of government practices that the First Amend
ment was drawn to prohibit. The ongoing chill on speech makes it
necessary to invoke the earlier precedents that a statute that chills
speech can and must be invalidated where its facial invalidity has
been demonstrated. Pp. 12–20.
2. Austin is overruled, and thus provides no basis for allowing the
Government to limit corporate independent expenditures. Hence,
§441b’s restrictions on such expenditures are invalid and cannot be
applied to Hillary. Given this conclusion, the part of McConnell that
upheld BCRA §203’s extension of §441b’s restrictions on independent
corporate expenditures is also overruled. Pp. 20–51.
(a) Although the First Amendment provides that “Congress shall
make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech,” §441b’s prohibition
on corporate independent expenditures is an outright ban on speech,
backed by criminal sanctions. It is a ban notwithstanding the fact
that a PAC created by a corporation can still speak, for a PAC is a
separate association from the corporation. Because speech is an es
sential mechanism of democracy—it is the means to hold officials ac
countable to the people—political speech must prevail against laws
that would suppress it by design or inadvertence. Laws burdening
such speech are subject to strict scrutiny, which requires the Gov
ernment to prove that the restriction “furthers a compelling interest
and is narrowly tailored to achieve that interest.” WRTL, 551 U. S.,
at 464. This language provides a sufficient framework for protecting
the interests in this case. Premised on mistrust of governmental
power, the First Amendment stands against attempts to disfavor cer
tain subjects or viewpoints or to distinguish among different speak
ers, which may be a means to control content. The Government may
also commit a constitutional wrong when by law it identifies certain

