Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

39

Opinion of the Court

profit, the Government prevents their voices and view
points from reaching the public and advising voters on
which persons or entities are hostile to their interests.
Factions will necessarily form in our Republic, but the
remedy of “destroying the liberty” of some factions is
“worse than the disease.” The Federalist No. 10, p. 130 (B.
Wright ed. 1961) (J. Madison). Factions should be checked
by permitting them all to speak, see ibid., and by entrust
ing the people to judge what is true and what is false.
The purpose and effect of this law is to prevent corpora
tions, including small and nonprofit corporations, from
presenting both facts and opinions to the public. This
makes Austin’s antidistortion rationale all the more an
aberration. “[T]he First Amendment protects the right of
corporations to petition legislative and administrative
bodies.” Bellotti, 435 U. S., at 792, n. 31 (citing California
Motor Transport Co. v. Trucking Unlimited, 404 U. S. 508,
510–511 (1972); Eastern Railroad Presidents Conference v.
Noerr Motor Freight, Inc., 365 U. S. 127, 137–138 (1961)).
Corporate executives and employees counsel Members of
Congress and Presidential administrations on many is
sues, as a matter of routine and often in private. An amici
brief filed on behalf of Montana and 25 other States notes
that lobbying and corporate communications with elected
officials occur on a regular basis. Brief for State of Mon
tana et al. as Amici Curiae 19. When that phenomenon is
coupled with §441b, the result is that smaller or nonprofit
corporations cannot raise a voice to object when other
corporations, including those with vast wealth, are coop
erating with the Government. That cooperation may
sometimes be voluntary, or it may be at the demand of a
Government official who uses his or her authority, influ
ence, and power to threaten corporations to support the
Government’s policies. Those kinds of interactions are
often unknown and unseen. The speech that §441b for
bids, though, is public, and all can judge its content and

