Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

feature-length video-on-demand film (such as Hillary) or
to a nonprofit corporation exempt from taxation under 26
U. S. C. §501(c)(4)11 and funded overwhelmingly by indi­
viduals (such as itself). See Brief for Appellant 16–41.
Success on either of these claims would not necessarily
carry any implications for the validity of §203 as applied to
other types of broadcasts, other types of corporations, or
unions. It certainly would not invalidate the statute as
applied to a large for-profit corporation. See Tr. of Oral
Arg. 8, 4 (Mar. 24, 2009) (counsel for Citizens United
emphasizing that appellant is “a small, nonprofit organi­
zation, which is very much like [an MCFL corporation],”
and affirming that its argument “definitely would not be
the same” if Hillary were distributed by General Motors).12
There is no legitimate basis for resurrecting a facial chal­
——————
11 Internal

Revenue Code section 501(c)(4) applies, inter alia, to non­
profit organizations “operated exclusively for the promotion of social
welfare, . . . the net earnings of which are devoted exclusively to chari­
table, educational, or recreational purposes.”
12 THE CHIEF JUSTICE is therefore much too quick when he suggests
that, “[e]ven if considered in as-applied terms, a holding in this case
that the Act may not be applied to Citizens United—because corpora­
tions as well as individuals enjoy the pertinent First Amendment
rights—would mean that any other corporation raising the same
challenge would also win.” Ante, at 4 (concurring opinion). That
conclusion would only follow if the Court were to ignore Citizens
United’s plausible as-applied arguments and instead take the implau­
sible position that all corporations and all types of expenditures enjoy
the same First Amendment protections, which always trump the
interests in regulation. At times, the majority appears to endorse this
extreme view. At other times, however, it appears to suggest that
nonprofit corporations have a better claim to First Amendment protec­
tion than for-profit corporations, see ante, at 20, 39, “advocacy” organi­
zations have a better claim than other nonprofits, ante, at 20, domestic
corporations have a better claim than foreign corporations, ante, at 46–
47, small corporations have a better claim than large corporations,
ante, at 38–40, and printed matter has a better claim than broadcast
communications, ante, at 33. The majority never uses a multinational
business corporation in its hypotheticals.

