Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

ROBERTS, C. J., concurring

tion of the idea that “speech that otherwise would be
within the protection of the First Amendment loses that
protection simply because its source is a corporation.” 435
U. S., at 784. The dissent correctly points out that Bellotti
involved a referendum rather than a candidate election,
and that Bellotti itself noted this factual distinction, id., at
788, n. 26; post, at 52. But this distinction does not ex
plain why corporations may be subject to prohibitions on
speech in candidate elections when individuals may not.
Second, the validity of Austin’s rationale—itself adopted
over two “spirited dissents,” Payne, 501 U. S., at 829—has
proved to be the consistent subject of dispute among Mem
bers of this Court ever since. See, e.g., WRTL, 551 U. S.,
at 483 (SCALIA, J., joined by KENNEDY and THOMAS, JJ.,
concurring in part and concurring in judgment); McCon­
nell, 540 U. S., at 247, 264, 286 (opinions of SCALIA,
THOMAS, and KENNEDY, JJ.); Beaumont, 539 U. S., at 163,
164 (opinions of KENNEDY and THOMAS, JJ.). The simple
fact that one of our decisions remains controversial is, of
course, insufficient to justify overruling it. But it does
undermine the precedent’s ability to contribute to the
stable and orderly development of the law. In such cir
cumstances, it is entirely appropriate for the Court—
which in this case is squarely asked to reconsider Austin’s
validity for the first time—to address the matter with a
greater willingness to consider new approaches capable of
restoring our doctrine to sounder footing.
Third, the Austin decision is uniquely destabilizing
because it threatens to subvert our Court’s decisions even
outside the particular context of corporate express advo
cacy. The First Amendment theory underlying Austin’s
holding is extraordinarily broad. Austin’s logic would
authorize government prohibition of political speech by a
category of speakers in the name of equality—a point that
most scholars acknowledge (and many celebrate), but that
the dissent denies. Compare, e.g., Garrett, New Voices in

