Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

Amendment is invalidated. See McConnell, supra, at 339
(KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment in part and dissent
ing in part). The Snowe-Jeffords Amendment would ex
empt from §441b’s expenditure ban the political speech of
certain nonprofit corporations if the speech were funded
“exclusively” by individual donors and the funds were
maintained in a segregated account. §441b(c)(2). Citizens
United would not qualify for the Snowe-Jeffords exemp
tion, under its terms as written, because Hillary was
funded in part with donations from for-profit corporations.
Consequently, to hold for Citizens United on this argu
ment, the Court would be required to revise the text of
MCFL, sever BCRA’s Wellstone Amendment, §441b(c)(6),
and ignore the plain text of BCRA’s Snowe-Jeffords
Amendment, §441b(c)(2). If the Court decided to create a
de minimis exception to MCFL or the Snowe-Jeffords
Amendment, the result would be to allow for-profit corpo
rate general treasury funds to be spent for independent
expenditures that support candidates. There is no princi
pled basis for doing this without rewriting Austin’s hold
ing that the Government can restrict corporate independ
ent expenditures for political speech.
Though it is true that the Court should construe stat
utes as necessary to avoid constitutional questions, the
series of steps suggested would be difficult to take in view
of the language of the statute. In addition to those diffi
culties the Government’s suggestion is troubling for still
another reason. The Government does not say that it
agrees with the interpretation it wants us to consider. See
Supp. Brief for Appellee 3, n. 1 (“Some courts” have im
plied a de minimis exception, and “appellant would appear
to be covered by these decisions”). Presumably it would
find textual difficulties in this approach too. The Govern
ment, like any party, can make arguments in the alterna
tive; but it ought to say if there is merit to an alternative
proposal instead of merely suggesting it. This is especially

