Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

Opinion of the Court

and dissemination of ideas,” for “effective public communi
cation requires the speaker to make use of the services of
others”). If §441b applied to individuals, no one would
believe that it is merely a time, place, or manner restric
tion on speech. Its purpose and effect are to silence enti
ties whose voices the Government deems to be suspect.
Speech is an essential mechanism of democracy, for it is
the means to hold officials accountable to the people. See
Buckley, supra, at 14–15 (“In a republic where the people
are sovereign, the ability of the citizenry to make informed
choices among candidates for office is essential”). The
right of citizens to inquire, to hear, to speak, and to use
information to reach consensus is a precondition to
enlightened self-government and a necessary means to
protect it. The First Amendment “ ‘has its fullest and most
urgent application’ to speech uttered during a campaign
for political office.” Eu v. San Francisco County Democ
ratic Central Comm., 489 U. S. 214, 223 (1989) (quoting
Monitor Patriot Co. v. Roy, 401 U. S. 265, 272 (1971)); see
Buckley, supra, at 14 (“Discussion of public issues and
debate on the qualifications of candidates are integral to
the operation of the system of government established by
our Constitution”).
For these reasons, political speech must prevail against
laws that would suppress it, whether by design or inadver
tence. Laws that burden political speech are “subject to
strict scrutiny,” which requires the Government to prove
that the restriction “furthers a compelling interest and is
narrowly tailored to achieve that interest.” WRTL, 551
U. S., at 464 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.). While it might
be maintained that political speech simply cannot be
banned or restricted as a categorical matter, see Simon &
Schuster, 502 U. S., at 124 (KENNEDY, J., concurring in
judgment), the quoted language from WRTL provides a
sufficient framework for protecting the relevant First
Amendment interests in this case. We shall employ it

