4

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
SCALIA, J., concurring

porations? At the time of the founding, religious, educa
tional, and literary corporations were incorporated under
general incorporation statutes, much as business corpora
tions are today.4 See Davis 16–17; R. Seavoy, Origins of
the American Business Corporation, 1784–1855, p. 5
(1982); Cooke 94. There were also small unincorporated
business associations, which some have argued were the
“ ‘true progenitors’ ” of today’s business corporations.
Friedman 200 (quoting S. Livermore, Early American
Land Companies: Their Influence on Corporate Develop
ment 216 (1939)); see also Davis 33. Were all of these
silently excluded from the protections of the First
Amendment?
The lack of a textual exception for speech by corpora
tions cannot be explained on the ground that such organi
zations did not exist or did not speak. To the contrary,
colleges, towns and cities, religious institutions, and guilds
had long been organized as corporations at common law
and under the King’s charter, see 1 W. Blackstone, Com
mentaries on the Laws of England 455–473 (1765); 1 S.
Kyd, A Treatise on the Law of Corporations 1–32, 63
(1793) (reprinted 2006), and as I have discussed, the prac
tice of incorporation only expanded in the United States.
Both corporations and voluntary associations actively
petitioned the Government and expressed their views in
newspapers and pamphlets. For example: An antislavery
Quaker corporation petitioned the First Congress, distrib
uted pamphlets, and communicated through the press in
1790. W. diGiacomantonio, “For the Gratification of a
Volunteering Society”: Antislavery and Pressure Group
——————
4 At times (though not always) the dissent seems to exclude such non
“business corporations” from its denial of free speech rights. See post,
at 37. Finding in a seemingly categorical text a distinction between the
rights of business corporations and the rights of non-business corpora
tions is even more imaginative than finding a distinction between the
rights of all corporations and the rights of other associations.

