Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Ante, at 51 (internal quotation marks and citations omit­
ted). Of course they do. Disclaimer and disclosure re­
quirements enable private citizens and elected officials to
implement political strategies specifically calculated to
curtail campaign-related activity and prevent the lawful,
peaceful exercise of First Amendment rights.
The Court nevertheless insists that as-applied chal­
lenges to disclosure requirements will suffice to vindicate
those speech rights, as long as potential plaintiffs can
“show a reasonable probability that disclosure . . . will
subject them to threats, harassment, or reprisals from
either Government officials or private parties.” Ante, at 52
(internal quotation marks omitted). But the Court’s opin­
ion itself proves the irony in this compromise. In correctly
explaining why it must address the facial constitutionality
of §203, see ante, at 5–20, the Court recognizes that “[t]he
First Amendment does not permit laws that force speakers
to . . . seek declaratory rulings before discussing the most
salient political issues of our day,” ante, at 7; that as­
applied challenges to §203 “would require substantial
litigation over an extended time” and result in an “inter­
pretive process [that] itself would create an inevitable,
pervasive, and serious risk of chilling protected speech
pending the drawing of fine distinctions that, in the end,
would themselves be questionable,” ante, at 9–10; that “a
court would be remiss in performing its duties were it to
accept an unsound principle merely to avoid the necessity
of making a broader ruling,” ante, at 12; and that avoiding
a facial challenge to §203 “would prolong the substantial,
nation-wide chilling effect” that §203 causes, ante, at 16.
This logic, of course, applies equally to as-applied chal­
lenges to §§201 and 311.
Irony aside, the Court’s promise that as-applied chal­
lenges will adequately protect speech is a hollow assur­
ance. Now more than ever, §§201 and 311 will chill pro­
tected speech because—as California voters can attest—

