Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

ROBERTS, C. J., concurring

might unduly influence “the market for legislation.” Post,
at 82. The dissent reads Austin to permit restrictions on
corporate speech based on nothing more than the fact that
the corporate form may help individuals coordinate and
present their views more effectively. Post, at 82. A
speaker’s ability to persuade, however, provides no basis
for government regulation of free and open public debate
on what the laws should be.
If taken seriously, Austin’s logic would apply most di
rectly to newspapers and other media corporations. They
have a more profound impact on public discourse than
most other speakers. These corporate entities are, for the
time being, not subject to §441b’s otherwise generally
applicable prohibitions on corporate political speech. But
this is simply a matter of legislative grace. The fact that
the law currently grants a favored position to media cor
porations is no reason to overlook the danger inherent in
accepting a theory that would allow government restric
tions on their political speech. See generally McConnell,
supra, at 283–286 (THOMAS, J., concurring in part, concur
ring in judgment in part, and dissenting in part).
These readings of Austin do no more than carry that
decision’s reasoning to its logical endpoint. In doing so,
they highlight the threat Austin poses to First Amend
ment rights generally, even outside its specific factual
context of corporate express advocacy. Because Austin is
so difficult to confine to its facts—and because its logic
threatens to undermine our First Amendment jurispru
dence and the nature of public discourse more broadly—
the costs of giving it stare decisis effect are unusually high.
Finally and most importantly, the Government’s own
effort to defend Austin—or, more accurately, to defend
something that is not quite Austin—underscores its weak
ness as a precedent of the Court. The Government con
cedes that Austin “is not the most lucid opinion,” yet asks
us to reaffirm its holding. Tr. of Oral Arg. 62 (Sept. 9,

