54

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of the Court

tion and disclosure requirements on lobbyists, even
though Congress has no power to ban lobbying itself.
United States v. Harriss, 347 U. S. 612, 625 (1954) (Con
gress “has merely provided for a modicum of information
from those who for hire attempt to influence legislation or
who collect or spend funds for that purpose”). For these
reasons, we reject Citizens United’s contention that the
disclosure requirements must be limited to speech that is
the functional equivalent of express advocacy.
Citizens United also disputes that an informational
interest justifies the application of §201 to its ads, which
only attempt to persuade viewers to see the film. Even if
it disclosed the funding sources for the ads, Citizens
United says, the information would not help viewers make
informed choices in the political marketplace. This is
similar to the argument rejected above with respect to
disclaimers. Even if the ads only pertain to a commercial
transaction, the public has an interest in knowing who is
speaking about a candidate shortly before an election.
Because the informational interest alone is sufficient to
justify application of §201 to these ads, it is not necessary
to consider the Government’s other asserted interests.
Last, Citizens United argues that disclosure require
ments can chill donations to an organization by exposing
donors to retaliation. Some amici point to recent events in
which donors to certain causes were blacklisted, threat
ened, or otherwise targeted for retaliation. See Brief for
Institute for Justice as Amicus Curiae 13–16; Brief for
Alliance Defense Fund as Amicus Curiae 16–22. In
McConnell, the Court recognized that §201 would be un
constitutional as applied to an organization if there were a
reasonable probability that the group’s members would
face threats, harassment, or reprisals if their names were
disclosed. 540 U. S., at 198. The examples cited by amici
are cause for concern. Citizens United, however, has
offered no evidence that its members may face similar

