Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

candidates, whereas national parties will not be able to
spend a dime of soft money on ads of any kind. The
Court’s ruling thus dramatically enhances the role of
corporations and unions—and the narrow interests they
represent—vis-à-vis the role of political parties—and the
broad coalitions they represent—in determining who will
hold public office.22
Beyond the reliance interests at stake, the other stare
decisis factors also cut against the Court. Considerations
of antiquity are significant for similar reasons. McConnell
is only six years old, but Austin has been on the books for
two decades, and many of the statutes called into question
by today’s opinion have been on the books for a half­
century or more. The Court points to no intervening
change in circumstances that warrants revisiting Austin.
Certainly nothing relevant has changed since we decided
WRTL two Terms ago. And the Court gives no reason to
think that Austin and McConnell are unworkable.
In fact, no one has argued to us that Austin’s rule has
proved impracticable, and not a single for-profit corpora­
tion, union, or State has asked us to overrule it. Quite to
the contrary, leading groups representing the business
community,23 organized labor,24 and the nonprofit sector,25
together with more than half of the States,26 urge that we
——————
22 To be sure, the majority may respond that Congress can correct the
imbalance by removing BCRA’s soft-money limits. Cf. Tr. of Oral Arg.
24 (Sept. 9, 2009) (query of KENNEDY, J.). But this is no response to any
legislature that takes campaign finance regulation seriously. It merely
illustrates the breadth of the majority’s deregulatory vision.
23 See Brief for Committee for Economic Development as Amicus Cu
riae; Brief for American Independent Business Alliance as Amicus
Curiae. But see Supp. Brief for Chamber of Commerce of the United
States of America as Amicus Curiae.
24 See Brief for American Federation of Labor and Congress of Indus­
trial Organizations as Amicus Curiae 3, 9.
25 See Brief for Independent Sector as Amicus Curiae 16–20.
26 See Brief for State of Montana et al. as Amici Curiae.

