Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

factor undermining Austin). Why it diminishes the value
of stare decisis is left unexplained. We have never thought
fit to overrule a precedent because a litigant has taken
any particular tack. Nor should we. Our decisions can
often be defended on multiple grounds, and a litigant may
have strategic or case-specific reasons for emphasizing
only a subset of them. Members of the public, moreover,
often rely on our bottom-line holdings far more than our
precise legal arguments; surely this is true for the legisla­
tures that have been regulating corporate electioneering
since Austin. The task of evaluating the continued viabil­
ity of precedents falls to this Court, not to the parties.19
Although the majority opinion spends several pages
making these surprising arguments, it says almost noth­
ing about the standard considerations we have used to
determine stare decisis value, such as the antiquity of the
precedent, the workability of its legal rule, and the reli­
ance interests at stake. It is also conspicuously silent
about McConnell, even though the McConnell Court’s
decision to uphold BCRA §203 relied not only on the anti­
distortion logic of Austin but also on the statute’s histori­
cal pedigree, see, e.g., 540 U. S., at 115–132, 223–224, and
the need to preserve the integrity of federal campaigns,
see id., at 126–129, 205–208, and n. 88.
We have recognized that “[s]tare decisis has special force
when legislators or citizens ‘have acted in reliance on a
previous decision, for in this instance overruling the deci­
——————
19 Additionally, the majority cites some recent scholarship challenging
the historical account of campaign finance law given in United States v.
Automobile Workers, 352 U. S. 567 (1957). Ante, at 48. Austin did not
so much as allude to this historical account, much less rely on it. Even
if the scholarship cited by the majority is correct that certain campaign
finance reforms were less deliberate or less benignly motivated than
Automobile Workers suggested, the point remains that this body of law
has played a significant and broadly accepted role in American political
life for decades upon decades.

