Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

81

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

diture restrictions of [2 U. S. C.] §441b are thus meant to
ensure that competition among actors in the political
arena is truly competition among ideas.” MCFL, 479
U. S., at 259.
In addition to this immediate drowning out of noncorpo­
rate voices, there may be deleterious effects that follow
soon thereafter. Corporate “domination” of electioneering,
Austin, 494 U. S., at 659, can generate the impression that
corporations dominate our democracy. When citizens turn
on their televisions and radios before an election and hear
only corporate electioneering, they may lose faith in their
capacity, as citizens, to influence public policy. A Gov­
ernment captured by corporate interests, they may come
to believe, will be neither responsive to their needs nor
willing to give their views a fair hearing. The predictable
result is cynicism and disenchantment: an increased
perception that large spenders “ ‘call the tune’ ” and a
reduced “ ‘willingness of voters to take part in democratic
governance.’ ” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 144 (quoting
Shrink Missouri, 528 U. S., at 390). To the extent that
corporations are allowed to exert undue influence in elec­
toral races, the speech of the eventual winners of those
races may also be chilled. Politicians who fear that a
certain corporation can make or break their reelection
chances may be cowed into silence about that corporation.
On a variety of levels, unregulated corporate electioneer­
ing might diminish the ability of citizens to “hold officials
accountable to the people,” ante, at 23, and disserve the
goal of a public debate that is “uninhibited, robust, and
wide-open,” New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S.
254, 270 (1964). At the least, I stress again, a legislature
is entitled to credit these concerns and to take tailored
measures in response.
The majority’s unwillingness to distinguish between
corporations and humans similarly blinds it to the possi­
bility that corporations’ “war chests” and their special

