Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

ROBERTS, C. J., concurring

that decision. In fact, the only opinion in Austin endorsing
the Government’s argument based on the threat of quid
pro quo corruption was JUSTICE STEVENS’s concurrence.
494 U. S., at 678. The Court itself did not do so, despite
the fact that the concurrence highlighted the argument.
Moreover, the Court’s only discussion of shareholder pro
tection in Austin appeared in a section of the opinion that
sought merely to distinguish Austin’s facts from those of
Federal Election Comm’n v. Massachusetts Citizens for
Life, Inc., 479 U. S. 238 (1986). Austin, supra, at 663.
Nowhere did Austin suggest that the goal of protecting
shareholders is itself a compelling interest authorizing
restrictions on First Amendment rights.
To the extent that the Government’s case for reaffirming
Austin depends on radically reconceptualizing its reason
ing, that argument is at odds with itself. Stare decisis is a
doctrine of preservation, not transformation. It counsels
deference to past mistakes, but provides no justification
for making new ones. There is therefore no basis for the
Court to give precedential sway to reasoning that it has
never accepted, simply because that reasoning happens to
support a conclusion reached on different grounds that
have since been abandoned or discredited.
Doing so would undermine the rule-of-law values that
justify stare decisis in the first place. It would effectively
license the Court to invent and adopt new principles of
constitutional law solely for the purpose of rationalizing
its past errors, without a proper analysis of whether those
principles have merit on their own. This approach would
allow the Court’s past missteps to spawn future mistakes,
undercutting the very rule-of-law values that stare decisis
is designed to protect.
None of this is to say that the Government is barred
from making new arguments to support the outcome in
Austin. On the contrary, it is free to do so. And of course
the Court is free to accept them. But the Government’s

