36

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of the Court

could have their voices diminished to put them on par
with other media entities. There is no precedent for per
mitting this under the First Amendment.
The media exemption discloses further difficulties with
the law now under consideration. There is no precedent
supporting laws that attempt to distinguish between
corporations which are deemed to be exempt as media
corporations and those which are not. “We have consis
tently rejected the proposition that the institutional press
has any constitutional privilege beyond that of other
speakers.” Id., at 691 (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (citing Bel
lotti, 435 U. S., at 782); see Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v.
Greenmoss Builders, Inc., 472 U. S. 749, 784 (1985) (Bren
nan, J., joined by Marshall, Blackmun, and STEVENS, JJ.,
dissenting); id., at 773 (White, J., concurring in judgment).
With the advent of the Internet and the decline of print
and broadcast media, moreover, the line between the
media and others who wish to comment on political and
social issues becomes far more blurred.
The law’s exception for media corporations is, on its own
terms, all but an admission of the invalidity of the antidis
tortion rationale. And the exemption results in a further,
separate reason for finding this law invalid: Again by its
own terms, the law exempts some corporations but covers
others, even though both have the need or the motive to
communicate their views. The exemption applies to media
corporations owned or controlled by corporations that have
diverse and substantial investments and participate in
endeavors other than news. So even assuming the most
doubtful proposition that a news organization has a right
to speak when others do not, the exemption would allow a
conglomerate that owns both a media business and an
unrelated business to influence or control the media in
order to advance its overall business interest. At the same
time, some other corporation, with an identical business
interest but no media outlet in its ownership structure,

