6

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Syllabus
are corrupt. And the appearance of influence or access will not cause
the electorate to lose faith in this democracy. Caperton v. A. T.
Massey Coal Co., 556 U. S. ___, distinguished. Pp. 40–45.
(3) The Government’s asserted interest in protecting share
holders from being compelled to fund corporate speech, like the anti
distortion rationale, would allow the Government to ban political
speech even of media corporations. The statute is underinclusive; it
only protects a dissenting shareholder’s interests in certain media for
30 or 60 days before an election when such interests would be impli
cated in any media at any time. It is also overinclusive because it
covers all corporations, including those with one shareholder. P. 46.
(4) Because §441b is not limited to corporations or associa
tions created in foreign countries or funded predominately by foreign
shareholders, it would be overbroad even if the Court were to recog
nize a compelling governmental interest in limiting foreign influence
over the Nation’s political process. Pp. 46–47.
(d) The relevant factors in deciding whether to adhere to stare
decisis, beyond workability—the precedent’s antiquity, the reliance
interests at stake, and whether the decision was well reasoned—
counsel in favor of abandoning Austin, which itself contravened the
precedents of Buckley and Bellotti. As already explained, Austin was
not well reasoned. It is also undermined by experience since its an
nouncement. Political speech is so ingrained in this country’s culture
that speakers find ways around campaign finance laws. Rapid
changes in technology—and the creative dynamic inherent in the
concept of free expression—counsel against upholding a law that re
stricts political speech in certain media or by certain speakers. In
addition, no serious reliance issues are at stake. Thus, due consid
eration leads to the conclusion that Austin should be overruled. The
Court returns to the principle established in Buckley and Bellotti that
the Government may not suppress political speech based on the
speaker’s corporate identity. No sufficient governmental interest jus
tifies limits on the political speech of nonprofit or for-profit corpora
tions. Pp. 47–50.
3. BCRA §§201 and 311 are valid as applied to the ads for Hillary
and to the movie itself. Pp. 50–57.
(a) Disclaimer and disclosure requirements may burden the abil
ity to speak, but they “impose no ceiling on campaign-related activi
ties,” Buckley, 424 U. S., at 64, or “ ‘ “prevent anyone from speak
ing,” ’ ” McConnell, supra, at 201. The Buckley Court explained that
disclosure can be justified by a governmental interest in providing
“the electorate with information” about election-related spending
sources. The McConnell Court applied this interest in rejecting facial
challenges to §§201 and 311. 540 U. S., at 196. However, the Court

