Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

67

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

205, 206, n. 88. Had we felt constrained by the view of
today’s Court that quid pro quo corruption and its appear­
ance are the only interests that count in this field, ante, at
32–46, we of course would have looked closely at that
issue. And as the analysis by Judge Kollar-Kotelly re­
flects, it is a very real possibility that we would have found
one or both of those interests satisfied and §203 appropri­
ately tailored to them.
The majority’s rejection of the Buckley anticorruption
rationale on the ground that independent corporate ex­
penditures “do not give rise to [quid pro quo] corruption or
the appearance of corruption,” ante, at 42, is thus unfair
as well as unreasonable. Congress and outside experts
have generated significant evidence corroborating this
rationale, and the only reason we do not have any of the
relevant materials before us is that the Government had
no reason to develop a record at trial for a facial challenge
the plaintiff had abandoned. The Court cannot both
sua sponte choose to relitigate McConnell on appeal and
then complain that the Government has failed to substan­
tiate its case. If our colleagues were really serious about
the interest in preventing quid pro quo corruption, they
would remand to the District Court with instructions to
commence evidentiary proceedings.66
The insight that even technically independent expendi­
——————
66 In fact, the notion that the “electioneering communications” covered
by §203 can breed quid pro quo corruption or the appearance of such
corruption has only become more plausible since we decided McConnell.
Recall that THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s controlling opinion in WRTL subse­
quently limited BCRA’s definition of “electioneering communications”
to those that are “susceptible of no reasonable interpretation other than
as an appeal to vote for or against a specific candidate.” 551 U. S., at
470. The upshot was that after WRTL, a corporate or union expendi­
ture could be regulated under §203 only if everyone would understand
it as an endorsement of or attack on a particular candidate for office. It
does not take much imagination to perceive why this type of advocacy
might be especially apt to look like or amount to a deal or a threat.

