Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Syllabus
acknowledged that as-applied challenges would be available if a
group could show a “ ‘reasonable probability’ ” that disclosing its con
tributors’ names would “ ‘subject them to threats, harassment, or re
prisals from either Government officials or private parties.’ ” Id., at
198. Pp. 50–52.
(b) The disclaimer and disclosure requirements are valid as ap
plied to Citizens United’s ads. They fall within BCRA’s “electioneer
ing communication” definition: They referred to then-Senator Clinton
by name shortly before a primary and contained pejorative references
to her candidacy. Section 311 disclaimers provide information to the
electorate, McConnell, supra, at 196, and “insure that the voters are
fully informed” about who is speaking, Buckley, supra, at 76. At the
very least, they avoid confusion by making clear that the ads are not
funded by a candidate or political party. Citizens United’s arguments
that §311 is underinclusive because it requires disclaimers for broad
cast advertisements but not for print or Internet advertising and that
§311 decreases the quantity and effectiveness of the group’s speech
were rejected in McConnell. This Court also rejects their contention
that §201’s disclosure requirements must be confined to speech that
is the functional equivalent of express advocacy under WRTL’s test
for restrictions on independent expenditures, 551 U. S., at 469–476
(opinion of ROBERTS, C.J.). Disclosure is the less-restrictive alterna
tive to more comprehensive speech regulations. Such requirements
have been upheld in Buckley and McConnell. Citizens United’s ar
gument that no informational interest justifies applying §201 to its
ads is similar to the argument this Court rejected with regard to dis
claimers. Citizens United finally claims that disclosure requirements
can chill donations by exposing donors to retaliation, but offers no
evidence that its members face the type of threats, harassment, or
reprisals that might make §201 unconstitutional as applied. Pp. 52–
55.
(c) For these same reasons, this Court affirms the application of
the §§201 and 311 disclaimer and disclosure requirements to Hillary.
Pp. 55–56.
Reversed in part, affirmed in part, and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA and ALITO, JJ., joined, in which THOMAS, J., joined as
to all but Part IV, and in which STEVENS, GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined as to Part IV. ROBERTS, C. J., filed a concurring
opinion, in which ALITO, J., joined. SCALIA, J., filed a concurring opin
ion, in which ALITO, J., joined, and in which THOMAS, J., joined in part.
STEVENS, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part,
in which GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. THOMAS, J.,
filed an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part.

