Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

57

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

tal interest in preventing corruption or the appearance of
corruption” is one that is “limited to quid pro quo corrup­
tion.” Ante, at 43. This is the same “crabbed view of
corruption” that was espoused by JUSTICE KENNEDY in
McConnell and squarely rejected by the Court in that case.
540 U. S., at 152. While it is true that we have not always
spoken about corruption in a clear or consistent voice, the
approach taken by the majority cannot be right, in my
judgment. It disregards our constitutional history and the
fundamental demands of a democratic society.
On numerous occasions we have recognized Congress’
legitimate interest in preventing the money that is spent
on elections from exerting an “ ‘undue influence on an
officeholder’s judgment’ ” and from creating “ ‘the appear­
ance of such influence,’ ” beyond the sphere of quid pro quo
relationships. Id., at 150; see also, e.g., id., at 143–144,
152–154; Colorado II, 533 U. S., at 441; Shrink Missouri,
528 U. S., at 389. Corruption can take many forms. Brib­
ery may be the paradigm case. But the difference between
selling a vote and selling access is a matter of degree, not
kind. And selling access is not qualitatively different from
giving special preference to those who spent money on
one’s behalf. Corruption operates along a spectrum, and
the majority’s apparent belief that quid pro quo arrange­
ments can be neatly demarcated from other improper
influences does not accord with the theory or reality of
politics. It certainly does not accord with the record Con­
gress developed in passing BCRA, a record that stands as
a remarkable testament to the energy and ingenuity with
which corporations, unions, lobbyists, and politicians may
go about scratching each other’s backs—and which amply
supported Congress’ determination to target a limited set
of especially destructive practices.
The District Court that adjudicated the initial challenge
to BCRA pored over this record. In a careful analysis,
Judge Kollar-Kotelly made numerous findings about the

