Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

ROBERTS, C. J., concurring

It is only because the majority rejects Citizens United’s
statutory claim that it proceeds to consider the group’s
various constitutional arguments, beginning with its
narrowest claim (that Hillary is not the functional equiva
lent of express advocacy) and proceeding to its broadest
claim (that Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce, 494
U. S. 652 (1990) should be overruled). This is the same
order of operations followed by the controlling opinion in
Federal Election Comm’n v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc.,
551 U. S. 449 (2007) (WRTL). There the appellant was
able to prevail on its narrowest constitutional argument
because its broadcast ads did not qualify as the functional
equivalent of express advocacy; there was thus no need to
go on to address the broader claim that McConnell v.
Federal Election Comm’n, 540 U. S. 93 (2003), should be
overruled. WRTL, 551 U. S., at 482; id., at 482–483
(ALITO, J., concurring). This case is different—not, as the
dissent suggests, because the approach taken in WRTL
has been deemed a “failure,” post, at 11, but because, in
the absence of any valid narrower ground of decision,
there is no way to avoid Citizens United’s broader consti
tutional argument.
The dissent advocates an approach to addressing Citi
zens United’s claims that I find quite perplexing. It pre
sumably agrees with the majority that Citizens United’s
narrower statutory and constitutional arguments lack
merit—otherwise its conclusion that the group should lose
this case would make no sense. Despite agreeing that
these narrower arguments fail, however, the dissent ar
gues that the majority should nonetheless latch on to one
of them in order to avoid reaching the broader constitu
tional question of whether Austin remains good law. It
even suggests that the Court’s failure to adopt one of these
concededly meritless arguments is a sign that the majority
is not “serious about judicial restraint.” Post, at 16.
This approach is based on a false premise: that our

