Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

This is not merely a technical defect in the Court’s
decision. The unnecessary resort to a facial inquiry
“run[s] contrary to the fundamental principle of judicial
restraint that courts should neither anticipate a question
of constitutional law in advance of the necessity of decid­
ing it nor formulate a rule of constitutional law broader
than is required by the precise facts to which it is to be
applied.” Washington State Grange, 552 U. S., at 450
(internal quotation marks omitted). Scanting that princi­
ple “threaten[s] to short circuit the democratic process by
preventing laws embodying the will of the people from
being implemented in a manner consistent with the Con­
stitution.” Id., at 451. These concerns are heightened
when judges overrule settled doctrine upon which the
legislature has relied. The Court operates with a sledge
hammer rather than a scalpel when it strikes down one of
Congress’ most significant efforts to regulate the role that
corporations and unions play in electoral politics. It com­
pounds the offense by implicitly striking down a great
many state laws as well.
The problem goes still deeper, for the Court does all of
this on the basis of pure speculation. Had Citizens United
maintained a facial challenge, and thus argued that there
are virtually no circumstances in which BCRA §203 can be
applied constitutionally, the parties could have developed,
through the normal process of litigation, a record about
the actual effects of §203, its actual burdens and its actual
benefits, on all manner of corporations and unions.4
——————
4 Shortly

before Citizens United mooted the issue by abandoning its
facial challenge, the Government advised the District Court that it
“require[d] time to develop a factual record regarding [the] facial
challenge.” 1:07–cv–2240–RCL–RWR, Docket Entry No. 47, p. 4 (Mar.
26, 2008). By reinstating a claim that Citizens United abandoned, the
Court gives it a perverse litigating advantage over its adversary, which
was deprived of the opportunity to gather and present information
necessary to its rebuttal.

