Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

SCALIA, J., concurring

in the field of business,” Davis 8, and represented “un
precedented growth,” id., at 309. Moreover, what seems
like a small number by today’s standards surely does not
indicate the relative importance of corporations when the
Nation was considerably smaller. As I have previously
noted, “[b]y the end of the eighteenth century the corpora
tion was a familiar figure in American economic life.”
McConnell v. Federal Election Comm’n, 540 U. S. 93, 256
(2003) (SCALIA, J., concurring in part, concurring in judg
ment in part, and dissenting in part) (quoting C. Cooke,
Corporation Trust and Company 92 (1951) (hereinafter
Cooke)).
Even if we thought it proper to apply the dissent’s ap
proach of excluding from First Amendment coverage what
the Founders disliked, and even if we agreed that the
Founders disliked founding-era corporations; modern
corporations might not qualify for exclusion. Most of the
Founders’ resentment towards corporations was directed
at the state-granted monopoly privileges that individually
chartered corporations enjoyed.3 Modern corporations do
not have such privileges, and would probably have been
favored by most of our enterprising Founders—excluding,
perhaps, Thomas Jefferson and others favoring perpetua
tion of an agrarian society. Moreover, if the Founders’
specific intent with respect to corporations is what mat
ters, why does the dissent ignore the Founders’ views
about other legal entities that have more in common with
modern business corporations than the founding-era cor
——————
3 “[P]eople

in 1800 identified corporations with franchised monopo
lies.” L. Friedman, A History of American Law 194 (2d ed. 1985)
(hereinafter Friedman). “The chief cause for the changed popular
attitude towards business corporations that marked the opening of the
nineteenth century was the elimination of their inherent monopolistic
character. This was accomplished primarily by an extension of the
principle of free incorporation under general laws.” 1 W. Fletcher,
Cyclopedia of the Law of Corporations §2, p. 8 (rev. ed. 2006).

