62

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

tutional order into being, the Framers had their minds
trained on a threat to republican self-government that this
Court has lost sight of.
Quid Pro Quo Corruption
There is no need to take my side in the debate over the
scope of the anticorruption interest to see that the Court’s
merits holding is wrong. Even under the majority’s
“crabbed view of corruption,” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 152,
the Government should not lose this case.
“The importance of the governmental interest in pre­
venting [corruption through the creation of political debts]
has never been doubted.” Bellotti, 435 U. S., at 788, n. 26.
Even in the cases that have construed the anticorruption
interest most narrowly, we have never suggested that
such quid pro quo debts must take the form of outright
vote buying or bribes, which have long been distinct
crimes. Rather, they encompass the myriad ways in which
outside parties may induce an officeholder to confer a
legislative benefit in direct response to, or anticipation of,
some outlay of money the parties have made or will make
on behalf of the officeholder. See McConnell, 540 U. S., at
143 (“We have not limited [the anticorruption] interest to
the elimination of cash-for-votes exchanges. In Buckley,
we expressly rejected the argument that antibribery laws
provided a less restrictive alternative to FECA’s contribu­
tion limits, noting that such laws ‘deal[t] with only the
most blatant and specific attempts of those with money to
influence governmental action’ ” (quoting 424 U. S., at 28;
alteration in original)). It has likewise never been doubted
that “[o]f almost equal concern as the danger of actual
quid pro quo arrangements is the impact of the appear­
ance of corruption.” Id., at 27. Congress may “legiti­
mately conclude that the avoidance of the appearance of
improper influence is also critical . . . if confidence in the
system of representative Government is not to be eroded

