4

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

The success of such intimidation tactics has apparently
spawned a cottage industry that uses forcibly disclosed
donor information to pre-empt citizens’ exercise of their
First Amendment rights. Before the 2008 Presidential
election, a “newly formed nonprofit group . . . plann[ed] to
confront donors to conservative groups, hoping to create a
chilling effect that will dry up contributions.” Luo, Group
Plans Campaign Against G.O.P. Donors, N. Y. Times, Aug.
8, 2008, p. A15. Its leader, “who described his effort as
‘going for the jugular,’ ” detailed the group’s plan to send a
“warning letter . . . alerting donors who might be consider­
ing giving to right-wing groups to a variety of potential
dangers, including legal trouble, public exposure and
watchdog groups digging through their lives.” Ibid.
These instances of retaliation sufficiently demonstrate
why this Court should invalidate mandatory disclosure
and reporting requirements. But amici present evidence
of yet another reason to do so—the threat of retaliation
from elected officials. As amici’s submissions make clear,
this threat extends far beyond a single ballot proposition
in California. For example, a candidate challenging an
incumbent state attorney general reported that some
members of the State’s business community feared donat­
ing to his campaign because they did not want to cross the
incumbent; in his words, “ ‘I go to so many people and hear
the same thing: “I sure hope you beat [the incumbent], but
I can’t afford to have my name on your records. He might
come after me next.” ’ ” Strassel, Challenging Spitzerism
at the Polls, Wall Street Journal, Aug. 1, 2008, p. A11.
The incumbent won reelection in 2008.
My point is not to express any view on the merits of the
political controversies I describe. Rather, it is to demon­
strate—using real-world, recent examples—the fallacy in
the Court’s conclusion that “[d]isclaimer and disclosure
requirements . . . impose no ceiling on campaign-related
activities, and do not prevent anyone from speaking.”

