60

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

correct” in the conduct of Government, Webster’s Third
New International Dictionary 512 (1966) (defining “cor­
ruption”), that it amounts to a “subversion . . . of the elec­
toral process,” Automobile Workers, 352 U. S., at 575. At
stake in the legislative efforts to address this threat is
therefore not only the legitimacy and quality of Govern­
ment but also the public’s faith therein, not only “the
capacity of this democracy to represent its constituents
[but also] the confidence of its citizens in their capacity to
govern themselves,” WRTL, 551 U. S., at 507 (Souter, J.,
dissenting). “Take away Congress’ authority to regulate
the appearance of undue influence and ‘the cynical as­
sumption that large donors call the tune could jeopardize
the willingness of voters to take part in democratic gov­
ernance.’ ” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 144 (quoting Shrink
Missouri, 528 U. S., at 390).64
The cluster of interrelated interests threatened by such
undue influence and its appearance has been well cap­
tured under the rubric of “democratic integrity.” WRTL,
551 U. S., at 522 (Souter, J., dissenting). This value has
underlined a century of state and federal efforts to regu­
late the role of corporations in the electoral process.65
——————
64 The majority declares by fiat that the appearance of undue influ­
ence by high-spending corporations “will not cause the electorate to lose
faith in our democracy.” Ante, at 44. The electorate itself has consis­
tently indicated otherwise, both in opinion polls, see McConnell v. FEC,
251 F. Supp. 2d 176, 557–558, 623–624 (DC 2003) (opinion of KollarKotelly, J.), and in the laws its representatives have passed, and our
colleagues have no basis for elevating their own optimism into a tenet
of constitutional law.
65 Quite distinct from the interest in preventing improper influences
on the electoral process, I have long believed that “a number of [other]
purposes, both legitimate and substantial, may justify the imposition of
reasonable limitations on the expenditures permitted during the course
of any single campaign.” Davis v. FEC, 554 U. S. ___, ___ (2008) (slip
op., at 3) (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). In my
judgment, such limitations may be justified to the extent they are
tailored to “improving the quality of the exposition of ideas” that voters

