Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

result. They cited these incidents in a complaint they filed
after the 2008 election, seeking to invalidate California’s
mandatory disclosure laws. Supporters recounted being
told: “Consider yourself lucky. If I had a gun I would have
gunned you down along with each and every other sup­
porter,” or, “we have plans for you and your friends.”
Complaint in ProtectMarriage.com—Yes on 8 v. Bowen,
Case No. 2:09–cv–00058–MCE–DAD (ED Cal.), ¶31.
Proposition 8 opponents also allegedly harassed the meas­
ure’s supporters by defacing or damaging their property.
Id., ¶32. Two religious organizations supporting Proposi­
tion 8 reportedly received through the mail envelopes
containing a white powdery substance. Id., ¶33.
Those accounts are consistent with media reports de­
scribing Proposition 8-related retaliation. The director of
the nonprofit California Musical Theater gave $1,000 to
support the initiative; he was forced to resign after artists
complained to his employer. Lott & Smith, Donor Disclo­
sure Has Its Downsides, Wall Street Journal, Dec. 26,
2008, p. A13. The director of the Los Angeles Film Festi­
val was forced to resign after giving $1,500 because oppo­
nents threatened to boycott and picket the next festival.
Ibid. And a woman who had managed her popular, fam­
ily-owned restaurant for 26 years was forced to resign
after she gave $100, because “throngs of [angry] protest­
ers” repeatedly arrived at the restaurant and “shout[ed]
‘shame on you’ at customers.” Lopez, Prop. 8 Stance Up­
ends Her Life, Los Angeles Times, Dec. 14, 2008, p. B1.
The police even had to “arriv[e] in riot gear one night to
quell the angry mob” at the restaurant. Ibid. Some sup­
porters of Proposition 8 engaged in similar tactics; one real
estate businessman in San Diego who had donated to a
group opposing Proposition 8 “received a letter from the
Prop. 8 Executive Committee threatening to publish his
company’s name if he didn’t also donate to the ‘Yes on 8’
campaign.” Donor Disclosure, supra, at A13.

