32

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

uting to or participating in political activities. See n. 45,
supra. These statutes burden the political expression of
one class of speakers, namely, civil servants. Yet we have
sustained them on the basis of longstanding practice and
Congress’ reasoned judgment that certain regulations
which leave “untouched full participation . . . in political
decisions at the ballot box,” Civil Service Comm’n v. Letter
Carriers, 413 U. S. 548, 556 (1973) (internal quotation
marks omitted), help ensure that public officials are “suffi­
ciently free from improper influences,” id., at 564, and
that “confidence in the system of representative Govern­
ment is not . . . eroded to a disastrous extent,” id., at 565.
The same logic applies to this case with additional force
because it is the identity of corporations, rather than
individuals, that the Legislature has taken into account.
As we have unanimously observed, legislatures are enti­
tled to decide “that the special characteristics of the corpo­
rate structure require particularly careful regulation” in
an electoral context. NRWC, 459 U. S., at 209–210.50 Not
only has the distinctive potential of corporations to corrupt
the electoral process long been recognized, but within the
area of campaign finance, corporate spending is also “fur­
thest from the core of political expression, since corpora­
tions’ First Amendment speech and association interests
are derived largely from those of their members and of the
public in receiving information,” Beaumont, 539 U. S., at
161, n. 8 (citation omitted). Campaign finance distinctions
based on corporate identity tend to be less worrisome, in
other words, because the “speakers” are not natural per­
sons, much less members of our political community, and
——————
50 They are likewise entitled to regulate media corporations differ­
ently from other corporations “to ensure that the law ‘does not hinder or
prevent the institutional press from reporting on, and publishing
editorials about, newsworthy events.’ ” McConnell, 540 U. S., at 208
(quoting Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce, 494 U. S. 652, 668
(1990)).

