54

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

state constitutional amendment to authorize a graduated
income tax. The statute was a transparent attempt to
prevent corporations from spending money to defeat this
amendment, which was favored by a majority of legislators
but had been repeatedly rejected by the voters. See id., at
769–770, and n. 3. We said that “where, as here, the
legislature’s suppression of speech suggests an attempt to
give one side of a debatable public question an advantage
in expressing its views to the people, the First Amendment
is plainly offended.” Id., at 785–786 (footnote omitted).
Bellotti thus involved a viewpoint-discriminatory stat­
ute, created to effect a particular policy outcome. Even
Justice Rehnquist, in dissent, had to acknowledge that “a
very persuasive argument could be made that the [Massa­
chusetts Legislature], desiring to impose a personal in­
come tax but more than once defeated in that desire by the
combination of the Commonwealth’s referendum provision
and corporate expenditures in opposition to such a tax,
simply decided to muzzle corporations on this sort of issue
so that it could succeed in its desire.” Id., at 827, n. 6. To
make matters worse, the law at issue did not make any
allowance for corporations to spend money through PACs.
Id., at 768, n. 2 (opinion of the Court). This really was a
complete ban on a specific, preidentified subject. See
MCFL, 479 U. S., at 259, n. 12 (stating that 2 U. S. C.
§441b’s expenditure restriction “is of course distinguish
able from the complete foreclosure of any opportunity for
political speech that we invalidated in the state referen­
dum context in . . . Bellotti” (emphasis added)).
The majority grasps a quotational straw from Bellotti,
that speech does not fall entirely outside the protection of
the First Amendment merely because it comes from a
corporation. Ante, at 30–31. Of course not, but no one
suggests the contrary and neither Austin nor McConnell
held otherwise. They held that even though the expendi­
tures at issue were subject to First Amendment scrutiny,

