42

CITIZENS UNITED v. FEDERAL ELECTION COMM’N
Opinion of the Court

America as Amicus Curiae 8–9, n. 5.
A single footnote in Bellotti purported to leave open the
possibility that corporate independent expenditures could
be shown to cause corruption. 435 U. S., at 788, n. 26. For
the reasons explained above, we now conclude that inde
pendent expenditures, including those made by corpora
tions, do not give rise to corruption or the appearance of
corruption. Dicta in Bellotti’s footnote suggested that “a
corporation’s right to speak on issues of general public
interest implies no comparable right in the quite different
context of participation in a political campaign for election
to public office.” Ibid. Citing the portion of Buckley that
invalidated the federal independent expenditure ban, 424
U. S., at 46, and a law review student comment, Bellotti
surmised that “Congress might well be able to demon
strate the existence of a danger of real or apparent corrup
tion in independent expenditures by corporations to influ
ence candidate elections.” 435 U. S., at 788, n. 26.
Buckley, however, struck down a ban on independent
expenditures to support candidates that covered corpora
tions, 424 U. S., at 23, 39, n. 45, and explained that “the
distinction between discussion of issues and candidates
and advocacy of election or defeat of candidates may often
dissolve in practical application,” id., at 42. Bellotti’s
dictum is thus supported only by a law review student
comment, which misinterpreted Buckley. See Comment,
The Regulation of Union Political Activity: Majority and
Minority Rights and Remedies, 126 U. Pa. L. Rev. 386, 408
(1977) (suggesting that “corporations and labor unions
should be held to different and more stringent standards
than an individual or other associations under a regula
tory scheme for campaign financing”).
Seizing on this aside in Bellotti’s footnote, the Court in
NRWC did say there is a “sufficient” governmental inter
est in “ensur[ing] that substantial aggregations of wealth
amassed” by corporations would not “be used to incur

