2

TURNER v. ROGERS
Syllabus
tion,” Turner’s imprisonment for up to 12 months, is “in its duration
too short to be fully litigated” through the state courts (and arrive
here) prior to its “expiration.” First Nat’l Bank of Boston v. Bellotti,
435 U. S. 765, 774. And there is a more than “reasonable” likelihood
that Turner will again be “subjected to the same action” because he
has frequently failed to make his support payments, has been the
subject of several civil contempt proceedings, has been imprisoned
several times, and is, once again, the subject of civil contempt pro
ceedings for failure to pay. DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416 U. S. 312, and
St. Pierre v. United States, 319 U. S. 41, distinguished. Pp. 5–7.
2. The Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause does not auto
matically require the State to provide counsel at civil contempt pro
ceedings to an indigent noncustodial parent who is subject to a child
support order, even if that individual faces incarceration. In particu
lar, that Clause does not require that counsel be provided where the
opposing parent or other custodian is not represented by counsel and
the State provides alternative procedural safeguards equivalent to
adequate notice of the importance of the ability to pay, a fair oppor
tunity to present, and to dispute, relevant information, and express
court findings as to the supporting parent’s ability to comply with the
support order. Pp. 7–16.
(a) This Court’s precedents provide no definitive answer to the
question whether counsel must be provided. The Sixth Amendment
grants an indigent criminal defendant the right to counsel, see, e.g.,
United States v. Dixon, 509 U. S. 688, 696, but does not govern civil
cases. Civil and criminal contempt differ. A court may not impose
punishment “in a civil contempt proceeding when it is clearly estab
lished that the alleged contemnor is unable to comply with the terms
of the order.” Hicks v. Feiock, 485 U. S. 624, 638, n. 9. And once a
civil contemnor complies with the underlying order, he is purged of
the contempt and is free. Id., at 633. The Due Process Clause allows
a State to provide fewer procedural protections in civil contempt pro
ceedings than in a criminal case. Id., at 637–641. Cases directly con
cerning a right to counsel in civil cases have found a presumption of
such a right “only” in cases involving incarceration, but have not held
that a right to counsel exists in all such cases. See In re Gault, 387
U. S. 1; Vitek v. Jones, 445 U. S. 480; and Lassiter v. Department of
Social Servs. of Durham Cty., 452 U. S. 18. Pp. 7–10.
(b) Because a contempt proceeding to compel support payments
is civil, the question whether the “specific dictates of due process” re
quire appointed counsel is determined by examining the “distinct fac
tors” this Court has used to decide what specific safeguards are
needed to make a civil proceeding fundamentally fair. Mathews v.
Eldridge, 424 U. S. 319, 335. As relevant here those factors include

