Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

THOMAS, J., dissenting

have never raised: The family court’s procedures “were
in adequate to ensure an accurate determination of
[Turner’s] present ability to pay.” Brief for United States
as Amicus Curiae 19 (capitalization and boldface type
deleted); see ante, at 14–16. I would not reach this issue.
There are good reasons not to consider new issues raised
for the first and only time in an amicus brief. As here,
the new issue may be outside the question presented.3 See
Pet. for Cert. i (“Whether . . . an indigent defendant has no
constitutional right to appointed counsel at a civil con
tempt proceeding that results in his incarceration”); see
also ante, at 4–5 (identifying the conflict among lower
courts as regarding “the right to counsel”). As here, the
new issue may not have been addressed by, or even pre
sented to, the state court. See 387 S. C. 142, 144, 691
S. E. 2d 470, 472 (2010) (describing the only question as
whether “the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments of the
United States Constitution guarantee [Turner], as an
indigent defendant in family court, the right to appointed
counsel”). As here, the parties may not have preserved the
issue, leaving the record undeveloped. See Tr. of Oral Arg.
49, 43 (“The record is insufficient” regarding alternative
procedures because “[t]hey were raised for the very first
time at the merits stage here; so, there’s been no develop
ment”); Brief for Respondents 63. As here, the parties
may not address the new issue in this Court, leaving its
boundaries untested. See Brief for Petitioner 27, n. 15
(reiterating that “[t]he particular constitutional violation
——————
3 Indeed,

the new question is not one that would even merit certiorari.
See this Court’s Rule 10. Because the family court received a form
detailing Turner’s finances and the judge could not hold Turner in
contempt without concluding that he could pay, the due process ques
tion that the majority answers reduces to a factbound assessment of the
family court’s performance. See ante, at 14–16; Reply Brief for Peti
tioner 14–15 (“[I]n advance of his hearing, Turner supplied to the
family court just such a form”).

