12

TURNER v. ROGERS
THOMAS, J., dissenting

traditional enforcement mechanisms, many States also
use civil contempt proceedings to coerce “deadbeats” into
paying what they owe. The States that use civil contempt
with the threat of detention find it a “highly effective” tool
for collecting child support when nothing else works.
Compendium of Responses Collected by the U. S. Dept. of
Health and Human Services Office of Child Support En
forcement (Dec. 28, 2010), reprinted in App. to Brief
for Sen. DeMint et al. as Amici Curiae 7a; see id., at 3a,
9a. For example, Virginia, which uses civil contempt as
“a last resort,” reports that in 2010 “deadbeats” paid ap
proximately $13 million “either before a court hearing
to avoid a contempt finding or after a court hearing to
purge the contempt finding.” Id., at 13a–14a. Other
States confirm that the mere threat of imprisonment is
often quite effective because most contemners “will pay . . .
rather than go to jail.” Id., at 4a; see also Underground
Economy C–2 (“Many judges . . . report that the prospect
of [detention] often causes obligors to discover previously
undisclosed resources that they can use to make child
support payments”).
This case illustrates the point. After the family court
imposed Turner’s weekly support obligation in June 2003,
he made no payments until the court held him in contempt
three months later, whereupon he paid over $1,000 to
avoid confinement. App. 17a–18a, 131a. Three more
times, Turner refused to pay until the family court held
him in contempt—then paid in short order. Id., at 23a–
25a, 31a–34a, 125a–126a, 129a–130a.
Although I think that the majority’s analytical frame
work does not account for the interests that children and
mothers have in effective and flexible methods to secure
payment, I do not pass on the wisdom of the majority’s
preferred procedures. Nor do I address the wisdom of
the State’s decision to use certain methods of enforcement.
Whether “deadbeat dads” should be threatened with in

