4

TURNER v. ROGERS
THOMAS, J., dissenting

“civil contempt is not a ‘criminal prosecution’ within the
meaning of the Sixth Amendment”). He argues instead
that “the right to the assistance of counsel for persons
facing incarceration arises not only from the Sixth
Amendment, but also from the requirement of fundamen
tal fairness under the Due Process Clause of the Four
teenth Amendment.” Brief for Petitioner 28. In his view,
this Court has relied on due process to “rejec[t] formalistic
distinctions between criminal and civil proceedings, in
stead concluding that incarceration or other confinement
triggers the right to counsel.” Id., at 33.
But if the Due Process Clause created a right to ap
pointed counsel in all proceedings with the potential for
detention, then the Sixth Amendment right to appointed
counsel would be unnecessary. Under Turner’s theory,
every instance in which the Sixth Amendment guarantees
a right to appointed counsel is covered also by the Due
Process Clause. The Sixth Amendment, however, is the
only constitutional provision that even mentions the assis
tance of counsel; the Due Process Clause says nothing
about counsel. Ordinarily, we do not read a general provi
sion to render a specific one superfluous. Cf. Morales v.
Trans World Airlines, Inc., 504 U. S. 374, 384 (1992)
(“[I]t is a commonplace of statutory construction that the
specific governs the general”). The fact that one constitu
tional provision expressly provides a right to appointed
counsel in specific circumstances indicates that the Con
stitution does not also sub silentio provide that right far
more broadly in another, more general, provision. Cf.
Albright v. Oliver, 510 U. S. 266, 273 (1994) (plurality
opinion) (“Where a particular Amendment provides an
explicit textual source of constitutional protection against
a particular sort of government behavior, that Amend
ment, not the more generalized notion of ‘substantive due
process,’ must be the guide for analyzing these claims”
(internal quotation marks omitted)); id., at 281 (KENNEDY,

