(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

TURNER v. ROGERS ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH CAROLINA
No. 10–10. Argued March 23, 2011—Decided June 20, 2011
After a South Carolina family court ordered petitioner Turner to pay
$51.73 per week to respondent Rogers to help support their child,
Turner repeatedly failed to pay the amount due and was held in con
tempt five times. For the first four, he was sentenced to 90 days’ im
prisonment, but he ultimately paid what he owed (twice without be
ing jailed, twice after spending a few days in custody). The fifth time
he did not pay but completed a 6-month sentence. After his release,
the family court clerk issued a new “show cause” order against
Turner because he was $5728.76 in arrears. Both he and Rogers
were unrepresented by counsel at his brief civil contempt hearing.
The judge found Turner in willful contempt and sentenced him to 12
months in prison without making any finding as to his ability to pay
or indicating on the contempt order form whether he was able to
make support payments. After Turner completed his sentence, the
South Carolina Supreme Court rejected his claim that the Federal
Constitution entitled him to counsel at his contempt hearing, declar
ing that civil contempt does not require all the constitutional safe
guards applicable in criminal contempt proceedings.
Held:
1. Even though Turner has completed his 12-month sentence, and
there are not alleged to be collateral consequences of the contempt
determination that might keep the dispute alive, this case is not
moot, because it is “capable of repetition” while “evading review,”
Southern Pac. Terminal Co. v. Interstate Commerce Comm’n, 219
U. S. 498, 515. A case remains live if “(1) the challenged action [is] in
its duration too short to be fully litigated prior to its cessation or ex
piration, and (2) there [is] a reasonable expectation that the same
complaining party [will] be subjected to the same action again.”
Weinstein v. Bradford, 423 U. S. 147, 149. Here, the “challenged ac

