Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

778. And in determining whether the Clause requires a
right to counsel here, we must take account of opposing
interests, as well as consider the probable value of “addi
tional or substitute procedural safeguards.” Mathews,
supra, at 335.
Doing so, we find three related considerations that,
when taken together, argue strongly against the Due
Process Clause requiring the State to provide indigents
with counsel in every proceeding of the kind before us.
First, the critical question likely at issue in these cases
concerns, as we have said, the defendant’s ability to pay.
That question is often closely related to the question of the
defendant’s indigence. But when the right procedures are
in place, indigence can be a question that in many—but
not all—cases is sufficiently straightforward to warrant
determination prior to providing a defendant with counsel,
even in a criminal case. Federal law, for example, re
quires a criminal defendant to provide information show
ing that he is indigent, and therefore entitled to state
funded counsel, before he can receive that assistance. See
18 U. S. C. §3006A(b).
Second, sometimes, as here, the person opposing the
defendant at the hearing is not the government repre
sented by counsel but the custodial parent unrepresented
by counsel. See Dept. of Health and Human Services,
Office of Child Support Enforcement, Understanding Child
Support Debt: A Guide to Exploring Child Support Debt in
Your State 5, 6 (2004) (51% of nationwide arrears, and
58% in South Carolina, are not owed to the government).
The custodial parent, perhaps a woman with custody of
one or more children, may be relatively poor, unemployed,
and unable to afford counsel. Yet she may have encour
aged the court to enforce its order through contempt. Cf.
Tr. Contempt Proceedings (Sept. 14, 2005), App. 44a–45a
(Rogers asks court, in light of pattern of nonpayment, to
confine Turner). She may be able to provide the court

