Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
(1) the nature of “the private interest that will be affected,” (2) the
comparative “risk” of an “erroneous deprivation” of that interest with
and without “additional or substitute procedural safeguards,” and (3)
the nature and magnitude of any countervailing interest in not pro
viding “additional or substitute procedural requirement[s].” Ibid.
The “private interest that will be affected” argues strongly for the
right to counsel here. That interest consists of an indigent defen
dant’s loss of personal liberty through imprisonment. Freedom “from
bodily restraint” lies “at the core of the liberty protected by the Due
Process Clause.” Foucha v. Louisiana, 504 U. S. 71, 80. Thus, accu
rate decisionmaking as to the “ability to pay”—which marks a divid
ing line between civil and criminal contempt, Hicks, supra, at 635, n.
7—must be assured because an incorrect decision can result in a
wrongful incarceration. And because ability to comply divides civil
and criminal contempt proceedings, an erroneous determination
would also deprive a defendant of the procedural protections a crimi
nal proceeding would demand. Questions about ability to pay are
likely to arise frequently in child custody cases. On the other hand,
due process does not always require the provision of counsel in civil
proceedings where incarceration is threatened. See Gagnon v. Scar
pelli, 411 U. S. 778. To determine whether a right to counsel is re
quired here, opposing interests and the probable value of “additional
or substitute procedural safeguards” must be taken into account.
Mathews, supra, at 335.
Doing so reveals three related considerations that, taken together,
argue strongly against requiring counsel in every proceeding of the
present kind. First, the likely critical question in these cases is the
defendant’s ability to pay, which is often closely related to his indi
gence and relatively straightforward. Second, sometimes, as here,
the person opposing the defendant at the hearing is not the govern
ment represented by counsel but the custodial parent unrepresented
by counsel. A requirement that the State provide counsel to the non
custodial parent in these cases could create an asymmetry of repre
sentation that would “alter significantly the nature of the proceed
ing,” Gagnon, supra, at 787, creating a degree of formality or delay
that would unduly slow payment to those immediately in need and
make the proceedings less fair overall. Third, as the Federal Gov
ernment points out, an available set of “substitute procedural safe
guards,” Mathews, supra, at 335, if employed together, can signifi
cantly reduce the risk of an erroneous deprivation of liberty. These
include (1) notice to the defendant that his “ability to pay” is a critical
issue in the contempt proceeding; (2) the use of a form (or the equiva
lent) to elicit relevant financial information from him; (3) an oppor
tunity at the hearing for him to respond to statements and questions

