Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

example, that sometimes assistance other than purely
legal assistance (here, say, that of a neutral social worker)
can prove constitutionally sufficient. Cf. Vitek, 445 U. S.,
at 499–500 (Powell, J., concurring in part) (provision of
mental health professional). But the Government does
claim that these alternatives can assure the “fundamental
fairness” of the proceeding even where the State does not
pay for counsel for an indigent defendant.
While recognizing the strength of Turner’s arguments,
we ultimately believe that the three considerations we
have just discussed must carry the day. In our view, a
categorical right to counsel in proceedings of the kind
before us would carry with it disadvantages (in the form of
unfairness and delay) that, in terms of ultimate fairness,
would deprive it of significant superiority over the alterna
tives that we have mentioned. We consequently hold that
the Due Process Clause does not automatically require the
provision of counsel at civil contempt proceedings to an
indigent individual who is subject to a child support order,
even if that individual faces incarceration (for up to a
year). In particular, that Clause does not require the
provision of counsel where the opposing parent or other
custodian (to whom support funds are owed) is not repre
sented by counsel and the State provides alternative
procedural safeguards equivalent to those we have men
tioned (adequate notice of the importance of ability to pay,
fair opportunity to present, and to dispute, relevant in
formation, and court findings).
We do not address civil contempt proceedings where the
underlying child support payment is owed to the State, for
example, for reimbursement of welfare funds paid to the
parent with custody. See supra, at 10. Those proceedings
more closely resemble debt-collection proceedings. The
government is likely to have counsel or some other compe
tent representative. Cf. Johnson v. Zerbst, 304 U. S. 458,
462–463 (1938) (“[T]he average defendant does not have

