8

TURNER v. ROGERS
THOMAS, J., dissenting

that Turner challenges in this case is the failure of the
family court to appoint counsel”); Brief for Respondents 62
(declining to address the Government’s argument because
it is not “properly before this Court” (capitalization and
boldface type deleted). Finally, as here, a party may even
oppose the position taken by its allegedly supportive
amicus. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 7–12, 14–15 (Turner’s coun
sel rejecting the Government’s argument that any proce
dures short of a categorical right to appointed counsel
could satisfy due process); Reply Brief for Petitioner 14–
15.
Accordingly, it is the wise and settled general practice of
this Court not to consider an issue in the first instance,
much less one raised only by an amicus. See this Court’s
Rule 14.1(a) (“Only the questions set out in the petition, or
fairly included therein, will be considered by the Court”);
Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Mineta, 534 U. S. 103, 110
(2001) (per curiam) (“[T]his is a court of final review and
not first view” (internal quotation marks omitted)); United
Parcel Service, Inc. v. Mitchell, 451 U. S. 56, 60, n. 2 (1981)
(declining to consider an amicus’ argument “since it was
not raised by either of the parties here or below” and was
outside the grant of certiorari). This is doubly true when
we review the decision of a state court and triply so when
the new issue is a constitutional matter. See McGoldrick
v. Compagnie Generale Transatlantique, 309 U. S. 430,
434 (1940) (“[I]t is only in exceptional cases, and then only
in cases coming from the federal courts, that [this Court]
considers questions urged by a petitioner or appellant not
pressed or passed upon in the courts below”); Cardinale v.
Louisiana, 394 U. S. 437, 438 (1969) (“[T]he Court will not
decide federal constitutional issues raised here for the first
time on review of state court decisions”).
The majority errs in moving beyond the question that
was litigated below, decided by the state courts, petitioned
to this Court, and argued by the parties here, to resolve a

