14

TURNER v. ROGERS
Opinion of the Court

with significant information. Cf. id., at 41a–43a (Rogers
describes where Turner lived and worked). And the pro
ceeding is ultimately for her benefit.
A requirement that the State provide counsel to the
noncustodial parent in these cases could create an asym
metry of representation that would “alter significantly the
nature of the proceeding.” Gagnon, supra, at 787. Doing
so could mean a degree of formality or delay that would
unduly slow payment to those immediately in need. And,
perhaps more important for present purposes, doing so
could make the proceedings less fair overall, increasing the
risk of a decision that would erroneously deprive a family
of the support it is entitled to receive. The needs of such
families play an important role in our analysis. Cf. post,
at 10–12 (opinion of THOMAS, J.).
Third, as the Solicitor General points out, there is avail
able a set of “substitute procedural safeguards,” Mathews,
424 U. S., at 335, which, if employed together, can signifi
cantly reduce the risk of an erroneous deprivation of lib
erty. They can do so, moreover, without incurring some of
the drawbacks inherent in recognizing an automatic right
to counsel. Those safeguards include (1) notice to the de
fendant that his “ability to pay” is a critical issue in the
contempt proceeding; (2) the use of a form (or the equiva
lent) to elicit relevant financial information; (3) an oppor
tunity at the hearing for the defendant to respond to
statements and questions about his financial status, (e.g.,
those triggered by his responses on the form); and (4) an
express finding by the court that the defendant has the
ability to pay. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 26–27; Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 23–25. In presenting these al
ternatives, the Government draws upon considerable
experience in helping to manage statutorily mandated
federal-state efforts to enforce child support orders. See
supra, at 10. It does not claim that they are the only
possible alternatives, and this Court’s cases suggest, for

