Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

And as respondent and the Solicitor General elsewhere
acknowledge, quite a few aspects of the FCA, including a
reference to “administrative” proceedings in §3733(l)
(7)(A)11 and the reference to “news media” in
§3730(e)(4)(A) itself, are not just federal. In any event, the
“federal focus” of the statute, as a whole, does not shine
light on the specific question whether the public disclosure
bar extends to certain nonfederal contexts. It is the fact of
“public disclosure”—not Federal Government creation or
receipt—that is the touchstone of §3730(e)(4)(A).
Respondent and the Solicitor General make one last
argument grounded in the statutory text: It would be
anomalous, they say, for state and local administrative
reports to count as public disclosures, when state legisla
tive reports do not. See Brief for Respondent 15; Brief for
United States 15–16. Yet neither respondent nor the
Solicitor General disputes the contention of petitioners
and their amici that, at the time the public disclosure bar
was enacted in 1986, Congress rarely gave state legisla
tures a meaningful role in administering or overseeing
federally funded programs. See Brief for Petitioners 36–
39; Brief for National League of Cities et al. as Amici
Curiae 8–13. As in the instant case, the Federal Govern
ment was far more likely to enter into contracts with, and
to provide moneys to, state and local executive agencies.
Whether or not state legislative sources should have been
included in §3730(e)(4)(A), their exclusion therefore car
ries no clear implications for the status of state adminis
trative sources.
In sum, although the term “administrative” may be
sandwiched in Category 2 between terms that are federal
——————
11 On its face, §3733(l)(7)(A) is silent as to whether it includes nonfed
eral proceedings. Respondent and the Solicitor General suggest that it
does, though they fairly argue that this provision, relating to civil
investigative demands, has little if any relevance to the case at hand.
See Brief for Respondent 21, n. 8; Brief for United States 31–32.

