18

GRAHAM COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
DIST. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. WILSON
Opinion of the Court

303, 310 (1976), there is no “evident legislative purpose” to
guide our resolution of the discrete issue that confronts us.
V
Respondent and her amici likewise fail to prove their
case that petitioners’ reading of the statute will lead to
results that Congress could not have intended. Their
argument rests on an empirical proposition: “While federal
inquiries and their outcomes are readily available to De
partment of Justice [(DOJ)] attorneys, many state and
local reports and investigations never come to the atten
tion of federal authorities.” Brief for United States 22; see
also 528 F. 3d, at 306 (“Because the federal government is
unlikely to learn about state and local investigations, a
large number of fraudulent claims against the government
would go unremedied without the financial incentives
offered by the qui tam provisions of the FCA”). This
proposition is not implausible, but it is sheer conjecture.
Numerous federal investigations may be occurring at any
given time, and DOJ attorneys may not reliably learn
about their findings. DOJ attorneys may learn about
quite a few state and local inquiries, especially when the
inquiries are conducted pursuant to a joint federal-state
program financed in part by federal dollars, such as the
program at issue in this case.18 Just how accessible to the
Attorney General a typical state or local source will be, as
compared to a federal source, is an open question. And it
——————
18 In some instances, federal law dictates that state and local govern
ments receiving federal funds perform an audit of their programs. See
31 U. S. C. §7502(a)(1)(B) (requiring nonfederal entities that expend
federal awards above a certain amount to “undergo a single audit” in
accordance with specified conditions); Brief for State of Pennsylvania et
al. as Amici Curiae 7–10 (discussing the Single Audit Act of 1984). It
bears mention that, to the extent one is worried about Federal Gov
ernment ignorance of state and local antifraud efforts, see post, at 10–
11, today’s ruling may induce federal authorities to pay closer attention
to such efforts going forward.

