Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

The Court draws additional support for its conclusion
from reference to the provision’s “larger scheme,” ante, at
8—i.e., the sources enumerated in Categories 1 and 3.
Although the scope of Category 1 is not before us today
(and although this Court has never addressed that ques
tion), the Court believes that reading Category 2 as lim
ited to Federal Government sources would be inconsistent
with decisions of lower courts that have interpreted
“criminal, civil, or administrative hearing[s]” in Category
1 to include both state and federal proceedings. There is
no conflict, however, if both categories are read, as re
spondent and the Solicitor General urge, as exclusively
federal. See Brief for Respondent 23–24; Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 25–26. Even reading Category 1
more broadly, however, does not change the exclusively
federal nature of “congressional” and “[GAO],” which
undermines whatever inference might be drawn from
taking the statutory terms in strict succession. Treating
the entirety of §3730(e)(4)(A) as an undifferentiated list of
items gives short shrift to the syntactical choices Congress
made in offsetting each category with commas and prepo
sitions, and in providing distinct classes of adjectives that
modify different nouns.
Finally, the Court also views “news media” as “distinctly
nonfederal in nature.” Ante, at 8–9. But “news media”
does not seem particularly illuminating in this context. As
the Court of Appeals observed, although media sources
——————
disjunctive be given separate meanings”). Because Congress did not
employ a completely disjunctive list in §3730(e)(4)(A)—i.e., “congres
sional or administrative or [GAO]”—the Reiter principle applies with
less force. Cf. Garcia v. United States, 469 U. S. 70, 73 (1984) (applying
disjunctive principle in construing statutory prohibition on assault and
robbery of any custodian of “ ‘mail matter or of any money or other
property of the United States,’ ” and observing that “[t]he three classes
of property . . . are each separated by the conjunction ‘or’ ” (quoting 18
U. S. C. §2114; some emphasis deleted)).

