14

GRAHAM COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
DIST. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. WILSON
Opinion of the Court

include the words “administrative,” “audit,” or “investiga
tion” in its version of Category 2, nor did it contain an
original source exception. See S. Rep., at 42–43 (text of
proposed §3730(e)(4)).13
In respondent and her amici’s view, this background
counsels in favor of an exclusively federal interpretation of
“administrative” for three separate reasons. First, the
drafting history of the public disclosure bar suggests that
Congress intended such a result. Second, a major aim of
the 1986 amendments was to limit the scope of the Gov
ernment knowledge bar, and “[c]onstruing [§3730(e)(4)(A)]
as limited to disclosures in federal proceedings furthers
Congress’s purpose ‘to encourage more private enforce
ment suits.’ ” Brief for United States 21 (quoting S. Rep.,
at 23–24). Third, whereas federal administrative proceed
ings can be presumed to provide the Attorney General
with a fair opportunity to decide whether to bring an FCA
action based on revelations made therein, the Attorney
General is much less likely to learn of fraud disclosed in
state proceedings. Respondent and her amici further
maintain that it would be perverse to include nonfederal
sources in Category 2, as local governments would then be
able to shield themselves from qui tam liability by dis
cretely disclosing evidence of fraud in “public” reports.14
These arguments are reasonable so far as they go, but
they do not go very far. As many have observed, the draft
ing history of the public disclosure bar raises more ques
tions than it answers.15 Significant substantive changes—
——————
13 See

also H. R. Rep. No. 99–660, pp. 2–3 (1986) (text of proposed
§3730(b)(5)). The public disclosure bar that was enacted more closely
resembles the version in the Senate bill.
14 State governments are already shielded from qui tam liability un
der our precedent. Stevens, 529 U. S. 765.
15 See, e.g., Dunleavy, 123 F. 3d, at 745 (“Congress gave us little spe
cific guidance to determine the scope of public disclosure sources”);
United States ex rel. Stinson, Lyons, Gerlin & Bustamante, P. A. v.

