20

GRAHAM COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
DIST. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. WILSON
Opinion of the Court

that an agency trying to cover up its fraud would reveal
the requisite ‘allegations or transactions’ underlying the
fraud in a public document”).19
Our conclusion is buttressed by the fact that Congress
carefully preserved the rights of the most deserving qui
tam plaintiffs: those whistle-blowers who qualify as origi
nal sources. Notwithstanding public disclosure of the
allegations made by a qui tam plaintiff, her case may go
forward if she is “an original source of the information.”
§3730(e)(4)(A). It is therefore flat wrong to suggest that a
finding for petitioners will “ ‘in effect return us to the
unduly restrictive “government knowledge” standard’ ”
that prevailed prior to 1986. Brief for United States 31
(quoting Dunleavy, 123 F. 3d, at 746); see Brief for Re
spondent 34 (asserting that “petitioners’ construction
would reimpose a form of the ‘government knowledge’ bar”
(capitalization omitted)). Today’s ruling merely confirms
that disclosures made in one type of context—a state or
local report, audit, or investigation—may trigger the
public disclosure bar. It has no bearing on disclosures
made in other contexts, and it leaves intact the ability of
original sources to prosecute qui tam actions irrespective
of the state of Government knowledge. Whether respon
dent can qualify as an “original source,” as that term is
defined in §3730(e)(4), is one of many issues that remain
open on remand.
——————
19 Petitioners and their amici also counter with public policy argu
ments of their own. Under the Court of Appeals’ reading of the statute,
they allege, there is an increased likelihood that parasitic relators will
beat more deserving relators to the courthouse, Brief for Petitioners 31,
and that state and local governments will find their antifraud investi
gations impeded, or will decline to conduct such investigations in the
first place, on account of “opportunistic potential relators trolling state
records and reports, available to the public,” in search of a qui tam
claim, Brief for State of Pennsylvania et al. as Amici Curiae 11.

