4

GRAHAM COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 

DIST. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. WILSON 

Opinion of the Court 


II
We have examined the FCA’s qui tam provisions in
several recent opinions.3 At issue in this case is the FCA’s
public disclosure bar, which deprives courts of jurisdiction
over qui tam suits when the relevant information has
already entered the public domain through certain chan
nels. The statute contains three categories of jurisdiction
stripping disclosures. Following the example of the Court
of Appeals, see 528 F. 3d, at 300–301, we have inserted
Arabic numerals to identify these categories:
“No court shall have jurisdiction over an action under
this section based upon the public disclosure of allega
tions or transactions [1] in a criminal, civil, or admin
istrative hearing, [2] in a congressional, administra
tive, or Government Accounting Office [(GAO)] report,
hearing, audit, or investigation, or [3] from the news
media, unless the action is brought by the Attorney
General or the person bringing the action is an origi
nal source[4] of the information.” §3730(e)(4)(A) (foot
note omitted).
This dispute turns on the meaning of the adjective “ad
ministrative” in the second category (Category 2): whether
it embraces only forums that are federal in nature, as
respondent alleges, or whether it extends to disclosures
made in state and local sources such as the DEHNR Re
——————
3 See,

e.g., Rockwell Int’l Corp. v. United States, 549 U. S. 457 (2007)
(construing §3730(e)(4)(A)’s original source exception); Cook County v.
United States ex rel. Chandler, 538 U. S. 119 (2003) (holding that local
governments are subject to qui tam liability); Vermont Agency of
Natural Resources v. United States ex rel. Stevens, 529 U. S. 765 (2000)
(holding that States are not subject to private FCA actions).
4 A separate statutory provision defines an “original source” as “an
individual who has direct and independent knowledge of the informa
tion on which the allegations are based and has voluntarily provided
the information to the Government before filing an action under this
section which is based on the information.” 31 U. S. C. §3730(e)(4)(B).

