Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of the Court

is not even the right question. The statutory touchstone,
once again, is whether the allegations of fraud have been
“public[ly] disclos[ed],” §3730(e)(4)(A), not whether they
have landed on the desk of a DOJ lawyer.
Respondent’s argument also gives insufficient weight to
Congress’ decision to bar qui tam actions based on disclo
sures “from the news media.” Ibid. Because there was no
such bar prior to 1986, the addition of the news media as a
jurisdiction-stripping category forecloses the suggestion
that the 1986 amendments implemented a single-minded
intent to increase the availability of qui tam litigation.
And since the “news media” include a large number of
local newspapers and radio stations, this category likely
describes a multitude of sources that would seldom come
to the attention of the Attorney General.
As for respondent and her amici’s concern that local
governments will insulate themselves from qui tam liabil
ity “through careful, low key ‘disclosures’ ” of potential
fraud, Brief for American Center for Law and Justice as
Amicus Curiae 17, this argument rests not just on specu
lation but indeed on rather strained speculation. Any
such disclosure would not immunize the local government
from FCA liability in an action brought by the United
States, see Rockwell Int’l Corp. v. United States, 549 U. S.
457, 478 (2007)—and to the contrary it could tip off the
Attorney General that such an action might be fruitful. It
seems to us that petitioners have the more clear-eyed view
when they assert that, “[g]iven the fact that the submis
sion of a false claim to the United States subjects a defen
dant to criminal liability, fines, debarment, treble dam
ages and attorneys’ fees, no rational entity would prepare
a report that self-discloses fraud with the sole purpose of
cutting off qui tam actions.” Reply Brief for Petitioners 19;
see also United States ex rel. Bly-Magee v. Premo, 470
F. 3d 914, 919 (CA9 2006) (“The fear [of self-insulating
disclosures] is unfounded in general because it is unlikely

