8

GRAHAM COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 

DIST. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. WILSON 

Opinion of the Court 


More important, we need to evaluate “administrative”
within the larger scheme of the public disclosure bar.
Both parties acknowledge, as they must, that “[s]tatutory
language has meaning only in context,” Graham County
Soil, 545 U. S., at 415; where they differ is in determining
the relevant context. The Sandwich Theory presupposes
that Category 2 is the only piece of §3730(e)(4)(A) that
matters. We agree with petitioners, however, that all of
the sources listed in §3730(e)(4)(A) provide interpretive
guidance. All of these sources drive at the same end:
specifying the types of disclosures that can foreclose qui
tam actions. In light of the public disclosure bar’s gram
matical structure, it may be convenient and even clarify
ing to parse the list of sources into three categories. But it
does not follow that we should treat these categories as
islands unto themselves. Courts have a “duty to construe
statutes, not isolated provisions.” Gustafson v. Alloyd Co.,
513 U. S. 561, 568 (1995).
When we consider the entire text of the public disclosure
bar, the case for limiting “administrative” to federal
sources becomes significantly weaker. The “news media”
referenced in Category 3 plainly have a broader sweep.
The Federal Government funds certain media outlets, and
certain private outlets have a national focus; but no one
contends that Category 3 is limited to these sources.
There is likewise no textual basis for assuming that the
“criminal, civil, or administrative hearing[s]” listed in
Category 1 must be federal hearings.8 Of the numerous
——————
“common feature” at all, post, at 4—apart from a governmental conno
tation. It takes the Sandwich Theory to graft a federal limitation onto
“administrative.”
8 A number of lower courts have concluded that, as used in Category
1, “ ‘hearing’ is roughly synonymous with ‘proceeding.’ ” United States
ex rel. Springfield Terminal R. Co. v. Quinn, 14 F. 3d 645, 652 (CADC
1994); see also 1 J. Boese, Civil False Claims and Qui Tam Actions
§4.02[B], p. 4–59, and n. 231 (3d ed. 2006) (hereinafter Boese); C.

