Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

unintended breadth to the Acts of Congress.’ ” Gutierrez v.
Ada, 528 U. S. 250, 255 (2000) (quoting Jarecki v. G. D.
Searle & Co., 367 U. S. 303, 307 (1961)). Here, the imme
diate proximity of “congressional” and “[GAO]” suggests
that “administrative” should be read, like its neighbors, as
referring to Federal Government sources. If Congress had
intended to include state or local government administra
tive materials, it could have said so, for instance by refer
ring generically to “governmental” sources. See 528 F. 3d,
at 304–305.
The Court applies the logic that underlies the noscitur a
sociis canon in concluding that “administrative” does not
refer to private entities because of the meaning suggested
by the slightly more distant neighbors “report, hearing,
audit, or investigation.” See ante, at 5. I agree with the
majority that “administrative” in this context does not
reach private entities. But in my view, “congressional”
and “[GAO]” provide the better textual grounding for that
conclusion. I see no reason why the “administrati[on]” of a
private university, for instance, could not issue a “report,”
order an “audit” or “investigation,” or conduct a “hearing.”
Nor, contrary to the majority’s suggestion, are private
entities—particularly those receiving federal funds or
participating in federal programs—incapable of making
“public disclosure[s]” of fraud on the Federal Government.
Despite its own implicit reliance on the canon, the Court
nevertheless rejects the Court of Appeals’ application of
noscitur a sociis to interpret the three terms in Category 2,
concluding that “[a] list of three items, each quite distinct
from the other no matter how construed, is too short to be
particularly illuminating.” Ante, at 6–7. The three terms
in Category 2, the Court concludes, are “too few and too
disparate” to justify invocation of noscitur a sociis. Ante,
at 7. We have not previously constrained the canon in this
way, and I would not do so here.
To take just one example, in Jarecki we construed the

