(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

GRAHAM COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVA-

TION DISTRICT ET AL. v. UNITED STATES EX REL.

WILSON 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–304.

Argued November 30, 2009—Decided March 30, 2010

The False Claims Act (FCA) authorizes both the Attorney General and
private qui tam relators to recover from persons who make false or
fraudulent payment claims to the United States, but it bars qui tam
actions based upon the public disclosure of allegations or transactions
in, inter alia, “a congressional, administrative, or Government Ac
counting Office [(GAO)] report, hearing, audit, or investigation.” 31
U. S. C. §3730(e)(4)(A). Here, federal contracts provided that two
North Carolina counties would remediate areas damaged by flooding
and that the Federal Government would shoulder most of the costs.
Respondent Wilson, then an employee of a local government body in
volved in this effort, alerted local and federal officials about possible
fraud. Both the county and the State issued reports identifying po
tential irregularities in the contracts’ administration. Subsequently,
Wilson filed a qui tam action, alleging, as relevant here, that peti
tioners, county conservation districts and local and federal officials,
knowingly submitted false payment claims in violation of the FCA.
The District Court ultimately dismissed for lack of jurisdiction be
cause Wilson had not refuted that her action was based upon allega
tions publicly disclosed in the county and state reports, which it held
were “administrative” reports under the FCA’s public disclosure bar.
In reversing, the Fourth Circuit concluded that only federal adminis
trative reports may trigger the public disclosure bar.
Held: The reference to “administrative” reports, audits, and investiga
tions in §3730(e)(4)(A) encompasses disclosures made in state and lo
cal sources as well as federal sources. Pp. 4–21.

