10

GRAHAM COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
DIST. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. WILSON
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

sources.8
Although these points do not definitively resolve the
question presented today, to my mind they counsel against
reading §3730(e)(4)(A) (2006 ed.) so broadly as to disturb
the balance Congress evidently sought to achieve through
the 1986 amendments. Today’s decision risks such a
result. The Court imposes a jurisdictional bar that is by
all appearances more restrictive of qui tam suits than the
pre-1986 regime. Construing §3730(e)(4)(A) to encompass
the thousands of state and local government administra
tive reports produced each year effectively imputes to the
Federal Government knowledge of such sources, whether
or not the Government is aware of the information or in a
——————
8 In

June 1986, the House Committee on the Judiciary reported a bill
that would have barred qui tam actions based on information “which
the Government disclosed as a basis for allegations made in a prior
administrative, civil, or criminal proceeding,” “disclosed during the
course of a congressional investigation,” or “disseminated by any news
media.” H. R. Rep. No. 99–660, pp. 2, 3 (internal quotation marks
omitted). The references to information disclosed by the Government
itself (with a capital “G”) and to “congressional investigation[s]” connote
federal, not state or local, government sources. In July, the Senate
Committee on the Judiciary reported its own version of the bill, barring
actions “based upon allegations or transactions which are the subject of
a civil suit in which the Government is already a party, or within six
months of the disclosure of specific information relating to such allega
tions or transactions in a criminal, civil, or administrative hearing, a
congressional or Government Accounting Office report or hearing, or
from the news media.” S. Rep., at 43. The reference to suits in which
the Federal Government is a party and absence of the ambiguous term
“administrative” in the bill’s reference to “congressional or [GAO]”
reports or hearings, similarly tend to exclude disclosures from state or
local government reports. The enacted legislation did differ in several
respects from the reported bills, but the subsequent legislative record
contains no reference to the inclusion of state or local government
sources. See, e.g., 132 Cong. Rec. 20535–20537 (statement of Sen.
Grassley); id., at 29321–29322 (statements of Reps. Glickman and
Berman).

