12

GRAHAM COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
DIST. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. WILSON
Opinion of the Court

in nature, those terms are themselves sandwiched be
tween phrases that have been generally understood to
include nonfederal sources; and one of those phrases, in
Category 1, contains the exact term that is the subject of
our inquiry. These textual clues negate the force of the
noscitur a sociis canon, as it was applied by the Court of
Appeals.12 We are not persuaded that the associates with
which “administrative” keeps company in §3730(e)(4)(A)
endow it with an exclusively federal character.
IV
As originally enacted, the FCA did not limit the sources
from which a relator could acquire the information to
bring a qui tam action. In United States ex rel. Marcus v.
Hess, 317 U. S. 537 (1943), we upheld the relator’s recov
ery even though he had discovered the fraud by reading a
federal criminal indictment—a quintessential “parasitic”
suit. Id., at 545–548; see id., at 545 (“Even if, as the gov
ernment suggests, the petitioner has contributed nothing
to the discovery of this crime, he has contributed much to
accomplishing one of the purposes for which the Act was
passed”). Congress promptly reacted to that decision by
amending the statute to preclude qui tam actions “based
upon evidence or information in the possession of the
United States, or any agency, officer or employee thereof,
——————
12 The Court of Appeals repeatedly referred to the three categories in
§3730(e)(4)(A) as “clauses.” See 528 F. 3d, at 300–305. Were they in
fact clauses rather than prepositional phrases, reliance on noscitur a
sociis might have been supported by one of our earliest cases using
that term, Watson v. Mercer, 8 Pet. 88, 105 (1834) (Reporter’s statement
of the case), which suggested that “different clauses of the same sen
tence” should be presumed “to embrace the subject matter of the
sentence.” The Court of Appeals’ mistaken reference to “clauses” is of
course less significant than its failure to treat the public disclosure bar
as an integrated whole. Cf. Stevens, The Shakespeare Canon of Statu
tory Construction, 140 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1373, 1376 (1992) (emphasizing
importance of reading provisions in their broader statutory context).

