16

GRAHAM COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
DIST. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. WILSON
Opinion of the Court

Respondent and her amici place particular emphasis on
a remark made by the lead sponsor of the Senate bill,
Senator Grassley. See Brief for Respondent 29; Brief for
United States 20; Brief for American Center for Law and
Justice as Amicus Curiae 13–14; Brief for Taxpayers
Against Fraud Education Fund as Amicus Curiae 30–31.
In a floor statement, Grassley said that “the term ‘Gov
ernment’ in the definition of original source is meant to
include any Government source of disclosures cited in [the
public disclosure bar]; that is[,] Government includes
Congress, the General Accounting Office, any executive or
independent agency as well as all other governmental
bodies that may have publicly disclosed the allegations.”
132 Cong. Rec. 20536 (1986). Yet even if a single sentence
by a single legislator were entitled to any meaningful
weight, Senator Grassley’s remark merely begs the ques
tion before us. His formulation fails to indicate whether
the “other governmental bodies” may be state or local
bodies. It also turns on a term, “Government” with a
capital “G,” that does not appear in the codified version of
the public disclosure bar, which Congress subsequently
revised in numerous respects prior to passage.
There is, in fact, only one item in the legislative record
that squarely corroborates respondent’s reading of the
statute: a letter sent by the primary sponsors of the 1986
amendments to the Attorney General in 1999. See 145
Cong. Rec. 16032 (1999) (reproducing text of letter in
which Rep. Berman and Sen. Grassley state: “We did
intend, and any fair reading of the statute will confirm,
that the disclosure must be in a federal criminal, civil or
administrative hearing. Disclosure in a state proceeding
——————
on the matter. In our view, neither the general trajectory of 20th
century FCA reform nor the specific statements made during the 1986
legislative process clearly point one way or the other on the question
before us.

