2

GRAHAM COUNTY SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 

DIST. v. UNITED STATES EX REL. WILSON 

Syllabus 

(a) Section 3730(e)(4)(A) specifies three categories of disclosures
that can deprive federal courts of jurisdiction over qui tam suits. The
language at issue is contained in the second category (Category 2).
Pp. 4–5.
(b) The FCA’s plain text does not limit “administrative” to federal
sources. Because that term modifies “report, hearing, audit, or inves
tigation” in a provision about “the public disclosure” of fraud on the
United States, it is most naturally read to describe government
agency activities. But since “administrative” is not itself modified by
“federal,” there is no immediately apparent basis for excluding state
and local agency activities from its ambit. The interpretive maxim
noscitur a sociis—“a word may be known by the company it keeps,”
Russell Motor Car Co. v. United States, 261 U. S. 514, 519—does not
support the Fourth Circuit’s more limited view. In Category 2, “ad
ministrative” is sandwiched between the federal terms “congres
sional” and “[GAO],” but these items are too few and too disparate to
qualify as “a string of statutory terms,” S. D. Warren Co. v. Maine
Bd. of Environmental Protection, 547 U. S. 370, 378, or “items in a
list,” Beecham v. United States, 511 U. S. 368, 371, for noscitur a so
ciis purposes. Furthermore, evaluating “administrative” within the
public disclosure bar’s larger scheme, the Court observes that Cate
gory 2’s terms are themselves sandwiched between phrases in Cate
gory 1 (“criminal, civil, or administrative hearing”) and Category 3
(“news media”) that are generally understood to include nonfederal
sources; and Category 1 contains the same term (“administrative”)
that is at issue. Even if Category 1 were best understood to refer to
adjudicative proceedings and Category 2 to legislative or quasi
legislative activities, state and local administrative sources of a legis
lative-type character are presumably just as public, and just as likely
to put the Federal Government on notice of a potential fraud, as state
and local administrative hearings of an adjudicatory character. The
FCA’s overall federal focus shines no light on the specific question
whether the public disclosure bar extends to nonfederal contexts.
And the fact that state legislative sources are not included in
§3730(e)(4)(A) carries no clear implications for the status of state
administrative sources. Pp. 5–12.
(c) The legislative record does not support an exclusively federal in
terpretation of “administrative.” The current §3730(e)(4)(A) was en
acted to strike a balance between encouraging private persons to root
out fraud and stifling parasitic lawsuits. How exactly the statute
came to strike this balance as it did is uncertain, as significant sub
stantive changes—including the introduction of “administrative” in
Category 2—were inserted without floor debate or other discussion,
as “technical” amendments. Though Congress wanted “to strengthen

