2

FCC v. AT&T INC.
Syllabus
personal correspondence to describe the characteristics or correspon
dence of corporations. In fact, “personal” is often used to mean pre
cisely the opposite of business-related: We speak of personal expenses
and business expenses, personal life and work life, personal opinion
and a company’s view. Dictionary definitions also suggest that “per
sonal” does not ordinarily relate to artificial “persons” like corpora
tions.
AT&T contends that its reading of “personal” is supported by the
common legal usage of the word “person.” Yet while “person,” in a le
gal setting, often refers to artificial entities, AT&T’s effort to ascribe
a corresponding legal meaning to “personal” again elides the differ
ence between “person” and “personal.” AT&T provides scant support
for the proposition that “personal” denotes corporations, even in a le
gal context.
Regardless of whether “personal” can carry a legal meaning apart
from its ordinary one, statutory language should be construed “in
light of the terms surrounding it.” Leocal v. Ashcroft, 543 U. S. 1, 9.
Exemption 7(C) refers not just to the word “personal,” but to the term
“personal privacy.” “Personal” in that phrase conveys more than just
“of a person”; it suggests a type of privacy evocative of human con
cerns—not the sort usually associated with an entity like AT&T.
AT&T does not cite any other instance in which a court has expressly
referred to a corporation’s “personal privacy.” Nor does it identify
any other statute that does so. While AT&T argues that this Court
has recognized “privacy” interests of corporations in the Fourth
Amendment and double jeopardy contexts, this case does not call for
the Court to pass on the scope of a corporation’s “privacy” interests as
a matter of constitutional or common law. AT&T contends that the
FCC has not demonstrated that the phrase “personal privacy” neces
sarily excludes corporations’ privacy. But construing statutory lan
guage is not merely an exercise in ascertaining “the outer limits of [a
word’s] definitional possibilities,” Dolan v. Postal Service, 546 U. S.
481, 486, and AT&T has provided no sound reason in the statutory
text or context to disregard the ordinary meaning of the phrase.
Pp. 3–9.
(b) The meaning of “personal privacy” in Exemption 7(C) is further
clarified by two pre-existing FOIA exemptions. Exemption 6, which
Congress enacted eight years before Exemption 7(C), covers “person
nel and medical files and similar files the disclosure of which would
constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.”
§552(b)(6). This Court has regularly referred to Exemption 6 as in
volving an “individual’s right of privacy,” Department of State v. Ray,
502 U. S. 164, 175, and Congress used in Exemption 7(C) the same
phrase—“personal privacy”—used in Exemption 6. In contrast, FOIA

