6

FCC v. AT&T INC.
Opinion of the Court

[o]f, pertaining to, or characteristic of a person or self
conscious being, as opposed to a thing or abstraction”); 11
OED at 599–600 (2d ed. 1989) (same); Webster’s Third
New International Dictionary 1686 (1976) (“[3] relating to
the person or body”; “[4] relating to an individual, his
character, conduct, motives, or private affairs”; “[5] relat
ing to or characteristic of human beings as distinct from
things”); ibid. (2002) (same).
AT&T dismisses these definitions, correctly noting that
“personal”—at its most basic level—simply means “[o]f or
pertaining to a particular person.” Webster’s New Inter
national Dictionary 1828 (2d ed. 1954). The company
acknowledges that “in non-legal usage, where a ‘person’ is
a human being, it is entirely unsurprising that the word
‘personal’ is used to refer to human beings.” AT&T Brief
8. But in a watered-down version of the “grammatical
imperative” argument, AT&T contends that “person”—in
common legal usage—is understood to include a corpora
tion. “Personal” in the same context therefore can and
should have the same scope, especially here in light of the
statutory definition. See id., at 8–9, 16.
The construction of statutory language often turns on
context, see, e.g., Johnson, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 5),
which certainly may include the definitions of related
words. But here the context to which AT&T points does
not dissuade us from the ordinary meaning of “personal.”
We have no doubt that “person,” in a legal setting, often
refers to artificial entities. The Dictionary Act makes that
clear. 1 U. S. C. §1 (defining “person” to include “corpora
tions, companies, associations, firms, partnerships, socie
ties, and joint stock companies, as well as individuals”).
But AT&T’s effort to ascribe a corresponding legal mean
ing to “personal” again elides the difference between “per
son” and “personal.”
When it comes to the word “personal,” there is little
support for the notion that it denotes corporations, even in

