(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION ET AL. v.
AT&T INC. ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 09–1279. Argued January 19, 2011—Decided March 1, 2011
The Freedom of Information Act requires federal agencies to make re
cords and documents publicly available upon request, subject to sev
eral statutory exemptions. One of those exemptions, Exemption 7(C),
covers law enforcement records the disclosure of which “could rea
sonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of per
sonal privacy.” 5 U. S. C. §552(b)(7)(C). CompTel, a trade associa
tion, submitted a FOIA request for documents AT&T had provided to
the Federal Communications Commission Enforcement Bureau dur
ing an investigation of that company. The Bureau found that Ex
emption 7(C) applied to individuals identified in AT&T’s submissions
but not to the company itself, concluding that corporations do not
have “personal privacy” interests as required by the exemption. The
FCC agreed with the Bureau, but the Court of Appeals for the Third
Circuit did not. It held that Exemption 7(C) extends to the “personal
privacy” of corporations, reasoning that “personal” is the adjective
form of the term “person,” which Congress has defined, as applicable
here, to include corporations, §551(2).
Held: Corporations do not have “personal privacy” for the purposes of
Exemption 7(C). Pp. 3–12.
(a) AT&T argues that the word “personal” in Exemption 7(C) incor
porates the statutory definition of “person,” which includes corpora
tions, §551(2). But adjectives do not always reflect the meaning of
corresponding nouns. “Person” is a defined term in the statute; “per
sonal” is not. When a statute does not define a term, the Court typi
cally “give[s] the phrase its ordinary meaning.” Johnson v. United
States, 559 U. S. ___, ___. “Personal” ordinarily refers to individuals.
People do not generally use terms such as personal characteristics or

