8

FCC v. AT&T INC.
Opinion of the Court

greater significance. But two words together may assume
a more particular meaning than those words in isolation.
We understand a golden cup to be a cup made of or resem
bling gold. A golden boy, on the other hand, is one who
is charming, lucky, and talented. A golden opportunity is
one not to be missed. “Personal” in the phrase “personal
privacy” conveys more than just “of a person.” It suggests
a type of privacy evocative of human concerns—not the
sort usually associated with an entity like, say, AT&T.
Despite its contention that “[c]ommon legal usage” of the
word “person” supports its reading of the term “personal
privacy,” AT&T Brief 9, 13, 18, AT&T does not cite a
single instance in which this Court or any other (aside
from the Court of Appeals below) has expressly referred to
a corporation’s “personal privacy.” Nor does it identify any
other statute that does so. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 26. On the
contrary, treatises in print around the time that Congress
drafted the exemptions at hand reflect the understanding
that the specific concept of “personal privacy,” at least as a
matter of common law, did not apply to corporations. See
Restatement (Second) of Torts §652I, Comment c (1976)
(“A corporation, partnership or unincorporated association
has no personal right of privacy”); W. Prosser, Law of
Torts §97, pp. 641–642 (2d ed. 1955) (“A corporation or a
partnership as such can have no personal privacy, al
though it seems clear that it may have an exclusive right
to its name and its business prestige” (footnotes omitted));
cf. id., §112, at 843–844 (3d ed. 1964) (“It seems to be
generally agreed that the right of privacy is one pertaining
only to individuals, and that a corporation or a partner
ship cannot claim it as such” (footnotes omitted)); id.,
§117, at 815 (4th ed. 1971) (same).
AT&T contends that this Court has recognized “privacy”
interests of corporations in the Fourth Amendment and
double jeopardy contexts, and that the term should be
similarly construed here. See AT&T Brief 20–25. But this

