Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

which might bear some relation to the distorted or crooked
angular shape from which a “crank” takes its name. That
is not the point. What is significant is that, in ordinary
usage, a noun and its adjective form may have meanings
as disparate as any two unrelated words. The FCC’s
argument that “personal” does not, in fact, derive from the
English word “person,” but instead developed along its
own etymological path, Reply Brief for Petitioners 6, sim
ply highlights the shortcomings of AT&T’s proposed rule.
“Person” is a defined term in the statute; “personal” is
not. When a statute does not define a term, we typically
“give the phrase its ordinary meaning.” Johnson v. United
States, 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 4). “Personal”
ordinarily refers to individuals. We do not usually speak
of personal characteristics, personal effects, personal
correspondence, personal influence, or personal tragedy as
referring to corporations or other artificial entities. This is
not to say that corporations do not have correspondence,
influence, or tragedies of their own, only that we do not
use the word “personal” to describe them.
Certainly, if the chief executive officer of a corporation
approached the chief financial officer and said, “I have
something personal to tell you,” we would not assume the
CEO was about to discuss company business. Responding
to a request for information, an individual might say,
“that’s personal.” A company spokesman, when asked for
information about the company, would not. In fact, we
often use the word “personal” to mean precisely the oppo
site of business-related: We speak of personal expenses
and business expenses, personal life and work life, per
sonal opinion and a company’s view.
Dictionaries also suggest that “personal” does not ordi
narily relate to artificial “persons” such as corporations.
See, e.g., 7 OED 726 (1933) (“[1] [o]f, pertaining to . . . the
individual person or self,” “individual; private; one’s own,”
“[3] [o]f or pertaining to one’s person, body, or figure,” “[5]

