Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Per Curiam

(2009) (slip op., at 2) (BREYER, J., in chambers), and our
task should be at an end. Neither the United States nor
JUSTICE BREYER, post, at 1–6 (dissenting opinion), cites a
single instance in this Court’s history in which a stay
issued under analogous circumstances.
Even if there were circumstances under which a stay
could issue in light of proposed legislation, this case would
not present them. Medellín himself sought a stay of exe­
cution on the ground that Congress might enact imple­
menting legislation. We denied his stay application, ex­
plaining that “Congress has not progressed beyond the
bare introduction of a bill in the four years since the ICJ
ruling and the four months since our ruling in [Medellín
I].” Medellín v. Texas, 554 U. S. 759, 760 (2008) (per
curiam) (Medellín II). It has now been seven years since
the ICJ ruling and three years since our decision in
Medellín I, making a stay based on the bare introduction
of a bill in a single house of Congress even less justified. If
a statute implementing Avena had genuinely been a prior­
ity for the political branches, it would have been enacted
by now.
The United States and JUSTICE BREYER complain of the
grave international consequences that will follow from
Leal’s execution. Post, at 4. Congress evidently did not
find these consequences sufficiently grave to prompt its
enactment of implementing legislation, and we will follow
the law as written by Congress. We have no authority to
stay an execution in light of an “appeal of the President,”
post, at 6, presenting free-ranging assertions of foreign
policy consequences, when those assertions come unac­
companied by a persuasive legal claim.
Finally, we noted in Medellín II that “[t]he beginning
premise for any stay . . . must be that petitioner’s confes­
sion was obtained unlawfully,” and that “[t]he United
States has not wavered in its position that petitioner was
not prejudiced by his lack of consular access.” 554 U. S.,

