Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

BREYER, J., dissenting

relations. See, e.g., United States v. Curtiss-Wright Export
Corp., 299 U. S. 304, 320 (1936). And it has ordinarily
given his views significant weight in such matters. Jama
v. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 543 U. S. 335,
348 (2005) (noting the Court’s “customary policy of defer
ence to the President in matters of foreign affairs”). It
should do so here.
Finally, this Court has adequate legal authority to grant
the requested stay. Should Senator Leahy’s bill become
law by the end of September (when we would consider the
petition in the ordinary course), this Court would almost
certainly grant the petition for a writ of certiorari, vacate
the judgment below, and remand the case for further
proceedings consistent with that law. Indeed, were the
Solicitor General to indicate at that time that the bill was
about to become law, I believe it likely that we would hold
the petition for at least several weeks until the bill was
enacted and then do the same. And this Court, under the
All Writs Act, 28 U. S. C. §1651, can take appropriate
action to preserve its “potential jurisdiction.” FTC v. Dean
Foods Co., 384 U. S. 597, 603 (1966).
Thus, on the one hand, international legal obligations,
related foreign policy considerations, the prospect of legis
lation, and the consequent injustice involved should that
legislation, coming too late for Leal, help others in identi
cal circumstances all favor granting a stay. And issuing a
brief stay until the end of September, when the Court
could consider this matter in the ordinary course, would
put Congress on clear notice that it must act quickly. On
the other hand, the State has an interest in proceeding
with an immediate execution. But it is difficult to see how
the State’s interest in the immediate execution of an
individual convicted of capital murder 16 years ago
can outweigh the considerations that support additional
delay, perhaps only until the end of the summer.
Consequently I would grant the stay that the petitioner

