2

LEAL GARCIA v. TEXAS
Per Curiam

cerning Avena and Other Mexican Nationals (Mex. v. U. S.),
2004 I. C. J. 12 (Judgment of Mar. 31), in which the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) held that the United
States had violated the Vienna Convention by failing to
notify him of his right to consular assistance. His ar­
gument is foreclosed by Medellín v. Texas, 552 U. S. 491
(2008) (Medellín I), in which we held that neither the
Avena decision nor the President’s Memorandum purport­
ing to implement that decision constituted directly en­
forceable federal law. 552 U. S., at 498–499.
Leal and the United States ask us to stay the execution
so that Congress may consider whether to enact legisla­
tion implementing the Avena decision. Leal contends that
the Due Process Clause prohibits Texas from executing
him while such legislation is under consideration. This
argument is meritless. The Due Process Clause does not
prohibit a State from carrying out a lawful judgment in
light of unenacted legislation that might someday author­
ize a collateral attack on that judgment.
The United States does not endorse Leal’s due process
claim. Instead, it asks us to stay the execution until
January 2012 in support of our “future jurisdiction to
review the judgment in a proceeding” under this yet-to-be­
enacted legislation. Brief for United States as Amicus
Curiae 2–3, n. 1. It relies on the fact that on June 14,
2011, Senator Patrick Leahy introduced implementing
legislation in the Senate with the Executive Branch’s sup­
port. No implementing legislation has been introduced in
the House.
We reject this suggestion. First, we are doubtful that it
is ever appropriate to stay a lower court judgment in light
of unenacted legislation. Our task is to rule on what
the law is, not what it might eventually be. In light of
Medellín I, it is clear that there is no “fair prospect that a
majority of the Court will conclude that the decision below
was erroneous,” O’Brien v. O’Laughlin, 557 U. S. ___, ___

