Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Per Curiam

litigation,” the party seeking relief “ ‘must have suffered,
or be threatened with, an actual injury traceable to the de
fendant and likely to be redressed by a favorable judicial
decision.’ ” Spencer, supra, at 7 (quoting Lewis v. Conti
nental Bank Corp., 494 U. S. 472, 477 (1990)).
In criminal cases, this requirement means that a defen
dant wishing to continue his appeals after the expiration
of his sentence must suffer some “continuing injury” or
“collateral consequence” sufficient to satisfy Article III.
See Spencer, 523 U. S., at 7–8. When the defendant chal
lenges his underlying conviction, this Court’s cases have
long presumed the existence of collateral consequences.
Id., at 8; see Sibron v. New York, 392 U. S. 40, 55–56
(1968). But when a defendant challenges only an expired
sentence, no such presumption applies, and the defendant
must bear the burden of identifying some ongoing “collat
eral consequenc[e]” that is “traceable” to the challenged
portion of the sentence and “likely to be redressed by a
favorable judicial decision.” See Spencer, supra, at 7, 14.
At the time of the Ninth Circuit’s decision in this case,
the District Court’s order of juvenile supervision had
expired, and respondent was no longer subject to the sex
offender-registration conditions that he sought to chal
lenge on appeal. 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 2). As a
result, respondent’s challenge was moot before the Ninth
Circuit unless he could “show that a decision invalidating”
the District Court’s order would likely redress some collat
eral consequence of the registration conditions. Id., at ___
(slip op., at 2–3) (citing Spencer, supra, at 14).
As we noted in our prior opinion, one “potential collat
eral consequence that might be remedied” by an order
invalidating the registration conditions “is the require
ment that respondent remain registered” under Montana
law. 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 3) (internal quotation
marks and brackets omitted). But as the Montana Su
preme Court has now clarified, respondent’s “state law

