6

UNITED STATES v. JUVENILE MALE
Per Curiam

duty to remain registered as a sex offender is not contin
gent upon the validity of the conditions of his federal
supervision order,” 2011 WL 2162807, *1, and continues to
apply regardless of the outcome in this case. True, a
favorable decision in this case might serve as a useful
precedent for respondent in a hypothetical lawsuit chal
lenging Montana’s registration requirement on ex post
facto grounds. But this possible, indirect benefit in a
future lawsuit cannot save this case from mootness. See
Camreta v. Greene, 563 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at
16); Commodity Futures Trading Comm’n v. Board of
Trade of Chicago, 701 F. 2d 653, 656 (CA7 1989) (Posner,
J.) (“[O]ne can never be certain that findings made in a
decision concluding one lawsuit will not some day . . .
control the outcome of another suit. But if that were
enough to avoid mootness, no case would ever be moot”).
Respondent also argues that this case “cannot be con
sidered moot in any practical sense” because, under cur
rent law, respondent may have “an independent duty to
register as a sex offender” under SORNA itself. Brief in
Opposition 6.2 But the duty to register under SORNA is
not a consequence—collateral or otherwise—of the District
Court’s special conditions of supervision. The statutory
duty to register is, as respondent notes, an obligation that
exists “independent” of those conditions. That continuing
obligation might provide grounds for a pre-enforcement
challenge to SORNA’s registration requirements. It does
not, however, render the current controversy regarding
the validity of respondent’s sentence any less moot.
Respondent further argues that this case falls within
——————
2 See 42 U. S. C. §16911(8) (SORNA applicable if the juvenile was “14
years of age or older at the time of the offense and the offense adjudi
cated was comparable to or more severe than aggravated sexual abuse
(as described in section 2241 of title 18)”); 72 Fed. Reg. 8897 (codified at
28 CFR pt. 72) (SORNA’s requirements extend to sex offenders con
victed before the statute’s enactment).

