2

RADLAX GATEWAY HOTEL, LLC v. AMALGAMATED BANK 

Opinion of the Court 


had run out of funds and were forced to halt construction.
By August 2009, they owed more than $120 million on the
loan, with over $1 million in interest accruing every month
and no prospect for obtaining additional funds to complete
the project. Both debtors filed voluntary petitions for
relief under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code.
A Chapter 11 bankruptcy is implemented according to
a “plan,” typically proposed by the debtor, which divides
claims against the debtor into separate “classes” and
specifies the treatment each class will receive. See 11
U. S. C. §1123. Generally, a bankruptcy court may confirm a Chapter 11 plan only if each class of creditors affected by the plan consents. See §1129(a)(8). Section
1129(b) creates an exception to that general rule, permitting confirmation of nonconsensual plans—commonly
known as “cramdown” plans—if “the plan does not discriminate unfairly, and is fair and equitable, with respect
to each class of claims or interests that is impaired under,
and has not accepted, the plan.” Section 1129(b)(2)(A),
which we review in further depth below, establishes criteria for determining whether a cramdown plan is “fair and
equitable” with respect to secured claims like the Bank’s.
In 2010, the RadLAX debtors submitted a Chapter 11
plan to the United States Bankruptcy Court for the
Northern District of Illinois. The plan proposed to dissolve
the debtors and to sell substantially all of their assets
pursuant to procedures set out in a contemporaneously
filed “Sale and Bid Procedures Motion.” Specifically, the
debtors sought to auction their assets to the highest bidder, with the initial bid submitted by a “stalking horse”—a
potential purchaser who was willing to make an advance
bid of $47.5 million.1 The sale proceeds would be used to
fund the plan, primarily by repaying the Bank. Of course
——————
1 In a later proposal, the stalking-horse bid increased to $55 million.
The precise amount of the bid is not relevant here.

