4

RADLAX GATEWAY HOTEL, LLC v. AMALGAMATED BANK
Opinion of the Court

amount of such claims; and (II) that each holder of a
claim of such class receive on account of such claim
deferred cash payments totaling at least the allowed
amount of such claim, of a value, as of the effective
date of the plan, of at least the value of such holder’s
interest in the estate’s interest in such property;
“(ii) for the sale, subject to section 363(k) of this title, of any property that is subject to the liens securing such claims, free and clear of such liens, with such
liens to attach to the proceeds of such sale, and the
treatment of such liens on proceeds under clause (i) or
(iii) of this subparagraph; or
“(iii) for the realization by such holders of the
indubitable equivalent of such claims.” 11 U. S. C.
§1129(b)(2)(A).
Under clause (i), the secured creditor retains its lien on
the property and receives deferred cash payments. Under
clause (ii), the property is sold free and clear of the lien,
“subject to section 363(k),” and the creditor receives a lien
on the proceeds of the sale. Section 363(k), in turn, provides that “unless the court for cause orders otherwise
the holder of such claim may bid at such sale, and, if the
holder of such claim purchases such property, such holder
may offset such claim against the purchase price of such
property”—i.e., the creditor may credit-bid at the sale, up
to the amount of its claim.2 Finally, under clause (iii), the
plan provides the secured creditor with the “indubitable
equivalent” of its claim.
——————
2 The

ability to credit-bid helps to protect a creditor against the risk
that its collateral will be sold at a depressed price. It enables the
creditor to purchase the collateral for what it considers the fair market
price (up to the amount of its security interest) without committing
additional cash to protect the loan. That right is particularly important
for the Federal Government, which is frequently a secured creditor in
bankruptcy and which often lacks appropriations authority to throw
good money after bad in a cash-only bankruptcy auction.

