6

RADLAX GATEWAY HOTEL, LLC v. AMALGAMATED BANK
Opinion of the Court

applied to statutes in which a general permission or prohibition is contradicted by a specific prohibition or permission. To eliminate the contradiction, the specific provision
is construed as an exception to the general one. See, e.g.,
Morton v. Mancari, 417 U. S. 535, 550–551 (1974). But
the canon has full application as well to statutes such as
the one here, in which a general authorization and a more
limited, specific authorization exist side-by-side. There
the canon avoids not contradiction but the superfluity of
a specific provision that is swallowed by the general one,
“violat[ing] the cardinal rule that, if possible, effect shall
be given to every clause and part of a statute.” D. Ginsberg & Sons, Inc. v. Popkin, 285 U. S. 204, 208 (1932).
The terms of the specific authorization must be complied
with. For example, in the last cited case a provision of the
Bankruptcy Act prescribed in great detail the procedures
governing the arrest and detention of bankrupts about
to leave the district in order to avoid examination. The
Court held that those prescriptions could not be avoided
by relying upon a general provision of the Act authorizing bankruptcy courts to “ ‘make such orders, issue such
process, and enter such judgments in addition to those specifically provided for as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of [the] Act.’ ” Id., at 206 (quoting
Bankruptcy Act of 1898, §2(15), 30 Stat. 546). The Court
said that “[g]eneral language of a statutory provision,
although broad enough to include it, will not be held to
apply to a matter specifically dealt with in another part
of the same enactment.” 285 U. S., at 208. We recently
quoted that language approvingly in Bloate v. United
States, 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 10). Or as we
said in a much earlier case:
“It is an old and familiar rule that, where there is, in
the same statute, a particular enactment, and also a
general one, which, in its most comprehensive sense,

