Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

The debtors in this case have proposed to sell their
property free and clear of the Bank’s liens, and to repay
the Bank using the sale proceeds—precisely, it would
seem, the disposition contemplated by clause (ii). Yet
since the debtors’ proposed auction procedures do not
permit the Bank to credit-bid, the proposed sale cannot
satisfy the requirements of clause (ii).3 Recognizing this
problem, the debtors instead seek plan confirmation pursuant to clause (iii), which—unlike clause (ii)—does not
expressly foreclose the possibility of a sale without creditbidding. According to the debtors, their plan can satisfy
clause (iii) by ultimately providing the Bank with the
“indubitable equivalent” of its secured claim, in the form of
cash generated by the auction.
We find the debtors’ reading of §1129(b)(2)(A)—under
which clause (iii) permits precisely what clause (ii) proscribes—to be hyperliteral and contrary to common sense.
A well established canon of statutory interpretation succinctly captures the problem: “[I]t is a commonplace of
statutory construction that the specific governs the general.” Morales v. Trans World Airlines, Inc., 504 U. S.
374, 384 (1992). That is particularly true where, as in
§1129(b)(2)(A), “Congress has enacted a comprehensive
scheme and has deliberately targeted specific problems
with specific solutions.” Varity Corp. v. Howe, 516 U. S.
489, 519 (1996) (THOMAS, J., dissenting); see also HCSCLaundry v. United States, 450 U. S. 1, 6 (1981) (per
curiam) (the specific governs the general “particularly
when the two are interrelated and closely positioned,
both in fact being parts of [the same statutory scheme]”).
The general/specific canon is perhaps most frequently
——————
3 Title 11 U. S. C. §363(k)—and by extension clause (ii)—provides an
exception to the credit-bidding requirement if “the court for cause
orders otherwise.” The Bankruptcy Court found that there was no
“cause” to deny credit-bidding in this case, and the debtors have not
appealed that disposition.

