Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

C
Categorical rules tend to be imperfect, but one is neces
sary here. Two alternative approaches are not adequate
to address the relevant constitutional concerns. First, the
State argues that the laws of Florida and other States
governing criminal procedure take sufficient account of
the age of a juvenile offender. Here, Florida notes that
under its law prosecutors are required to charge 16- and
17-year-old offenders as adults only for certain serious
felonies; that prosecutors have discretion to charge those
offenders as adults for other felonies; and that prosecutors
may not charge nonrecidivist 16- and 17-year-old offenders
as adults for misdemeanors. Brief for Respondent 54
(citing Fla. Stat. §985.227 (2003)). The State also stresses
that “in only the narrowest of circumstances” does Florida
law impose no age limit whatsoever for prosecuting juve
niles in adult court. Brief for Respondent 54.
Florida is correct to say that state laws requiring con
sideration of a defendant’s age in charging decisions are
salutary. An offender’s age is relevant to the Eighth
Amendment, and criminal procedure laws that fail to take
defendants’ youthfulness into account at all would be
flawed. Florida, like other States, has made substantial
efforts to enact comprehensive rules governing the treat
ment of youthful offenders by its criminal justice system.
See generally Fla. Stat. §958 et seq. (2007).
The provisions the State notes are, nonetheless, by
themselves insufficient to address the constitutional con
cerns at issue. Nothing in Florida’s laws prevents its
courts from sentencing a juvenile nonhomicide offender to
life without parole based on a subjective judgment that the
defendant’s crimes demonstrate an “irretrievably de
praved character.” Roper, supra, at 570. This is inconsis
tent with the Eighth Amendment. Specific cases are
illustrative. In Graham’s case the sentencing judge de
cided to impose life without parole—a sentence greater

