Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

ers were eligible for life without parole sentences, the
comparison suggests that in proportion to the opportuni
ties for its imposition, life without parole sentences for
juveniles convicted of nonhomicide crimes is as rare as
other sentencing practices found to be cruel and unusual.
The evidence of consensus is not undermined by the fact
that many jurisdictions do not prohibit life without parole
for juvenile nonhomicide offenders. The Court confronted
a similar situation in Thompson, where a plurality con
cluded that the death penalty for offenders younger than
16 was unconstitutional. A number of States then allowed
the juvenile death penalty if one considered the statutory
scheme. As is the case here, those States authorized the
transfer of some juvenile offenders to adult court; and at
that point there was no statutory differentiation between
adults and juveniles with respect to authorized penalties.
The plurality concluded that the transfer laws show “that
the States consider 15-year-olds to be old enough to be
tried in criminal court for serious crimes (or too old to be
dealt with effectively in juvenile court), but tells us noth
ing about the judgment these States have made regarding
the appropriate punishment for such youthful offenders.”
487 U. S., at 826, n. 24. Justice O’Connor, concurring in
the judgment, took a similar view. Id., at 850 (“When a
legislature provides for some 15-year-olds to be processed
through the adult criminal justice system, and capital
punishment is available for adults in that jurisdiction, the
death penalty becomes at least theoretically applicable to
such defendants. . . . [H]owever, it does not necessarily
follow that the legislatures in those jurisdictions have
deliberately concluded that it would be appropriate”).
The same reasoning obtains here. Many States have
chosen to move away from juvenile court systems and to
allow juveniles to be transferred to, or charged directly in,
adult court under certain circumstances. Once in adult
court, a juvenile offender may receive the same sentence

