18

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

case provides another example. Graham was statutorily
eligible for a life-without-parole sentence after his first
crime. But the record indicates that the trial court did not
give such a sentence serious consideration at Graham’s
initial plea hearing. It was only after Graham subse
quently violated his parole by invading a home at gun
point that the maximum sentence was imposed.
In sum, the Court’s calculation that 123 juvenile non
homicide life-without-parole sentences have been imposed
nationwide in recent memory, even if accepted, hardly
amounts to strong evidence that the sentencing practice
offends our common sense of decency.11
——————
11 Because

existing legislation plainly suffices to refute any consensus
against this sentencing practice, I assume the accuracy of the Court’s
evidence regarding the frequency with which this sentence has been
imposed. But I would be remiss if I did not mention two points about
the Court’s figures. First, it seems odd that the Court counts only those
juveniles sentenced to life without parole and excludes from its analysis
all juveniles sentenced to lengthy term-of-years sentences (e.g., 70 or 80
years’ imprisonment). It is difficult to argue that a judge or jury
imposing such a long sentence—which effectively denies the offender
any material opportunity for parole—would express moral outrage at a
life-without-parole sentence.
Second, if objective indicia of consensus were truly important to the
Court’s analysis, the statistical information presently available would
be woefully inadequate to form the basis of an Eighth Amendment rule
that can be revoked only by constitutional amendment. The only
evidence submitted to this Court regarding the frequency of this sen
tence’s imposition was a single study completed after this Court
granted certiorari in this case. See P. Annino, D. Rasmussen, & C.
Rice, Juvenile Life Without Parole for Non-Homicide Offenses: Florida
Compared to Nation 2 (Sept. 14, 2009). Although I have no reason to
question the professionalism with which this study was conducted, the
study itself acknowledges that it was incomplete and the first of its
kind. See id., at 1. The Court’s questionable decision to “complete” the
study on its own does not materially increase its reliability. For one
thing, by finishing the study itself, the Court prohibits the parties from
ever disputing its findings. Complicating matters further, the original
study sometimes relied on third-party data rather than data from the
States themselves, see ibid.; the study has never been peer reviewed;

