Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

THOMAS, J., dissenting

pointing out that life-without-parole sentences are rarely
imposed on juvenile nonhomicide offenders—123 times in
recent memory9 by the Court’s calculation, spread out
across 11 States.10 Ante, at 11–13. Based on this rarity of
use, the Court proclaims a consensus against the practice,
implying that laws allowing it either reflect the consensus
of a prior, less civilized time or are the work of legislatures
tone-deaf to moral values of their constituents that this
Court claims to have easily discerned from afar. See ante,
at 11.
This logic strains credulity. It has been rejected before.
Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U. S. 153, 182 (1976) (joint opinion
of Stewart, Powell, and STEVENS, JJ.) (“[T]he relative
——————
9 I say “recent memory” because the research relied upon by the Court
provides a headcount of juvenile nonhomicide offenders presently
incarcerated in this country, but does not provide more specific infor
mation about all of the offenders, such as the dates on which they were
convicted.
10 When issued, the Court’s opinion relied on a letter the Court had
requested from the Bureau of Prisons (BOP), which stated that there
were six juvenile nonhomicide offenders then serving life-without
parole sentences in the federal system. After the Court released its
opinion, the Acting Solicitor General disputed the BOP’s calculations
and stated that none of those six offenders was serving a life without
parole sentence solely for a juvenile nonhomicide crime completed
before the age of 18. See Letter from Neal Kumar Katyal, Acting
Solicitor General, U. S. Dept. of Justice, to Clerk of the Supreme Court
(May 24, 2010) (available in Clerk of Court’s case file) (noting that five
of the six inmates were convicted for participation in unlawful con
spiracies that began when they were juveniles but continued after they
reached the age of 18, and noting that the sixth inmate was convicted of
murder as a predicate offense under the Racketeer Influenced and
Corrupt Organizations Act). The Court has amended its opinion in
light of the Acting Solicitor General’s letter. In my view, the inconsis
tency between the BOP’s classification of these six offenders and the
Solicitor General’s is irrelevant. The fact remains that federal law, and
the laws of a supermajority of States, permit this sentencing practice.
And, as will be explained, see infra this page and 16–20, judges and
jurors have chosen to impose this sentence in the very worst cases they
have encountered.

