Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

27

Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

crimes. Few, perhaps no, judicial responsibilities are more
difficult than sentencing. The task is usually undertaken
by trial judges who seek with diligence and professional
ism to take account of the human existence of the offender
and the just demands of a wronged society.
The case-by-case approach to sentencing must, however,
be confined by some boundaries. The dilemma of juvenile
sentencing demonstrates this. For even if we were to
assume that some juvenile nonhomicide offenders might
have “sufficient psychological maturity, and at the same
time demonstrat[e] sufficient depravity,” Roper, 543 U. S.,
at 572, to merit a life without parole sentence, it does not
follow that courts taking a case-by-case proportionality
approach could with sufficient accuracy distinguish the
few incorrigible juvenile offenders from the many that
have the capacity for change. Roper rejected the argument
that the Eighth Amendment required only that juries be
told they must consider the defendant’s age as a mitigat
ing factor in sentencing. The Court concluded that an
“unacceptable likelihood exists that the brutality or cold
blooded nature of any particular crime would overpower
mitigating arguments based on youth as a matter of
course, even where the juvenile offender’s objective imma
turity, vulnerability, and lack of true depravity should
require a sentence less severe than death.” Id., at 573.
Here, as with the death penalty, “[t]he differences between
juvenile and adult offenders are too marked and well
understood to risk allowing a youthful person to receive” a
sentence of life without parole for a nonhomicide crime
“despite insufficient culpability.” Id., at 572–573.
Another problem with a case-by-case approach is that it
does not take account of special difficulties encountered by
counsel in juvenile representation. As some amici note,
the features that distinguish juveniles from adults also
put them at a significant disadvantage in criminal pro
ceedings. Juveniles mistrust adults and have limited

