Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

lest the Eighth Amendment’s rule against disproportion
ate sentences be a nullity.
Finally there is rehabilitation, a penological goal that
forms the basis of parole systems. See Solem, 463 U. S., at
300; Mistretta v. United States, 488 U. S. 361, 363 (1989).
The concept of rehabilitation is imprecise; and its utility
and proper implementation are the subject of a substan
tial, dynamic field of inquiry and dialogue. See, e.g., Cul
len & Gendreau, Assessing Correctional Rehabilitation:
Policy, Practice, and Prospects, 3 Criminal Justice 2000,
pp. 119–133 (2000) (describing scholarly debates regarding
the effectiveness of rehabilitation over the last several
decades). It is for legislatures to determine what rehabili
tative techniques are appropriate and effective.
A sentence of life imprisonment without parole, how
ever, cannot be justified by the goal of rehabilitation. The
penalty forswears altogether the rehabilitative ideal. By
denying the defendant the right to reenter the community,
the State makes an irrevocable judgment about that per
son’s value and place in society. This judgment is not
appropriate in light of a juvenile nonhomicide offender’s
capacity for change and limited moral culpability. A
State’s rejection of rehabilitation, moreover, goes beyond a
mere expressive judgment. As one amicus notes, defen
dants serving life without parole sentences are often de
nied access to vocational training and other rehabilitative
services that are available to other inmates. See Brief for
Sentencing Project as Amicus Curiae 11–13. For juvenile
offenders, who are most in need of and receptive to reha
bilitation, see Brief for J. Lawrence Aber et al. as Amici
Curiae 28–31 (hereinafter Aber Brief), the absence of
rehabilitative opportunities or treatment makes the dis
proportionality of the sentence all the more evident.
In sum, penological theory is not adequate to justify life
without parole for juvenile nonhomicide offenders. This
determination; the limited culpability of juvenile non

