18

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

equate the failings of a minor with those of an adult, for a
greater possibility exists that a minor’s character deficien
cies will be reformed.” Ibid. These matters relate to the
status of the offenders in question; and it is relevant to
consider next the nature of the offenses to which this
harsh penalty might apply.
The Court has recognized that defendants who do not
kill, intend to kill, or foresee that life will be taken are
categorically less deserving of the most serious forms of
punishment than are murderers. Kennedy, supra; En
mund, 458 U. S. 782; Tison v. Arizona, 481 U. S. 137
(1987); Coker, 433 U. S. 584. There is a line “between
homicide and other serious violent offenses against the
individual.” Kennedy, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 27).
Serious nonhomicide crimes “may be devastating in their
harm . . . but ‘in terms of moral depravity and of the injury
to the person and to the public,’ . . . they cannot be com
pared to murder in their ‘severity and irrevocability.’ ” Id.,
at ___ (slip op., at 28) (quoting Coker, 433 U. S., at 598
(plurality opinion)). This is because “[l]ife is over for the
victim of the murderer,” but for the victim of even a very
serious nonhomicide crime, “life . . . is not over and nor
mally is not beyond repair.” Ibid. (plurality opinion).
Although an offense like robbery or rape is “a serious
crime deserving serious punishment,” Enmund, supra, at
797, those crimes differ from homicide crimes in a moral
sense.
It follows that, when compared to an adult murderer, a
juvenile offender who did not kill or intend to kill has a
twice diminished moral culpability.
The age of the
offender and the nature of the crime each bear on the
analysis.
As for the punishment, life without parole is “the second
most severe penalty permitted by law.” Harmelin, 501
U. S., at 1001 (opinion of KENNEDY, J.). It is true that a
death sentence is “unique in its severity and irrevocabil

