22

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

juvenile. The question, instead, is whether the Constitu
tion prohibits judges and juries from ever concluding that
an offender under the age of 18 has demonstrated suffi
cient depravity and incorrigibility to warrant his perma
nent incarceration.
In holding that the Constitution imposes such a ban, the
Court cites “developments in psychology and brain sci
ence” indicating that juvenile minds “continue to mature
through late adolescence,” ante, at 17 (citing Brief for
American Medical Association et al. as Amici Curiae 16–
24; Brief for American Psychological Association et al. as
Amici Curiae 22–27 (hereinafter APA Brief)), and that
juveniles are “more likely [than adults] to engage in risky
behaviors,” id., at 7. But even if such generalizations from
social science were relevant to constitutional rulemaking,
the Court misstates the data on which it relies.
The Court equates the propensity of a fairly substantial
number of youths to engage in “risky” or antisocial behav
iors with the propensity of a much smaller group to com
mit violent crimes. Ante, at 25–29. But research relied
upon by the amici cited in the Court’s opinion differenti
ates between adolescents for whom antisocial behavior is a
fleeting symptom and those for whom it is a lifelong pat
tern. See Moffitt, Adolescence-Limited and Life-CoursePersistent Antisocial Behavior: A Developmental Taxon
omy, 100 Psychological Rev. 674, 678 (1993) (cited in APA
Brief 8, 17, 20) (distinguishing between adolescents who
are “antisocial only during adolescence” and a smaller
group who engage in antisocial behavior “at every life
stage” despite “drift[ing] through successive systems
aimed at curbing their deviance”). That research further
suggests that the pattern of behavior in the latter group
often sets in before 18. See Moffitt, supra, at 684 (“The
well-documented resistance of antisocial personality dis
order to treatments of all kinds seems to suggest that the
life-course-persistent style is fixed sometime before age

