12

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

because it does not count juvenile offenders who were
convicted of both a homicide and a nonhomicide offense,
even when the offender received a life without parole
sentence for the nonhomicide. See Brief for Respondent
34; Tr. of Oral Arg. in Sullivan v. Florida, O. T. 2009,
No. 08–7621, pp. 28–31. This distinction is unpersuasive.
Juvenile offenders who committed both homicide and
nonhomicide crimes present a different situation for a
sentencing judge than juvenile offenders who committed
no homicide. It is difficult to say that a defendant who
receives a life sentence on a nonhomicide offense but who
was at the same time convicted of homicide is not in some
sense being punished in part for the homicide when the
judge makes the sentencing determination. The instant
case concerns only those juvenile offenders sentenced
to life without parole solely for a nonhomicide offense.
Florida further criticizes this study because the authors
were unable to obtain complete information on some
States and because the study was not peer reviewed. See
Brief for Respondent 40. The State does not, however,
provide any data of its own. Although in the first instance
it is for the litigants to provide data to aid the Court, we
have been able to supplement the study’s findings. The
study’s authors were not able to obtain a definitive tally
for Nevada, Utah, or Virginia. See Annino 11–13. Our
research shows that Nevada has five juvenile nonhomicide
offenders serving life without parole sentences, Utah has
none, and Virginia has eight. See Letter from Alejandra
Livingston, Offender Management Division, Nevada Dept.
of Corrections, to Supreme Court Library (Mar. 26, 2010)
(available in Clerk of Court’s case file); Letter from Steve
Gehrke, Utah Dept. of Corrections, to Supreme Court
Library (Mar. 29, 2010) (same); Letter from Dr. Tama S.
Celi, Virginia Dept. of Corrections, to Supreme Court
Library (Mar. 30, 2010) (same). Finally, since the study
was completed, a defendant in Oklahoma has apparently

