Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

THOMAS, J., dissenting

out parole after hearing evidence that he viciously at
tacked a 17-year-old girl who gave him a ride home from a
party. See Stogsdill, Teen Gets Life Terms in Stabbing,
Rape Case, Tulsa World, Apr. 2, 2010, p. A10; Stogsdill,
Delaware County Teen Sentenced in Rape, Assault Case,
Tulsa World, May 4, 2010, p. A12. Budder allegedly put
the girl’s head “ ‘into a headlock and sliced her throat,’ ”
raped her, stabbed her about 20 times, beat her, and
pounded her face into the rocks alongside a dirt road.
Teen Gets Life Terms in Stabbing, Rape Case, at A10.
Miraculously, the victim survived. Ibid.
Budder’s crime was rare in its brutality. The sentence
the jury imposed was also rare. According to the study
relied upon by this Court, Oklahoma had no such offender
in its prison system before Budder’s offense. P. Annino, D.
Rasmussen, & C. Rice, Juvenile Life Without Parole for
Non-Homicide Offenses: Florida Compared to Nation 2, 14
(Sept. 14, 2009) (Table A). Without his conviction, there
fore, the Court would have counted Oklahoma’s citizens as
morally opposed to life-without-parole sentences for juve
niles nonhomicide offenders.
Yet Oklahoma’s experience proves the inescapable flaw
in that reasoning: Oklahoma citizens have enacted laws
that allow Oklahoma juries to consider life-without-parole
sentences in juvenile nonhomicide cases. Oklahoma juries
invoke those laws rarely—in the unusual cases that they
find exceptionally depraved. I cannot agree with the
Court that Oklahoma citizens should be constitutionally
disabled from using this sentencing practice merely be
cause they have not done so more frequently. If anything,
the rarity of this penalty’s use underscores just how judi
cious sentencing judges and juries across the country have
been in invoking it.
This fact is entirely consistent with the Court’s intuition
that juveniles generally are less culpable and more capable
of growth than adults. See infra, at 21–22. Graham’s own

