6

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

play a central role in the inquiry.
JUSTICE THOMAS disagrees with even our limited reli
ance on Roper on the ground that the present case does
not involve capital punishment. Post, at 26 (dissenting
opinion). That distinction is important—indeed, it under
lies our rejection of the categorical rule declared by the
Court. But Roper’s conclusion that juveniles are typically
less culpable than adults has pertinence beyond capital
cases, and rightly informs the case-specific inquiry I be
lieve to be appropriate here.
In short, our existing precedent already provides a
sufficient framework for assessing the concerns outlined
by the majority. Not every juvenile receiving a life sen
tence will prevail under this approach. Not every juvenile
should. But all will receive the protection that the Eighth
Amendment requires.
II
Applying the “narrow proportionality” framework to the
particular facts of this case, I conclude that Graham’s
sentence of life without parole violates the Eighth
Amendment.*
——————
* JUSTICE ALITO suggests that Graham has failed to preserve any
challenge to his sentence based on the “narrow, as-applied proportional
ity principle.” Post, at 1 (dissenting opinion). I disagree. It is true that
Graham asks us to declare, categorically, that no juvenile convicted of a
nonhomicide offense may ever be subject to a sentence of life without
parole. But he claims that this rule is warranted under the narrow
proportionality principle we set forth in Solem v. Helm, 463 U. S. 277
(1983), Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U. S. 957 (1991), and Ewing v.
California, 538 U. S. 11 (2003). Brief for Petitioner 30, 31, 54–64.
Insofar as he relies on that framework, I believe we may do so as well,
even if our analysis results in a narrower holding than the categorical rule Graham seeks. See also Reply Brief for Petitioner 15, n. 8
(“[T]he Court could rule narrowly in this case and hold only that
petitioner’s sentence of life without parole was unconstitutionally
disproportionate”).

