Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

U. S., at 149. And as Roper observed, “[w]hether viewed
as an attempt to express the community’s moral outrage
or as an attempt to right the balance for the wrong to the
victim, the case for retribution is not as strong with a
minor as with an adult.” 543 U. S., at 571. The case
becomes even weaker with respect to a juvenile who did
not commit homicide. Roper found that “[r]etribution is
not proportional if the law’s most severe penalty is im
posed” on the juvenile murderer. Ibid. The considerations
underlying that holding support as well the conclusion
that retribution does not justify imposing the second most
severe penalty on the less culpable juvenile nonhomicide
offender.
Deterrence does not suffice to justify the sentence ei
ther. Roper noted that “the same characteristics that
render juveniles less culpable than adults suggest . . . that
juveniles will be less susceptible to deterrence.” Ibid.
Because juveniles’ “lack of maturity and underdeveloped
sense of responsibility . . . often result in impetuous and
ill-considered actions and decisions,” Johnson v. Texas,
509 U. S. 350, 367 (1993), they are less likely to take a
possible punishment into consideration when making
decisions. This is particularly so when that punishment is
rarely imposed. That the sentence deters in a few cases is
perhaps plausible, but “[t]his argument does not overcome
other objections.” Kennedy, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
31). Even if the punishment has some connection to a
valid penological goal, it must be shown that the punish
ment is not grossly disproportionate in light of the justifi
cation offered. Here, in light of juvenile nonhomicide
offenders’ diminished moral responsibility, any limited
deterrent effect provided by life without parole is not
enough to justify the sentence.
Incapacitation, a third legitimate reason for imprison
ment, does not justify the life without parole sentence in
question here. Recidivism is a serious risk to public

