Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

a new categorical rule that juveniles may never receive a
sentence of life without parole for nonhomicide crimes. I
disagree. In Roper, the Court tailored its analysis of
juvenile characteristics to the specific question whether
juvenile offenders could constitutionally be subject to
capital punishment. Our answer that they could not be
sentenced to death was based on the explicit conclusion
that they “cannot with reliability be classified among the
worst offenders.” Id., at 569 (emphasis added).
This conclusion does not establish that juveniles can
never be eligible for life without parole. A life sentence is
of course far less severe than a death sentence, and we
have never required that it be imposed only on the very
worst offenders, as we have with capital punishment.
Treating juvenile life sentences as analogous to capital
punishment is at odds with our longstanding view that
“the death penalty is different from other punishments in
kind rather than degree.” Solem, supra, at 294. It is also
at odds with Roper itself, which drew the line at capital
punishment by blessing juvenile sentences that are “less
severe than death” despite involving “forfeiture of some of
the most basic liberties.” 543 U. S., at 573–574. Indeed,
Roper explicitly relied on the possible imposition of life
without parole on some juvenile offenders. Id., at 572.
But the fact that Roper does not support a categorical
rule barring life sentences for all juveniles does not mean
that a criminal defendant’s age is irrelevant to those
sentences. On the contrary, our cases establish that the
“narrow proportionality” review applicable to noncapital
cases itself takes the personal “culpability of the offender”
into account in examining whether a given punishment is
proportionate to the crime. Solem, supra, at 292. There
is no reason why an offender’s juvenile status should be
excluded from the analysis. Indeed, given Roper’s conclu
sion that juveniles are typically less blameworthy than
adults, 543 U. S., at 571, an offender’s juvenile status can

