Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
sentencing practice at issue is not dispositive because it does not nec
essarily follow that the legislatures in those jurisdictions have delib
erately concluded that such sentences would be appropriate. See
Thompson v. Oklahoma, 487 U. S. 815, 826, n. 24, 850. Pp. 10–16.
(2) The inadequacy of penological theory to justify life without
parole sentences for juvenile nonhomicide offenders, the limited cul
pability of such offenders, and the severity of these sentences all lead
the Court to conclude that the sentencing practice at issue is cruel
and unusual. No recent data provide reason to reconsider Roper’s
holding that because juveniles have lessened culpability they are less
deserving of the most serious forms of punishment. 543 U. S., at 551.
Moreover, defendants who do not kill, intend to kill, or foresee that
life will be taken are categorically less deserving of such punishments
than are murderers. E.g., Kennedy, supra. Serious nonhomicide
crimes “may be devastating in their harm . . . but ‘in terms of moral
depravity and of the injury to the person and to the public,’ . . . they
cannot be compared to murder in their ‘severity and irrevocability.’ ”
Id., at ___. Thus, when compared to an adult murderer, a juvenile of
fender who did not kill or intend to kill has a twice diminished moral
culpability. Age and the nature of the crime each bear on the analy
sis. As for the punishment, life without parole is “the second most
severe penalty permitted by law,” Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U. S.
957, 1001, and is especially harsh for a juvenile offender, who will on
average serve more years and a greater percentage of his life in
prison than an adult offender, see, e.g., Roper, supra, at 572. And
none of the legitimate goals of penal sanctions—retribution, deter
rence, incapacitation, and rehabilitation, see Ewing v. California, 538
U. S. 11, 25—is adequate to justify life without parole for juvenile
nonhomicide offenders, see, e.g., Roper, 543 U. S., at 571, 573. Be
cause age “18 is the point where society draws the line for many pur
poses between childhood and adulthood,” it is the age below which a
defendant may not be sentenced to life without parole for a nonhomi
cide crime. Id., at 574. A State is not required to guarantee eventual
freedom to such an offender, but must impose a sentence that pro
vides some meaningful opportunity for release based on demon
strated maturity and rehabilitation. It is for the State, in the first
instance, to explore the means and mechanisms for compliance.
Pp. 16–24.
(3) A categorical rule is necessary, given the inadequacy of two
alternative approaches to address the relevant constitutional con
cerns. First, although Florida and other States have made substan
tial efforts to enact comprehensive rules governing the treatment of
youthful offenders, such laws allow the imposition of the type of sen
tence at issue based only on a discretionary, subjective judgment by a

