10

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

sentence of life without parole imposed on any juvenile for
any nonhomicide offense is unconstitutional. This cate
gorical conclusion is as unnecessary as it is unwise.
A holding this broad is unnecessary because the particu
lar conduct and circumstances at issue in the case before
us are not serious enough to justify Graham’s sentence.
In reaching this conclusion, there is no need for the Court
to decide whether that same sentence would be constitu
tional if imposed for other more heinous nonhomicide
crimes.
A more restrained approach is especially appropriate in
light of the Court’s apparent recognition that it is perfectly
legitimate for a juvenile to receive a sentence of life with
out parole for committing murder. This means that there
is nothing inherently unconstitutional about imposing
sentences of life without parole on juvenile offenders;
rather, the constitutionality of such sentences depends on
the particular crimes for which they are imposed. But if
the constitutionality of the sentence turns on the particu
lar crime being punished, then the Court should limit its
holding to the particular offenses that Graham committed
here, and should decline to consider other hypothetical
crimes not presented by this case.
In any event, the Court’s categorical conclusion is also
unwise. Most importantly, it ignores the fact that some
nonhomicide crimes—like the ones committed by Milagro
Cunningham, Nathan Walker, and Jakaris Taylor—are
especially heinous or grotesque, and thus may be deserv
ing of more severe punishment.
Those under 18 years old may as a general matter have
“diminished” culpability relative to adults who commit the
same crimes, Roper, 543 U. S., at 571, but that does not
mean that their culpability is always insufficient to justify
a life sentence. See generally Thompson, 487 U. S., at 853
(O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment). It does not take a
moral sense that is fully developed in every respect to

