26

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

than that requested by the prosecutor—for Graham’s
armed burglary conviction. The judge did so because he
concluded that Graham was incorrigible: “[Y]ou decided
that this is how you were going to lead your life and that
there is nothing that we can do for you. . . . We can’t do
anything to deter you.” App. 394.
Another example comes from Sullivan v. Florida,
No. 08–7621. Sullivan was argued the same day as this
case, but the Court has now dismissed the writ of certio
rari in Sullivan as improvidently granted. Post, p. ___.
The facts, however, demonstrate the flaws of Florida’s
system. The petitioner, Joe Sullivan, was prosecuted as
an adult for a sexual assault committed when he was 13
years old. Noting Sullivan’s past encounters with the law,
the sentencing judge concluded that, although Sullivan
had been “given opportunity after opportunity to upright
himself and take advantage of the second and third
chances he’s been given,” he had demonstrated himself to
be unwilling to follow the law and needed to be kept away
from society for the duration of his life. Brief for Respon
dent in Sullivan v. Florida, O. T. 2009, No. 08–7621, p. 6.
The judge sentenced Sullivan to life without parole. As
these examples make clear, existing state laws, allowing
the imposition of these sentences based only on a discre
tionary, subjective judgment by a judge or jury that the
offender is irredeemably depraved, are insufficient to
prevent the possibility that the offender will receive a life
without parole sentence for which he or she lacks the
moral culpability.
Another possible approach would be to hold that the
Eighth Amendment requires courts to take the offender’s
age into consideration as part of a case-specific gross
disproportionality inquiry, weighing it against the seri
ousness of the crime. This approach would allow courts to
account for factual differences between cases and to im
pose life without parole sentences for particularly heinous

