Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

inquiry the Court also considers whether the challenged
sentencing practice serves legitimate penological goals.
Kennedy, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 30–36); Roper, supra, at
571–572; Atkins, supra, at 318–320.
Roper established that because juveniles have lessened
culpability they are less deserving of the most severe
punishments. 543 U. S., at 569. As compared to adults,
juveniles have a “ ‘lack of maturity and an underdeveloped
sense of responsibility’ ”; they “are more vulnerable or
susceptible to negative influences and outside pressures,
including peer pressure”; and their characters are “not as
well formed.” Id., at 569–570. These salient characteris
tics mean that “[i]t is difficult even for expert psycholo
gists to differentiate between the juvenile offender whose
crime reflects unfortunate yet transient immaturity, and
the rare juvenile offender whose crime reflects irreparable
corruption.” Id., at 573. Accordingly, “juvenile offenders
cannot with reliability be classified among the worst of
fenders.” Id., at 569. A juvenile is not absolved of respon
sibility for his actions, but his transgression “is not as
morally reprehensible as that of an adult.” Thompson,
supra, at 835 (plurality opinion).
No recent data provide reason to reconsider the Court’s
observations in Roper about the nature of juveniles. As
petitioner’s amici point out, developments in psychology
and brain science continue to show fundamental differ
ences between juvenile and adult minds. For example,
parts of the brain involved in behavior control continue to
mature through late adolescence. See Brief for American
Medical Association et al. as Amici Curiae 16–24; Brief for
American Psychological Association et al. as Amici Curiae
22–27. Juveniles are more capable of change than are
adults, and their actions are less likely to be evidence of
“irretrievably depraved character” than are the actions of
adults. Roper, 543 U. S., at 570. It remains true that
“[f]rom a moral standpoint it would be misguided to

