8

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

to noncapital sentences at all, emphasizing that “a sen
tence of death differs in kind from any sentence of impris
onment, no matter how long.” Rummel, 445 U. S., at 272
(emphasis added). Based on that rationale, the Court
found that the excessiveness of one prison term as com
pared to another was “properly within the province of
legislatures, not courts,” id., at 275–276, precisely because
it involved an “invariably . . . subjective determination,
there being no clear way to make ‘any constitutional dis
tinction between one term of years and a shorter or longer
term of years,’ ” Hutto v. Davis, 454 U. S. 370, 373 (1982)
(per curiam) (quoting Rummel, supra, at 275; emphasis
added).
Even when the Court broke from that understanding in
its 5-to-4 decision in Solem v. Helm, 463 U. S. 277 (1983)
(striking down as “grossly disproportionate” a life-without
parole sentence imposed on a defendant for passing a
worthless check), the Court did so only as applied to the
facts of that case; it announced no categorical rule. Id., at
288, 303. Moreover, the Court soon cabined Solem’s ra
tionale. The controlling opinion in the Court’s very next
noncapital proportionality case emphasized that principles
of federalism require substantial deference to legislative
choices regarding the proper length of prison sentences.
Harmelin, 501 U. S., at 999 (opinion of KENNEDY, J.)
(“[M]arked divergences both in underlying theories of
sentencing and in the length of prescribed prison terms
are the inevitable, often beneficial, result of the federal
structure”); id., at 1000 (“[D]iffering attitudes and percep
tions of local conditions may yield different, yet rational,
conclusions regarding the appropriate length of prison
terms for particular crimes”). That opinion thus concluded
that “successful challenges to the proportionality of
[prison] sentences [would be] exceedingly rare.” Id., at
1001 (internal quotation marks omitted).
They have been rare indeed. In the 28 years since

