22

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

safety, and so incapacitation is an important goal. See
Ewing, supra, at 26 (plurality opinion) (statistics show 67
percent of former inmates released from state prisons are
charged with at least one serious new crime within three
years). But while incapacitation may be a legitimate
penological goal sufficient to justify life without parole in
other contexts, it is inadequate to justify that punishment
for juveniles who did not commit homicide. To justify life
without parole on the assumption that the juvenile of
fender forever will be a danger to society requires the
sentencer to make a judgment that the juvenile is incorri
gible. The characteristics of juveniles make that judgment
questionable. “It is difficult even for expert psychologists
to differentiate between the juvenile offender whose crime
reflects unfortunate yet transient immaturity, and the
rare juvenile offender whose crime reflects irreparable
corruption.” Roper, supra, at 573. As one court concluded
in a challenge to a life without parole sentence for a 14
year-old, “incorrigibility is inconsistent with youth.”
Workman v. Commonwealth, 429 S. W. 2d 374, 378 (Ky.
App. 1968).
Here one cannot dispute that this defendant posed an
immediate risk, for he had committed, we can assume,
serious crimes early in his term of supervised release and
despite his own assurances of reform. Graham deserved
to be separated from society for some time in order to
prevent what the trial court described as an “escalating
pattern of criminal conduct,” App. 394, but it does not
follow that he would be a risk to society for the rest of his
life. Even if the State’s judgment that Graham was incor
rigible were later corroborated by prison misbehavior or
failure to mature, the sentence was still disproportionate
because that judgment was made at the outset. A life
without parole sentence improperly denies the juvenile
offender a chance to demonstrate growth and maturity.
Incapacitation cannot override all other considerations,

