26

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

immaturity, and the difficult circumstances of his upbring
ing.” Ante, at 7 (ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment).
But the Court previously has upheld a life-without-parole
sentence imposed on a first-time offender who committed a
nonviolent drug crime. See Harmelin, supra, at 1002–
1004. Graham’s conviction for an actual violent felony is
surely more severe than that offense. As for Graham’s
age, it is true that Roper held juveniles categorically ineli
gible for capital punishment, but as the concurrence ex
plains, Roper was based on the “explicit conclusion that
[juveniles] ‘cannot with reliability be classified among the
worst offenders’ ”; it did “not establish that juveniles can
never be eligible for life without parole.” Ante, at 5
(ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment) (quoting Roper,
543 U. S., at 569 (emphasis added in opinion of ROBERTS,
C. J.)). In my view, Roper’s principles are thus not gener
ally applicable outside the capital sentencing context.
By holding otherwise, the concurrence relies on the
same type of subjective judgment as the Court, only it
restrains itself to a case-by-case rather than a categorical
ruling. The concurrence is quite ready to hand Graham
“the general presumption of diminished culpability” for
juveniles, ante, at 7, apparently because it believes that
Graham’s armed burglary and home invasion crimes were
“certainly less serious” than murder or rape, ibid. It
recoils only from the prospect that the Court would extend
the same presumption to a juvenile who commits a sex
crime. See ante, at 10. I simply cannot accept that these
subjective judgments of proportionality are ones the
Eighth Amendment authorizes us to make.
The “objective” elements of the Solem test provide no
additional support for the concurrence’s conclusion. The
concurrence compares Graham’s sentence to “similar”
sentences in Florida and concludes that Graham’s sen
tence was “far more severe.” Ante, at 8 (ROBERTS, C. J,
concurring in judgment). But strangely, the concurrence

