14

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

jurisdiction’s penal system, regardless of when they were
convicted. It becomes all the more clear how rare these
sentences are, even within the jurisdictions that do some
times impose them, when one considers that a juvenile
sentenced to life without parole is likely to live in prison
for decades. Thus, these statistics likely reflect nearly all
juvenile nonhomicide offenders who have received a life
without parole sentence stretching back many years. It is
not certain that this opinion has identified every juvenile
nonhomicide offender nationwide serving a life without
parole sentence, for the statistics are not precise. The
available data, nonetheless, are sufficient to demonstrate
how rarely these sentences are imposed even if there are
isolated cases that have not been included in the presenta
tions of the parties or the analysis of the Court.
It must be acknowledged that in terms of absolute num
bers juvenile life without parole sentences for nonhomi
cides are more common than the sentencing practices at
issue in some of this Court’s other Eighth Amendment
cases. See, e.g., Enmund, 458 U. S., at 794 (only six exe
cutions of nontriggerman felony murderers between 1954
and 1982) Atkins, 536 U. S., at 316 (only five executions of
mentally retarded defendants in 13-year period). This
contrast can be instructive, however, if attention is first
given to the base number of certain types of offenses. For
example, in the year 2007 (the most recent year for which
statistics are available), a total of 13,480 persons, adult
and juvenile, were arrested for homicide crimes. That
same year, 57,600 juveniles were arrested for aggravated
assault; 3,580 for forcible rape; 34,500 for robbery; 81,900
for burglary; 195,700 for drug offenses; and 7,200 for
arson. See Dept. of Justice, Office of Juvenile Justice and
Delinquency Prevention, Statistical Briefing Book, online
at http://ojjdp.ncjrs.org/ojstatbb/ (as visited May 14, 2010,
and available in Clerk of Court’s case file). Although it is
not certain how many of these numerous juvenile offend

