4

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

entirely the Court’s creation. As has been described else
where at length, there is virtually no indication that the
Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause originally was
understood to require proportionality in sentencing. See
Harmelin, 501 U. S., at 975–985 (opinion of SCALIA, J.).
Here, it suffices to recall just two points. First, the Clause
does not expressly refer to proportionality or invoke any
synonym for that term, even though the Framers were
familiar with the concept, as evidenced by several found
ing-era state constitutions that required (albeit without
defining) proportional punishments. See id., at 977–978.
In addition, the penal statute adopted by the First Con
gress demonstrates that proportionality in sentencing was
not considered a constitutional command.1 See id., at
980–981 (noting that the statute prescribed capital pun
ishment for offenses ranging from “ ‘run[ning] away with
. . . goods or merchandise to the value of fifty dollars,’ ” to
“murder on the high seas” (quoting 1 Stat. 114)); see also
Preyer, Penal Measures in the American Colonies: An
Overview, 26 Am. J. Legal Hist. 326, 348–349, 353 (1982)
(explaining that crimes in the late 18th-century colonies
——————
1 THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s concurrence suggests that it is unnecessary to
remark on the underlying question whether the Eighth Amendment
requires proportionality in sentencing because “[n]either party here
asks us to reexamine our precedents” requiring “proportionality be
tween noncapital offenses and their corresponding punishments.” Ante,
at 2 (opinion concurring in judgment). I disagree. Both the Court and
the concurrence do more than apply existing noncapital proportionality
precedents to the particulars of Graham’s claim. The Court radically
departs from the framework those precedents establish by applying to a
noncapital sentence the categorical proportionality review its prior
decisions have reserved for death penalty cases alone. See Part III,
infra. The concurrence, meanwhile, breathes new life into the case-by
case proportionality approach that previously governed noncapital
cases, from which the Court has steadily, and wisely, retreated since
Solem v. Helm, 463 U. S. 277 (1983). See Part IV, infra. In dissenting
from both choices to expand proportionality review, I find it essential to
reexamine the foundations on which that doctrine is built.

