16

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

infrequency of jury verdicts imposing the death sentence
does not indicate rejection of capital punishment per se.
Rather, [it] . . . may well reflect the humane feeling that
this most irrevocable of sanctions should be reserved for a
small number of extreme cases”). It should also be re
jected here. That a punishment is rarely imposed demon
strates nothing more than a general consensus that it
should be just that—rarely imposed. It is not proof that
the punishment is one the Nation abhors.
The Court nonetheless insists that the 26 States that
authorize this penalty, but are not presently incarcerating
a juvenile nonhomicide offender on a life-without-parole
sentence, cannot be counted as approving its use. The
mere fact that the laws of a jurisdiction permit this pen
alty, the Court explains, “does not indicate that the pen
alty has been endorsed through deliberate, express, and
full legislative consideration.” Ante, at 16.
But this misapplies the Court’s own evolving standards
test. Under that test, “[i]t is not the burden of [a State] to
establish a national consensus approving what their citi
zens have voted to do; rather, it is the ‘heavy burden’ of
petitioners to establish a national consensus against it.”
Stanford v. Kentucky, 492 U. S. 361, 373 (1989) (quoting
Gregg, supra, at 175 (joint opinion of Stewart, Powell, and
STEVENS, JJ.); some emphasis added). In light of this fact,
the Court is wrong to equate a jurisdiction’s disuse of a
legislatively authorized penalty with its moral opposition
to it. The fact that the laws of a jurisdiction permit this
sentencing practice demonstrates, at a minimum, that the
citizens of that jurisdiction find tolerable the possibility
that a jury of their peers could impose a life-without
parole sentence on a juvenile whose nonhomicide crime is
sufficiently depraved.
The recent case of 16-year-old Keighton Budder illus
trates this point. Just weeks before the release of this
opinion, an Oklahoma jury sentenced Budder to life with

