(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
CERTIORARI TO THE DISTRICT COURT OF APPEAL OF

FLORIDA, 1ST DISTRICT

No. 08–7412. Argued November 9, 2009—Decided May 17, 2010; 

modified July 6, 2010 

Petitioner Graham was 16 when he committed armed burglary and
another crime. Under a plea agreement, the Florida trial court sen
tenced Graham to probation and withheld adjudication of guilt. Sub
sequently, the trial court found that Graham had violated the terms
of his probation by committing additional crimes. The trial court ad
judicated Graham guilty of the earlier charges, revoked his proba
tion, and sentenced him to life in prison for the burglary. Because
Florida has abolished its parole system, the life sentence left Graham
no possibility of release except executive clemency. He challenged his
sentence under the Eighth Amendment’s Cruel and Unusual Pun
ishments Clause, but the State First District Court of Appeal af
firmed.
Held: The Clause does not permit a juvenile offender to be sentenced to
life in prison without parole for a nonhomicide crime. Pp. 7–31.
(a) Embodied in the cruel and unusual punishments ban is the
“precept . . . that punishment for crime should be graduated and pro
portioned to [the] offense.” Weems v. United States, 217 U. S. 349,
367. The Court’s cases implementing the proportionality standard
fall within two general classifications. In cases of the first type, the
Court has considered all the circumstances to determine whether the
length of a term-of-years sentence is unconstitutionally excessive for
a particular defendant’s crime. The second classification comprises
cases in which the Court has applied certain categorical rules against
the death penalty. In a subset of such cases considering the nature of
the offense, the Court has concluded that capital punishment is im
permissible for nonhomicide crimes against individuals. E.g., Ken
nedy v. Louisiana, 554 U. S. ___, ___. In a second subset, cases turn
ing on the offender’s characteristics, the Court has prohibited death

