Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

THOMAS, J., dissenting

18”). And, notably, it suggests that violence itself is evi
dence that an adolescent offender’s antisocial behavior is
not transient. See Moffitt, A Review of Research on the
Taxonomy of Life-Course Persistent Versus AdolescenceLimited Antisocial Behavior, in Taking Stock: the Status
of Criminological Theory 277, 292–293 (F. Cullen, J.
Wright, & K. Blevins eds. 2006) (observing that “life
course persistent” males “tended to specialize in serious
offenses (carrying a hidden weapon, assault, robbery,
violating court orders), whereas adolescence-limited” ones
“specialized in non-serious offenses (theft less than $5,
public drunkenness, giving false information on applica
tion forms, pirating computer software, etc.)”).
In sum, even if it were relevant, none of this psychologi
cal or sociological data is sufficient to support the Court’s
“ ‘moral’ ” conclusion that youth defeats culpability in every
case. Ante, at 18 (quoting Roper, 543 U. S., at 570); see
id., at 618 (SCALIA, J., dissenting); R. Epstein, The Case
Against Adolescence 171 (2007) (reporting on a study of
juvenile reasoning skills and concluding that “most teens
are capable of conventional, adult-like moral reasoning”).
The Court responds that a categorical rule is nonethe
less necessary to prevent the “ ‘unacceptable likelihood’ ”
that a judge or jury, unduly swayed by “ ‘the brutality or
cold-blooded nature’ ” of a juvenile’s nonhomicide crime,
will sentence him to a life-without-parole sentence for
which he possesses “ ‘insufficient culpability,’ ” ante, at 27
(quoting Roper, supra, at 572–573). I find that justifica
tion entirely insufficient. The integrity of our criminal
justice system depends on the ability of citizens to stand
between the defendant and an outraged public and dispas
sionately determine his guilt and the proper amount of
punishment based on the evidence presented. That proc
ess necessarily admits of human error. But so does the
process of judging in which we engage. As between the
two, I find far more “unacceptable” that this Court,

