4

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
Syllabus
judge or jury that the juvenile offender is irredeemably depraved, and
are therefore insufficient to prevent the possibility that the offender
will receive such a sentence despite a lack of moral culpability. Sec
ond, a case-by-case approach requiring that the particular offender’s
age be weighed against the seriousness of the crime as part of a gross
disproportionality inquiry would not allow courts to distinguish with
sufficient accuracy the few juvenile offenders having sufficient psy
chological maturity and depravity to merit a life without parole sen
tence from the many that have the capacity for change. Cf. Roper,
supra, at 572–573. Nor does such an approach take account of spe
cial difficulties encountered by counsel in juvenile representation,
given juveniles’ impulsiveness, difficulty thinking in terms of long
term benefits, and reluctance to trust adults. A categorical rule
avoids the risk that, as a result of these difficulties, a court or jury
will erroneously conclude that a particular juvenile is sufficiently
culpable to deserve life without parole for a nonhomicide. It also
gives the juvenile offender a chance to demonstrate maturity and re
form. Pp. 24–29.
(4) Additional support for the Court’s conclusion lies in the fact
that the sentencing practice at issue has been rejected the world over:
The United States is the only Nation that imposes this type of sen
tence. While the judgments of other nations and the international
community are not dispositive as to the meaning of the Eighth
Amendment, the Court has looked abroad to support its independent
conclusion that a particular punishment is cruel and unusual. See,
e.g., Roper, supra, at 575–578. Pp. 29–31.

982 So. 2d 43, reversed and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which STEVENS,
GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. STEVENS, J., filed a
concurring opinion, in which GINSBURG and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.
ROBERTS, C. J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment. THOMAS,
J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which SCALIA, J., joined, and in which
ALITO, J., joined as to Parts I and III. ALITO, J., filed a dissenting opin
ion.

