6

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

tive indicia’ ” of “national consensus,” such as state and
federal legislation, jury behavior, and (surprisingly, given
that we are talking about “national” consensus) interna
tional opinion. Ante, at 10 (quoting Roper, supra, at 563);
see also ante, at 10–16, 29–31. Yet even assuming that is
true, the Framers did not provide for the constitutionality
of a particular type of punishment to turn on a “snapshot
of American public opinion” taken at the moment a case
is decided. Roper, supra, at 629 (SCALIA, J., dissenting).
By holding otherwise, the Court pretermits in all but one
direction the evolution of the standards it describes, thus
“calling a constitutional halt to what may well be a pen
dulum swing in social attitudes,” Thompson, supra, at
869 (SCALIA, J., dissenting), and “stunt[ing] legislative
consideration” of new questions of penal policy as they
emerge, Kennedy, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 2) (ALITO, J.,
dissenting).
But the Court is not content to rely on snapshots of
community consensus in any event. Ante, at 16 (“Commu
nity consensus, while ‘entitled to great weight,’ is not itself
determinative” (quoting Kennedy, supra, at __ (slip op., at
24))). Instead, it reserves the right to reject the evidence
of consensus it finds whenever its own “independent judg
ment” points in a different direction. Ante, at 16. The
Court thus openly claims the power not only to approve or
disapprove of democratic choices in penal policy based on
evidence of how society’s standards have evolved, but also
on the basis of the Court’s “independent” perception of
how those standards should evolve, which depends on
what the Court concedes is “ ‘ “necessarily . . . a moral
judgment” ’ ” regarding the propriety of a given punish
ment in today’s society. Ante, at 7 (quoting Kennedy,
supra, at ___ (slip op., at 8)).
The categorical proportionality review the Court em
ploys in capital cases thus lacks a principled foundation.
The Court’s decision today is significant because it does

