28

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

understandings of the criminal justice system and the
roles of the institutional actors within it. They are less
likely than adults to work effectively with their lawyers to
aid in their defense. Brief for NAACP Legal Defense &
Education Fund et al. as Amici Curiae 7–12; Henning,
Loyalty, Paternalism, and Rights: Client Counseling
Theory and the Role of Child’s Counsel in Delinquency
Cases, 81 Notre Dame L. Rev. 245, 272–273 (2005). Diffi
culty in weighing long-term consequences; a corresponding
impulsiveness; and reluctance to trust defense counsel
seen as part of the adult world a rebellious youth rejects,
all can lead to poor decisions by one charged with a juve
nile offense. Aber Brief 35. These factors are likely to
impair the quality of a juvenile defendant’s representa
tion. Cf. Atkins, 536 U. S., at 320 (“Mentally retarded
defendants may be less able to give meaningful assistance
to their counsel”). A categorical rule avoids the risk that,
as a result of these difficulties, a court or jury will errone
ously conclude that a particular juvenile is sufficiently
culpable to deserve life without parole for a nonhomicide.
Finally, a categorical rule gives all juvenile nonhomicide
offenders a chance to demonstrate maturity and reform.
The juvenile should not be deprived of the opportunity to
achieve maturity of judgment and self-recognition of hu
man worth and potential. In Roper, that deprivation
resulted from an execution that brought life to its end.
Here, though by a different dynamic, the same concerns
apply. Life in prison without the possibility of parole gives
no chance for fulfillment outside prison walls, no chance
for reconciliation with society, no hope. Maturity can lead
to that considered reflection which is the foundation for
remorse, renewal, and rehabilitation. A young person who
knows that he or she has no chance to leave prison before
life’s end has little incentive to become a responsible indi
vidual. In some prisons, moreover, the system itself be
comes complicit in the lack of development. As noted

