8

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

consider punishments challenged not as inherently bar
baric but as disproportionate to the crime. The concept of
proportionality is central to the Eighth Amendment.
Embodied in the Constitution’s ban on cruel and unusual
punishments is the “precept of justice that punishment for
crime should be graduated and proportioned to [the] of
fense.” Weems v. United States, 217 U. S. 349, 367 (1910).
The Court’s cases addressing the proportionality of
sentences fall within two general classifications. The first
involves challenges to the length of term-of-years sen
tences given all the circumstances in a particular case.
The second comprises cases in which the Court imple
ments the proportionality standard by certain categorical
restrictions on the death penalty.
In the first classification the Court considers all of the
circumstances of the case to determine whether the sen
tence is unconstitutionally excessive. Under this ap
proach, the Court has held unconstitutional a life without
parole sentence for the defendant’s seventh nonviolent
felony, the crime of passing a worthless check. Solem v.
Helm, 463 U. S. 277 (1983). In other cases, however, it
has been difficult for the challenger to establish a lack of
proportionality. A leading case is Harmelin v. Michigan,
501 U. S. 957 (1991), in which the offender was sentenced
under state law to life without parole for possessing a
large quantity of cocaine. A closely divided Court upheld
the sentence. The controlling opinion concluded that the
Eighth Amendment contains a “narrow proportionality
principle,” that “does not require strict proportionality
between crime and sentence” but rather “forbids only
extreme sentences that are ‘grossly disproportionate’ to
the crime.” Id., at 997, 1000–1001 (KENNEDY, J., concur
ring in part and concurring in judgment). Again closely
divided, the Court rejected a challenge to a sentence of 25
years to life for the theft of a few golf clubs under Califor
nia’s so-called three-strikes recidivist sentencing scheme.

