10

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

thinks clear lines are a good idea, see ante, at 25. I find
those factors wholly insufficient to justify the Court’s
break from past practice. First, the Court fails to ac
knowledge that a petitioner seeking to exempt an entire
category of offenders from a sentencing practice carries a
much heavier burden than one seeking case-specific relief
under Solem. Unlike the petitioner in Solem, Graham
must establish not only that his own life-without-parole
sentence is “grossly disproportionate,” but also that such a
sentence is always grossly disproportionate whenever it is
applied to a juvenile nonhomicide offender, no matter how
heinous his crime. Cf. United States v. Salerno, 481 U. S.
739 (1987). Second, even applying the Court’s categorical
“evolving standards” test, neither objective evidence of
national consensus nor the notions of culpability on which
the Court’s “independent judgment” relies can justify the
categorical rule it declares here.
A
According to the Court, proper Eighth Amendment
analysis “begins with objective indicia of national consen
sus,”3 and “[t]he clearest and most reliable objective evi
dence of contemporary values is the legislation enacted by
the country’s legislatures,” ante, at 10–11 (internal quota
——————
3 The Court ignores entirely the threshold inquiry of whether subject
ing juvenile offenders to adult penalties was one of the “modes or acts of
punishment that had been considered cruel and unusual at the time
that the Bill of Rights was adopted.” Ford v. Wainwright, 477 U. S.
399, 405 (1986). As the Court has noted in the past, however, the
evidence is clear that, at the time of the Founding, “the common law set
a rebuttable presumption of incapacity to commit any felony at the age
of 14, and theoretically permitted [even] capital punishment to be
imposed on a person as young as age 7.” Stanford v. Kentucky, 492
U. S. 361, 368 (1989) (citing 4 W. Blackstone, Commentaries *23–*24; 1
M. Hale, Pleas of the Crown 24–29 (1800)). It thus seems exceedingly
unlikely that the imposition of a life-without-parole sentence on a
person of Graham’s age would run afoul of those standards.

