28

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

drawing problems to which courts must seek answers
beyond the strictures of the Constitution. The Court holds
that “[a] State is not required to guarantee eventual free
dom to a juvenile offender convicted of a nonhomicide
crime,” but must provide the offender with “some mean
ingful opportunity to obtain release based on demon
strated maturity and rehabilitation.” Ante, at 24. But
what, exactly, does such a “meaningful” opportunity en
tail? When must it occur? And what Eighth Amendment
principles will govern review by the parole boards the
Court now demands that States empanel? The Court
provides no answers to these questions, which will no
doubt embroil the courts for years.13
V
The ultimate question in this case is not whether a life
without-parole sentence ‘fits’ the crime at issue here or the
crimes of juvenile nonhomicide offenders more generally,
but to whom the Constitution assigns that decision. The
Florida Legislature has concluded that such sentences
should be available for persons under 18 who commit
certain crimes, and the trial judge in this case decided to
impose that legislatively authorized sentence here. Be
cause a life-without-parole prison sentence is not a “cruel
and unusual” method of punishment under any standard,
——————
13 It bears noting that Colorado, one of the five States that prohibit
life-without-parole sentences for juvenile nonhomicide offenders,
permits such offenders to be sentenced to mandatory terms of impris
onment for up to 40 years. Colo. Rev. Stat. §18–1.3–401(4)(b) (2009).
In light of the volume of state and federal legislation that presently
permits life-without-parole sentences for juvenile nonhomicide offend
ers, it would be impossible to argue that there is any objective evidence
of agreement that a juvenile is constitutionally entitled to a parole
hearing any sooner than 40 years after conviction. See Tr. of Oral Arg.
6–7 (counsel for Graham, stating that, “[o]ur position is that it should
be left up to the States to decide. We think that the . . . Colorado
provision would probably be constitutional”).

