20

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

on average serve more years and a greater percentage of
his life in prison than an adult offender. A 16-year-old
and a 75-year-old each sentenced to life without parole
receive the same punishment in name only. See Roper,
supra, at 572; cf. Harmelin, supra, at 996 (“In some cases
. . . there will be negligible difference between life without
parole and other sentences of imprisonment—for example,
. . . a lengthy term sentence without eligibility for parole,
given to a 65-year-old man”). This reality cannot be
ignored.
The penological justifications for the sentencing practice
are also relevant to the analysis. Kennedy, supra, at ___
(slip op., at 30–36); Roper, 543 U. S., at 571–572; Atkins,
supra, at 318–320. Criminal punishment can have differ
ent goals, and choosing among them is within a legisla
ture’s discretion. See Harmelin, supra, at 999 (opinion of
KENNEDY, J.) (“[T]he Eighth Amendment does not man
date adoption of any one penological theory”). It does not
follow, however, that the purposes and effects of penal
sanctions are irrelevant to the determination of Eighth
Amendment restrictions. A sentence lacking any legiti
mate penological justification is by its nature dispropor
tionate to the offense. With respect to life without parole
for juvenile nonhomicide offenders, none of the goals of
penal sanctions that have been recognized as legitimate—
retribution, deterrence, incapacitation, and rehabilitation,
see Ewing, 538 U. S., at 25 (plurality opinion)—provides
an adequate justification.
Retribution is a legitimate reason to punish, but it
cannot support the sentence at issue here. Society is
entitled to impose severe sanctions on a juvenile nonhomi
cide offender to express its condemnation of the crime and
to seek restoration of the moral imbalance caused by the
offense. But “[t]he heart of the retribution rationale is
that a criminal sentence must be directly related to the
personal culpability of the criminal offender.” Tison, 481

