2

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
Syllabus
for defendants who committed their crimes before age 18, Roper v.
Simmons, 543 U. S. 551, or whose intellectual functioning is in a low
range, Atkins v. Virginia, 536 U. S. 304. In cases involving categori
cal rules, the Court first considers “objective indicia of society’s stan
dards, as expressed in legislative enactments and state practice” to
determine whether there is a national consensus against the sentenc
ing practice at issue. Roper, supra, at 563. Next, looking to “the
standards elaborated by controlling precedents and by the Court’s
own understanding and interpretation of the Eighth Amendment’s
text, history, meaning, and purpose,” Kennedy, supra, at ___, the
Court determines in the exercise of its own independent judgment
whether the punishment in question violates the Constitution, Roper,
supra, at 564. Because this case implicates a particular type of sen
tence as it applies to an entire class of offenders who have committed
a range of crimes, the appropriate analysis is the categorical ap
proach used in Atkins, Roper, and Kennedy. Pp. 7–10.
(b) Application of the foregoing approach convinces the Court that
the sentencing practice at issue is unconstitutional. Pp. 10–31.
(1) Six jurisdictions do not allow life without parole sentences for
any juvenile offenders. Seven jurisdictions permit life without parole
for juvenile offenders, but only for homicide crimes. Thirty-seven
States, the District of Columbia, and the Federal Government permit
sentences of life without parole for a juvenile nonhomicide offender in
some circumstances. The State relies on these data to argue that no
national consensus against the sentencing practice in question exists.
An examination of actual sentencing practices in those jurisdictions
that permit life without parole for juvenile nonhomicide offenders,
however, discloses a consensus against the sentence. Nationwide,
there are only 123 juvenile offenders serving life without parole sen
tences for nonhomicide crimes. Because 77 of those offenders are
serving sentences imposed in Florida and the other 46 are imprisoned
in just 10 States, it appears that only 11 jurisdictions nationwide in
fact impose life without parole sentences on juvenile nonhomicide of
fenders, while 26 States, the District of Columbia, and the Federal
Government do not impose them despite apparent statutory authori
zation. Given that the statistics reflect nearly all juvenile nonhomi
cide offenders who have received a life without parole sentence
stretching back many years, moreover, it is clear how rare these sen
tences are, even within the States that do sometimes impose them.
While more common in terms of absolute numbers than the sentenc
ing practices in, e.g., Atkins and Enmund v. Florida, 458 U. S. 782, the
type of sentence at issue is actually as rare as those other sentencing
practices when viewed in proportion to the opportunities for its imposi
tion. The fact that many jurisdictions do not expressly prohibit the

