Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

ity,” Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U. S. 153, 187 (1976) (joint
opinion of Stewart, Powell, and STEVENS, JJ.); yet life
without parole sentences share some characteristics with
death sentences that are shared by no other sentences.
The State does not execute the offender sentenced to life
without parole, but the sentence alters the offender’s life
by a forfeiture that is irrevocable. It deprives the convict
of the most basic liberties without giving hope of restora
tion, except perhaps by executive clemency—the remote
possibility of which does not mitigate the harshness of the
sentence. Solem, 463 U. S., at 300–301. As one court
observed in overturning a life without parole sentence for
a juvenile defendant, this sentence “means denial of hope;
it means that good behavior and character improvement
are immaterial; it means that whatever the future might
hold in store for the mind and spirit of [the convict], he
will remain in prison for the rest of his days.” Naovarath
v. State, 105 Nev. 525, 526, 779 P. 2d 944 (1989).
The Court has recognized the severity of sentences that
deny convicts the possibility of parole. In Rummel, 445
U. S. 263, the Court rejected an Eighth Amendment chal
lenge to a life sentence for a defendant’s third nonviolent
felony but stressed that the sentence gave the defendant
the possibility of parole. Noting that “parole is an estab
lished variation on imprisonment of convicted criminals,”
it was evident that an analysis of the petitioner’s sentence
“could hardly ignore the possibility that he will not actu
ally be imprisoned for the rest of his life.” Id., at 280–281
(internal quotation marks omitted). And in Solem, the
only previous case striking down a sentence for a term of
years as grossly disproportionate, the defendant’s sentence
was deemed “far more severe than the life sentence we
considered in Rummel,” because it did not give the defen
dant the possibility of parole. 463 U. S., at 297.
Life without parole is an especially harsh punishment
for a juvenile. Under this sentence a juvenile offender will

