Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

been sentenced to life without parole for a rape and stab
bing he committed at the age of 16. See Stogsdill, Dela
ware County Teen Sentenced in Rape, Assault Case, Tulsa
World, May 4, 2010, p. A12.
Thus, adding the individuals counted by the study to
those we have been able to locate independently, there are
123 juvenile nonhomicide offenders serving life without
parole sentences. A significant majority of those, 77 in
total, are serving sentences imposed in Florida. Annino 2.
The other 46 are imprisoned in just 10 States—California,
Delaware, Iowa, Louisiana, Mississippi, Nebraska, Ne
vada, Oklahoma, South Carolina, and Virginia. Id., at 14;
supra, at 12–13; Letter from Thomas P. Hoey, Dept. of
Corrections, Government of the District of Columbia, to
Supreme Court Library (Mar. 31, 2010) (available in Clerk
of Court’s case file); Letter from Judith Simon Garrett,
U. S. Dept. of Justice, Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP), to
Supreme Court Library (Apr. 9, 2010) (available in Clerk
of Court’s case file). Thus, only 11 jurisdictions nation
wide in fact impose life without parole sentences on juve
nile nonhomicide offenders—and most of those do so quite
rarely—while 26 States, the District of Columbia, and the
Federal Government do not impose them despite statutory
authorization.*
The numbers cited above reflect all current convicts in a
——————
* When issued, the Court’s opinion relied on a report from the BOP
stating that there are six juvenile nonhomicide offenders serving life
without parole in the federal system. The Acting Solicitor General
subsequently informed the Court that further review revealed that
none of the six prisoners referred to in the earlier BOP report is serving
a life without parole sentence solely for a juvenile nonhomicide crime
completed before the age of 18. Letter from Neal Kumar Katyal, Acting
Solicitor General, to William K. Suter, Clerk of Court (May 24, 2010)
(available in Clerk of Court’s case file). The letter further stated that
the Government was not aware of any other federal prisoners serving
life without parole sentences solely for juvenile nonhomicide crimes.
Ibid. The opinion was amended in light of this new information.

