Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

31

Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

hibits the imposition of “life imprisonment without possi
bility of release . . . for offences committed by persons
below eighteen years of age.” Brief for Petitioner 66; Brief
for Amnesty International et al. as Amici Curiae 15–17.
As we concluded in Roper with respect to the juvenile
death penalty, “the United States now stands alone in a
world that has turned its face against” life without parole
for juvenile nonhomicide offenders. 543 U. S., at 577.
The State’s amici stress that no international legal
agreement that is binding on the United States prohibits
life without parole for juvenile offenders and thus urge us
to ignore the international consensus. See Brief for Soli
darity Center for Law and Justice et al. as Amici Curiae
14–16; Brief for Sixteen Members of United States House
of Representatives as Amici Curiae 40–43. These argu
ments miss the mark. The question before us is not
whether international law prohibits the United States
from imposing the sentence at issue in this case. The
question is whether that punishment is cruel and unusual.
In that inquiry, “the overwhelming weight of international
opinion against” life without parole for nonhomicide of
fenses committed by juveniles “provide[s] respected and
significant confirmation for our own conclusions.” Roper,
supra, at 578.
The debate between petitioner’s and respondent’s amici
over whether there is a binding jus cogens norm against
this sentencing practice is likewise of no import. See Brief
for Amnesty International 10–23; Brief for Sixteen Mem
bers of United States House of Representatives 4–40. The
Court has treated the laws and practices of other nations
and international agreements as relevant to the Eighth
Amendment not because those norms are binding or con
trolling but because the judgment of the world’s nations
that a particular sentencing practice is inconsistent with
basic principles of decency demonstrates that the Court’s
rationale has respected reasoning to support it.

