Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

THOMAS, J., dissenting

Finally, I cannot help but note that the statistics the
Court finds inadequate to justify the penalty in this case
are stronger than those supporting at least one other
penalty this Court has upheld. Not long ago, this Court,
joined by the author of today’s opinion, upheld the applica
tion of the death penalty against a 16-year-old, despite the
fact that no such punishment had been carried out on a
person of that age in this country in nearly 30 years. See
Stanford, 492 U. S., at 374. Whatever the statistical
frequency with which life-without-parole sentences have
been imposed on juvenile nonhomicide offenders in the
last 30 years, it is surely greater than zero.
In the end, however, objective factors such as legislation
and the frequency of a penalty’s use are merely ornaments
in the Court’s analysis, window dressing that accompanies
its judicial fiat.12 By the Court’s own decree, “[c]ommunity
——————
and specific data on all 123 offenders (age, date of conviction, crime of
conviction, etc.), have not been collected, making verification of the
Court’s headcount impossible. The Court inexplicably blames Florida
for all of this. See ante, at 12. But as already noted, it is not Florida’s
burden to collect data to prove a national consensus in favor of this
sentencing practice, but Graham’s “heavy burden” to prove a consensus
against it. See supra, at 16.
12 I confine to a footnote the Court’s discussion of foreign laws and
sentencing practices because past opinions explain at length why such
factors are irrelevant to the meaning of our Constitution or the Court’s
discernment of any longstanding tradition in this Nation. See Atkins,
536 U. S., at 324–325 (Rehnquist, C. J., dissenting). Here, two points
suffice. First, despite the Court’s attempt to count the actual number of
juvenile nonhomicide offenders serving life-without-parole sentences in
other nations (a task even more challenging than counting them within
our borders), the laws of other countries permit juvenile life-without
parole sentences, see Child Rights Information, Network, C. de la Vega,
M. Montesano, & A. Solter, Human Rights Advocates, Statement on
Juvenile Sentencing to Human Rights Council, 10th Sess. (Nov. 3,
2009) (“Eleven countries have laws with the potential to permit the
sentencing of child offenders to life without the possibility of release,”
online at http://www.crin.org/resources/infoDetail.asp?ID=19806) (as
visited May 14, 2010, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file)).

