16

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
Appendix to opinion of the Court
Opinion of the Court

as would be given to an adult offender, including a life
without parole sentence. But the fact that transfer and
direct charging laws make life without parole possible for
some juvenile nonhomicide offenders does not justify a
judgment that many States intended to subject such of
fenders to life without parole sentences.
For example, under Florida law a child of any age can be
prosecuted as an adult for certain crimes and can be sen
tenced to life without parole. The State acknowledged at
oral argument that even a 5-year-old, theoretically, could
receive such a sentence under the letter of the law. See
Tr. of Oral Arg. 36–37. All would concede this to be unre
alistic, but the example underscores that the statutory
eligibility of a juvenile offender for life without parole does
not indicate that the penalty has been endorsed through
deliberate, express, and full legislative consideration.
Similarly, the many States that allow life without parole
for juvenile nonhomicide offenders but do not impose the
punishment should not be treated as if they have ex
pressed the view that the sentence is appropriate. The
sentencing practice now under consideration is exceed
ingly rare. And “it is fair to say that a national consensus
has developed against it.” Atkins, supra, at 316.
B
Community consensus, while “entitled to great weight,”
is not itself determinative of whether a punishment is
cruel and unusual. Kennedy, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
24). In accordance with the constitutional design, “the
task of interpreting the Eighth Amendment remains our
responsibility.” Roper, 543 U. S., at 575. The judicial
exercise of independent judgment requires consideration
of the culpability of the offenders at issue in light of their
crimes and characteristics, along with the severity of the
punishment in question. Id., at 568; Kennedy, supra, at
___ (slip op., at 27–28); cf. Solem, 463 U. S., at 292. In this

