Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

BREYER, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1521
_________________

OTIS MCDONALD, ET AL., PETITIONERS v. CITY OF 

CHICAGO, ILLINOIS, ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT

[June 28, 2010] 


JUSTICE BREYER, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG and
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
In my view, JUSTICE STEVENS has demonstrated that
the Fourteenth Amendment’s guarantee of “substantive
due process” does not include a general right to keep and
bear firearms for purposes of private self-defense. As he
argues, the Framers did not write the Second Amendment
with this objective in view. See ante, at 41–44 (dissenting
opinion). Unlike other forms of substantive liberty, the
carrying of arms for that purpose often puts others’ lives
at risk. See ante, at 35–37. And the use of arms for pri
vate self-defense does not warrant federal constitutional
protection from state regulation. See ante, at 44–51.
The Court, however, does not expressly rest its opinion
upon “substantive due process” concerns. Rather, it di
rects its attention to this Court’s “incorporation” prece
dents and asks whether the Second Amendment right to
private self-defense is “fundamental” so that it applies to
the States through the Fourteenth Amendment. See ante,
at 11–19.
I shall therefore separately consider the question of
“incorporation.” I can find nothing in the Second Amend
ment’s text, history, or underlying rationale that could
warrant characterizing it as “fundamental” insofar as it
seeks to protect the keeping and bearing of arms for pri


2

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

vate self-defense purposes. Nor can I find any justification
for interpreting the Constitution as transferring ultimate
regulatory authority over the private uses of firearms from
democratically elected legislatures to courts or from the
States to the Federal Government. I therefore conclude
that the Fourteenth Amendment does not “incorporate”
the Second Amendment’s right “to keep and bear Arms.”
And I consequently dissent.
I
The Second Amendment says: “A well regulated Militia,
being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of
the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed.”
Two years ago, in District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U. S.
___ (2008), the Court rejected the pre-existing judicial
consensus that the Second Amendment was primarily
concerned with the need to maintain a “well regulated
Militia.” See id., at ___ (STEVENS, J., dissenting) (slip op.,
at 2–3, and n. 2, 38–45); United States v. Miller, 307 U. S.
174, 178 (1939). Although the Court acknowledged that
“the threat that the new Federal Government would de
stroy the citizens’ militia by taking away their arms was
the reason that right . . . was codified in a written Consti
tution,” the Court asserted that “individual self defense
. . . was the central component of the right itself.” Heller,
supra, at ___ (slip op., at 26) (first emphasis added). The
Court went on to hold that the Second Amendment re
stricted Congress’ power to regulate handguns used for
self-defense, and the Court found unconstitutional the
District of Columbia’s ban on the possession of handguns
in the home. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 64).
The Court based its conclusions almost exclusively upon
its reading of history. But the relevant history in Heller
was far from clear: Four dissenting Justices disagreed
with the majority’s historical analysis. And subsequent
scholarly writing reveals why disputed history provides


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

BREYER, J., dissenting

treacherous ground on which to build decisions written by
judges who are not expert at history.
Since Heller, historians, scholars, and judges have con
tinued to express the view that the Court’s historical
account was flawed. See, e.g., Konig, Why the Second
Amendment Has a Preamble: Original Public Meaning
and the Political Culture of Written Constitutions in
Revolutionary America, 56 UCLA L. Rev. 1295 (2009);
Finkelman, It Really Was About a Well Regulated Militia,
59 Syracuse L. Rev. 267 (2008); P. Charles, The Second
Amendment: The Intent and Its Interpretation by the
States and the Supreme Court (2009); Merkel, The District
of Columbia v. Heller and Antonin Scalia’s Perverse Sense
of Originalism, 13 Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 349 (2009);
Kozuskanich, Originalism in a Digital Age: An Inquiry
into the Right to Bear Arms, 29 J. Early Republic 585
(2009); Cornell, St. George Tucker’s Lecture Notes, the
Second Amendment, and Originalist Methodology, 103
Nw. U. L. Rev. 1541 (2009); Posner, In Defense of Loose
ness: The Supreme Court and Gun Control, New Republic,
Aug. 27, 2008, pp. 32–35; see also Epstein, A Structural
Interpretation of the Second Amendment: Why Heller is
(Probably) Wrong on Originalist Grounds, 59 Syracuse
L. Rev. 171 (2008).
Consider as an example of these critiques an amici brief
filed in this case by historians who specialize in the study
of the English Civil Wars. They tell us that Heller misun
derstood a key historical point. See Brief for Eng
lish/Early American Historians as Amici Curiae (hereinaf
ter English Historians’ Brief) (filed by 21 professors at
leading universities in the United States, United King
dom, and Australia). Heller’s conclusion that “individual
self-defense” was “the central component” of the Second
Amendment’s right “to keep and bear Arms” rested upon
its view that the Amendment “codified a pre-existing right”
that had “nothing whatever to do with service in a mili


4

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

tia.” 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 26, 19–20). That view in
turn rested in significant part upon Blackstone having
described the right as “ ‘the right of having and using arms
for self-preservation and defence,’ ” which reflected the
provision in the English Declaration of Right of 1689 that
gave the King’s Protestant “ ‘subjects’ ” the right to “ ‘have
Arms for their defence suitable to their Conditions, and as
allowed by law.’ ” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 19–20) (quoting 1
W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 140
(1765) (hereinafter Blackstone) and 1 W. & M., c. 2, §7, in
3 Eng. Stat. at Large 441 (1689)). The Framers, said the
majority, understood that right “as permitting a citizen to
‘repe[l] force by force’ when ‘the intervention of society in
his behalf, may be too late to prevent an injury.’ ” 554
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 21) (quoting St. George Tucker, 1
Blackstone’s Commentaries 145–146, n. 42 (1803)).
The historians now tell us, however, that the right to
which Blackstone referred had, not nothing, but every
thing, to do with the militia. As properly understood at
the time of the English Civil Wars, the historians claim,
the right to bear arms “ensured that Parliament had the
power” to arm the citizenry: “to defend the realm” in the
case of a foreign enemy, and to “secure the right of ‘self
preservation,’ ” or “self-defense,” should “the sovereign
usurp the English Constitution.” English Historians’ Brief
3, 8–13, 23–24 (emphasis added). Thus, the Declaration of
Right says that private persons can possess guns only “as
allowed by law.” See id., at 20–24. Moreover, when
Blackstone referred to “ ‘the right of having and using
arms for self-preservation and defence,’ ” he was referring
to the right of the people “to take part in the militia to
defend their political liberties,” and to the right of Parlia
ment (which represented the people) to raise a militia even
when the King sought to deny it that power. Id., at 4, 24–
27 (emphasis added) (quoting 1 Blackstone 140). Nor can
the historians find any convincing reason to believe that


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

BREYER, J., dissenting

the Framers had something different in mind than what
Blackstone himself meant. Compare Heller, supra, at ___
(slip op., at 21–22) with English Historians’ Brief 28–40.
The historians concede that at least one historian takes a
different position, see id., at 7, but the Court, they imply,
would lose a poll taken among professional historians of
this period, say, by a vote of 8 to 1.
If history, and history alone, is what matters, why
would the Court not now reconsider Heller in light of these
more recently published historical views? See Leegin
Creative Leather Products, Inc. v. PSKS, Inc., 551 U. S.
877, 923–924 (2007) (BREYER, J., dissenting) (noting that
stare decisis interests are at their lowest with respect to
recent and erroneous constitutional decisions that create
unworkable legal regimes); Citizens United v. Federal
Election Comm’n, 558 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 47)
(listing similar factors); see also Wallace v. Jaffree, 472
U. S. 38, 99 (1985) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting) (“[S]tare
decisis may bind courts as to matters of law, but it cannot
bind them as to matters of history”). At the least, where
Heller’s historical foundations are so uncertain, why ex
tend its applicability?
My aim in referring to this history is to illustrate the
reefs and shoals that lie in wait for those nonexpert judges
who place virtually determinative weight upon historical
considerations. In my own view, the Court should not look
to history alone but to other factors as well—above all, in
cases where the history is so unclear that the experts
themselves strongly disagree. It should, for example,
consider the basic values that underlie a constitutional
provision and their contemporary significance. And it
should examine as well the relevant consequences and
practical justifications that might, or might not, warrant
removing an important question from the democratic
decisionmaking process. See ante, at 16–20 (STEVENS, J.,
dissenting) (discussing shortcomings of an exclusively


6

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

historical approach).
II 

A

In my view, taking Heller as a given, the Fourteenth
Amendment does not incorporate the Second Amendment
right to keep and bear arms for purposes of private self
defense. Under this Court’s precedents, to incorporate the
private self-defense right the majority must show that the
right is, e.g., “fundamental to the American scheme of
justice,” Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U. S. 145, 149 (1968);
see ibid., n. 14; see also ante, at 44 (plurality opinion)
(finding that the right is “fundamental” and therefore
incorporated). And this it fails to do.
The majority here, like that in Heller, relies almost
exclusively upon history to make the necessary showing.
Ante, at 20–33. But to do so for incorporation purposes is
both wrong and dangerous. As JUSTICE STEVENS points
out, our society has historically made mistakes—for ex
ample, when considering certain 18th- and 19th-century
property rights to be fundamental. Ante, at 19 (dissenting
opinion). And in the incorporation context, as elsewhere,
history often is unclear about the answers. See Part I,
supra; Part III, infra.
Accordingly, this Court, in considering an incorporation
question, has never stated that the historical status of a
right is the only relevant consideration. Rather, the Court
has either explicitly or implicitly made clear in its opin
ions that the right in question has remained fundamental
over time. See, e.g., Apodaca v. Oregon, 406 U. S. 404, 410
(1972) (plurality opinion) (stating that the incorporation
“inquiry must focus upon the function served” by the right
in question in “contemporary society” (emphasis added));
Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U. S. 145, 154 (1968) (noting
that the right in question “continues to receive strong
support”); Klopfer v. North Carolina, 386 U. S. 213, 226


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

(1967) (same). And, indeed, neither of the parties before
us in this case has asked us to employ the majority’s his
tory-constrained approach. See Brief for Petitioners 67–69
(arguing for incorporation based on trends in contempo
rary support for the right); Brief for Respondents City of
Chicago et al. 23–31 (hereinafter Municipal Respondents)
(looking to current state practices with respect to the
right).
I thus think it proper, above all where history provides
no clear answer, to look to other factors in considering
whether a right is sufficiently “fundamental” to remove it
from the political process in every State. I would include
among those factors the nature of the right; any contem
porary disagreement about whether the right is funda
mental; the extent to which incorporation will further
other, perhaps more basic, constitutional aims; and the
extent to which incorporation will advance or hinder the
Constitution’s structural aims, including its division of
powers among different governmental institutions (and
the people as well). Is incorporation needed, for example,
to further the Constitution’s effort to ensure that the
government treats each individual with equal respect?
Will it help maintain the democratic form of government
that the Constitution foresees? In a word, will incorpora
tion prove consistent, or inconsistent, with the Constitu
tion’s efforts to create governmental institutions well
suited to the carrying out of its constitutional promises?
Finally, I would take account of the Framers’ basic
reason for believing the Court ought to have the power of
judicial review. Alexander Hamilton feared granting that
power to Congress alone, for he feared that Congress,
acting as judges, would not overturn as unconstitutional a
popular statute that it had recently enacted, as legislators.
The Federalist No. 78, p. 405 (G. Carey & J. McClellan
eds. 2001) (A. Hamilton) (“This independence of the judges
is equally requisite to guard the constitution and the


8

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

rights of individuals from the effects of those ill humours,
which” can, at times, lead to “serious oppressions of the
minor part in the community”). Judges, he thought, may
find it easier to resist popular pressure to suppress the
basic rights of an unpopular minority. See United States
v. Carolene Products Co., 304 U. S. 144, 152, n. 4 (1938).
That being so, it makes sense to ask whether that particu
lar comparative judicial advantage is relevant to the case
at hand. See, e.g., J. Ely, Democracy and Distrust (1980).
B
How do these considerations apply here? For one thing,
I would apply them only to the private self-defense right
directly at issue. After all, the Amendment’s militia
related purpose is primarily to protect States from federal
regulation, not to protect individuals from militia-related
regulation. Heller, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 26); see
also Miller, 307 U. S., at 178. Moreover, the Civil War
Amendments, the electoral process, the courts, and nu
merous other institutions today help to safeguard the
States and the people from any serious threat of federal
tyranny. How are state militias additionally necessary?
It is difficult to see how a right that, as the majority con
cedes, has “largely faded as a popular concern” could
possibly be so fundamental that it would warrant incorpo
ration through the Fourteenth Amendment. Ante, at 22.
Hence, the incorporation of the Second Amendment cannot
be based on the militia-related aspect of what Heller found
to be more extensive Second Amendment rights.
For another thing, as Heller concedes, the private self
defense right that the Court would incorporate has noth
ing to do with “the reason” the Framers “codified” the right
to keep and bear arms “in a written Constitution.” 554
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 26) (emphasis added). Heller
immediately adds that the self-defense right was nonethe
less “the central component of the right.” Ibid. In my


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

BREYER, J., dissenting

view, this is the historical equivalent of a claim that water
runs uphill. See Part I, supra. But, taking it as valid, the
Framers’ basic reasons for including language in the Con
stitution would nonetheless seem more pertinent (in decid
ing about the contemporary importance of a right) than
the particular scope 17th- or 18th-century listeners would
have then assigned to the words they used. And examina
tion of the Framers’ motivation tells us they did not think
the private armed self-defense right was of paramount
importance. See Amar, The Bill of Rights as a Constitu
tion, 100 Yale L. J. 1131, 1164 (1991) (“[T]o see the [Sec
ond] Amendment as primarily concerned with an individ
ual right to hunt, or protect one’s home,” would be “like
viewing the heart of the speech and assembly clauses as
the right of persons to meet to play bridge”); see also, e.g.,
Rakove, The Second Amendment: The Highest Stage of
Originalism, 76 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 103, 127–128 (2000);
Brief for Historians on Early American Legal, Constitu
tional, and Pennsylvania History as Amici Curiae 22–33.
Further, there is no popular consensus that the private
self-defense right described in Heller is fundamental. The
plurality suggests that two amici briefs filed in the case
show such a consensus, see ante, at 42–43, but, of course,
numerous amici briefs have been filed opposing incorpora
tion as well. Moreover, every State regulates firearms
extensively, and public opinion is sharply divided on the
appropriate level of regulation. Much of this disagreement
rests upon empirical considerations. One side believes the
right essential to protect the lives of those attacked in the
home; the other side believes it essential to regulate the
right in order to protect the lives of others attacked with
guns. It seems unlikely that definitive evidence will de
velop one way or the other. And the appropriate level of
firearm regulation has thus long been, and continues to
be, a hotly contested matter of political debate. See, e.g.,
Siegel, Dead or Alive: Originalism as Popular Constitu


10

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

tionalism in Heller, 122 Harv. L. Rev. 191, 201–246 (2008).
(Numerous sources supporting arguments and data in
Part II–B can be found in the Appendix, infra.)
Moreover, there is no reason here to believe that incor
poration of the private self-defense right will further any
other or broader constitutional objective. We are aware of
no argument that gun-control regulations target or are
passed with the purpose of targeting “discrete and insular
minorities.” Carolene Products Co., supra, at 153, n. 4;
see, e.g., ante, at 49–51 (STEVENS, J., dissenting). Nor will
incorporation help to assure equal respect for individuals.
Unlike the First Amendment’s rights of free speech, free
press, assembly, and petition, the private self-defense
right does not comprise a necessary part of the democratic
process that the Constitution seeks to establish. See, e.g.,
Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357, 377 (1927) (Brandeis,
J., concurring). Unlike the First Amendment’s religious
protections, the Fourth Amendment’s protection against
unreasonable searches and seizures, the Fifth and Sixth
Amendments’ insistence upon fair criminal procedure, and
the Eighth Amendment’s protection against cruel and
unusual punishments, the private self-defense right does
not significantly seek to protect individuals who might
otherwise suffer unfair or inhumane treatment at the
hands of a majority. Unlike the protections offered by
many of these same Amendments, it does not involve
matters as to which judges possess a comparative exper
tise, by virtue of their close familiarity with the justice
system and its operation. And, unlike the Fifth Amend
ment’s insistence on just compensation, it does not involve
a matter where a majority might unfairly seize for itself
property belonging to a minority.
Finally, incorporation of the right will work a significant
disruption in the constitutional allocation of decisionmak
ing authority, thereby interfering with the Constitution’s
ability to further its objectives.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

BREYER, J., dissenting

First, on any reasonable accounting, the incorporation of
the right recognized in Heller would amount to a signifi
cant incursion on a traditional and important area of state
concern, altering the constitutional relationship between
the States and the Federal Government. Private gun
regulation is the quintessential exercise of a State’s “police
power”—i.e., the power to “protec[t] . . . the lives, limbs,
health, comfort, and quiet of all persons, and the protec
tion of all property within the State,” by enacting “all
kinds of restraints and burdens” on both “persons and
property.” Slaughter-House Cases, 16 Wall. 36, 62 (1873)
(internal quotation marks omitted). The Court has long
recognized that the Constitution grants the States special
authority to enact laws pursuant to this power. See, e.g.,
Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr, 518 U. S. 470, 475 (1996) (noting
that States have “great latitude” to use their police powers
(internal quotation marks omitted)); Metropolitan Life Ins.
Co. v. Massachusetts, 471 U. S. 724, 756 (1985). A decade
ago, we wrote that there is “no better example of the police
power” than “the suppression of violent crime.” United
States v. Morrison, 529 U. S. 598, 618 (2000). And exam
ples in which the Court has deferred to state legislative
judgments in respect to the exercise of the police power
are legion. See, e.g., Gonzales v. Oregon, 546 U. S. 243,
270 (2006) (assisted suicide); Washington v. Glucksberg,
521 U. S. 702, 721 (1997) (same); Berman v. Parker, 348
U. S. 26, 32 (1954) (“We deal, in other words, with what
traditionally has been known as the police power. An
attempt to define its reach or trace its outer limits is
fruitless . . .”).
Second, determining the constitutionality of a particular
state gun law requires finding answers to complex empiri
cally based questions of a kind that legislatures are better
able than courts to make. See, e.g., Los Angeles v. Ala
meda Books, Inc., 535 U. S. 425, 440 (2002) (plurality
opinion); Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC, 520


12

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

U. S. 180, 195–196 (1997). And it may require this kind of
analysis in virtually every case.
Government regulation of the right to bear arms nor
mally embodies a judgment that the regulation will help
save lives. The determination whether a gun regulation is
constitutional would thus almost always require the
weighing of the constitutional right to bear arms against
the “primary concern of every government—a concern for
the safety and indeed the lives of its citizens.” United
States v. Salerno, 481 U. S. 739, 755 (1987). With respect
to other incorporated rights, this sort of inquiry is some
times present. See, e.g., Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U. S.
444, 447 (1969) (per curiam) (free speech); Sherbert v.
Verner, 374 U. S. 398, 403 (1963) (religion); Brigham City
v. Stuart, 547 U. S. 398, 403–404 (2006) (Fourth Amend
ment); New York v. Quarles, 467 U. S. 649, 655 (1984)
(Fifth Amendment); Salerno, supra, at 755 (bail). But
here, this inquiry—calling for the fine tuning of protective
rules—is likely to be part of a daily judicial diet.
Given the competing interests, courts will have to try to
answer empirical questions of a particularly difficult kind.
Suppose, for example, that after a gun regulation’s adop
tion the murder rate went up. Without the gun regulation
would the murder rate have risen even faster? How is this
conclusion affected by the local recession which has left
numerous people unemployed? What about budget cuts
that led to a downsizing of the police force? How effective
was that police force to begin with? And did the regula
tion simply take guns from those who use them for lawful
purposes without affecting their possession by criminals?
Consider too that countless gun regulations of many
shapes and sizes are in place in every State and in many
local communities. Does the right to possess weapons for
self-defense extend outside the home? To the car? To
work? What sort of guns are necessary for self-defense?
Handguns? Rifles? Semiautomatic weapons? When is a


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

BREYER, J., dissenting

gun semi-automatic? Where are different kinds of weap
ons likely needed? Does time-of-day matter? Does the
presence of a child in the house matter? Does the pres
ence of a convicted felon in the house matter? Do police
need special rules permitting patdowns designed to find
guns? When do registration requirements become severe
to the point that they amount to an unconstitutional ban?
Who can possess guns and of what kind? Aliens? Prior
drug offenders? Prior alcohol abusers? How would the
right interact with a state or local government’s ability to
take special measures during, say, national security emer
gencies? As the questions suggest, state and local gun
regulation can become highly complex, and these “are only
a few uncertainties that quickly come to mind.” Caperton
v. A. T. Massey Coal Co., 556 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting) (slip op., at 10).
The difficulty of finding answers to these questions is
exceeded only by the importance of doing so. Firearms
cause well over 60,000 deaths and injuries in the United
States each year. Those who live in urban areas, police
officers, women, and children, all may be particularly at
risk. And gun regulation may save their lives. Some
experts have calculated, for example, that Chicago’s hand
gun ban has saved several hundred lives, perhaps close to
1,000, since it was enacted in 1983. Other experts argue
that stringent gun regulations “can help protect police
officers operating on the front lines against gun violence,”
have reduced homicide rates in Washington, D. C., and
Baltimore, and have helped to lower New York’s crime and
homicide rates.
At the same time, the opponents of regulation cast doubt
on these studies. And who is right? Finding out may
require interpreting studies that are only indirectly re
lated to a particular regulatory statute, say one banning
handguns in the home. Suppose studies find more acci
dents and suicides where there is a handgun in the home


14

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

than where there is a long gun in the home or no gun at
all? To what extent do such studies justify a ban? What if
opponents of the ban put forth counter studies?
In answering such questions judges cannot simply refer
to judicial homilies, such as Blackstone’s 18th-century
perception that a man’s home is his castle. See 4 Black
stone 223. Nor can the plurality so simply reject, by mere
assertion, the fact that “incorporation will require judges
to assess the costs and benefits of firearms restrictions.”
Ante, at 44. How can the Court assess the strength of the
government’s regulatory interests without addressing
issues of empirical fact? How can the Court determine if a
regulation is appropriately tailored without considering its
impact? And how can the Court determine if there are
less restrictive alternatives without considering what will
happen if those alternatives are implemented?
Perhaps the Court could lessen the difficulty of the
mission it has created for itself by adopting a jurispruden
tial approach similar to the many state courts that admin
ister a state constitutional right to bear arms. See infra,
at 19–20 (describing state approaches). But the Court has
not yet done so. Cf. Heller, 544 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
57–64) (rejecting an “ ‘interest-balancing’ approach” simi
lar to that employed by the States); ante, at 44 (plurality
opinion). Rather, the Court has haphazardly created a few
simple rules, such as that it will not touch “prohibitions on
the possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill,”
“laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive
places such as schools and government buildings,” or “laws
imposing conditions and qualifications on the commercial
sale of arms.” Heller, 544 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 54–55);
Ante, at 39 (plurality opinion). But why these rules and
not others? Does the Court know that these regulations
are justified by some special gun-related risk of death? In
fact, the Court does not know. It has simply invented
rules that sound sensible without being able to explain


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

BREYER, J., dissenting

why or how Chicago’s handgun ban is different.
The fact is that judges do not know the answers to the
kinds of empirically based questions that will often deter
mine the need for particular forms of gun regulation. Nor
do they have readily available “tools” for finding and
evaluating the technical material submitted by others.
District Attorney’s Office for Third Judicial Dist. v. Os
borne, 557 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 21); see also
Turner Broadcasting, 520 U. S., at 195–196. Judges can
not easily make empirically based predictions; they have
no way to gather and evaluate the data required to see if
such predictions are accurate; and the nature of litigation
and concerns about stare decisis further make it difficult
for judges to change course if predictions prove inaccurate.
Nor can judges rely upon local community views and
values when reaching judgments in circumstances where
prediction is difficult because the basic facts are unclear or
unknown.
At the same time, there is no institutional need to send
judges off on this “mission-almost-impossible.” Legislators
are able to “amass the stuff of actual experience and cull
conclusions from it.” United States v. Gainey, 380 U. S.
63, 67 (1965). They are far better suited than judges to
uncover facts and to understand their relevance. And
legislators, unlike Article III judges, can be held democ
ratically responsible for their empirically based and value
laden conclusions. We have thus repeatedly affirmed our
preference for “legislative not judicial solutions” to this
kind of problem, see, e.g., Patsy v. Board of Regents of Fla.,
457 U. S. 496, 513 (1982), just as we have repeatedly
affirmed the Constitution’s preference for democratic
solutions legislated by those whom the people elect.
In New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, 285 U. S. 262, 310–
311 (1932), Justice Brandeis stated in dissent:
“Some people assert that our present plight is due, in


16

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

part, to the limitations set by courts upon experimen
tation in the fields of social and economic science; and
to the discouragement to which proposals for better
ment there have been subjected otherwise. There
must be power in the States and the Nation to re
mould, through experimentation, our economic prac
tices and institutions to meet changing social and eco
nomic needs. I cannot believe that the framers of the
Fourteenth Amendment, or the States which ratified
it, intended to deprive us of the power to correct [the
social problems we face].”
There are 50 state legislatures. The fact that this Court
may already have refused to take this wise advice with
respect to Congress in Heller is no reason to make matters
worse here.
Third, the ability of States to reflect local preferences
and conditions—both key virtues of federalism—here has
particular importance. The incidence of gun ownership
varies substantially as between crowded cities and uncon
gested rural communities, as well as among the different
geographic regions of the country. Thus, approximately
60% of adults who live in the relatively sparsely populated
Western States of Alaska, Montana, and Wyoming report
that their household keeps a gun, while fewer than 15% of
adults in the densely populated Eastern States of Rhode
Island, New Jersey, and Massachusetts say the same.
The nature of gun violence also varies as between rural
communities and cities. Urban centers face significantly
greater levels of firearm crime and homicide, while rural
communities have proportionately greater problems with
nonhomicide gun deaths, such as suicides and accidents.
And idiosyncratic local factors can lead to two cities find
ing themselves in dramatically different circumstances:
For example, in 2008, the murder rate was 40 times
higher in New Orleans than it was in Lincoln, Nebraska.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

BREYER, J., dissenting

It is thus unsurprising that States and local communi
ties have historically differed about the need for gun regu
lation as well as about its proper level. Nor is it surpris
ing that “primarily, and historically,” the law has treated
the exercise of police powers, including gun control, as
“matter[s] of local concern.” Medtronic, 518 U. S., at 475
(internal quotation marks omitted).
Fourth, although incorporation of any right removes
decisions from the democratic process, the incorporation of
this particular right does so without strong offsetting
justification—as the example of Oak Park’s handgun ban
helps to show. See Oak Park, Ill., Municipal Code, §27–2–
1 (1995). Oak Park decided to ban handguns in 1983,
after a local attorney was shot to death with a handgun
that his assailant had smuggled into a courtroom in a
blanket. Brief for Oak Park Citizens Committee for
Handgun Control as Amicus Curiae 1, 21 (hereinafter Oak
Park Brief). A citizens committee spent months gathering
information about handguns. Id., at 21. It secured 6,000
signatures from community residents in support of a ban.
Id., at 21–22. And the village board enacted a ban into
law. Id., at 22.
Subsequently, at the urging of ban opponents the Board
held a community referendum on the matter. Ibid. The
citizens committee argued strongly in favor of the ban.
Id., at 22–23. It pointed out that most guns owned in Oak
Park were handguns and that handguns were misused
more often than citizens used them in self-defense. Id., at
23. The ban opponents argued just as strongly to the
contrary. Ibid. The public decided to keep the ban by a
vote of 8,031 to 6,368. Ibid. And since that time, Oak
Park now tells us, crime has decreased and the community
has seen no accidental handgun deaths. Id., at 2.
Given the empirical and local value-laden nature of the
questions that lie at the heart of the issue, why, in a Na
tion whose Constitution foresees democratic decisionmak


18

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

ing, is it so fundamental a matter as to require taking that
power from the people? What is it here that the people did
not know? What is it that a judge knows better?
*
*
*
In sum, the police power, the superiority of legislative
decisionmaking, the need for local decisionmaking, the
comparative desirability of democratic decisionmaking,
the lack of a manageable judicial standard, and the life
threatening harm that may flow from striking down regu
lations all argue against incorporation. Where the incor
poration of other rights has been at issue, some of these
problems have arisen. But in this instance all these prob
lems are present, all at the same time, and all are likely to
be present in most, perhaps nearly all, of the cases in
which the constitutionality of a gun regulation is at issue.
At the same time, the important factors that favor incor
poration in other instances—e.g., the protection of broader
constitutional objectives—are not present here. The up
shot is that all factors militate against incorporation—
with the possible exception of historical factors.
III
I must, then, return to history. The plurality, in seeking
to justify incorporation, asks whether the interests the
Second Amendment protects are “ ‘deeply rooted in this
Nation’s history and tradition.’ ” Ante, at 19 (quoting
Glucksberg, 521 U. S., at 721; internal quotation marks
omitted). It looks to selected portions of the Nation’s
history for the answer. And it finds an affirmative reply.
As I have made clear, I do not believe history is the only
pertinent consideration. Nor would I read history as
broadly as the majority does. In particular, since we here
are evaluating a more particular right—namely, the right
to bear arms for purposes of private self-defense—general
historical references to the “right to keep and bear arms”


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

BREYER, J., dissenting

are not always helpful. Depending upon context, early
historical sources may mean to refer to a militia-based
right—a matter of considerable importance 200 years
ago—which has, as the majority points out, “largely faded
as a popular concern.” Ante, at 22. There is no reason to
believe that matters of such little contemporary impor
tance should play a significant role in answering the
incorporation question. See Apodaca, 406 U. S., at 410
(incorporation “inquiry must focus upon the function
served” by the right in question in “contemporary soci
ety”); Wolf v. Colorado, 338 U. S. 25, 27 (1949) (incorpora
tion must take into account “the movements of a free
society” and “the gradual and empiric process of inclusion
and exclusion” (internal quotation marks omitted)); cf.
U. S. Const., Art. I, §910 (prohibiting federal officeholders
from accepting a “Title, of any kind whatever, from [a]
foreign State”—presumably a matter of considerable
importance 200 years ago).
That said, I can find much in the historical record that
shows that some Americans in some places at certain
times thought it important to keep and bear arms for
private self-defense. For instance, the reader will see that
many States have constitutional provisions protecting gun
possession. But, as far as I can tell, those provisions
typically do no more than guarantee that a gun regulation
will be a reasonable police power regulation. See Winkler,
Scrutinizing the Second Amendment, 105 Mich. L. Rev.
683, 686, 716–717 (2007) (the “courts of every state to
consider the question apply a deferential ‘reasonable
regulation’ standard”) (hereinafter Winkler, Scrutinizing);
see also id., at 716–717 (explaining the difference between
that standard and ordinary rational-basis review). It is
thus altogether unclear whether such provisions would
prohibit cities such as Chicago from enacting laws, such as
the law before us, banning handguns. See id., at 723. The
majority, however, would incorporate a right that is likely


20

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

inconsistent with Chicago’s law; and the majority would
almost certainly strike down that law. Cf. Heller, 554
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 57–64) (striking down the District
of Columbia’s handgun ban).
Thus, the specific question before us is not whether
there are references to the right to bear arms for self
defense throughout this Nation’s history—of course there
are—or even whether the Court should incorporate a
simple constitutional requirement that firearms regula
tions not unreasonably burden the right to keep and bear
arms, but rather whether there is a consensus that so
substantial a private self-defense right as the one de
scribed in Heller applies to the States. See, e.g., Glucks
berg, supra, at 721 (requiring “a careful description” of the
right at issue when deciding whether it is “deeply rooted
in this Nation’s history and tradition” (internal quotation
marks omitted)). On this question, the reader will have to
make up his or her own mind about the historical record
that I describe in part below. In my view, that record is
insufficient to say that the right to bear arms for private
self-defense, as explicated by Heller, is fundamental in the
sense relevant to the incorporation inquiry. As the evi
dence below shows, States and localities have consistently
enacted firearms regulations, including regulations simi
lar to those at issue here, throughout our Nation’s history.
Courts have repeatedly upheld such regulations. And it is,
at the very least, possible, and perhaps likely, that incor
poration will impose on every, or nearly every, State a
different right to bear arms than they currently recog
nize—a right that threatens to destabilize settled state
legal principles. Cf. 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 57–64)
(rejecting an “ ‘interest-balancing’ approach” similar to
that employed by the States).
I thus cannot find a historical consensus with respect to
whether the right described by Heller is “fundamental” as
our incorporation cases use that term. Nor can I find


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

BREYER, J., dissenting

sufficient historical support for the majority’s conclusion
that that right is “deeply rooted in this Nation’s history
and tradition.” Instead, I find no more than ambiguity
and uncertainty that perhaps even expert historians
would find difficult to penetrate. And a historical record
that is so ambiguous cannot itself provide an adequate
basis for incorporating a private right of self-defense and
applying it against the States.
The Eighteenth Century
The opinions in Heller collect much of the relevant 18th
century evidence. See 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 5–32);
id., at ___ (STEVENS, J., dissenting) (slip op., at 5–31); id.,
at ___ (BREYER, J., dissenting) (slip op., at 4–7). In respect
to the relevant question—the “deeply rooted nature” of a
right to keep and bear arms for purposes of private self
defense—that evidence is inconclusive, particularly when
augmented as follows:
First, as I have noted earlier in this opinion, and JUSTICE STEVENS argued in dissent, the history discussed in
Heller shows that the Second Amendment was enacted
primarily for the purpose of protecting militia-related
rights. See supra, at 4; Heller, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 5–
31). Many of the scholars and historians who have written
on the subject apparently agree. See supra, at 2–5.
Second, historians now tell us that the right to which
Blackstone referred, an important link in the Heller ma
jority’s historical argument, concerned the right of Par
liament (representing the people) to form a militia to
oppose a tyrant (the King) threatening to deprive the
people of their traditional liberties (which did not include
an unregulated right to possess guns). Thus, 18th-century
language referring to a “right to keep and bear arms” does
not ipso facto refer to a private right of self-defense—
certainly not unambiguously so. See English Historians’
Brief 3–27; see also supra, at 2–5.


22

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

Third, scholarly articles indicate that firearms were
heavily regulated at the time of the framing—perhaps
more heavily regulated than the Court in Heller believed.
For example, one scholar writes that “[h]undreds of indi
vidual statutes regulated the possession and use of guns
in colonial and early national America.” Churchill, Gun
Regulation, the Police Power, and the Right to Keep Arms,
25 Law & Hist. Rev. 139, 143 (2007). Among these stat
utes was a ban on the private firing of weapons in Boston,
as well as comprehensive restrictions on similar conduct
in Philadelphia and New York. See Acts and Laws of
Massachusetts, p. 208 (1746); 5 J. Mitchell, & H. Flanders,
Statutes at Large of Pennsylvania From 1682 to 1801, pp.
108–109 (1898); 4 Colonial Laws of New York ch. 1233, p.
748 (1894); see also Churchill, supra, at 162–163 (discuss
ing bans on the shooting of guns in Pennsylvania and New
York).
Fourth, after the Constitution was adopted, several
States continued to regulate firearms possession by, for
example, adopting rules that would have prevented the
carrying of loaded firearms in the city, Heller, 554 U. S., at
___ (slip op., at 5–7) (BREYER, J., dissenting); see also id.,
at ___ (slip op., at 59–60). Scholars have thus concluded
that the primary Revolutionary era limitation on a State’s
police power to regulate guns appears to be only that
regulations were “aimed at a legitimate public purpose”
and “consistent with reason.” Cornell, Early American
Gun Regulation and the Second Amendment, 25 Law &
Hist. Rev. 197, 198 (2007).
The Pre-Civil War Nineteenth Century
I would also augment the majority’s account of this
period as follows:
First, additional States began to regulate the discharge
of firearms in public places. See, e.g., Act of Feb. 17, 1831,
§6, reprinted in 3 Statutes of Ohio and the Northwestern


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

BREYER, J., dissenting

Territory 1740 (S. Chase ed. 1835); Act of Dec. 3, 1825, ch.
CCXCII, §3, 1825 Tenn. Priv. Acts 306.
Second, States began to regulate the possession of con
cealed weapons, which were both popular and dangerous.
See, e.g., C. Cramer, Concealed Weapon Laws of the Early
Republic 143–152 (1999) (collecting examples); see also
1837–1838 Tenn. Pub. Acts ch. 137, pp. 200–201 (banning
the wearing, sale, or giving of Bowie knives); 1847 Va.
Acts ch. 7, §8, p. 110, (“Any free person who shall habitu
ally carry about his person, hidden from common observa
tion, any pistol, dirk, bowie knife, or weapon of the like
kind, from the use of which the death of any person might
probably ensue, shall for every offense be punished by [a]
fine not exceed fifty dollars”).
State courts repeatedly upheld the validity of such laws,
finding that, even when the state constitution granted a
right to bear arms, the legislature was permitted to, e.g.,
“abolish” these small, inexpensive, “most dangerous weap
ons entirely from use,” even in self-defense. Day v. State,
37 Tenn. 496, 500 (1857); see also, e.g., State v. Jumel, 13
La. Ann. 399, 400 (1858) (upholding concealed weapon ban
because it “prohibited only a particular mode of bearing
arms which is found dangerous to the peace of society”);
State v. Chandler, 5 La. Ann. 489, 489–490 (1850) (uphold
ing concealed weapon ban and describing the law as “abso
lutely necessary to counteract a vicious state of society,
growing out of the habit of carrying concealed weapons”);
State v. Reid, 1 Ala. 612, 616–617 (1840).
The Post-Civil War Nineteenth Century
It is important to read the majority’s account with the
following considerations in mind:
First, the Court today properly declines to revisit our
interpretation of the Privileges or Immunities Clause. See
ante, at 10. The Court’s case for incorporation must thus
rest on the conclusion that the right to bear arms is “fun


24

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

damental.” But the very evidence that it advances in
support of the conclusion that Reconstruction-era Ameri
cans strongly supported a private self-defense right shows
with equal force that Americans wanted African-American
citizens to have the same rights to possess guns as did
white citizens. Ante, at 22–33. Here, for example is what
Congress said when it enacted a Fourteenth Amendment
predecessor, the Second Freedman’s Bureau Act. It wrote
that the statute, in order to secure “the constitutional
right to bear arms . . . for all citizens,” would assure that
each citizen:
“shall have . . . full and equal benefit of all laws and
proceedings concerning personal liberty, personal se
curity, and the acquisition, enjoyment, and disposition
of estate, real and personal, including the constitu
tional right to bear arms, [by securing] . . . to . . . all
the citizens of [every] . . . State or district without re
spect to race or color, or previous condition of slavery.”
§14, 14 Stat. 176–177 (emphasis added).
This sounds like an antidiscrimination provision. See
Rosenthal, The New Originalism Meets the Fourteenth
Amendment: Original Public Meaning and the Problem of
Incorporation, 18 J. Contemp. Legal Issues 361, 383–384
(2009) (discussing evidence that the Freedmen’s Bureau
was focused on discrimination).
Another Fourteenth Amendment predecessor, the Civil
Rights Act of 1866, also took aim at discrimination. See
§1, 14 Stat. 27 (citizens of “every race and color, without
regard to any previous condition of slavery or involuntary
servitude . . . shall have the same right [to engage in
various activities] and to full and equal benefit of all laws
. . . as is enjoyed by white citizens”). And, of course, the
Fourteenth Amendment itself insists that all States guar
antee their citizens the “equal protection of the laws.”
There is thus every reason to believe that the funda


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

BREYER, J., dissenting

mental concern of the Reconstruction Congress was the
eradication of discrimination, not the provision of a new
substantive right to bear arms free from reasonable state
police power regulation. See, e.g., Brief for Municipal
Respondents 62–69 (discussing congressional record evi
dence that Reconstruction Congress was concerned about
discrimination). Indeed, why would those who wrote the
Fourteenth Amendment have wanted to give such a right
to Southerners who had so recently waged war against the
North, and who continued to disarm and oppress recently
freed African-American citizens? Cf. Act of Mar. 2, 1867,
§6, 14 Stat. 487 (disbanding Southern militias because
they were, inter alia, disarming the freedmen).
Second, firearms regulation in the later part of the 19th
century was common. The majority is correct that the
Freedmen’s Bureau points to a right to bear arms, and it
stands to reason, as the majority points out, that “[i]t
would have been nonsensical for Congress to guarantee
the . . . equal benefit of a . . . right that does not exist.”
Ante, at 32. But the majority points to no evidence that
there existed during this period a fundamental right to
bear arms for private self-defense immune to the reason
able exercise of the state police power. See Emberton, The
Limits of Incorporation: Violence, Gun Rights, and Gun
Regulation in the Reconstruction South, 17 Stan. L. &
Pol’y Rev. 615, 621–622 (2006) (noting that history shows
that “nineteenth-century Americans” were “not opposed to
the idea that the state should be able to control the use of
firearms”).
To the contrary, in the latter half of the 19th century, a
number of state constitutions adopted or amended after
the Civil War explicitly recognized the legislature’s gen
eral ability to limit the right to bear arms. See Tex.
Const., Art. I, §13 (1869) (protecting “the right to keep and
bear arms,” “under such regulations as the legislature
may prescribe”); Idaho Const., Art. I, §11 (1889) (“The


26

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

people have the right to bear arms . . .; but the Legislature
shall regulate the exercise of this right by law”); Utah
Const., Art. I, §6 (1896) (same). And numerous other state
constitutional provisions adopted during this period ex
plicitly granted the legislature various types of regulatory
power over firearms. See Brief for Thirty-Four Profes
sional Historians et al. as Amici Curiae 14–15 (hereinafter
Legal Historians’ Brief).
Moreover, four States largely banned the possession of
all nonmilitary handguns during this period. See 1879
Tenn. Pub. Acts ch. 186, §1 (prohibiting citizens from
carrying “publicly or privately, any . . . belt or pocket
pistol, revolver, or any kind of pistol, except the army or
navy pistol, usually used in warfare, which shall be car
ried openly in the hand”); 1876 Wyo. Comp. Laws ch. 52,
§1 (forbidding “concealed or ope[n]” bearing of “any fire
arm or other deadly weapon, within the limits of any city,
town or village”); Ark. Act of Apr. 1, 1881, ch. 96, §1 (pro
hibiting the “wear[ing] or carry[ng]” of “any pistol . . .
except such pistols as are used in the army or navy,”
except while traveling or at home); Tex. Act of Apr. 12,
1871, ch. 34 (prohibiting the carrying of pistols unless
there are “immediate and pressing” reasonable grounds to
fear “immediate and pressing” attack or for militia ser
vice). Fifteen States banned the concealed carry of pistols
and other deadly weapons. See Legal Historians’ Brief 16,
n. 14. And individual municipalities enacted stringent
gun controls, often in response to local conditions—Dodge
City, Kansas, for example, joined many western cattle
towns in banning the carrying of pistols and other danger
ous weapons in response to violence accompanying west
ern cattle drives. See Brief for Municipal Respondents 30
(citing Dodge City, Kan., Ordinance No. 16, §XI (Sept. 22,
1876)); D. Courtwright, The Cowboy Subculture, in Guns
in America: A Reader 96 (J. Dizard et al. eds. 1999) (dis
cussing how Western cattle towns required cowboys to


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

27

BREYER, J., dissenting

“check” their guns upon entering town).
Further, much as they had during the period before the
Civil War, state courts routinely upheld such restrictions.
See, e.g., English v. State, 35 Tex. 473 (1871); Hill v. State,
53 Ga. 472, 475 (1874); Fife v. State, 31 Ark. 455, 461
(1876); State v. Workman, 35 W. Va. 367, 373 (1891). The
Tennessee Supreme Court, in upholding a ban on posses
sion of nonmilitary handguns and certain other weapons,
summarized the Reconstruction understanding of the
states’ police power to regulate firearms:
“Admitting the right of self-defense in its broadest
sense, still on sound principle every good citizen is
bound to yield his preference as to the means to be
used, to the demands of the public good; and where
certain weapons are forbidden to be kept or used by the
law of the land, in order to the prevention of [sic]
crime—a great public end—no man can be permitted
to disregard this general end, and demand of the
community the right, in order to gratify his whim or
willful desire to use a particular weapon in his par
ticular self-defense. The law allows ample means of
self-defense, without the use of the weapons which we
have held may be rightfully prescribed by this statute.
The object being to banish these weapons from the
community by an absolute prohibition for the preven
tion of crime, no man’s particular safety, if such case
could exist, ought to be allowed to defeat this end.”
Andrews v. State, 50 Tenn. 165, 188–189 (1871) (em
phasis added).
The Twentieth and Twenty-First Centuries
Although the majority does not discuss 20th- or 21st
century evidence concerning the Second Amendment at
any length, I think that it is essential to consider the
recent history of the right to bear arms for private self
defense when considering whether the right is “fundamen


28

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

tal.” To that end, many States now provide state constitu
tional protection for an individual’s right to keep and bear
arms. See Volokh, State Constitutional Rights to Keep
and Bear Arms, 11 Tex. Rev. L. & Pol. 191, 205 (2006)
(identifying over 40 States). In determining the impor
tance of this fact, we should keep the following considera
tions in mind:
First, by the end of the 20th century, in every State and
many local communities, highly detailed and complicated
regulatory schemes governed (and continue to govern)
nearly every aspect of firearm ownership: Who may sell
guns and how they must be sold; who may purchase guns
and what type of guns may be purchased; how firearms
must be stored and where they may be used; and so on.
See generally Legal Community Against Violence, Regu
lating Guns In America (2008), available at http://
www.lcav.org/publications-briefs/regulating_guns. asp (all
Internet materials as visited June 24, 2010, and available
in Clerk of Court’s case file) (detailing various arms regu
lations in every State).
Of particular relevance here, some municipalities ban
handguns, even in States that constitutionally protect the
right to bear arms. See Chicago, Ill., Municipal Code, §8–
20–050(c) (2009); Oak Park, Ill., Municipal Code, §§27–2–
1, 27–1–1 (1995); Toledo, Ohio, Municipal Code, ch. 549.25
(2010). Moreover, at least seven States and Puerto Rico
ban assault weapons or semiautomatic weapons. See Cal.
Penal Code Ann. §12280(b) (West Supp. 2009); Conn. Gen.
Stat. Ann. §53–202c (2007); Haw. Rev. Stat. §134–8
(1993); Md. Crim. Law Code Ann. §4–303(a) (Lexis 2002);
Mass. Gen. Laws, ch. 140, §131M (West 2006); N. J. Stat.
Ann. §2C:39-5 (West Supp. 2010); N. Y. Penal Law Ann.
§265.02(7) (West Supp. 2008); 25 Laws P. R. Ann. §456m
(Supp. 2006); see also 18 U. S. C. §922(o) (federal ma
chinegun ban).
Thirteen municipalities do the same. See Albany, N. Y.,


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

29

BREYER, J., dissenting

City Code §193–16(A) (2005); Aurora, Ill., Code of Ordi
nances §29–49(a) (2009); Buffalo, N. Y., City Code §180–
1(F) (2000); Chicago, Ill., Municipal Code §8–24–025(a)
(2010); Cincinnati, Ohio, Municipal Code §708–37(a)
(2008); Cleveland, Ohio, Codified Ordinances §628.03(a)
(2008); Columbus, Ohio, City Code §2323.31 (2007); Den
ver, Colo., Municipal Code §38–130(e) (2008); Morton
Grove, Ill., Village Code §6–2–3(A); N. Y. C. Admin. Code
§10–303.1 (2009); Oak Park, Ill., Village Code §27–2–1
(2009); Rochester, N. Y., City Code §47–5(F) (2008);
Toledo, Ohio, Municipal Code §549.23(a). And two States,
Maryland and Hawaii, ban assault pistols. See Haw. Rev.
Stat. Ann. §134–8; Md. Crim. Law Code Ann. §4–303
(Lexis 2002).
Second, as I stated earlier, state courts in States with
constitutions that provide gun rights have almost uni
formly interpreted those rights as providing protection
only against unreasonable regulation of guns. See, e.g.,
Winkler, Scrutinizing 686 (the “courts of every state to
consider” a gun regulation apply the “ ‘reasonable regula
tion’ ” approach); State v. McAdams, 714 P. 2d 1236, 1238
(Wyo. 1986); Robertson v. City & County of Denver, 874
P. 2d 325, 328 (Colo. 1994).
When determining reasonableness those courts have
normally adopted a highly deferential attitude towards
legislative determinations. See Winkler, Scrutinizing 723
(identifying only six cases in the 60 years before the arti
cle’s publication striking down gun control laws: three that
banned “the transportation of any firearms for any pur
pose whatsoever,” a single “permitting law,” and two as
applied challenges in “unusual circumstances”). Hence, as
evidenced by the breadth of existing regulations, States
and local governments maintain substantial flexibility to
regulate firearms—much as they seemingly have through
out the Nation’s history—even in those States with an
arms right in their constitutions.


30

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

Although one scholar implies that state courts are less
willing to permit total gun prohibitions, see Volokh, Im
plementing the Right to Keep and Bear Arms for SelfDefense: An Analytical Framework and a Research
Agenda, 56 UCLA L. Rev. 1443, 1458 (2009), I am aware
of no instances in the past 50 years in which a state court
has struck down as unconstitutional a law banning a
particular class of firearms, see Winkler, Scrutinizing 723.
Indeed, state courts have specifically upheld as constitu
tional (under their state constitutions) firearms regula
tions that have included handgun bans. See Kalodimos v.
Village of Morton Grove, 103 Ill. 2d 483, 499, 470 N. E. 2d
266, 273 (1984) (upholding a handgun ban because the
arms right is merely a right “to possess some form of
weapon suitable for self-defense or recreation”); Cleveland
v. Turner, No. 36126, 1977 WL 201393, *5 (Ohio Ct. App.,
Aug. 4, 1977) (handgun ban “does not absolutely interfere
with the right of the people to bear arms, but rather pro
scribes possession of a specifically defined category of
handguns”); State v. Bolin 378 S. C. 96, 99, 662 S. E. 2d
38, 39 (2008) (ban on handgun possession by persons
under 21 did not infringe arms right because they can
“posses[s] other types of guns”). Thus, the majority’s
decision to incorporate the private self-defense right rec
ognized in Heller threatens to alter state regulatory re
gimes, at least as they pertain to handguns.
Third, the plurality correctly points out that only a few
state courts, a “paucity” of state courts, have specifically
upheld handgun bans. Ante, at 39. But which state courts
have struck them down? The absence of supporting in
formation does not help the majority find support. Cf.
United States v. Wells, 519 U. S. 482, 496 (1997) (noting
that it is “treacherous to find in congressional silence
alone the adoption of a controlling rule of law” (internal
quotation marks omitted)). Silence does not show or tend
to show a consensus that a private self-defense right


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

31

BREYER, J., dissenting

(strong enough to strike down a handgun ban) is “deeply
rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition.”
*
*
*
In sum, the Framers did not write the Second Amend
ment in order to protect a private right of armed self
defense. There has been, and is, no consensus that the
right is, or was, “fundamental.” No broader constitutional
interest or principle supports legal treatment of that right
as fundamental. To the contrary, broader constitutional
concerns of an institutional nature argue strongly against
that treatment.
Moreover, nothing in 18th-, 19th-, 20th-, or 21st-century
history shows a consensus that the right to private armed
self-defense, as described in Heller, is “deeply rooted in
this Nation’s history or tradition” or is otherwise “funda
mental.” Indeed, incorporating the right recognized in
Heller may change the law in many of the 50 States. Read
in the majority’s favor, the historical evidence is at most
ambiguous. And, in the absence of any other support for
its conclusion, ambiguous history cannot show that the
Fourteenth Amendment incorporates a private right of
self-defense against the States.
With respect, I dissent.


32

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting
Appendix to opinion of BREYER, J.

APPENDIX

Sources Supporting Data in Part II–B 

Popular Consensus
Please see the following sources to support the paragraph
on popular opinion on pages 9–10:
•	 Briefs filed in this case that argue against incorpo
ration include: Brief for United States Conference
of Mayors as Amicus Curiae 1, 17–33 (organization
representing “all United States cities with popula
tions of 30,000 or more”); Brief for American Cities
et al. as Amici Curiae 1–3 (brief filed on behalf of
many cities, e.g., Philadelphia, Seattle, San Fran
cisco, Oakland, Cleveland); Brief for Representative
Carolyn McCarthy et al. as Amici Curiae 5–10;
Brief for State of Illinois et al. as Amici Curiae
7–35.
•	 Wilkinson, Of Guns, Abortions, and the Unraveling
Rule of Law, 95 Va. L. Rev. 253, 301 (2009) (dis
cussing divided public opinion over the correct level
of gun control).
Data on Gun Violence
Please see the following sources to support the sen
tences concerning gun violence on page 13:
•	 Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, M.
Zawitz & K. Strom, Firearm Injury and Death from
Crime, 1993–1997, p. 2 (Oct. 2000) (over 60,000
deaths and injuries caused by firearms each year).
•	 Campbell, et al., Risk Factors for Femicide in Abu
sive Relationships: Results from a Multisite Case
Control Study, 93 Am. J. of Pub. Health 1089, 1092
(2003) (noting that an abusive partner’s access to a
firearm increases the risk of homicide eightfold for


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

33

BREYER, J., dissenting
Appendix to opinion of BREYER, J.

women in physically abusive relationship).
•	 American Academy of Pediatrics, Firearm-Related
Injuries Affecting the Pediatric Population, 105 Pe
diatrics 888 (2000) (noting that in 1997 “firearm
related deaths accounted for 22.5% of all injury
deaths” for individuals between 1 and 19).
•	 Dept. of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
Law Enforcement Officers Killed & Assaulted,
2006, (Table) 27 (noting that firearms killed 93% of
the 562 law enforcement officers feloniously killed
in the line of duty between 1997 and 2006), online
at http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/killed/2006/ table27.html.
•	 Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, D.
Duhart, Urban, Suburban, and Rural Victimiza
tion, 1993–1998, pp. 1, 9 (Oct. 2000) (those who live
in urban areas particularly at risk of firearm vio
lence).
•	 Wintemute, The Future of Firearm Violence Pre
vention, 281 JAMA 475 (1999) (“half of all homi
cides occurred in 63 cities with 16% of the nation’s
population”).
Data on the Effectiveness of Regulation
Please see the following sources to support the sen
tences concerning the effectiveness of regulation on page
13:
•	 See Brief for Professors of Criminal Justice as Amici
Curiae 13 (noting that Chicago’s handgun ban
saved several hundred lives, perhaps close to 1,000,
since it was enacted in 1983).
•	 Brief for Association of Prosecuting Attorneys et al.
as Amici Curiae 13–16, 20 (arguing that stringent
gun regulations “can help protect police officers op


34

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting
Appendix to opinion of BREYER, J.

erating on the front lines against gun violence,”
and have reduced homicide rates in Washington,
D. C., and Baltimore).
•	 Brief for United States Conference of Mayors as
Amici Curiae 4–13 (arguing that gun regulations
have helped to lower New York’s crime and homi
cide rates).
Data on Handguns in the Home
Please see the following sources referenced in the sen
tences discussing studies concerning handguns in the
home on pages 13–14:
•	 Brief for Organizations Committed to Protecting the
Public’s Health, Safety, and Well-Being as Amici
Curiae in Support of Respondents 13–16 (discuss
ing studies that show handgun ownership in the
home is associated with increased risk of homicide).
•	 Wiebe, Firearms in US Homes as a Risk Factor for
Unintentional Gunshot Fatality, 35 Accident
Analysis and Prevention 711, 713–714 (2003)
(showing that those who die in firearms accidents
are nearly four times more likely than average to
have a gun in their home).
•	 Kellerman et al., Suicide in the Home in Relation to
Gun Ownership, 327 New England J. Medicine
467, 470 (1992) (demonstrating that “homes with
one or more handguns were associated with a risk
of suicide almost twice as high as that in homes
containing only long guns”).
Data on Regional Views and Conditions
Please see the following sources referenced in the sec
tion on the diversity of regional views and conditions on
page 16:


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

35

BREYER, J., dissenting
Appendix to opinion of BREYER, J.

•	 Okoro, et al., Prevalence of Household Firearms and
Firearm-Storage Practices in the 50 States and the
District of Columbia: Findings From the Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance System, 2002, 116 Pediat
rics 370, 372 (2005) (presenting data on firearm
ownership by State).
•	 Heller, 554 U. S., at ___ (BREYER, J., dissenting)
(slip op., at 19–20) (discussing various sources
showing that gun violence varies by state, includ
ing Wintemute, The Future of Firearm Violence
Prevention, 281 JAMA 475 (1999)).
•	 Heller, supra, at ___ (BREYER, J., dissenting) (slip
op., at 19–20) (citing Branas, Nance, Elliott, Rich
mond, & Schwab, Urban-Rural Shifts in Inten
tional Firearm Death, 94 Am. J. Public Health
1750, 1752 (2004)) (discussing the fact that urban
centers face significantly greater levels of firearm
crime and homicide, while rural communities have
proportionately greater problems with nonhomicide
gun deaths, such as suicides and accidents).
•	 Dept. of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
2008 Crime in the United States, tbl. 6 (noting that
murder rate is 40 times higher in New Orleans
than it is in Lincoln, Nebraska).

