Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

SCALIA, J., concurring

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1521
_________________

OTIS MCDONALD, ET AL., PETITIONERS v. CITY OF 

CHICAGO, ILLINOIS, ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT

[June 28, 2010] 


JUSTICE SCALIA, concurring.
I join the Court’s opinion. Despite my misgivings about
Substantive Due Process as an original matter, I have
acquiesced in the Court’s incorporation of certain guaran­
tees in the Bill of Rights “because it is both long estab­
lished and narrowly limited.” Albright v. Oliver, 510 U. S.
266, 275 (1994) (SCALIA, J., concurring). This case does
not require me to reconsider that view, since straightfor­
ward application of settled doctrine suffices to decide it.
I write separately only to respond to some aspects of
JUSTICE STEVENS’ dissent. Not that aspect which dis­
agrees with the majority’s application of our precedents to
this case, which is fully covered by the Court’s opinion.
But much of what JUSTICE STEVENS writes is a broad
condemnation of the theory of interpretation which under­
lies the Court’s opinion, a theory that makes the traditions
of our people paramount. He proposes a different theory,
which he claims is more “cautiou[s]” and respectful of
proper limits on the judicial role. Post, at 57. It is that
claim I wish to address.
I
A
After stressing the substantive dimension of what he


2

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
SCALIA, J., concurring

has renamed the “liberty clause,” post, at 4–7,1 JUSTICE
STEVENS proceeds to urge readoption of the theory of
incorporation articulated in Palko v. Connecticut, 302
U. S. 319, 325 (1937), see post, at 14–20. But in fact he
does not favor application of that theory at all. For
whether Palko requires only that “a fair and enlightened
system of justice would be impossible without” the right
sought to be incorporated, 302 U. S., at 325, or requires in
addition that the right be rooted in the “traditions and
conscience of our people,” ibid. (internal quotation marks
omitted), many of the rights JUSTICE STEVENS thinks are
incorporated could not pass muster under either test:
abortion, post, at 7 (citing Planned Parenthood of South
eastern Pa. v. Casey, 505 U. S. 833, 847 (1992)); homosex­
ual sodomy, post, at 16 (citing Lawrence v. Texas, 539
U. S. 558, 572 (2003)); the right to have excluded from
criminal trials evidence obtained in violation of the Fourth
Amendment, post, at 18 (citing Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U. S.
643, 650, 655–657 (1961)); and the right to teach one’s
children foreign languages, post, at 7 (citing Meyer v.
Nebraska, 262 U. S. 390, 399–403 (1923)), among others.
That JUSTICE STEVENS is not applying any version of
Palko is clear from comparing, on the one hand, the rights
he believes are covered, with, on the other hand, his con­
clusion that the right to keep and bear arms is not cov­
ered. Rights that pass his test include not just those
“relating to marriage, procreation, contraception, family
relationships, and child rearing and education,” but also
rights against “[g]overnment action that shocks the con­
——————
1 I do not entirely understand JUSTICE STEVENS’ renaming of the Due
Process Clause. What we call it, of course, does not change what the
Clause says, but shorthand should not obscure what it says. Accepting
for argument’s sake the shift in emphasis—from avoiding certain
deprivations without that “process” which is “due,” to avoiding the
deprivations themselves—the Clause applies not just to deprivations of
“liberty,” but also to deprivations of “life” and even “property.”


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

SCALIA, J., concurring

science, pointlessly infringes settled expectations, tres­
passes into sensitive private realms or life choices without
adequate justification, [or] perpetrates gross injustice.”
Post, at 23 (internal quotation marks omitted). Not all
such rights are in, however, since only “some fundamental
aspects of personhood, dignity, and the like” are protected,
post, at 24 (emphasis added). Exactly what is covered is
not clear. But whatever else is in, he knows that the right
to keep and bear arms is out, despite its being as “deeply
rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition,” Washington
v. Glucksberg, 521 U. S. 702, 721 (1997) (internal quota­
tion marks omitted), as a right can be, see District of
Columbia v. Heller, 554 U. S. ___, ___–___, ___–___, ___–
___ (2008) (slip op., at 20–21, 26–30, 41–44). I can find no
other explanation for such certitude except that JUSTICE
STEVENS, despite his forswearing of “personal and private
notions,” post, at 21 (internal quotation marks omitted),
deeply believes it should be out.
The subjective nature of JUSTICE STEVENS’ standard is
also apparent from his claim that it is the courts’ preroga­
tive—indeed their duty—to update the Due Process Clause
so that it encompasses new freedoms the Framers were
too narrow-minded to imagine, post, at 19–20, and n. 21.
Courts, he proclaims, must “do justice to [the Clause’s]
urgent call and its open texture” by exercising the “inter­
pretive discretion the latter embodies.” Post, at 21. (Why
the people are not up to the task of deciding what new
rights to protect, even though it is they who are authorized
to make changes, see U. S. Const., Art. V, is never ex­
plained.2) And it would be “judicial abdication” for a judge
to “tur[n] his back” on his task of determining what the
——————
2 JUSTICE STEVENS insists that he would not make courts the sole
interpreters of the “liberty clause”; he graciously invites “[a]ll Ameri­
cans” to ponder what the Clause means to them today. Post, at 20, n.
22. The problem is that in his approach the people’s ponderings do not
matter, since whatever the people decide, courts have the last word.


4

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
SCALIA, J., concurring

Fourteenth Amendment covers by “outsourc[ing]” the job
to “historical sentiment,” post, at 20—that is, by being
guided by what the American people throughout our his­
tory have thought. It is only we judges, exercising our
“own reasoned judgment,” post, at 15, who can be en­
trusted with deciding the Due Process Clause’s scope—
which rights serve the Amendment’s “central values,” post,
at 23—which basically means picking the rights we want
to protect and discarding those we do not.
B
JUSTICE STEVENS resists this description, insisting that
his approach provides plenty of “guideposts” and “con­
straints” to keep courts from “injecting excessive subjectiv­
ity” into the process.3 Post, at 21. Plenty indeed—and
that alone is a problem. The ability of omnidirectional
guideposts to constrain is inversely proportional to their
number. But even individually, each lodestar or limitation
he lists either is incapable of restraining judicial whimsy
or cannot be squared with the precedents he seeks to
preserve.
He begins with a brief nod to history, post, at 21, but as
——————
3 JUSTICE BREYER is not worried by that prospect. His interpretive
approach applied to incorporation of the Second Amendment includes
consideration of such factors as “the extent to which incorporation will
further other, perhaps more basic, constitutional aims; and the extent
to which incorporation will advance or hinder the Constitution’s struc­
tural aims”; whether recognizing a particular right will “further the
Constitution’s effort to ensure that the government treats each individ­
ual with equal respect” or will “help maintain the democratic form of
government”; whether it is “inconsistent . . . with the Constitution’s
efforts to create governmental institutions well suited to the carrying
out of its constitutional promises”; whether it fits with “the Framers’
basic reason for believing the Court ought to have the power of judicial
review”; courts’ comparative advantage in answering empirical ques­
tions that may be involved in applying the right; and whether there is a
“strong offsetting justification” for removing a decision from the democ­
ratic process. Post, at 7, 11–17 (dissenting opinion).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

SCALIA, J., concurring

he has just made clear, he thinks historical inquiry un­
availing, post, at 19–20. Moreover, trusting the meaning
of the Due Process Clause to what has historically been
protected is circular, see post, at 19, since that would
mean no new rights could get in.
JUSTICE STEVENS moves on to the “most basic” con­
straint on subjectivity his theory offers: that he would
“esche[w] attempts to provide any all-purpose, top-down,
totalizing theory of ‘liberty.’ ” Post, at 22. The notion that
the absence of a coherent theory of the Due Process Clause
will somehow curtail judicial caprice is at war with reason.
Indeterminacy means opportunity for courts to impose
whatever rule they like; it is the problem, not the solution.
The idea that interpretive pluralism would reduce courts’
ability to impose their will on the ignorant masses is not
merely naïve, but absurd. If there are no right answers,
there are no wrong answers either.
JUSTICE STEVENS also argues that requiring courts to
show “respect for the democratic process” should serve as
a constraint. Post, at 23. That is true, but JUSTICE
STEVENS would have them show respect in an extraordi­
nary manner. In his view, if a right “is already being
given careful consideration in, and subjected to ongoing
calibration by, the States, judicial enforcement may not be
appropriate.” Ibid. In other words, a right, such as the
right to keep and bear arms, that has long been recognized
but on which the States are considering restrictions, ap­
parently deserves less protection, while a privilege the
political branches (instruments of the democratic process)
have withheld entirely and continue to withhold, deserves
more. That topsy-turvy approach conveniently accom­
plishes the objective of ensuring that the rights this Court
held protected in Casey, Lawrence, and other such cases fit
the theory—but at the cost of insulting rather than re­
specting the democratic process.
The next constraint JUSTICE STEVENS suggests is harder


6

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
SCALIA, J., concurring

to evaluate. He describes as “an important tool for guiding
judicial discretion” “sensitivity to the interaction between
the intrinsic aspects of liberty and the practical realities of
contemporary society.” Post, at 24. I cannot say whether
that sensitivity will really guide judges because I have no
idea what it is. Is it some sixth sense instilled in judges
when they ascend to the bench? Or does it mean judges
are more constrained when they agonize about the cosmic
conflict between liberty and its potentially harmful conse­
quences? Attempting to give the concept more precision,
JUSTICE STEVENS explains that “sensitivity is an aspect of
a deeper principle: the need to approach our work with
humility and caution.” Ibid. Both traits are undeniably
admirable, though what relation they bear to sensitivity is
a mystery. But it makes no difference, for the first case
JUSTICE STEVENS cites in support, see ibid., Casey, 505
U. S., at 849, dispels any illusion that he has a meaningful
form of judicial modesty in mind.
JUSTICE STEVENS offers no examples to illustrate the
next constraint: stare decisis, post, at 25. But his view of it
is surely not very confining, since he holds out as a “ca­
nonical” exemplar of the proper approach, see post, at 16,
54, Lawrence, which overruled a case decided a mere 17
years earlier, Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U. S. 186 (1986),
see 539 U. S., at 578 (it “was not correct when it was
decided, and it is not correct today”). Moreover, JUSTICE
STEVENS would apply that constraint unevenly: He appar­
ently approves those Warren Court cases that adopted jot­
for-jot incorporation of procedural protections for criminal
defendants, post, at 11, but would abandon those Warren
Court rulings that undercut his approach to substantive
rights, on the basis that we have “cut back” on cases from
that era before, post, at 12.
JUSTICE STEVENS also relies on the requirement of a
“careful description of the asserted fundamental liberty
interest” to limit judicial discretion. Post, at 25 (internal


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

SCALIA, J., concurring

quotation marks omitted). I certainly agree with that
requirement, see Reno v. Flores, 507 U. S. 292, 302 (1993),
though some cases JUSTICE STEVENS approves have not
applied it seriously, see, e.g., Lawrence, supra, at 562
(“The instant case involves liberty of the person both in its
spatial and in its more transcendent dimensions”). But if
the “careful description” requirement is used in the man­
ner we have hitherto employed, then the enterprise of
determining the Due Process Clause’s “conceptual core,”
post, at 23, is a waste of time. In the cases he cites we
sought a careful, specific description of the right at issue
in order to determine whether that right, thus narrowly
defined, was fundamental. See, e.g., Glucksberg, 521
U. S., at 722–728; Reno, supra, at 302–306; Collins v.
Harker Heights, 503 U. S. 115, 125–129 (1992); Cruzan v.
Director, Mo. Dept. of Health, 497 U. S. 261, 269–279
(1990); see also Vacco v. Quill, 521 U. S. 793, 801–808
(1997). The threshold step of defining the asserted right
with precision is entirely unnecessary, however, if (as
JUSTICE STEVENS maintains) the “conceptual core” of the
“liberty clause,” post, at 23, includes a number of capa­
cious, hazily defined categories. There is no need to define
the right with much precision in order to conclude that it
pertains to the plaintiff’s “ability independently to define
[his] identity,” his “right to make certain unusually impor­
tant decisions that will affect his own, or his family’s,
destiny,” or some aspect of his “[s]elf-determination, bodily
integrity, freedom of conscience, intimate relationships,
political equality, dignity [or] respect.” Ibid. (internal
quotation marks omitted). JUSTICE STEVENS must there­
fore have in mind some other use for the careful­
description requirement—perhaps just as a means of
ensuring that courts “procee[d] slowly and incrementally,”
post, at 25. But that could be achieved just as well by


8

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
SCALIA, J., concurring

having them draft their opinions in longhand.4
II
If JUSTICE STEVENS’ account of the constraints of his
approach did not demonstrate that they do not exist, his
application of that approach to the case before us leaves no
doubt. He offers several reasons for concluding that the
Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms is not
fundamental enough to be applied against the States.5
None is persuasive, but more pertinent to my purpose,
each is either intrinsically indeterminate, would preclude
incorporation of rights we have already held incorporated,
or both. His approach therefore does nothing to stop a
judge from arriving at any conclusion he sets out to reach.
JUSTICE STEVENS begins with the odd assertion that
——————
4 After

defending the careful-description criterion, JUSTICE STEVENS
quickly retreats and cautions courts not to apply it too stringently.
Post, at 26. Describing a right too specifically risks robbing it of its
“universal valence and a moral force it might otherwise have,” ibid.,
and “loads the dice against its recognition,” post, at 26, n. 25 (internal
quotation marks omitted). That must be avoided, since it endangers
rights JUSTICE STEVENS does like. See ibid. (discussing Lawrence v.
Texas, 539 U. S. 558 (2003)). To make sure those rights get in, we must
leave leeway in our description, so that a right that has not itself been
recognized as fundamental can ride the coattails of one that has been.
5 JUSTICE STEVENS claims that I mischaracterize his argument by
referring to the Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms,
instead of “the interest in keeping a firearm of one’s choosing in the
home,” the right he says petitioners assert. Post, at 38, n. 36. But it is
precisely the “Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms” that
petitioners argue is incorporated by the Due Process Clause. See, e.g.,
Pet. for Cert. i. Under JUSTICE STEVENS’ own approach, that should end
the matter. See post, at 26 (“[W]e must pay close attention to the
precise liberty interest the litigants have asked us to vindicate”). In
any event, the demise of watered-down incorporation, see ante, at 17–
19, means that we no longer subdivide Bill of Rights guarantees into
their theoretical components, only some of which apply to the States.
The First Amendment freedom of speech is incorporated—not the
freedom to speak on Fridays, or to speak about philosophy.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

SCALIA, J., concurring

“firearms have a fundamentally ambivalent relationship
to liberty,” since sometimes they are used to cause (or
sometimes accidentally produce) injury to others. Post, at
35. The source of the rule that only nonambivalent liber­
ties deserve Due Process protection is never explained—
proof that judges applying JUSTICE STEVENS’ approach can
add new elements to the test as they see fit. The criterion,
moreover, is inherently manipulable. Surely JUSTICE
STEVENS does not mean that the Clause covers only rights
that have zero harmful effect on anyone. Otherwise even
the First Amendment is out. Maybe what he means is
that the right to keep and bear arms imposes too great a
risk to others’ physical well-being. But as the plurality
explains, ante, at 35–36, other rights we have already held
incorporated pose similarly substantial risks to public
safety. In all events, JUSTICE STEVENS supplies neither a
standard for how severe the impairment on others’ liberty
must be for a right to be disqualified, nor (of course) any
method of measuring the severity.
JUSTICE STEVENS next suggests that the Second
Amendment right is not fundamental because it is “differ­
ent in kind” from other rights we have recognized. Post, at
37. In one respect, of course, the right to keep and bear
arms is different from some other rights we have held the
Clause protects and he would recognize: It is deeply
grounded in our nation’s history and tradition. But
JUSTICE STEVENS has a different distinction in mind:
Even though he does “not doubt for a moment that many
Americans . . . see [firearms] as critical to their way of life
as well as to their security,” he pronounces that owning a
handgun is not “critical to leading a life of autonomy,
dignity, or political equality.”6 Post, at 37–38. Who says?
——————
6 JUSTICE STEVENS goes a step farther still, suggesting that the right
to keep and bear arms is not protected by the “liberty clause” because it
is not really a liberty at all, but a “property right.” Post, at 38. Never


10

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
SCALIA, J., concurring

Deciding what is essential to an enlightened, liberty-filled
life is an inherently political, moral judgment—the an­
tithesis of an objective approach that reaches conclusions
by applying neutral rules to verifiable evidence.7
No determination of what rights the Constitution of the
United States covers would be complete, of course, without
a survey of what other countries do. Post, at 40–41. When
it comes to guns, JUSTICE STEVENS explains, our Nation is
already an outlier among “advanced democracies”; not
even our “oldest allies” protect as robust a right as we do,
and we should not widen the gap. Ibid. Never mind that
he explains neither which countries qualify as “advanced
democracies” nor why others are irrelevant. For there is
an even clearer indication that this criterion lets judges
pick which rights States must respect and those they can
ignore: As the plurality shows, ante, at 34–35, and nn. 28–
29, this follow-the-foreign-crowd requirement would fore­
——————
mind that the right to bear arms sounds mighty like a liberty; and
never mind that the “liberty clause” is really a Due Process Clause
which explicitly protects “property,” see United States v. Carlton, 512
U. S. 26, 41–42 (1994) (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment). JUSTICE
STEVENS’ theory cannot explain why the Takings Clause, which unques­
tionably protects property, has been incorporated, see Chicago, B. & Q.
R. Co. v. Chicago, 166 U. S. 226, 241 (1897), in a decision he appears to
accept, post, at 14, n. 14.
7 As JUSTICE STEVENS notes, see post, at 51–52, I accept as a matter of
stare decisis the requirement that to be fundamental for purposes of the
Due Process Clause, a right must be “implicit in the concept of ordered
liberty,” Lawrence, supra, at 593, n. 3 (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (internal
quotation marks omitted). But that inquiry provides infinitely less
scope for judicial invention when conducted under the Court’s ap­
proach, since the field of candidates is immensely narrowed by the prior
requirement that a right be rooted in this country’s traditions. JUSTICE
STEVENS, on the other hand, is free to scan the universe for rights that
he thinks “implicit in the concept, etc.” The point JUSTICE STEVENS
makes here is merely one example of his demand that an historical
approach to the Constitution prove itself, not merely much better than
his in restraining judicial invention, but utterly perfect in doing so. See
Part III, infra.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

SCALIA, J., concurring

close rights that we have held (and JUSTICE STEVENS
accepts) are incorporated, but that other “advanced” na­
tions do not recognize—from the exclusionary rule to the
Establishment Clause.
A judge applying JUSTICE
STEVENS’ approach must either throw all of those rights
overboard or, as cases JUSTICE STEVENS approves have
done in considering unenumerated rights, simply ignore
foreign law when it undermines the desired conclusion,
see, e.g., Casey, 505 U. S. 833 (making no mention of
foreign law).
JUSTICE STEVENS also argues that since the right to
keep and bear arms was codified for the purpose of “pre­
vent[ing] elimination of the militia,” it should be viewed as
“ ‘a federalism provision’ ” logically incapable of incorpora­
tion. Post, at 41–42 (quoting Elk Grove Unified School
Dist. v. Newdow, 542 U. S. 1, 45 (2004) (THOMAS, J., con­
curring in judgment); some internal quotation marks
omitted). This criterion, too, evidently applies only when
judges want it to. The opinion JUSTICE STEVENS quotes
for the “federalism provision” principle, JUSTICE THOMAS’s
concurrence in Newdow, argued that incorporation of the
Establishment Clause “makes little sense” because that
Clause was originally understood as a limit on congres­
sional interference with state establishments of religion.
Id., at 49–51. JUSTICE STEVENS, of course, has no problem
with applying the Establishment Clause to the States.
See, e.g., id., at 8, n. 4 (opinion for the Court by STEVENS,
J.) (acknowledging that the Establishment Clause
“appl[ies] to the States by incorporation into the Four­
teenth Amendment”). While he insists that Clause is not a
“federalism provision,” post, at 42, n. 40, he does not ex­
plain why it is not, but the right to keep and bear arms is
(even though only the latter refers to a “right of the peo­
ple”). The “federalism” argument prevents the incorpora­
tion of only certain rights.
JUSTICE STEVENS next argues that even if the right to


12

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
SCALIA, J., concurring

keep and bear arms is “deeply rooted in some important
senses,” the roots of States’ efforts to regulate guns run
just as deep. Post, at 44 (internal quotation marks omit­
ted). But this too is true of other rights we have held
incorporated. No fundamental right—not even the First
Amendment—is absolute. The traditional restrictions go
to show the scope of the right, not its lack of fundamental
character. At least that is what they show (JUSTICE
STEVENS would agree) for other rights. Once again, prin­
ciples are applied selectively.
JUSTICE STEVENS’ final reason for rejecting incorpora­
tion of the Second Amendment reveals, more clearly than
any of the others, the game that is afoot. Assuming that
there is a “plausible constitutional basis” for holding that
the right to keep and bear arms is incorporated, he asserts
that we ought not to do so for prudential reasons. Post, at
47. Even if we had the authority to withhold rights that
are within the Constitution’s command (and we assuredly
do not), two of the reasons JUSTICE STEVENS gives for
abstention show just how much power he would hand to
judges. The States’ “right to experiment” with solutions to
the problem of gun violence, he says, is at its apex here
because “the best solution is far from clear.” Post, at 47–
48 (internal quotation marks omitted). That is true of
most serious social problems—whether, for example, “the
best solution” for rampant crime is to admit confessions
unless they are affirmatively shown to have been coerced,
but see Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U. S. 436, 444–445
(1966), or to permit jurors to impose the death penalty
without a requirement that they be free to consider “any
relevant mitigating factor,” see Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455
U. S. 104, 112 (1982), which in turn leads to the conclusion
that defense counsel has provided inadequate defense if he
has not conducted a “reasonable investigation” into poten­
tially mitigating factors, see, e.g., Wiggins v. Smith, 539
U. S. 510, 534 (2003), inquiry into which question tends to


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

SCALIA, J., concurring

destroy any prospect of prompt justice, see, e.g., Wong v.
Belmontes, 558 U. S. ___ (2009) (per curiam) (reversing
grant of habeas relief for sentencing on a crime committed
in 1981). The obviousness of the optimal answer is in the
eye of the beholder. The implication of JUSTICE STEVENS’
call for abstention is that if We The Court conclude that
They The People’s answers to a problem are silly, we are
free to “interven[e],” post, at 47, but if we too are uncertain
of the right answer, or merely think the States may be on
to something, we can loosen the leash.
A second reason JUSTICE STEVENS says we should ab­
stain is that the States have shown they are “capable” of
protecting the right at issue, and if anything have pro­
tected it too much. Post, at 49. That reflects an assump­
tion that judges can distinguish between a proper democ­
ratic decision to leave things alone (which we should
honor), and a case of democratic market failure (which we
should step in to correct). I would not—and no judge
should—presume to have that sort of omniscience, which
seems to me far more “arrogant,” post, at 41, than confin­
ing courts’ focus to our own national heritage.
III
JUSTICE STEVENS’ response to this concurrence, post, at
51–56, makes the usual rejoinder of “living Constitution”
advocates to the criticism that it empowers judges to
eliminate or expand what the people have prescribed: The
traditional, historically focused method, he says, reposes
discretion in judges as well.8 Historical analysis can be
——————
8 JUSTICE

STEVENS also asserts that his approach is “more faithful to
this Nation’s constitutional history” and to “the values and commit­
ments of the American people, as they stand today,” post, at 54. But
what he asserts to be the proof of this is that his approach aligns (no
surprise) with those cases he approves (and dubs “canonical,” ibid.).
Cases he disfavors are discarded as “hardly bind[ing]” “excesses,” post,
at 12, or less “enduring,” post, at 17, n. 16. Not proven. Moreover,
whatever relevance JUSTICE STEVENS ascribes to current “values and


14

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
SCALIA, J., concurring

difficult; it sometimes requires resolving threshold ques­
tions, and making nuanced judgments about which evi­
dence to consult and how to interpret it.
I will stipulate to that.9 But the question to be decided
is not whether the historically focused method is a perfect
means of restraining aristocratic judicial Constitution­
writing; but whether it is the best means available in an
imperfect world. Or indeed, even more narrowly than
that: whether it is demonstrably much better than what
JUSTICE STEVENS proposes. I think it beyond all serious
dispute that it is much less subjective, and intrudes much
less upon the democratic process. It is less subjective
because it depends upon a body of evidence susceptible of
reasoned analysis rather than a variety of vague ethico­
political First Principles whose combined conclusion can
be found to point in any direction the judges favor. In the
most controversial matters brought before this Court—for
example, the constitutionality of prohibiting abortion,
assisted suicide, or homosexual sodomy, or the constitu­
tionality of the death penalty—any historical methodology,
under any plausible standard of proof, would lead to the
same conclusion.10 Moreover, the methodological differ­
ences that divide historians, and the varying interpretive
——————
commitments of the American people” (and that is unclear, see post, at
48–49, n. 47), it is hard to see how it shows fidelity to them that he
disapproves a different subset of old cases than the Court does.
9 That is not to say that every historical question on which there is
room for debate is indeterminate, or that every question on which
historians disagree is equally balanced. Cf. post, at 52–53. For exam­
ple, the historical analysis of the principal dissent in Heller is as valid
as the Court’s only in a two-dimensional world that conflates length
and depth.
10 By the way, JUSTICE STEVENS greatly magnifies the difficulty of an
historical approach by suggesting that it was my burden in Lawrence to
show the “ancient roots of proscriptions against sodomy,” post, at 53
(internal quotation marks omitted). Au contraire, it was his burden (in
the opinion he joined) to show the ancient roots of the right of sodomy.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

SCALIA, J., concurring

assumptions they bring to their work, post, at 52–54, are
nothing compared to the differences among the American
people (though perhaps not among graduates of prestig­
ious law schools) with regard to the moral judgments
JUSTICE STEVENS would have courts pronounce. And
whether or not special expertise is needed to answer his­
torical questions, judges most certainly have no “compara­
tive . . . advantage,” post, at 24 (internal quotation marks
omitted), in resolving moral disputes. What is more, his
approach would not eliminate, but multiply, the hard
questions courts must confront, since he would not replace
history with moral philosophy, but would have courts
consider both.
And the Court’s approach intrudes less upon the democ­
ratic process because the rights it acknowledges are those
established by a constitutional history formed by democ­
ratic decisions; and the rights it fails to acknowledge are
left to be democratically adopted or rejected by the people,
with the assurance that their decision is not subject to
judicial revision. JUSTICE STEVENS’ approach, on the
other hand, deprives the people of that power, since what­
ever the Constitution and laws may say, the list of pro­
tected rights will be whatever courts wish it to be. After
all, he notes, the people have been wrong before, post, at
55, and courts may conclude they are wrong in the future.
JUSTICE STEVENS abhors a system in which “majorities or
powerful interest groups always get their way,” post, at 56,
but replaces it with a system in which unelected and life­
tenured judges always get their way. That such usurpa­
tion is effected unabashedly, see post, at 53—with “the
judge’s cards . . . laid on the table,” ibid.—makes it even
worse. In a vibrant democracy, usurpation should have to
be accomplished in the dark. It is JUSTICE STEVENS’ ap­
proach, not the Court’s, that puts democracy in peril.

