Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1521
_________________

OTIS MCDONALD, ET AL., PETITIONERS v. CITY OF 

CHICAGO, ILLINOIS, ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT

[June 28, 2010] 


JUSTICE THOMAS, concurring in part and concurring in
the judgment.
I agree with the Court that the Fourteenth Amendment
makes the right to keep and bear arms set forth in the
Second Amendment “fully applicable to the States.” Ante,
at 1. I write separately because I believe there is a more
straightforward path to this conclusion, one that is more
faithful to the Fourteenth Amendment’s text and history.
Applying what is now a well-settled test, the plurality
opinion concludes that the right to keep and bear arms
applies to the States through the Fourteenth Amend
ment’s Due Process Clause because it is “fundamental” to
the American “scheme of ordered liberty,” ante, at 19
(citing Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U. S. 145, 149 (1968)),
and “ ‘deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradi
tion,’ ” ante, at 19 (quoting Washington v. Glucksberg, 521
U. S. 702, 721 (1997)). I agree with that description of the
right. But I cannot agree that it is enforceable against the
States through a clause that speaks only to “process.”
Instead, the right to keep and bear arms is a privilege of
American citizenship that applies to the States through
the Fourteenth Amendment’s Privileges or Immunities
Clause.


2

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

I
In District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U. S. ___ (2008),
this Court held that the Second Amendment protects an
individual right to keep and bear arms for the purpose of
self-defense, striking down a District of Columbia ordi
nance that banned the possession of handguns in the
home. Id., at __ (slip op., at 64). The question in this case
is whether the Constitution protects that right against
abridgment by the States.
As the Court explains, if this case were litigated before
the Fourteenth Amendment’s adoption in 1868, the an
swer to that question would be simple. In Barron ex rel.
Tiernan v. Mayor of Baltimore, 7 Pet. 243 (1833), this
Court held that the Bill of Rights applied only to the Fed
eral Government. Writing for the Court, Chief Justice
Marshall recalled that the founding generation added the
first eight Amendments to the Constitution in response to
Antifederalist concerns regarding the extent of federal—
not state—power, and held that if “the framers of these
amendments [had] intended them to be limitations on the
powers of the state governments,” “they would have de
clared this purpose in plain and intelligible language.”
Id., at 250. Finding no such language in the Bill, Chief
Justice Marshall held that it did not in any way restrict
state authority. Id., at 248–250; see Lessee of Livingston
v. Moore, 7 Pet. 469, 551–552 (1833) (reaffirming Barron’s
holding); Permoli v. Municipality No. 1 of New Orleans, 3
How. 589, 609–610 (1845) (same).
Nearly three decades after Barron, the Nation was
splintered by a civil war fought principally over the ques
tion of slavery. As was evident to many throughout our
Nation’s early history, slavery, and the measures designed
to protect it, were irreconcilable with the principles of
equality, government by consent, and inalienable rights
proclaimed by the Declaration of Independence and em
bedded in our constitutional structure. See, e.g., 3 Records


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

of the Federal Convention of 1787, p. 212 (M. Farrand ed.
1911) (remarks of Luther Martin) (“[S]lavery is inconsis
tent with the genius of republicanism, and has a tendency
to destroy those principles on which it is supported, as it
lessens the sense of the equal rights of mankind” (empha
sis deleted)); A. Lincoln, Speech at Peoria, Ill. (Oct. 16,
1854), reprinted in 2 The Collected Works of Abraham
Lincoln 266 (R. Basler ed. 1953) (“[N]o man is good enough
to govern another man, without that other’s consent. I say
this is the leading principle—the sheet anchor of American
republicanism. . . . Now the relation of masters and slaves
is, pro tanto, a total violation of this principle”).
After the war, a series of constitutional amendments
were adopted to repair the Nation from the damage slav
ery had caused. The provision at issue here, §1 of the
Fourteenth Amendment, significantly altered our system
of government. The first sentence of that section provides
that “[a]ll persons born or naturalized in the United States
and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the
United States and of the State wherein they reside.” This
unambiguously overruled this Court’s contrary holding in
Dred Scott v. Sandford, 19 How. 393 (1857), that the
Constitution did not recognize black Americans as citizens
of the United States or their own State. Id., at 405–406.
The meaning of §1’s next sentence has divided this
Court for many years. That sentence begins with the
command that “[n]o State shall make or enforce any law
which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citi
zens of the United States.” On its face, this appears to
grant the persons just made United States citizens a
certain collection of rights—i.e., privileges or immunities—
attributable to that status.
This Court’s precedents accept that point, but define the
relevant collection of rights quite narrowly.
In the
Slaughter-House Cases, 16 Wall. 36 (1873), decided just
five years after the Fourteenth Amendment’s adoption, the


4

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Court interpreted this text, now known as the Privileges
or Immunities Clause, for the first time. In a closely
divided decision, the Court drew a sharp distinction be
tween the privileges and immunities of state citizenship
and those of federal citizenship, and held that the Privi
leges or Immunities Clause protected only the latter cate
gory of rights from state abridgment. Id., at 78. The
Court defined that category to include only those rights
“which owe their existence to the Federal government, its
National character, its Constitution, or its laws.” Id., at
79. This arguably left open the possibility that certain
individual rights enumerated in the Constitution could be
considered privileges or immunities of federal citizenship.
See ibid. (listing “[t]he right to peaceably assemble” and
“the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus” as rights poten
tially protected by the Privileges or Immunities Clause).
But the Court soon rejected that proposition, interpreting
the Privileges or Immunities Clause even more narrowly
in its later cases.
Chief among those cases is United States v. Cruikshank,
92 U. S. 542 (1876). There, the Court held that members
of a white militia who had brutally murdered as many as
165 black Louisianians congregating outside a courthouse
had not deprived the victims of their privileges as Ameri
can citizens to peaceably assemble or to keep and bear
arms. Ibid.; see L. Keith, The Colfax Massacre 109 (2008).
According to the Court, the right to peaceably assemble
codified in the First Amendment was not a privilege of
United States citizenship because “[t]he right . . . existed
long before the adoption of the Constitution.” 92 U. S., at
551 (emphasis added). Similarly, the Court held that the
right to keep and bear arms was not a privilege of United
States citizenship because it was not “in any manner
dependent upon that instrument for its existence.” Id., at
553. In other words, the reason the Framers codified the
right to bear arms in the Second Amendment—its nature


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

as an inalienable right that pre-existed the Constitution’s
adoption—was the very reason citizens could not enforce it
against States through the Fourteenth.
That circular reasoning effectively has been the Court’s
last word on the Privileges or Immunities Clause.1 In the
intervening years, the Court has held that the Clause
prevents state abridgment of only a handful of rights, such
as the right to travel, see Saenz v. Roe, 526 U. S. 489, 503
(1999), that are not readily described as essential to
liberty.
As a consequence of this Court’s marginalization of the
Clause, litigants seeking federal protection of fundamental
rights turned to the remainder of §1 in search of an alter
native fount of such rights. They found one in a most
curious place—that section’s command that every State
guarantee “due process” to any person before depriving
him of “life, liberty, or property.” At first, litigants argued
that this Due Process Clause “incorporated” certain proce
dural rights codified in the Bill of Rights against the
States. The Court generally rejected those claims, how
ever, on the theory that the rights in question were not
sufficiently “fundamental” to warrant such treatment.
See, e.g., Hurtado v. California, 110 U. S. 516 (1884)
(grand jury indictment requirement); Maxwell v. Dow, 176
U. S. 581 (1900) (12-person jury requirement); Twining v.
New Jersey, 211 U. S. 78 (1908) (privilege against self
incrimination).
That changed with time. The Court came to conclude
that certain Bill of Rights guarantees were sufficiently
fundamental to fall within §1’s guarantee of “due process.”
These included not only procedural protections listed in
——————
1 In the two decades after United States v. Cruikshank, 92 U. S. 542
(1876), was decided, this Court twice reaffirmed its holding that the
Privileges or Immunities Clause does not apply the Second Amendment
to the States. Presser v. Illinois, 116 U. S. 252, 266–267 (1886); Miller
v. Texas, 153 U. S. 535 (1894).


6

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

the first eight Amendments, see, e.g., Benton v. Maryland,
395 U. S. 784 (1969) (protection against double jeopardy),
but substantive rights as well, see, e.g., Gitlow v. New
York, 268 U. S. 652, 666 (1925) (right to free speech); Near
v. Minnesota ex rel. Olson, 283 U. S. 697, 707 (1931)
(same). In the process of incorporating these rights
against the States, the Court often applied them differ
ently against the States than against the Federal Gov
ernment on the theory that only those “fundamental”
aspects of the right required Due Process Clause protec
tion. See, e.g., Betts v. Brady, 316 U. S. 455, 473 (1942)
(holding that the Sixth Amendment required the appoint
ment of counsel in all federal criminal cases in which the
defendant was unable to retain an attorney, but that the
Due Process Clause required appointment of counsel in
state criminal cases only where “want of counsel . . . re
sult[ed] in a conviction lacking in . . . fundamental fair
ness”). In more recent years, this Court has “abandoned
the notion” that the guarantees in the Bill of Rights apply
differently when incorporated against the States than they
do when applied to the Federal Government. Ante, at 17–
18 (opinion of the Court) (internal quotation marks omit
ted). But our cases continue to adhere to the view that a
right is incorporated through the Due Process Clause only
if it is sufficiently “fundamental,” ante, at 37, 42–44 (plu
rality opinion)—a term the Court has long struggled to
define.
While this Court has at times concluded that a right
gains “fundamental” status only if it is essential to the
American “scheme of ordered liberty” or “ ‘deeply rooted in
this Nation’s history and tradition,’ ” ante, at 19 (plurality
opinion) (quoting Glucksberg, 521 U. S., at 721), the Court
has just as often held that a right warrants Due Process
Clause protection if it satisfies a far less measurable range
of criteria, see Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U. S. 558, 562
(2003) (concluding that the Due Process Clause protects


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

“liberty of the person both in its spatial and in its more
transcendent dimensions”). Using the latter approach, the
Court has determined that the Due Process Clause applies
rights against the States that are not mentioned in the
Constitution at all, even without seriously arguing that
the Clause was originally understood to protect such
rights. See, e.g., Lochner v. New York, 198 U. S. 45 (1905);
Roe v. Wade, 410 U. S. 113 (1973); Lawrence, supra.
All of this is a legal fiction. The notion that a constitu
tional provision that guarantees only “process” before a
person is deprived of life, liberty, or property could define
the substance of those rights strains credulity for even the
most casual user of words. Moreover, this fiction is a
particularly dangerous one. The one theme that links the
Court’s substantive due process precedents together is
their lack of a guiding principle to distinguish “fundamen
tal” rights that warrant protection from nonfundamental
rights that do not. Today’s decision illustrates the point.
Replaying a debate that has endured from the inception of
the Court’s substantive due process jurisprudence, the
dissents laud the “flexibility” in this Court’s substantive
due process doctrine, post, at 14 (STEVENS, J., dissenting);
see post, at 6–8 (BREYER, J., dissenting), while the plural
ity makes yet another effort to impose principled re
straints on its exercise, see ante, at 33–41. But neither
side argues that the meaning they attribute to the Due
Process Clause was consistent with public understanding
at the time of its ratification.
To be sure, the plurality’s effort to cabin the exercise of
judicial discretion under the Due Process Clause by focus
ing its inquiry on those rights deeply rooted in American
history and tradition invites less opportunity for abuse
than the alternatives. See post, at 7 (BREYER, J., dissent
ing) (arguing that rights should be incorporated against
the States through the Due Process Clause if they are
“well-suited to the carrying out of . . . constitutional prom


8

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

ises”); post, at 22 (STEVENS, J., dissenting) (warning that
there is no “all-purpose, top-down, totalizing theory of
‘liberty’ ” protected by the Due Process Clause). But any
serious argument over the scope of the Due Process Clause
must acknowledge that neither its text nor its history
suggests that it protects the many substantive rights this
Court’s cases now claim it does.
I cannot accept a theory of constitutional interpretation
that rests on such tenuous footing. This Court’s substan
tive due process framework fails to account for both the
text of the Fourteenth Amendment and the history that
led to its adoption, filling that gap with a jurisprudence
devoid of a guiding principle. I believe the original mean
ing of the Fourteenth Amendment offers a superior alter
native, and that a return to that meaning would allow this
Court to enforce the rights the Fourteenth Amendment is
designed to protect with greater clarity and predictability
than the substantive due process framework has so far
managed.
I acknowledge the volume of precedents that have been
built upon the substantive due process framework, and I
further acknowledge the importance of stare decisis to the
stability of our Nation’s legal system. But stare decisis is
only an “adjunct” of our duty as judges to decide by our
best lights what the Constitution means. Planned Par
enthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, 505 U. S. 833, 963
(1992) (Rehnquist, C. J., concurring in judgment in part
and dissenting in part). It is not “an inexorable com
mand.” Lawrence, supra, at 577. Moreover, as judges, we
interpret the Constitution one case or controversy at a
time. The question presented in this case is not whether
our entire Fourteenth Amendment jurisprudence must be
preserved or revised, but only whether, and to what ex
tent, a particular clause in the Constitution protects the
particular right at issue here. With the inquiry appropri
ately narrowed, I believe this case presents an opportunity


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

to reexamine, and begin the process of restoring, the
meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment agreed upon by
those who ratified it.
II
“It cannot be presumed that any clause in the constitu
tion is intended to be without effect.” Marbury v. Madi
son, 1 Cranch 137, 174 (1803) (Marshall, C. J.). Because
the Court’s Privileges or Immunities Clause precedents
have presumed just that, I set them aside for the moment
and begin with the text.
The Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment declares that “[n]o State . . . shall abridge the
privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States.”
In interpreting this language, it is important to recall that
constitutional provisions are “ ‘written to be understood by
the voters.’ ” Heller, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 3) (quot
ing United States v. Sprague, 282 U. S. 716, 731 (1931)).
Thus, the objective of this inquiry is to discern what “ordi
nary citizens” at the time of ratification would have un
derstood the Privileges or Immunities Clause to mean.
554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 3).
A
1
At the time of Reconstruction, the terms “privileges” and
“immunities” had an established meaning as synonyms for
“rights.” The two words, standing alone or paired to
gether, were used interchangeably with the words “rights,”
“liberties,” and “freedoms,” and had been since the time of
Blackstone. See 1 W. Blackstone, Commentaries *129
(describing the “rights and liberties” of Englishmen as
“private immunities” and “civil privileges”). A number of
antebellum judicial decisions used the terms in this man
ner. See, e.g., Magill v. Brown, 16 F. Cas. 408, 428 (No.
8,952) (CC ED Pa. 1833) (Baldwin, J.) (“The words ‘privi


10

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

leges and immunities’ relate to the rights of persons, place
or property; a privilege is a peculiar right, a private law,
conceded to particular persons or places”). In addition,
dictionary definitions confirm that the public shared this
understanding. See, e.g., N. Webster, An American Dic
tionary of the English Language 1039 (C. Goodrich & N.
Porter rev. 1865) (defining “privilege” as “a right or immu
nity not enjoyed by others or by all” and listing among its
synonyms the words “immunity,” “franchise,” “right,” and
“liberty”); id., at 661 (defining “immunity” as “[f]reedom
from an obligation” or “particular privilege”); id., at 1140
(defining “right” as “[p]rivilege or immunity granted by
authority”).2
The fact that a particular interest was designated as a
“privilege” or “immunity,” rather than a “right,” “liberty,”
or “freedom,” revealed little about its substance. Black
stone, for example, used the terms “privileges” and “im
munities” to describe both the inalienable rights of indi
viduals and the positive-law rights of corporations. See 1
Commentaries, at *129 (describing “private immunities”
as a “residuum of natural liberty,” and “civil privileges” as
those “which society has engaged to provide, in lieu of the
natural liberties so given up by individuals” (footnote
omitted)); id., at *468 (stating that a corporate charter
enables a corporation to “establish rules and orders” that
serve as “the privileges and immunities . . . of the corpora
tion”). Writers in this country at the time of Reconstruc
——————
2 See also 2 C. Richardson, A New Dictionary of the English Language
1512 (1839) (defining “privilege” as “an appropriate or peculiar law or
rule or right; a peculiar immunity, liberty, or franchise”); 1 id., at 1056
(defining “immunity” as “[f]reedom or exemption, (from duties,) liberty,
privilege”); The Philadelphia School Dictionary; or Expositor of the
English Language 152 (3d ed. 1812) (defining “privilege” as a “peculiar
advantage”); id., at 105 (defining “immunity” as “privilege, exemption”);
Royal Standard English Dictionary 411 (1788) (defining “privilege” as
“public right; peculiar advantage”).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

tion followed a similar practice. See, e.g., Racine & Mis
sissippi R. Co. v. Farmers’ Loan & Trust Co., 49 Ill. 331,
334 (1868) (describing agreement between two railroad
companies in which they agreed “ ‘to fully merge and
consolidate the[ir] capital stock, powers, privileges, immu
nities and franchises’ ”); Hathorn v. Calef, 53 Me. 471,
483–484 (1866) (concluding that a statute did not “modify
any power, privileges, or immunity, pertaining to the
franchise of any corporation”). The nature of a privilege or
immunity thus varied depending on the person, group, or
entity to whom those rights were assigned. See Lash, The
Origins of the Privileges or Immunities Clause, Part I:
“Privileges and Immunities” as an Antebellum Term of
Art, 98 Geo. L. J. 1241, 1256–1257 (2010) (surveying
antebellum usages of these terms).
2
The group of rights-bearers to whom the Privileges or
Immunities Clause applies is, of course, “citizens.” By the
time of Reconstruction, it had long been established that
both the States and the Federal Government existed to
preserve their citizens’ inalienable rights, and that these
rights were considered “privileges” or “immunities” of
citizenship.
This tradition begins with our country’s English roots.
Parliament declared the basic liberties of English citizens
in a series of documents ranging from the Magna Carta to
the Petition of Right and the English Bill of Rights. See 1
B. Schwartz, The Bill of Rights: A Documentary History
8−16, 19−21, 41−46 (1971) (hereinafter Schwartz). These
fundamental rights, according to the English tradition,
belonged to all people but became legally enforceable only
when recognized in legal texts, including acts of Parlia
ment and the decisions of common-law judges. See B.
Bailyn, The Ideological Origins of the American Revolu
tion 77−79 (1967). These rights included many that later


12

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

would be set forth in our Federal Bill of Rights, such as
the right to petition for redress of grievances, the right to
a jury trial, and the right of “Protestants” to “have arms
for their defence.” English Bill of Rights (1689), reprinted
in 1 Schwartz 41, 43.
As English subjects, the colonists considered themselves
to be vested with the same fundamental rights as other
Englishmen. They consistently claimed the rights of
English citizenship in their founding documents, repeat
edly referring to these rights as “privileges” and “immuni
ties.” For example, a Maryland law provided that
“[A]ll the Inhabitants of this Province being Chris
tians (Slaves excepted) Shall have and enjoy all such
rights liberties immunities priviledges and free cus
toms within this Province as any naturall born subject
of England hath or ought to have or enjoy in the
Realm of England . . . .” Md. Act for the Liberties of
the People (1639), in id., at 68 (emphasis added).3
——————
3 See also, e.g., Charter of Va. (1606), reprinted in 7 The Federal and
State Constitutions, Colonial Charters, and Other Organic Laws 3783,
3788 (F. Thorpe ed. 1909) (hereinafter Thorpe) (“DECLAR[ING]” that “all
and every the Persons being our Subjects, . . . shall HAVE and enjoy all
Liberties, Franchises, and Immunities . . . as if they had been abiding
and born, within this our Realm of England” (emphasis in original));
Charter of New England (1620), in 3 id., at 1827, 1839 (“[A]ll and every
the Persons, beinge our Subjects, . . . shall have and enjoy all Liberties,
and ffranchizes, and Immunities of free Denizens and naturall subjects
. . . as if they had been abidinge and born within this our Kingdome of
England”); Charter of Mass. Bay (1629), in id. at 1846, 1856−1857
(guaranteeing that “all and every the Subjects of Us, . . . shall have and
enjoy all liberties and Immunities of free and naturall Subjects . . . as yf
they and everie of them were borne within the Realme of England”);
Grant of the Province of Me. (1639), in id., at 1625, 1635 (guaranteeing
“Liberties Francheses and Immunityes of or belonging to any the
naturall borne subjects of this our Kingdome of England”); Charter of
Carolina (1663), in 5 id., at 2743, 2747 (guaranteeing to all subjects “all
liberties franchises and priviledges of this our kingdom of England”);
Charter of R. I. and Providence Plantations (1663), in 6 id., at 3211,


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

As tensions between England and the Colonies in
creased, the colonists adopted protest resolutions reassert
ing their claim to the inalienable rights of Englishmen.
Again, they used the terms “privileges” and “immunities”
to describe these rights. As the Massachusetts Resolves
declared:
“Resolved, That there are certain essential Rights of
the British Constitution of Government, which are
founded in the Law of God and Nature, and are the
common Rights of Mankind—Therefore. . . . .
“Resolved, That no Man can justly take the Property
of another without his Consent: And that upon this
original Principle the Right of Representation . . . is
evidently founded. . . . Resolved, That this inherent
Right, together with all other, essential Rights, Liber
ties, Privileges and Immunities of the People of Great
Britain, have been fully confirmed to them by Magna
Charta.” The Massachusetts Resolves (Oct. 29, 1765),
reprinted in Prologue to Revolution: Sources and
Documents on the Stamp Act Crisis, 1764−1766, p. 56
(E. Morgan ed. 1959) (some emphasis added).4
——————
3220 (“[A]ll and every the subjects of us . . . shall have and enjoye all
libertyes and immunityes of ffree and naturall subjects within any the
dominions of us, our heires, or successours, . . . as if they, and every of
them, were borne within the realme of England”); Charter of Ga.
(1732), in 2 id., at 765, 773 (“[A]ll and every the persons which shall
happen to be born within the said province . . . shall have and enjoy all
liberties, franchises and immunities of free denizens and natural born
subjects, within any of our dominions, to all intents and purposes, as if
abiding and born within this our kingdom of Great-Britain”).
4 See also, e.g., A. Howard, The Road from Runnymede: Magna Carta
and Constitutionalism in America 174 (1968) (quoting 1774 Georgia
resolution declaring that the colony’s inhabitants were entitled to “ ‘the
same rights, privileges, and immunities with their fellow-subjects in
Great Britain’ ” (emphasis in original)); The Virginia Resolves, The
Resolutions as Printed in the Journal of the House of Burgesses,
reprinted in Prologue to Revolution: Sources and Documents on the


14

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

In keeping with this practice, the First Continental
Congress declared in 1774 that the King had wrongfully
denied the colonists “the rights, liberties, and immunities
of free and natural-born subjects . . . within the realm of
England.” 1 Journals of the Continental Congress 1774–
1789, p. 68 (1904). In an address delivered to the inhabi
tants of Quebec that same year, the Congress described
those rights as including the “great” “right[s]” of “trial by
jury,” “Habeas Corpus,” and “freedom of the press.” Ad
dress of the Continental Congress to the Inhabitants of
Quebec (1774), reprinted in 1 Schwartz 221–223.
After declaring their independence, the newly formed
States replaced their colonial charters with constitutions
and state bills of rights, almost all of which guaranteed
the same fundamental rights that the former colonists
previously had claimed by virtue of their English heritage.
See, e. g., Pa. Declaration of Rights (1776), reprinted in 5
Thorpe 3081–3084 (declaring that “all men are born
equally free and independent, and have certain natural,
inherent and inalienable rights,” including the “right to
worship Almighty God according to the dictates of their
own consciences” and the “right to bear arms for the de
fence of themselves and the state”).5
Several years later, the Founders amended the Consti
tution to expressly protect many of the same fundamental
rights against interference by the Federal Government.
Consistent with their English heritage, the founding
——————
Stamp Act Crisis, 1764−1766, at 46, 48 (“[T]he Colonists aforesaid are
declared entitled to all Liberties, Privileges, and Immunities of Deni
zens and natural Subjects, to all Intents and Purposes, as if they had
been abiding and born within the Realm of England” (emphasis in
original)).
5 See also Va. Declaration of Rights (1776), reprinted in 1 Schwartz
234–236; Pa. Declaration of Rights (1776), in id., at 263–275; Del.
Declaration of Rights (1776), in id., at 276–278; Md. Declaration of
Rights (1776), in id., at 280–285; N. C. Declaration of Rights (1776), in
id., 286–288.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

generation generally did not consider many of the rights
identified in these amendments as new entitlements, but
as inalienable rights of all men, given legal effect by their
codification in the Constitution’s text. See, e.g., 1 Annals
of Cong. 431−432, 436–437, 440–442 (1834) (statement of
Rep. Madison) (proposing Bill of Rights in the first Con
gress); The Federalist No. 84, pp. 531−533 (B. Wright ed.
1961) (A. Hamilton); see also Heller, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip
op., at 19) (“[I]t has always been widely understood that
the Second Amendment, like the First and Fourth Amend
ments, codified a pre-existing right”). The Court’s subse
quent decision in Barron, however, made plain that the
codification of these rights in the Bill made them legally
enforceable only against the Federal Government, not the
States. See 7 Pet., at 247.
3
Even though the Bill of Rights did not apply to the
States, other provisions of the Constitution did limit state
interference with individual rights. Article IV, §2, cl. 1
provides that “[t]he Citizens of each State shall be entitled
to all Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in the several
States.” The text of this provision resembles the Privi
leges or Immunities Clause, and it can be assumed that
the public’s understanding of the latter was informed by
its understanding of the former.
Article IV, §2 was derived from a similar clause in the
Articles of Confederation, and reflects the dual citizenship
the Constitution provided to all Americans after replacing
that “league” of separate sovereign States. Gibbons v.
Ogden, 9 Wheat. 1, 187 (1824); see 3 J. Story, Commentar
ies on the Constitution of the United States §1800, p. 675
(1833). By virtue of a person’s citizenship in a particular
State, he was guaranteed whatever rights and liberties
that State’s constitution and laws made available. Article
IV, §2 vested citizens of each State with an additional


16

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

right: the assurance that they would be afforded the
“privileges and immunities” of citizenship in any of the
several States in the Union to which they might travel.
What were the “Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in
the several States”? That question was answered perhaps
most famously by Justice Bushrod Washington sitting as
Circuit Justice in Corfield v. Coryell, 6 F. Cas. 546,
551−552 (No. 3,230) (CC ED Pa. 1825). In that case, a
Pennsylvania citizen claimed that a New Jersey law pro
hibiting nonresidents from harvesting oysters from the
State’s waters violated Article IV, §2 because it deprived
him, as an out-of-state citizen, of a right New Jersey
availed to its own citizens. Id., at 550. Justice Washing
ton rejected that argument, refusing to “accede to the
proposition” that Article IV, §2 entitled “citizens of the
several states . . . to participate in all the rights which
belong exclusively to the citizens of any other particular
state.” Id., at 552 (emphasis added). In his view, Article
IV, §2 did not guarantee equal access to all public benefits
a State might choose to make available to its citizens. See
id., at 552. Instead, it applied only to those rights “which
are, in their nature, fundamental; which belong, of right,
to the citizens of all free governments.” Id., at 551 (em
phasis added). Other courts generally agreed with this
principle. See, e.g., Abbott v. Bayley, 23 Mass. 89, 92–93
(1827) (noting that the “privileges and immunities” of
citizens in the several States protected by Article IV, §2
are “qualified and not absolute” because they do not grant
a traveling citizen the right of “suffrage or of eligibility to
office” in the State to which he travels).
When describing those “fundamental” rights, Justice
Washington thought it “would perhaps be more tedious
than difficult to enumerate” them all, but suggested that
they could “be all comprehended under” a broad list of
“general heads,” such as “[p]rotection by the government,”
“the enjoyment of life and liberty, with the right to acquire


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

and possess property of every kind,” “the benefit of the
writ of habeas corpus,” and the right of access to “the
courts of the state,” among others.6 Corfield, supra, at
551−552.
Notably, Justice Washington did not indicate whether
Article IV, §2 required States to recognize these funda
mental rights in their own citizens and thus in sojourning
citizens alike, or whether the Clause simply prohibited the
States from discriminating against sojourning citizens
with respect to whatever fundamental rights state law
happened to recognize. On this question, the weight of
legal authorities at the time of Reconstruction indicated
that Article IV, §2 prohibited States from discriminating
against sojourning citizens when recognizing fundamental
rights, but did not require States to recognize those rights
and did not prescribe their content. The highest courts of
several States adopted this view, see, e.g., Livingston v.
Van Ingen, 9 Johns. 507, 561 (N. Y. Sup. Ct. 1812) (Yates,
J.); id., at 577 (Kent, J.); Campbell v. Morris, 3 H. & McH.
535, 553−554 (Md. Gen. Ct. 1797) (Chase, J.), as did sev
eral influential treatise-writers, see T. Cooley, A Treatise
——————
6 Justice Washington’s complete list was as follows:
“Protection by the government; the enjoyment of life and liberty, with
the right to acquire and possess property of every kind, and to pursue
and obtain happiness and safety; subject nevertheless to such re
straints as the government may justly prescribe for the general good of
the whole. The right of a citizen of one state to pass through, or to
reside in any other state, for purposes of trade, agriculture, professional
pursuits, or otherwise; to claim the benefit of the writ of habeas corpus;
to institute and maintain actions of any kind in the courts of the state;
to take, hold and dispose of property, either real or personal; and an
exemption from higher taxes or impositions than are paid by the other
citizens of the state; may be mentioned as some of the particular
privileges and immunities of citizens, which are clearly embraced by
the general description of privileges deemed to be fundamental: to
which may be added, the elective franchise, as regulated and estab
lished by the laws or constitution of the state in which it is to be exer
cised.” 6 Fed. Cas., at 551−552.


18

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

on the Constitutional Limitations Which Rest Upon the
Legislative Power of the State of the American Union 15–
16, and n. 3 (1868) (reprint 1972) (describing Article IV,
§2 as designed “to prevent discrimination by the several
States against the citizens and public proceedings of other
States”); 2 J. Kent, Commentaries on American Law 35
(11th ed. 1867) (stating that Article IV, §2 entitles sojourn
ing citizens “to the privileges that persons of the same
description are entitled to in the state to which the re
moval is made, and to none other”). This Court adopted
the same conclusion in a unanimous opinion just one year
after the Fourteenth Amendment was ratified. See Paul
v. Virginia, 8 Wall. 168, 180 (1869).
*
*
*
The text examined so far demonstrates three points
about the meaning of the Privileges or Immunities Clause
in §1. First, “privileges” and “immunities” were synonyms
for “rights.” Second, both the States and the Federal
Government had long recognized the inalienable rights of
their citizens. Third, Article IV, §2 of the Constitution
protected traveling citizens against state discrimination
with respect to the fundamental rights of state citizenship.
Two questions still remain, both provoked by the textual
similarity between §1’s Privileges or Immunities Clause
and Article IV, §2. The first involves the nature of the
rights at stake: Are the privileges or immunities of “citi
zens of the United States” recognized by §1 the same as
the privileges and immunities of “citizens in the several
States” to which Article IV, §2 refers? The second involves
the restriction imposed on the States: Does §1, like Article
IV, §2, prohibit only discrimination with respect to certain
rights if the State chooses to recognize them, or does it
require States to recognize those rights? I address each
question in turn.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010) 


19

Opinion of THOMAS, J. 


B

I start with the nature of the rights that §1’s Privileges
or Immunities Clause protects. Section 1 overruled Dred
Scott’s holding that blacks were not citizens of either the
United States or their own State and, thus, did not enjoy
“the privileges and immunities of citizens” embodied in the
Constitution. 19 How., at 417. The Court in Dred Scott
did not distinguish between privileges and immunities of
citizens of the United States and citizens in the several
States, instead referring to the rights of citizens generally.
It did, however, give examples of what the rights of citi
zens were—the constitutionally enumerated rights of “the
full liberty of speech” and the right “to keep and carry
arms.” Ibid.
Section 1 protects the rights of citizens “of the United
States” specifically. The evidence overwhelmingly demon
strates that the privileges and immunities of such citizens
included individual rights enumerated in the Constitution,
including the right to keep and bear arms.
1
Nineteenth-century treaties through which the United
States acquired territory from other sovereigns routinely
promised inhabitants of the newly acquired territories
that they would enjoy all of the “rights,” “privileges,” and
“immunities” of United States citizens. See, e.g., Treaty of
Amity, Settlement, and Limits, Art. 6, Feb. 22, 1819, 8
Stat. 256−258, T. S. No. 327 (entered into force Feb. 19,
1821) (cession of Florida) (“The inhabitants of the territo
ries which his Catholic Majesty cedes to the United States,
by this Treaty, shall be incorporated in the Union of the
United States, as soon as may be consistent with the
principles of the Federal Constitution, and admitted to the
enjoyment of all the privileges, rights, and immunities, of


20

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

the citizens of the United States” (emphasis added)).7
Commentators of the time explained that the rights and
immunities of “citizens of the United States” recognized in
these treaties “undoubtedly mean[t] those privileges that
are common to all citizens of this republic.” Marcus, An
Examination of the Expediency and Constitutionality of
Prohibiting Slavery in the State of Missouri 17 (1819). It
is therefore altogether unsurprising that several of these
treaties identify liberties enumerated in the Constitution
as privileges and immunities common to all United States
citizens.
For example, the Louisiana Cession Act of 1803, which
codified a treaty between the United States and France
culminating in the Louisiana Purchase, provided that
“The inhabitants of the ceded territory shall be incor
porated in the Union of the United States, and admit
ted as soon as possible, according to the principles of
the Federal constitution, to the enjoyments of all the
rights, advantages and immunities of citizens of the
United States; and in the mean time they shall be
maintained and protected in the free enjoyment of
their liberty, property and the religion which they pro
fess.” Treaty Between the United States of America
——————
7 See

also Treaty Between the United States of America and the Ot
tawa Indians of Blanchard’s Fork and Roche De Boeuf, June 24, 1862,
12 Stat. 1237 (“The Ottawa Indians of the United Bands of Blanchard’s
Fork and of Roche de Boeuf, having become sufficiently advanced in
civilization, and being desirous of becoming citizens of the United
States . . . [after five years from the ratification of this treaty] shall be
deemed and declared to be citizens of the United States, to all intents
and purposes, and shall be entitled to all the rights, privileges, and
immunities of such citizens” (emphasis added)); Treaty Between the
United States of America and Different Tribes of Sioux Indians, Art. VI,
April 29, 1868, 15 Stat. 637 (“[A]ny Indian or Indians receiving a patent
for land under the foregoing provisions, shall thereby and from thence
forth become and be a citizen of the United States, and be entitled to all
the privileges and immunities of such citizens” (emphasis added)).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

and the French Republic, Art. III, Apr. 30, 1803, 8
Stat. 202, T. S. No. 86 (emphasis added).8
The Louisiana Cession Act reveals even more about the
privileges and immunities of United States citizenship
because it provoked an extensive public debate on the
meaning of that term. In 1820, when the Missouri Terri
tory (which the United States acquired through the Ces
sion Act) sought to enter the Union as a new State, a
debate ensued over whether to prohibit slavery within
Missouri as a condition of its admission. Some congress
men argued that prohibiting slavery in Missouri would
deprive its inhabitants of the “privileges and immunities”
they had been promised by the Cession Act. See, e.g., 35
Annals of Cong. 1083 (1855) (remarks of Kentucky Rep.
Hardin). But those who opposed slavery in Missouri
argued that the right to hold slaves was merely a matter
of state property law, not one of the privileges and immu
nities of United States citizenship guaranteed by the Act.9
——————
8 Subsequent treaties contained similar guarantees that the inhabi
tants of the newly acquired territories would enjoy the freedom to
exercise certain constitutional rights. See Treaty of Peace, Friendship,
Limits, and Settlement with the Republic of Mexico, Art. IX, Feb. 2,
1848, 9 Stat. 930, T. S. No. 207 (cession of Texas) (declaring that
inhabitants of the Territory were entitled “to the enjoyment of all the
rights of citizens of the United States, according to the principles of the
constitution; and in the mean time shall be maintained and protected
in the free enjoyment of their liberty and property, and secured in the
free exercise of their religion without restriction”); Treaty concerning
the Cession of the Russian Possessions in North America by his Maj
esty the Emperor of all the Russians to the United States of America,
Art. III, Mar. 30, 1867, 15 Stat. 542, T. S. No. 301 (June 20, 1867)
(cession of Alaska) (“The inhabitants of the ceded territory, . . . if they
should prefer to remain in the ceded territory, they, with the exception
of uncivilized native tribes, shall be admitted to the enjoyment of all
the rights, advantages, and immunities of citizens of the United States,
and shall be maintained and protected in the free enjoyment of their
liberty, property, and religion”).
9 See, e.g., Speech of Mr. Joseph Hemphill (Pa.) on the Missouri Ques


22

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Daniel Webster was among the leading proponents of
the antislavery position. In his “Memorial to Congress,”
Webster argued that “[t]he rights, advantages and immu
nities here spoken of [in the Cession Act] must . . . be such
as are recognized or communicated by the Constitution of
the United States,” not the “rights, advantages and im
munities, derived exclusively from the State governments
. . . .” D. Webster, A Memorial to the Congress of the
United States on the Subject of Restraining the Increase of
Slavery in New States to be Admitted into the Union 15
(Dec. 15, 1819) (emphasis added). “The obvious meaning”
of the Act, in Webster’s view, was that “the rights derived
under the federal Constitution shall be enjoyed by the
inhabitants of [the territory].” Id., at 15–16 (emphasis
added). In other words, Webster articulated a distinction
between the rights of United States citizenship and the
rights of state citizenship, and argued that the former
included those rights “recognized or communicated by the
Constitution.” Since the right to hold slaves was not
mentioned in the Constitution, it was not a right of federal
citizenship.
Webster and his allies ultimately lost the debate over
slavery in Missouri and the territory was admitted as a
slave State as part of the now-famous Missouri Compro
mise. Missouri Enabling Act of March 6, 1820, ch. 22, §8,
3 Stat. 548. But their arguments continued to inform
public understanding of the privileges and immunities of
——————
tion in the House of the Representatives 16 (1820), as published in
pamphlet form and reprinted in 22 Moore Pamphlets, p. 16 (“If the
right to hold slaves is a federal right and attached merely to citizenship
of the United States, [then slavery] could maintain itself against state
authority, and on this principle the owner might take his slaves into
any state he pleased, in defiance of the state laws, but this would be
contrary to the constitution”); see also Lash, The Origins of the Privi
leges or Immunities Clause, Part I: “Privileges and Immunities” as an
Antebellum Term of Art, 98 Geo. L. J. 1241, 1288–1290 (2010) (collect
ing other examples).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

United States citizenship. In 1854, Webster’s Memorial
was republished in a pamphlet discussing the Nation’s
next major debate on slavery—the proposed repeal of the
Missouri Compromise through the Kansas-Nebraska Act,
see The Nebraska Question: Comprising Speeches in the
United States Senate: Together with the History of the
Missouri Compromise 9–12 (1854). It was published again
in 1857 in a collection of famous American speeches. See
The Political Text-Book, or Encyclopedia: Containing
Everything Necessary for the Reference of the Politicians
and Statesmen of the United States 601–604 (M. Cluskey
ed. 1857); see also Lash, 98 Geo. L. J., at 1294–1296 (de
scribing Webster’s arguments and their influence).
2
Evidence from the political branches in the years lead
ing to the Fourteenth Amendment’s adoption demon
strates broad public understanding that the privileges and
immunities of United States citizenship included rights
set forth in the Constitution, just as Webster and his allies
had argued. In 1868, President Andrew Johnson issued a
proclamation granting amnesty to former Confederates,
guaranteeing “to all and to every person who directly or
indirectly participated in the late insurrection or rebellion,
a full pardon and amnesty for the offence of treason . . .
with restoration of all rights, privileges, and immunities
under the Constitution and the laws which have been
made in pursuance thereof.” 15 Stat. 712.
Records from the 39th Congress further support this
understanding.
a
After the Civil War, Congress established the Joint
Committee on Reconstruction to investigate circumstances
in the Southern States and to determine whether, and on
what conditions, those States should be readmitted to the


24

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Union. See Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 6, 30
(1865) (hereinafter 39th Cong. Globe); M. Curtis, No State
Shall Abridge: The Fourteenth Amendment and the Bill of
Rights 57 (1986) (hereinafter Curtis). That Committee
would ultimately recommend the adoption of the Four
teenth Amendment, justifying its recommendation by
submitting a report to Congress that extensively cata
logued the abuses of civil rights in the former slave States
and argued that “adequate security for future peace and
safety . . . can only be found in such changes of the organic
law as shall determine the civil rights and privileges of all
citizens in all parts of the republic.” See Report of the
Joint Committee on Reconstruction, S. Rep. No. 112, 39th
Cong., 1st Sess., p. 15 (1866); H. R. Rep. No. 30, 39th
Cong., 1st Sess., p. XXI (1866).
As the Court notes, the Committee’s Report “was widely
reprinted in the press and distributed by members of the
39th Congress to their constituents.” Ante, at 24; B.
Kendrick, Journal of the Joint Committee of Fifteen on
Reconstruction 264–265 (1914) (noting that 150,000 copies
of the Report were printed and that it was widely distrib
uted as a campaign document in the election of 1866). In
addition, newspaper coverage suggests that the wider
public was aware of the Committee’s work even before the
Report was issued. For example, the Fort Wayne Daily
Democrat (which appears to have been unsupportive of the
Committee’s work) paraphrased a motion instructing the
Committee to
“enquire into [the] expediency of amending the Con
stitution of the United States so as to declare with
greater certainty the power of Congress to enforce and
determine by appropriate legislation all the guaran
tees contained in that instrument.” The Nigger Con
gress!, Fort Wayne Daily Democrat, Feb. 1, 1866, p. 4
(emphasis added).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

b
Statements made by Members of Congress leading up
to, and during, the debates on the Fourteenth Amendment
point in the same direction. The record of these debates
has been combed before. See Adamson v. California, 332
U. S. 46, 92–110 (1947) (Appendix to dissenting opinion of
Black, J.) (concluding that the debates support the conclu
sion that §1 was understood to incorporate the Bill of
Rights against the States); ante, at 14, n. 9, 26–27, n. 23,
(opinion of the Court) (counting the debates among other
evidence that §1 applies the Second Amendment against
the States). Before considering that record here, it is
important to clarify its relevance. When interpreting
constitutional text, the goal is to discern the most likely
public understanding of a particular provision at the time
it was adopted. Statements by legislators can assist in
this process to the extent they demonstrate the manner in
which the public used or understood a particular word or
phrase. They can further assist to the extent there is
evidence that these statements were disseminated to the
public. In other words, this evidence is useful not because
it demonstrates what the draftsmen of the text may have
been thinking, but only insofar as it illuminates what the
public understood the words chosen by the draftsmen to
mean.
(1)
Three speeches stand out as particularly significant.
Representative John Bingham, the principal draftsman of
§1, delivered a speech on the floor of the House in Febru
ary 1866 introducing his first draft of the provision. Bing
ham began by discussing Barron and its holding that the
Bill of Rights did not apply to the States. He then argued
that a constitutional amendment was necessary to provide
“an express grant of power in Congress to enforce by penal
enactment these great canons of the supreme law, secur


26

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

ing to all the citizens in every State all the privileges and
immunities of citizens, and to all the people all the sacred
rights of person.” 39th Cong. Globe 1089–1090 (1866).
Bingham emphasized that §1 was designed “to arm the
Congress of the United States, by the consent of the people
of the United States, with the power to enforce the bill of
rights as it stands in the Constitution today. It ‘hath that
extent—no more.’ ” Id., at 1088.
Bingham’s speech was printed in pamphlet form and
broadly distributed in 1866 under the title, “One Country,
One Constitution, and One People,” and the subtitle, “In
Support of the Proposed Amendment to Enforce the Bill of
Rights.”10 Newspapers also reported his proposal, with
the New York Times providing particularly extensive
coverage, including a full reproduction of Bingham’s first
draft of §1 and his remarks that a constitutional amend
ment to “enforc[e]” the “immortal bill of rights” was “abso
lutely essential to American nationality.” N. Y. Times,
Feb. 27, 1866, p. 8.
Bingham’s first draft of §1 was different from the ver
sion ultimately adopted. Of particular importance, the
first draft granted Congress the “power to make all laws
. . . necessary and proper to secure” the “citizens of each
State all privileges and immunities of citizens in the sev
eral States,” rather than restricting state power to
“abridge” the privileges or immunities of citizens of the
United States.11 39th Cong. Globe 1088.
——————
10 One Country, One Constitution, and One People: Speech of Hon.
John A. Bingham, of Ohio, In the House of Representatives, February
28, 1866, In Support of the Proposed Amendment to Enforce the Bill of
Rights (Cong. Globe). The pamphlet was published by the official
reporter of congressional debates, and was distributed presumably
pursuant to the congressional franking privilege. See B. Wildenthal,
Nationalizing the Bill of Rights: Revisiting the Original Understanding
of the Fourteenth Amendment in 1866–67, 68 Ohio St. L. J. 1509, 1558,
n. 167 (2007) (hereinafter Wildenthal).
11 The full text of Bingham’s first draft of §1 provided as follows:


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

27

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

That draft was met with objections, which the Times
covered extensively. A front-page article hailed the “Clear
and Forcible Speech” by Representative Robert Hale
against the draft, explaining—and endorsing—Hale’s view
that Bingham’s proposal would “confer upon Congress all
the rights and power of legislation now reserved to the
States” and would “in effect utterly obliterate State rights
and State authority over their own internal affairs.”12
N. Y. Times, Feb. 28, 1866, p. 1.
Critically, Hale did not object to the draft insofar as it
purported to protect constitutional liberties against state
interference. Indeed, Hale stated that he believed (incor
rectly in light of Barron) that individual rights enumer
ated in the Constitution were already enforceable against
the States. See 39th Cong. Globe 1064 (“I have, somehow
or other, gone along with the impression that there is that
sort of protection thrown over us in some way, whether
with or without the sanction of a judicial decision that we
are so protected”); see N. Y. Times, Feb. 28, 1866, at 1.
Hale’s misperception was not uncommon among members
of the Reconstruction generation. See infra, at 38–40. But
that is secondary to the point that the Times’ coverage of
——————
“The Congress shall have power to make all laws which shall be neces
sary and proper to secure to the citizens of each State all privileges and
immunities of citizens in the several States, and to all persons in the
several States equal protection in the rights of life, liberty, and prop
erty.” 39th Cong. Globe 1088.
12 In a separate front-page article on the same day, the paper ex
pounded upon Hale’s arguments in even further detail, while omitting
Bingham’s chief rebuttals. N. Y. Times, Feb. 28, 1866, p. 1. The
unbalanced nature of The New York Times’ coverage is unsurprising.
As scholars have noted, “[m]ost papers” during the time of Reconstruc
tion “had a frank partisan slant . . . and the Times was no exception.”
Wildenthal 1559. In 1866, the paper “was still defending” President
Johnson’s resistance to Republican reform measures, as exemplified by
the fact that it “supported Johnson’s veto of the Civil Rights Act of
1866.” Ibid.


28

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

this debate over §1’s meaning suggests public awareness
of its main contours—i.e., that §1 would, at a minimum,
enforce constitutionally enumerated rights of United
States citizens against the States.
Bingham’s draft was tabled for several months. In the
interim, he delivered a second well-publicized speech,
again arguing that a constitutional amendment was re
quired to give Congress the power to enforce the Bill of
Rights against the States. That speech was printed in
pamphlet form, see Speech of Hon. John A. Bingham, of
Ohio, on the Civil Rights Bill, Mar. 9, 1866 (Cong. Globe);
see 39th Cong. Globe 1837 (remarks of Rep. Lawrence)
(noting that the speech was “extensively published”), and
the New York Times covered the speech on its front page.
Thirty-Ninth Congress, N. Y. Times, Mar. 10, 1866, p. 1.
By the time the debates on the Fourteenth Amendment
resumed, Bingham had amended his draft of §1 to include
the text of the Privileges or Immunities Clause that was
ultimately adopted. Senator Jacob Howard introduced the
new draft on the floor of the Senate in the third speech
relevant here. Howard explained that the Constitution
recognized “a mass of privileges, immunities, and rights,
some of them secured by the second section of the fourth
article of the Constitution, . . . some by the first eight
amendments of the Constitution,” and that “there is no
power given in the Constitution to enforce and to carry out
any of these guarantees” against the States. 39th Cong.
Globe 2765. Howard then stated that “the great object” of
§1 was to “restrain the power of the States and compel
them at all times to respect these great fundamental
guarantees.” Id., at 2766. Section 1, he indicated, im
posed “a general prohibition upon all the States, as such,
from abridging the privileges and immunities of the citi
zens of the United States.” Id., at 2765.
In describing these rights, Howard explained that they
included “the privileges and immunities spoken of” in


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

29

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Article IV, §2. Id., at 2765. Although he did not catalogue
the precise “nature” or “extent” of those rights, he thought
“Corfield v. Coryell” provided a useful description. How
ard then submitted that
“[t]o these privileges and immunities, whatever they
may be— . . . should be added the personal rights gua
rantied and secured by the first eight amendments of
the Constitution; such as the freedom of speech and of
the press; the right of the people peaceably to assem
ble and petition the Government for a redress of
grievances, [and] . . . the right to keep and to bear
arms.” Ibid. (emphasis added).
News of Howard’s speech was carried in major newspa
pers across the country, including the New York Herald,
see N. Y. Herald, May 24, 1866, p. 1, which was the best
selling paper in the Nation at that time, see A. Amar, The
Bill of Rights: Creation and Reconstruction 187 (1998)
(hereinafter Amar).13 The New York Times carried the
speech as well, reprinting a lengthy excerpt of Howard’s
remarks, including the statements quoted above. N. Y.
Times, May 24, 1866, p. 1. The following day’s Times
editorialized on Howard’s speech, predicting that “[t]o this,
the first section of the amendment, the Union party
throughout the country will yield a ready acquiescence,
and the South could offer no justifiable resistance,” sug
gesting that Bingham’s narrower second draft had not
been met with the same objections that Hale had raised
against the first. N. Y. Times, May 25, 1866, p. 4.
——————
13 Other papers that covered Howard’s speech include the following:
Baltimore Gazette, May 24, 1866, p. 4; Boston Daily Journal, May 24,
1866, p. 4; Boston Daily Advertiser, May 24, 1866, p. 1; Daily National
Intelligencer, May 24, 1866, p. 3. Springfield Daily Republican, May 24,
1866, p. 3; Charleston Daily Courier, May 28, 1866, p. 4; Charleston
Daily Courier, May 29, 1866, p. 1; Chicago Tribune, May 29, 1866, p. 2;
Philadelphia Inquirer, May 24, 1866, p. 8.


30

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

As a whole, these well-circulated speeches indicate that
§1 was understood to enforce constitutionally declared
rights against the States, and they provide no suggestion
that any language in the section other than the Privileges
or Immunities Clause would accomplish that task.
(2)
When read against this backdrop, the civil rights legis
lation adopted by the 39th Congress in 1866 further sup
ports this view. Between passing the Thirteenth Amend
ment—which outlawed slavery alone—and the Fourteenth
Amendment, Congress passed two significant pieces of
legislation. The first was the Civil Rights Act of 1866,
which provided that “all persons born in the United
States” were “citizens of the United States” and that “such
citizens, of every race and color, . . . shall have the same
right” to, among other things, “full and equal benefit of all
laws and proceedings for the security of person and prop
erty, as is enjoyed by white citizens.” Ch. 31, §1, 14 Stat.
27.
Both proponents and opponents of this Act described it
as providing the “privileges” of citizenship to freedmen,
and defined those privileges to include constitutional
rights, such as the right to keep and bear arms. See 39th
Cong. Globe 474 (remarks of Sen. Trumbull) (stating that
the “the late slaveholding States” had enacted laws “de
priving persons of African descent of privileges which are
essential to freemen,” including “prohibit[ing] any negro or
mulatto from having fire-arms” and stating that “[t]he
purpose of the bill under consideration is to destroy all
these discriminations”); id., at 1266–1267 (remarks of Rep.
Raymond) (opposing the Act, but recognizing that to
“[m]ake a colored man a citizen of the United States”
would guarantee to him, inter alia, “a defined status . . . a
right to defend himself and his wife and children; a right
to bear arms”).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

31

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Three months later, Congress passed the Freedmen’s
Bureau Act, which also entitled all citizens to the “full and
equal benefit of all laws and proceedings concerning per
sonal liberty” and “personal security.” Act of July 16,
1866, ch. 200, §14, 14 Stat. 176. The Act stated expressly
that the rights of personal liberty and security protected
by the Act “includ[ed] the constitutional right to bear
arms.” Ibid.
(3)
There is much else in the legislative record. Many
statements by Members of Congress corroborate the view
that the Privileges or Immunities Clause enforced consti
tutionally enumerated rights against the States. See
Curtis 112 (collecting examples). I am not aware of any
statement that directly refutes that proposition. That
said, the record of the debates—like most legislative his
tory—is less than crystal clear. In particular, much ambi
guity derives from the fact that at least several Members
described §1 as protecting the privileges and immunities
of citizens “in the several States,” harkening back to Arti
cle IV, §2. See supra, at 28–29 (describing Sen. Howard’s
speech). These statements can be read to support the view
that the Privileges or Immunities Clause protects some or
all the fundamental rights of “citizens” described in Cor
field. They can also be read to support the view that the
Privileges or Immunities Clause, like Article IV, §2, pro
hibits only state discrimination with respect to those
rights it covers, but does not deprive States of the power to
deny those rights to all citizens equally.
I examine the rest of the historical record with this
understanding. But for purposes of discerning what the
public most likely thought the Privileges or Immunities
Clause to mean, it is significant that the most widely
publicized statements by the legislators who voted on §1—
Bingham, Howard, and even Hale—point unambiguously


32

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

toward the conclusion that the Privileges or Immunities
Clause enforces at least those fundamental rights enu
merated in the Constitution against the States, including
the Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms.
3
Interpretations of the Fourteenth Amendment in the
period immediately following its ratification help to estab
lish the public understanding of the text at the time of its
adoption.
Some of these interpretations come from Members of
Congress. During an 1871 debate on a bill to enforce the
Fourteenth Amendment, Representative Henry Dawes
listed the Constitution’s first eight Amendments, includ
ing “the right to keep and bear arms,” before explaining
that after the Civil War, the country “gave the most grand
of all these rights, privileges, and immunities, by one
single amendment to the Constitution, to four millions of
American citizens” who formerly were slaves. Cong.
Globe, 42d Cong., 1st Sess., 475–476 (1871). “It is all
these,” Dawes explained, “which are comprehended in the
words ‘American citizen.’ ” Ibid.; see also id., at 334 (re
marks of Rep. Hoar) (stating that the Privileges or Immu
nities Clause referred to those rights “declared to belong to
the citizen by the Constitution itself”). Even opponents of
Fourteenth Amendment enforcement legislation acknowl
edged that the Privileges or Immunities Clause protected
constitutionally enumerated individual rights. See 2
Cong. Rec. 384–385 (1874) (remarks of Rep. Mills) (oppos
ing enforcement law, but acknowledging, in referring to
the Bill of Rights, that “[t]hese first amendments and
some provisions of the Constitution of like import embrace
the ‘privileges and immunities’ of citizenship as set forth
in article 4, section 2 of the Constitution and in the four
teenth amendment” (emphasis added)); see Curtis 166–170
(collecting examples).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

33

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Legislation passed in furtherance of the Fourteenth
Amendment demonstrates even more clearly this under
standing. For example, Congress enacted the Civil Rights
Act of 1871, 17 Stat. 13, which was titled in pertinent part
“An Act to enforce the Provisions of the Fourteenth
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States,” and
which is codified in the still-existing 42 U. S. C. §1983.
That statute prohibits state officials from depriving citi
zens of “any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by
the Constitution.” Rev. Stat. 1979, 42 U. S. C. §1983 (em
phasis added). Although the Judiciary ignored this provi
sion for decades after its enactment, this Court has come
to interpret the statute, unremarkably in light of its text,
as protecting constitutionally enumerated rights. Monroe
v. Pape, 365 U. S. 167, 171 (1961).
A Federal Court of Appeals decision written by a future
Justice of this Court adopted the same understanding of
the Privileges or Immunities Clause. See, e.g., United
States v. Hall, 26 F. Cas. 79, 82 (No. 15,282) (CC SD Ala.
1871) (Woods, J.) (“We think, therefore, that the . . . rights
enumerated in the first eight articles of amendment to the
constitution of the United States, are the privileges and
immunities of citizens of the United States”). In addition,
two of the era’s major constitutional treatises reflected the
understanding that §1 would protect constitutionally
enumerated rights from state abridgment.14 A third such
treatise unambiguously indicates that the Privileges or
——————
14 See J. Pomeroy, An Introduction to the Constitutional Law of the
United States 155–156 (E. Bennett ed. 1886) (describing §1, which the
country was then still considering, as a “needed” “remedy” for Barron ex
rel. Tiernan v. Mayor of Baltimore, 7 Pet. 243 (1833), which held that
the Bill of Rights was not enforceable against the States); T. Farrar,
Manual of the Constitution of the United States of America 58–59,
145−146, 395–397 (1867) (reprint 1993); id., at 546 (3d ed. 1872)
(describing the Fourteenth Amendment as having “swept away” the
“decisions of many courts” that “the popular rights guaranteed by the
Constitution are secured only against [the federal] government”).


34

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Immunities Clause accomplished this task. G. Paschal,
The Constitution of the United States 290 (1868) (explain
ing that the rights listed in §1 had “already been guaran
tied” by Article IV and the Bill of Rights, but that “[t]he
new feature declared” by §1 was that these rights, “which
had been construed to apply only to the national govern
ment, are thus imposed upon the States”).
Another example of public understanding comes from
United States Attorney Daniel Corbin’s statement in an
1871 Ku Klux Klan prosecution. Corbin cited Barron and
declared:
“[T]he fourteenth amendment changes all that theory,
and lays the same restriction upon the States that be
fore lay upon the Congress of the United States—that,
as Congress heretofore could not interfere with the
right of the citizen to keep and bear arms, now, after
the adoption of the fourteenth amendment, the State
cannot interfere with the right of the citizen to keep
and bear arms. The right to keep and bear arms is in
cluded in the fourteenth amendment, under ‘privi
leges and immunities.’ ” Proceedings in the Ku Klux
Trials at Columbia, S. C., in the United States Circuit
Court, November Term, 1871, p. 147 (1872).
*
*
*
This evidence plainly shows that the ratifying public
understood the Privileges or Immunities Clause to protect
constitutionally enumerated rights, including the right to
keep and bear arms. As the Court demonstrates, there
can be no doubt that §1 was understood to enforce the
Second Amendment against the States. See ante, at 22–
33. In my view, this is because the right to keep and bear
arms was understood to be a privilege of American citizen
ship guaranteed by the Privileges or Immunities Clause.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

35

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

C
The next question is whether the Privileges or Immuni
ties Clause merely prohibits States from discriminating
among citizens if they recognize the Second Amendment’s
right to keep and bear arms, or whether the Clause re
quires States to recognize the right. The municipal re
spondents, Chicago and Oak Park, argue for the former
interpretation. They contend that the Second Amend
ment, as applied to the States through the Fourteenth,
authorizes a State to impose an outright ban on handgun
possession such as the ones at issue here so long as a State
applies it to all citizens equally.15 The Court explains why
this antidiscrimination-only reading of §1 as a whole is
“implausible.” Ante, at 31 (citing Brief for Municipal
Respondents 64). I agree, but because I think it is the
Privileges or Immunities Clause that applies this right to
the States, I must explain why this Clause in particular
protects against more than just state discrimination, and
in fact establishes a minimum baseline of rights for all
American citizens.
1
I begin, again, with the text. The Privileges or Immuni
ties Clause opens with the command that “No State shall”
abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the
——————
15 The municipal respondents and JUSTICE BREYER’s dissent raise a
most unusual argument that §1 prohibits discriminatory laws affecting
only the right to keep and bear arms, but offers substantive protection
to other rights enumerated in the Constitution, such as the freedom of
speech. See post, at 24. Others, however, have made the more compre
hensive—and internally consistent—argument that §1 bars discrimina
tion alone and does not afford protection to any substantive rights. See,
e.g., R. Berger, Government By Judiciary: The Transformation of the
Fourteenth Amendment (1997). I address the coverage of the Privi
leges or Immunities Clause only as it applies to the Second Amendment
right presented here, but I do so with the understanding that my
conclusion may have implications for the broader argument.


36

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

United States. Amdt. 14, §1 (emphasis added). The very
same phrase opens Article I, §10 of the Constitution,
which prohibits the States from “pass[ing] any Bill of
Attainder” or “ex post facto Law,” among other things.
Article I, §10 is one of the few constitutional provisions
that limits state authority. In Barron, when Chief Justice
Marshall interpreted the Bill of Rights as lacking “plain
and intelligible language” restricting state power to in
fringe upon individual liberties, he pointed to Article I, §10
as an example of text that would have accomplished that
task. 7 Pet., at 250. Indeed, Chief Justice Marshall would
later describe Article I, §10 as “a bill of rights for the
people of each state.” Fletcher v. Peck, 6 Cranch 87, 138
(1810). Thus, the fact that the Privileges or Immunities
Clause uses the command “[n]o State shall”—which Arti
cle IV, §2 does not—strongly suggests that the former
imposes a greater restriction on state power than the
latter.
This interpretation is strengthened when one considers
that the Privileges or Immunities Clause uses the verb
“abridge,” rather than “discriminate,” to describe the limit
it imposes on state authority. The Webster’s dictionary in
use at the time of Reconstruction defines the word
“abridge” to mean “[t]o deprive; to cut off; . . . as, to
abridge one of his rights.” Webster, An American Diction
ary of the English Language, at 6. The Clause is thus best
understood to impose a limitation on state power to in
fringe upon pre-existing substantive rights. It raises no
indication that the Framers of the Clause used the word
“abridge” to prohibit only discrimination.
This most natural textual reading is underscored by a
well-publicized revision to the Fourteenth Amendment
that the Reconstruction Congress rejected. After several
Southern States refused to ratify the Amendment, Presi
dent Johnson met with their Governors to draft a com
promise. N. Y. Times, Feb. 5, 1867, p. 5. Their proposal


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

37

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

eliminated Congress’ power to enforce the Amendment
(granted in §5), and replaced the Privileges or Immunities
Clause in §1 with the following:
“All persons born or naturalized in the United States,
and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of
the United States, and of the States in which they re
side, and the Citizens of each State shall be entitled to
all the privileges and immunities of citizens in the sev
eral States.” Draft reprinted in 1 Documentary His
tory of Reconstruction 240 (W. Fleming ed. 1950)
(hereinafter Fleming).
Significantly, this proposal removed the “[n]o State
shall” directive and the verb “abridge” from §1, and also
changed the class of rights to be protected from those
belonging to “citizens of the United States” to those of the
“citizens in the several States.” This phrasing is materi
ally indistinguishable from Article IV, §2, which gener
ally was understood as an antidiscrimination provision
alone. See supra, at 15–18. The proposal thus strongly
indicates that at least the President of the United States
and several southern Governors thought that the Privi
leges or Immunities Clause, which they unsuccessfully
tried to revise, prohibited more than just state-sponsored
discrimination.
2
The argument that the Privileges or Immunities Clause
prohibits no more than discrimination often is followed by
a claim that public discussion of the Clause, and of §1
generally, was not extensive. Because of this, the argu
ment goes, §1 must not have been understood to accom
plish such a significant task as subjecting States to federal
enforcement of a minimum baseline of rights. That argu
ment overlooks critical aspects of the Nation’s history that
underscored the need for, and wide agreement upon,


38

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

federal enforcement of constitutionally enumerated rights
against the States, including the right to keep and bear
arms.
a
I turn first to public debate at the time of ratification. It
is true that the congressional debates over §1 were rela
tively brief. It is also true that there is little evidence of
extensive debate in the States. Many state legislatures
did not keep records of their debates, and the few records
that do exist reveal only modest discussion. See Curtis
145. These facts are not surprising.
First, however consequential we consider the question
today, the nationalization of constitutional rights was not
the most controversial aspect of the Fourteenth Amend
ment at the time of its ratification. The Nation had just
endured a tumultuous civil war, and §§2, 3, and 4—which
reduced the representation of States that denied voting
rights to blacks, deprived most former Confederate officers
of the power to hold elective office, and required States to
disavow Confederate war debts—were far more polarizing
and consumed far more political attention. See Wilden
thal 1600; Hardy, Original Popular Understanding of the
Fourteenth Amendment as Reflected in the Print Media of
1866–1868, 30 Whittier L. Rev. 695, 699 (2009).
Second, the congressional debates on the Fourteenth
Amendment reveal that many representatives, and proba
bly many citizens, believed that the Thirteenth Amend
ment, the 1866 Civil Rights legislation, or some combina
tion of the two, had already enforced constitutional rights
against the States. Justice Black’s dissent in Adamson
chronicles this point in detail. 332 U. S., at 107–108
(Appendix to dissenting opinion). Regardless of whether
that understanding was accurate as a matter of constitu
tional law, it helps to explain why Congressmen had little
to say during the debates about §1. See ibid.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

39

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Third, while Barron made plain that the Bill of Rights
was not legally enforceable against the States, see supra,
at 2, the significance of that holding should not be over
stated. Like the Framers, see supra, at 14–15, many 19th
century Americans understood the Bill of Rights to declare
inalienable rights that pre-existed all government. Thus,
even though the Bill of Rights technically applied only to
the Federal Government, many believed that it declared
rights that no legitimate government could abridge.
Chief Justice Henry Lumpkin’s decision for the Georgia
Supreme Court in Nunn v. State, 1 Ga. 243 (1846), illus
trates this view. In assessing state power to regulate
firearm possession, Lumpkin wrote that he was “aware
that it has been decided, that [the Second Amendment],
like other amendments adopted at the same time, is a
restriction upon the government of the United States, and
does not extend to the individual States.” Id., at 250. But
he still considered the right to keep and bear arms as “an
unalienable right, which lies at the bottom of every free
government,” and thus found the States bound to honor it.
Ibid. Other state courts adopted similar positions with
respect to the right to keep and bear arms and other enu
merated rights.16 Some courts even suggested that the
protections in the Bill of Rights were legally enforceable
against the States, Barron notwithstanding.17 A promi
nent treatise of the era took the same position. W. Rawle,
A View of the Constitution of the United States of America
——————
16 See, e.g., Raleigh & Gaston R. Co. v. Davis, 19 N. C. 451, 458–462
(1837) (right to just compensation for government taking of property);
Rohan v. Swain, 59 Mass. 281, 285 (1850) (right to be secure from
unreasonable government searches and seizures); State v. Buzzard, 4
Ark. 18, 28 (1842) (right to keep and bear arms); State v. Jumel, 13 La.
Ann. 399, 400 (1858) (same); Cockrum v. State, 24 Tex. 394, 401–404
(1859) (same).
17 See, e.g., People v. Goodwin, 18 Johns. Cas. 187, 201 (N. Y. Sup. Ct.
1820); Rhinehart v. Schulyer, 7 Ill. 473, 522 (1845).


40

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

124–125 (2d ed. 1829) (reprint 2009) (arguing that certain
of the first eight Amendments “appl[y] to the state legisla
tures” because those Amendments “form parts of the
declared rights of the people, of which neither the state
powers nor those of the Union can ever deprive them”); id.,
at 125−126 (describing the Second Amendment “right of
the people to keep and bear arms” as “a restraint on both”
Congress and the States); see also Heller, 554 U. S., at __
(slip op., at 34) (describing Rawle’s treatise as “influen
tial”). Certain abolitionist leaders adhered to this view as
well. Lysander Spooner championed the popular aboli
tionist argument that slavery was inconsistent with con
stitutional principles, citing as evidence the fact that it
deprived black Americans of the “natural right of all men
‘to keep and bear arms’ for their personal defence,” which
he believed the Constitution “prohibit[ed] both Congress
and the State governments from infringing.” L. Spooner,
The Unconstitutionality of Slavery 98 (1860).
In sum, some appear to have believed that the Bill of
Rights did apply to the States, even though this Court had
squarely rejected that theory. See, e.g., supra, at 27–28
(recounting Rep. Hale’s argument to this effect). Many
others believed that the liberties codified in the Bill of
Rights were ones that no State should abridge, even
though they understood that the Bill technically did not
apply to States. These beliefs, combined with the fact that
most state constitutions recognized many, if not all, of the
individual rights enumerated in the Bill of Rights, made
the need for federal enforcement of constitutional liberties
against the States an afterthought. See ante, at 29 (opin
ion of the Court) (noting that, “[i]n 1868, 22 of the 37
States in the Union had state constitutional provisions
explicitly protecting the right to keep and bear arms”).
That changed with the national conflict over slavery.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

41

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

b
In the contentious years leading up to the Civil War,
those who sought to retain the institution of slavery found
that to do so, it was necessary to eliminate more and more
of the basic liberties of slaves, free blacks, and white
abolitionists. Congressman Tobias Plants explained that
slaveholders “could not hold [slaves] safely where dissent
was permitted,” so they decided that “all dissent must be
suppressed by the strong hand of power.” 39th Cong.
Globe 1013. The measures they used were ruthless, re
pressed virtually every right recognized in the Constitu
tion, and demonstrated that preventing only discrimina
tory state firearms restrictions would have been a hollow
assurance for liberty. Public reaction indicates that the
American people understood this point.
The overarching goal of pro-slavery forces was to repress
the spread of abolitionist thought and the concomitant
risk of a slave rebellion. Indeed, it is difficult to overstate
the extent to which fear of a slave uprising gripped slave
holders and dictated the acts of Southern legislatures.
Slaves and free blacks represented a substantial percent
age of the population and posed a severe threat to South
ern order if they were not kept in their place. According to
the 1860 Census, slaves represented one quarter or more
of the population in 11 of the 15 slave States, nearly half
the population in Alabama, Florida, Georgia, and Louisi
ana, and more than 50% of the population in Mississippi
and South Carolina. Statistics of the United States (In
cluding Mortality, Property, &c.,) in 1860, The Eighth
Census 336−350 (1866).
The Southern fear of slave rebellion was not unfounded.
Although there were others, two particularly notable slave
uprisings heavily influenced slaveholders in the South. In
1822, a group of free blacks and slaves led by Denmark
Vesey planned a rebellion in which they would slay their
masters and flee to Haiti. H. Aptheker, American Negro


42

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Slave Revolts 268–270 (1983). The plan was foiled, lead
ing to the swift arrest of 130 blacks, and the execution of
37, including Vesey. Id., at 271. Still, slaveowners took
notice—it was reportedly feared that as many as 6,600 to
9,000 slaves and free blacks were involved in the plot. Id.,
at 272. A few years later, the fear of rebellion was real
ized. An uprising led by Nat Turner took the lives of at
least 57 whites before it was suppressed. Id., at 300–302.
The fear generated by these and other rebellions led
Southern legislatures to take particularly vicious aim at
the rights of free blacks and slaves to speak or to keep and
bear arms for their defense. Teaching slaves to read (even
the Bible) was a criminal offense punished severely in
some States. See K. Stampp, The Peculiar Institution:
Slavery in the Ante-bellum South 208, 211 (1956). Vir
ginia made it a crime for a member of an “abolition” soci
ety to enter the State and argue “that the owners of slaves
have no property in the same, or advocate or advise the
abolition of slavery.” 1835–1836 Va. Acts ch. 66, p. 44.
Other States prohibited the circulation of literature deny
ing a master’s right to property in his slaves and passed
laws requiring postmasters to inspect the mails in search
of such material. C. Eaton, The Freedom-of-Thought
Struggle in the Old South 118–143, 199–200 (1964).
Many legislatures amended their laws prohibiting
slaves from carrying firearms18 to apply the prohibition to
free blacks as well. See, e.g., Act of Dec. 23, 1833, §7, 1833
Ga. Acts pp. 226, 228 (declaring that “it shall not be lawful
for any free person of colour in this state, to own, use, or
carry fire arms of any description whatever”); H. Ap
——————
18 See, e.g., Black Code, ch. 33, §19, 1806 La. Acts pp. 160, 162 (pro
hibiting slaves from using firearms unless they were authorized by
their master to hunt within the boundaries of his plantation); Act of
Dec. 18, 1819, 1819 S. C. Acts pp. 29, 31 (same); An Act Concerning
Slaves, §6, 1840 Tex. Laws pp. 42–43 (making it unlawful for “any slave
to own firearms of any description”).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

43

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

theker, Nat Turner’s Slave Rebellion 74–76, 83–94 (1966)
(discussing similar Maryland and Virginia statutes); see
also Act of Mar. 15, 1852, ch. 206, 1852 Miss. Laws p. 328
(repealing laws allowing free blacks to obtain firearms
licenses); Act of Jan. 31, 1831, 1831 Fla. Acts p. 30 (same).
Florida made it the “duty” of white citizen “patrol[s] to
search negro houses or other suspected places, for fire
arms.” Act of Feb. 17, 1833, ch. 671, 1833 Fla. Acts pp. 26,
30. If they found any firearms, the patrols were to take
the offending slave or free black “to the nearest justice of
the peace,” whereupon he would be “severely punished” by
“whipping on the bare back, not exceeding thirty-nine
lashes,” unless he could give a “plain and satisfactory”
explanation of how he came to possess the gun. Ibid.
Southern blacks were not alone in facing threats to their
personal liberty and security during the antebellum era.
Mob violence in many Northern cities presented dangers
as well. Cottrol & Diamond, The Second Amendment:
Toward an Afro-Americanist Reconsideration, 80 Geo. L.
J. 309, 340 (1991) (hereinafter Cottrol) (recounting a July
1834 mob attack against “churches, homes, and businesses
of white abolitionists and blacks” in New York that in
volved “upwards of twenty thousand people and required
the intervention of the militia to suppress”); ibid. (noting
an uprising in Boston nine years later in which a confron
tation between a group of white sailors and four blacks led
“a mob of several hundred whites” to “attac[k] and se
verely beat every black they could find”).
c
After the Civil War, Southern anxiety about an uprising
among the newly freed slaves peaked. As Representative
Thaddeus Stevens is reported to have said, “[w]hen it was
first proposed to free the slaves, and arm the blacks, did
not half the nation tremble? The prim conservatives, the
snobs, and the male waiting-maids in Congress, were in


44

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

hysterics.” K. Stampp, The Era of Reconstruction, 1865–
1877, p. 104 (1965) (hereinafter Era of Reconstruction).
As the Court explains, this fear led to “systematic ef
forts” in the “old Confederacy” to disarm the more than
180,000 freedmen who had served in the Union Army, as
well as other free blacks. See ante, at 23. Some States
formally prohibited blacks from possessing firearms. Ante,
at 23–24 (quoting 1865 Miss. Laws p. 165, §1, reprinted in
1 Fleming 289). Others enacted legislation prohibiting
blacks from carrying firearms without a license, a restric
tion not imposed on whites. See, e.g., La. Statute of 1865,
reprinted in id., at 280. Additionally, “[t]hroughout the
South, armed parties, often consisting of ex-Confederate
soldiers serving in the state militias, forcibly took firearms
from newly freed slaves.” Ante, at 24.
As the Court makes crystal clear, if the Fourteenth
Amendment “had outlawed only those laws that discrimi
nate on the basis of race or previous condition of servitude,
African-Americans in the South would likely have re
mained vulnerable to attack by many of their worst abus
ers: the state militia and state peace officers.” Ante, at 32.
In the years following the Civil War, a law banning fire
arm possession outright “would have been nondiscrimina
tory only in the formal sense,” for it would have “left fire
arms in the hands of the militia and local peace officers.”
Ibid.
Evidence suggests that the public understood this at the
time the Fourteenth Amendment was ratified. The pub
licly circulated Report of the Joint Committee on Recon
struction extensively detailed these abuses, see ante, at
23–24 (collecting examples), and statements by citizens
indicate that they looked to the Committee to provide a
federal solution to this problem, see, e.g., 39th Cong. Globe
337 (remarks of Rep. Sumner) (introducing “a memorial
from the colored citizens of the State of South Carolina”
asking for, inter alia, “constitutional protection in keeping


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

45

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

arms, in holding public assemblies, and in complete liberty
of speech and of the press”).
One way in which the Federal Government responded
was to issue military orders countermanding Southern
arms legislation. See, e.g., Jan. 17, 1866, order from Major
General D. E. Sickles, reprinted in E. McPherson, The
Political History of the United States of America During
the Period of Reconstruction 37 (1871) (“The constitutional
rights of all loyal and well-disposed inhabitants to bear
arms will not be infringed”). The significance of these
steps was not lost on those they were designed to protect.
After one such order was issued, The Christian Recorder,
published by the African Methodist Episcopal Church,
published the following editorial:
“ ‘We have several times alluded to the fact that the
Constitution of the United States, guaranties to every
citizen the right to keep and bear arms. . . . All men,
without the distinction of color, have the right to keep
arms to defend their homes, families, or themselves.’
“We are glad to learn that [the] Commissioner for
this State . . . has given freedmen to understand that
they have as good a right to keep fire arms as any
other citizens. The Constitution of the United States
is the supreme law of the land, and we will be gov
erned by that at present.” Right to Bear Arms, Chris
tian Recorder (Phila.), Feb. 24, 1866, pp. 29–30.
The same month, The Loyal Georgian carried a letter to
the editor asking “Have colored persons a right to own and
carry fire arms?—A Colored Citizen.” The editors re
sponded as follows:
“Almost every day, we are asked questions similar
to the above. We answer certainly you have the same
right to own and carry fire arms that other citizens
have. You are not only free but citizens of the United
States and, as such, entitled to the same privileges


46

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

granted to other citizens by the Constitution of the
United States.
.
.
.
.
.
“. . . Article II, of the amendments to the Constitution
of the United States, gives the people the right to bear
arms and states that this right shall not be infringed.
. . . All men, without distinction of color, have the
right to keep arms to defend their homes, families or
themselves.” Letter to the Editor, Loyal Georgian
(Augusta), Feb. 3, 1866, p. 3.
These statements are consistent with the arguments of
abolitionists during the antebellum era that slavery, and
the slave States’ efforts to retain it, violated the constitu
tional rights of individuals—rights the abolitionists de
scribed as among the privileges and immunities of citizen
ship.
See, e.g., J. Tiffany, Treatise on the
Unconstitutionality of American Slavery 56 (1849) (reprint
1969) (“pledg[ing] . . . to see that all the rights, privileges,
and immunities, granted by the constitution of the United
States, are extended to all”); id., at 99 (describing the
“right to keep and bear arms” as one of those rights se
cured by “the constitution of the United States”). The
problem abolitionists sought to remedy was that, under
Dred Scott, blacks were not entitled to the privileges and
immunities of citizens under the Federal Constitution and
that, in many States, whatever inalienable rights state
law recognized did not apply to blacks. See, e.g., Cooper v.
Savannah, 4 Ga. 68, 72 (1848) (deciding, just two years
after Chief Justice Lumpkin’s opinion in Nunn recognizing
the right to keep and bear arms, see supra, at 39, that
“[f]ree persons of color have never been recognized here as
citizens; they are not entitled to bear arms”).
Section 1 guaranteed the rights of citizenship in the
United States and in the several States without regard to
race. But it was understood that liberty would be assured


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

47

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

little protection if §1 left each State to decide which privi
leges or immunities of United States citizenship it would
protect. As Frederick Douglass explained before §1’s
adoption, “the Legislatures of the South can take from him
the right to keep and bear arms, as they can—they would
not allow a negro to walk with a cane where I came from,
they would not allow five of them to assemble together.”
In What New Skin Will the Old Snake Come Forth? An
Address Delivered in New York, New York, May 10, 1865,
reprinted in 4 The Frederick Douglass Papers 79, 83–84
(J. Blassingame & J. McKivigan eds., 1991) (footnote
omitted). “Notwithstanding the provision in the Constitu
tion of the United States, that the right to keep and bear
arms shall not be abridged,” Douglass explained that “the
black man has never had the right either to keep or bear
arms.” Id., at 84. Absent a constitutional amendment to
enforce that right against the States, he insisted that “the
work of the Abolitionists [wa]s not finished.” Ibid.
This history confirms what the text of the Privileges or
Immunities Clause most naturally suggests: Consistent
with its command that “[n]o State shall . . . abridge” the
rights of United States citizens, the Clause establishes a
minimum baseline of federal rights, and the constitutional
right to keep and bear arms plainly was among them.19
III
My conclusion is contrary to this Court’s precedents,
which hold that the Second Amendment right to keep and
bear arms is not a privilege of United States citizenship.
——————
19 I

conclude that the right to keep and bear arms applies to the
States through the Privileges or Immunities Clause, which recognizes
the rights of United States “citizens.” The plurality concludes that the
right applies to the States through the Due Process Clause, which
covers all “person[s].” Because this case does not involve a claim
brought by a noncitizen, I express no view on the difference, if any,
between my conclusion and the plurality’s with respect to the extent to
which the States may regulate firearm possession by noncitizens.


48

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

See Cruikshank, 92 U. S., at 548–549, 551–553. I must,
therefore, consider whether stare decisis requires reten
tion of those precedents. As mentioned at the outset, my
inquiry is limited to the right at issue here. Thus, I do not
endeavor to decide in this case whether, or to what extent,
the Privileges or Immunities Clause applies any other
rights enumerated in the Constitution against the
States.20 Nor do I suggest that the stare decisis considera
tions surrounding the application of the right to keep and
bear arms against the States would be the same as those
surrounding another right protected by the Privileges or
Immunities Clause. I consider stare decisis only as it
applies to the question presented here.
A
This inquiry begins with the Slaughter-House Cases.
There, this Court upheld a Louisiana statute granting a
monopoly on livestock butchering in and around the city of
New Orleans to a newly incorporated company. 16 Wall.
36. Butchers excluded by the monopoly sued, claiming
that the statute violated the Privileges or Immunities
Clause because it interfered with their right to pursue and
“exercise their trade.” Id., at 60. This Court rejected the
butchers’ claim, holding that their asserted right was not a
——————
20 I

note, however, that I see no reason to assume that the constitu
tionally enumerated rights protected by the Privileges or Immunities
Clause should consist of all the rights recognized in the Bill of Rights
and no others. Constitutional provisions outside the Bill of Rights
protect individual rights, see, e.g., Art. I, §9, cl. 2 (granting the “Privi
lege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus”), and there is no obvious evidence
that the Framers of the Privileges or Immunities Clause meant to
exclude them. In addition, certain Bill of Rights provisions prevent
federal interference in state affairs and are not readily construed as
protecting rights that belong to individuals. The Ninth and Tenth
Amendments are obvious examples, as is the First Amendment’s
Establishment Clause, which “does not purport to protect individual
rights.” Elk Grove Unified School Dist. v. Newdow, 542 U. S. 1, 50
(2004) (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment); see Amar 179–180.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

49

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

privilege or immunity of American citizenship, but one
governed by the States alone. The Court held that the
Privileges or Immunities Clause protected only rights of
federal citizenship—those “which owe their existence to
the Federal government, its National character, its Con
stitution, or its laws,” id., at 79—and did not protect any
of the rights of state citizenship, id., at 74. In other
words, the Court defined the two sets of rights as mutually
exclusive.
After separating these two sets of rights, the Court
defined the rights of state citizenship as “embrac[ing]
nearly every civil right for the establishment and protec
tion of which organized government is instituted”—that is,
all those rights listed in Corfield. 16 Wall., at 76 (refer
ring to “those rights” that “Judge Washington” described).
That left very few rights of federal citizenship for the
Privileges or Immunities Clause to protect. The Court
suggested a handful of possibilities, such as the “right of
free access to [federal] seaports,” protection of the Federal
Government while traveling “on the high seas,” and even
two rights listed in the Constitution. Id., at 79 (noting
“[t]he right to peaceably assemble” and “the privilege of
the writ of habeas corpus”); see supra, at 4. But its deci
sion to interpret the rights of state and federal citizenship
as mutually exclusive led the Court in future cases to
conclude that constitutionally enumerated rights were
excluded from the Privileges or Immunities Clause’s scope.
See Cruikshank, supra.
I reject that understanding. There was no reason to
interpret the Privileges or Immunities Clause as putting
the Court to the extreme choice of interpreting the “privi
leges and immunities” of federal citizenship to mean ei
ther all those rights listed in Corfield, or almost no rights
at all. 16 Wall., at 76. The record is scant that the public
understood the Clause to make the Federal Government
“a perpetual censor upon all legislation of the States” as


50

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

the Slaughter-House majority feared. Id., at 78. For one
thing, Corfield listed the “elective franchise” as one of the
privileges and immunities of “citizens of the several
states,” 6 F. Cas., at 552, yet Congress and the States still
found it necessary to adopt the Fifteenth Amendment—
which protects “[t]he right of citizens of the United States
to vote”—two years after the Fourteenth Amendment’s
passage. If the Privileges or Immunities Clause were
understood to protect every conceivable civil right from
state abridgment, the Fifteenth Amendment would have
been redundant.
The better view, in light of the States and Federal Gov
ernment’s shared history of recognizing certain inalienable
rights in their citizens, is that the privileges and immuni
ties of state and federal citizenship overlap. This is not to
say that the privileges and immunities of state and federal
citizenship are the same. At the time of the Fourteenth
Amendment’s ratification, States performed many more
functions than the Federal Government, and it is unlikely
that, simply by referring to “privileges or immunities,” the
Framers of §1 meant to transfer every right mentioned in
Corfield to congressional oversight. As discussed, “privi
leges” and “immunities” were understood only as syno
nyms for “rights.” See supra, at 9–11. It was their at
tachment to a particular group that gave them content,
and the text and history recounted here indicate that the
rights of United States citizens were not perfectly identi
cal to the rights of citizens “in the several States.” Justice
Swayne, one of the dissenters in Slaughter-House, made
the point clear:
“The citizen of a State has the same fundamental
rights as a citizen of the United States, and also cer
tain others, local in their character, arising from his
relation to the State, and in addition, those which be
long to the citizen of the United States, he being in


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

51

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

that relation also. There may thus be a double citi
zenship, each having some rights peculiar to itself. It
is only over those which belong to the citizen of the
United States that the category here in question
throws the shield of its protection.” 16 Wall., at 126
(emphasis added).
Because the privileges and immunities of American citi
zenship include rights enumerated in the Constitution,
they overlap to at least some extent with the privileges
and immunities traditionally recognized in citizens in the
several States.
A separate question is whether the privileges and im
munities of American citizenship include any rights be
sides those enumerated in the Constitution. The four
dissenting Justices in Slaughter-House would have held
that the Privileges or Immunities Clause protected the
unenumerated right that the butchers in that case as
serted. See id., at 83 (Field, J., dissenting); id., at 111
(Bradley, J., dissenting); id., at 124 (Swayne, J., dissent
ing). Because this case does not involve an unenumerated
right, it is not necessary to resolve the question whether
the Clause protects such rights, or whether the Court’s
judgment in Slaughter-House was correct.
Still, it is argued that the mere possibility that the
Privileges or Immunities Clause may enforce unenumer
ated rights against the States creates “ ‘special hazards’ ”
that should prevent this Court from returning to the
original meaning of the Clause.21 Post, at 3 (STEVENS, J.,
dissenting). Ironically, the same objection applies to the
——————
21 To the extent JUSTICE STEVENS is concerned that reliance on the
Privileges or Immunities Clause may invite judges to “write their
personal views of appropriate public policy into the Constitution,” post,
at 3 (internal quotation marks omitted), his celebration of the alterna
tive—the “flexibility,” “transcend[ence],” and “dynamism” of substan
tive due process—speaks for itself, post, at 14–15, 20.


52

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Court’s substantive due process jurisprudence, which
illustrates the risks of granting judges broad discretion to
recognize individual constitutional rights in the absence of
textual or historical guideposts. But I see no reason to
assume that such hazards apply to the Privileges or Im
munities Clause. The mere fact that the Clause does not
expressly list the rights it protects does not render it
incapable of principled judicial application. The Constitu
tion contains many provisions that require an examination
of more than just constitutional text to determine whether
a particular act is within Congress’ power or is otherwise
prohibited. See, e.g., Art. I, §8, cl. 18 (Necessary and
Proper Clause); Amdt. 8 (Cruel and Unusual Punishments
Clause). When the inquiry focuses on what the ratifying
era understood the Privileges or Immunities Clause to
mean, interpreting it should be no more “hazardous” than
interpreting these other constitutional provisions by using
the same approach. To be sure, interpreting the Privileges
or Immunities Clause may produce hard questions. But
they will have the advantage of being questions the Con
stitution asks us to answer. I believe those questions are
more worthy of this Court’s attention—and far more likely
to yield discernable answers—than the substantive due
process questions the Court has for years created on its
own, with neither textual nor historical support.
Finding these impediments to returning to the original
meaning overstated, I reject Slaughter-House insofar as it
precludes any overlap between the privileges and immuni
ties of state and federal citizenship. I next proceed to the
stare decisis considerations surrounding the precedent
that expressly controls the question presented here.
B
Three years after Slaughter-House, the Court in Cruik
shank squarely held that the right to keep and bear arms
was not a privilege of American citizenship, thereby over


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

53

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

turning the convictions of militia members responsible for
the brutal Colfax Massacre. See supra, at 4–5. Cruik
shank is not a precedent entitled to any respect. The flaws
in its interpretation of the Privileges or Immunities
Clause are made evident by the preceding evidence of its
original meaning, and I would reject the holding on that
basis alone. But, the consequences of Cruikshank warrant
mention as well.
Cruikshank’s holding that blacks could look only to state
governments for protection of their right to keep and bear
arms enabled private forces, often with the assistance of
local governments, to subjugate the newly freed slaves and
their descendants through a wave of private violence
designed to drive blacks from the voting booth and force
them into peonage, an effective return to slavery. Without
federal enforcement of the inalienable right to keep and
bear arms, these militias and mobs were tragically suc
cessful in waging a campaign of terror against the very
people the Fourteenth Amendment had just made citizens.
Take, for example, the Hamburg Massacre of 1876.
There, a white citizen militia sought out and murdered a
troop of black militiamen for no other reason than that
they had dared to conduct a celebratory Fourth of July
parade through their mostly black town. The white mili
tia commander, “Pitchfork” Ben Tillman, later described
this massacre with pride: “[T]he leading white men of
Edgefield” had decided “to seize the first opportunity that
the negroes might offer them to provoke a riot and teach
the negroes a lesson by having the whites demonstrate
their superiority by killing as many of them as was justifi
able.” S. Kantrowitz, Ben Tillman & the Reconstruction of
White Supremacy 67 (2000) (ellipsis, brackets, and inter
nal quotation marks omitted). None of the perpetrators of
the Hamburg murders was ever brought to justice.22
——————
22 Tillman

went on to a long career as South Carolina’s Governor and,


54

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Organized terrorism like that perpetuated by Tillman
and his cohorts proliferated in the absence of federal
enforcement of constitutional rights. Militias such as the
Ku Klux Klan, the Knights of the White Camellia, the
White Brotherhood, the Pale Faces, and the ’76 Associa
tion spread terror among blacks and white Republicans by
breaking up Republican meetings, threatening political
leaders, and whipping black militiamen. Era of Recon
struction, 199–200; Curtis 156. These groups raped,
murdered, lynched, and robbed as a means of intimidat
ing, and instilling pervasive fear in, those whom they
despised. A. Trelease, White Terror: The Ku Klux Klan
Conspiracy and Southern Reconstruction 28–46 (1995).
Although Congress enacted legislation to suppress these
activities,23 Klan tactics remained a constant presence in
the lives of Southern blacks for decades. Between 1882
and 1968, there were at least 3,446 reported lynchings of
blacks in the South. Cottrol 351–352. They were tortured
and killed for a wide array of alleged crimes, without even
the slightest hint of due process. Emmit Till, for example,
was killed in 1955 for allegedly whistling at a white
woman. S. Whitfield, A Death in the Delta: The Story of
Emmett Till 15–31 (1988). The fates of other targets of
mob violence were equally depraved. See, e.g., Lynched
Negro and Wife Were First Mutilated, Vicksburg (Miss.)
——————
later, United States Senator. Tillman’s contributions to campaign
finance law have been discussed in our recent cases on that subject.
See Citizens United v. Federal Election Comm’n, 558 U. S. ___, ___
(2010) (STEVENS, J., dissenting) (slip. op., at 2, 42, 56, 87) (discussing at
length the Tillman Act of 1907, 34 Stat. 864). His contributions to the
culture of terrorism that grew in the wake of Cruikshank had an even
more dramatic and tragic effect.
23 In an effort to enforce the Fourteenth Amendment and halt this
violence, Congress enacted a series of civil rights statutes, including the
Force Acts, see Act of May 31, 1870, 16 Stat. 140; Act of Feb. 28, 1871,
16 Stat. 433, and the Ku Klux Klan Act, see Act of Apr. 20, 1871, 17
Stat. 13.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

55

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Evening Post, Feb. 8, 1904, reprinted in R. Ginzburg, 100
Years of Lynchings 63 (1988); Negro Shot Dead for Kissing
His White Girlfriend, Chi. Defender, Feb. 31, 1915, in id.,
at 95 (reporting incident in Florida); La. Negro Is Burned
Alive Screaming “I Didn’t Do It,” Cleveland Gazette, Dec.
13, 1914, in id., at 93 (reporting incident in Louisiana).
The use of firearms for self-defense was often the only
way black citizens could protect themselves from mob
violence. As Eli Cooper, one target of such violence, is said
to have explained, “ ‘[t]he Negro has been run over for fifty
years, but it must stop now, and pistols and shotguns are
the only weapons to stop a mob.’ ” Church Burnings Fol
low Negro Agitator’s Lynching, Chicago Defender, Sept. 6,
1919, in id., at 124. Sometimes, as in Cooper’s case, self
defense did not succeed. He was dragged from his home
by a mob and killed as his wife looked on. Ibid. But at
other times, the use of firearms allowed targets of mob
violence to survive. One man recalled the night during his
childhood when his father stood armed at a jail until
morning to ward off lynchers. See Cottrol, 354. The ex
perience left him with a sense, “not ‘of powerlessness, but
of the “possibilities of salvation” ’ ” that came from stand
ing up to intimidation. Ibid.
In my view, the record makes plain that the Framers of
the Privileges or Immunities Clause and the ratifying-era
public understood—just as the Framers of the Second
Amendment did—that the right to keep and bear arms
was essential to the preservation of liberty. The record
makes equally plain that they deemed this right necessary
to include in the minimum baseline of federal rights that
the Privileges or Immunities Clause established in the
wake of the War over slavery. There is nothing about
Cruikshank’s contrary holding that warrants its retention.
*
*
*
I agree with the Court that the Second Amendment is


56

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

fully applicable to the States. I do so because the right to
keep and bear arms is guaranteed by the Fourteenth
Amendment as a privilege of American citizenship.

