12

DOE v. REED
Opinion of the Court

regulation of private property; energy resource use by
certain electric utilities; long-term care services for the
elderly and persons with disabilities; and state, county,
and city revenue); id., at 26–27 (stating that in the past 20
years, referendum measures that have qualified for the
ballot in the State concerned land-use regulation; unem
ployment insurance; charter public schools; and insurance
coverage and benefits). Voters care about such issues,
some quite deeply—but there is no reason to assume that
any burdens imposed by disclosure of typical referendum
petitions would be remotely like the burdens plaintiffs fear
in this case.
Plaintiffs have offered little in response. They have
provided us scant evidence or argument beyond the bur
dens they assert disclosure would impose on R–71 petition
signers or the signers of other similarly controversial
petitions. Indeed, what little plaintiffs do offer with
respect to typical petitions in Washington hurts, not
helps: Several other petitions in the State “have been
subject to release in recent years,” plaintiffs tell us, Brief
for Petitioners 50, but apparently that release has come
without incident. Cf. Citizens United, supra, at ___ (slip
op., at 55) (“Citizens United has been disclosing its donors
for years and has identified no instance of harassment or
retaliation”).
Faced with the State’s unrebutted arguments that only
modest burdens attend the disclosure of a typical petition,
we must reject plaintiffs’ broad challenge to the PRA. In
doing so, we note—as we have in other election law disclo
sure cases—that upholding the law against a broad-based
challenge does not foreclose a litigant’s success in a nar
rower one. See Buckley, supra, at 74 (“minor parties” may
be exempt from disclosure requirements if they can show
“a reasonable probability that the compelled disclosure of
a party’s contributors’ names will subject them to threats,
harassment, or reprisals from either Government officials

