16

DOE v. REED 

THOMAS, J., dissenting


B

In addition, as I have previously explained, the state of
technology today creates at least some probability that
signers of every referendum will be subjected to threats,
harassment, or reprisals if their personal information is
disclosed. “ ‘[T]he advent of the Internet’ enables” rapid
dissemination of “ ‘the information needed’ to” threaten or
harass every referendum signer. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 6)
(opinion of THOMAS, J.). “Thus, ‘disclosure permits citi
zens . . . to react to the speech of [their political opponents]
in a proper’—or undeniably improper—‘way’ long before a
plaintiff could prevail on an as-applied challenge.” Ibid.
The Court apparently disagrees, asserting that “there is
no reason to assume that any burdens imposed by disclo
sure of typical referendum petitions would be remotely
like the burdens plaintiffs fear in this case.” Ante, at 12.
That conclusion rests on the premise that some referen
dum measures are so benign that the fact of public dis
closure will not chill protected First Amendment activity.
I am not convinced that this premise is correct.
The historical evidence shows that the referendum and
initiative process first gained popularity as a means of
“provid[ing] an occasional safety valve for interests that
failed to get a fair hearing in the legislatures.” T. Cronin,
Direct Democracy: The Politics of Initiative, Referendum,
and Recall 59 (1989). Unsurprisingly, such interests
tended to be controversial by nature. Early examples
include “the single tax, prohibition, women’s suffrage,
prolabor legislation, and the graduated income tax.” Id.,
at 58. And proponents of initiative measures tended to
include politically marginalized groups such as the
“Farmer’s Alliance” in rural states; “[t]housands of labor
federations, notably the miners”; and “the Women’s Suf
frage Association,” which “saw the initiative and referen
dum as a possible new means to overcome” repeated failed
attempts in state legislatures to secure for women the

