4

DOE v. REED
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

and laws either anonymously or not at all.’ ” McIntyre, 514
U. S., at 342.4
In my view, this is unlikely to occur in cases involving
the PRA. Any burden on speech that petitioners posit is
speculative as well as indirect. For an as-applied chal
lenge to a law such as the PRA to succeed, there would
have to be a significant threat of harassment directed at
those who sign the petition that cannot be mitigated by
law enforcement measures.5 Moreover, the character of
the law challenged in a referendum does not, in itself,
affect the analysis. Debates about tax policy and regula
tion of private property can become just as heated as
debates about domestic partnerships. And as a general
matter, it is very difficult to show that by later disclosing
the names of petition signatories, individuals will be less
willing to sign petitions. Just as we have in the past, I
would demand strong evidence before concluding that an
indirect and speculative chain of events imposes a sub
——————
4 JUSTICE SCALIA conceives of the issue as a right to anonymous
speech. See, e.g., post, at 1 (opinion concurring in judgment). But our
decision in McIntyre posited no such freewheeling right. The Constitu
tion protects “freedom of speech.” Amdt. 1; see also McIntyre, 514 U. S.,
at 336 (“The question presented is whether [a] . . . statute that prohib
its the distribution of anonymous campaign literature is a ‘law . . .
abridging the freedom of speech’ within the meaning of the First
Amendment”). That freedom can be burdened by a law that exposes
the speaker to fines, as much as it can be burdened by a law that
exposes a speaker to harassment, changes the content of his speech, or
prejudices others against his message. See id., at 342. The right,
however, is the right to speak, not the right to speak without being
fined or the right to speak anonymously.
5 A rare case may also arise in which the level of threat to any indi
vidual is not quite so high but a State’s disclosure would substantially
limit a group’s ability to “garner the number of signatures necessary to
place [a] matter on the ballot,” thereby “limiting [its] ability to make
the matter the focus of statewide discussion.” Meyer v. Grant, 486 U. S.
414, 423 (1988).

