18

DOE v. REED
THOMAS, J., dissenting

will prove controversial—combined with Washington’s
default position that signed referendum petitions will be
disclosed on-demand, thereby allowing anyone to place
this information on the Internet for broad dissemination—
raises the significant probability that today’s decision will
“inhibit the exercise of legitimate First Amendment activ
ity” with respect to referendum and initiative petitions.
Colorado Republican, 518 U. S., at 634 (THOMAS, J., con
curring in judgment and dissenting in part). “[D]isclosure
requirements enable private citizens and elected officials
to implement political strategies specifically calculated to
curtail campaign-related activity and prevent the lawful,
peaceful exercise of First Amendment rights.” Citizens
United, 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 5) (THOMAS, J., con
curring in part and dissenting in part). Our cases have
long recognized this reality;4 as the Court recently reiter
ated, the First Amendment does not require “case-by-case
determinations” if “archetypical” First Amendment rights
“would be chilled in the meantime.” Id., at ___ (slip op.,
at 12).
This chill in protected First Amendment activity harms
others besides the dissuaded signer. We have already
expressed deep skepticism about restrictions that “mak[e]
it less likely that” a referendum “will garner the number
of signatures necessary to place the matter on the ballot,
——————
4 See, e.g., NAACP v. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U. S. 449, 462
(1958) (noting the “hardly . . . novel perception that compelled disclo
sure of affiliation with groups engaged in advocacy may constitute” an
“effective . . . restraint on freedom of association”); Bates v. Little Rock,
361 U. S. 516, 523 (1960) (“Freedoms such as” the “freedom of associa
tion for the purpose of advancing ideas and airing grievances” are
“protected not only against heavy-handed frontal attack, but also from
being stifled by more subtle government interference”); see also id., at
528 (Black and Douglas, JJ., concurring) (“First Amendment rights are
beyond abridgment either by legislation that directly restrains their
exercise or by suppression or impairment through harassment, hu
miliation, or exposure by government” (emphasis added)).

