Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

States, and particularly one that has the validation of
long, accepted usage, bears a strong presumption of constitutionality.”
McIntyre, supra, at 375 (SCALIA, J.,
dissenting).
A
When a Washington voter signs a referendum petition
subject to the PRA, he is acting as a legislator. The Wash
ington Constitution vests “[t]he legislative authority” of
the State in the legislature, but “the people reserve to
themselves the power . . . to approve or reject at the polls
any act, item, section, or part of any bill, act, or law passed
by the legislature.” Art. 2, §1. This “referendum” power of
popular legislation is exercised by submitting a petition, in
accordance with certain specifications, to the Washington
secretary of state with valid signatures of registered vot
ers in number equal to or exceeding four percent of the
votes cast in the last gubernatorial election. §1(b); Wash.
Rev. Code §29A.72.100, 130, 140, 150, 160 (2008).
The filing of a referendum petition that satisfies these
requirements has two legal effects: (1) It requires the
secretary to place the measure referred to the people on
the ballot at the next general election; and (2) it suspends
operation of the measure, causing it only to have effect 30
days after it is approved during that election. Art. 2,
§1(d). See Brief for Respondent Sam Reed, Secretary of
State of Washington 2–6. A voter who signs a referendum
petition is therefore exercising legislative power because
his signature, somewhat like a vote for or against a bill in
the legislature, seeks to affect the legal force of the meas
ure at issue.2
——————
2 The Court notes that “only some petition signing has legal effect.”
Ante, at 8, n. 1. That is true. Some petitions may never be submitted
to the secretary; they are irrelevant here, since they will never be
subject to the PRA. But some petitions that are submitted to the
secretary may lack the requisite number of signatures. Even as to

