Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

judge of the proper conduct of public business,” openness
in the democratic process is of “critical importance.” Cox
Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn, 420 U. S. 469, 495 (1975); see
also post, at 4 (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment) (noting
that “[t]he public nature of federal lawmaking is constitu
tionally required”).
On the other side of the ledger, I view the burden of
public disclosure on speech and associational rights as
minimal in this context. As this Court has observed with
respect to campaign-finance regulations, “disclosure re
quirements . . . ‘do not prevent anyone from speaking.’ ”
Citizens United, 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 51). When it
comes to initiatives and referenda, the impact of public
disclosure on expressive interests is even more attenuated.
While campaign-finance disclosure injects the government
into what would otherwise have been private political
activity, the process of legislating by referendum is inher
ently public. To qualify a referendum for the ballot, citi
zens are required to sign a petition and supply identifying
information to the State. The act of signing typically
occurs in public, and the circulators who collect and sub
mit signatures ordinarily owe signers no guarantee of
confidentiality. For persons with the “civic courage” to
participate in this process, post, at 10 (opinion of SCALIA,
J.), the State’s decision to make accessible what they
voluntarily place in the public sphere should not deter
them from engaging in the expressive act of petition sign
ing. Disclosure of the identity of petition signers, more
over, in no way directly impairs the ability of anyone to
speak and associate for political ends either publicly or
privately.
Given the relative weight of the interests at stake and
the traditionally public nature of initiative and referen
dum processes, the Court rightly rejects petitioners’ con
stitutional challenge to the State of Washington’s petition
disclosure regulations. These same considerations also

