Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

THOMAS, J., dissenting

can lead courts unnecessarily to anticipate constitutional
questions or formulate broad constitutional rules, and may
prevent governmental officers from implementing laws “in
a manner consistent with the Constitution.” Id., at 450–
451. For those reasons, we rejected in Washington State
Grange political parties’ pre-enforcement facial challenge
to a Washington initiative that allowed candidates in a
primary election to self-designate their political party
preference on the primary election ballot. See id., at 458–
459. Because the challenge was a pre-enforcement one,
Washington “had no opportunity to implement” the initia
tive, id., at 450, so the political parties’ arguments that it
violated their association rights all depended “on the
possibility that voters will be confused as to the meaning
of the party-preference designation,” id., at 454. More
over, a facial challenge was inappropriate because the
regulation did “not on its face impose a severe burden on
political parties’ associational rights.” Id., at 444.
Those considerations point in the opposite direction
here. Washington’s construction of the PRA “on its face
impose[s] a severe burden,” ibid.—compelled disclosure of
privacy in political association protected by the First
Amendment, see infra, at 4–5—on all referendum signers.
And Washington has had several “opportunit[ies] to im
plement” the PRA’s disclosure requirements with respect
to initiative petitions. Washington State Grange, supra, at
450. Indeed, Washington admits that “[a]ll petitions for
initiatives, referendum, recall, and candidate nomination
are public records subject to disclosure.” Brief for Respon
dent Reed 59; see also App. 26 (listing six completed re
quests for disclosure of signed initiative petitions since
2006). Washington thus has eliminated any “possibility”
that referendum petition signers “will be confused as to”
how the State will respond to a request under the PRA to
disclose their names and addresses. Washington State
Grange, 552 U. S., at 454.

