2

DOE v. REED
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

mously in the referendum itself.1 Referendum petitions
are subject to public disclosure under the Public Records
Act (PRA), Wash. Rev. Code §42.56.001 et seq., which
requires government agencies to “make available for
public inspection and copying all public records,” subject to
certain exemptions not relevant here.
§42.56.070(1)
(2008). Plaintiffs contend that disclosure of the names,
and other personal information included on the petitions,
of those who took this legislative action violates their First
Amendment right to anonymity.
Today’s opinion acknowledges such a right, finding that
it can be denied here only because of the State’s interest in
“preserving the integrity of the electoral process,” ante, at
8. In my view this is not a matter for judicial interest
balancing. Our Nation’s longstanding traditions of legis
lating and voting in public refute the claim that the First
Amendment accords a right to anonymity in the perform
ance of an act with governmental effect. “A governmental
practice that has become general throughout the United
——————
1 Plaintiffs seem to disavow reliance on McIntyre v. Ohio Elections
Comm’n, 514 U. S. 334 (1995), see Reply Brief for Petitioners 12.
Certainly, there are differences between McIntyre and this case. Mrs.
McIntyre was required to disclose her identity herself, by placing her
name on her handbill. Here, plaintiffs do not object to signing their
names to the referendum petition, where it can presumably be observed
by later signers; they challenge only the later disclosure of that infor
mation by the State. But both cases are about public disclosure, and
both involve a claim to anonymity under the First Amendment. If
anything, the line plaintiffs seek to draw—which seeks a sort of partial
anonymity—is stranger still.
JUSTICE STEVENS quibbles with the shorthand I use, and tries to rein
in McIntyre’s holding, by saying that it did not create a “right to speak
anonymously,” ante, at 4, n. 4 (opinion concurring in part and concur
ring in judgment). But McIntyre used the same shorthand. See 514
U. S., at 357 (“[t]he right to remain anonymous”); id., at 342 (“[t]he
freedom to publish anonymously”); see also ibid. (“an author’s decision
to remain anonymous . . . is an aspect of the freedom of speech pro
tected by the First Amendment”).

