8

DOE v. REED
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

voters’ freedom of speech, and the manner in which it
occurred suggests the contrary. States adopted the paper
ballot at different times, and some States changed meth
ods multiple times. New York’s 1777 Constitution, for
example, explicitly provided for the State to switch be
tween methods. Art. VI. Kentucky’s 1792 Constitution
required paper ballots, Art. III, §2, but its 1799 Constitu
tion required viva voce voting, Art. VI, §16. The different
voting methods simply reflected different views about how
democracy should function. One scholar described Vir
ginia’s and Kentucky’s steadfast use of viva voce voting
through the Civil War as follows: “[I]n the appeal to un
flinching manliness at the polls these two states insisted
still that every voter should show at the hustings the
courage of his personal conviction.” Schouler, Evolution of
the American Voter, 2 The American Historical Review
665, 671 (1897). See also id., at 666–667 (“In Virginia and
the other states in close affiliation with her this oral ex
pression was vaunted as the privilege of the free-born
voter, to show the faith that was in him by an outspoken
announcement of his candidate”).
The new paper ballots did not make voting anonymous.
See Evans 10 (“[T]he ballot was not secret”); Argersinger
48 (“Certainly there were no legal provisions to ensure
secrecy”). Initially, many States did not regulate the form
of the paper ballot. See Evans 10; Argersinger 48–49.
Taking advantage of this, political parties began printing
ballots with their candidates’ names on them. They used
brightly colored paper and other distinctive markings so
that the ballots could be recognized from a distance, mak
ing the votes public. See Burson, supra, at 200–201;
Evans 10–11. Abuse of these unofficial paper ballots was
rampant. The polling place had become an “open auction
place” where votes could be freely bought or coerced.
Burson, supra, at 202. Employers threatened employees.
Party workers kept voters from the other party away from

