2

DOE v. REED
Syllabus
alleges that the PRA “is unconstitutional as applied to the Referen
dum 71 petition because there is a reasonable probability that the
signatories . . . will be subjected to threats, harassment, and repri
sals.” Determining that the PRA burdened core political speech, the
District Court held that plaintiffs were likely to succeed on the merits
of Count I and granted a preliminary injunction preventing release of
the signatory information. Reviewing only Count I, the Ninth Circuit
held that plaintiffs were unlikely to succeed on their claim that the
PRA is unconstitutional as applied to referendum petitions in gen
eral, and therefore reversed.

Held: Disclosure of referendum petitions does not as a general matter
violate the First Amendment. Pp. 4–13.
(a) Because plaintiffs’ Count I claim and the relief that would fol
low—an injunction barring the secretary of state from releasing ref
erendum petitions to the public—reach beyond the particular circum
stances of these plaintiffs, they must satisfy this Court’s standards
for a facial challenge to the extent of that reach. See United States v.
Stevens, 559 U. S. ___, ___. Pp. 4–5.
(b) The compelled disclosure of signatory information on referen
dum petitions is subject to review under the First Amendment. In
most cases, the individual’s signature will express the view that the
law subject to the petition should be overturned. Even if the signer is
agnostic as to the merits of the underlying law, his signature still ex
presses the political view that the question should be considered “by
the whole electorate.” Meyer v. Grant, 486 U. S. 414, 421. In either
case, the expression of a political view implicates a First Amendment
right.
Petition signing remains expressive even when it has legal effect in
the electoral process. But that does not mean that the electoral con
text is irrelevant to the nature of this Court’s First Amendment re
view. States have significant flexibility in implementing their own
voting systems. To the extent a regulation concerns the legal effect of
a particular activity in that process, the government is afforded sub
stantial latitude to enforce that regulation. Also pertinent is the fact
that the PRA is not a prohibition on speech, but a disclosure re
quirement that may burden “the ability to speak, but [does] ‘not pre
vent anyone from speaking.’ ” Citizens United v. Federal Election
Comm’n, 558 U. S. ___, ___. This Court has reviewed First Amend
ment challenges to disclosure requirements in the electoral context
under an “exacting scrutiny” standard, requiring “a ‘substantial rela
tion’ between the disclosure requirement and a ‘sufficiently impor
tant’ governmental interest.” Id., at ___. To withstand this scrutiny,
“the strength of the governmental interest must reflect the serious
ness of the actual burden on First Amendment rights.” Davis v. Fed

