Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

groups plan to post the petitions in searchable form on the
Internet, and then encourage other citizens to seek out the
R–71 signers. See App. 11; Brief for Petitioners 8, 46–47.
Plaintiffs explain that once on the Internet, the petition
signers’ names and addresses “can be combined with
publicly available phone numbers and maps,” in what will
effectively become a blueprint for harassment and intimi
dation. Id., at 46. To support their claim that they will be
subject to reprisals, plaintiffs cite examples from the
history of a similar proposition in California, see, e.g., id.,
at 2–6, 31–32, and from the experience of one of the peti
tion sponsors in this case, see App. 9.
In related contexts, we have explained that those
resisting disclosure can prevail under the First Amend
ment if they can show “a reasonable probability that the
compelled disclosure [of personal information] will sub
ject them to threats, harassment, or reprisals from ei
ther Government officials or private parties.” Buckley,
supra, at 74; see also Citizens United, 558 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 52). The question before us, however, is not
whether PRA disclosure violates the First Amendment
with respect to those who signed the R–71 petition, or
other particularly controversial petitions. The question
instead is whether such disclosure in general violates
the First Amendment rights of those who sign referen
dum petitions.
The problem for plaintiffs is that their argument rests
almost entirely on the specific harm they say would attend
disclosure of the information on the R–71 petition, or on
similarly controversial ones. See, e.g., Brief for Petitioners
10, 26–29, 46, 56. But typical referendum petitions “con
cern tax policy, revenue, budget, or other state law issues.”
Brief for Respondent WFST 36 (listing referenda); see also
App. 26 (stating that in recent years the State has re
ceived PRA requests for petitions supporting initiatives
concerning limiting motor vehicle charges; government

