4

DOE v. REED
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

Plaintiffs point to no precedent from this Court holding
that legislating is protected by the First Amendment.3
Nor do they identify historical evidence demonstrating
that “the freedom of speech” the First Amendment codified
encompassed a right to legislate without public disclosure.
This should come as no surprise; the exercise of lawmak
ing power in the United States has traditionally been
public.
The public nature of federal lawmaking is constitution
ally required. Article I, §5, cl. 3 requires Congress to
legislate in public: “Each House shall keep a Journal of its
Proceedings, and from time to time publish the same,
excepting such Parts as may in their Judgment require
Secrecy; and the Yeas and Nays of the Members of either
House on any question shall, at the Desire of one fifth of
those Present, be entered on the Journal.”4 State constitu
——————
those, the petition signer has exercised his portion of the legislative
power when he signs the petition, much like a legislator who casts a
losing vote.
3 The Court quotes Republican Party of Minn. v. White, 536 U. S. 765,
788 (2002), which stated that a State “having ‘cho[sen] to tap the
energy and the legitimizing power of the democratic process, . . . must
accord the participants in that process the First Amendment rights
that attach to their roles.’ ” Ante, at 6. That is correct, but it is not on
point. White involved a prohibition on speaking as a condition of
running for judicial office. I do not suggest that a State could require
legislators (or the citizen-legislators who participate in a referendum)
to give up First Amendment rights unconnected with their act of
legislating. The electioneering disclosure cases the Court cites, ante, at
7, are likewise not on point, since they involve disclosure requirements
applied to political speech, not legislative action.
4 The exception for “such Parts as may in their Judgment require
Secrecy” was assuredly not designed to permit anonymous voting. It
refers to details whose disclosure would threaten an important national
interest. The similar clause in the Articles of Confederation created an
exception to the journal requirement for parts of the proceedings
“relating to treaties, alliances or military operations, as in [Congress’s]
judgment require secresy.” Art. IX. The Constitution’s requirement is
broader, but its object is obviously the same.

