Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

threat of fraud in this context is not merely hypothetical;
respondents and their amici cite a number of cases of
petition-related fraud across the country to support the
point. See Brief for Respondent Reed 43; Brief for State of
Ohio et al. as Amici Curiae 22–24.
But the State’s interest in preserving electoral integrity
is not limited to combating fraud. That interest extends to
efforts to ferret out invalid signatures caused not by fraud
but by simple mistake, such as duplicate signatures or
signatures of individuals who are not registered to vote in
the State. See Brief for Respondent Reed 42. That inter
est also extends more generally to promoting transparency
and accountability in the electoral process, which the
State argues is “essential to the proper functioning of a
democracy.” Id., at 39.
Plaintiffs contend that the disclosure requirements of
the PRA are not “sufficiently related” to the interest of
protecting the integrity of the electoral process. Brief for
Petitioners 51. They argue that disclosure is not neces
sary because the secretary of state is already charged with
verifying and canvassing the names on a petition, advo
cates and opponents of a measure can observe that proc
ess, and any citizen can challenge the secretary’s actions
in court. See Wash. Rev. Code §§29A.72.230, 29A.72.240.
They also stress that existing criminal penalties reduce
the danger of fraud in the petition process. See Brief for
Petitioners 50; §§29A.84.210, 29A.84.230, 29A.84.250.
But the secretary’s verification and canvassing will not
catch all invalid signatures: The job is large and difficult
(the secretary ordinarily checks “only 3 to 5% of signa
tures,” Brief for Respondent WFST 54), and the secretary
can make mistakes, too, see Brief for Respondent Reed 42.
Public disclosure can help cure the inadequacies of the
verification and canvassing process.
Disclosure also helps prevent certain types of petition
fraud otherwise difficult to detect, such as outright forgery

