8

DOE v. REED 

Opinion of the Court 


B

Respondents assert two interests to justify the burdens
of compelled disclosure under the PRA on First Amend
ment rights: (1) preserving the integrity of the electoral
process by combating fraud, detecting invalid signatures,
and fostering government transparency and accountabil
ity; and (2) providing information to the electorate about
who supports the petition. See, e.g., Brief for Respondent
Reed 39–42, 44–45. Because we determine that the
State’s interest in preserving the integrity of the electoral
process suffices to defeat the argument that the PRA is
unconstitutional with respect to referendum petitions in
general, we need not, and do not, address the State’s
“informational” interest.
The State’s interest in preserving the integrity of the
electoral process is undoubtedly important. “States allow
ing ballot initiatives have considerable leeway to protect
the integrity and reliability of the initiative process, as
they have with respect to election processes generally.”
ACLF, 525 U. S., at 191. The State’s interest is particu
larly strong with respect to efforts to root out fraud, which
not only may produce fraudulent outcomes, but has a
systemic effect as well: It “drives honest citizens out of the
democratic process and breeds distrust of our govern
ment.” Purcell v. Gonzalez, 549 U. S. 1, 4 (2006) (per
curiam); see also Crawford v. Marion County Election Bd.,
553 U. S. 181, 196 (2008) (opinion of STEVENS, J.). The
——————
First Amendment interest, see supra, at 5–7—do not. See post, at 3–4,
and n. 3. That line is not as sharp as JUSTICE SCALIA would have it; he
himself recognizes “the existence of a First Amendment interest in
voting,” post, at 6, which of course also can have legal effect. The
distinction becomes even fuzzier given that only some petition signing
has legal effect, and any such legal effect attaches only well after the
expressive act of signing, if the secretary determines that the petition
satisfies the requirements for inclusion on the ballot. See post, at 3.
Petitions that do not qualify for the ballot of course carry no legal effect.

