10

DOE v. REED
Opinion of the Court

and “bait and switch” fraud, in which an individual signs
the petition based on a misrepresentation of the underly
ing issue. See Brief for Respondent WFST 9–11, 53–54;
cf. Brief for Massachusetts Gay and Lesbian Political
Caucus et al. as Amici Curiae 18–22 (detailing “bait and
switch” fraud in a petition drive in Massachusetts). The
signer is in the best position to detect these types of
fraud, and public disclosure can bring the issue to the
signer’s attention.
Public disclosure thus helps ensure that the only signa
tures counted are those that should be, and that the only
referenda placed on the ballot are those that garner
enough valid signatures. Public disclosure also promotes
transparency and accountability in the electoral process to
an extent other measures cannot. In light of the foregoing,
we reject plaintiffs’ argument and conclude that public
disclosure of referendum petitions in general is substan
tially related to the important interest of preserving the
integrity of the electoral process.2
C
Plaintiffs’ more significant objection is that “the
strength of the governmental interest” does not “reflect
the seriousness of the actual burden on First Amendment
rights.” Davis, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 18) (citing
Buckley, 424 U. S., at 68, 71); see, e.g., Brief for Petitioners
12–13, 30. According to plaintiffs, the objective of those
seeking disclosure of the R–71 petition is not to prevent
fraud, but to publicly identify those who had validly signed
and to broadcast the signers’ political views on the subject
of the petition. Plaintiffs allege, for example, that several
——————
2 JUSTICE THOMAS’s contrary assessment of the relationship between
the disclosure of referendum petitions generally and the State’s inter
ests in this case is based on his determination that strict scrutiny
applies, post, at 5 (dissenting opinion), rather than the standard of
review that we have concluded is appropriate, see supra, at 7.

