6

DOE v. REED
Opinion of the Court

still expresses the political view that the question should
be considered “by the whole electorate.” Meyer v. Grant,
486 U. S. 414, 421 (1988). In either case, the expression of
a political view implicates a First Amendment right. The
State, having “cho[sen] to tap the energy and the legiti
mizing power of the democratic process, . . . must accord
the participants in that process the First Amendment
rights that attach to their roles.” Republican Party of
Minn. v. White, 536 U. S. 765, 788 (2002) (internal quota
tion marks and ellipsis omitted).
Respondents counter that signing a petition is a legally
operative legislative act and therefore “does not involve
any significant expressive element.” Brief for Respondent
Reed 31. It is true that signing a referendum petition may
ultimately have the legal consequence of requiring the
secretary of state to place the referendum on the ballot.
But we do not see how adding such legal effect to an ex
pressive activity somehow deprives that activity of its
expressive component, taking it outside the scope of the
First Amendment. Respondents themselves implicitly
recognize that the signature expresses a particular view
point, arguing that one purpose served by disclosure is to
allow the public to engage signers in a debate on the mer
its of the underlying law. See, e.g., id., at 45; Brief for
Respondent WCOG 49; Brief for Respondent WFST 58.
Petition signing remains expressive even when it has
legal effect in the electoral process. But that is not to say
that the electoral context is irrelevant to the nature of our
First Amendment review. We allow States significant
flexibility in implementing their own voting systems. See
Burdick v. Takushi, 504 U. S. 428, 433–434 (1992). To the
extent a regulation concerns the legal effect of a particular
activity in that process, the government will be afforded
substantial latitude to enforce that regulation. Also perti
nent to our analysis is the fact that the PRA is not a pro
hibition on speech, but instead a disclosure requirement.

