Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
eral Election Comm’n, 554 U. S. ___, ___. Pp. 5–7.
(c) The State’s interest in preserving the integrity of the electoral
process suffices to defeat the argument that the PRA is unconstitu
tional with respect to referendum petitions in general. That interest
is particularly strong with respect to efforts to root out fraud. But
the State’s interest is not limited to combating fraud; it extends to ef
forts to ferret out invalid signatures caused not by fraud but by sim
ple mistake, such as duplicate signatures or signatures of individuals
who are not registered to vote in the State. The State’s interest also
extends more generally to promoting transparency and accountability
in the electoral process.
Plaintiffs contend that disclosure is not sufficiently related to the
interest of protecting the integrity of the electoral process to with
stand First Amendment scrutiny. They argue that disclosure is not
necessary because the secretary of state is already charged with veri
fying and canvassing the names on a petition, a measure’s advocates
and opponents can observe that process, any citizen can challenge the
secretary’s actions in court, and criminal penalties reduce the danger
of fraud in the petition process. But the secretary’s verification and
canvassing will not catch all the invalid signatures, and public disclo
sure can help cure the inadequacies of the secretary’s process. Dis
closure also helps prevent difficult-to-detect fraud such as outright
forgery and “bait and switch” fraud, in which an individual signs the
petition based on a misrepresentation of the underlying issue. And
disclosure promotes transparency and accountability in the electoral
process to an extent other measures cannot. Pp. 8–10.
(d) Plaintiffs’ main objection is that “the strength of the govern
mental interest” does not “reflect the seriousness of the actual burden
on First Amendment rights.” Davis, supra, at ___. According to
plaintiffs, the objective of those seeking disclosure is not to prevent
fraud, but to publicly identify signatories and broadcast their politi
cal views on the subject of the petition. Plaintiffs allege, for example,
that several groups plan to post the petitions in searchable form on
the Internet, and then encourage other citizens to seek out R–71 peti
tion signers. That, plaintiffs argue, would subject them to threats,
harassment, and reprisals.
The problem for plaintiffs is that their argument rests almost en
tirely on the specific harm that would attend the disclosure of infor
mation on the R–71 petition. But the question before the Court at
this stage of the litigation is whether disclosure of referendum peti
tions in general violates the First Amendment. Faced with the
State’s unrebutted arguments that only modest burdens attend the
disclosure of a typical petition, plaintiffs’ broad challenge to the PRA
must be rejected. But upholding the PRA against a broad-based chal

