2

DOE v. REED
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

sive act of signing a petition. Regulations of this nature,
however, stand “a step removed from the communicative
aspect of petitioning,” and the ability of States to impose
them can scarcely be doubted. Buckley, 525 U. S., at 215
(O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment in part and dissent
ing in part); see also McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Comm’n,
514 U. S. 334, 345 (1995) (contrasting measures to “control
the mechanics of the electoral process” with the “regula
tion of pure speech”). It is by no means necessary for a
State to prove that such “reasonable, nondiscriminatory
restrictions” are narrowly tailored to its interests. Ander
son, 460 U. S., at 788.
The Court today confirms that the State of Washington’s
decision to make referendum petition signatures available
for public inspection falls squarely within the realm of
permissible election-related regulations. Cf. Buckley, 525
U. S., at 200 (describing a state law requiring petition
circulators to submit affidavits containing their names
and addresses as “exemplif[ying] the type of regulation”
that States may adopt). Public disclosure of the identity of
petition signers, which is the rule in the overwhelming
majority of States that use initiatives and referenda,
advances States’ vital interests in “[p]reserving the integ
rity of the electoral process, preventing corruption, and
sustaining the active, alert responsibility of the individual
citizen in a democracy for the wise conduct of govern
ment.” First Nat. Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765,
788–789 (1978) (internal quotation marks and alterations
omitted); see also Citizens United v. Federal Election
Comm’n, 558 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 55)
(“[T]ransparency enables the electorate to make informed
decisions and give proper weight to different speakers and
messages”); Brief for Respondent Washington Families
Standing Together 34 (reporting that only one State ex
empts initiative and referendum petitions from public
disclosure). In a society “in which the citizenry is the final

