Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

THOMAS, J., dissenting

already uses an “electronic voter registration database” in
its “verification process.” Id., at 50.
Washington nevertheless contends that its citizens must
“have access to public records . . . to independently evalu
ate whether the Secretary properly determined to certify
or not to certify a referendum to the ballot.” Brief for
Respondent Reed 41. “[W]ithout the access to signed
petitions that the PRA provides,” Washington argues, its
“citizens could not fulfill their role as the final judge of
public business.” Ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted).
But Washington’s Election Code already gives Washing
ton voters access to referendum petition data. Under
§29A.72.230, “[t]he verification and canvass of signatures
on the [referendum] petition may be observed by persons
representing the advocates and opponents of the proposed
measure so long as they make no record of the names,
addresses, or other information on the petitions or related
records except upon” court order. Each side is entitled to
at least two such observers, although the secretary may
increase that number if, in his opinion, doing so would not
“cause undue delay or disruption of the verification proc
ess.” Ibid.
Washington does not explain why this existing access,
which petitioners do not challenge here, is insufficient to
permit its citizens to oversee the verification process un
der §29A.72.230, or to decide intelligently whether to
pursue a court challenge under §29A.72.240. Moreover, if
Washington had implemented the more narrowly tailored
electronic referendum database discussed above, observers
could see the secretary of state’s employees examine the
data using exactly the same techniques they would use if
the data were released to them under the PRA. Obtaining
a digitized list to navigate on their own computer would
not allow an observer to learn any additional information.
Washington law also contains several other measures
that preserve the integrity of the referendum process.

