8

DOE v. REED
THOMAS, J., dissenting

wide voter registration database,” §29A.08.651(1),2 to
ensure that each referendum signer meets Washington’s
residency and voter registration requirements, see
§29A.72.130. Doing so presumably would drastically
reduce or eliminate possible errors or mistakes that Wash
ington argues the secretary might make, see Brief for
Respondent Reed 42, since it would allow the secretary to
verify virtually all of the signatures instead of the mere “3
to 5%” he “ordinarily checks,” ante, at 9 (internal quota
tion marks omitted).3
An electronic referendum database would also enable
the secretary to determine whether multiple entries corre
spond to a single registered voter, thereby detecting
whether a voter had signed the petition more than once.
In addition, the database would protect victims of “for
gery” or “ ‘bait and switch’ fraud.” Ibid. In Washington, “a
unique identifier is assigned to each legally registered
voter in the state.” §29A.08.651(4). Washington could
create a Web site, linked to the electronic referendum
database, where a voter concerned that his name had been
fraudulently signed could conduct a search using his
unique identifier to ensure that his name was absent from
the database—without requiring disclosure of the names
and addresses of all the voluntary, legitimate signers.
Washington admits that creating this sort of electronic
referendum database “could be done.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 51.
Implementing such a system would not place a heavy
burden on Washington; “the Secretary of State’s staff”
——————
2 Under

Washington law, this “computerized list must serve as the
single system for storing and maintaining the official list of registered
voters throughout the state” and “must contain the name and registra
tion information of every legally registered voter in the state.” Wash.
Rev. Code §§29A.08.651(2)–(3) (2008).
3 See §29A.72.230 (permitting the secretary of state to verify and
canvass referendum petitions using approved statistical sampling
methods).

