6

DOE v. REED
ALITO, J., concurring

affiliation, sexual orientation, ethnic background, and
interest-group memberships. Requiring such disclosures,
however, runs headfirst into a half century of our case
law, which firmly establishes that individuals have a right
to privacy of belief and association. See Rumsfeld v. Fo
rum for Academic and Institutional Rights, Inc., 547 U. S.
47, 69 (2006); Brown, supra, at 91; Buckley, 424 U. S., at
64; DeGregory v. Attorney General of N. H., 383 U. S. 825,
829 (1966); Gibson v. Florida Legislative Investigation
Comm., 372 U. S. 539, 544 (1963); NAACP v. Alabama ex
rel. Patterson, 357 U. S. 449, 462 (1958). Indeed, the
State’s informational interest paints such a chilling pic
ture of the role of government in our lives that at oral
argument the Washington attorney general balked when
confronted with the logical implications of accepting such
an argument, conceding that the State could not require
petition signers to disclose their religion or ethnicity. Tr.
of Oral Arg. 37, 56.
Respondents’ informational interest is no more legiti
mate when viewed as a means of providing the public with
information needed to locate and contact supporters of a
referendum. In the name of pursuing such an interest, the
State would be free to require petition signers to disclose
any information that would more easily enable members
of the voting public to contact them and engage them in
discussion, including telephone numbers, e-mail ad
dresses, and Internet aliases. Once again, permitting the
government to require speakers to disclose such informa
tion runs against the current of our associational privacy
cases. But more important, when speakers are faced with
a reasonable probability of harassment or intimidation,
the State no longer has any interest in enabling the public
to locate and contact supporters of a particular measure—
for in that instance, disclosure becomes a means of facili
tating harassment that impermissibly chills the exercise
of First Amendment rights.

