10

DOE v. REED
ALITO, J., concurring

Cal. Govt. Code Ann. §6253.5 (West 2008). It is thus
entirely possible for a State to keep signatory information
private and maintain a referendum and initiative process
free from fraud.
Finally, Washington could easily and cheaply employ
alternative mechanisms for protecting against fraud and
mistake that would be far more protective of circulators’
and signers’ First Amendment rights. For example, the
Washington attorney general represented to us at oral
argument that “the Secretary of State’s first step after
receiving submitted petitions is to take them to his archiv
ing section and to have them digitized.” Tr. of Oral Arg.
30. With a digitized list, it should be relatively easy for
the secretary to check for duplicate signatures on a refer
endum petition. And given that the secretary maintains a
“centralized, uniform, interactive computerized statewide
voter registration list that contains the name and registra
tion information of every registered voter in the state,”
Wash. Rev. Code Ann. §29A.08.125(1) (West Supp. 2010),
the secretary could use a computer program to cross-check
the names and addresses on the petition with the names
and addresses on the voter registration roles, thus ensur
ing the accuracy and legitimacy of each signature.
Additionally, using the digitized version of the referen
dum petition, the State could set up a simple system for
Washington citizens to check whether their names have
been fraudulently signed to a petition. For example, on
his Web site, the secretary maintains an interface that
allows voters to confirm their voter registration informa
tion simply by inputting their name and date of birth. See
http://wei.secstate.wa.gov/osos/VoterVault/Pages/MyVote.a
spx. Presumably the secretary could set up a similar
interface for referendum petitions. Indeed, the process
would seem to be all the more simple given that Washing
ton requires a “unique identifier [to] be assigned to each
registered voter in the state.” §29A.08.125(4).

