(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

DOE ET AL. v. REED, WASHINGTON SECRETARY OF 

STATE, ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–559.

Argued April 28, 2010—Decided June 24, 2010

The Washington Constitution allows citizens to challenge state laws by
referendum. To initiate a referendum, proponents must file a peti
tion with the secretary of state that contains valid signatures of reg
istered Washington voters equal to or exceeding four percent of the
votes cast for the office of Governor at the last gubernatorial election.
A valid submission requires not only a signature, but also the signer’s
address and the county in which he is registered to vote.
In May 2009, Washington Governor Christine Gregoire signed into
law Senate Bill 5688, which expanded the rights and responsibilities
of state-registered domestic partners, including same-sex domestic
partners. That same month, Protect Marriage Washington, one of
the petitioners here, was organized as a “State Political Committee”
for the purpose of collecting the petition signatures necessary to place
a referendum challenging SB 5688 on the ballot. If the referendum
made it onto the ballot, Protect Marriage Washington planned to en
courage voters to reject SB 5688. Protect Marriage Washington sub
mitted the petition with more than 137,000 signatures to the secre
tary of state, and after conducting the verification and canvassing
process required by state law, the secretary determined that the peti
tion contained sufficient signatures to qualify the referendum (R–71)
for the ballot. Respondent intervenors invoked the Washington Pub
lic Records Act (PRA) to obtain copies of the petition, which contained
the signers’ names and addresses.
The R–71 petition sponsor and certain signers filed a complaint
and a motion for injunctive relief in Federal District Court, seeking to
enjoin the public release of the petition. Count I alleges that the PRA
“is unconstitutional as applied to referendum petitions,” and Count II

