2

FOWLER v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
the precise communication and nature of the officer who may receive
it are not yet known. Hence, the statute covers a defendant, like pe
titioner, who kills with intent to prevent communication with any
and all officers. The Court must consequently decide what, if any
thing, the Government must show about the likelihood of a hypo
thetical communication with a federal officer where the defendant did
not think specifically about any particular communication or its re
cipient. Pp. 4–7.
(c) To determine what the Government must prove in such in
stances, the Court looks to the dictionary definition of the statutory
word “prevent,” which means rendering an “intended,” “possible,” or
“likely” event impractical or impossible by anticipatory action. No
one suggests that the word “intended” sets forth the appropriate
standard here. The Government and the Eleventh Circuit would rest
their standard on the word “possible.” But that standard would
eliminate the independent force of the statutory “federal officer” re
quirement, and would extend the statute beyond its intended, basi
cally federal, scope. Fashioning a standard based on the word
“likely” is consistent with the statute’s language and objectives.
Thus, where the defendant kills a person with an intent to prevent
communication with law enforcement officers generally, that intent
includes an intent to prevent communications with federal officers
only if there is a reasonable likelihood under the circumstances that,
in the absence of the killing, at least one of the relevant communica
tions would have been made to a federal officer. The Government
need not show that such a communication, had it occurred, would
have been federal beyond a reasonable doubt, nor even that it is more
likely than not. But it must show that the likelihood of communica
tion to a federal officer was more than remote, outlandish, or hypo
thetical. Pp. 7–10.
(d) Because Fowler’s argument that the evidence is insufficient to
satisfy a “reasonable likelihood” standard was not raised at trial, the
lower courts must determine whether, and how, the standard applies
in this case. P. 10.

603 F. 3d 883, vacated and remanded.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, THOMAS, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined.
SCALIA, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment. ALITO, J., filed
a dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, J., joined.

