6

FOWLER v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

officer would have occurred.
The principal defect in this interpretation is that it
makes the words “of the United States” superfluous.
Section 1512(a)(1)(C) specifically requires that the in
formation the defendant seeks to prevent from being com
municated be “information relating to the commission or
possible commission of a Federal offense.” If the phrase
“to a law enforcement officer . . . of the United States”
requires nothing more than this it is utterly without effect.
The implication of this view is that Congress enacted
§1512(a)(1)(C)’s reference to “a law enforcement officer . . .
of the United States,” only to immediately nullify it by
§1512(g)(2)’s “no state of mind” provision. Not likely—and
not sound statutory interpretation.
The dissent claims that my analysis “confuses what the
prosecution must prove with what a rational jury may
choose to infer in a particular case.” Post, at 6. I find this
contention difficult to understand. In the dissent’s view, a
properly instructed jury should be required to find neither
that the defendant’s mens rea had any connection to a
federal officer, nor that the defendant’s actus reus had any
connection to a federal officer. It therefore follows that
under the dissent’s view, a properly instructed jury should
be required to find nothing about a connection to a federal
officer beyond the fact that the information related to a
federal offense, which means that, unless the jury is acting
irrationally or is engaging in jury nullification, the “of the
United States” provision is indeed superfluous. The dis
sent is correct that the proof of one element of a crime
(such as an overt act) can sometimes be used to prove that
a different element (such as a conspiratorial agreement) is
satisfied, post, at 6–7, n. 2; but in such cases, the jury is
instructed that it is required to make a separate finding to
convict (e.g., that a conspiratorial agreement actually
occurred). Here, the dissent identifies no separate finding
the jury must make beyond the fact of a federal offense.

