2

FOWLER v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

prevent communication to a law enforcement officer who
happens to be a law enforcement officer of the United
States?
Happily, a different statutory provision resolves this
ambiguity. It states that “no state of mind need be proved
with respect to the circumstance . . . that the law enforce
ment officer is an officer or employee of the Federal Gov
ernment.” §1512(g)(2). This makes clear that the first
possibility is wrong, and the second right. But removing
the “federal officer” requirement as an element of the
statute’s mens rea does not remove it as an element of the
actus reus—that is, as an element of the facts that must be
proved for conviction. It must be proved, and proved
beyond a reasonable doubt, that the communication in
tended to be prevented was communication to a federal
officer. Thus, if a suspect in an investigation murders an
informant to prevent him from talking to authorities, but
is unaware that the informant was working for the FBI,
the suspect would be guilty: He would have committed a
murder with the intention of preventing the informant’s
communication to authorities about his criminal activities,
and the communication he sought to prevent would neces
sarily have been to federal law enforcement. Likewise, a
suspect would be guilty if he committed a murder to pre
vent a witness from informing law enforcement that he
lied on his federal income tax return: He sought to pre
vent a communication that would have been made to
federal officials, because they alone prosecute federal tax
violations. But a suspect who commits a murder with the
general intent of preventing law enforcement from learn
ing about activities that violate both state and federal
law would not be guilty, because the Government would
be unable to prove that the communication he sought to
prevent necessarily would have been to a federal official.
Applying that standard, this is an easy case. There was
evidence that Fowler murdered Officer Horner in order

