8

FOWLER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

F. 3d, at 888 (requiring showing of a “possible or potential
communication to federal authorities”). But, in our view,
that standard is difficult to reconcile with the statute’s
language and its intended, basically federal, scope. Cf.
supra, at 6–7.
Often, when a defendant acts in ways that violate state
criminal law, some or all of those acts will violate federal
criminal law as well. And where a federal crime is at
issue, communication with federal law enforcement offi
cers is almost always a possibility. Thus, to allow the
Government to show only a mere possibility that a com
munication would have been with federal officials is to
permit the Government to show little more than the possi
ble commission of a federal offense. (That is to say, the
latter showing by itself would almost automatically show
the statutorily necessary connection with a federal law
enforcement officer.) The “possibility” standard would
thereby weaken or eliminate the independent force of the
separate statutory requirement that the defendant, in
killing the victim, must intend to prevent communication
with one who is “a law enforcement officer or judge of
the United States.” 18 U. S. C. §1512(a)(1)(C) (emphasis
added); see §1515(a)(4) (defining “law enforcement officer”
as “an officer or employee of the Federal Government”
(emphasis added)). Cf. Duncan v. Walker, 533 U. S. 167,
174 (2001) (normally we must give effect “to every clause
and word of a statute” (internal quotation marks omit
ted)); Ratzlaf v. United States, 510 U. S. 135, 140–141
(1994) (expressing particular reluctance to “treat statutory
terms” as “surplusage” “when the words describe an ele
ment of a criminal offense”).
Moreover, because of the frequent overlap between state
and federal crimes, the use of a standard based on the
word “possible” would transform a federally oriented
statute into a statute that would deal with crimes, investi
gations, and witness tampering that, as a practical mat

