(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FOWLER v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–5443. Argued March 29, 2011—Decided May 26, 2011
While preparing to rob a bank, petitioner Fowler and others were dis
covered by a local police officer, whom Fowler killed. Fowler was
convicted of violating the federal witness tampering statute, which
makes it a crime “to kill another person, with intent to . . . prevent
the communication by any person to a [Federal] law enforcement offi
cer” of “information relating to the . . . possible commission of a Fed
eral offense,” 18 U. S. C. §1512(a)(1)(C). Rejecting Fowler’s argument
that the evidence was insufficient to show that he had killed the offi
cer intending to prevent him from communicating with a federal offi
cer, the Eleventh Circuit held that a showing of a possible or poten
tial communication to federal authorities was sufficient.
Held: In such circumstances, the Government must establish a
§1512(a)(1)(C) violation by showing there was a reasonable likelihood
that a relevant communication would have been made to a federal of
ficer. Pp. 3–10.
(a) In a §1512(a)(1)(C) prosecution, “no state of mind need be
proved with respect to the circumstance . . . that the law enforcement
officer is an . . . employee of the Federal Government,” §1512(g)(2).
Thus, the Government must prove (1) a killing, (2) committed with a
particular intent, namely, an intent (a) to “prevent” a “communica
tion” (b) about “the commission or possible commission of a Federal
offense” (c) to a federal “law enforcement officer.” P. 3.
(b) Nothing in §1512(a)(1)(C)’s language limits it to instances in
which the defendant has some identifiable law enforcement officers
particularly in mind. Any such limitation would conflict with the
statute’s basic purpose. Witness tampering may prove more serious
(and more effective) when the crime takes place before the victim has
engaged in any communication at all with officers—at a time when

