4

FOWLER v. UNITED STATES 

Opinion of the Court 


III 

When the defendant has in mind a particular individual
or a particular set of individuals with whom he fears the
victim might communicate, the application of the statute
is relatively clear. For instance, if a defendant kills a
victim with the intent of preventing the victim from com
municating with a particular individual, say John Smith,
who the defendant knows is a federal law enforcement
officer, the statute fits like a glove. If a defendant kills a
victim with the intent of preventing the victim from com
municating with Sam Smith, who is in fact (but who the
defendant does not know is) a federal law enforcement
officer, the statute still fits, for it specifically says that “no
state of mind need be proved” with respect to this last
mentioned circumstance.
Nothing in the statutory language, however, limits it to
these kinds of instances, instances in which the defendant
has some law enforcement officer or set of officers, or other
identifiable individuals, particularly in mind. Moreover,
any such limitation would conflict with the statute’s basic
purpose. Witness tampering may prove more serious (and
more effective) when the crime takes place before the
victim has engaged in any communication at all with law
enforcement officers—at a time when the precise commu
nication and nature of the officer who may receive it are
not yet known. Cf., e.g., S. Rep. No. 97–532, pp. 14, 15
(1982) (statute applies “to offenses against witnesses,
victims, or informants which occur before the witness
testifies or the informant communicates with law en
forcement officers”); id., at 19 (witness “[i]ntimidation
offenses are particularly insidious and do violence to
traditional notions of justice because no one can be con
victed of a crime which is not reported. [Section 1512]
reaches intimidation offenses committed before a crime is
reported to the appropriate authorities”). Hence the stat
ute covers a defendant who kills with intent to prevent

