4

FOWLER v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

The Court also proclaims that a narrower view “would
conflict with the statute’s basic purpose,” which is to
prevent witness tampering “at a time when the precise
communication and nature of the officer who may receive
it are not yet known.” Ante, at 4. It cites no basis for
attributing that purpose, and there is none—other than
the fact that it supports the Court’s outcome. Another
purpose is just as likely—and indeed more likely, since it
can be achieved without abandonment of the ancient rule
that in criminal prosecutions facts must be found beyond a
reasonable doubt. Murder, after all, is a crime, and often
a capital crime, under all state laws. There is no reason to
ascribe to Congress the “purpose” of transferring murder
prosecutions that would ordinarily be brought in state
court to federal court based on only a tangential federal
interest. Congress was concerned with preserving the
integrity and effectiveness of federal prosecutions, and
where they are not clearly involved (as the ordinary be
yond-a-reasonable-doubt standard would require) a federal
murder prosecution has no proper place. Limited as I
have suggested, the federal law would still have ample
scope, reaching what were surely the principal cases Con
gress had in mind—the killing of prospective witnesses in
federal trials or in ongoing federal investigations. Here,
as would be the case in many situations involving a
merely hypothetical link to a federal investigation, Fowler
murdered a state police officer. The natural place to have
prosecuted him would have been state court.
The Court’s analysis is even less persuasive in light of
the rule of lenity, under which we must construe ambigu
ous criminal statutes in favor of the defendant. Here, the
Court adopts a kind of rule of harshness, discarding the
most straightforward construction of the text in favor of
textually implausible one, based on vague intuitions about
the statute’s purpose. The Court’s opinion never cites the
rule of lenity, probably because it cannot honestly say that

