Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

The dissent also observes that when a defendant murders
a federal officer to prevent him from communicating in
formation about a nonfederal crime, he does not violate
the statute. Post, at 7. This observation convincingly
establishes that the statutory words “Federal offense” are
not superfluous under the dissent’s view, an observation
irrelevant to my point that the dissent makes the statu
tory words “of the United States” superfluous.
The dissent contends that my interpretation “has no
grounding in the language of the statute.” Post, at 4. It
asserts that “the text of the statute makes it perfectly
clear that the federal officer requirement is exclusively an
element of the defendant’s mens rea.” Post, at 5 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Perhaps the only thing “per
fectly clear” about this statute is that it states the precise
opposite of that proposition: “[N]o state of mind need be
proved with respect to the circumstance . . . that the law
enforcement officer is an officer or employee of the Federal
Government.” §1512(g)(2).
The dissent’s interpretation would federalize crimes
that have no connection to any federal investigation. A
person caught by a state police officer with marijuana who
murders the state police officer to cover it up could be
prosecuted in federal court. That would approach the
outer limits of Congress’s enumerated powers. We have
adopted a federalism principle that applies when a statute
would render “traditionally local criminal conduct . . . a
matter for federal enforcement”: “[U]nless Congress con
veys its purpose clearly, it will not be deemed to have
significantly changed the federal-state balance in the
prosecution of crimes.” Jones v. United States, 529 U. S.
848, 858 (2000) (internal quotation marks omitted). Thus,
the dissent adds to the Court’s “rule of harshness” a rule of
antifederalism, under which a court must actually ignore
a federal connection that Congress prescribed so as to
avoid intrusion into traditionally local law enforcement.

