Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

communication with law enforcement officers generally
(i.e., with any and all law enforcement officers). And we
must consequently decide what, if anything, the Govern
ment must show about the likelihood of a hypothetical
communication with a federal law enforcement officer in
circumstances where the defendant did not think specifi
cally about any particular communication or its recipient.
In these circumstances, the application of the statute is
not as simple. We cannot determine whether the individ
ual the defendant had in mind is in fact a federal officer,
because the defendant did not have a particular individual
in mind. And we cannot insist that the defendant have
had some general thought about federal officers in mind
because the statute says that “no state of mind need be
proved” in respect to the federal nature of the communica
tion’s recipient. §1512(g)(2). What, then, must the Gov
ernment show to prove that such a defendant intended to
prevent communications to federal officers?
We begin with two basic propositions. First, in our
view, the Government need not show beyond a reasonable
doubt (or even that it is more likely than not) that the
hypothetical communication would have been to a federal
officer. No Circuit has adopted this interpretation, and no
party argues for it here. But see post, at 1–2 (SCALIA, J.,
concurring in judgment). And for good reason: The rele
vant question concerns the defendant’s intent. The Gov
ernment will already have shown beyond a reasonable
doubt that the defendant possessed the relevant broad
indefinite intent, namely, the intent to prevent the victim
from communicating with (unspecified) law enforcement
officers. And one can possess an intent (i.e., one can act in
order to bring about a certain state of affairs) even if there
is considerable doubt whether the event that the intent
contemplates will in fact occur. One can, for example, put
up shutters with the intent of protecting the furniture
from hurricane damage even if there is considerable doubt

