18

AMERICAN NEEDLE, INC. v. NATIONAL 

FOOTBALL LEAGUE
Opinion of the Court 





VI
Football teams that need to cooperate are not trapped
by antitrust law. “[T]he special characteristics of this
industry may provide a justification” for many kinds of
agreements. Brown, 518 U. S., at 252 (STEVENS, J., dis­
senting). The fact that NFL teams share an interest in
making the entire league successful and profitable, and
that they must cooperate in the production and scheduling
of games, provides a perfectly sensible justification for
making a host of collective decisions. But the conduct at
issue in this case is still concerted activity under the
Sherman Act that is subject to §1 analysis.
When “restraints on competition are essential if the
product is to be available at all,” per se rules of illegality
are inapplicable, and instead the restraint must be judged
according to the flexible Rule of Reason.10 NCAA, 468
——————
Government urges that the choices “to offer only a blanket license” and
“to have only a single headwear licensee” might not constitute con­
certed action under its test. Id., at 32. However, because the teams
still own their own trademarks and are free to market those trade­
marks as they see fit, even those two choices were agreements amongst
potential competitors and would constitute concerted action under the
Government’s own standard. At any point, the teams could decide to
license their own trademarks. It is significant, moreover, that the
teams here control NFLP. The two choices that the Government might
treat as independent action, although nominally made by NFLP, are for
all functional purposes choices made by the 32 entities with potentially
competing interests.
10 Justice Brandeis provided the classic formulation of the Rule of
Reason in Board of Trade of Chicago v. United States, 246 U. S. 231,

238 (1918): 

“The true test of legality is whether the restraint imposed is such as 

merely regulates and perhaps thereby promotes competition or whether
it is such as may suppress or even destroy competition. To determine
that question the court must ordinarily consider the facts peculiar to
the business to which the restraint is applied; its condition before and
after the restraint is imposed; the nature of the restraint and its effect,
actual or probable. The history of the restraint, the evil believed to
exist, the reason for adopting the particular remedy, the purpose or end

