Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
managerial and playing personnel. See, e.g., Brown v. Pro Football,
Inc., 518 U. S. 231, 249. Directly relevant here, the teams are poten
tially competing suppliers in the market for intellectual property.
When teams license such property, they are not pursuing the “com
mon interests of the whole” league, but, instead, the interests of each
“corporation itself.” Copperweld, 467 U. S., at 770. It is not disposi
tive, as respondents argue, that, by forming NFLP, they have formed
a single entity, akin to a merger, and market their NFL brands
through a single outlet. Although the NFL respondents may be simi
lar in some sense to a single enterprise, they are not similar in the
relevant functional sense. While teams have common interests such
as promoting the NFL brand, they are still separate, profit
maximizing entities, and their interests in licensing team trade
marks are not necessarily aligned. Nor does it matter that the teams
may find the alleged cooperation necessary to compete against other
forms of entertainment. Although decisions made by NFLP are not
as easily classified as concerted activity, the NFLP’s decisions about
licensing the teams’ separately owned intellectual property are con
certed activity and thus covered by §1 for the same reason that deci
sions made directly by the 32 teams are covered by §1. In making the
relevant licensing decisions, NFLP is “an instrumentality” of the
teams. Sealy, 388 U. S., at 352–354. Pp. 11–17.
(e) Football teams that need to cooperate are not trapped by anti
trust law. The fact that the NFL teams share an interest in making
the entire league successful and profitable, and that they must coop
erate to produce games, provides a perfectly sensible justification for
making a host of collective decisions. Because some of these re
straints on competition are necessary to produce the NFL’s product,
the Rule of Reason generally should apply, and teams’ cooperation is
likely to be permissible. And depending upon the activity in ques
tion, the Rule of Reason can at times be applied without detailed
analysis. But the activity at issue in this case is still concerted activ
ity covered for §1 purposes. Pp. 18–19.
538 F. 3d 736, reversed and remanded.
STEVENS, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

