6

AMERICAN NEEDLE, INC. v. NATIONAL 

FOOTBALL LEAGUE
Opinion of the Court 





Hovenkamp ¶1464c, at 206. Concerted activity is thus
“judged more sternly than unilateral activity under §2,”
Copperweld, 467 U. S., at 768. For these reasons, §1
prohibits any concerted action “in restraint of trade or
commerce,” even if the action does not “threate[n] monopo­
lization,” Ibid. And therefore, an arrangement must
embody concerted action in order to be a “contract, combi­
nation . . . or conspiracy” under §1.
III
We have long held that concerted action under §1 does
not turn simply on whether the parties involved are le­
gally distinct entities. Instead, we have eschewed such
formalistic distinctions in favor of a functional considera­
tion of how the parties involved in the alleged anticom­
petitive conduct actually operate.
As a result, we have repeatedly found instances in
which members of a legally single entity violated §1 when
the entity was controlled by a group of competitors and
served, in essence, as a vehicle for ongoing concerted
activity. In United States v. Sealy, Inc., 388 U. S. 350
(1967), for example, a group of mattress manufacturers
operated and controlled Sealy, Inc., a company that li­
censed the Sealy trademark to the manufacturers, and
——————
trade (even if it does not threaten monopolization), that prohibition
could deter perfectly competitive conduct by firms that are fearful of
litigation costs and judicial error. See Copperweld, 467 U. S., at 768
(“Judging unilateral conduct in this manner reduces the risk that the
antitrust laws will dampen the competitive zeal of a single aggressive
competitor”); cf. United States v. United States Gypsum Co., 438 U. S.
422, 441 (1978) (“[S]alutary and procompetitive conduct . . . might be
shunned by businessmen who chose to be excessively cautious in the
face of uncertainty”). Moreover, if every unilateral action that re­
strained trade were subject to antitrust scrutiny, then courts would be
forced to judge almost every internal business decision. See 7 P.
Areeda & H. Hovenkamp, Antitrust Law ¶1464c, at 206 (2d ed. 2003)
(hereinafter Areeda & Hovenkamp) (unilateral behavior is “often
difficult to evaluate or remedy”).

