(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

AMERICAN NEEDLE, INC. v. NATIONAL FOOTBALL

LEAGUE ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–661.

Argued January 13, 2010—Decided May 24, 2010

Respondent National Football League (NFL) is an unincorporated asso
ciation of 32 separately owned professional football teams, also re
spondents here. The teams, each of which owns its own name, colors,
logo, trademarks, and related intellectual property, formed respon
dent National Football League Properties (NFLP) to develop, license,
and market that property. At first, NFLP granted nonexclusive li
censes to petitioner and other vendors to manufacture and sell team
labeled apparel. In December 2000, however, the teams authorized
NFLP to grant exclusive licenses. NFLP granted an exclusive license
to respondent Reebok International Ltd. to produce and sell trade
marked headwear for all 32 teams. When petitioner’s license was not
renewed, it filed this action alleging that the agreements between re
spondents violated the Sherman Act, §1 of which makes “[e]very con
tract, combination . . . or, conspiracy, in restraint of trade” illegal.
Respondents answered that they were incapable of conspiring within
§1’s meaning because the NFL and its teams are, in antitrust law
jargon, a single entity with respect to the conduct challenged. The
District Court granted respondents summary judgment, and the Sev
enth Circuit affirmed.
Held: The alleged conduct related to licensing of intellectual property
constitutes concerted action that is not categorically beyond §1’s cov
erage. Pp. 4–20.
(a) The meaning of “contract, combination . . . , or, conspiracy” in §1
of the Sherman Act is informed by the Act’s “ ‘basic distinction be
tween concerted and independent action.’ ” Copperweld Corp. v. In
dependence Tube Corp., 467 U. S. 752, 767. Section 1 “treat[s] con
certed behavior more strictly than unilateral behavior,” id., at 768,

