Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

to the conduct challenged.” App. 99. After limited discov­
ery, the District Court granted summary judgment on the
question “whether, with regard to the facet of their opera­
tions respecting exploitation of intellectual property
rights, the NFL and its 32 teams are, in the jargon of
antitrust law, acting as a single entity.” American Needle,
Inc. v. New Orleans La. Saints, 496 F. Supp. 2d 941, 943
(2007). The court concluded “that in that facet of their
operations they have so integrated their operations that
they should be deemed a single entity rather than joint
ventures cooperating for a common purpose.” Ibid.
The Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit affirmed.
The panel observed that “in some contexts, a league seems
more aptly described as a single entity immune from
antitrust scrutiny, while in others a league appears to be a
joint venture between independently owned teams that is
subject to review under §1.” 538 F. 3d, 736, 741 (2008).
Relying on Circuit precedent, the court limited its inquiry
to the particular conduct at issue, licensing of teams’
intellectual property. The panel agreed with petitioner
that “when making a single-entity determination, courts
must examine whether the conduct in question deprives
the marketplace of the independent sources of economic
control that competition assumes.” Id., at 742. The court,
however, discounted the significance of potential competi­
tion among the teams regarding the use of their intellec­
tual property because the teams “can function only as one
source of economic power when collectively producing NFL
football.” Id., at 743. The court noted that football itself
can only be carried out jointly. See ibid. (“Asserting that
a single football team could produce a football game . . . is
a Zen riddle: Who wins when a football team plays itself ”).
Moreover, “NFL teams share a vital economic interest in
collectively promoting NFL football . . . [to] compet[e] with
other forms of entertainment.” Ibid. “It thus follows,” the
court found, “that only one source of economic power con­

