2

AMERICAN NEEDLE, INC. v. NATIONAL 

FOOTBALL LEAGUE
Syllabus 





because, unlike independent action, “[c]oncerted activity inherently is
fraught with anticompetitive risk” insofar as it “deprives the market
place of independent centers of decisionmaking that competition as
sumes and demands,” id., at 768–769. And because concerted action
is discrete and distinct, a limit on such activity leaves untouched a
vast amount of business conduct. That creates less risk of deterring
a firm’s necessary conduct and leaves courts to examine only discrete
agreements. An arrangement must therefore embody concerted ac
tion in order to be a “contract, combination . . . or, conspiracy” under
§1. Pp. 4–6.
(b) In determining whether there is concerted action under §1, the
Court has eschewed formalistic distinctions, such as whether the al
leged conspirators are legally distinct entities, in favor of a functional
consideration of how they actually operate. The Court has repeatedly
found instances in which members of a legally single entity violated
§1 when the entity was controlled by a group of competitors and
served, in essence, as a vehicle for ongoing concerted activity. See,
e.g., United States v. Sealy, Inc., 388 U. S. 350, 352–356. Conversely,
the Court has found that although the entities may be “separate” for
purposes of incorporation or formal title, if they are controlled by a
single center of decisionmaking and they control a single aggregation
of economic power, an agreement between them does not constitute a
“contract, combination . . . or, conspiracy.” Copperweld, 467 U. S., at
769. Pp. 6–10.
(c) The relevant inquiry is therefore one of substance, not form,
which does not turn on whether the alleged parties to contract, com
bination, or conspiracy are part of a legally single entity or seem like
one firm or multiple firms in any metaphysical sense. The inquiry is
whether the agreement in question joins together “separate economic
actors pursuing separate economic interests,” Copperweld, 467 U. S.,
at 768, such that it “deprives the marketplace of independent centers
of decisionmaking,” id., at 769, and therefore of diversity of entrepre
neurial interests and thus of actual or potential competition. If it
does, then there is concerted action covered by §1, and the court must
decide whether the restraint of trade is unreasonable and therefore
illegal. Pp. 10–11.
(d) The NFL teams do not possess either the unitary decisionmak
ing quality or the single aggregation of economic power characteristic
of independent action. Each of them is a substantial, independently
owned, independently managed business, whose “general corporate
actions are guided or determined” by “separate corporate conscious
nesses,” and whose “objectives are” not “common.” Copperweld, 467
U. S., at 771. They compete with one another, not only on the play
ing field, but to attract fans, for gate receipts, and for contracts with

