Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

analysis. Nor does it mean that once a group of firms
agree to produce a joint product, cooperation amongst
those firms must be treated as independent conduct. The
mere fact that the teams operate jointly in some sense
does not mean that they are immune.7
The question whether NFLP decisions can constitute
concerted activity covered by §1 is closer than whether
decisions made directly by the 32 teams are covered by §1.
This is so both because NFLP is a separate corporation
with its own management and because the record indi­
cates that most of the revenues generated by NFLP are
shared by the teams on an equal basis. Nevertheless we
think it clear that for the same reasons the 32 teams’
conduct is covered by §1, NFLP’s actions also are subject
to §1, at least with regards to its marketing of property
owned by the separate teams. NFLP’s licensing decisions
are made by the 32 potential competitors, and each of
them actually owns its share of the jointly managed as­
sets. Cf. Sealy, 388 U. S., at 352–354. Apart from their
agreement to cooperate in exploiting those assets, includ­
ing their decisions as the NFLP, there would be nothing to
prevent each of the teams from making its own market
——————
7 In any event, it simply is not apparent that the alleged conduct was
necessary at all. Although two teams are needed to play a football
game, not all aspects of elaborate interleague cooperation are necessary
to produce a game. Moreover, even if leaguewide agreements are
necessary to produce football, it does not follow that concerted activity
in marketing intellectual property is necessary to produce football.
The Court of Appeals carved out a zone of antitrust immunity for
conduct arguably related to league operations by reasoning that coordi­
nated team trademark sales are necessary to produce “NFL football,” a
single NFL brand that competes against other forms of entertainment.
But defining the product as “NFL football” puts the cart before the
horse: Of course the NFL produces NFL football; but that does not
mean that cooperation amongst NFL teams is immune from §1 scru­
tiny. Members of any cartel could insist that their cooperation is
necessary to produce the “cartel product” and compete with other
products.

