2

AMERICAN NEEDLE, INC. v. NATIONAL 

FOOTBALL LEAGUE
Opinion of the Court 





colors, and logo, and owns related intellectual property.
Like each of the other teams in the league, the New Or­
leans Saints and the Indianapolis Colts, for example, have
their own distinctive names, colors, and marks that are
well known to millions of sports fans.
Prior to 1963, the teams made their own arrangements
for licensing their intellectual property and marketing
trademarked items such as caps and jerseys. In 1963, the
teams formed National Football League Properties (NFLP)
to develop, license, and market their intellectual property.
Most, but not all, of the substantial revenues generated by
NFLP have either been given to charity or shared equally
among the teams. However, the teams are able to and
have at times sought to withdraw from this arrangement.
Between 1963 and 2000, NFLP granted nonexclusive
licenses to a number of vendors, permitting them to manu­
facture and sell apparel bearing team insignias. Peti­
tioner, American Needle, Inc., was one of those licensees.
In December 2000, the teams voted to authorize NFLP to
grant exclusive licenses, and NFLP granted Reebok Inter­
national Ltd. an exclusive 10-year license to manufacture
and sell trademarked headwear for all 32 teams. It there­
after declined to renew American Needle’s nonexclusive
license.
American Needle filed this action in the Northern Dis­
trict of Illinois, alleging that the agreements between the
NFL, its teams, NFLP, and Reebok violated §§1 and 2 of
the Sherman Act. In their answer to the complaint, the
defendants averred that the teams, NFL, and NFLP were
incapable of conspiring within the meaning of §1 “because
they are a single economic enterprise, at least with respect
——————
sional Football Association.” United States Football League v. National
Football League, 842 F. 2d 1335, 1343 (CA2 1988). It took its current
name in 1922. Ibid. Forty-one franchises failed in the first forty-one
years of the League’s existence. Ibid.

