Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

economic benefits separate and apart from NFLP profits
as a result of the decisions they make for the NFLP.
NFLP’s decisions thus affect each team’s profits from
licensing its own intellectual property. “Although the
business interests of” the teams “will often coincide with
those of the” NFLP “as an entity in itself, that commonal­
ity of interest exists in every cartel.” Los Angeles Memo
rial Coliseum Comm’n v. NFL, 726 F. 2d 1381, 1389 (CA9
1984) (emphasis added). In making the relevant licensing
decisions, NFLP is therefore “an instrumentality” of the
teams. Sealy, 388 U. S., at 352–354; see also Topco Asso
ciates, Inc., 405 U. S., at 609.
If the fact that potential competitors shared in profits or
losses from a venture meant that the venture was immune
from §1, then any cartel “could evade the antitrust law
simply by creating a ‘joint venture’ to serve as the exclu­
sive seller of their competing products.” Major League
Baseball Properties, Inc. v. Salvino, Inc., 542 F. 3d 290,
335 (CA2 2008) (Sotomayor, J., concurring in judgment).
“So long as no agreement,” other than one made by the
cartelists sitting on the board of the joint venture, “explic­
itly listed the prices to be charged, the companies could act
as monopolies through the ‘joint venture.’ ” Ibid. (Indeed,
a joint venture with a single management structure is
generally a better way to operate a cartel because it de­
creases the risks of a party to an illegal agreement defect­
ing from that agreement). However, competitors “cannot
simply get around” antitrust liability by acting “through a
third-party intermediary or ‘joint venture’.” Id., at 336.9
——————
9 For the purposes of resolving this case, there is no need to pass upon
the Government’s position that entities are incapable of conspiring
under §1 if they “have effectively merged the relevant aspect of their
operations, thereby eliminating actual and potential competition . . . in
that operational sphere” and “the challenged restraint [does] not
significantly affect actual or potential competition . . . outside their
merged operations.” Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 17. The

