14

AMERICAN NEEDLE, INC. v. NATIONAL 

FOOTBALL LEAGUE
Opinion of the Court 





at the expense of those who are not parties. It is true, as
respondents describe, that they have for some time mar­
keted their trademarks jointly. But a history of concerted
activity does not immunize conduct from §1 scrutiny.
“Absence of actual competition may simply be a manifes­
tation of the anticompetitive agreement itself.” Freeman,
322 F. 3d, at 1149.
Respondents argue that nonetheless, as the Court of
Appeals held, they constitute a single entity because
without their cooperation, there would be no NFL football.
It is true that “the clubs that make up a professional
sports league are not completely independent economic
competitors, as they depend upon a degree of cooperation
for economic survival.” Brown, 518 U. S., at 248. But the
Court of Appeals’ reasoning is unpersuasive.
The justification for cooperation is not relevant to
whether that cooperation is concerted or independent
action.6 A “contract, combination . . . or conspiracy,” §1,
that is necessary or useful to a joint venture is still a
“contract, combination . . . or conspiracy” if it “deprives the
marketplace of independent centers of decisionmaking,”
Copperweld, 467 U. S., at 769. See NCAA, 468 U. S., at
113 (“[J]oint ventures have no immunity from antitrust
laws”). Any joint venture involves multiple sources of
economic power cooperating to produce a product. And for
many such ventures, the participation of others is neces­
sary. But that does not mean that necessity of cooperation
transforms concerted action into independent action; a nut
and a bolt can only operate together, but an agreement
between nut and bolt manufacturers is still subject to §1
——————
6 As discussed infra, necessity of cooperation is a factor relevant to
whether the agreement is subject to the Rule of Reason. See NCAA,
468 U. S., at 101 (holding that NCAA restrictions on televising college
football games are subject to Rule of Reason analysis for the “critical”
reason that “horizontal restraints on competition are essential if the
product is to be available at all”).

