Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Per Curiam

under 28 U. S. C. §2254 in the United States District
Court for the Northern District of Illinois. Cross argued,
among other things, that the state court had unreasonably applied clearly established Supreme Court precedents holding that the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth
Amendment precludes the admission of the prior testimony of an allegedly unavailable witness unless the prosecution made a good-faith effort to obtain the declarant’s
presence at trial. The District Court denied Cross’ petition, but the Seventh Circuit reversed. According to the
Seventh Circuit, the Illinois Court of Appeals was unreasonable in holding that the State had made a sufficient
effort to secure A. S.’s presence at the retrial. The Seventh Circuit stressed the importance of A. S.’s testimony
and the manner of her testimony at the first trial.
In Barber v. Page, 390 U. S. 719 (1968), we held that “a
witness is not ‘unavailable’ for purposes of the . . . confrontation requirement unless the prosecutorial authorities
have made a good-faith effort to obtain his presence at
trial.” Id., at 724–725. In Barber, we held that a witness
had not been unavailable for Confrontation Clause purposes because the State, which could have brought the
witness to court by seeking a writ of habeas corpus ad
testificandum, had “made absolutely no effort to obtain
[his] presence . . . at trial” apart from determining that he
was serving a sentence in a federal prison. Id., at 723; see
also id., at 725.
We again addressed the question of witness unavailability in Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U. S. 56 (1980). In that case,
we held, the State had discharged its “duty of good-faith
effort.” Id., at 75. We noted that the prosecutor had
spoken to the witness’ mother, who reported that she had
no knowledge of her daughter’s whereabouts and “knew of
no way to reach [her] even in an emergency.” Ibid. We
also noted that the State had served five subpoenas in the
witness’ name to her parents’ residence over a 4-month

