(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

KUCANA v. HOLDER, ATTORNEY GENERAL
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–911.

Argued November 10, 2009—Decided January 20, 2010

The Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of
1996 (IIRIRA) amended the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA or
Act), codifying certain rules, earlier prescribed by the Attorney Gen
eral, that govern the process of reopening removal proceedings.
IIRIRA also added a provision stating that no court has jurisdiction
to review any action of the Attorney General “the authority for which
is specified under this subchapter to be in the discretion of the Attor
ney General.” 8 U. S. C. §1252(a)(2)(B)(ii). A regulation, amended
just months before IIRIRA’s enactment, provides that “[t]he decision
to grant or deny a motion to reopen . . . is within the discretion of the
[Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA)],” 8 CFR §1003.2(a). As adjudi
cator in immigration cases, the BIA exercises authority delegated by
the Attorney General.
Petitioner Kucana moved to reopen his removal proceedings, as
serting new evidence in support of his plea for asylum. An Immigra
tion Judge denied the motion, and the BIA sustained that ruling.
The Seventh Circuit concluded that it lacked jurisdiction to review
the administrative determination, holding that §1252(a)(2)(B)(ii) bars
judicial review not only of administrative decisions made discretion
ary by statute, but also of those made discretionary by regulation.
Held: Section 1252(a)(2)(B)’s proscription of judicial review applies only
to Attorney General determinations made discretionary by statute,
not to determinations declared discretionary by the Attorney General
himself through regulation. Pp. 6–18.
(a) The motion to reopen is an “important safeguard” intended “to
ensure a proper and lawful disposition” of immigration proceedings.
Dada v. Mukasey, 554 U. S. 1, ___. Federal-court review of adminis
trative decisions denying motions to reopen removal proceedings

