Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
(4) Also significant is the character of the decisions insulated
from judicial review in §1252(a)(2)(B)(i). The listed determinations
are substantive decisions the Executive makes involving whether or
not aliens can stay in the country. Other decisions specified by stat
ute “to be in the discretion of the Attorney General,” and therefore
shielded from court oversight by §1252(a)(2)(B)(ii), are of a like kind.
See, e.g., §1157(c)(1). Decisions on reopening motions made discre
tionary by regulation, in contrast, are adjunct rulings. A court deci
sion reversing the denial of a motion to reopen does not direct the
Executive to afford the alien substantive relief; ordinarily, it touches
and concerns only the question whether the alien’s claims have been
accorded a reasonable hearing. Had Congress wanted the jurisdic
tional bar to encompass decisions specified as discretionary by regu
lation as well as by statute, moreover, Congress could easily have
said so, as it did in provisions enacted simultaneously with
§1252(a)(2)(B)(ii). See, e.g., IIRIRA, §213, 110 Stat. 3009–572.
Pp. 12–14.
(5) The history of the relevant statutory provisions corroborates
this determination. Attorney General regulations have long ad
dressed reopening requests. In enacting IIRIRA, Congress simulta
neously codified the process for filing motions to reopen and acted to
bar judicial review of a number of executive decisions regarding re
moval. But Congress did not codify the regulation delegating to the
BIA discretion to grant or deny reopening motions. This legislative
silence indicates that Congress left the matter where it was preIIRIRA: The BIA has broad discretion, conferred by the Attorney
General, “to grant or deny a motion to reopen,” 8 CFR §1003.2(a), but
courts retain jurisdiction to review the BIA’s decision. It is unsur
prising that Congress would leave in place judicial oversight of this
“important [procedural] safeguard,” Dada, 554 U. S., at ___, where,
as here, the alien’s underlying asylum claim would itself be review
able. The REAL ID Act of 2005, which further amended the INA by
adding or reformulating provisions on asylum, protection from re
moval, and even judicial review, did not disturb the unbroken line of
decisions upholding court review of administrative denials of motions
to reopen. Pp. 14–16.
(c) Any lingering doubt about §1252(a)(2)(B)(ii)’s proper interpreta
tion would be dispelled by a familiar statutory construction principle:
the presumption favoring judicial review of administrative action.
When a statute is “reasonably susceptible to divergent interpreta
tion,” this Court adopts the reading “that executive determinations
generally are subject to judicial review.” Gutierrez de Martinez v.
Lamagno, 515 U. S. 417, 434. The Court has consistently applied
this interpretive guide to legislation regarding immigration, and par

