12

KUCANA v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

ing the meaning of the clause (ii) catchall. Read harmoni
ously, both clauses convey that Congress barred court
review of discretionary decisions only when Congress itself
set out the Attorney General’s discretionary authority in
the statute. See Hall Street Associates, L. L. C. v. Mattel,
Inc., 552 U. S. ___, ___ (2008) (slip op., at 9) (“[W]hen a
statute sets out a series of specific items ending with a
general term, that general term is confined to covering
subjects comparable to the specifics it follows.”).14
4
We also find significant the character of the decisions
Congress enumerated in §1252(a)(2)(B)(i), thereby insulat
ing them from judicial review. As the Government ex
plained at oral argument, the determinations there listed
are “substantive decisions . . . made by the Executive in
the immigration context as a matter of grace, things that
involve whether aliens can stay in the country or not.” Tr.
of Oral Arg. 14.15 They include waivers of inadmissibility
based on certain criminal offenses, §1182(h), or based on
fraud or misrepresentation, §1182(i); cancellation of re
——————
14 Amicus suggests that the word “any” in §1252(a)(2)(B)(ii) should be
read expansively to draw in decisions made discretionary by regulation.
Brief for Court-Appointed Amicus Curiae in Support of Judgment
Below 21–23. But §1252(a)(2)(B)(ii) does not say “any decision”; it says
“any other decision.” And as we have just explained, other decisions
falling within §1252(a)(2)(B)(ii)’s compass are most sensibly understood
to include only decisions made discretionary by Congress. See Brief for
Respondent 19–20, and n. 11 (noting that “over thirty provisions in the
relevant subchapter of the INA . . . explicitly grant the Attorney Gen
eral . . . ‘discretion’ to make a certain decision”).
15 Counsel offered this explanation in response to the question: “Why
would Congress want to exclude review for discretionary judgments by
the Attorney General that are recited explicitly to be discretionary in
the statute, but provide judicial review for judgments that are just as
lawfully discretionary because the Attorney General is given the
authority to make them discretionary and has done so?” Tr. of Oral
Arg. 9; see id., at 13–14.

