Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

from the moment a delivery truck pulls up to the gate.
See supra, at 3–4. So the FMIA addresses not just food
safety, but humane treatment as well. Even California
conceded at oral argument that the FSIS could issue
regulations under the FMIA, similar to §599f, mandating
the euthanasia of nonambulatory swine.9 See Tr. of Oral
Arg. 46–47. If that is so—and it is, because of the FSIS’s
authority over humane-handling methods—then §599f ’s
requirements must fall within the FMIA’s scope.
The Circuit decisions upholding state bans on slaughtering horses, on which the Ninth Circuit relied, do not demand any different conclusion. We express no view on
those decisions, except to say that the laws sustained
there differ from §599f in a significant respect. A ban on
butchering horses for human consumption works at a
remove from the sites and activities that the FMIA most
directly governs. When such a ban is in effect, no horses
will be delivered to, inspected at, or handled by a slaughterhouse, because no horses will be ordered for purchase
in the first instance. But §599f does not and cannot work
in that way. As earlier noted, many nonambulatory pigs
become disabled either in transit to or after arrival at a
slaughterhouse. See supra, at 6–9, and nn. 5–6. So even
with §599f in effect, a swine slaughterhouse will encounter
nonambulatory pigs. In that circumstance, §599f tells the
slaughterhouse what to do with those animals. Unlike a
horse slaughtering ban, the statute thus reaches into the
slaughterhouse’s facilities and affects its daily activities.
And in so doing, the California law runs smack into the
FMIA’s regulations. So whatever might be said of other
bans on slaughter, §599f imposes requirements within—
——————
9 Indeed,

the FSIS recently solicited comment on a rulemaking petition that would require all nonambulatory disabled livestock, including
swine, to be humanely euthanized. See 76 Fed. Reg. 6572 (2011). The
FSIS has taken no further action on that petition.

