10

NATIONAL MEAT ASSN. v. HARRIS
Opinion of the Court

sold.” Brief for Non-State Respondents 45. At most, the
Humane Society claims, §599f(b)’s ban on sales offers
an “incentiv[e]” to a slaughterhouse to take nonambulatory
pigs out of the meat production process. Id., at 46. And
California may so “motivate[]” an operational choice without running afoul of the FMIA’s preemption provision.
Ibid. (quoting Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC, 544 U. S.
431, 443 (2005)).
But this argument mistakes how the prohibition on
sales operates within §599f as a whole. The sales ban is
a criminal proscription calculated to help implement and
enforce each of the section’s other regulations—its prohibition of receipt and purchase, its bar on butchering and
processing, and its mandate of immediate euthanasia.
The idea—and the inevitable effect—of the provision is to
make sure that slaughterhouses remove nonambulatory
pigs from the production process (or keep them out of the
process from the beginning) by criminalizing the sale of
their meat. That, we think, is something more than an
“incentive” or “motivat[or]”; the sales ban instead functions as a command to slaughterhouses to structure their
operations in the exact way the remainder of §599f mandates. And indeed, if the sales ban were to avoid the
FMIA’s preemption clause, then any State could impose
any regulation on slaughterhouses just by framing it as
a ban on the sale of meat produced in whatever way the
State disapproved. That would make a mockery of the
FMIA’s preemption provision. Cf. Engine Mfrs. Assn. v.
South Coast Air Quality Management Dist., 541 U. S. 246,
255 (2004) (stating that it “would make no sense” to allow
state regulations to escape preemption because they addressed the purchase, rather than manufacture, of a federally regulated product). Like the rest of §599f, the sales
ban regulates how slaughterhouses must deal with nonambulatory pigs on their premises. The FMIA therefore
preempts it for all the same reasons.

