2

NATIONAL MEAT ASSN. v. HARRIS
Syllabus
shall “buy, sell, or receive a nonambulatory animal”; “process, butcher, or sell meat or products of nonambulatory animals for human
consumption”; or “hold a nonambulatory animal without taking immediate action to humanely euthanize the animal.” §§599f(a)–(c).
Petitioner National Meat Association (NMA), a trade association representing meatpackers and processors, sued to enjoin enforcement of
§599f against swine slaughterhouses, arguing that the FMIA
preempts application of the state law. The District Court agreed, and
granted the NMA a preliminary injunction. The Ninth Circuit reversed, holding that §599f is not preempted because it regulates only
“the kind of animal that may be slaughtered,” not the inspection or
slaughtering process itself.

Held: The FMIA expressly preempts §599f’s application against federally inspected swine slaughterhouses. Pp. 6−14.
(a) The FMIA’s preemption clause sweeps widely, and so blocks the
applications of §599f challenged here. The clause prevents a State
from imposing any additional or different―even if nonconflicting―requirements that fall within the FMIA’s scope and concern
slaughterhouse facilities or operations. Section 599f imposes additional or different requirements on swine slaughterhouses: Where
under federal law a slaughterhouse may take one course of action in
handling a nonambulatory pig, under state law the slaughterhouse
must take another. For example, when a pig becomes injured and
thus nonambulatory sometime after delivery to a slaughterhouse,
§599f(c) prohibits the slaughterhouse from “hold[ing]” the pig without
immediately euthanizing it; and §599f(b) prohibits the slaughterhouse from “process[ing]” or “butcher[ing]” the animal to make food.
By contrast, the FMIA and its regulations allow a slaughterhouse to
hold (without euthanizing) any nonambulatory animal that has not
been condemned, and to process and butcher such an animal’s meat,
subject to an FSIS official’s approval at post-mortem inspection. Similarly, when a pig is nonambulatory at the time of delivery, §599f(a)
prohibits a slaughterhouse from “receiv[ing]” or “buy[ing]” the pig.
But the FMIA and its regulations expressly allow slaughterhouses to
purchase nonambulatory pigs. See 21 U. S. C. §644; 9 CFR
§325.20(c). And the FSIS inspection regime clearly contemplates
that slaughterhouses will receive nonambulatory animals. So §599f
substitutes a new regulatory regime for the one the FMIA prescribes.
Respondent Humane Society argues that §599f(a)’s ban on purchasing nonambulatory animals escapes preemption because it would
not be preempted if applied to purchases occurring off slaughterhouse
premises. But the record does not disclose whether §599f(a) ever applies beyond the slaughterhouse gate, much less how an application
of that kind would affect a slaughterhouse’s operations. Moreover,

