12

NATIONAL MEAT ASSN. v. HARRIS
Opinion of the Court

mals on a slaughterhouse’s premises that will never suffer
that fate. The Act’s implementing regulations themselves
exclude many classes of animals from the slaughtering
process. Swine with hog cholera, for example, are disqualified, see 9 CFR §309.5(a); so too are swine and other
livestock “affected with anthrax,” §309.7(a). Indeed, the
federal regulations prohibit the slaughter of any nonambulatory cattle for human consumption. See §309.3(e). As
these examples demonstrate, one vital function of the Act
and its regulations is to ensure that some kinds of livestock delivered to a slaughterhouse’s gates will not be
turned into meat. Under federal law, nonambulatory pigs
are not among those excluded animals. But that is to
say only that §599f ’s requirements differ from those of
the FMIA—not that §599f ’s requirements fall outside the
FMIA’s scope.
Nor are respondents right to suggest that §599f ’s exclusion avoids the FMIA’s scope because it is designed to
ensure the humane treatment of pigs, rather than the
safety of meat. See, e.g., Brief for State Respondents 29;
Brief for Non-State Respondents 39–40. That view misunderstands the authority—and indeed responsibility—
that the FMIA gives to federal officials. Since 1978, when
Congress incorporated the HMSA’s standards, the FMIA
has required slaughterhouses to follow prescribed methods
of humane handling, so as to minimize animals’ pain and
suffering. See 21 U. S. C. §§603(b), 610(b); supra, at 2–4.
A violation of those standards is a crime, see §676, and the
Secretary of Agriculture can suspend inspections at—and
thus effectively shut down—a slaughterhouse that disobeys them, see §§603(b), 610(c). To implement the Act’s
humane-handling provisions, the FSIS has issued detailed
regulations, see 9 CFR pt. 313, including some specifically
addressing animals that cannot walk, see §§313.2(d),
313.1(c). Those rules, as earlier noted, apply throughout
the time an animal is on a slaughterhouse’s premises,

