Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

animal’s meat for human consumption, subject to an FSIS
official’s approval at a post-mortem inspection. See ibid.
The State’s proscriptions thus exceed the FMIA’s. To be
sure, nothing in the federal Act requires what the state
law forbids (or forbids what the state law requires); California is right to note that “[t]he FMIA does not mandate
that ‘U. S. Suspect’ [nonambulatory] animals . . . be placed
into the human food production process.” Brief for State
Respondents 31. But that is irrelevant, because the
FMIA’s preemption clause covers not just conflicting, but
also different or additional state requirements. It therefore precludes California’s effort in §§599f(b) and (c) to impose new rules, beyond any the FSIS has chosen to adopt,
on what a slaughterhouse must do with a pig that becomes nonambulatory during the production process.
Similarly, consider how the state and federal laws address what a slaughterhouse should do when a pig is nonambulatory at the time of delivery, usually because of
harsh transportation conditions.6 Section 599f(a) of the
California law bars a slaughterhouse from “receiv[ing]” or
“buy[ing]” such a pig, thus obligating the slaughterhouse
to refuse delivery of the animal.7 But that directive, too,
deviates from any imposed by federal law. A regulation
issued under the FMIA specifically authorizes slaughterhouses to buy disabled or diseased animals (including
nonambulatory swine), by exempting them from a general
prohibition on such purchases. See 9 CFR §325.20(c).
——————
6 According to one estimate, almost half of one percent of the pigs
slaughtered annually in the United States become nonambulatory
during the trip from farm to slaughterhouse. See National Pork Board,
Transport Quality Assurance Handbook 25 (Version 4, 2010). About
half that many die during transport. See ibid.
7 Section 599f(a) also bans “sell[ing]” nonambulatory animals. But
because slaughterhouses (unlike other entities referenced in the provision) do not typically sell live animals, that prohibition is not at issue in
this case. The statute’s distinct ban on selling meat from nonambulatory animals that have been slaughtered is discussed infra, at 9–10.

