(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

NATIONAL MEAT ASSOCIATION v. HARRIS, 

ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CALIFORNIA, ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–224.

Argued November 9, 2011—Decided January 23, 2012

The Federal Meat Inspection Act (FMIA), 21 U. S. C. §601 et seq., regulates a broad range of activities at slaughterhouses to ensure the
safety of meat and the humane handling of animals. The Department of Agriculture’s Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS),
which administers the FMIA, has issued extensive regulations to
govern the inspection of animals and meat, as well as other aspects of
slaughterhouses’ operations and facilities. See 9 CFR §300.1 et seq.
The FSIS inspection procedure begins with an “ante-mortem” inspection of each animal brought to a slaughterhouse. If, at that inspection, a nonambulatory animal is found to suffer from a particularly
severe disease or condition, it must be classified as “U. S. Condemned” and killed apart from the slaughtering facilities where food
is produced. §§309.3, 311.1 et seq. Nonambulatory animals that are
not condemned are classified as “U. S. Suspect.” §309.2(b). They are
set apart, specially monitored, and “slaughtered separately from other livestock.” §309.2(n). Following slaughter, an inspector decides at
a “post-mortem” examination which parts, if any, of the suspect animal’s carcass may be processed into food for humans. See 9 CFR pts.
310, 311. FSIS regulations additionally prescribe methods for handling animals humanely at all stages of the slaughtering process, 9
CFR pt. 313, including specific provisions for the humane treatment
of nonambulatory animals, 9 CFR 313.2(d).
The FMIA’s preemption clause, §678, precludes states from imposing requirements that are “within the scope” of the FMIA, relate to
slaughterhouse “premises, facilities and operations,” and are “in addition to, or different than those made under” the FMIA. In 2008,
California amended its penal code to provide that no slaughterhouse

