Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

evidence of disease or injury, he approves the animal for
slaughter. If, at the other end of the spectrum, the inspector sees that an animal is dead or dying, comatose, suffering from a high fever, or afflicted with a serious disease or
condition, he designates the animal as “U. S. Condemned.”
See §309.3; §311.1 et seq. (listing diseases requiring condemnation). A condemned animal (if not already dead)
must be killed apart from the slaughtering facilities where
food is produced, and no part of its carcass may be sold for
human consumption. See §309.13(a); 21 U. S. C. §610(c).
The inspector also has an intermediate option: If he
determines that an animal has a less severe condition—or
merely suspects the animal of having a disease meriting
condemnation—he classifies the animal as “U. S. Suspect.”
See 9 CFR §309.2. That category includes all nonambulatory animals not found to require condemnation.2 See
§309.2(b). Suspect livestock must be “set apart,” specially
monitored, and (if not reclassified because of a change in
condition) “slaughtered separately from other livestock.”
§309.2(n). Following slaughter, an inspector decides at
a “post-mortem” examination which parts, if any, of the
suspect animal’s carcass may be processed into food for
humans. See 9 CFR pts. 310, 311.
The regulations implementing the FMIA additionally
prescribe methods for handling animals humanely at all
stages of the slaughtering process. Those rules apply from
the moment a truck carrying livestock “enters, or is in line
to enter,” a slaughterhouse’s premises. Humane Handling
and Slaughter of Livestock, FSIS Directive 6900.2, ch. II(I)
(rev. Aug. 15, 2011). And they include specific provisions
for the humane treatment of animals that cannot walk.
——————
2 The FSIS’s regulations define “non-ambulatory disabled livestock”
as “livestock that cannot rise from a recumbent position or that cannot
walk, including, but not limited to, those with broken appendages,
severed tendons or ligaments, nerve paralysis, fractured vertebral
column, or metabolic conditions.” §309.2(b).

