Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

BREYER, J., dissenting

authorize a pilot program permitting the use of video in
nonjury civil cases as part of an “experiment with the
dissemination of video recordings in civil nonjury matters”
(specifically those selected by the Chief Judge of the Cir
cuit and the Chief Judge of the District Court). And it
issued a press release. News Release, Ninth Circuit Judi
cial Council Approves Experimental Use of Cameras in
District Courts (Dec. 17, 2009), Exh, 13. App. to Pet.
In this context the United States District Court for the
Northern District of California amended its local rules on
December 22, 2009 to bring them into conformity with
Ninth Circuit policy. In particular, the court amended the
local Rule forbidding the public broadcasting or televising
of court proceedings by creating an exception “for partici
pation in a pilot or other project authorized by the Judicial
Council of the Ninth Circuit.” Public Notice Concerning
Revisions of Civil Local Rule 77–3, id., Exh. 14. The court
initially relied on a provision in the United States Code
that permits District Courts to prescribe rules “without
public notice and opportunity for comment” “[i]f the pre
scribing court determines that there is an immediate need
for a rule,” and if the court “promptly thereafter afford[s]
such notice and opportunity for comment,” 28 U. S. C. §
2071(e). See Exh. 1, at 11, Supp. App. to Response. Then,
on December 31, the court revised its public notice to ask
for comments directly. By January 8, 2010, the court had
received 138,574 comments, all but 32 of which favored
transmitting the proceedings. Id., at 12.
Viewed in light of this history, the court satisfied the
statute’s insistence that “notice” be “appropriate.” Cf. 28
U. S. C. §§2071(b), (e). The parties, the judges, and the
interested public were aware of the proposals to change
Ninth Circuit policy that culminated in the “pilot pro
gram” well before the change in the local rules that en
abled participation in the project. The Ninth Circuit
issued a press release in mid-December explaining its new

