Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

BREYER, J., dissenting

mines that there is an immediate need” to do so (and to
receive comments later)? And more importantly, what is
the legal source of the Court’s demand for additional
comment time in respect to a rule change to conform to
Judicial Council policy?
Second, this legal question is not the kind of legal ques
tion that this Court would normally grant certiorari to
consider. There is no conflict among the state or federal
courts regarding the procedures by which a district court
changes its local rules. Cf. this Court’s Rules 10(a)–(b).
The technical validity of the procedures followed below
does not implicate an open “important question of federal
law.” Cf. Rule 10(c). Nor do the procedures below clearly
conflict with any precedent from this Court. Cf. ibid.
It is particularly inadvisable for this Court to consider
this kind of question because it involves local rules and
local judicial administration. Here, for example, the Court
decides just how a district court should modify its own
local rules; in a word, this Court micromanages district
court administrative procedures in the most detailed way.
And, without briefing, the Court imposes limitations on
the Judicial Councils’ ability to implement policy deci
sions, ante, at 11–12 (suggesting Council policy does not
abrogate local rules), with consequences we cannot pre
dict. The District Councils, the Circuit Councils, the
Judicial Conference of the United States, and the Chief
Justice bear responsibility for judicial administration, not
this Court. See 28 U. S. C. §§331–332. And those bodies
have adequate authority to resolve disagreements about
how to promulgate and apply local rules, and, particularly,
about the use of cameras in the courtroom.
For the past 80 years, local judicial administration has
been left to the exclusive province of the Circuit Judicial
Councils, and this Court lacks their institutional experi
ence. See generally P. Fish, The Politics of Federal Judi
cial Administration 152–153 (1973) (From their creation,

