10

HOLLINGSWORTH v. PERRY
Per Curiam

general ban on the broadcasting of court proceedings “for
participation in a pilot or other project authorized by the
Judicial Council of the Ninth Circuit.” Exh. 14, App. to
Pet. Respondents rely on this amended version of the
Rule.
The amended version of Rule 77–3 appears to be invalid.
In amending this rule, it appears that the District Court
failed to “giv[e] appropriate public notice and an opportu
nity for comment,” as required by federal law. 28 U. S. C.
§2071(b). The first time the District Court asked for pub
lic comments was on the afternoon of New Year’s Eve.
The court stated that it would leave the comment period
open until January 8. At most, the District Court there
fore allowed a comment period spanning five business
days. There is substantial merit to the argument that this
was not “appropriate” notice and an opportunity for com
ment. Administrative agencies, for instance, “usually”
provide a comment period of “thirty days or more.” River
bend Farms, Inc. v. Madigan, 958 F. 2d 1479, 1484 (CA9
1992); see Petry v. Block, 737 F. 2d 1193, 1201 (CADC
1984) (“[T]he shortest period in which parties can mean
ingfully review a proposed rule and file informed re
sponses is thirty days”).
To be sure, the possibility that some aspects of the trial
might be broadcast was first raised to the parties by the
District Court at an in-court hearing on September 25,
some three months before the Rule was changed. The
broadcasting, however, was prohibited under both Circuit
and local rules at that time. The first public indication
that the District Court intended to adopt a rule of general
applicability came in its Web site posting on December 23.
And even if Chief Judge Walker’s in-court allusion to the
possibility that the Proposition 8 trial might be broadcast
could be considered as providing notice to the parties in
this case—his statement that “[t]his is all in flux” notwith
standing—the disclosure falls far short of the “appropriate

