2

HOLLINGSWORTH v. PERRY
BREYER, J., dissenting

that “[a]ny rule . . . shall be prescribed only after giving
appropriate public notice and an opportunity for com
ment.” 28 U. S. C. §2071(b). The question here is whether
the District Court accompanied the modification of its
antivideo rule with “appropriate public notice and an
opportunity for comment.”
Certainly the parties themselves had more than ade
quate notice and opportunity to comment before the Rule
was changed. On September 25, 2009, the trial judge,
Chief Judge Vaughn Walker, discussed the possibility of
broadcasting trial proceedings both within the courthouse
and beyond, and asked for the parties’ views. No party
objected to the presence of cameras in the courtroom for
transmissions within the courthouse, Exh. 9, p. 70, App. to
Pet. for Mandamus in No. 10–70063 (CA9) (hereinafter
App. to Pet.). (“No objection. None at all”), and both sides
made written submissions to the court regarding their
views on other transmissions. The court again raised the
issue at a hearing on December 16.
Nor, in practice, did other members of the Judiciary lack
information about the issue. In May 1996 the Circuit
Council adopted a policy permitting video in connection
with appellate proceedings, but prohibiting its use in the
district court. Subsequently, appellate court panels have
frequently permitted electronic coverage. Judges, the
press, lawyers, and others have discussed the matter. In
2007 the lawyers and judges present at the Ninth Circuit
Judicial Conference considered a resolution that favored
the use of cameras in district court civil nonjury proceed
ings. And, voting separately, both lawyers and judges
“approved the resolution by resounding margins.” Letter
from Chief Judge Kozinski to Judge Anthony Scirica (Jan.
10, 2010), Exh. 8, p. 4, Supp. App. to Response for Perry
et al. (hereinafter Supp. App. to Response). Subsequently,
a committee of judges was created to study the matter.
And on December 17, 2009, the Circuit Council voted to

