4

HOLLINGSWORTH v. PERRY
BREYER, J., dissenting

“pilot program.” Then, once the District Court amended
its local rule, it issued its own notice nearly three weeks
before the transmissions that the rule change authorized
were to begin. And the rule change itself is simply a
change that conforms local rule to Circuit policy—a con
formity that the law may well require. (The Judicial
Council had long before voted to make its video policy
“binding on all courts within the Ninth Circuit,” Letter
from Chief Judge Hug to All Ninth Circuit Judges (June
21, 1996) (available in Clerk of Court’s case file); it an
nounced its new “pilot program” policy in December 2009,
App. to Application, Exh. 13, App. to Pet.; and federal
statutes render district court rules void insofar as they
have been “modified or abrogated” by the Council, see
§2071(c)(1). Compare ante, at 11 (“Council only has the
power to modify or abrogate local rules that conflict with
federal law”), with 28 U. S. C. §332(d)(1) (“[C]ouncil shall
make all necessary and appropriate orders for the effective
and expeditious administration of justice within its cir
cuit”).) The applicants point to no interested person un
aware of the change. How can the Majority reasonably
demand yet more notice in respect to a local rule modifica
tion that a statute likely requires regardless?
There was also sufficient “opportunity for comment.”
The parties, the intervenors, other judges, the public—all
had an opportunity to comment. The parties were specifi
cally invited by Chief Judge Walker to comment on the
possibility of broadcast as early as September. And the
entire public was invited by the District Court to submit
comments after the rule change was announced, right up
to the eve of trial. As I said, the court received 138,574
comments during that time. How much more “opportunity
for comment” does the Court believe necessary, particu
larly when the statutes themselves authorize the local
court to put a new rule into effect “without” receiving any
“comments” before doing so when that local “court deter

