Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

BREYER, J., dissenting

20 years of trial-management experience, will be sufficient
to address any possible harm, either to the witnesses or to
the integrity of the trial.
Fourth, no fair balancing of the equities (including harm
to the public interest) could support issuance of the stay.
See Times-Picayune Publishing Corp. v. Schulingkamp,
419 U. S. 1301, 1305 (1974) (Powell, J. in Chambers)
(recognizing “significant public and private interests
balanced on both sides” when “present[ed with] a funda
mental confrontation between the competing values of free
press and fair trial”). As I have just explained, the appli
cants’ equities consist of potential harm to witnesses—
harm that is either nonexistent or that can be cured
through protective measures by the District Court as the
circumstances warrant. The competing equities consist of
not only respondents’ interest in obtaining the courthouse
to-courthouse transmission that they desire, but also the
public’s interest in observing trial proceedings to learn
about this case and about how courts work. See Nebraska
Press Assn. v. Stuart, 427 U. S. 539, 587 (1976) (Brennan,
J., concurring in judgment); see also Exh. 2, at 42, App. to
Pet. (statement of Chief Judge Walker) (“[I]f the public
could see how the judicial process works, they would take
a somewhat different view of it.” “I think the only time
that you’re going to draw sufficient interest in the legal
process is when you have an issue such as the issues here,
that people think about, talk about, debate about and
consider”). With these considerations in the balance, the
scales tip heavily against, not in favor, of issuing the stay.
The majority’s action today is unusual. It grants a stay
in order to consider a mandamus petition, with a view to
intervening in a matter of local court administration that
it would not (and should not) consider. It cites no prece
dent for doing so. It identifies no real harm, let alone
“irreparable harm,” to justify its issuance of this stay.
And the public interest weighs in favor of providing access

