Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Per Curiam

confrontational phone calls and e-mail messages from
opponents of Proposition 8, ibid., and others have been
forced to resign their jobs after it became public that they
had donated to groups supporting the amendment, see
Brief for Center for Competitive Politics as Amicus Curiae
13–14, in Citizens United v. Federal Election Comm’n, No.
08–205, now pending before this Court. Opponents of
Proposition 8 also are alleged to have compiled “Internet
blacklists” of pro-Proposition 8 businesses and urged
others to boycott those businesses in retaliation for sup
porting the ballot measure. Carlton, Gay Activists Boycott
Backers of Prop 8, Wall Street Journal, Dec. 27, 2008, A3.
And numerous instances of vandalism and physical vio
lence have been reported against those who have been
identified as Proposition 8 supporters. See Exhs. B, I, and
L to Defendant-Intervenors’ Motion for Protective Order in
Perry v. Schwarzenegger, No. 3:09–cv–02292 (ND Cal.)
(hereinafter Defendant-Intervenors’ Motion).
Respondents filed suit in the United States District
Court for the Northern District of California, seeking to
invalidate Proposition 8. They contend that the amend
ment to the State’s Constitution violates the Equal Protec
tion and Due Process Clauses of the Fourteenth Amend
ment of the United States Constitution. The State of
California declined to defend Proposition 8, and the defen
dant-intervenors (who are the applicants here) entered the
suit to defend its constitutionality. A bench trial began on
Monday, January 11, 2010, before the Chief Judge of the
District Court, the Honorable Vaughn R. Walker.
On September 25, 2009, the District Court informed the
parties at a hearing that there was interest in the possibil
ity that the trial would be broadcast. Respondents indi
cated their support for the idea, while applicants opposed
it. The court noted that “[t]here are, of course, Judicial
Conference positions on this,” but also that “[t]his is all in
flux.” Exh. 9, p. 72, App. to Pet. for Mandamus in No. 10–

