6

HOLLINGSWORTH v. PERRY
BREYER, J., dissenting

“[t]he councils constituted . . . a mechanism through which
there could be a concentration of responsibility in the
various Circuits—immediate responsibility for the work of
the courts, with power and authority . . . to insure compe
tence in th[eir] work . . .”). For that reason it is inappro
priate as well as unnecessary for this Court to intervene in
the procedural aspects of local judicial administration.
Perhaps that is why I have not been able to find any other
case in which this Court has previously done so, through
emergency relief or otherwise. Cf. Bank of Nova Scotia v.
United States, 487 U. S. 250, 264 (1988) (SCALIA, J., con
curring) (“I do not see the basis for any direct authority to
supervise lower courts” (citing Frazier v. Heebe, 482 U. S.
641, 651–652 (1987) (Rehnquist, C. J., dissenting))). Nor
am I aware of any instance in which this Court has pre
emptively sought to micromanage district court proceed
ings as it does today.
I recognize that the Court may see this matter not as
one of promulgating and applying a local rule but, rather,
as presenting the larger question of the place of cameras
in the courtroom. But the wisdom of a camera policy is
primarily a matter for the proper administrative bodies to
determine. See 28 U. S. C. §332. This Court has no legal
authority to address that larger policy question except
insofar as it implicates a question of law. The relevant
question of law here concerns the procedure for amending
local rules. And the only relevant legal principles that
allow us here to take account of the immediate subject
matter of that local rule, namely cameras, are those legal
principles that permit us—indeed require us—to look to
the nature of the harm at issue and to balance equities,
including the public interest. I consequently turn to those
two matters.
Third, consider the harm: I can find no basis for the
Court’s conclusion that, were the transmissions to other
courtrooms to take place, the applicants would suffer

