12

HOLLINGSWORTH v. PERRY
Per Curiam

immediate need here was to allow this case to be broad
cast pursuant to the Ninth Circuit’s new pilot program.
See Exh. 1, p. 11, Supp. App. to Response for Perry et al.
This does not qualify as an immediate need that justi
fies dispensing with the notice and comment procedures
required by federal law. While respondents (the plaintiffs
in the District Court) had indicated their approval of the
plan, no party alleged that it would be imminently harmed
if the trial were not broadcast. Had an administrative
agency acted as the District Court did here, the immediate
need exception would likely not have been available. See
5 U. S. C. §553(b)(B) (administrative agencies cannot
invoke an exception to affording notice-and-comment
before rulemaking unless the notice-and-comment proce
dures would be “impracticable, unnecessary, or contrary to
the public interest”). In issuing its order the District
Court relied on the Ninth Circuit Judicial Council’s pilot
program. Yet nothing in that program—which was not
adopted after notice and comment procedures, cf. 28
U. S. C. §332(d)(1)—required any “immediate” revision in
local rules. The Ninth Circuit Judicial Council did not
purport to modify or abrogate the District Court’s local
Rule. Nor could it, as the Judicial Council only has the
power to modify or abrogate local rules that conflict with
federal law. See §332(d)(4) (permitting a circuit court
council to modify a local rule that is “found inconsistent”
with rules promulgated by the Supreme Court). No fed
eral law requires that the District Court broadcast some of
its cases. The District Court’s local Rule, in addition, was
not a conforming amendment to Ninth Circuit policy,
because that policy does not require district courts to
broadcast proceedings.
Applicants also have shown that irreparable harm will
likely result from the denial of the stay. Without a stay,
the District Court will broadcast the trial. It would be
difficult—if not impossible—to reverse the harm from

