14

HOLLINGSWORTH v. PERRY
Per Curiam

course of judicial proceedings . . . as to call for an exercise
of this Court’s supervisory power”). The Court may use its
supervisory authority to invalidate local rules that were
promulgated in violation of an Act of Congress. See Fra
zier, 482 U. S., at 645–646; id., at 652, 654 (Rehnquist,
C. J., dissenting). The Court’s interest in ensuring com
pliance with proper rules of judicial administration is
particularly acute when those rules relate to the integrity
of judicial processes. The District Court here attempted to
revise its rules in haste, contrary to federal statutes and
the policy of the Judicial Conference of the United States.
It did so to allow broadcasting of this high-profile trial
without any considered standards or guidelines in place.
The arguments in favor of developing procedures and rules
to allow broadcast of certain cases have considerable
merit, and reasonable minds can surely differ over the
general and specific terms of rules and standards adopted
for that purpose. Here, however, the order in question
complied neither with existing rules or policies nor the
required procedures for amending them.
By insisting that courts comply with the law, parties
vindicate not only the rights they assert but also the law’s
own insistence on neutrality and fidelity to principle.
Those systematic interests are all the more evident here,
where the lack of a regular rule with proper standards to
determine the guidelines for broadcasting could compro
mise the orderly, decorous, rational traditions that courts
rely upon to ensure the integrity of their own judgments.
These considerations, too, are part of the reasons leading
to the decision to grant extraordinary relief.
In addressing a discrete instance authorizing a closed
circuit broadcast of a trial, Congress has illustrated the
need for careful guidelines and standards. The trial of the
two defendants in the Oklahoma City bombing case had
been transferred to the United States District Court for
the District of Colorado, so it was set to take place in

