8

HOLLINGSWORTH v. PERRY
BREYER, J., dissenting

make them well known than a closed-circuit broadcast to
another federal courthouse.
The likelihood of any “irreparable” harm is further
diminished by the fact that the court order before us
would simply increase the trial’s viewing audience from
the occupants of one courtroom in one courthouse to the
occupants of five other courtrooms in five other court
houses (in all of which taking pictures or retransmissions
have been forbidden). By way of comparison literally
hundreds of national and international newspapers are
already covering this trial and reporting in detail the
names and testimony of all of the witnesses. See, e.g.,
Leff, Woman Recalls Emotional Ordeal of Gay Marriage
Ban, Associated Press, Jan. 11, 2010. I see no reason why
the incremental increase in exposure caused by transmit
ting these proceedings to five additional courtrooms would
create any further risk of harm, as the Court apparently
believes. See ante, at 13. Moreover, if in respect to any
particular witness this transmission threatens harm, the
District Court can prevent that harm. Chief Judge
Walker has already said that he would keep the broadcast
“completely under the Court’s control, to permit the Court
to stop it if [it] proves to be a problem, if it proves to be a
distraction, [or] if it proves to create problems with wit
nesses.” See Exh. 2, at 45, App. to Pet. The Circuit Coun
cil confirmed in a press release that the District Court
“will fully control the process” and that “Judge Walker has
reserved the right to terminate any part of the audio
or video, or both, for any duration” or to terminate par
ticipation in the pilot program “at any time.” News
Release, Federal Courthouses to Offer Remote Viewing
of Pro-position 8 Trial (Jan. 8, 2010), http://www.
ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/general/2010/01/08/Prop8_
Remote_Viewing_Locations.pdf (as visited Jan. 13, 2010,
and available in Clerk of Court’s case file). Surely such
firm control, exercised by an able district court judge with

