Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Per Curiam

those broadcasts. The trial will involve various witnesses,
including members of same-sex couples; academics, who
apparently will discuss gender issues and gender equality,
as well as family structures; and those who participated in
the campaign leading to the adoption of Proposition 8.
This Court has recognized that witness testimony may be
chilled if broadcast. See Estes v. Texas, 381 U. S. 532, 547
(1965); id., at 591 (Harlan, J., concurring). Some of appli
cants’ witnesses have already said that they will not tes
tify if the trial is broadcast, and they have substantiated
their concerns by citing incidents of past harassment. See,
e.g., Exh. K to Defendant-Intervenors’ Motion (71 news
articles detailing incidents of harassment related to people
who supported Proposition 8). These concerns are not
diminished by the fact that some of applicants’ witnesses
are compensated expert witnesses. There are qualitative
differences between making public appearances regarding
an issue and having one’s testimony broadcast throughout
the country. Applicants may not be able to obtain ade
quate relief through an appeal. The trial will have already
been broadcast. It is difficult to demonstrate or analyze
whether a witness would have testified differently if his or
her testimony had not been broadcast. And witnesses
subject to harassment as a result of broadcast of their
testimony might be less likely to cooperate in any future
proceedings.
The balance of equities favors applicants. While appli
cants have demonstrated the threat of harm they face if
the trial is broadcast, respondents have not alleged any
harm if the trial is not broadcast. The issue, moreover,
must be resolved at this stage, for the injury likely cannot
be undone once the broadcast takes place.
This Court also has a significant interest in supervising
the administration of the judicial system. See this Court’s
Rule 10(a) (the Court will consider whether the courts
below have “so far departed from the accepted and usual

