Cite as: 588 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Per Curiam

Rule 77–3 created an exception to this general prohibition
to allow “for participation in a pilot or other project au
thorized by the Judicial Council of the Ninth Circuit.” Id.,
Exh. 14. Applicants objected to the revision, arguing that
any change to Ninth Circuit or local rules would require a
sufficient notice and comment period.
On December 31, the District Court revised its Web site
to remove the previous announcement about the change to
Rule 77–3. A new announcement was posted indicating a
“proposed revision of Civil Local Rule 77–3,” which had
been “approved for public comment.” Id., Exh. 17. The
proposed revision was the same as the previously an
nounced amendment. Comments on the proposed revision
were to be submitted by Friday, January 8, 2010.
On January 4, 2010, the District Court again revised its
Web site. The announcement regarding the proposed
revision of Rule 77–3 was removed and replaced with a
third version of the announcement. This third version
stated that the revised Rule was “effective December 22,
2009,” and that “[t]he revised rule was adopted pursuant
to the ‘immediate need’ provision of Title 28 Section
2071(e).” Id., Exh. 19, at 3.
On January 6, 2010, the District Court held a hearing
regarding the recording and broadcasting of the upcoming
trial. The court announced that an audio and video feed of
trial proceedings would be streamed live to certain court
houses in other cities. It also announced that, pending
approval of the Chief Judge of the Ninth Circuit, the trial
would be recorded and then broadcast on the Internet. A
court technician explained that the proceedings would be
recorded by three cameras, and then the resulting broad
cast would be uploaded for posting on the Internet, with a
delay due to processing requirements.
On January 7, 2010, the District Court filed an order
formally requesting that Chief Judge Kozinski approve
“inclusion of the trial in the pilot project on the terms and

