14

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

regular basis. And he could have sought permission from
the state courts to proceed pro se and thus remove Collins
from the equation.10 This is not to say the District Court
was correct to conclude Holland was not diligent; but the
answer is not as obvious as the Court would make it seem.
*
*
*
The Court’s impulse to intervene when a litigant’s law
yer has made mistakes is understandable; the temptation
to tinker with technical rules to achieve what appears a
just result is often strong, especially when the client faces
——————
10 Holland made many pro se filings in state court (which were
stricken because Holland was still represented), and he sought to have
new counsel appointed in Collins’s place, but did not seek to proceed
pro se. The Court does not dispute this, nor does Holland. The most he
asserts is that one of the pro se motions he filed, if granted, would have
entitled him to proceed pro se, see Brief for Petitioner 50–51—an
assertion he appears not to have made in the District Court, see 1
Record, Doc. 35, at 15. The concurrence equates that assertion with an
allegation that he actually sought to litigate his case on his own behalf.
Ante, at 6. It is not the same. The filing Holland refers to, see Brief for
Petitioner 12, and n. 13, like his earlier filings, requested that Collins
be replaced by new counsel. App. 149–163. The motion also asked for a
hearing pursuant to Nelson v. State, 274 So. 2d 256, 259 (Fla. App.
1973), to show Collins’s poor performance, App. 149–150, but that did
not amount to a request to proceed pro se. Nelson held that a defendant
facing trial who seeks to discharge his court-appointed counsel for
ineffectiveness is entitled to a hearing to determine if new counsel is
required. 274 So. 2d, at 259. If the defendant fails to make that
showing, but “continues to demand a dismissal of his court appointed
counsel,” Nelson explained that “a trial judge may in his discretion
discharge counsel and require the defendant to proceed to trial without
representation by court appointed counsel.” Ibid.; see also Hardwick v.
State, 521 So. 2d 1071, 1074–1075 (Fla. 1988). There is no reason why
requesting that procedure in state habeas proceedings should be
construed as a request to proceed pro se. Holland, unlike a defendant
still facing trial, did not need permission to fire Collins, since there was
no right to representation to waive. Once his request for a new attor
ney was denied, Holland himself could have informed Collins that his
services were no longer required.

