Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

SCALIA, J., dissenting

tical, to the attorney’s error in Lawrence. The relevant
time period extends at most from November 10, 2005—
when the Florida Supreme Court affirmed the denial of
Holland’s state habeas petition6—to December 15, 2005,
the latest date on which §2244(d)’s limitations period
could have expired.7 Within that period, Collins could
have alerted Holland to the Florida Supreme Court’s
decision, and either Collins or Holland himself could have
filed a timely federal habeas application. Collins did not
do so, but instead filed a petition for certiorari several
months later.
Why Collins did not notify Holland or file a timely fed
eral application for him is unclear, but none of the plausi
ble explanations would support equitable tolling. By far
the most likely explanation is that Collins made exactly
the same mistake as the attorney in Lawrence—i.e., he
assumed incorrectly that the pendency of a petition for
certiorari in this Court seeking review of the denial of
Holland’s state habeas petition would toll AEDPA’s time
bar under §2244(d)(2). In December 2002, Collins had
explained to Holland by letter that if his state habeas
petition was denied and this Court denied certiorari in
that proceeding, Holland’s claims “will then be ripe for
presentation in a petition for writ of habeas corpus in
federal court.” App. 61 (emphasis added). Holland him
self interprets that statement as proof that, at that time,
“Collins was under the belief that [Holland’s] time to file
——————
6 The Florida Supreme Court did not issue its mandate, and the limi
tations period did not resume, see Lawrence, 549 U. S., at 331, until
December 1, 2005. But once the Florida Supreme Court issued its
decision (with the mandate still to come), Collins could have notified
Holland, who in turn could have filed a pro se federal application.
7 The parties dispute when Holland’s state habeas petition was filed,
and thus when the limitations period expired. Brief for Petitioner 4–5,
and n. 4; Brief for Respondent 8, 9, n. 7. The discrepancy is immaterial,
but I give Holland the benefit of the doubt.

