14

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
Opinion of the Court

“se[t] forth its time limitations in unusually emphatic
form”; (2) used “highly detailed” and “technical” language
“that, linguistically speaking, cannot easily be read as
containing implicit exceptions”; (3) “reiterate[d] its limita
tions several times in several different ways”; (4) related
to an “underlying subject matter,” nationwide tax collec
tion, with respect to which the practical consequences of
permitting tolling would have been substantial; and (5)
would, if tolled, “require tolling, not only procedural limi
tations, but also substantive limitations on the amount of
recovery—a kind of tolling for which we . . . found no
direct precedent.” 519 U. S., at 350–352. And in Beggerly
we held that Irwin’s presumption was overcome where (1)
the 12-year statute of limitations at issue was “unusually
generous” and (2) the underlying claim “deal[t] with own
ership of land” and thereby implicated landowners’ need to
“know with certainty what their rights are, and the period
during which those rights may be subject to challenge.”
524 U. S., at 48–49.
By way of contrast, AEDPA’s statute of limitations,
unlike the statute at issue in Brockamp, does not contain
language that is “unusually emphatic,” nor does it “re
iterat[e]” its time limitation. Neither would application of
equitable tolling here affect the “substance” of a peti
tioner’s claim. Moreover, in contrast to the 12-year limita
tions period at issue in Beggerly, AEDPA’s limitations
period is not particularly long. And unlike the subject
matters at issue in both Brockamp and Beggerly—tax
collection and land claims—AEDPA’s subject matter,
habeas corpus, pertains to an area of the law where equity
finds a comfortable home. See Munaf, supra, at 693. In
short, AEDPA’s 1-year limit reads like an ordinary, run-of
the-mill statute of limitations. See Calderon, supra, at
1288.
Respondent, citing Brockamp, argues that AEDPA
should be interpreted to foreclose equitable tolling because

