8

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

his federal habeas petition would continue to be tolled
until this Court denied certiorari” in his state postconvic
tion proceeding. Pet. for Cert. 12, n. 10. That misunder
standing would entirely account for Collins’s conduct—
filing a certiorari petition instead of a habeas application,
and waiting nearly three months to do so. But it would
also be insufficient, as Lawrence held it was, to warrant
tolling.
The other conceivable explanations for Collins’s failure
fare no better. It may be that Collins believed—as he
explained to Holland in a January 2006 letter, after Hol
land had informed him that a certiorari petition in a state
postconviction proceeding would not stop the clock—that
the certiorari petition in Holland’s direct appeal also did
not toll the time bar. Consequently, Collins wrote, Hol
land’s time to file a federal application had expired even
before Collins was appointed. App. 78–79. As the Court
explains, ante, at 8, this view too was wrong, but it is no
more a basis for equitable tolling than the attorney’s
misunderstanding in Lawrence.
Or it may be that Collins (despite what he wrote to
Holland) correctly understood the rule but simply ne
glected to notify Holland; perhaps he missed the state
court’s ruling in his mail, or perhaps it simply slipped his
mind. Such an oversight is unfortunate, but it amounts to
“garden variety” negligence, not a basis for equitable
tolling. Irwin v. Department of Veterans Affairs, 498 U. S.
89, 96 (1990). Surely it is no more extraordinary than the
attorney’s error in Lawrence, which rudimentary research
and arithmetic would have avoided.
The Court insists that Collins’s misconduct goes beyond
garden-variety neglect and mine-run miscalculation.
Ante, at 19. But the only differences it identifies had no
effect on Holland’s ability to file his federal application on
time. The Court highlights Collins’s nonresponsiveness
while Holland’s state postconviction motions were still

