20

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
Opinion of the Court

tion on time and appears to have been unaware of the date
on which the limitations period expired—two facts that,
alone, might suggest simple negligence. But, in these
circumstances, the record facts we have elucidated suggest
that the failure amounted to more: Here, Collins failed to
file Holland’s federal petition on time despite Holland’s
many letters that repeatedly emphasized the importance
of his doing so. Collins apparently did not do the research
necessary to find out the proper filing date, despite Hol
land’s letters that went so far as to identify the applicable
legal rules. Collins failed to inform Holland in a timely
manner about the crucial fact that the Florida Supreme
Court had decided his case, again despite Holland’s many
pleas for that information. And Collins failed to communi
cate with his client over a period of years, despite various
pleas from Holland that Collins respond to his letters.
A group of teachers of legal ethics tells us that these
various failures violated fundamental canons of profes
sional responsibility, which require attorneys to perform
reasonably competent legal work, to communicate with
their clients, to implement clients’ reasonable requests, to
keep their clients informed of key developments in their
cases, and never to abandon a client. See Brief for Legal
Ethics Professors et al. as Amici Curiae (describing ethical
rules set forth in case law, the Restatements of Agency,
the Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers
(1998), and in the ABA Model Rules of Professional Con
duct (2009)). And in this case, the failures seriously preju
diced a client who thereby lost what was likely his single
opportunity for federal habeas review of the lawfulness of
his imprisonment and of his death sentence.
We do not state our conclusion in absolute form, how
ever, because more proceedings may be necessary. The
District Court rested its ruling not on a lack of extraordi
nary circumstances, but rather on a lack of diligence—a
ruling that respondent does not defend. See Brief for

