6

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
Opinion of ALITO, J.

provide a basis for equitable tolling, the AEDPA statute of
limitations may be tolled if the missed deadline results
from attorney misconduct that is not constructively at
tributable to the petitioner. In this case, petitioner alleges
facts that amount to such misconduct. See ante, at 19
(acknowledging that ordinary attorney negligence does not
warrant equitable tolling, but observing that “the facts of
this case present far more serious instances of attorney
misconduct”). In particular, he alleges that his attorney
essentially “abandoned” him, as evidenced by counsel’s
near-total failure to communicate with petitioner or to
respond to petitioner’s many inquiries and requests over a
period of several years. See ante, at 3–4. Petitioner also
appears to allege that he made reasonable efforts to ter
minate counsel due to his inadequate representation and
to proceed pro se, and that such efforts were successfully
opposed by the State on the perverse ground that peti
tioner failed to act through appointed counsel. See ante,
at 4; Brief for Petitioner 50–51 (stating that petitioner
filed “two pro se motions in the Florida Supreme Court to
remove Collins as counsel (one which, if granted, would
have allowed [petitioner] to proceed pro se)” (emphasis
deleted)).
If true, petitioner’s allegations would suffice to establish
extraordinary circumstances beyond his control. Common
sense dictates that a litigant cannot be held constructively
responsible for the conduct of an attorney who is not oper
ating as his agent in any meaningful sense of that word.
See Coleman, supra, at 754 (relying on “well-settled prin
ciples of agency law” to determine whether attorney error
was attributable to client); Baldayaque, supra, at 154
(Jacobs, J., concurring) (“[W]hen an ‘agent acts in a man
ner completely adverse to the principal’s interest,’ the
‘principal is not charged with [the] agent’s misdeeds’ ”).
That is particularly so if the litigant’s reasonable efforts to
terminate the attorney’s representation have been

