2

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

But §2244(d) does much more than that, establishing a
detailed scheme regarding the filing deadline that ad
dresses an array of contingencies. In an ordinary case, the
clock starts when the state-court judgment becomes final
on direct review. §2244(d)(1)(A).1 But the statute delays
the start date—thus effectively tolling the limitations
period—in cases where (1) state action unlawfully im
peded the prisoner from filing his habeas application, (2)
the prisoner asserts a constitutional right newly recog
nized by this Court and made retroactive to collateral
cases, or (3) the factual predicate for the prisoner’s claim
could not previously have been discovered through due
diligence. §2244(d)(1)(B)–(D). It also expressly tolls the
limitations period during the pendency of a properly filed
application for state collateral relief. §2244(d)(2). Con
gress, in short, has considered and accounted for specific
circumstances that in its view excuse an applicant’s delay.
The question, therefore, is not whether §2244(d)’s time
——————
1 Title

28 U. S. C. §2244(d) provides:
“(1) A 1-year period of limitation shall apply to an application for a
writ of habeas corpus by a person in custody pursuant to the judgment
of a State court. The limitation period shall run from the latest of—
“(A) the date on which the judgment became final by the conclusion
of direct review or the expiration of the time for seeking such review;
“(B) the date on which the impediment to filing an application
created by State action in violation of the Constitution or laws of the
United States is removed, if the applicant was prevented from filing by
such State action;
“(C) the date on which the constitutional right asserted was initially
recognized by the Supreme Court, if the right has been newly recog
nized by the Supreme Court and made retroactively applicable to cases
on collateral review; or
“(D) the date on which the factual predicate of the claim or claims
presented could have been discovered through the exercise of due
diligence.
“(2) The time during which a properly filed application for State
post-conviction or other collateral review with respect to the pertinent
judgment or claim is pending shall not be counted toward any period of
limitation under this subsection.”

