18

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
Opinion of the Court

we have previously stated, without qualification, that a
petitioner “must ‘bear the risk of attorney error.’ ” Cole
man v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, 752–753 (1991). But
Coleman was “a case about federalism,” id., at 726, in that
it asked whether federal courts may excuse a petitioner’s
failure to comply with a state court’s procedural rules,
notwithstanding the state court’s determination that its
own rules had been violated. Equitable tolling, by con
trast, asks whether federal courts may excuse a peti
tioner’s failure to comply with federal timing rules, an
inquiry that does not implicate a state court’s interpreta
tion of state law.
Cf. Lawrence, 549 U. S., at 341
(GINSBURG, J., dissenting). Holland does not argue that
his attorney’s misconduct provides a substantive ground
for relief, cf. §2254(i), nor is this a case that asks whether
AEDPA’s statute of limitations should be recognized at all,
cf. Day, supra, at 209. Rather, this case asks how equity
should be applied once the statute is recognized. And
given equity’s resistance to rigid rules, we cannot read
Coleman as requiring a per se approach in this context.
In short, no pre-existing rule of law or precedent de
mands a rule like the one set forth by the Eleventh Circuit
in this case. That rule is difficult to reconcile with more
general equitable principles in that it fails to recognize
that, at least sometimes, professional misconduct that
fails to meet the Eleventh Circuit’s standard could none
theless amount to egregious behavior and create an ex
traordinary circumstance that warrants equitable tolling.
And, given the long history of judicial application of equi
table tolling, courts can easily find precedents that can
guide their judgments. Several lower courts have specifi
cally held that unprofessional attorney conduct may, in
certain circumstances, prove “egregious” and can be “ex
traordinary” even though the conduct in question may not
satisfy the Eleventh Circuit’s rule. See, e.g., Nara v.
Frank, 264 F. 3d 310, 320 (CA3 2001) (ordering hearing as

