(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–5327. Argued March 1, 2010—Decided June 14, 2010
Petitioner Holland was convicted of first-degree murder and sentenced
to death in Florida state court. After the State Supreme Court af
firmed on direct appeal and denied collateral relief, Holland filed a
pro se federal habeas corpus petition, which was approximately five
weeks late under the 1-year statute of limitations set forth in the An
titerrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), 28
U. S. C. §2244(d). The record facts reveal, inter alia, that Holland’s
court-appointed attorney, Bradley Collins, had failed to file a timely
federal petition, despite Holland’s many letters emphasizing the im
portance of doing so; that Collins apparently did not do the research
necessary to find out the proper filing date, despite the fact that Hol
land had identified the applicable legal rules for him; that Collins
failed to inform Holland in a timely manner that the State Supreme
Court had decided his case, despite Holland’s many pleas for that in
formation; and that Collins failed to communicate with Holland over
a period of years, despite Holland’s pleas for responses to his letters.
Meanwhile, Holland repeatedly requested that the state courts and
the Florida bar remove Collins from his case. Based on these and
other record facts, Holland asked the Federal District Court to toll
the AEDPA limitations period for equitable reasons. It refused, hold
ing that he had not demonstrated the due diligence necessary to in
voke equitable tolling. Affirming, the Eleventh Circuit held that, re
gardless of diligence, Holland’s case did not constitute “extraordinary
circumstances.” Specifically, it held that when a petitioner seeks to
excuse a late filing based on his attorney’s unprofessional conduct,
that conduct, even if grossly negligent, cannot justify equitable toll
ing absent proof of bad faith, dishonesty, divided loyalty, mental im
pairment, or the like.

