10

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

illusion to the contrary, as his repeated efforts to replace
Collins reflect.9
B
Despite its insistence that Lawrence does not control
this case, the Court does not actually hold that Holland is
entitled to equitable tolling. It concludes only that the
Eleventh Circuit applied the wrong rule and remands the
case for a re-do. That would be appropriate if the Court
identified a legal error in the Eleventh Circuit’s analysis
and set forth the proper standard it should have applied.
The Court does neither. It rejects as “too rigid,” ante, at
17, the Eleventh Circuit’s test—which requires, beyond
ordinary attorney negligence, “an allegation and proof of
bad faith, dishonesty, divided loyalty, mental impairment
or so forth on the lawyer’s part,” 539 F. 3d, at 1339. But
the Court never explains why that “or so forth” test, which
explicitly leaves room for other kinds of egregious attorney
——————
9 The

concurrence argues that Holland’s allegations suffice because
they show, if true, that Collins “essentially ‘abandoned’ ” Holland by
failing to respond to Holland’s inquiries, and therefore ceased to act as
Holland’s agent. Ante, at 6 (ALITO, J., concurring in part and concur
ring in judgment). But Collins’s failure to communicate has no bearing
unless it ended the agency relationship before the relevant window.
The concurrence does not explain why it would—does not contend, for
example, that Collins’s conduct amounted to disloyalty or renunciation
of his role, which would terminate Collins’s authority, see Restatement
(Second) of Agency §§112, 118 (1957). Collins’s alleged nonresponsive
ness did not help Holland’s cause, but it was no more “adverse to
[Holland’s] interest” or “beyond [Holland’s] control,” ante, at 6, 7 (inter
nal quotation marks omitted), and thus no more a basis for holding
Holland harmless from the consequences of his counsel’s conduct, than
mine-run attorney mistakes, cf. Irwin v. Department of Veterans Af
fairs, 498 U. S. 89, 96 (1990). The concurrence also relies upon Hol
land’s requests to replace Collins with new appointed counsel. But if
those requests could prevent imputing Collins’s acts to Holland, every
habeas applicant who unsuccessfully asks for a new state-provided
lawyer (but who does not seek to proceed pro se when that request is
denied) would not be bound by his attorney’s subsequent acts.

