Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of ALITO, J.

Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, 756–757 (1991)
(emphasis added)).
The basic rationale for Lawrence’s holding is that the
mistakes of counsel are constructively attributable to the
client, at least in the postconviction context. The Law
rence Court’s reliance on Coleman is instructive. In Cole
man, the Court addressed whether attorney error provided
cause for a procedural default based on a late filing. See
501 U. S., at 752. Because “[t]here is no constitutional
right to an attorney in state post-conviction proceedings,”
the Court explained, “a petitioner cannot claim constitu
tionally ineffective assistance of counsel in such proceed
ings.” Ibid. In such circumstances, the Court reasoned,
there was “ ‘no inequity in requiring [the petitioner] to
bear the risk of attorney error that results in a procedural
default.’ ” Ibid. (quoting Murray v. Carrier, 477 U. S. 478,
488 (1986)); accord, Coleman, 501 U. S., at 753 (“ ‘[C]ause’
under the cause and prejudice test must be something
external to the petitioner, something that cannot fairly be
attributed to him”); ibid. (“Attorney ignorance or inadver
tence is not ‘cause’ because the attorney is the petitioner’s
agent when acting, or failing to act, in furtherance of the
litigation, and the petitioner must ‘bear the risk of attor
ney error’ ”); id., at 754 (what matters is whether “the
error [of counsel] must be seen as an external factor, i.e.,
‘imputed to the State’ ”); ibid. (“In the absence of a consti
tutional violation, the petitioner bears the risk in federal
habeas for all attorney errors made in the course of the
representation”); id., at 757 (“Because Coleman had no
right to counsel to pursue his appeal in state habeas, any
attorney error that led to the default of Coleman’s claims
in state court cannot constitute cause to excuse the default
in federal habeas”). As Lawrence makes clear, the same
analysis applies when a petitioner seeks equitable tolling
based on attorney error in the postconviction context. See
549 U. S., at 336–337 (citing Coleman).

