Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
327 U. S. 392, 396, in order to “relieve hardships . . . aris[ing] from a
hard and fast adherence” to more absolute legal rules, Hazel-Atlas
Glass Co. v. Hartford-Empire Co., 322 U. S. 238, 248. The Court’s
cases recognize that equity courts can and do draw upon decisions
made in other similar cases for guidance, exercising judgment in light
of precedent, but with awareness of the fact that specific circum
stances, often hard to predict, could warrant special treatment in an
appropriate case. Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, 753, distin
guished. No pre-existing rule of law or precedent demands the Elev
enth Circuit’s rule. That rule is difficult to reconcile with more gen
eral equitable principles in that it fails to recognize that, at least
sometimes, an attorney’s unprofessional conduct can be so egregious
as to create an extraordinary circumstance warranting equitable toll
ing, as several other federal courts have specifically held. Although
equitable tolling is not warranted for “a garden variety claim of ex
cusable neglect,” Irwin, supra, at 96, this case presents far more seri
ous instances of attorney misconduct than that. Pp. 16–19.
2. While the record facts suggest that this case may well present
“extraordinary” circumstances, the Court does not state its conclusion
absolutely because more proceedings may be necessary. The District
Court incorrectly rested its ruling not on a lack of such circum
stances, but on a lack of diligence. Here, Holland diligently pursued
his rights by writing Collins numerous letters seeking crucial infor
mation and providing direction, by repeatedly requesting that Collins
be removed from his case, and by filing his own pro se habeas petition
on the day he learned his AEDPA filing period had expired. Because
the District Court erroneously concluded that Holland was not dili
gent, and because the Court of Appeals erroneously relied on an
overly rigid per se approach, no lower court has yet considered
whether the facts of this case indeed constitute extraordinary cir
cumstances sufficient to warrant equitable tolling. The Eleventh
Circuit may determine on remand whether such tolling is appropri
ate, or whether an evidentiary hearing and other proceedings might
indicate that the State should prevail. Pp. 19–21.
539 F. 3d 1334, reversed and remanded.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and STEVENS, KENNEDY, GINSBURG, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.
ALITO, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the
judgment. SCALIA, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which THOMAS, J.,
joined as to all but Part I.

