Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

SCALIA, J., dissenting

error, is insufficiently elastic.
Moreover, even if the Eleventh Circuit had adopted an
entirely inflexible rule, it is simply untrue that, as the
Court appears to believe, ante, at 17, all general rules are
ipso facto incompatible with equity. We have rejected that
canard before, see, e.g., Grupo Mexicano de Desarrollo,
S. A. v. Alliance Bond Fund, Inc., 527 U. S. 308, 321–322
(1999), and we have relied on the existence of general
rules regarding equitable tolling in particular, see, e.g.,
Young, 535 U. S., at 53. As we observed in rejecting
ad hoc equitable restrictions on habeas relief, “the alterna
tive is to use each equity chancellor’s conscience as a
measure of equity, which alternative would be as arbitrary
and uncertain as measuring distance by the length of each
chancellor’s foot.” Lonchar, 517 U. S., at 323.
Consistent with its failure to explain the error in the
Eleventh Circuit’s test, the Court offers almost no clue
about what test that court should have applied. The Court
unhelpfully advises the Court of Appeals that its test is
too narrow, with no explanation besides the assertion that
its test left out cases where tolling might be warranted,
and no precise indication of what those cases might be.
Ante, at 18 (“[A]t least sometimes, professional misconduct
that fails to meet the Eleventh Circuit’s standard could
nonetheless amount to egregious behavior and create an
extraordinary circumstance that warrants equitable toll
ing”). The Court says that “courts can easily find prece
dents that can guide their judgments,” ibid., citing several
Court of Appeals opinions that (in various contexts) permit
tolling for attorney error—but notably omitting opinions
that disallow it, such as the Seventh Circuit’s opinion in
Powell v. Davis, 415 F. 3d 722, 727 (2005), which would
have “guide[d] . . . judgmen[t]” precisely where this court
arrived: “[A]ttorney misconduct, whether labeled negli
gent, grossly negligent, or willful, is attributable to the
client and thus is not a circumstance beyond a petitioner’s

