Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

fornia corporation, and Interstate Gas Supply, Inc., an
Ohio company, are IMs that market and sell natural gas
to Ohio consumers. Plaintiff-respondent Gregory Slone is
an Ohio citizen who has purchased natural gas from In­
terstate Gas Supply since 1999. Alleging discriminatory
taxation of IMs and their patrons in violation of the Com­
merce and Equal Protection Clauses, Complaint ¶¶35–39,
App. 11–13, respondents sued Richard A. Levin, Tax
Commissioner of Ohio (Commissioner), in the U. S. Dis­
trict Court for the Southern District of Ohio. Invoking
that court’s federal-question jurisdiction under 28 U. S. C.
§1331, Complaint ¶6, App. 3, respondents sought declara­
tory and injunctive relief invalidating the three tax ex­
emptions LDCs enjoy and ordering the Commissioner to
stop “recognizing and/or enforcing” the exemptions. Id., at
20–21. Respondents named the Commissioner as sole
defendant; they did not extend the litigation to include the
LDCs whose tax burden their suit aimed to increase.1
The District Court granted the Commissioner’s motion
to dismiss the complaint. The TIA did not block the suit,
the District Court initially held, because respondents, like
the plaintiffs in Hibbs, were “third-parties challenging the
constitutionality of [another’s] tax benefit,” and their
requested relief “would not disrupt the flow of tax reve­
nue” to the State. App. to Pet. for Cert. 24a.
Nevertheless, the District Court “decline[d] to exercise
jurisdiction” as a matter of comity. Id., at 32a. Ohio’s
Legislature, the District Court observed, chose to provide
the challenged tax exemptions to LDCs. Respondents
requested relief that would “requir[e] Ohio to collect taxes
which its legislature has not seen fit to impose.” Ibid.
——————
1 In moving to dismiss the complaint, the Commissioner urged, inter
alia, that the LDCs were parties necessary to a just adjudication. See
Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 19. Ruling for the Commissioner on comity
grounds, the District Court did not reach the question whether the
LDCs were indispensable parties. App. to Pet. for Cert. 21a, 32a–33a.

