Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

plaintiffs sought declaratory and injunctive relief and an
order requiring the organizations to pay sums still in their
possession into the State’s general fund. Id., at 96.
The Director of Arizona’s Department of Revenue sought
to escape suit in federal court by invoking the TIA. We
held that the litigation fell outside the TIA’s governance.
Our prior decisions holding suits blocked by the TIA, we
noted, were tied to the Act’s “state-revenue-protective
moorings.” Id., at 106. The Act, we explained, “re­
strain[ed] state taxpayers from instituting federal actions
to contest their [own] liability for state taxes,” id., at 108,
suits that, if successful, would deplete state coffers. But
“third parties” like the Hibbs plaintiffs, we concluded,
were not impeded by the TIA “from pursuing constitu­
tional challenges to tax benefits in a federal forum.” Ibid.
The case, we stressed, was “not rationally distinguishable”
from a procession of pathmarking civil-rights controver­
sies in which federal courts had entertained challenges to
state tax credits without conceiving of the TIA as a juris­
dictional barrier. Id., at 93–94, 110–112. See, e.g., Griffin
v. School Bd. of Prince Edward Cty., 377 U. S. 218 (1964)
(involving, inter alia, tax credits for contributions to pri­
vate segregated schools).
Arizona’s Revenue Director also invoked comity as cause
for dismissing the action. We dispatched the Director’s
comity argument in a spare footnote that moved the Sixth
Circuit here to reverse the District Court’s comity-based
dismissal. As earlier set out, see supra, at 4, the footnote
stated: “[T]his Court has relied upon ‘principles of comity’
to preclude original federal-court jurisdiction only when
plaintiffs have sought district-court aid in order to arrest
or countermand state tax collection.” 542 U. S., at 107,
n. 9 (citation omitted) (citing Fair Assessment, 454 U. S.,
at 107–108; Great Lakes, 319 U. S., at 296–299).
Relying heavily on our footnote in Hibbs, respondents
urge that “comity should no more bar this action than it

