(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

LEVIN, TAX COMMISSIONER OF OHIO v. COMMERCE
ENERGY, INC., ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–223.

Argued March 22, 2010—Decided June 1, 2010

Historically, all Ohio natural gas consumers purchased gas from a local
distribution company (LDC), the public utility serving their geo
graphic area. Today, however, consumers in Ohio’s major metropoli
tan areas can alternatively contract with independent marketers
(IMs) that compete with LDCs for retail sales of natural gas. Re
spondents, mainly IMs offering to sell natural gas to Ohio consumers,
sued petitioner Ohio Tax Commissioner (Commissioner) in federal
court, alleging discriminatory taxation of IMs and their patrons in
violation of the Commerce and Equal Protection Clauses. They
sought declaratory and injunctive relief invalidating three tax ex
emptions Ohio grants exclusively to LDCs. The court initially held
that respondents’ suit was not blocked by the Tax Injunction Act
(TIA), which prohibits lower federal courts from restraining “the as
sessment, levy or collection of any tax under State law where a plain,
speedy and efficient remedy may be had in the courts of such State,”
28 U. S. C. §1341. Nevertheless, the court dismissed the suit based
on the more embracive comity doctrine, which restrains federal
courts from entertaining claims that risk disrupting state tax ad
ministration, see Fair Assessment in Real Estate Assn., Inc. v.
McNary, 454 U. S. 100. The Sixth Circuit agreed with the District
Court’s TIA holding, but reversed the court’s comity ruling, and re
manded for adjudication of the merits. A footnote in Hibbs v. Winn,
542 U. S. 88, 107, n. 9, the Court of Appeals believed, foreclosed an
expansive reading of this Court’s comity precedents. The footnote
stated that the Court “has relied upon ‘principles of comity’ to pre
clude original federal-court jurisdiction only when plaintiffs have
sought district-court aid in order to arrest or countermand state tax

