6

LEVIN v. COMMERCE ENERGY, INC.
Opinion of the Court

means to carry on their respective governments, and it is
of the utmost importance to all of them that the modes
adopted to enforce the taxes levied should be interfered
with as little as possible.” Dows v. Chicago, 11 Wall. 108,
110 (1871).
“An examination of [our] decisions,” this Court wrote
more than a century ago, “shows that a proper reluctance
to interfere by prevention with the fiscal operations of the
state governments has caused [us] to refrain from so doing
in all cases where the Federal rights of the persons could
otherwise be preserved unimpaired.” Boise Artesian Hot
& Cold Water Co. v. Boise City, 213 U. S. 276, 282 (1909).
Accord Matthews v. Rodgers, 284 U. S. 521, 525–526
(1932) (So long as the state remedy was “plain, adequate,
and complete,” the “scrupulous regard for the rightful
independence of state governments which should at all
times actuate the federal courts, and a proper reluctance
to interfere by injunction with their fiscal operations,
require that such relief should be denied in every case
where the asserted federal right may be preserved without
it.”).2
——————
2 Justice Brennan cogently explained, in practical terms, “the special
reasons justifying the policy of federal noninterference with state tax
collection”:
“The procedures for mass assessment and collection of state taxes and
for administration and adjudication of taxpayers’ disputes with tax
officials are generally complex and necessarily designed to operate
according to established rules. State tax agencies are organized to
discharge their responsibilities in accordance with the state procedures.
If federal declaratory relief were available to test state tax assess­
ments, state tax administration might be thrown into disarray, and
taxpayers might escape the ordinary procedural requirements imposed
by state law. During the pendency of the federal suit the collection of
revenue under the challenged law might be obstructed, with consequent
damage to the State’s budget, and perhaps a shift to the State of the
risk of taxpayer insolvency. Moreover, federal constitutional issues are
likely to turn on questions of state tax law, which, like issues of state
regulatory law, are more properly heard in the state courts.” Perez v.

