14

LEVIN v. COMMERCE ENERGY, INC.
Opinion of the Court

what the Ohio Legislature would have willed. See supra,
at 11. In short, if the Ohio scheme is indeed unconstitu­
tional, surely the Ohio courts are better positioned to
determine—unless and until the Ohio Legislature weighs
in—how to comply with the mandate of equal treatment.
See Davis v. Michigan Dept. of Treasury, 489 U. S. 803,
817–818 (1989).11
As earlier noted, our unelaborated footnote on comity in
Hibbs, see supra, at 9, led the Sixth Circuit to conclude
that we had diminished the force of that doctrine and
made it inapplicable here. We intended no such conse­
quential ruling. Hibbs was hardly a run-of-the-mine tax
case. It was essentially an attack on the allocation of state
resources for allegedly unconstitutional purposes. In
Hibbs, the charge was state aid in alleged violation of the
Establishment Clause; in other cases of the same genre,
the attack was on state allocations to maintain racially
segregated schools. See Hibbs, 542 U. S., at 93–94, 110–
112. The plaintiffs in Hibbs were outsiders to the tax
expenditure, “third parties” whose own tax liability was
not a relevant factor. In this case, by contrast, the very
premise of respondents’ suit is that they are taxed differ­
ently from LDCs. Unlike the Hibbs plaintiffs, respondents
do object to their own tax situation, measured by the
allegedly more favorable treatment accorded LDCs.
Hibbs held that the TIA did not preclude a federal chal­
lenge by a third party who objected to a tax credit received
——————
11 Respondents note that “[o]nce the district court grants the minimal
relief requested—to disallow the exemptions—it will be up to the Ohio
General Assembly to balance its own interests and determine how best
to recast the tax laws, within constitutional restraints.” Brief for
Respondents 41. But the legislature may not be convened on the spot,
and the blunt interim relief respondents ask the District Court to
decree “may [immediately] derange the operations of government, and
thereby cause serious detriment to the public.” Dows v. Chicago, 11
Wall. 108, 110 (1871).

