2

LEVIN v. COMMERCE ENERGY, INC.
Syllabus
collection.” Respondents challenged only a few limited exemptions,
the Sixth Circuit observed, therefore their success on the merits
would not significantly intrude upon Ohio’s administration of its tax
system.

Held: Under the comity doctrine, a taxpayer’s complaint of allegedly
discriminatory state taxation, even when framed as a request to in
crease a competitor’s tax burden, must proceed originally in state
court. Pp. 5–17.
(a) The comity doctrine reflects a proper respect for the States and
their institutions. E.g., Fair Assessment, 454 U. S., at 112. Comity’s
constraint has particular force when lower federal courts are asked to
pass on the constitutionality of state taxation of commercial activity.
States rely chiefly on taxation to fund their governments’ operations,
therefore their tax-enforcement methods should not be interfered
with absent strong cause. See Dows v. Chicago, 11 Wall. 108, 110.
The TIA was enacted specifically to constrain the issuance of federal
injunctions in state-tax cases, see Fair Assessment, 454 U. S., at 129,
and is best understood as but a partial codification of the federal re
luctance to interfere with state taxation, National Private Truck
Council, Inc. v. Oklahoma Tax Comm’n, 515 U. S. 582, 590. Pp. 5–8.
(b) Hibbs does not restrict comity’s compass. Plaintiffs in Hibbs
were Arizona taxpayers who challenged, as violative of the Estab
lishment Clause, a tax credit that allegedly served to support paro
chial schools. Their federal-court suit for declaratory and injunctive
relief did not implicate in any way their own tax liability, and the re
lief they sought would not deplete the State’s treasury. Rejecting
Arizona’s plea that the TIA barred the suit, the Court found that the
case was “not rationally distinguishable” from pathmarking civil
rights controversies in which federal courts had entertained chal
lenges to state tax credits without conceiving of the TIA as a jurisdic
tional barrier. 542 U. S., at 93–94, 110–112. The Court also dis
patched Arizona’s comity argument in the footnote that moved the
Sixth Circuit here to reverse the District Court’s comity-based dis
missal. Id., at 107, n. 9. Neither Hibbs nor any other decision of this
Court, however, has considered the comity doctrine’s application to
cases of the kind presented here. Pp. 8–10.
(c) Respondents contend that state action “selects [them] out for
discriminatory treatment by subjecting [them] to taxes not imposed
on others of the same class.” Hillsborough v. Cromwell, 326 U. S.
620, 623. When economic legislation does not employ classifications
subject to heightened scrutiny or impinge on fundamental rights,
courts generally view constitutional challenges with the skepticism
due respect for legislative choices demands. See, e.g., Hodel v. Indi
ana, 452 U. S. 314, 331–332. And “in taxation, even more than in

