Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

ante, at 14−15 (emphasizing that the “plaintiffs in Hibbs
were outsiders to the tax expenditure, ‘third parties’
whose own tax liability was not a relevant factor”). This is
not such a case, because the respondents here are in no
sense “outsiders” to the revenue-raising state-tax regime
they ask the federal courts to restrain. Ibid.; see also
Hibbs, supra, at 104. Respondents compete with entities
who receive tax exemptions under that regime in provid
ing services whose cost is affected by the exemptions.
Respondents thus do object to their own liability in a very
real and economically significant way: The liability the
state tax regime imposes on them but not on their com
petitors makes it more difficult for respondents to match
or beat their competitors’ prices. The fact that they raise
this objection through the expedient of contesting their
competitors’ exemptions is plainly not enough to qualify
them as Hibbs-like “outsiders” to the state revenue-raising
scheme they wish to enjoin. If it were, application of the
Act’s jurisdictional bar would depend on little more than a
pleading game. The Act would bar a federal suit challeng
ing a state tax scheme that requires the challenger to pay
more taxes than his competitor if the challenger styles the
suit as an objection to his own tax liability, but would not
bar the suit if he styles it as an objection to the competi
tor’s exemption.
Because the Court appears to agree that even Hibbs
does not endorse such a narrow view of the Act’s jurisdic
tional bar, see ante, at 14−15, 17, n. 13, the “proper
course” is to dismiss this suit under the statute and not
reach the comity principles that the Court correctly holds
independently support the same result, Sinochem, supra,
at 436. Here, unlike in Sinochem, there is no economy to
deciding the case on the nonjurisdictional ground: The
same analysis that supports dismissal for comity reasons
subjects this case to the Act’s jurisdictional prohibition,
even as construed in Hibbs. Compare ante, at 5–17, with

