2

LEVIN v. COMMERCE ENERGY, INC.
THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

cases outside the Act’s purview. See ante, at 7−8; 12−17. I
therefore agree with the Court that nothing in the Act or
in Hibbs affects the application of comity principles to
cases not covered by the Act. I disagree that this conclu
sion moots the need for us to decide “whether the TIA
would itself block th[is] suit.” Ante, at 16.
The Court posits that because comity is available as a
ground for dismissal even where the Act is not, the Act’s
application to this case is irrelevant if comity would also
support sending the case to state court. See ante, at
16−17. The Court rests this analysis on our recent holding
in Sinochem that a court may dismiss a case on a nonmer
its ground such as comity without first resolving an ac
companying jurisdictional issue. See ante, at 16−17 (citing
549 U. S., at 425). The Court’s reliance on Sinochem is
misplaced, however, because it confuses the fact that a
court may do that with whether, and when, it should. As
Sinochem itself explains, courts should not dismiss cases
on nonjurisdictional grounds where “jurisdiction . . . ‘in
volve[s] no arduous inquiry’ ” and deciding it would not
substantially undermine “judicial economy.” 549 U. S., at
436 (quoting Ruhrgas AG v. Marathon Oil Co., 526 U. S.
574, 587−588 (1999)). In such circumstances, Sinochem
reiterates the settled rule that “the proper course” is to
dismiss for lack of jurisdiction. 549 U. S., at 436. That is
the proper course here.
The TIA prohibits federal courts from exercising juris
diction over any action that would “suspend or restrain the
assessment, levy or collection of [a] tax under State law.”
§1341. As the Court appears to agree, see ante, at 17,
n. 13, this is such a case even under the crabbed construc
tion of the Act in Hibbs, which the Court accurately de
scribes as holding only that the Act does “not preclude a
federal challenge by a third party who object[s] to a tax
credit received by others, but in no way object[s] to her
own liability under any revenue-raising tax provision,”

