4

LEVIN v. COMMERCE ENERGY, INC.
THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

Sinochem, supra, at 435–436 (approving dismissal of a
suit on forum non conveniens grounds because dismissal
on personal jurisdiction grounds would have required the
“expense and delay” of a minitrial on forum contacts).
Given this, I see only one explanation for the Court’s
decision to dismiss on a “prudential” ground (comity), ante,
at 16−17, rather than a mandatory one (jurisdiction): The
Court wishes to leave the door open to doing in future
cases what it did in Hibbs, namely, retain federal jurisdic
tion over constitutional claims that the Court simply does
not believe Congress should have entrusted to state judges
under the Act, see 542 U. S., at 113–128 (KENNEDY, J.,
dissenting).
That is not a legitimate approach to this important area
of the law, see ibid., and the Court’s assertion that our
civil rights precedents require it does not withstand scru
tiny. If it is indeed true (which it may have been in the
civil rights cases) that federal jurisdiction is necessary to
ensure a fair forum in which to litigate an allegedly un
constitutional state tax scheme, the Act itself permits
federal courts to retain jurisdiction on the ground that “a
plain, speedy and efficient remedy” cannot be had in state
court. §1341. But where, as here and in Hibbs, such a
remedy can be had in state court, the Court should apply
the Act as written. See 542 U. S., at 113–128 (KENNEDY,
J., dissenting).
Because I believe the Act forbids the approach to federal
jurisdiction over state tax issues that the Court adopted in
Hibbs, I would not decide this case in a way that leaves
the door open to it even if the Court could find a doorstop
that accords with, rather than upends, the settled princi
ple that judges presented with multiple nonmerits
grounds for dismissal should dismiss on jurisdictional
grounds first. But the tension the Court’s decision creates
with this settled principle should be enough to convince
even those who do not share my view of the TIA that the

