Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

by others, but in no way objected to her own liability
under any revenue-raising tax provision. In context, we
clarify, the Hibbs footnote comment on comity is most
sensibly read to affirm that, just as the case was a poor fit
under the TIA, so it was a poor fit for comity. The Court,
in other words, did not deploy the footnote to recast the
comity doctrine; it intended the note to convey only that
the Establishment Clause-grounded case cleared both the
TIA and comity hurdles.
Respondents steadfastly maintain that this case is fit for
federal-court adjudication because of the simplicity of the
relief they seek, i.e., invalidation of exemptions accorded
the LDCs. But as we just explained, even if respondents’
Commerce Clause and equal protection claims had merit,
respondents would have no entitlement to their preferred
remedy. See supra, at 11. In Hibbs, however, if the Dis­
trict Court found the Arizona tax credit impermissible
under the Establishment Clause, only one remedy would
redress the plaintiffs’ grievance: invalidation of the credit,
which inevitably would increase the State’s tax receipts.
Notably, redress in state court similarly would be limited
to an order ending the allegedly impermissible state sup­
port for parochial schools.12 Because state courts would
have no greater leeway than federal courts to cure the
alleged violation, nothing would be lost in the currency of
comity or state autonomy by permitting the Hibbs suit to
proceed in a federal forum.
Comity, in sum, serves to ensure that “the National
Government, anxious though it may be to vindicate and
protect federal rights and federal interests, always en­
deavors to do so in ways that will not unduly interfere
——————
12 No refund suit (or other taxpayer mechanism) was open to the
plaintiffs in Hibbs, who were financially disinterested “third parties”;
they did not, therefore, improperly bypass any state procedure. Re­
spondents here, however, could have asserted their federal rights by
seeking a reduction in their tax bill in an Ohio refund suit.

