Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
other fields, legislatures possess the greatest freedom in classifica
tion.” Madden v. Kentucky, 309 U. S. 83, 88. Of key importance,
when unlawful discrimination infects tax classifications or other leg
islative prescriptions, the Constitution simply calls for equal treat
ment. How equality is accomplished—by extension or invalidation of
the unequally distributed benefit or burden, or some other measure—
is a matter on which the Constitution is silent. See, e.g., Heckler v.
Mathews, 465 U. S. 728, 740. On finding unlawful discrimination,
courts may attempt, within the bounds of their institutional compe
tence, to implement what the legislature would have willed had it
been apprised of the constitutional infirmity. E.g., id., at 739, n. 5.
With the State’s legislative prerogative firmly in mind, this Court,
upon finding impermissible discrimination in a State’s tax measure,
generally remands the case, leaving the interim remedial choice to
state courts. See, e.g., McKesson Corp. v. Division of Alcoholic Bever
ages and Tobacco, Fla. Dept. of Business Regulation, 496 U. S. 18,
39–40. If lower federal courts were to consider the merits of suits al
leging uneven state tax burdens, however, recourse to state court for
the interim remedial determination would be unavailable, for federal
tribunals lack authority to remand to state court an action initiated
in federal court. Federal judges, moreover, are bound by the TIA,
which generally precludes relief that would diminish state revenues,
even if such relief is the remedy least disruptive of the state legisla
ture’s design. These limitations on the remedial competence of lower
federal courts counsel that they refrain from taking up cases of this
genre, so long as state courts are equipped fairly to adjudicate them.
Pp. 10–13.
(d) Comity considerations warrant dismissal of respondents’ suit.
If Ohio’s scheme is unconstitutional, the Ohio courts are better posi
tioned to determine—unless and until the Ohio Legislature weighs
in—how to comply with the mandate of equal treatment. See Davis
v. Michigan Dept. of Treasury, 489 U. S. 803, 817–818. The unelabo
rated comity footnote in Hibbs does not counsel otherwise. Hardly a
run-of-the-mine tax case, Hibbs was essentially an attack on the allo
cation of state resources for allegedly unconstitutional purposes.
Plaintiffs there were third parties whose own tax liability was not a
relevant factor. Here, by contrast, the very premise of respondents’
suit is that they are taxed differently from LDCs. The Hibbs footnote
is most sensibly read to affirm that, just as that case was a poor fit
under the TIA, so it was a poor fit for comity. Respondents’ argu
ment that this case is fit for federal-court adjudication because of the
simplicity of the relief sought is unavailing. Even if their claims had
merit, respondents would not be entitled to their preferred remedy.
In Hibbs, however, if the District Court found the Arizona tax credit

