4

LEVIN v. COMMERCE ENERGY, INC.
Syllabus
impermissible under the Establishment Clause, only one remedy
would redress the plaintiffs’ grievance: invalidation of the tax credit
at issue. Pp. 13–15.
(e) In sum, a confluence of factors in this case, absent in Hibbs,
leads to the conclusion that the comity doctrine controls here. First,
respondents seek federal-court review of commercial matters over
which Ohio enjoys wide regulatory latitude; their suit does not in
volve any fundamental right or classification that attracts heightened
judicial scrutiny. Second, while respondents portray themselves as
third-party challengers to an allegedly unconstitutional tax scheme,
they are in fact seeking federal-court aid in an endeavor to improve
their competitive position. Third, the Ohio courts are better posi
tioned than their federal counterparts to correct any violation be
cause they are more familiar with state legislative preferences and
because the TIA does not constrain their remedial options. Individu
ally, these considerations may not compel forbearance by federal dis
trict courts; in combination, however, they demand deference to the
state adjudicative process. Pp. 15–16.
(f) The Sixth Circuit’s concern that application of the comity doc
trine here would render the TIA effectively superfluous overlooks
Congress’ aim, in enacting the TIA, to secure the comity doctrine
against diminishment. Comity, moreover, is a prudential doctrine.
“If the State voluntarily chooses to submit to a federal forum, princi
ples of comity do not demand that the federal court force the case
back into the State’s own system.” Ohio Bureau of Employment
Servs. v. Hodory, 431 U. S. 471, 480. P. 16.
(g) In light of the foregoing, the Court need not decide whether the
TIA would itself block this suit. Pp. 16–17.

554 F. 3d 1094, reversed and remanded.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and STEVENS, KENNEDY, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.
KENNEDY, J., filed a concurring opinion. THOMAS, J., filed an opinion
concurring in the judgment, in which SCALIA, J., joined. ALITO, J., filed
an opinion concurring in the judgment.

