Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
vated felony” for immigration law purposes. But his circumstances
were not identical to the Government’s hypothesis. And the Govern
ment’s approach cannot be reconciled with 8 U. S. C. §1229b(a)(3),
which requires an “aggravated felony” conviction—not that the non
citizen merely could have been convicted of a felony but was not.
Second, the Government’s position fails to effectuate 21 U. S. C.
§851’s mandatory notice and process requirements, which have great
practical significance with respect to the conviction itself and are in
tegral to the structure and design of federal drug laws. They author
ize prosecutors to exercise discretion when electing whether to pur
sue a recidivist enhancement. So do many state criminal codes,
including Texas’. Permitting an immigration judge to apply his own
recidivist enhancement after the fact would denigrate state prosecu
tors’ independent judgment to execute such laws. Third, the Fifth
Circuit misread Lopez. This Court never used a “hypothetical ap
proach” in its analysis. By focusing on facts known to the immigra
tion court that could have but did not serve as the basis for the state
conviction and punishment, the Circuit’s approach introduces a level
of conjecture that has no basis in Lopez. Fourth, the Government’s
argument is inconsistent with common practice in the federal courts,
for it is quite unlikely that petitioner’s conduct would have been pun
ished as a felony in federal court. Finally, as the Court noted in Leo
cal v. Ashcroft, 543 U. S. 1, 11, n. 8, ambiguities in criminal statutes
referenced in immigration laws should be construed in the nonciti
zen’s favor. Notably, here, the question whether petitioner has com
mitted an “aggravated felony” is relevant to the type of relief he may
obtain from a removal order, but not to whether he is in fact remov
able. Thus, any relief he may obtain still depends on the Attorney
General’s discretion. Pp. 11–18.
570 F. 3d 263, reversed.
STEVENS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined. SCALIA, J., and THOMAS, J., filed opinions concurring in the
judgment.

