Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

tioner’s second simple possession conviction was an “ag
gravated felony” that made him ineligible for cancellation
of removal.
The Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) followed Cir
cuit precedent and affirmed that decision, but it disagreed
with the Immigration Judge’s legal analysis. In its en
banc opinion, the BIA ruled that in cases arising in Cir
cuits in which the question had not yet been decided, the
BIA would not treat a second or successive misdemeanor
conviction as an aggravated felony unless the conviction
contained a finding that the offender was a recidivist.
In re Carachuri-Rosendo, 24 I. & N. Dec. 382, 387, 391
(2007).
The BIA explained that the statutory question is com
plicated by the fact that “ ‘recidivist possession’ ” is not a
“discrete offense under Federal law.” Id., at 388. While
most federal offenses are defined by elements that must be
proved to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt, recidivist
possession is an “amalgam of elements, substantive sen
tencing factors, and procedural safeguards.” Id., at 389.
Section 844(a) defines simple possession by reference to
statutory elements, but “facts leading to recidivist felony
punishment, such as the existence of a prior conviction, do
not qualify as ‘elements’ in the traditional sense.” Ibid.
The BIA observed, however, that “21 U. S. C. §851
precludes a Federal judge from enhancing a drug of
fender’s sentence on the basis of recidivism absent compli
ance with a number of safeguards that, among other
things, serve to protect the right of the accused to notice
and an opportunity to be heard as to the propriety of an
increased punishment based on prior convictions.” Ibid.
Therefore, these requirements “are part and parcel of
what it means for a crime to be a ‘recidivist’ offense.” Id.,
at 391. “[U]nless the State successfully sought to impose
punishment for a recidivist drug conviction,” the BIA
concluded, a state simple possession “conviction cannot

