2

CARACHURI-ROSENDO v. HOLDER
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

paragraph whether in violation of Federal or State law.”
This language, we have said, confirms that “a state offense
whose elements include the elements of a felony punish
able under the [Controlled Substances Act] is an aggra
vated felony.” Lopez v. Gonzales, 549 U. S. 47, 57 (2006).
The conceptual problem in the present case is that the
only crime defined by 21 U. S. C. §844(a) of the Controlled
Substances Act, simple possession of prohibited drugs, is a
misdemeanor.
That misdemeanor becomes a “felony
punishable under the Controlled Substances Act” only
because the sentencing factor of recidivism authorizes
additional punishment beyond one year, the criterion for a
felony. We held in Almendarez-Torres v. United States,
523 U. S. 224 (1998), that recidivism can constitutionally
be made a sentencing factor rather than an element of the
crime, despite the fact that it is used to increase the al
lowable sentence. And we said in Lopez that a “state
possession crim[e] that correspond[s] to” the “felony viola
tio[n]” of “recidivist possession” in §844(a) “clearly fall[s]
within the definitions used by Congress . . . in
§1101(a)(43)(B) and . . . §924(c)(2).” 549 U. S., at 55, n. 6.
But to say all that is not to say that an alien has been
“convicted of” an aggravated felony (which is what
§1229b(a)(3) requires) when he has been convicted of
nothing more than a second state misdemeanor violation,
the punishment for which could, because of recidivism, be
extended beyond one year. Just because, by reason of
Almendarez-Torres, the federal misdemeanor offense has
been raised to a felony offense without changing its ele
ments, solely by increasing its penalty pursuant to a
recidivist “sentencing factor”; it does not follow that when
the question is asked whether someone has been “con
victed of” a state offense that “corresponds” to the federal
misdemeanor-become-felony, the answer can be sought in
sentencing factors. A defendant is not “convicted” of sen
tencing factors, but only of the elements of the crime

