12

CARACHURI-ROSENDO v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

Substances Act, the “maximum term of imprisonment
authorized” must be “more than one year,” 18 U. S. C.
§3559(a)(5). Congress, recall, chose to authorize only a 1
year sentence for nearly all simple possession offenses, but
it created a narrow exception for those cases in which a
prosecutor elects to charge the defendant as a recidivist
and the defendant receives notice and an opportunity to
defend against that charge. See 21 U. S. C. §851; Part I,
supra.
Indisputably, Carachuri-Rosendo’s record of conviction
contains no finding of the fact of his prior drug offense.
Carachuri-Rosendo argues that even such a finding would
be insufficient, and that a prosecutorial charge of recidi
vism and an opportunity to defend against that charge
also would be required before he could be deemed “con
victed” of a felony punishable under the Controlled Sub
stances Act. In the absence of any finding of recidivism,
we need not, and do not, decide whether these additional
procedures would be necessary. Although a federal immi
gration court may have the power to make a recidivist
finding in the first instance, see, e.g., Almendarez-Torres
v. United States, 523 U. S. 224, 247 (1998), it cannot,
ex post, enhance the state offense of record just because
facts known to it would have authorized a greater penalty
under either state or federal law.11 Carachuri-Rosendo
——————
11 Our decision last Term in Nijhawan v. Holder, 557 U. S. ___ (2009),
also relied upon by the Government, is not to the contrary. In that
case, we rejected the so-called categorical approach employed in cases
like United States v. Rodriquez, 553 U. S. 377 (2008), when assessing
whether, under 8 U. S. C. §1101(a)(43)(M)(i), a noncitizen has commit
ted “an offense that . . . involves fraud or deceit in which the loss to the
. . . victims exceeds $10,000.” Our analysis was tailored to the “circum
stance-specific” language contained in that particular subsection of the
aggravated felony definition. Nijhawan, 557 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
8). And we specifically distinguished the “generic” categories of aggra
vated felonies for which a categorical approach might be appropriate—
including the “illicit trafficking” provision—from the “circumstance

