Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

mum term authorized for such a conviction is less than
one year. 21 U. S. C. §844(a). However, a conviction for a
simple possession offense “after a prior conviction under
this subchapter [or] under the law of any State . . . has
become final”—what we will call recidivist simple posses
sion3—may be punished as a felony, with a prison sen
tence of up to two years. Ibid.4 Thus, except for simple
possession offenses involving isolated categories of drugs
not presently at issue, only recidivist simple possession
offenses are “punishable” as a federal “felony” under the
Controlled Substances Act, 18 U. S. C. §924(c)(2). And
thus only a conviction within this particular category of
simple possession offenses might, conceivably, be an “ag
gravated felony” under 8 U. S. C. §1101(a)(43).
For a subsequent simple possession offense to be eligible
for an enhanced punishment, i.e., to be punishable as a
felony, the Controlled Substances Act requires that a
prosecutor charge the existence of the prior simple posses
——————
3 Although

§844(a) does not expressly define a separate offense of
“recidivist simple possession,” the fact of a prior conviction must none
theless be found before a defendant is subject to a felony sentence.
True, the statutory scheme comports with Almendarez-Torres v. United
States, 523 U. S. 224, 247 (1998), in which we explained that the
Constitution does not require treating recidivism as an element of the
offense. In other words, Congress has permissibly set out a criminal
offense for simple possession whereby a recidivist finding by the judge,
by a preponderance of the evidence, authorizes a punishment that
exceeds the statutory maximum penalty for a simple possession offense.
But the fact of a prior conviction must still be found—if only by a judge
and if only by a preponderance of the evidence—before a defendant is
subject to felony punishment. For present purposes, we therefore view
§844(a)’s felony simple possession provision as separate and distinct
from the misdemeanor simple possession offense that section also
prescribes.
4 The statute provides in relevant part: “Any person who violates this
subsection may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than 1 year . . . except that if he commits such offense after a prior
conviction . . . he shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment for not
less than 15 days but not more than 2 years . . . .” 21 U. S. C. §844(a).

