16

CARACHURI-ROSENDO v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

We never used the term “hypothetical” to describe our
analysis in that case. We did look to the “proscribe[d]
conduct” of a state offense to determine whether it is
“punishable as a felony under that federal law.” 549 U. S.,
at 60. But the “hypothetical approach” employed by the
Court of Appeals introduces a level of conjecture at the
outset of this inquiry that has no basis in Lopez. It ig
nores both the conviction (the relevant statutory hook),
and the conduct actually punished by the state offense.
Instead, it focuses on facts known to the immigration court
that could have but did not serve as the basis for the state
conviction and punishment. As the Sixth Circuit has
explained, this approach is really a “ ‘hypothetical to a
hypothetical.’ ” Rashid v. Mukasey, 531 F. 3d 438, 445
(2008). Not only does the Government wish us to consider
a fictional federal felony—whether the crime for which
Carachuri-Rosendo was actually convicted would be a
felony under the Controlled Substances Act—but the
Government also wants us to consider facts not at issue in
the crime of conviction (i.e., the existence of a prior convic
tion) to determine whether Carachuri-Rosendo could have
been charged with a federal felony. This methodology is
far removed from the more focused, categorical inquiry
employed in Lopez.
Fourth, it seems clear that the Government’s argument
is inconsistent with common practice in the federal courts.
It is quite unlikely that the “conduct” that gave rise to
Carachuri-Rosendo’s conviction would have been punished
as a felony in federal court. Under the United States
Sentencing Guidelines, Carachuri-Rosendo’s recom
mended sentence, based on the type of controlled sub
stance at issue, would not have exceeded one year and
very likely would have been less than 6 months. See
United States Sentencing Commission, Guidelines Manual
§2D2.1(a)(3) (Nov. 2009) (base offense level of 4). And as
was true in Lopez, the Government has provided us with

