2

CARACHURI-ROSENDO v. HOLDER
Syllabus
§851(a)(1). Notice and an opportunity to challenge its validity,
§§851(b)–(c), are mandatory prerequisites to obtaining a punishment
based on the fact of the prior conviction and necessary prerequisites
to “authorize” a felony punishment, 18 U. S. C. §3559(a), for the sim
ple possession offense at issue.
Here, the Immigration Judge held that petitioner’s second simple
possession conviction was an “aggravated felony” that made him in
eligible for cancellation of removal. The Board of Immigration Ap
peals and Fifth Circuit affirmed. Relying on the holding in Lopez v.
Gonzales, 549 U. S. 47, 56—that to be an “aggravated felony” for im
migration law purposes, a state drug conviction must be punishable
as a felony under federal law—the court used a “hypothetical ap
proach,” concluding that because petitioner’s “conduct” could have
been prosecuted as a recidivist simple possession under state law, it
could have also been punished as a felony under federal law.

Held: Second or subsequent simple possession offenses are not aggra
vated felonies under §1101(a)(43) when, as in this case, the state con
viction is not based on the fact of a prior conviction. Pp. 9–19.
(a) Considering the disputed provisions’ terms and their “common
sense conception,” Lopez, 549 U. S., at 53, it would be counterintui
tive and “unorthodox” to apply an “aggravated felony” or “illicit traf
ficking” label to petitioner’s recidivist possession, see id., at 54. The
same is true for his penalty. One does not usually think of a 10-day
sentence for unauthorized possession of one prescription pill as an
“aggravated felony.” This Court must be very wary in this case be
cause the Government seeks a result that “the English language tells
[the Court] not to expect.” Ibid. Pp. 9–11.
(b) The Government’s position—that “conduct punishable as a fel
ony” should be treated as the equivalent of a felony conviction when
the underlying conduct could have been a felony under federal law—
is unpersuasive. First, it ignores the INA’s text, which limits the At
torney General’s cancellation power only when, inter alia, a nonciti
zen “has . . . been convicted of a[n] aggravated felony.” 8 U. S. C.
§1229b(a)(3). Thus, the conviction itself is the starting place, not
what might have or could have been charged. Under the Controlled
Substances Act, simple possession offenses carry only a 1-year sen
tence unless a prosecutor elects to charge the defendant as a recidi
vist and the defendant receives notice and an opportunity to defend
against that charge. Here, petitioner’s record of conviction contains
no finding of the fact of his prior drug offense. An immigration court
cannot, ex post, enhance the state offense of record just because facts
known to it would have authorized a greater penalty. The Govern
ment contends that had petitioner been prosecuted in federal court
under identical circumstances, he would have committed an “aggra

