Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

was not actually “convicted,” §1229b(a)(3), of a drug pos
session offense committed “after a prior conviction . . . has
become final,” §844(a), and no subsequent development
can undo that history.12
The Government contends that if Carachuri-Rosendo
had been prosecuted in federal court for simple possession
under 21 U. S. C. §844(a) under identical circumstances,
he would have committed an “aggravated felony” for im
migration law purposes. Tr. of Oral Arg. 36–37. This is
——————
specific” offense at hand. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 6–7, 8). Moreover,
unlike the instant case, there was no debate in Nijhawan over whether
the petitioner actually had been “convicted” of fraud; we only consid
ered how to calculate the amount of loss once a conviction for a particu
lar category of aggravated felony has occurred.
12 Linking our inquiry to the record of conviction comports with how
we have categorized convictions for state offenses within the definition
of generic federal criminal sanctions under the Armed Career Criminal
Act (ACCA), 18 U. S. C. §924(e). The United States urges that our
decision in Rodriquez, 553 U. S. 377, an ACCA case, supports its
position in this case. Brief for Respondent 29–30. To the extent that
Rodriquez is relevant to the issue at hand, we think the contrary is
true. In that decision we considered whether a recidivist finding under
state law that had the effect of increasing the “maximum term of
imprisonment” to 10 years, irrespective of the actual sentence imposed,
made the offense a “serious drug offense” within the meaning of 18
U. S. C. §924(e)(1) and therefore an ACCA predicate offense. 553 U. S.,
at 382. We held that a recidivist finding could set the “maximum term
of imprisonment,” but only when the finding is a part of the record of
conviction. Id., at 389. Indeed, we specifically observed that “in those
cases in which the records that may properly be consulted do not show
that the defendant faced the possibility of a recidivist enhancement, it
may well be that the Government will be precluded from establishing
that a conviction was for a qualifying offense.” Ibid. In other words,
when the recidivist finding giving rise to a 10-year sentence is not
apparent from the sentence itself, or appears neither as part of the
“judgment of conviction” nor the “formal charging document,” ibid., the
Government will not have established that the defendant had a prior
conviction for which the maximum term of imprisonment was 10 years
or more (assuming the recidivist finding is a necessary precursor to
such a sentence).

