Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

10 days, and that mere possession of one tablet of Xanax
does not constitute “trafficking,” Lopez instructs us to be
doubly wary of the Government’s position in this case.10
IV
The Government’s position, like the Court of Appeals’
“hypothetical approach,” would treat all “conduct punish
able as a felony” as the equivalent of a “conviction” of a
felony whenever, hypothetically speaking, the underlying
conduct could have received felony treatment under fed
eral law. We find this reasoning—and the “hypothetical
approach” itself—unpersuasive for the following reasons.
First, and most fundamentally, the Government’s posi
tion ignores the text of the INA, which limits the Attorney
General’s cancellation power only when, inter alia, a
noncitizen “has . . . been convicted of a[n] aggravated
felony.” 8 U. S. C. §1229b(a)(3) (emphasis added). The
text thus indicates that we are to look to the conviction
itself as our starting place, not to what might have or
could have been charged. And to be convicted of an aggra
vated felony punishable as such under the Controlled
——————
10 The Court stated in Lopez that “recidivist possession, see 21
U. S. C. §844(a), clearly fall[s] within the definitions used by Congress
in 8 U. S. C. §1101(a)(43)(B) and 18 U. S. C. §924(c)(2), regardless of
whether these federal possession felonies or their state counterparts
constitute ‘illicit trafficking in a controlled substance’ or ‘drug traffick
ing’ as those terms are used in ordinary speech.” 549 U. S., at 55, n. 6.
Our decision today is not in conflict with this footnote; it is still true
that recidivist simple possession offenses charged and prosecuted as
such “clearly fall” within the definition of an aggravated felony. What
we had no occasion to decide in Lopez, and what we now address, is
what it means to be convicted of an aggravated felony. Lopez teaches
us that it is necessary that the conduct punished under state law
correspond to a felony punishable under the Controlled Substances Act
to be an aggravated felony under §1101(a)(43)(B). But it does not
instruct as to whether the mere possibility that conduct could be—but
is not—charged as an offense punishable as a felony under federal law
is sufficient.

