14

CARACHURI-ROSENDO v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

so, the Government suggests, because the only statutory
text that matters is the word “punishable” in 18 U. S. C.
§924(c)(2): Whatever conduct might be “punishable” as a
felony, regardless of whether it actually is so punished or
not, is a felony for immigration law purposes. But for the
reasons just stated, the circumstances of CarachuriRosendo’s prosecution were not identical to those hypothe
sized by the Government. And the Government’s ab
stracted approach to §924(c)(2) cannot be reconciled with
the more concrete guidance of 8 U. S. C. §1229b(a)(3),
which limits the Attorney General’s cancellation authority
only when the noncitizen has actually been “convicted of
a[n] aggravated felony”—not when he merely could have
been convicted of a felony but was not.
Second, and relatedly, the Government’s position fails to
give effect to the mandatory notice and process require
ments contained in 21 U. S. C. §851. For federal law
purposes, a simple possession offense is not “punishable”
as a felony unless a federal prosecutor first elects to
charge a defendant as a recidivist in the criminal informa
tion. The statute, as described in Part I, supra, at 3–4,
speaks in mandatory terms, permitting “[n]o person” to be
subject to a recidivist enhancement—and therefore, in this
case, a felony sentence—“unless” he has been given notice
of the Government’s intent to prove the fact of a prior
conviction. Federal law also gives the defendant an oppor
tunity to challenge the fact of the prior conviction itself.
§§851(b)–(c). The Government would dismiss these proce
dures as meaningless, so long as they may be satisfied
during the immigration proceeding.
But these procedural requirements have great practical
significance with respect to the conviction itself and are
integral to the structure and design of our drug laws.
They authorize prosecutors to exercise discretion when
electing whether to pursue a recidivist enhancement. See
United States v. Dodson, 288 F. 3d 153, 159 (CA5 2002)

