(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CARACHURI-ROSENDO v. HOLDER, ATTORNEY 

GENERAL

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–60. Argued March 31, 2010—Decided June 14, 2010
Petitioner, a lawful permanent resident of the United States, faced de
portation after committing two misdemeanor drug offenses in Texas.
For the first, possession of a small amount of marijuana, he received
20 days in jail. For the second, possession without a prescription of
one antianxiety tablet, he received 10 days. Texas law, like federal
law, authorized a sentencing enhancement if the State proved that
petitioner had been previously convicted of a similar offense, but
Texas did not seek such an enhancement here. After the second con
viction, the Federal Government initiated removal proceedings. Peti
tioner conceded that he was removable, but claimed that he was eli
gible for discretionary cancellation of removal under the Immigration
and Nationality Act (INA) because he had not been convicted of any
“aggravated felony,” 8 U. S. C. §1229b(a)(3). Section 1101(a)(43)(B)
defines that term to include, inter alia, “illicit trafficking in a con
trolled substance . . . including a drug trafficking crime” as defined in
18 U. S. C. §924(c), which, in turn, defines a “drug trafficking crime”
as a “felony punishable under,” inter alia, “the Controlled Substances
Act (21 U. S. C. 801 et seq.).” A felony is a crime for which the
“maximum term of imprisonment authorized” is “more than one
year.” §3559(a). Simple possession offenses are ordinarily misde
meanors punishable with shorter sentences, but a conviction “after a
prior conviction under this subchapter [or] the law of any State . . .
has become final”—a “recidivist” simple possession offense—is “pun
ishable” as a “felony” under §924(c)(2) and subject to a 2-year sen
tence. Only this “recidivist” simple possession category might be an
“aggravated felony” under 8 U. S. C. §1101(a)(43). A prosecutor must
charge the existence of the prior conviction.
See 21 U. S. C.

