10

CARACHURI-ROSENDO v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

churi-Rosendo’s possessing a single tablet of Xanax, “and
certainly it is no element of simple possession.” 549 U. S.,
at 54. As an initial matter, then, we observe that a read
ing of this statutory scheme that would apply an “aggra
vated” or “trafficking” label to any simple possession of
fense is, to say the least, counterintuitive and
“unorthodox,” ibid.
The same is true for the type of penalty at issue. We do
not usually think of a 10-day sentence for the unauthor
ized possession of a trivial amount of a prescription drug
as an “aggravated felony.” A “felony,” we have come to
understand, is a “serious crime usu[ally] punishable by
imprisonment for more than one year or by death.”
Black’s Law Dictionary 694 (9th ed. 2009) (hereinafter
Black’s). An “aggravated” offense is one “made worse or
more serious by circumstances such as violence, the pres
ence of a deadly weapon, or the intent to commit another
crime.” Id., at 75. The term “aggravated felony” is unique
to Title 8, which covers immigration matters; it is not a
term used elsewhere within the United States Code. Our
statutory criminal law classifies the most insignificant of
federal felonies—“Class E” felonies—as carrying a sen
tence of “less than five years but more than one year.” 18
U. S. C. §3559(a)(5). While it is true that a defendant’s
criminal history might be seen to make an offense “worse”
by virtue thereof, Black’s 75, it is nevertheless unorthodox
to classify this type of petty simple possession recidivism
as an “aggravated felony.”
Of course, as Justice Souter observed in his opinion for
the Court in Lopez, Congress, like “Humpty Dumpty,” has
the power to give words unorthodox meanings. 549 U. S.,
at 54. But in this case the Government argues for a result
that “the English language tells us not to expect,” so we
must be “very wary of the Government’s position.” Ibid.
Because the English language tells us that most aggra
vated felonies are punishable by sentences far longer than

