8

CARACHURI-ROSENDO v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

‘proscribe conduct punishable as’ recidivist possession”
under federal law. Ibid.
On review, the Court of Appeals affirmed the BIA’s
decision in Carachuri-Rosendo’s case, reading our decision
in Lopez as dictating its outcome. “[I]f the conduct pro
scribed by the state offense could have been prosecuted as
a felony” under the Controlled Substances Act, the court
reasoned, then the defendant’s conviction qualifies as an
aggravated felony. 570 F. 3d 263, 267 (CA5 2009) (citing
Lopez, 549 U. S., at 60). The court deemed its analysis
“the hypothetical approach,” a term it derived from its
understanding of our method of analysis in Lopez. 570
F. 3d, at 266, and n. 3; see also United States v. PachecoDiaz, 513 F. 3d 776, 779 (CA7 2008) (per curiam) (employ
ing the “hypothetical-federal-felony approach”). Under
this approach, as the Court of Appeals understood it,
courts “g[o] beyond the state statute’s elements to look at
the hypothetical conduct a state statute proscribes.” 570
F. 3d, at 266, n. 3. Accordingly, any “conduct” that “hypo
thetically” “could have been punished as a felony” “had [it]
been prosecuted in federal court” is an “aggravated felony”
for federal immigration law purposes. Id., at 265. In
applying this hypothetical approach, the Court of Appeals
did not discuss the §851 procedural requirements. In
stead, it concluded that because Carachuri-Rosendo’s
“conduct” could have been prosecuted as simple possession
with a recidivist enhancement under state law—even
though it was not—it could have also been punished as a
felony under federal law. Thus, in the Court of Appeals’
view, his conviction for simple possession under state law,
without a recidivist enhancement, was an “aggravated
felony” for immigration law purposes.8
——————
8 Since the Court of Appeals issued its decision in this case, Cara
churi-Rosendo has been removed. Brief for Respondent 10–11. Neither
party, however, has suggested that this case is now moot. If Carachuri

