Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

attend.
Whether the Constitution permits the trial in absentia
of a defendant who is not present at the start of trial is a
serious question. It is one we expressly left open in Crosby,
though not without noting that there are good reasons
for distinguishing in this context between a defendant who
was present at the start of trial and one who was not
present at all. We observed that “the defendant’s initial
presence serves to assure that any waiver [of the right to
be present] is indeed knowing.” 506 U. S., at 261–262.
And we noted that “the costs of suspending a proceeding
already under way will be greater than the cost of postponing a trial not yet begun,” and so “[i]f a clear line is to
be drawn marking the point at which the costs of delay are
likely to outweigh the interests of the defendant and
society in having the defendant present, the commencement of trial is at least a plausible place at which to draw
that line.” Id., at 261.
Even assuming that a waiver of the right to be present
at trial could ever be found when the defendant was not
initially present, the facts here do not remotely demonstrate such a waiver. Our cases clearly establish that
“waiver is the intentional relinquishment or abandonment
of a known right.” United States v. Olano, 507 U. S. 725,
733 (1993) (internal quotation marks omitted). A defendant’s waiver of a fundamental constitutional right is not to
be lightly presumed; rather, a court must “indulge every
reasonable presumption against waiver of fundamental
constitutional rights.” Carnley v. Cochran, 369 U. S. 506,
514 (1962) (internal quotation marks omitted). It was not
reasonable for the state court to conclude that Fairey
intentionally abandoned his right to be present.
As a pro se litigant, Fairey represented himself actively
in pretrial proceedings; he made two interstate trips to do
so and demonstrated every intention of mounting a vigorous defense at trial. To be sure, he did not appear in court

