Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1448
_________________

EDMUND G. BROWN, JR., GOVERNOR OF CAL- 

IFORNIA, ET AL., PETITIONERS v. ENTERTAIN- 

MENT MERCHANTS ASSOCIATION ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[June 27, 2011]


JUSTICE ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE joins,
concurring in the judgment.
The California statute that is before us in this case
represents a pioneering effort to address what the state
legislature and others regard as a potentially serious
social problem: the effect of exceptionally violent video
games on impressionable minors, who often spend count
less hours immersed in the alternative worlds that these
games create. Although the California statute is well
intentioned, its terms are not framed with the precision
that the Constitution demands, and I therefore agree with
the Court that this particular law cannot be sustained.
I disagree, however, with the approach taken in the
Court’s opinion. In considering the application of un
changing constitutional principles to new and rapidly
evolving technology, this Court should proceed with cau
tion. We should make every effort to understand the new
technology. We should take into account the possibility
that developing technology may have important societal
implications that will become apparent only with time.
We should not jump to the conclusion that new technology
is fundamentally the same as some older thing with which
we are familiar. And we should not hastily dismiss the
judgment of legislators, who may be in a better position


2

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

than we are to assess the implications of new technology.
The opinion of the Court exhibits none of this caution.
In the view of the Court, all those concerned about the
effects of violent video games—federal and state legisla
tors, educators, social scientists, and parents—are unduly
fearful, for violent video games really present no serious
problem. See ante, at 10–13, 15–16. Spending hour upon
hour controlling the actions of a character who guns down
scores of innocent victims is not different in “kind” from
reading a description of violence in a work of literature.
See ante, at 10–11.
The Court is sure of this; I am not. There are reasons to
suspect that the experience of playing violent video games
just might be very different from reading a book, listening
to the radio, or watching a movie or a television show.
I
Respondents in this case, representing the video-game
industry, ask us to strike down the California law on two
grounds: The broad ground adopted by the Court and the
narrower ground that the law’s definition of “violent video
game,” see Cal. Civ. Code Ann. §1746(d)(1)(A) (West 2009),
is impermissibly vague. See Brief for Respondents 23–61.
Because I agree with the latter argument, I see no need to
reach the broader First Amendment issues addressed by
the Court.1
A
Due process requires that laws give people of ordinary
intelligence fair notice of what is prohibited. Grayned v.
City of Rockford, 408 U. S. 104, 108 (1972). The lack of
such notice in a law that regulates expression “raises
——————
1 It

is well established that a judgment may be affirmed on an alter
native ground that was properly raised but not addressed by the lower
court. Washington v. Confederated Bands and Tribes of Yakima
Nation, 439 U. S. 463, 478, n. 20 (1979).


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

special First Amendment concerns because of its obvious
chilling effect on free speech.” Reno v. American Civil
Liberties Union, 521 U. S. 844, 871–872 (1997). Vague
laws force potential speakers to “ ‘steer far wider of the
unlawful zone’ . . . than if the boundaries of the forbidden
areas were clearly marked.” Baggett v. Bullitt, 377 U. S.
360, 372 (1964) (quoting Speiser v. Randall, 357 U. S. 513,
526 (1958)). While “perfect clarity and precise guidance
have never been required even of regulations that restrict
expressive activity,” Ward v. Rock Against Racism, 491
U. S. 781, 794 (1989), “government may regulate in the
area” of First Amendment freedoms “only with narrow
specificity,” NAACP v. Button, 371 U. S. 415, 433 (1963);
see also Hoffman Estates v. Flipside, Hoffman Estates,
Inc., 455 U. S. 489, 499 (1982). These principles apply to
laws that regulate expression for the purpose of protecting
children. See Interstate Circuit, Inc. v. Dallas, 390 U. S.
676, 689 (1968).
Here, the California law does not define “violent video
games” with the “narrow specificity” that the Constitution
demands. In an effort to avoid First Amendment prob
lems, the California Legislature modeled its violent video
game statute on the New York law that this Court upheld
in Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U. S. 629 (1968)—a law that
prohibited the sale of certain sexually related materials to
minors, see id., at 631–633. But the California Legisla
ture departed from the Ginsberg model in an important
respect, and the legislature overlooked important differ
ences between the materials falling within the scope of the
two statutes.
B
The law at issue in Ginsberg prohibited the sale to
minors of materials that were deemed “harmful to mi
nors,” and the law defined “harmful to minors” simply by
adding the words “for minors” to each element of the


4

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

definition of obscenity set out in what were then the
Court’s leading obscenity decisions, see Roth v. United
States, 354 U. S. 476 (1957), and Book Named “John Cle
land’s Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure” v. Attorney Gen
eral of Mass., 383 U. S. 413 (1966).
Seeking to bring its violent video game law within the
protection of Ginsberg, the California Legislature began
with the obscenity test adopted in Miller v. California, 413
U. S. 15 (1973), a decision that revised the obscenity tests
previously set out in Roth and Memoirs. The legislature
then made certain modifications to accommodate the aim
of the violent video game law.
Under Miller, an obscenity statute must contain a thresh
old limitation that restricts the statute’s scope to specifi
cally described “hard core” materials. See 413 U. S.,
at 23–25, 27. Materials that fall within this “hard core”
category may be deemed to be obscene if three additional
requirements are met:
(1) an “average person, applying contemporary com
munity standards [must] find . . . the work, taken as a
whole, appeals to the prurient interest”;
(2) “the work [must] depic[t] or describ[e], in a pat
ently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically de
fined by the applicable state law; and”
(3) “the work, taken as a whole, [must] lac[k] serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.” Id., at
24 (internal quotation marks omitted).
Adapting these standards, the California law imposes
the following threshold limitation: “[T]he range of options
available to a player [must] includ[e] killing, maiming,
dismembering, or sexually assaulting an image of a hu
man being.” §1746(d)(1). Any video game that meets this
threshold test is subject to the law’s restrictions if it also
satisfies three further requirements:
“(i) A reasonable person, considering the game as a


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

whole, would find [the game] appeals to a deviant or
morbid interest of minors.
“(ii) It is patently offensive to prevailing standards
in the community as to what is suitable for minors.
“(iii) It causes the game, as a whole, to lack serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value for mi
nors.” §1746(d)(1)(A).2
C
The first important difference between the Ginsberg law
and the California violent video game statute concerns
their respective threshold requirements. As noted, the
Ginsberg law built upon the test for adult obscenity, and
the current adult obscenity test, which was set out in
Miller, requires an obscenity statute to contain a threshold
limitation that restricts the statute’s coverage to specifi
cally defined “hard core” depictions. See 413 U. S., at 23–
25, 27. The Miller Court gave as an example a statute
that applies to only “[p]atently offensive representations
or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts,” “masturbation,
excretory functions, and lewd exhibition of the genitals.”
Id., at 25. The Miller Court clearly viewed this threshold
limitation as serving a vital notice function. “We are
satisfied,” the Court wrote, “that these specific prerequi
sites will provide fair notice to a dealer in such materials
that his public and commercial activities may bring prose
cution.” Id., at 27; see also Reno, supra, at 873 (observing
that Miller’s threshold limitation “reduces the vagueness
——————
2 Under the California law, a game that meets the threshold require
ment set out in text also qualifies as “violent” if it “[e]nables the player
to virtually inflict serious injury upon images of human beings or
characters with substantially human characteristics in a manner which
is especially heinous, cruel, or depraved in that it involves torture or
serious physical abuse to the victim.” §1746(d)(1)(B). In the Court of
Appeals, California conceded that this alternative definition is uncon
stitutional, 556 F. 3d 950, 954, n. 5 (CA9 2009), and therefore only the
requirements set out in text are now before us.


6

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

inherent in the open-ended term ‘patently offensive’ ”).3
By contrast, the threshold requirement of the California
law does not perform the narrowing function served by the
limitation in Miller. At least when Miller was decided,
depictions of “hard core” sexual conduct were not a com
mon feature of mainstream entertainment. But nothing
similar can be said about much of the conduct covered by
the California law. It provides that a video game cannot
qualify as “violent” unless “the range of options available
to a player includes killing, maiming, dismembering, or
sexually assaulting an image of a human being.”
§1746(d)(1).
For better or worse, our society has long regarded many
depictions of killing and maiming4 as suitable features of
popular entertainment, including entertainment that is
widely available to minors. The California law’s threshold
requirement would more closely resemble the limitation in
Miller if it targeted a narrower class of graphic depictions.
Because of this feature of the California law’s threshold
test, the work of providing fair notice is left in large part
to the three requirements that follow, but those elements
are also not up to the task. In drafting the violent video
game law, the California Legislature could have made its
own judgment regarding the kind and degree of violence
that is acceptable in games played by minors (or by minors
in particular age groups). Instead, the legislature relied
on undefined societal or community standards.
——————
3 The provision of New York law under which the petitioner was con
victed in Ginsberg was framed with similar specificity. This provision
applied to depictions of “nudity” and “sexual conduct,” and both those
terms were specifically and unambiguously defined. See 390 U. S., at
645–647 (Appendix A to opinion of the Court).
4 The California law does not define the term “maiming,” nor has the
State cited any decisions from its courts that define the term in this
context. Accordingly, I take the term to have its ordinary meaning,
which includes the infliction of any serious wound, see Webster’s Third
New International Dictionary 1362 (2002) (hereinafter Webster’s).


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

One of the three elements at issue here refers expressly
to “prevailing standards in the community as to what is
suitable for minors.” §1746(d)(1)(A)(ii). Another element
points in the same direction, asking whether “[a] reason
able person, considering [a] game as a whole,” would find
that it “appeals to a deviant or morbid interest of minors.”
§1746(d)(1)(A)(i) (emphasis added).
The terms “deviant” and “morbid” are not defined in
the statute, and California offers no reason to think that
its courts would give the terms anything other than their
ordinary meaning. See Reply Brief for Petitioners 5 (argu
ing that “[a] reasonable person can make this judgment
through . . . a common understanding and definition of the
applicable terms”). I therefore assume that “deviant” and
“morbid” carry the meaning that they convey in ordinary
speech. The adjective “deviant” ordinarily means “deviat
ing . . . from some accepted norm,” and the term “morbid”
means “of, relating to, or characteristic of disease.” Web
ster’s 618, 1469. A “deviant or morbid interest” in
violence, therefore, appears to be an interest that de
viates from what is regarded—presumably in accordance
with some generally accepted standard—as normal and
healthy. Thus, the application of the California law is
heavily dependent on the identification of generally ac
cepted standards regarding the suitability of violent enter
tainment for minors.
The California Legislature seems to have assumed that
these standards are sufficiently well known so that a
person of ordinary intelligence would have fair notice as to
whether the kind and degree of violence in a particular
game is enough to qualify the game as “violent.” And
because the Miller test looks to community standards, the
legislature may have thought that the use of undefined
community standards in the violent video game law would
not present vagueness problems.
There is a critical difference, however, between obscen


8

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

ity laws and laws regulating violence in entertainment.
By the time of this Court’s landmark obscenity cases in
the 1960’s, obscenity had long been prohibited, see Roth,
354 U. S., at 484–485, and this experience had helped to
shape certain generally accepted norms concerning ex
pression related to sex.
There is no similar history regarding expression related
to violence. As the Court notes, classic literature contains
descriptions of great violence, and even children’s stories
sometimes depict very violent scenes. See ante, at 8–9.
Although our society does not generally regard all depic
tions of violence as suitable for children or adolescents, the
prevalence of violent depictions in children’s literature and
entertainment creates numerous opportunities for reason
able people to disagree about which depictions may excite
“deviant” or “morbid” impulses. See Edwards & Berman,
Regulating Violence on Television, 89 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1487,
1523 (1995) (observing that the Miller test would be diffi
cult to apply to violent expression because “there is noth
ing even approaching a consensus on low-value violence”).
Finally, the difficulty of ascertaining the community
standards incorporated into the California law is com
pounded by the legislature’s decision to lump all minors
together. The California law draws no distinction between
young children and adolescents who are nearing the age of
majority.
In response to a question at oral argument, the attorney
defending the constitutionality of the California law said
that the State would accept a narrowing construction of
the law under which the law’s references to “minors”
would be interpreted to refer to the oldest minors—that is,
those just short of 18. Tr. of Oral Arg. 11–12. However,
“it is not within our power to construe and narrow state
laws.” Grayned, 408 U. S., at 110. We can only “ ‘extrapo
late [their] allowable meaning’ ” from the statutory text
and authoritative interpretations of similar laws by courts


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

of the State. Ibid. (quoting Garner v. Louisiana, 368 U. S.
157, 174 (1961) (Frankfurter, J., concurring in judgment)).
In this case, California has not provided any evidence
that the California Legislature intended the law to be
limited in this way, or cited any decisions from its courts
that would support an “oldest minors” construction.5
For these reasons, I conclude that the California violent
video game law fails to provide the fair notice that the
Constitution requires. And I would go no further. I would
not express any view on whether a properly drawn statute
would or would not survive First Amendment scrutiny.
We should address that question only if and when it is
necessary to do so.
II
Having outlined how I would decide this case, I will now
briefly elaborate on my reasons for questioning the wis
dom of the Court’s approach. Some of these reasons are
touched upon by the dissents, and while I am not prepared
at this time to go as far as either JUSTICE THOMAS or
JUSTICE BREYER, they raise valid concerns.
A
The Court is wrong in saying that the holding in United
States v. Stevens, 559 U. S. ___ (2010), “controls this case.”
Ante, at 4. First, the statute in Stevens differed sharply
from the statute at issue here. Stevens struck down a law
that broadly prohibited any person from creating, selling,
or possessing depictions of animal cruelty for commercial
gain. The California law involved here, by contrast, is
——————
5 At oral argument, California also proposed that the term “minors”
could be interpreted as referring to the “typical age group of minors”
who play video games. Tr. of Oral Arg. 11. But nothing in the law’s
text supports such a limitation. Nor has California cited any decisions
indicating that its courts would restrict the law in this way. And there
is nothing in the record indicating what this age group might be.


10

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

limited to the sale or rental of violent video games to
minors. The California law imposes no restriction on the
creation of violent video games, or on the possession of
such games by anyone, whether above or below the age of
18. The California law does not regulate the sale or rental
of violent games by adults. And the California law does
not prevent parents and certain other close relatives from
buying or renting violent games for their children or other
young relatives if they see fit.
Second, Stevens does not support the proposition that a
law like the one at issue must satisfy strict scrutiny. The
portion of Stevens on which the Court relies rejected the
Government’s contention that depictions of animal cruelty
were categorically outside the range of any First Amend
ment protection. 559 U. S., at __ (slip op., at 5). Going
well beyond Stevens, the Court now holds that any law
that attempts to prevent minors from purchasing violent
video games must satisfy strict scrutiny instead of the
more lenient standard applied in Ginsberg, 390 U. S. 629,
our most closely related precedent. As a result of today’s
decision, a State may prohibit the sale to minors of what
Ginsberg described as “girlie magazines,” but a State must
surmount a formidable (and perhaps insurmountable)
obstacle if it wishes to prevent children from purchasing
the most violent and depraved video games imaginable.
Third, Stevens expressly left open the possibility that a
more narrowly drawn statute targeting depictions of
animal cruelty might be compatible with the First
Amendment. See 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 19). In this
case, the Court’s sweeping opinion will likely be read by
many, both inside and outside the video-game industry, as
suggesting that no regulation of minors’ access to violent
video games is allowed—at least without supporting evi
dence that may not be realistically obtainable given the
nature of the phenomenon in question.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011) 


11

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment


B

The Court’s opinion distorts the effect of the California
law. I certainly agree with the Court that the government
has no “free-floating power to restrict the ideas to which
children may be exposed,” ante, at 7, but the California
law does not exercise such a power. If parents want their
child to have a violent video game, the California law does
not interfere with that parental prerogative. Instead, the
California law reinforces parental decisionmaking in
exactly the same way as the New York statute upheld in
Ginsberg. Under both laws, minors are prevented from
purchasing certain materials; and under both laws, par
ents are free to supply their children with these items if
that is their wish.
Citing the video-game industry’s voluntary rating sys
tem, the Court argues that the California law does not
“meet a substantial need of parents who wish to restrict
their children’s access to violent video games but cannot
do so.” Ante, at 15. The Court does not mention the fact
that the industry adopted this system in response to the
threat of federal regulation, Brief for Activision Blizzard,
Inc., as Amicus Curiae 7–10, a threat that the Court’s
opinion may now be seen as largely eliminating. Nor does
the Court acknowledge that compliance with this system
at the time of the enactment of the California law left
much to be desired6—or that future enforcement may
decline if the video-game industry perceives that any
threat of government regulation has vanished. Nor does
——————
6A

2004 Federal Trade Commission Report showed that 69 percent of
unaccompanied children ages 13 to 16 were able to buy M-rated games
and that 56 percent of 13-year-olds were able to buy an M-rated game.
Marketing Violent Entertainment to Children: A Fourth Follow-Up
Review of Industry Practices in the Motion Picture, Music Recording &
Electronic Game Industries 26–28 (July 2004), http://www.ftc.gov/os/
2004/07/040708kidsviolencerpt.pdf (all Internet materials as visited
June 24, 2011, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file).


12

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

the Court note, as JUSTICE BREYER points out, see post, at
11 (dissenting opinion), that many parents today are
simply not able to monitor their children’s use of com
puters and gaming devices.
C
Finally, the Court is far too quick to dismiss the possi
bility that the experience of playing video games (and the
effects on minors of playing violent video games) may be
very different from anything that we have seen before.
Any assessment of the experience of playing video games
must take into account certain characteristics of the video
games that are now on the market and those that are
likely to be available in the near future.
Today’s most advanced video games create realistic
alternative worlds in which millions of players immerse
themselves for hours on end. These games feature visual
imagery and sounds that are strikingly realistic, and in
the near future video-game graphics may be virtually
indistinguishable from actual video footage.7 Many of the
games already on the market can produce high definition
images,8 and it is predicted that it will not be long before
video-game images will be seen in three dimensions.9 It is
also forecast that video games will soon provide sensory
——————
7 See Chayka, Visual Games: Photorealism in Crisis, Kill Screen (May
2011), http://killscreendaily.com/articles/visual-games-photorealism-crisis.
8 To see brief video excerpts from games with highly realistic graph
ics, see Spike TV Video Game Awards 2010—Game of the Year Nomi
nees, GameTrailers.com (Dec. 10, 2010), http://www.gametrailers.com/
video/game-of-spike-tv-vga/707755?type=flv.
9 See Selleck, Sony PS3 Launching 50 3D-Capable Video Games in
the Near Future, SlashGear (Nov. 23, 2010), http://www.slashgear.com/
sony-ps3-launching-50-3d-capable-video-games-in-the-near-future-23115866;
Sofge, Why 3D Doesn’t Work for TV, But Is Great for Gaming, Popular Mechanics (Mar. 11, 2010), http://www.popularmechanics.com/
technology/digital/gaming/4342437.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

feedback.10 By wearing a special vest or other device, a
player will be able to experience physical sensations sup
posedly felt by a character on the screen.11 Some amici
who support respondents foresee the day when “ ‘virtual
reality shoot-‘em-ups’ ” will allow children to “ ‘actually feel
the splatting blood from the blown-off head’ ” of a victim.
Brief for Reporters Comm. for Freedom of the Press et al.
as Amici Curiae 29 (quoting H. Schechter, Savage Pas
times 18 (2005)).
Persons who play video games also have an unprece
dented ability to participate in the events that take place
in the virtual worlds that these games create. Players can
create their own video-game characters and can use pho
tos to produce characters that closely resemble actual
people. A person playing a sophisticated game can make a
multitude of choices and can thereby alter the course of
the action in the game. In addition, the means by which
players control the action in video games now bear a closer
relationship to the means by which people control action
in the real world. While the action in older games was
often directed with buttons or a joystick, players dictate
the action in newer games by engaging in the same mo
——————
10 T. Chatfield, Fun Inc.: Why Games are the Twenty-first Century’s
Most Serious Business 211 (2010) (predicting that “[w]e can expect . . .
physical feedback and motion detection as standard in every gaming
device in the near future”); J. Blascovich & J. Bailenson, Infinite
Reality: Avatars, Eternal Life, New Worlds, and the Dawn of the
Virtual Revolution 2 (2011) (“Technological developments powering
virtual worlds are accelerating, ensuring that virtual experiences will
become more immersive by providing sensory information that makes
people feel they are ‘inside’ virtual worlds” (emphasis in the original)).
11 See Topolsky, The Mindwire V5 Turns Gaming into Pure Electro
shock Torture, Engadget (Mar. 9, 2008), http://www.engadget.com/
2008/03/09/the-mindwire-v5-turns-gaming-into-pure-electroshock-torture;
Greenemeier, Video Game Vest Simulates Sensation of Being Capped,
Scientific American (Oct. 25, 2007), http://www.scientificamerican.com/
article.cfm?id=video-game-vest-simulates.


14

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

tions that they desire a character in the game to per
form.12 For example, a player who wants a video-game
character to swing a baseball bat—either to hit a ball or
smash a skull—could bring that about by simulating the
motion of actually swinging a bat.
These present-day and emerging characteristics of video
games must be considered together with characteristics of
the violent games that have already been marketed.
In some of these games, the violence is astounding.13
Victims by the dozens are killed with every imaginable
implement, including machine guns, shotguns, clubs,
hammers, axes, swords, and chainsaws. Victims are
dismembered, decapitated, disemboweled, set on fire, and
chopped into little pieces. They cry out in agony and beg
for mercy. Blood gushes, splatters, and pools. Severed
body parts and gobs of human remains are graphically
shown. In some games, points are awarded based, not
only on the number of victims killed, but on the killing
technique employed.
It also appears that there is no antisocial theme too base
for some in the video-game industry to exploit. There are
games in which a player can take on the identity and
reenact the killings carried out by the perpetrators of the
murders at Columbine High School and Virginia Tech.14
——————
12 See Schiesel, A Real Threat Now Faces the Nintendo Wii, N. Y.
Times, Dec. 3, 2010, p. F7 (describing how leading developers of video
game consoles are competing to deliver gesture-controlled gaming
devices).
13 For a sample of violent video games, see Wilson, The 10 Most
Violent Video Games of All Time, PCMag.com (Feb. 10, 2011),
http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2379959,00.asp. To see brief
video excerpts from violent games, see Chomik, Top 10: Most Violent
Video Games, AskMen.com, http://www.askmen.com/top_10/videogame/
top-10-most-violent-video-games.html; Sayed, 15 Most Violent Video
Games That Made You Puke, Gamingbolt (May 2, 2010), http://
gamingbolt.com/15-most-violent-video-games-that-made-you-puke.
14 Webley, “School Shooter” Video Game to Reenact Columbine, Vir


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

The objective of one game is to rape a mother and her
daughters;15 in another, the goal is to rape Native Ameri
can women.16 There is a game in which players engage in
“ethnic cleansing” and can choose to gun down AfricanAmericans, Latinos, or Jews.17 In still another game,
players attempt to fire a rifle shot into the head of Presi
dent Kennedy as his motorcade passes by the Texas School
Book Depository.18
If the technological characteristics of the sophisticated
games that are likely to be available in the near future are
combined with the characteristics of the most violent
games already marketed, the result will be games that
allow troubled teens to experience in an extraordinarily
personal and vivid way what it would be like to carry out
unspeakable acts of violence.
The Court is untroubled by this possibility. According to
the Court, the “interactive” nature of video games is “noth
ing new” because “all literature is interactive.” Ante, at
10–11. Disagreeing with this assessment, the Interna
tional Game Developers Association (IGDA)—a group that
presumably understands the nature of video games and
that supports respondents—tells us that video games are
——————
ginia Tech Killings, Time (Apr. 20, 2011), http://newsfeed.time.com/
2011/04/20/school-shooter-video-game-reenacts-columbine-virginia-tech
killings. After a Web site that made School Shooter available for
download removed it in response to mounting criticism, the developer
stated that it may make the game available on its own Web site. Inside
the Sick Site of a School Shooter Mod (Mar. 26, 2011), http://ssnat.com.
15 Lah, “RapeLay” Video Game Goes Viral Amid Outrage, CNN
(Mar. 30, 2010), http://articles.cnn.com/2010-03-30/world/japan.video.
game.rape_1_game-teenage-girl-japanese-government?_s=PM:WORLD.
16 Graham, Custer May be Shot Down Again in a Battle of the Sexes
Over X-Rated Video Games, People, Nov. 15, 1982, pp. 110, 115.
17 Scheeres, Games Elevate Hate to Next Level, Wired (Feb. 20,
2002), http://www.wired.com/culture/lifestyle/news/2002/02/50523.
18 Thompson, A View to a Kill: JFK Reloaded is Just Plain Creepy,
Slate (Nov. 22, 2004), http://www.slate.com/id/2110034.


16

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

“far more concretely interactive.” Brief for IGDA et al. as
Amici Curiae 3. And on this point, the game developers
are surely correct.
It is certainly true, as the Court notes, that “ ‘[l]it
erature, when it is successful draws the reader into the
story, makes him identify with the characters, invites
him to judge them and quarrel with them, to experience
their joys and sufferings as the reader’s own.’ ” Ante, at 11
(quoting American Amusement Machine Assn. v. Kendrick,
244 F. 3d 572, 577 (CA7 2001)). But only an extraordinar
ily imaginative reader who reads a description of a killing
in a literary work will experience that event as vividly as
he might if he played the role of the killer in a video game.
To take an example, think of a person who reads the
passage in Crime and Punishment in which Raskolnikov kills the old pawn broker with an axe. See F.
Dostoyevsky, Crime and Punishment 78 (Modern Library
ed. 1950). Compare that reader with a video-game player
who creates an avatar that bears his own image; who sees
a realistic image of the victim and the scene of the killing
in high definition and in three dimensions; who is forced to
decide whether or not to kill the victim and decides to do
so; who then pretends to grasp an axe, to raise it above the
head of the victim, and then to bring it down; who hears
the thud of the axe hitting her head and her cry of pain;
who sees her split skull and feels the sensation of blood on
his face and hands. For most people, the two experiences
will not be the same.19
When all of the characteristics of video games are taken
into account, there is certainly a reasonable basis for
——————
19 As the Court notes, there are a few children’s books that ask young
readers to step into the shoes of a character and to make choices that
take the stories along one of a very limited number of possible lines.
See ante, at 10. But the very nature of the print medium makes it
impossible for a book to offer anything like the same number of choices
as those provided by a video game.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

thinking that the experience of playing a video game may
be quite different from the experience of reading a book,
listening to a radio broadcast, or viewing a movie. And if
this is so, then for at least some minors, the effects of
playing violent video games may also be quite different.
The Court acts prematurely in dismissing this possibility
out of hand.
*
*
*
For all these reasons, I would hold only that the particu
lar law at issue here fails to provide the clear notice that
the Constitution requires. I would not squelch legislative
efforts to deal with what is perceived by some to be a
significant and developing social problem. If differently
framed statutes are enacted by the States or by the Fed
eral Government, we can consider the constitutionality of
those laws when cases challenging them are presented
to us.

