(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BROWN, GOVERNOR OF CALIFORNIA, ET AL. v.
ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSOCIATION ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1448. Argued November 2, 2010—Decided June 27, 2011
Respondents, representing the video-game and software industries,
filed a preenforcement challenge to a California law that restricts the
sale or rental of violent video games to minors. The Federal District
Court concluded that the Act violated the First Amendment and
permanently enjoined its enforcement. The Ninth Circuit affirmed.
Held: The Act does not comport with the First Amendment. Pp. 2–18.
(a) Video games qualify for First Amendment protection. Like pro
tected books, plays, and movies, they communicate ideas through fa
miliar literary devices and features distinctive to the medium. And
“the basic principles of freedom of speech . . . do not vary” with a new
and different communication medium. Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wil
son, 343 U. S. 495, 503. The most basic principle—that government
lacks the power to restrict expression because of its message, ideas,
subject matter, or content, Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Un
ion, 535 U. S. 564, 573—is subject to a few limited exceptions for his
torically unprotected speech, such as obscenity, incitement, and fight
ing words. But a legislature cannot create new categories of
unprotected speech simply by weighing the value of a particular
category against its social costs and then punishing it if it fails the
test. See United States v. Stevens, 559 U. S. ___, ___. Unlike the
New York law upheld in Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U. S. 629, Cali
fornia’s Act does not adjust the boundaries of an existing category of
unprotected speech to ensure that a definition designed for adults is
not uncritically applied to children. Instead, the State wishes to cre
ate a wholly new category of content-based regulation that is permis
sible only for speech directed at children. That is unprecedented and


2

BROWN v. ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANTS ASSN.
Syllabus
mistaken. This country has no tradition of specially restricting chil
dren’s access to depictions of violence. And California’s claim that
“interactive” video games present special problems, in that the player
participates in the violent action on screen and determines its out
come, is unpersuasive. Pp. 2–11.
(b) Because the Act imposes a restriction on the content of pro
tected speech, it is invalid unless California can demonstrate that it
passes strict scrutiny, i.e., it is justified by a compelling government
interest and is narrowly drawn to serve that interest. R. A. V. v. St.
Paul, 505 U. S. 377, 395. California cannot meet that standard. Psy
chological studies purporting to show a connection between exposure
to violent video games and harmful effects on children do not prove
that such exposure causes minors to act aggressively. Any demon
strated effects are both small and indistinguishable from effects pro
duced by other media. Since California has declined to restrict those
other media, e.g., Saturday morning cartoons, its video-game regula
tion is wildly underinclusive, raising serious doubts about whether
the State is pursuing the interest it invokes or is instead disfavoring
a particular speaker or viewpoint. California also cannot show that
the Act’s restrictions meet the alleged substantial need of parents
who wish to restrict their children’s access to violent videos. The
video-game industry’s voluntary rating system already accomplishes
that to a large extent. Moreover, as a means of assisting parents the
Act is greatly overinclusive, since not all of the children who are pro
hibited from purchasing violent video games have parents who dis
approve of their doing so. The Act cannot satisfy strict scrutiny.
Pp. 11–18.

556 F. 3d 950, affirmed.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which KENNEDY,
GINSBURG, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. ALITO, J., filed an opin
ion concurring in the judgment, in which ROBERTS, C. J., joined. THOMAS, J., and BREYER, J., filed dissenting opinions.

