(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

HAMILTON, CHAPTER 13 TRUSTEE v. LANNING
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE TENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–998.

Argued March 22, 2010—Decided June 7, 2010

Debtors filing for protection under Chapter 13 of the Bankruptcy Code
must agree to a court-approved plan under which they pay creditors
out of their future income. If the bankruptcy trustee or an unsecured
creditor objects, a bankruptcy court may not approve the plan unless
it provides for the full repayment of unsecured claims or “provides
that all of the debtor’s projected disposable income to be received”
over the plan’s duration “will be applied to make payments” in accor
dance with plan terms. 11 U. S. C. §1325(b)(1). Before enactment of
the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of
2005 (BAPCPA), the Code loosely defined “disposable income.”
Though it did not define “projected disposable income,” most bank
ruptcy courts calculated it using a mechanical approach, multiplying
monthly income by the number of months in the plan and then de
termining the “disposable” portion of the result. In exceptional cases,
those courts also took into account foreseeable changes in a debtor’s
income or expenses. BAPCPA defines “disposable income” as “cur
rent monthly income received by the debtor” less “amounts reasona
bly necessary to be expended” for, e.g., the debtor’s maintenance and
support. §1325(b)(2)(A)(i). “Current monthly income,” in turn, is cal
culated by averaging the debtor’s monthly income during a 6-month
look-back period preceding the petition’s filing. See §101(10A)(A)(i).
If a debtor’s income is below the median for his or her State,
“amounts reasonably necessary” include the full amount needed for
“maintenance or support,” see §1325(b)(2)(A)(i), but if the debtor’s in
come exceeds the state median, only certain specified expenses are
included, see §§707(b)(2), 1325(b)(3)(A).
A one-time buyout from respondent’s former employer caused her
current monthly income for the six months preceding her Chapter 13


2

HAMILTON v. LANNING
Syllabus
petition to exceed her State’s median income. However, based on the
income from her new job, which was below the state median, and her
expenses, she reported a monthly disposable income of $149.03. She
thus filed a plan that would have required her to pay $144 per month
for 36 months. Petitioner, the Chapter 13 trustee, objected to confir
mation of the plan because the proposed payment amount was less
than the full amount of the claims against respondent, and because
she had not committed all of her “projected disposable income” to re
paying creditors. Petitioner claimed that the mechanical approach
was the proper way to calculate projected disposable income, and that
using that approach, respondent should pay $756 per month for 60
months. Her actual income was insufficient to make such payments.
The Bankruptcy Court endorsed a $144 payment over a 60-month
period, concluding that “projected” requires courts to consider the
debtor’s actual income. The Tenth Circuit Bankruptcy Appellate
Panel affirmed, as did the Tenth Circuit, which held that a court cal
culating “projected disposable income” should begin with the “pre
sumption” that the figure yielded by the mechanical approach is cor
rect, but that this figure may be rebutted by evidence of a substantial
change in the debtor’s circumstances.

Held: When a bankruptcy court calculates a debtor’s projected dispos
able income, the court may account for changes in the debtor’s income
or expenses that are known or virtually certain at the time of confir
mation. Pp. 6–18.
(a) Respondent has the better interpretation of “projected dispos
able income.” First, such a forward-looking approach is supported by
the ordinary meaning of “projected.” See Asgrow Seed Co. v. Winter
boer, 513 U. S. 179, 187. In ordinary usage future occurrences are
not “projected” based on the assumption that the past will necessarily
repeat itself. While a projection takes past events into account, ad
justments are often made based on other factors that may affect the
outcome. Second, “projected” appears in many federal statutes, yet
Congress rarely uses it to mean simple multiplication. See, e.g., 7
U. S. C. §1301(b)(8)(B). By contrast, as the Bankruptcy Code shows,
Congress can make its mandate of simple multiplication unambigu
ous—commonly using the term “multiplied.” See, e.g., 11 U. S. C.
§1325(b)(3). Third, under pre-BAPCPA case law, the general rule
was that courts would multiply a debtor’s current monthly income by
the number of months in the commitment period as the first step in
determining projected disposable income, but would also have discre
tion to account for known or virtually certain changes in the debtor’s
income. This is significant, since the Court “will not read the Bank
ruptcy Code to erode past bankruptcy practice absent a clear indica
tion that Congress intended such a departure,” Travelers Casualty &


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
Surety Co. of America v. Pacific Gas & Elec. Co., 549 U. S. 443, 454,
and Congress did not amend the term “projected disposable income”
in 2005. Pp. 6–10.
(b) The mechanical approach also clashes with §1325’s terms.
First, §1325(b)(1)(B)’s reference to projected disposable income “to be
received in the applicable commitment period” strongly favors the
forward-looking approach. Because respondent would have far less
than $756 per month in disposable income during the plan period, pe
titioner’s projection does not accurately reflect disposable income “to
be received.” In such circumstances, the mechanical approach effec
tively reads that phrase out of the statute. Second, §1325(b)(1)’s di
rection to courts to determine projected disposable income “as of the
effective date of the plan,”— i.e., the confirmation date—is more con
sistent with the view that they are to consider postfiling information
about a debtor’s financial situation. Had Congress intended for pro
jected disposable income to be no more than a multiple of disposable
income, it could have specified the plan’s filing date as the effective
date. Third, §1325(b)(1)(B)’s requirement that projected disposable
income “will be applied to make payments” is rendered a hollow
command if, as of the plan’s effective date, the debtor lacks the
means to pay creditors in the calculated monthly amounts. Pp. 11–
12.
(c) The arguments supporting the mechanical approach are unper
suasive. The claim that the Code’s detailed and precise “disposable
income” definition would have no purpose without the mechanical
approach overlooks the important role that this statutory formula
plays under the forward-looking approach, which begins with a dis
posable income calculation. The Tenth Circuit’s rebuttable “pre
sumption” analysis simply heeds the ordinary meaning of “projected.”
This Court rejects petitioner’s argument that only the mechanical
approach is consistent with §1129(a)(15)(B), which refers to “pro
jected disposable income of the debtor (as defined in section
1325(b)(2)).” And the Court declines to infer from the fact that
§1325(b)(3) incorporates §707—which allows courts to consider “spe
cial circumstances,” but only with respect to calculating expenses—
that Congress intended to eliminate, sub silentio, the discretion that
courts previously exercised to account for known or virtually certain
changes. Pp. 12–14.
(d) Petitioner’s proposed strategies for avoiding or mitigating the
harsh results that the mechanical approach may produce for debt
ors—a debtor could delay filing a petition so as to place any extraor
dinary income outside the 6-month period; a debtor with unusually
high income during that period could seek leave to delay filing a
schedule of current income and ask the bankruptcy court to select a


4

HAMILTON v. LANNING
Syllabus
6-month period more representative of the debtor’s future disposable
income; a debtor could dismiss the petition and refile at a later, more
favorable date; and respondent might have been able to obtain relief
by filing under Chapter 7 or converting her Chapter 13 petition to
one under Chapter 7—are all flawed. Pp. 14–18.

545 F. 3d 1269, affirmed.
ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
and STEVENS, KENNEDY, THOMAS, GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR,
JJ., joined. SCALIA, J., filed a dissenting opinion.

