OCTOBER TERM, 2009 (Slip Opinion) Syllabus NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. Syllabus No. 08–876. Argued December 8, 2009—Decided June 24, 2010 Petitioners (hereinafter Defendants)—executives of Hollinger Interna tional, Inc. (Hollinger), a publicly held U. S. company—were indicted for mail fraud, 18 U. S. C. §§1341, 1346, and other federal crimes. At trial, the Government pursued alternative mail-fraud theories, charg ing that (1) Defendants stole millions from Hollinger by fraudulently paying themselves bogus “noncompetition fees”; and (2) by failing to disclose those fees, Defendants deprived Hollinger of their honest services. Before jury deliberations began, the Government proposed special-verdict forms that would reveal, in the event that the jury voted to convict on a mail-fraud count, the particular theory or theo ries accounting for the verdict. Defendants resisted, preferring an unelaborated general verdict. The Government ultimately acqui esced. The District Court instructed the jury on each of the alterna tive theories. As to honest-services fraud, the court informed the jury, over Defendants’ timely objection, that a person commits that offense if he misuses his position for private gain for himself and/or a co-schemer and knowingly and intentionally breaches his duty of loy alty. The jury returned general verdicts of “guilty” on the mail-fraud counts, found that one Defendant was also guilty of obstruction of justice, and acquitted Defendants on all other charges. On appeal, Defendants urged the invalidity of the honest-services fraud jury instructions. Seeking reversal of their mail-fraud convic which held that a general verdict may be set aside “where the verdict is supportable on one ground, but not on another, and it is impossible to tell which ground the jury selected.” The Seventh Circuit found no infirmity in the honest-services instructions, but further determined that even if those instructions were wrong, Defendants could not pre
Syllabus vail. By opposing the Government-proposed special-verdict forms, the Court of Appeals declared, defendants had forfeited their objec tion to the instructions. Their challenge would have become moot, the court observed, had the jury received special-verdict forms sepa rating the alternative fraud theories, and reported on the forms that Defendants were not guilty of honest-services fraud. Defendants, the Court of Appeals therefore reasoned, bore responsibility for the ob scurity of the jury’s verdict. Held: vacated a conviction on the ground that the honest-services compo nent of the federal mail-fraud statute, §1346, criminalizes only schemes to defraud that involve bribes or kickbacks. That holding renders the honest-services instructions given in this case incorrect. P. 5. 2. By properly objecting to the honest-services jury instructions at trial, Defendants secured their right to challenge those instructions on appeal. They did not forfeit that right by declining to acquiesce in the Government-proposed special-verdict forms. The Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure do not provide for submission of special ques tions to the jury. In contrast, Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 49 pro vides for jury interrogatories of two kinds: special verdicts, Rule 49(a); and general verdicts with answers to written questions, Rule 49(b). While the Criminal Rules are silent on special verdicts, they are informative on objections to instructions. Criminal Rule 30(d) provides that a “party who objects to any portion of the instructions or to a failure to give a requested instruction must inform the court of the specific objection and the grounds for the objection before the jury retires to deliberate.” Defendants here, it is undisputed, complied with that requirement. The Seventh Circuit, in essence, added a fur ther requirement for preservation of a meaningful objection to jury instructions. It devised a forfeiture sanction unmoored to any federal statute or criminal rule. And it placed in the prosecutor’s hands au thority to trigger the sanction simply by requesting a special verdict. To boot, the appeals court applied the sanction to Defendants, al though they lacked any notice that forfeiture would attend their re sistance to the Government’s special-verdict request. Criminal Rule 57(b) is designed to ward off such judicial invention. It provides: “No sanction . . . may be imposed for noncompliance with any require ment not in federal law [or] federal rules . . . unless the alleged viola tor was furnished with actual notice of the requirement before the noncompliance.” Pp. 5–8. 3. As in Skilling, the Court expresses no opinion on whether the honest-services instructional error was ultimately harmless, but
Syllabus leaves that matter for consideration on remand. P. 8. 530 F. 3d 596, vacated and remanded. GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J., and STEVENS, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. SCALIA, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment, in which THOMAS, J., joined. KENNEDY, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.