Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

BREYER, J., concurring in judgment

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–1343
_________________

J. MCINTYRE MACHINERY, LTD., PETITIONER v.

ROBERT NICASTRO, INDIVIDUALLY AND AS 

ADMINISTRATOR OF THE ESTATE OF 

ROSEANNE NICASTRO 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW 

JERSEY

[June 27, 2011] 


JUSTICE BREYER, with whom JUSTICE ALITO joins, con
curring in the judgment.
The Supreme Court of New Jersey adopted a broad
understanding of the scope of personal jurisdiction based
on its view that “[t]he increasingly fast-paced globalization
of the world economy has removed national borders as
barriers to trade.” Nicastro v. McIntyre Machinery Amer
ica, Ltd., 201 N. J. 48, 52, 987 A. 2d 575, 577 (2010). I do
not doubt that there have been many recent changes in
commerce and communication, many of which are not
anticipated by our precedents. But this case does not
present any of those issues. So I think it unwise to an
nounce a rule of broad applicability without full considera
tion of the modern-day consequences.
In my view, the outcome of this case is determined by
our precedents. Based on the facts found by the New
Jersey courts, respondent Robert Nicastro failed to meet
his burden to demonstrate that it was constitutionally
proper to exercise jurisdiction over petitioner J. McIntyre
Machinery, Ltd. (British Manufacturer), a British firm
that manufactures scrap-metal machines in Great Britain
and sells them through an independent distributor in the
United States (American Distributor). On that basis, I


2

J. MCINTYRE MACHINERY, LTD. v. NICASTRO
BREYER, J., concurring in judgment

agree with the plurality that the contrary judgment of the
Supreme Court of New Jersey should be reversed.
I
In asserting jurisdiction over the British Manufacturer,
the Supreme Court of New Jersey relied most heavily on
three primary facts as providing constitutionally sufficient
“contacts” with New Jersey, thereby making it fundamentally fair to hale the British Manufacturer before its
courts: (1) The American Distributor on one occasion sold
and shipped one machine to a New Jersey customer,
namely, Mr. Nicastro’s employer, Mr. Curcio; (2) the Brit
ish Manufacturer permitted, indeed wanted, its independ
ent American Distributor to sell its machines to anyone in
America willing to buy them; and (3) representatives of
the British Manufacturer attended trade shows in “such
cities as Chicago, Las Vegas, New Orleans, Orlando, San
Diego, and San Francisco.” Id., at 54–55, 987 A. 2d, at
578–579. In my view, these facts do not provide contacts
between the British firm and the State of New Jersey
constitutionally sufficient to support New Jersey’s asser
tion of jurisdiction in this case.
None of our precedents finds that a single isolated sale,
even if accompanied by the kind of sales effort indicated
here, is sufficient. Rather, this Court’s previous holdings
suggest the contrary. The Court has held that a single
sale to a customer who takes an accident-causing product
to a different State (where the accident takes place) is not
a sufficient basis for asserting jurisdiction. See WorldWide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U. S. 286 (1980).
And the Court, in separate opinions, has strongly sug
gested that a single sale of a product in a State does not
constitute an adequate basis for asserting jurisdiction over
an out-of-state defendant, even if that defendant places
his goods in the stream of commerce, fully aware (and
hoping) that such a sale will take place. See Asahi Metal


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

BREYER, J., concurring in judgment

Industry Co. v. Superior Court of Cal., Solano Cty., 480
U. S. 102, 111, 112 (1987) (opinion of O’Connor, J.) (requir
ing “something more” than simply placing “a product
into the stream of commerce,” even if defendant is “awar[e]”
that the stream “may or will sweep the product into the
forum State”); id., at 117 (Brennan, J., concurring in part
and concurring in judgment) (jurisdiction should lie where
a sale in a State is part of “the regular and anticipated
flow” of commerce into the State, but not where that sale
is only an “edd[y],” i.e., an isolated occurrence); id., at 122
(Stevens, J., concurring in part and concurring in judg
ment) (indicating that “the volume, the value, and the
hazardous character” of a good may affect the jurisdic
tional inquiry and emphasizing Asahi’s “regular course of
dealing”).
Here, the relevant facts found by the New Jersey Su
preme Court show no “regular . . . flow” or “regular course”
of sales in New Jersey; and there is no “something more,”
such as special state-related design, advertising, advice,
marketing, or anything else. Mr. Nicastro, who here bears
the burden of proving jurisdiction, has shown no specific
effort by the British Manufacturer to sell in New Jersey.
He has introduced no list of potential New Jersey custom
ers who might, for example, have regularly attended trade
shows. And he has not otherwise shown that the British
Manufacturer “purposefully avail[ed] itself of the privilege
of conducting activities” within New Jersey, or that it de
livered its goods in the stream of commerce “with the
expectation that they will be purchased” by New Jersey
users. World-Wide Volkswagen, supra, at 297–298 (inter
nal quotation marks omitted).
There may well have been other facts that Mr. Nicastro
could have demonstrated in support of jurisdiction. And
the dissent considers some of those facts. See post, at 3
(opinion of GINSBURG, J.) (describing the size and scope
of New Jersey’s scrap-metal business). But the plaintiff


4

J. MCINTYRE MACHINERY, LTD. v. NICASTRO
BREYER, J., concurring in judgment

bears the burden of establishing jurisdiction, and here I
would take the facts precisely as the New Jersey Supreme
Court stated them. Insurance Corp. of Ireland v. Com
pagnie des Bauxites de Guinee, 456 U. S. 694, 709 (1982);
Blakey v. Continental Airlines, Inc., 164 N. J. 38, 71, 751
A. 2d 538, 557 (2000); see 201 N. J., at 54–56, 987 A. 2d, at
578–579; App. to Pet. for Cert. 128a–137a (trial court’s
“reasoning and finding(s)”).
Accordingly, on the record present here, resolving this
case requires no more than adhering to our precedents.
II
I would not go further. Because the incident at issue in
this case does not implicate modern concerns, and because
the factual record leaves many open questions, this is an
unsuitable vehicle for making broad pronouncements that
refashion basic jurisdictional rules.
A
The plurality seems to state strict rules that limit juris
diction where a defendant does not “inten[d] to submit to
the power of a sovereign” and cannot “be said to have
targeted the forum.” Ante, at 7. But what do those stan
dards mean when a company targets the world by selling
products from its Web site? And does it matter if, instead
of shipping the products directly, a company consigns the
products through an intermediary (say, Amazon.com) who
then receives and fulfills the orders? And what if the
company markets its products through popup advertise
ments that it knows will be viewed in a forum? Those
issues have serious commercial consequences but are
totally absent in this case.
B
But though I do not agree with the plurality’s seemingly
strict no-jurisdiction rule, I am not persuaded by the
absolute approach adopted by the New Jersey Supreme


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

BREYER, J., concurring in judgment

Court and urged by respondent and his amici. Under that
view, a producer is subject to jurisdiction for a products
liability action so long as it “knows or reasonably should
know that its products are distributed through a nation
wide distribution system that might lead to those products
being sold in any of the fifty states.” 201 N. J., at 76–77,
987 A. 2d, at 592 (emphasis added). In the context of this
case, I cannot agree.
For one thing, to adopt this view would abandon the
heretofore accepted inquiry of whether, focusing upon the
relationship between “the defendant, the forum, and the
litigation,” it is fair, in light of the defendant’s contacts
with that forum, to subject the defendant to suit there.
Shaffer v. Heitner, 433 U. S. 186, 204 (1977) (emphasis
added). It would ordinarily rest jurisdiction instead upon
no more than the occurrence of a product-based accident in
the forum State. But this Court has rejected the notion
that a defendant’s amenability to suit “travel[s] with the
chattel.” World-Wide Volkswagen, 444 U. S., at 296.
For another, I cannot reconcile so automatic a rule
with the constitutional demand for “minimum contacts”
and “purposefu[l] avail[ment],” each of which rest upon a
particular notion of defendant-focused fairness. Id., at
291, 297 (internal quotation marks omitted). A rule like
the New Jersey Supreme Court’s would permit every State
to assert jurisdiction in a products-liability suit against
any domestic manufacturer who sells its products (made
anywhere in the United States) to a national distributor,
no matter how large or small the manufacturer, no matter
how distant the forum, and no matter how few the number
of items that end up in the particular forum at issue.
What might appear fair in the case of a large manufac
turer which specifically seeks, or expects, an equal-sized
distributor to sell its product in a distant State might
seem unfair in the case of a small manufacturer (say, an
Appalachian potter) who sells his product (cups and sau


6

J. MCINTYRE MACHINERY, LTD. v. NICASTRO
BREYER, J., concurring in judgment

cers) exclusively to a large distributor, who resells a single
item (a coffee mug) to a buyer from a distant State (Ha
waii). I know too little about the range of these or in
between possibilities to abandon in favor of the more
absolute rule what has previously been this Court’s less
absolute approach.
Further, the fact that the defendant is a foreign, rather
than a domestic, manufacturer makes the basic fairness
of an absolute rule yet more uncertain. I am again less
certain than is the New Jersey Supreme Court that the
nature of international commerce has changed so significantly as to require a new approach to personal
jurisdiction.
It may be that a larger firm can readily “alleviate the
risk of burdensome litigation by procuring insurance,
passing the expected costs on to customers, or, if the risks
are too great, severing its connection with the State.”
World-Wide Volkswagen, supra, at 297. But manufactur
ers come in many shapes and sizes. It may be fundamen
tally unfair to require a small Egyptian shirt maker, a
Brazilian manufacturing cooperative, or a Kenyan coffee
farmer, selling its products through international distribu
tors, to respond to products-liability tort suits in virtually
every State in the United States, even those in respect to
which the foreign firm has no connection at all but the sale
of a single (allegedly defective) good. And a rule like the
New Jersey Supreme Court suggests would require every
product manufacturer, large or small, selling to American
distributors to understand not only the tort law of every
State, but also the wide variance in the way courts within
different States apply that law. See, e.g., Dept. of Justice,
Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin, Tort Trials and
Verdicts in Large Counties, 2001, p. 11 (reporting percent
age of plaintiff winners in tort trials among 46 populous
counties, ranging from 17.9% (Worcester, Mass.) to 69.1%
(Milwaukee, Wis.)).


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

BREYER, J., concurring in judgment

C
At a minimum, I would not work such a change to the
law in the way either the plurality or the New Jersey
Supreme Court suggests without a better understanding
of the relevant contemporary commercial circumstances.
Insofar as such considerations are relevant to any change
in present law, they might be presented in a case (unlike
the present one) in which the Solicitor General partici
pates. Cf. Tr. of Oral Arg. in Goodyear Dunlop Tires Op
erations, S. A. v. Brown, O. T. 2010, No. 10–76, pp. 20–22
(Government declining invitation at oral argument to give
its views with respect to issues in this case).
This case presents no such occasion, and so I again re
iterate that I would adhere strictly to our precedents
and the limited facts found by the New Jersey Supreme
Court. And on those grounds, I do not think we can find
jurisdiction in this case. Accordingly, though I agree with
the plurality as to the outcome of this case, I concur only
in the judgment of that opinion and not its reasoning.

