10 MATCH-E-BE-NASH-SHE-WISH BAND OF POTTAWATOMI
INDIANS v. PATCHAK
Opinion of the Court

We repeat: “adverse claimants,” meaning plaintiffs who
themselves assert a claim to property antagonistic to the
Federal Government’s.
Our decision in United States v. Mottaz, 476 U. S. 834
(1986), is of a piece. There, we considered whether the
QTA, or instead the Tucker Act or General Allotment Act,
governed the plaintiff’s suit respecting certain allotments
of land held by the United States. We thought the QTA
the relevant statute because the plaintiff herself asserted
title to the property. Our opinion quoted the plaintiff’s
own description of her suit: “At no time in this proceeding
did [the plaintiff] drop her claim for title. To the contrary,
the claim for title is the essence and bottom line of [the
plaintiff’s] case.” Id., at 842 (quoting Brief for Respondent
in Mottaz, O. T. 1985, No. 546, p. 3). That fact, we held,
brought the suit “within the [QTA’s] scope”: “What [the
plaintiff] seeks is a declaration that she alone possesses
valid title.” 476 U. S., at 842. So once again, we construed
the QTA as addressing suits by adverse claimants.
But Patchak is not an adverse claimant—and so the
QTA (more specifically, its reservation of sovereign immunity from actions respecting Indian trust lands) cannot
bar his suit. Patchak does not contend that he owns the
Bradley Property, nor does he seek any relief corresponding to such a claim. He wants a court to strip the United
States of title to the land, but not on the ground that it is
his and not so that he can possess it. Patchak’s lawsuit
therefore lacks a defining feature of a QTA action. He is
not trying to disguise a QTA suit as an APA action to
circumvent the QTA’s “Indian lands” exception. Rather,
he is not bringing a QTA suit at all. He asserts merely
that the Secretary’s decision to take land into trust violates a federal statute—a garden-variety APA claim. See
5 U. S. C. §§706(2)(A), (C) (“The reviewing court shall . . .
hold unlawful and set aside agency action . . . not in accordance with law [or] in excess of statutory jurisdiction

