6

MATCH-E-BE-NASH-SHE-WISH BAND OF POTTAWATOMI
INDIANS v. PATCHAK

Opinion of the Court 


eration of this argument. First, suppose Patchak had sued
under the APA claiming that he owned the Bradley Property and that the Secretary therefore could not take it into
trust. The QTA would bar that suit, for reasons just suggested. True, it fits within the APA’s general waiver, but
the QTA specifically authorizes quiet title actions (which
this hypothetical suit is) except when they involve Indian
lands (which this hypothetical suit does). In such a circumstance, a plaintiff cannot use the APA to end-run
the QTA’s limitations. “[W]hen Congress has dealt in particularity with a claim and [has] intended a specified
remedy”—including its exceptions—to be exclusive, that is the
end of the matter; the APA does not undo the judgment.
Block v. North Dakota ex rel. Board of Univ. and School
Lands, 461 U. S. 273, 286, n. 22 (1983) (quoting H. R. Rep.
No. 94–1656, p. 13 (1976)).
But now suppose that Patchak had sued under the APA
claiming only that use of the Bradley Property was causing environmental harm, and raising no objection at all to
the Secretary’s title. The QTA could not bar that suit
because even though involving Indian lands, it asserts
a grievance altogether different from the kind the statute
concerns. JUSTICE SCALIA, in a former life as Assistant
Attorney General, made this precise point in a letter to
Congress about the APA’s waiver of immunity (which we
hasten to add, given the author, we use not as legislative
history, but only for its persuasive force). When a statute
“is not addressed to the type of grievance which the plaintiff seeks to assert,” then the statute cannot prevent an
APA suit. Id., at 28 (May 10, 1976, letter of Assistant
Atty. Gen. A. Scalia).3
——————
3 According to the dissent, we should look only to the kind of relief a
plaintiff seeks, rather than the type of grievance he asserts, in deciding
whether another statute bars an APA action. See post, at 6 (opinion of
SOTOMAYOR, J.). But the dissent’s test is inconsistent with the one we
adopted in Block, which asked whether Congress had particularly dealt

