12 MATCH-E-BE-NASH-SHE-WISH BAND OF POTTAWATOMI
INDIANS v. PATCHAK

Opinion of the Court 


these provisions (as well as to the QTA’s contemporane
ously enacted jurisdictional and venue sections), the waiver
clause rebuts, rather than supports, the Band’s and the
Government’s argument: That clause speaks not to any
suit in which a plaintiff challenges the Government’s title,
but only to an action in which the plaintiff also claims an
interest in the property.
The Band and Government next invoke cases holding
that “when a statute provides a detailed mechanism for
judicial consideration of particular issues at the behest of
particular persons,” the statute may “impliedly preclude[ ]”
judicial review “of those issues at the behest of other
persons.” Block v. Community Nutrition Institute, 467
U. S. 340, 349 (1984); see United States v. Fausto, 484
U. S. 439, 455 (1988). Here, the Band and Government
contend, the QTA’s specific authorization of adverse
claimants’ suits creates a negative implication: nonadverse claimants like Patchak cannot challenge Government ownership of land under any other statute. See
Reply Brief for Tribal Petitoner 7–10; Reply Brief for
Federal Petitioners 7–9; see also post, at 3–4. The QTA,
says the Band, thus “preempts [Patchak’s] more general
remedies.” Brief for Tribal Petitioner 23 (internal quotation marks omitted).
But we think that argument faulty, and the cited cases
inapposite, for the reason already given: Patchak is bringing a different claim, seeking different relief, from the
kind the QTA addresses. See supra, at 7–10. To see the
point, consider a contrasting example. Suppose the QTA
authorized suit only by adverse claimants who could
assert a property interest of at least a decade’s duration.
Then suppose an adverse claimant failing to meet that
requirement (because, say, his claim to title went back
only five years) brought suit under a general statute like
the APA. We would surely bar that suit, citing the cases
the Government and Band rely on; in our imaginary stat-

