Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

additional test: The interest he asserts must be “arguably
within the zone of interests to be protected or regulated by
the statute” that he says was violated. Association of Data
Processing Service Organizations, Inc. v. Camp, 397 U. S.
150, 153 (1970). Here, Patchak asserts that in taking
title to the Bradley Property, the Secretary exceeded her
authority under §465, which authorizes the acquisition of
property “for the purpose of providing land for Indians.”
And he alleges that this statutory violation will cause him
economic, environmental, and aesthetic harm as a nearby
property owner. See supra, at 3. The Government and
Band argue that the relationship between §465 and
Patchak’s asserted interests is insufficient. That is so,
they contend, because the statute focuses on land acquisition, whereas Patchak’s interests relate to the land’s use
as a casino. See Brief for Tribal Petitioner 46 (“The Secretary’s decision to put land into trust does not turn on any
particular use of the land, gaming or otherwise[,] . . . [and]
thus has no impact on [Patchak] or his asserted interests”); Brief for Federal Petitioners 34 (“[L]and may be
taken into trust for a host of purposes that have nothing at all to do with gaming”). We find this argument
unpersuasive.
The prudential standing test Patchak must meet “is not
meant to be especially demanding.” Clarke v. Securities
Industry Assn., 479 U. S. 388, 399 (1987). We apply the
test in keeping with Congress’s “evident intent” when
enacting the APA “to make agency action presumptively
reviewable.” Ibid. We do not require any “indication of
congressional purpose to benefit the would-be plaintiff.”
Id., at 399–400.7 And we have always conspicuously
——————
7 For this reason, the Band’s statement that Patchak is “not an Indian
or tribal official seeking land” and does not “claim an interest in advancing tribal development,” Brief for Tribal Petitioner 42, is beside the
point. The question is not whether §465 seeks to benefit Patchak;
everyone can agree it does not. The question is instead, as the Band’s

