Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

filed suit alleging that the Secretary’s decision violated
environmental and gaming statutes. The Secretary held
off taking title to the property while that litigation proceeded. Within the next few years, a District Court and
the D. C. Circuit rejected MichGO’s claims. See Michigan
Gambling Opposition v. Kempthorne, 525 F. 3d 23, 27–28
(CADC 2008); Michigan Gambling Opposition v. Norton,
477 F. Supp. 2d 1 (DC 2007).
Shortly after the D. C. Circuit ruled against MichGO
(but still before the Secretary took title), Patchak filed this
suit under the APA advancing a different legal theory. He
asserted that §465 did not authorize the Secretary to
acquire property for the Band because it was not a federally recognized tribe when the IRA was enacted in 1934.
See App. 37. To establish his standing to bring suit,
Patchak contended that he lived “in close proximity to” the
Bradley Property and that a casino there would “destroy
the lifestyle he has enjoyed” by causing “increased traffic,”
“increased crime,” “decreased property values,” “an irreversible change in the rural character of the area,” and
“other aesthetic, socioeconomic, and environmental problems.” Id., at 30–31. Notably, Patchak did not assert any
claim of his own to the Bradley Property. He requested
only a declaration that the decision to acquire the land
violated the IRA and an injunction to stop the Secretary
from accepting title. See id., at 38–39. The Band intervened in the suit to defend the Secretary’s decision.
In January 2009, about five months after Patchak filed
suit, this Court denied certiorari in MichGO’s case, 555
U. S. 1137, and the Secretary took the Bradley Property
into trust. That action mooted Patchak’s request for an
injunction to prevent the acquisition, and all parties agree
that the suit now effectively seeks to divest the Federal
Government of title to the land. See Brief for Match-E-BeNash-She-Wish Band of Pottawatomi Indians 17 (hereinafter Tribal Petitioner); Brief for Federal Petitioners 11;

