14 MATCH-E-BE-NASH-SHE-WISH BAND OF POTTAWATOMI
INDIANS v. PATCHAK

Opinion of the Court 


That argument is not without force, but it must be
addressed to Congress. In the QTA, Congress made a
judgment about how far to allow quiet title suits—to a
point, but no further. (The “no further” includes not only
the “Indian lands” exception, but one for security interests
and water rights, as well as a statute of limitations, a bar
on jury trials, jurisdictional and venue constraints, and
the just compensation option discussed earlier.) Perhaps
Congress would—perhaps Congress should—make the
identical judgment for the full range of lawsuits pertaining
to the Government’s ownership of land. But that is not
our call. The Band assumes that plaintiffs like Patchak
have a lesser interest than those bringing quiet title actions, and so should be precluded a fortiori. But all we can
say is that Patchak has a different interest. Whether it is
lesser, as the Band argues, because not based on property
rights; whether it is greater because implicating public
interests; or whether it is in the end exactly the same—
that is for Congress to tell us, not for us to tell Congress.
As the matter stands, Congress has not assimilated to
quiet title actions all other suits challenging the Government’s ownership of property. And so when a plaintiff like
Patchak brings a suit like this one, it falls within the
APA’s general waiver of sovereign immunity.
III
We finally consider the Band’s and the Government’s
alternative argument that Patchak cannot bring this action because he lacks prudential standing. This Court
has long held that a person suing under the APA must
satisfy not only Article III’s standing requirements, but an
——————
third parties to bring suit on their behalf. See post, at 9–11. But we
think that concern more imaginary than real. We have trouble conceiving of a plausible APA suit that omits mention of an adverse claimant’s
interest in property yet somehow leads to relief recognizing that very
interest.

