Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

In any event, the “grievance” Patchak asserts is no
different from that asserted in Block—a case in which we
unanimously rejected a plaintiff ’s attempt to avoid the
QTA’s restrictions by way of an APA action or the similar
device of an officer’s suit.3 That action, like this one, was
styled as a suit claiming that the Government’s actions
respecting land were “ ‘ “not within [its] statutory powers.” ’ ” 461 U. S., at 281. Cf. ante, at 10 (“[Patchak] asserts merely that the Secretary’s decision to take land into
trust violates a federal statute”). The relief requested was
also identical to that sought here: injunctive relief directing the United States to “ ‘cease and desist from . . . exercising privileges of ownership’ ” over the land in question.
461 U. S., at 278; see also App. 38.
The only difference that the majority can point to between Block and this case is that Patchak asserts a weaker
interest in the disputed property. But that is no reason
to imagine that Congress intended a different outcome. As
the majority itself acknowledges, the harm to the United
States and tribes when a plaintiff sues to extinguish the
Government’s title to Indian trust land is identical
“whether or not a plaintiff claims to own the land himself.”
Ante, at 12. Yet, if the majority is correct, Congress intended the APA’s waiver of immunity to apply to those
hypothetical plaintiffs differently. Congress, it suggests,
intended to permit anyone to circumvent the QTA’s careful
——————
result is entirely consistent with Block—which stated that the APA
“specifically confers no ‘authority to grant relief if any other statute . . .
expressly or impliedly forbids the relief which is sought.’ ” 461 U. S, at
286, n. 22 (quoting 5 U. S. C. §702).
3 An officer’s suit is an action directly against a federal officer, but
was otherwise identical to the kind of APA action at issue here. Compare Block, 461 U. S., at 281 (seeking relief because agency official’s
actions were “ ‘ “not within [his] statutory powers” ’ ”), with 5 U. S. C.
§706(2)(C) (“The reviewing court shall . . . hold unlawful and set aside
agency action . . . found to be . . . in excess of statutory jurisdiction,
authority, or limitations”).

