Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

That requires us first to look to the APA itself and then,
for reasons we will describe, to the QTA. We conclude that
the United States has waived its sovereign immunity from
Patchak’s action.
The APA generally waives the Federal Government’s
immunity from a suit “seeking relief other than money
damages and stating a claim that an agency or an officer
or employee thereof acted or failed to act in an official
capacity or under color of legal authority.” 5 U. S. C. §702.
That waiver would appear to cover Patchak’s suit, which
objects to official action of the Secretary and seeks only
non-monetary relief. But the APA’s waiver of immunity
comes with an important carve-out: The waiver does not
apply “if any other statute that grants consent to suit
expressly or impliedly forbids the relief which is sought”
by the plaintiff. Ibid. That provision prevents plaintiffs
from exploiting the APA’s waiver to evade limitations on
suit contained in other statutes. The question thus becomes whether another statute bars Patchak’s demand for
relief.
The Government and Band contend that the QTA does
so. The QTA authorizes (and so waives the Government’s
sovereign immunity from) a particular type of action,
known as a quiet title suit: a suit by a plaintiff asserting
a “right, title, or interest” in real property that conflicts
with a “right, title, or interest” the United States claims.
28 U. S. C. §2409a(d). The statute, however, contains an
exception: The QTA’s authorization of suit “does not apply
to trust or restricted Indian lands.” §2409a(a). According
to the Government and Band, that limitation on quiet title
suits satisfies the APA’s carve-out and so forbids Patchak’s
suit. In the Band’s words, the QTA exception retains “the
United States’ full immunity from suits seeking to challenge its title to or impair its legal interest in Indian trust
lands.” Brief for Tribal Petitioner 18.
Two hypothetical examples might help to frame consid-

