Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

instance, when he claims only an easement in land, the
right to explore an area for minerals, or some other lesser
right or interest. See S. Rep. No. 92–575, at 5. Notwithstanding its colloquial title, therefore, the QTA plainly
allows suit in circumstances well beyond “bread-andbutter quiet title actions,” ante, at 3, n. 3.5
The majority attempts to bolster its reading by emphasizing an unexpected source within §2409a: the clause
specifying that the United States may be sued “ ‘in a civil
action under this section.’ ” Ante, at 11. The majority
understands this clause to narrow the QTA’s scope (and
its limitations on the Government’s immunity waiver) to
quiet title claims only. But “this section” speaks broadly
to civil actions “to adjudicate a disputed title to real property in which the United States claims an interest.”
§2409a. Moreover, this clause is read most straightforwardly to serve a far more pedestrian purpose: simply to
state that a claimant can file “a civil action under this
section”—§2409a—to adjudicate a disputed title in which
the United States claims an interest. Regardless of how
one reads the clause, however, it does not alter the APA’s
clear command that suits seeking relief forbidden by other
statutes are not authorized by the APA. And the QTA
forbids the relief sought here: injunctive relief forcing the
Government to relinquish title to Indian lands.
Even if the majority were correct that the QTA itself
reached only as far as ordinary quiet title actions, that
——————
time of the Act. Ante, at 8, n. 4. But that substantial variation only
illustrates the artificiality of the majority’s claim that the Act only
“addresses quiet title actions, as ordinarily conceived.” Ante, at 9, n. 5.
5 I recognize, of course, that the QTA is titled “[a]n Act to permit suits
to adjudicate certain real property quiet title actions.” 86 Stat. 1176.
But “the title of a statute . . . cannot limit the plain meaning of [its]
text.” Trainmen v. Baltimore & Ohio R. Co., 331 U. S. 519, 528–529
(1947). As explained above, the substance of Congress’ enactment
plainly extends more broadly than quiet title actions, mirroring the
scope of the title proposed by the Government. See supra, at 2.

