8

MATCH-E-BE-NASH-SHE-WISH BAND OF POTTAWATOMI
INDIANS v. PATCHAK

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting


limitations and sue to force the Government to relinquish
Indian trust lands—anyone, that is, except those with the
strongest entitlement to bring such actions: those claiming
a personal “right, title, or interest” in the land in question.
The majority’s conclusion hinges, therefore, on the doubtful premise that Congress intended to waive the Government’s sovereign immunity wholesale for those like
Patchak, who assert an “aesthetic” interest in land, ante,
at 1, while retaining the Government’s sovereign immunity against those who assert a constitutional interest in
land—the deprivation of property without due process
of law. This is highly implausible. Unsurprisingly, the
majority does not even attempt to explain why Congress
would have intended this counterintuitive result.
It is no answer to say that the QTA reaches no further
than an “ordinary quiet title suit.” Ante, at 11. The action
permitted by §2409a is not an ordinary quiet title suit. At
common law, equity courts “permit[ted] a bill to quiet title
to be filed only by a party in possession [of land] against a
defendant, who ha[d] been ineffectually seeking to establish a legal title by repeated actions of ejectment.” Wehrman v. Conklin, 155 U. S. 314, 321–322 (1894) (emphasis
added). Section 2409a is broader, requiring neither prerequisite. Moreover, as the majority tells us, see ante,
at 7, an act to quiet title is “universally understood” as a
proceeding “to establish a plaintiff ’s title to land.” Black’s
Law Dictionary 34 (9th ed. 2009) (emphasis added). But
§2409a authorizes civil actions in cases in which neither
the Government, nor the plaintiff, claims title to the land
at issue. See §2409a(d) (“The complaint shall set forth . . .
the right, title, or interest which the plaintiff claims” (emphasis added)).4 A plaintiff may file suit under §2409a, for
——————
4 The majority notes that some States permit a broader class of
claims under the rubric of “quiet title,” and points to the “ ‘wide differences in State statutory and decisional law’ on quiet title suits” at the

