Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

[or] authority”). Because that is true—because in thenAssistant Attorney General Scalia’s words, the QTA is
“not addressed to the type of grievance which [Patchak]
seeks to assert,” H. R. Rep. 94–1656, at 28—the QTA’s
limitation of remedies has no bearing. The APA’s general
waiver of sovereign immunity instead applies.
The Band and Government, along with the dissent,
object to this conclusion on three basic grounds. First,
they contend that the QTA speaks more broadly than we
have indicated, waiving immunity from suits “to adjudicate a disputed title to real property in which the United
States claims an interest.” 28 U. S. C. §2409a(a). That
language, the argument goes, encompasses all actions
contesting the Government’s legal interest in land, regardless whether the plaintiff claims ownership himself. See
Brief for Federal Petitioners 19–20; Reply Brief for Tribal
Petitioner 4–6; post, at 8–9 (SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting).
The QTA (not the APA) thus becomes the relevant statute
after all—as to both its waiver and its “corresponding”
reservation of immunity from suits involving Indian lands.
Reply Brief for Tribal Petitioner 6.
But the Band and Government can reach that result
only by neglecting key words in the relevant provision.
That sentence, more fully quoted, reads: “The United
States may be named as a party defendant in a civil action
under this section to adjudicate a disputed title to real
property in which the United States claims an interest.”
§2409a(a) (emphasis added). And as we have already
noted, “this section”—§2409a—includes a host of indications that the “civil action” at issue is an ordinary quiet
title suit: Just recall the section’s title (“Real property
quiet title actions”), and its pleading requirements (the
plaintiff “shall set forth with particularity the nature of
the right, title, or interest which [he] claims”), and its
permission to the Government to remedy an infraction by
paying “just compensation.” Read with reference to all

