2

MATCH-E-BE-NASH-SHE-WISH BAND OF POTTAWATOMI
INDIANS v. PATCHAK

Syllabus

Patchak’s action. The APA’s general waiver of the Federal Government’s immunity from suit does not apply “if any other statute that
grants consent to suit expressly or impliedly forbids the relief which
is sought” by the plaintiff. 5 U. S. C. §702. The Government and
Band contend that the Quiet Title Act (QTA) is such a statute. The
QTA authorizes (and so waives the Government’s sovereign immunity from) a suit by a plaintiff asserting a “right, title, or interest” in
real property that conflicts with a “right, title, or interest” the United
States claims. 28 U. S. C. §2409a(d). But it contains an exception for
“trust or restricted Indian lands.” §2409a(a).
To determine whether the “Indian lands” exception bars Patchak’s
suit, the Court considers whether the QTA addresses the kind of
grievance Patchak advances. It does not, because Patchak’s action is
not a quiet title action. The QTA, from its title to its jurisdictional
grant to its venue provision, speaks specifically and repeatedly of
“quiet title” actions, a term universally understood to refer to suits in
which a plaintiff not only challenges someone else’s claim, but also
asserts his own right to disputed property. Although Patchak’s suit
contests the Secretary’s title, it does not claim any competing interest
in the Bradley Property.
Contrary to the argument of the Band and Government, the QTA
does not more broadly encompass any “civil action . . . to adjudicate a
disputed title to real property in which the United States claims an
interest.” §2409(a). Rather, §2409a includes a host of indications
that the “civil action” at issue is an ordinary quiet title suit. The
Band and Government also contend that the QTA’s specific authorization of adverse claimants’ suits creates the negative implication
that non-claimants like Patchak cannot challenge Government ownership of land under any statute. That argument is faulty for the
reason already given: Patchak is bringing a different claim, seeking
different relief, from the kind the QTA addresses. Finally, the Band
and Government argue that Patchak’s suit should be treated the
same as an adverse claimant’s because both equally implicate the
“Indian lands” exception’s policies. That argument must be addressed to Congress. The “Indian lands” exception reflects Congress’s
judgment about how far to allow quiet title suits—not all suits challenging the Government’s ownership of property. Pp. 4−14.
2. Patchak has prudential standing to challenge the Secretary’s acquisition. A person suing under the APA must assert an interest
that is “arguably within the zone of interests to be protected or regulated by the statute” that he says was violated. Association of Data
Processing Service Organizations, Inc. v. Camp, 397 U. S. 150, 153.
The Government and Band claim that Patchak’s economic, environmental, and aesthetic injuries are not within §465’s zone of interests

