Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

ute, Congress delineated the class of persons who could
bring a quiet title suit, and that judgment would preclude
others from doing so. But here, once again, Patchak is not
bringing a quiet title action at all. He is not claiming to
own the property, and he is not demanding that the court
transfer the property to him. So to succeed in their argument, the Government and Band must go much further
than the cited cases: They must say that in authorizing
one person to bring one kind of suit seeking one form of
relief, Congress barred another person from bringing
another kind of suit seeking another form of relief. Presumably, that contention would extend only to suits involving similar subject matter—i.e., the Government’s
ownership of property. But that commonality is not itself
sufficient. We have never held, and see no cause to hold
here, that some general similarity of subject matter can
alone trigger a remedial statute’s preclusive effect.
Last, the Band and Government argue that we should
treat Patchak’s suit as we would an adverse claimant’s
because they equally implicate the “Indian lands” exception’s policies. According to the Government, allowing
challenges to the Secretary’s trust acquisitions would
“pose significant barriers to tribes[’] . . . ability to promote
investment and economic development on the lands.”
Brief for Federal Petitioners 24. That harm is the same
whether or not a plaintiff claims to own the land himself.
Indeed, the Band argues that the sole difference in this
suit cuts in its direction, because non-adverse claimants
like Patchak have “the most remote injuries and indirect
interests in the land.” Brief for Tribal Petitioner 13; see
Reply Brief for Federal Petitioners 11–12; see also post, at
2, 7, 10.6
——————
6 In a related vein, the dissent argues that our holding will undermine the QTA’s “Indian lands” exception by allowing adverse claimants
to file APA complaints concealing their ownership interests or to recruit

