Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

where Patchak does not assert a right to the property. If
the United States loses the suit, an award of just compensation to the rightful owner (whoever and wherever he
might be) could do nothing to satisfy Patchak’s claim.5
In two prior cases, we likewise described the QTA as
addressing suits in which the plaintiff asserts an ownership interest in Government-held property. In Block v.
North Dakota ex rel. Board of Univ. and School Lands, 461
U. S. 273 (1982), we considered North Dakota’s claim to
land that the United States viewed as its own. We held
that the State could not circumvent the QTA’s statute of
limitations by invoking other causes of action, among
them the APA. See id., at 277–278, 286, n. 22. The crux
of our reasoning was that Congress had enacted the QTA
to address exactly the kind of suit North Dakota had
brought. Prior to the QTA, we explained, “citizens asserting title to or the right to possession of lands claimed by
the United States” had no recourse; by passing the statute, “Congress sought to rectify this state of affairs.” Id.,
at 282. Our decision reflected that legislative purpose:
Congress, we held, “intended the QTA to provide the
exclusive means by which adverse claimants could challenge the United States’ title to real property.” Id., at 286.
——————
5 The

legislative history, for those who think it useful, further shows
that the QTA addresses quiet title actions, as ordinarily conceived. The
Senate Report states that the QTA aimed to alleviate the “[g]rave
inequity” to private parties “excluded, without benefit of a recourse to
the courts, from lands they have reason to believe are rightfully theirs.”
S. Rep. No. 92–575, at 1. Similarly, the House Report notes that the
history of quiet title actions “goes back to the Courts of England,” and
provided as examples “a plaintiff whose title to land was continually
being subjected to litigation in the law courts,” and “one who feared
that an outstanding deed or other interest might cause a claim to be
presented in the future.” H. R. Rep. No. 92–1559, p. 6 (1972). From top
to bottom, these reports show that Congress thought itself to be authorizing bread-and-butter quiet title actions, in which a plaintiff asserts a
right, title, or interest of his own in disputed land.

