6

MATCH-E-BE-NASH-SHE-WISH BAND OF POTTAWATOMI
INDIANS v. PATCHAK

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting


ing the APA’s waiver of sovereign immunity inapplicable
“if any other statute that grants consent to suit expressly
or impliedly forbids the relief which is sought”).
B
The majority nonetheless permits Patchak to circumvent the QTA’s limitations by filing an action under the
APA. It primarily argues that the careful limitations Congress imposed upon the QTA’s waiver of sovereign immunity are “simply inapposite” to actions in which the
plaintiff advances a different “grievance” to that underlying a QTA suit, i.e., cases in which a plaintiff seeks to
“strip the United States of title to the land . . . not on the
ground that it is his,” but rather because “the Secretary’s
decision to take land into trust violates a federal statute.”
Ante, at 7, 10. This analysis is unmoored from the text of
the APA.
Section 702 focuses not on a plaintiff ’s motivation for
suit, nor the arguments on which he grounds his case, but
only on whether another statute expressly or impliedly
forbids the relief he seeks. The relief Patchak admittedly
seeks—to oust the Government of title to Indian trust
land—is identical to that forbidden by the QTA. Conversely, the Court’s hypothetical suit, alleging that the
Bradley Property was causing environmental harm, would
not be barred by the QTA. See ante, at 6. That is not
because such an action asserts a different “grievance,” but
because it seeks different relief—abatement of a nuisance
rather than the extinguishment of title.2
——————
2 The majority claims, ante, at 7, n. 3, that this test has “no obvious
limits,” but it merely applies the text of §702 (which speaks of “relief,”
not “grievances”). In any event, the majority’s hypothetical, ibid.,
compares apples to oranges. I do not contend that the APA bars all
injunctive relief involving Indian lands, simply other suits—like this
one—that seek “to adjudicate a disputed title to real property in which
the United States claims an interest.” 28 U. S. C. §2409a(a). That

