Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

U. S., at 286, n. 22. “ ‘It would require the suspension of
disbelief,’ ” we reasoned, “ ‘to ascribe to Congress the design to allow its careful and thorough remedial scheme to
be circumvented by artful pleading.’ ” Id., at 285 (quoting
Brown v. GSA, 425 U. S. 820, 833 (1976)). If a plaintiff
could oust the Government of title to land by means of an
APA action, “all of the carefully crafted provisions of the
QTA deemed necessary for the protection of the national
public interest could be averted,” and the “Indian lands
exception to the QTA would be rendered nugatory.” Block,
461 U. S., at 284–285. We therefore had little difficulty
concluding that Congress did not intend to render the
QTA’s limitations obsolete by affording any plaintiff the
right to dispute the Government’s title to any lands by
way of an APA action—and to empower any such plaintiff
to “disposses[s] [the United States] of the disputed property without being afforded the option of paying damages.”
Id., at 285.
It is undisputed that Patchak does not meet the conditions to sue under the QTA. He seeks to challenge the
Government’s title to Indian trust land (strike one); he
seeks to force the Government to relinquish possession
and title outright, leaving it no alternative to pay compensation (strike two); and he does not claim any personal
right, title, or interest in the property (strike three). Thus,
by its express terms, the QTA forbids the relief Patchak
seeks. Compare ante, at 3 (“[A]ll parties agree that the
suit now effectively seeks to divest the Federal Government of title to the [Indian trust] land”), with United
States v. Mottaz, 476 U. S. 834, 842 (1986) (Section
2409a(a)’s Indian lands exclusion “operates solely to retain
the United States’ immunity from suit by third parties
challenging the United States’ title to land held in trust
for Indians”). Consequently, Patchak may not avoid the
QTA’s constraints by suing under the APA, a statute
enacted only four years later. See 5 U. S. C. §702 (render-

