Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

conditions upon the Government’s waiver of sovereign immunity. First, the right to sue “does not apply to trust or
restricted Indian lands.” §2409a(a). The Indian lands
exception reflects the view that “a waiver of immunity in
this area would not be consistent with specific commitments [the Government] ha[s] made to the Indians
through treaties and other agreements.” Block, 461 U. S.,
at 283 (internal quotation marks omitted). By exempting
Indian lands, Congress ensured that the Government’s
“solemn obligations” to tribes would not be “abridg[ed] . . .
without the consent of the Indians.” S. Rep. No. 92–575,
at 4.
Second, the Act preserves the United States’ power to
retain possession or control of any disputed property, even
if a court determines that the Government’s property
claim is invalid. To that end, §2409a(b) “allow[s] the
United States the option of paying money damages instead of surrendering the property if it lost a case on the
merits.” Block, 461 U. S., at 283. This provision was
considered essential to addressing the Government’s
“main objection in the past to waiving sovereign immunity” where federal land was concerned: that an adverse
judgment “would make possible decrees ousting the United
States from possession and thus interfer[e] with operations of the Government.” S. Rep. No. 92–575, at 5–6.
Section 2409a(b) “eliminate[d] cause for such apprehension,” by ensuring that—even under the QTA—the United
States could not be stripped of its possession or control of
property without its consent. Id., at 6.
Finally, the Act limits the class of individuals permitted
to sue the Government to those claiming a “right, title, or
interest” in disputed property. §2409a(d). As we have
explained, Congress’ decision to restrict the class entitled
to relief indicates that Congress precluded relief for the
remainder. See, e.g., Block v. Community Nutrition Institute, 467 U. S. 340, 349 (1984) (“[W]hen a statute provides

