Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

We think that principle controls Patchak’s case: The
QTA’s “Indian lands” clause does not render the Government immune because the QTA addresses a kind of grievance different from the one Patchak advances. As we will
explain, the QTA—whose full name, recall, is the Quiet
Title Act—concerns (no great surprise) quiet title actions.
And Patchak’s suit is not a quiet title action, because
although it contests the Secretary’s title, it does not claim
any competing interest in the Bradley Property. That fact
makes the QTA’s “Indian lands” limitation simply inapposite to this litigation.
In reaching this conclusion, we need look no further
than the QTA’s text. From its title to its jurisdictional
grant to its venue provision, the Act speaks specifically and
repeatedly of “quiet title” actions. See 86 Stat. 1176 (“An
Act [t]o permit suits to adjudicate certain real property
quiet title actions”); 28 U. S. C. §1346(f) (giving district
courts jurisdiction over “civil actions . . . to quiet title” to
property in which the United States claims an interest);
§1402(d) (setting forth venue for “[a]ny civil action . . . to
quiet title” to property in which the United States claims
an interest). That term is universally understood to refer
to suits in which a plaintiff not only challenges someone
else’s claim, but also asserts his own right to disputed
property. See, e.g., Black’s Law Dictionary 34 (9th ed.
2009) (defining an “action to quiet title” as “[a] proceeding
——————
with a “claim.” See Block v. North Dakota ex rel. Board of Univ. and
School Lands, 461 U. S. 273, 286, n. 22 (1983). And the dissent’s
approach has no obvious limits. Suppose, for example, that Congress
passed a statute authorizing a particular form of injunctive relief in a
procurement contract suit except when the suit involved a “discretionary function” of a federal employee. Cf. 28 U. S. C. §2680(a). Under
the dissent’s method, that exception would preclude any APA suit
seeking that kind of injunctive relief if it involved a discretionary
function, no matter what the nature of the claim. That implausible
result demonstrates that limitations on relief cannot sensibly be understood apart from the claims to which they attach.

