Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

contest the Government’s decision to take title to land in
trust for Indian tribes, however, have been governed by a
different rule. Until today, parties seeking to challenge
such decisions had only a 30-day window to seek judicial review.
25 CFR §151.12 (2011); 61 Fed. Reg.
18,082–18,083 (1996). That deadline promoted finality and
security—necessary preconditions for the investment
and “economic development” that are central goals of the
Indian Reorganization Act. Ante, at 16.7 Today’s result
will promote the opposite, retarding tribes’ ability to develop land until the APA’s 6-year statute of limitations
has lapsed.8
Finally, the majority’s rule creates substantial uncertainty regarding who exactly is barred from bringing APA
claims. The majority leaves unclear, for instance, whether
its rule bars from suit only those who “claim any competing interest” in the disputed land in their complaint, ante,
at 7, or those who could claim a competing interest, but
plead only that the Government’s title claim violates a
federal statute. If the former, the majority’s holding
would allow Patchak’s challenge to go forward even if he
had some personal interest in the Bradley Property, so
long as his complaint did not assert it. That result is
difficult to square with Block and Mottaz. If the latter,
matters are even more peculiar. Because a shrewd plaintiff will avoid referencing her own property claim in her
——————
7 Trust

status, for instance, is a prerequisite to making lands eligible
for various federal incentives and tax credits closely tied to economic
development. See, e.g., App. 56. Delayed suits will also inhibit tribes
from investing in uses other than gaming that might be less objectionable—like farming or office use.
8 Despite notice of the Government’s intent through an organization
with which he was affiliated, Patchak did not challenge the Government’s fee-to-trust decision even though the organization did. See
Michigan Gambling Opposition v. Kempthorne, 525 F. 3d 23 (CADC
2008). Instead, Patchak waited to sue until three years after the
Secretary’s intent to acquire the property was published. App. 35, 39.

