2

SEARS v. UPTON
Per Curiam

For the reasons that follow, it is plain from the face of
the state court’s opinion that it failed to apply the correct
prejudice inquiry we have established for evaluating
Sears’ Sixth Amendment claim. We therefore grant the
petition for writ of certiorari, vacate the judgment, and
remand for further proceedings not inconsistent with this
opinion.1
I
In 1993, a Georgia jury convicted Sears of armed rob
bery and kidnaping with bodily injury (which also resulted
in death), a capital crime under state law. See Ga. Code
Ann. §16–5–40(d)(4) (2006).2 During the penalty phase of
Sears’ capital trial, his counsel presented evidence describ
ing his childhood as stable, loving, and essentially without
incident. Seven witnesses offered testimony along the
following lines: Sears came from a middle-class back
ground; his actions shocked and dismayed his relatives;
and a death sentence, the jury was told, would devastate
the family. See Pet. for Cert. 6–7. Counsel’s mitigation
——————
1 Although this is a state-court decision, it resolved a federal issue on
exclusively federal-law grounds. We therefore have jurisdiction. 28
U. S. C. §1257; see also Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U. S. ___ (2010)
(reviewing state postconviction decision raising Sixth Amendment
question).
2 Sears was sentenced to death for the Kentucky murder of a woman
whom he and an accomplice kidnaped in Georgia. Under Georgia law,
a jury may “impose a death sentence for the offense of kidnapping with
bodily injury on the ground that the offense of kidnapping with bodily
injury was committed while the offender was engaged in the commis
sion of the capital felon[y] of murder . . . .” Potts v. State, 261 Ga. 716,
720, 410 S. E. 2d 89, 93 (1991). So long as “the murder . . . [is] suffi
ciently a part of the same criminal transaction,” it may count as a
“statutory aggravating circumstanc[e] of the offense of kidnapping with
bodily injury.” Ibid., 410 S. E. 2d, at 94. Sears has raised a categorical
Eighth Amendment challenge to the constitutionality of his death
sentence for a kidnaping offense, which we decline to reach. And any
jurisdictional or constitutional issue with respect to Georgia’s ability to
execute Sears for a murder occurring in Kentucky is not before us.

