6

SEARS v. UPTON
Per Curiam

Further, the fact that Sears’ brother is a convicted drug
dealer and user, and introduced Sears to a life of crime, 6
Record 1683–1686, actually would have been consistent
with a mitigation theory portraying Sears as an individual
with diminished judgment and reasoning skills, who may
have desired to follow in the footsteps of an older brother
who had shut him out of his life. Post, at 6. And the fact
that some of such evidence may have been “hearsay” does
not necessarily undermine its value—or its admissibility—
for penalty phase purposes.6 Post, at 5, n. 3.
Finally, the fact that along with this new mitigation
evidence there was also some adverse evidence is unsur
prising, post, at 7, given that counsel’s initial mitigation
investigation was constitutionally inadequate. Competent
counsel should have been able to turn some of the adverse
evidence into a positive—perhaps in support of a cognitive
deficiency mitigation theory. In particular, evidence of
Sears’ grandiose self-conception and evidence of his magi
cal thinking, ibid., were features, in another well
credentialed expert’s view,7 of a “profound personality
——————
6 Like

Georgia’s “necessity exception” to its hearsay rules, see Ga.
Code Ann. §24–3–1(b) (2006), we have also recognized that reliable
hearsay evidence that is relevant to a capital defendant’s mitigation
defense should not be excluded by rote application of a state hearsay
rule. See Green v. Georgia, 442 U. S. 95, 97 (1979) (per curiam) (“Re
gardless of whether the proffered testimony comes within Georgia’s
hearsay rule, under the facts of this case its exclusion constituted a
violation of the Due Process Clause . . . . The excluded testimony was
highly relevant to a critical issue in the punishment phase of the trial”);
see also Chambers v. Mississippi, 410 U. S. 284, 302 (1973) (“In these
circumstances, where constitutional rights directly affecting the ascer
tainment of guilt are implicated, the hearsay rule may not be applied
mechanistically to defeat the ends of justice”). We take no view on
whether the evidence at issue would satisfy the considerations we set
forth in Green, or would be otherwise admissible under Georgia law.
7 Dr. Dudley, a psychiatrist, completed his internship and residency
at Northwestern University Medical Center, and has been board
certified in psychiatry by the American Board of Psychiatry and Neu

