Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Per Curiam

lead to these significant impairments. Id., at 150; see also
1 Record 44.
Whatever concern the dissent has about some of the
sources relied upon by Sears’ experts—informal personal
accounts, see post, at 5–7 (opinion of SCALIA, J.)—it does
not undermine the well-credentialed expert’s assessment,4
based on between 12 and 16 hours of interviews, testing,
and observations, see 1 Record 32, that Sears suffers from
substantial cognitive impairment. Sears performed dis
mally on several of the forensic tests administered to him
to assess his frontal lobe functioning. On the Stroop Word
Interference Test, which measures response inhibition, id.,
at 36–37, 99.6% of those individuals in his cohort (which
accounts for age, education, and background) performed
better than he did. Ibid. On the Trail-Making B test,
which also measures frontal lobe functioning, id., at 37–
38, Sears performed at the first (and lowest) percentile.
Id., at 38. Based on these results, the expert’s first-hand
observations, and an extensive review of Sears’ personal
history, the expert’s opinion was unequivocal: There is
“clear and compelling evidence” that Sears has “pro
nounced frontal lobe pathology.”5 Id., at 68.
——————
4 Dr. Strickland, a psychologist, is the director of a mild head injury
clinic and the Sports Concussion Institute at Centinella Freeman
Medical Center in Los Angeles. 1 Record 30. He is an associate profes
sor of psychiatry in residence at the University of California at Los
Angeles and directs a memory disorder and cerebral palsy clinic for
that university’s department of neuroscience. Id., at 30–31. The State
had no objection to his being tendered as an expert in neuropsychology.
Id., at 31.
5 During a colloquy with the court, Dr. Strickland further explained:
“THE COURT: But by taking some history of head injuries, coupled
with the results of the tests that you’ve given, you can comfortably
conclude that the results of the tests that you’ve given were a conse
quence of frontal lobe head injuries?
“THE WITNESS: Absolutely. And, moreover, Your Honor, the
patient has a lesion on the front of his head, which is something I can
observe.” Id., at 78.

