Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

mitigation theory would have made a difference. Ante, at
9. The reasonableness finding merely meant that the
prejudice determination had to be made by asking, not
whether the jury’s mind would probably have been
changed by hearing Sears’ new mitigation theory instead
of hearing no mitigation theory at all; but rather whether
it would probably have been changed by substituting
Sears’ new mitigation theory for the reasonable mitigation
theory that was presented and rejected.1 After hearing all
the witnesses and other evidence Sears presented before
it, the state court concluded that “it is just not possible to
know what effect a different mitigation theory would have
had.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 30B (emphasis added).2
The second, “and more fundamenta[l],” legal error the
Court alleges, ante, at 10–11, is really encased within the
first. The Court claims that the state habeas court “lim
ited the prejudice inquiry under Strickland to cases in
which there was only ‘little or no mitigation evidence’
presented.” Id., at 10 (quoting App. to Pet. for Cert. 30B).
The court erred, we are told, by determining that “pre
sent[ation of] some mitigation evidence should foreclose an
inquiry into whether” Sears was prejudiced. Ibid. That is
not a fair reading of the opinion. The state court did not
hold that a defendant could never suffer prejudice when
ever his counsel provided any mitigation evidence.
Rather, it stated that “[t]his case cannot be fairly com
——————
1 The

Court contends, ante, at 9, that there was a “tension” between
the state court’s conclusion that the investigation was deficient and its
conclusion that the mitigation theory presented to the jury was reason
able. This terribly misreads the state court’s opinion. It did not say (as
the Court’s point assumes) that counsel’s using the mitigation theory
they did was reasonable; it said that the theory itself was reasonable,
making it hard to say whether a different theory would have persuaded
the jury. This presents no conceivable “tension.”
2 On the fair reading we owe the state court, its opinion provides no
basis for inferring that it failed to “engag[e] with the evidence” and “did
not even conduct any real analysis.” Ante, at 8, n. 8.

