8

SEARS v. UPTON
Per Curiam

Because Sears’ counsel did present some mitigation evi
dence during his penalty phase, the court concluded that
“[t]his case cannot be fairly compared with those where
little or no mitigation evidence is presented and where a
reasonable prediction of outcome can be made.” App. to
Pet. for Cert. 30B. The court explained that “it is impossi
ble to know what effect [a different mitigation theory]
would have had on [the jury].” Ibid. “Because counsel put
forth a reasonable theory with supporting evidence,” the
court reasoned, “[Sears] . . . failed to meet his burden of
proving that there is a reasonable likelihood that the
outcome at trial would have been different if a different
mitigation theory had been advanced.”9 Ibid.
There are two errors in the state court’s analysis of
Sears’ Sixth Amendment claim. First, the court curtailed
a more probing prejudice inquiry because it placed undue
reliance on the assumed reasonableness of counsel’s miti
gation theory. The court’s determination that counsel had
conducted a constitutionally deficient mitigation investi
gation, should have, at the very least, called into question
the reasonableness of this theory. Cf. Wiggins v. Smith,
539 U. S. 510, 522 (2003) (explaining that “counsel’s fail
ure to uncover and present voluminous mitigating evi
dence at sentencing could not be justified as a tactical
decision . . . because counsel had not ‘fulfill[ed] their obli
——————
9 Channeling powers of telepathy, JUSTICE SCALIA asserts that what
the trial court actually decided in this case is that “Sears’ trial counsel
presented a reasonable mitigation theory and offered evidence suffi
cient to support it, so the prejudice inquiry was more difficult—so
difficult that Sears could not make the requisite showing.” Post, at 4.
Such a highly favorable reading of the trial court’s analysis would be
far more convincing had the trial court engaged with the evidence as
JUSTICE SCALIA does. But it offered no such analysis in its opinion;
indeed, it appears the court did not even conduct any real analysis,
explaining that it was “impossible to know what effect” the evidence
might have had on the jury. App. to Pet. for Cert. 30B (emphasis
added).

