Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Per Curiam

theory, it seems, was calculated to portray the adverse
impact of Sears’ execution on his family and loved ones.
20 Record 5181. But the strategy backfired. The prosecu
tor ultimately used the evidence of Sears’ purportedly
stable and advantaged upbringing against him during the
State’s closing argument. With Sears, the prosecutor told
the jury, “[w]e don’t have a deprived child from an inner
city; a person who[m] society has turned its back on at an
early age. But, yet, we have a person, privileged in every
way, who has rejected every opportunity that was afforded
him.” Pet. for Cert. 7 (quoting trial transcript; internal
quotation marks omitted).
The mitigation evidence that emerged during the state
postconviction evidentiary hearing, however, demon
strates that Sears was far from “privileged in every way.”
Sears’ home life, while filled with material comfort, was
anything but tranquil: His parents had a physically abu
sive relationship, Exh. 26, 6 Record 1676 (Affidavit of
Demetrius A. Sears), and divorced when Sears was young,
Exh. 22, id., at 1654 (Affidavit of Virginia Sears Graves);
he suffered sexual abuse at the hands of an adolescent
male cousin, Exh. 26, id., at 1681–1682; his mother’s
“favorite word for referring to her sons was ‘little mother
fuckers,’ ” Exh. 3, 2 Record 265 (Affidavit of Richard G.
Dudley, Jr., MD); and his father was “verbally abusive,”
Exh. 37, 6 Record 1746–1747 (Affidavit of Carol BecciYoungs),3 and disciplined Sears with age-inappropriate
——————
3 In the particular instance recounted in this affidavit, Sears’ art
teacher stated that his father “berate[d] [him] in front of” the school
principal and her during a parent-teacher conference. Exh. 37, 6 Record
1746. The event was significant: “I’ll never forget the way he bullied
him,” the art teacher explained, “Mr. Sears was so verbally abusive and
made such a scene, that it made everyone in the room uncomfortable.”
Ibid. The art teacher had “never been in a conference where a parent
severely criticized a child in the presence of his teachers and meant it,
as Mr. Sears did.” Id., at 1747.

