Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010) 	

11

Per Curiam

land inquiry requires precisely the type of probing and
fact-specific analysis that the state trial court failed to
undertake below.12 In the Williams decision, for instance,
we categorically rejected the type of truncated prejudice
inquiry undertaken by the state court in this case. 529
U. S., at 397–398. And, in Porter, we recently explained:
	
“To assess [the] probability [of a different outcome
under Strickland], we consider the totality of the
available mitigation evidence—both that adduced at
trial, and the evidence adduced in the habeas proceed
ing—and reweig[h] it against the evidence in aggrava
tion.” 558 U. S., at ____ (slip op., at 11) (internal quo
tation marks omitted; third alteration in original).
That same standard applies—and will necessarily require
a court to “speculate” as to the effect of the new evidence—
regardless of how much or how little mitigation evidence
was presented during the initial penalty phase. Indeed, it
is exactly this kind of probing inquiry that JUSTICE SCALIA
now undertakes, post, at 4–8, and that the trial court
failed to do. In all circumstances, this is the proper preju
dice standard for evaluating a claim of ineffective repre
sentation in the context of a penalty phase mitigation
investigation.
——————
12 Whether it did so implicitly is far from apparent, notwithstanding
JUSTICE SCALIA’s suggestion to the contrary. See post, at 3–4. The trial
court stated that the record was “largely silent” on “what [evidence]
would have been shown if [additional mitigating evidence] had been
sought.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 28B. This is a curious assertion in light
of the 22 volumes of evidentiary hearing transcripts and submissions in
the record, which spell out the findings discussed above. It also un
dermines any suggestion that the court did, in fact, do the reweighing
JUSTICE SCALIA believes it undertook; it is plain the record is not
“largely silent.” And it also undermines any suggestion that the court
simply discounted the value of the testimony; had it made any such
finding, the court could have easily stated, instead, that the record
evidence was unpersuasive.

