Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Per Curiam

gation to conduct a thorough investigation of the defen
dant’s background’ ” (quoting Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S.
362, 396 (2000); alteration in original)). And, more to the
point, that a theory might be reasonable, in the abstract,
does not obviate the need to analyze whether counsel’s
failure to conduct an adequate mitigation investigation
before arriving at this particular theory prejudiced Sears.
The “reasonableness” of counsel’s theory was, at this stage
in the inquiry, beside the point: Sears might be prejudiced
by his counsel’s failures, whether his haphazard choice
was reasonable or not.
JUSTICE SCALIA chides the Court for concluding that the
trial court assumed, rather than found, that counsel’s
mitigation theory was a reasonable one. Post, at 2. But
our point is that any finding with respect to the reason
ableness of the mitigation theory counsel utilized—in this
case, family impact—is in tension with the trial court’s
unambiguous finding that counsel’s investigation was
itself so unreasonable as to be facially unconstitutional.
This point is plain in Williams: We rejected any suggestion
that a decision to focus on one potentially reasonable trial
strategy—in that case, petitioner’s voluntary confession—
was “justified by a tactical decision” when “counsel did not
fulfill their obligation to conduct a thorough investigation
of the defendant’s background.” 529 U. S., at 396. A
“tactical decision” is a precursor to concluding that coun
sel has developed a “reasonable” mitigation theory in a
particular case.10
——————
10 Moreover,

the reasonableness of the theory is not relevant when
evaluating the impact of evidence that would have been available and
likely introduced, had counsel completed a constitutionally adequate
investigation before settling on a particular mitigation theory. This
point was also plain in Williams: “Whether or not . . . omissions [in the
investigation] were sufficiently prejudicial to have affected the outcome
of sentencing,” they may nevertheless demonstrate deficiency. 529
U. S., at 396. The one inquiry, deficient mitigation investigation, is

