8

SEARS v. UPTON
SCALIA, J., dissenting

the crime—which are at least just as relevant to assessing
whether the different mitigation theory would probably
have altered the sentence. But the jury heard all about
them. See Sears v. State, 268 Ga. 759, 759–760, 493 S. E.
2d 180, 182 (1997). They heard Sears’ confession that he
kidnaped, raped, and murdered Gloria Wilbur, a 59-year
old wife and mother. Sears, carrying a briefcase contain
ing various instruments of mayhem—brass knuckles,
knives, and handcuffs—and his accomplice, Phillip Wil
liams, were surveying a supermarket parking lot on a
Sunday evening in October 1990, looking for a car to steal
to drive back home to Ohio from Georgia. As the victim
was putting her groceries in the trunk of her car, Sears
approached, punched her in the face with his brass knuck
les, shoved her into the car, and drove to pick up Williams.
Sears then handcuffed her and pulled her into the back
seat as Williams drove. After they passed into Tennessee,
Sears raped her. Later in the evening, after they had
crossed into Kentucky, Sears told Williams to stop the car.
Sears forced her, still handcuffed, into the woods by the
side of the highway as she begged for her life. After
throwing her on the ground, he stabbed her in the neck.
In his confession he showed no regret or remorse for his
heinous crimes.5
I do not know how anyone could disagree with the ha
beas court’s conclusion that it is impossible to say that
substituting the “deprived-childhood-cum-brain-damage”
defense for the “good-middle-class-kid-who-made-a
mistake” defense would probably have produced a differ
ent verdict. I respectfully dissent.
——————
5 The jury also heard from several corrections officers who testified
that while Sears was incarcerated awaiting trial and sentencing, he
racked up dozens of disciplinary infractions, including assaults on other
inmates. “ ‘Predatory,’ ” “ ‘[i]ncorrigible,’ ” and incapable of reform was
how they described him. 10 id., at 2951–2957; 19 id., at 4868.

