Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Per Curiam

disorder.” 1 Record 104. This evidence might not have
made Sears any more likable to the jury, but it might well
have helped the jury understand Sears, and his horren
dous acts—especially in light of his purportedly stable
upbringing.
Because they failed to conduct an adequate mitigation
investigation, none of this evidence was known to Sears’
trial counsel. It emerged only during state postconviction
relief.
II
Unsurprisingly, the state postconviction trial court
concluded that Sears had demonstrated his counsel’s
penalty phase investigation was constitutionally deficient.
See Strickland, 466 U. S., at 688 (explaining that first
inquiry when evaluating Sixth Amendment ineffectiveness
claim is whether counsel’s representation “fell below an
objective standard of reasonableness”). In its view, the
cursory nature of counsel’s investigation into mitigation
evidence—“limited to one day or less, talking to witnesses
selected by [Sears’] mother”—was “on its face . . . constitu
tionally inadequate.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 27B.
What is surprising, however, is the court’s analysis
regarding whether counsel’s facially inadequate mitigation
investigation prejudiced Sears. See Strickland, supra, at
694. Although the court appears to have stated the proper
prejudice standard,8 it did not correctly conceptualize how
that standard applies to the circumstances of this case.
——————
rology for more than 35 years. 1 Record 91–92. The State also had no
objection to his being tendered as an expert in psychiatry. Id., at 93.
8 The court asked whether “there is a reasonable likelihood that the
outcome of his trial would have been different if his counsel had done
more investigation.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 29B–30B; see Strickland,
466 U. S., at 694 (“The defendant must show that there is a reasonable
probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of
the proceeding would have been different. A reasonable probability is a
probability sufficient to undermine confidence in the outcome”).

