8

CSX TRANSPORTATION, INC. v. ALABAMA DEPT. OF 

REVENUE
Opinion of the Court 





uses; what the complaint requests is that Alabama cease
to collect those taxes from CSX. App. 23. The exemptions,
no doubt, play a central role in CSX’s argument: They
demonstrate, in CSX’s view, that the State’s sales and use
taxes discriminate against railroads. See id., at 22, ¶¶24–
26. But the essential subject of the complaint remains the
taxes Alabama levies on CSX.
The key question thus becomes whether a tax might be
said to “discriminate” against a railroad under subsection
(b)(4) because the State has granted exemptions from the
tax to other entities (here, the railroad’s competitors). The
statute does not define “discriminates,” and so we again
look to the ordinary meaning of the word. See supra, at 5.
“Discrimination” is the “failure to treat all persons equally
when no reasonable distinction can be found between
those favored and those not favored.” Black’s Law Dic­
tionary 534 (9th ed. 2009); accord, id., at 420 (5th ed.
1979); see also Webster’s Third New International Dic­
tionary 648 (1976) (“discriminates” means “to make a
difference in treatment or favor on a class or categorical
basis in disregard of individual merit”). To charge one
group of taxpayers a 2% rate and another group a 4%
rate, if the groups are the same in all relevant respects,
is to discriminate against the latter. That discrimination
continues (indeed, it increases) if the State takes the
favored group’s rate down to 0%. And that is all an ex­
emption is. See West Lynn Creamery, Inc. v. Healy, 512
U. S. 186, 210–211 (1994) (SCALIA, J., concurring in judg­
ment) (noting that an “ ‘exemption’ from . . . a ‘neutral’ tax”
for favored persons “is no different in principle” than “a
discriminatory tax . . . imposing a higher liability” on
disfavored persons). To say that such a tax (with such an
exemption) does not “discriminate”—assuming the groups
are similarly situated and there is no justification for the
difference in treatment—is to adopt a definition of the
term at odds with its natural meaning.

