(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CSX TRANSPORTATION, INC. v. ALABAMA DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–520.

Argued November 10, 2010—Decided February 22, 2011

Petitioner (CSX) is an interstate rail carrier that operates, and pays
taxes, in Alabama. The State imposes sales and use taxes on rail
roads when they purchase or consume diesel fuel, but exempts their
main competitors—interstate motor and water carriers. CSX sued
respondents, the Alabama Department of Revenue and its Commis
sioner (Alabama), claiming that this tax scheme discriminates
against railroads in violation of the Railroad Revitalization and
Regulatory Reform Act of 1976 (4–R Act or Act), which bars four
forms of discriminatory taxation, 49 U. S. C. §11501(b). Three of the
delineated prohibitions deal with property taxes, §§11501(b)(1)–(3),
and the fourth is a catch-all provision that forbids a State to
“[i]mpose another tax that discriminates against a rail carrier,”
§11501(b)(4). The District Court dismissed CSX’s suit as not cogni
zable under the 4–R Act on the basis of this Court’s decision in De
partment of Revenue of Ore. v. ACF Industries, Inc., 510 U. S. 332,
and the Eleventh Circuit affirmed.
Held: CSX may challenge Alabama’s sales and use taxes under
§11501(b)(4). Pp. 5–19.
(a) CSX is challenging “another tax” within subsection (b)(4)’s plain
meaning. The Act does not define “tax.” Thus, this Court looks to the
word’s ordinary definition, which is expansive. A State seeking to
raise revenue may choose among multiple forms of taxation on prop
erty, income, transactions, or activities. “[A]nother tax” is thus best
understood to encompass any tax a State might impose, on any asset
or transaction, except the property taxes already addressed in sub
sections (b)(1)–(3). There is no reason to interpret subsection (b)(4)
as applying only to the gross-receipts taxes that some States imposed

