2

CSX TRANSPORTATION, INC. v. ALABAMA DEPT. OF 

REVENUE
Syllabus 





in lieu of property taxes at the time of the Act’s passage. Moreover,
CSX’s complaint, contrary to the Eleventh Circuit’s apparent view,
does protest Alabama’s imposition of taxes on its fuel. The exemp
tions the State has given may play a central role in CSX’s argument,
but the complaint’s essential subject remains the taxes imposed.
The key question thus becomes whether a tax might be said to “dis
criminate” against a railroad under subsection (b)(4) where the State
has granted exemptions from the tax to other entities (here, the rail
road’s competitors). Because the statute does not define “discrimi
nates,” the Court again looks to the term’s ordinary meaning, which
is to fail to treat all persons equally when no reasonable distinction
can be found between those favored and those not favored. To charge
one group of taxpayers a 2% rate and another group a 4% rate, if the
groups are the same in all relevant respects, is to discriminate
against the latter. That discrimination continues if the favored
group’s rate goes down to 0%, which is all an exemption is. To say
that such a tax does not “discriminate” is to adopt a definition at odds
with the word’s natural meaning. This Court has repeatedly recog
nized that tax schemes with exemptions may be discriminatory. See,
e.g., Davis v. Michigan Department of Treasury, 489 U. S. 803. And
even Department of Revenue of Ore. v. ACF Industries, Inc., 510 U. S.
332, on which the Eleventh Circuit heavily relied in dismissing CSX’s
suit, made clear that tax exemptions “could be a variant of tax dis
crimination.” Id., at 343. In addition, the statute’s prohibition of dis
crimination applies regardless whether the favored entities are inter
state or local. The distinctions drawn in the statute are not between
interstate and local actors, as Alabama suggests, but between rail
roads and all other actors, whether interstate or local. Pp. 5–10.
(b) ACF Industries does not require a different result. There, the
Court held that railroads could not contest property tax exemptions
under subsection (b)(4), reasoning that it would be illogical to permit
such a challenge when subsections (b)(1)–(3)—the §11501 provisions
specifically addressing property taxes—permitted States to grant
property tax exemptions. Such a reading would “subvert the statu
tory plan” and “contravene the ‘elementary canon of construction that
a statute should be interpreted so as not to render one part inopera
tive.’ ” 510 U. S., at 340. Contrary to Alabama’s argument, this
structural analysis does not apply here. Subsections (b)(1)–(3) spe
cifically allow property tax exemptions, but neither they nor any
other provision of the Act speaks to non-property exemptions like
those at issue here. Because Congress has expressed no intent to
“allo[w] the States to grant” non-property exemptions, id., at 343,
reading subsection (b)(4) to encompass them poses no danger of “nul
lify[ing]” a congressional policy choice or otherwise “subverting the

