4

CSX TRANSPORTATION, INC. v. ALABAMA DEPT. OF 

REVENUE
THOMAS, J., dissenting





ous subsections all describe taxes that “discriminate” in a
manner similar to that forbidden by subsection (b)(4). See
Washington State Dept. of Social and Health Servs. v.
Guardianship Estate of Keffeler, 537 U. S. 371, 384 (2003)
(reading the phrase “other legal process” restrictively
because “where general words follow specific words in a
statutory enumeration, the general words are construed to
embrace only objects similar in nature to those objects
enumerated by the preceding specific words” (internal
quotation marks and brackets omitted)).
Subsections (b)(1) through (3) each prohibit particular
types of state taxes that target or single out railroad prop
erty for less favorable tax treatment than other commer
cial and industrial property. First, the “discriminat[ion]”
addressed in subsections (b)(1) through (3) can only be
described as taxes that target or single out railroad prop
erty. Those subsections specifically concern taxes that
affect railroad property differently from the way they
affect a larger class of comparative taxpayers’ property.
See §§11501(b)(1)–(3); cf. ante, at 9 (“[E]ach of subsection
(b)’s provisions proscribes taxes that specially burden a
rail carrier’s property or otherwise discriminate against a
rail carrier” (emphasis deleted)). Second, each subsection
refers to the same comparison class—other “commercial
and industrial property.” §§11501(b)(1)–(3).
I think it follows that, under subsection (b)(4), a tax
“discriminates against a rail carrier” if it similarly targets
railroads for tax treatment less favorable than other com
mercial and industrial taxpayers. As we found in ACF
Industries, the structure of the statute provides a light by
which to navigate the meaning of subsection (b)(4).
2
The background of §11501(b) also supports this under
standing of subsection (b)(4). In previous cases, we have
identified the problem that made subsection (b) necessary.

