Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

THOMAS, J., dissenting

clining to provide the exemption at issue to rail carriers”).
I do not read subsection (b)(4) so independently of (b)(1)
through (3). Perhaps, as the majority asserts, subsection
(b)(4) is not an ideal candidate for ejusdem generis. Ante,
at 16–17. But given the ambiguity of subsection (b)(4),
(b)(1) through (3) are the best guides for understanding its
proper scope—something we recognized in ACF Industries.
510 U. S., at 343. It is more reasonable to discern the
meaning of “discriminates” in subsection (b)(4) using the
preceding subsections than to pluck from the dictionary a
definition for such a context-dependent term.
Detaching subsection (b)(4) from the rest of the section
would expand its meaning well beyond the scope of the
problem that necessitated §11501(b). Instead of simply
eliminating the particular vulnerability of railroads by
tying their tax fate to that of general commercial and
industrial taxpayers, railroads would receive a surprising
windfall: most-favored taxpayer status. This would con
vert subsection (b)(4) from a shield into a sword.
The implication of the majority opinion is that if every
person and business in the State of Alabama paid a $1
annual tax, and one person was exempt, CSX could sue
under subsection (b)(4) and require the State to either
exempt CSX also or “offe[r] a sufficient justification” for
the distinction. See ante, at 10, n. 8. Although the major
ity denies that this would provide railroads most-favored
taxpayer status, see ibid., it acknowledges that States
would have to justify any tax distinction that railroads
argue may disfavor them.
The only bulwark against requiring States to give rail
roads every tax exemption that anyone else gets would be
open-ended judicial determinations of what is “sufficient
justification” for such distinctions. Ibid. Unsurprisingly,
the statute provides no guidance for what “sufficient justi
fication” might mean, but neither does the majority.
There are all sorts of reasons that might lead a State to

