Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

THOMAS, J., dissenting

Widespread exemptions could theoretically cause a facially
general tax to target railroads, but the limited exemptions
at issue here do not suggest that, and CSX has not argued
it.2 Accordingly, CSX has not stated a cognizable claim for
discrimination under §11501(b)(4).
II
The Court does not settle the ambiguity in the word
“discriminates” in subsection (b)(4)—leaving open both the
appropriate comparison class and the type of differential
treatment required to constitute discrimination.3 The
majority “hold[s] only that §11501(b)(4) enables a railroad
to challenge an excise or other non-property tax as dis
criminatory on the basis of the tax scheme’s exemptions.”
Ante, at 10, n. 8. Thus, when the majority says that “a
state excise tax that applies to railroads but exempts their
interstate competitors is subject to challenge under sub
section (b)(4),” ante, at 10, it must mean only that a tax
exemption scheme could potentially violate subsection
(b)(4).
As I understand it, the majority does not decide whether
——————
2 Although the majority rightly observes that whether a given tax is
discriminatory may often be a difficult question, see ante, at 19, this is
not a close case. I therefore need not define the exact boundaries of
what constitutes targeting or singling out. See, e.g., Norfolk Southern
R. Co. v. Alabama Dept. of Revenue, 550 F. 3d 1306, 1316, n. 16 (CA11
2008) (listing examples of courts finding railroads targeted by various
state tax schemes).
3 The majority declines to reach the comparison class issue. But the
question presented was: “Whether a State’s exemptions of rail carrier
competitors, but not rail carriers, from generally applicable sales and
use taxes on fuel subject the taxes to challenge under 49 U. S. C.
§11501(b)(4) as ‘another tax that discriminates against a rail carrier.’ ”
The question presented thus asks whether CSX can challenge a “gener
ally applicable” tax based on exemptions granted to rail competitors—a
straightforward comparison class issue. The lower courts have split
over the proper scope of the comparison class, and the issue was pre
sented in this case. I would decide it.

