10

CSX TRANSPORTATION, INC. v. ALABAMA DEPT. OF 

REVENUE
Opinion of the Court 





Act (including the references in subsections (b)(1)–(3) to
“commercial and industrial property”) distinguishes be­
tween local and non-local taxpayers who receive favorable
tax treatment. The distinctions drawn in §11501(b) are
not between interstate and local actors, as the State con­
tends, but rather between railroads and other actors,
whether interstate or local. Accordingly, a state excise tax
that applies to railroads but exempts their interstate
competitors is subject to challenge under subsection (b)(4)
as a “tax that discriminates against a rail carrier.”8
——————
8 This conclusion does not, as Alabama and the dissent contend, turn
railroads into “most-favored-taxpayers,” entitled to any exemption (or
other tax break) that a State gives to another entity. See Brief for
Respondents 23; post, at 9 (opinion of THOMAS, J.). We hold only that
§11501(b)(4) enables a railroad to challenge an excise or other non­
property tax as discriminatory on the basis of the tax scheme’s exemp­
tions—as the dissent apparently agrees, post, at 1. Whether the
railroad will prevail—that is, whether it can prove the alleged dis­
crimination—depends on whether the State offers a sufficient justifica­
tion for declining to provide the exemption at issue to rail carriers. See
supra, at 8; Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 25–26; Richmond,
F. & P. R. Co. v. Department of Taxation, Commonwealth of Va., 762
F. 2d 375, 380–381, and n. 4 (CA4 1985). So if, to use the dissent’s
example, a railroad challenged a scheme in which “every person and
business in the State of Alabama paid a $1 annual tax, and one person
was exempt,” post, at 9, for some reason having nothing to do with
railroads, we presume the suit would be promptly dismissed. Nothing
in this application of §11501(b)(4) offers a “windfall” to railroads. Ibid.
The dissent argues in addition that a State should prevail against
any claim of discrimination brought under subsection (b)(4) if it can
demonstrate that a tax does not “target” or “single out” a railroad, post,
at 1; that showing, without more, would justify the tax (although the
dissent declines to say just what it means to “target,” post, at 7, n. 3).
This argument primarily concerns the question whether Alabama’s tax
scheme in fact discriminates under subsection (b)(4)—a question we
have explained is inappropriate to address, see n. 5, supra. We note,
however, that the dissent’s argument about subsection (b)(4) rests
entirely on the premise that subsections (b)(1)–(3) prohibit only prop­
erty taxes that “target” or “single out” railroads, see post, at 4; so, the
dissent would say, a State may impose a 4% property tax on railroads

