14

CSX TRANSPORTATION, INC. v. ALABAMA DEPT. OF 

REVENUE
Opinion of the Court 





because Congress had spoken with particularity in pro­
scribing other forms of discriminatory property taxes. The
very sentence Alabama highlights makes our reasoning
clear: Congress’s silence as to the practice of granting
property tax exemptions reflected its acquiescence in that
practice “in light of the explicit prohibition [in subsections
(b)(1)–(3)] of [property] tax rate and assessment ratio
discrimination.” Id., at 344 (emphasis added). If that
explicit prohibition had not existed—if §11501(b) had
consisted only of subsection (b)(4)’s broad ban on tax
discrimination—we could not have gleaned what we did
from congressional silence. After all, the very purpose of a
catch-all provision like subsection (b)(4) is to avoid the
necessity of listing each matter (here, each kind of tax
discrimination) falling within it. And with respect to non­
property taxes (like Alabama’s sales and use taxes), sub­
section (b)(4) is all there is. So here again, our analysis in
ACF Industries does not apply because it rested on subsec­
tions (b)(1)–(3)—that is, on the highly reticulated scheme
in the 4–R Act relating solely to property taxes.
Alabama also emphasizes our statement in ACF Indus­
tries that “ ‘[p]rinciples of federalism’ ” supported our hold­
ing, Brief for Respondents 41–43 (quoting 510 U. S., at
345), but this final effort to borrow from that decision’s
analysis similarly fails. We indeed recognized in ACF
Industries that the 4–R Act limits the traditional taxing
power of the States. Because that is so, we expressed
“hesitan[ce] to extend the statute beyond its evident
scope.” 510 U. S., at 345. But here, for all the reasons
already noted, we are not “extend[ing] the statute”; we are
merely giving effect to its clear meaning. To reiterate: The
4–R Act distinguishes between property taxes and other
taxes. Congress expressed its intent to insulate property
tax exemptions from challenge; against that background,
ACF Industries stated that permitting such suits would
intrude on the States’ rightful authority. By contrast,

