Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

granted certiorari, 560 U. S. ____ (2010), and now reverse.
II
We begin, as in any case of statutory interpretation,
with the language of the statute. Hardt v. Reliance Stan­
dard Life Ins. Co., 560 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 8).
Section 11501(b)(4) provides that a State may not
“[i]mpose another tax that discriminates against a rail
carrier.” CSX wishes to bring an action under this provi­
sion because rail carriers, but not motor or water carriers,
must pay Alabama’s sales and use taxes on diesel fuel. To
determine whether this suit may go forward, we must
therefore answer two questions. Is CSX challenging “an­
other tax” within the meaning of the statute? And, if so,
might that tax “discriminate” against rail carriers by
exempting their competitors?5
——————
ton No. R. Co. v. Commissioner of Revenue, 606 N. W. 2d 54, 58–59
(Minn. 2000) (same), and Atchison, T. & S. F. R. Co. v. Bair, 338 N. W.
2d 338, 348 (Iowa 1983) (same).
5 We consider here only questions relating to whether CSX can bring
a claim for discrimination based on the State’s pattern of tax exemp­
tions. We do not consider any issues concerning whether these exemp­
tions actually discriminate against CSX. See infra, at 18–19, and n. 8.
Alabama has raised two such issues in this Court. First, Alabama
contends that in deciding CSX’s claim, a federal court must consider
not only the specific taxes challenged, but also the broader tax scheme.
Brief for Respondents 58–60. Second, the State argues that the court
must compare the taxation of CSX not merely to direct competitors
but to other commercial entities as well. Id., at 48, n. 7. Most of the
dissenting opinion is devoted to supporting the State’s argument on
this second question. But we leave these and all other issues relating
to whether Alabama actually has discriminated against CSX to the
trial court on remand to address as and when it wishes. No court in
this case has previously considered these questions, and the parties’
briefs in this Court have only sketchily addressed them. In addition,
the parties dispute whether Alabama waived its claim on the second
issue by initially agreeing that “the comparison class consists of motor
carriers and water carriers,” App. to Pet. for Cert. 12a (internal quota­
tion marks omitted), and proceeding with the litigation on that basis.

