12

CSX TRANSPORTATION, INC. v. ALABAMA DEPT. OF 

REVENUE
Opinion of the Court 





considered ACF Industries “determinative” of the question
here, Norfolk Southern, 550 F. 3d, at 1313, and Alabama
agrees, Brief for Respondents 18. We think they misread
that decision.
We began our analysis in ACF Industries by explaining
that railroads could not challenge property tax exemptions
under subsections (b)(1)–(3)—the provisions of §11501
specifically addressing property taxes. As noted earlier,
subsections (b)(1)–(3) prohibit a State from imposing
higher property tax rates or assessment ratios on “rail
transportation property” than on “other commercial and
industrial property.” The statute defines “commercial and
industrial property” as including only “property . . . subject
to a property tax levy.” §11501(a)(4). We interpreted that
phrase to mean “property that is taxed,” rather than
property that is potentially taxable. 510 U. S., at 341–342.
As a result, we determined that exempt (i.e., non-taxed)
property fell outside the category of “other commercial and
industrial property” against which the taxation of railroad
property is measured. Ibid. The conclusion followed:
Subsections (b)(1)–(3) permitted States to impose property
taxes on railroads while exempting other entities. Ibid.
And because that was so, we stated, still another con­
clusion followed: Subsection (b)(4)’s prohibition on dis­
crimination likewise could not encompass property tax
exemptions. Id., at 343. We viewed this holding as a
matter of simple deduction: “It would be illogical to con­
clude that Congress, having allowed the States to grant
property tax exemptions in subsections (b)(1)–(3), would
turn around and nullify its own choice in subsection
(b)(4).” Ibid. Or stated otherwise: “[R]eading subsection
(b)(4) to prohibit what” other parts of the statute were
“designed to allow,” would “subvert the statutory plan”
and “contravene the ‘elementary canon of construction
that a statute should be interpreted so as not to render
one part inoperative.’ ” Id., at 340. The structure of

