Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

Circuit City Stores, Inc. v. Adams, 532 U. S. 105, 114–115
(2001); see 2A N. Singer, Sutherland on Statutes and
Statutory Construction §47:17 (7th ed. 2007). But that
concern is absent here. Reading subsection (b)(4) to cover
non-property tax exemptions will not deprive subsections
(b)(1)–(3) of effect, because those subsections are ad­
dressed only to property taxes. A canon meaning literally
“of the same kind” has no application to provisions di­
rected toward dissimilar subject matter.
The better version of Alabama’s claim reads entirely in
English; it is simply that distinguishing between property
tax exemptions and other tax exemptions makes not a
whit of sense. We are not much inclined to disagree.
Neither CSX nor the United States as amicus curiae has
offered a satisfying reason for why Congress drew this
line—why in §§11501(b)(1)–(3) it barred challenges based
on property tax exemptions, but then turned around in
§11501(b)(4) to allow challenges based on, say, excise tax
exemptions. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 4–5, 24–25. CSX, for
example, has not presented any evidence that different tax
exemptions posed different levels of threat to railroads’
financial stability. So even if Congress had a good reason
for distinguishing between property and non-property tax
exemptions, we acknowledge that it eludes us.
But this admission does not take us far in Alabama’s
direction. Even if the 4–R Act were ambiguous, we doubt
we would interpret subsection (b)(4) to replicate each facet
of subsections (b)(1)–(3). Treating property tax exemp­
tions and other tax exemptions equivalently might make
sense, as Alabama argues. But so too might allowing
railroads to challenge all taxes (property or non-property)
that contain exemptions. After all, as we noted earlier,
tax exemptions are an obvious form of tax discrimination.
See supra, at 8–9. It is hardly self-evident why Congress
would prohibit a State from charging a railroad a 4% tax
and a competitor a 2% tax, but allow the State to charge

