Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

Opinion of SCALIA, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–1498
_________________

UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. JASON LOUIS 

TINKLENBERG 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT

[May 26, 2011] 


JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and
JUSTICE THOMAS join, concurring in part and concurring
in the judgment.
I join Parts I and III of the Court’s opinion. I agree with
the judgment of the Court in Part II that a pretrial motion
need not actually postpone a trial, or create an expecta
tion of postponement, in order for its pendency to be ex
cluded under the Speedy Trial Act of 1974, 18 U. S. C.
§3161(h)(1)(D) (2006 ed., Supp. III). But I think that
conclusion is entirely clear from the text of the Speedy
Trial Act, and see no need to look beyond the text. The
clarity of the text is doubtless why, as the Court’s opinion
points out, ante, at 8, every Circuit disagrees with the
Sixth Circuit’s conclusion. That is the direction in which
the causality proceeds: Clarity of text produces unanimity
of Circuits—not, as the Court’s opinion would have it,
unanimity of Circuits clarifies text.
As the Court discusses, ante, at 5, the word “delay” can
mean postponement, but it can also mean an “interval of
time between two events.” American Heritage Dictionary
480 (4th ed. 2000). One might refer to the “delay” between
two ticks of a clock, or between seeing lightning and hear
ing thunder, but that does not imply that the first post
poned or slowed the second. Here there are substantial
textual indications that the word “delay” similarly refers


2

UNITED STATES v. TINKLENBERG
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

to the period between ticks of the speedy trial clock—in
other words, the period during which the Speedy Trial
Act’s 70-day requirement is tolled.
Interpreting the “delay” referred to in §3161(h)(1)(D) (or
referred to anywhere else in §3161(h)) as the delay of a
trial date* would make little sense in light of the context
of the provision and the structure of the statute. Section
3161(h)(1)(D) specifies starting and stopping points for the
excludable “delay” that bear no relation whatsoever to the
actual amount of time that a trial might be postponed by a
pretrial motion. It equates the “delay resulting from any
pretrial motion” to the period of time between “the filing
of the motion” and “the conclusion of the hearing on, or
other prompt disposition of, such motion.” This equation is
possible if “delay” refers to an interval of time excludable
for purposes of the Speedy Trial Act, but it makes no sense
if “delay” refers to the time a trial is postponed. Consider,
for example, a pretrial motion that is pending for 10 days
but causes the district court to push back a trial’s begin
ning by only one day. In such a situation, §3161(h)(1)(D)
would require that the entire 10-day period be excluded
for Speedy Trial Act purposes.
Neighboring statutory provisions, moreover, link the
excludable “delay” to the time consumed by the specified
event, not the number of days a trial is postponed. Section
3161(h)(1)(H), for example, excludes “delay reasonably
attributable to any period, not to exceed thirty days,
during which any proceeding concerning the defendant
is actually under advisement by the court.” And
§3161(h)(1)(F) excludes “delay resulting from transporta
——————
* I consider only this possibility, and not the extended meaning in
vented by the Sixth Circuit (“expectation of a dela[y] of trial”)—
presumably to explain how delay can be computed ex ante, before any
trial delay has actually occurred. See 579 F. 3d 589, 598 (2009).
“[E]xpectation of a delay” is simply not one of the possible meanings of
“delay.”


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of SCALIA, J.

tion . . . except that any time consumed in excess of ten
days from . . . an order directing such transportation, and
the defendant’s arrival at the destination shall be pre
sumed to be unreasonable.” If “delay” means trial delay, it
makes little sense for Congress to have placed a limit upon
the “time consumed” in transporting a defendant rather
than upon the permissible postponement of trial date.
The Speedy Trial Act’s structure also suggests that
§3161(h)(1)(D) is meant to apply automatically and is not
dependent on predicate findings of postponement. Section
3161(h) lists various types of delay that may be excluded,
the first six of which (including §3161(h)(1)(D)) make no
reference to any required findings. But the seventh, which
excludes “delay resulting from a continuance granted by
any judge,” conditions that exclusion upon certain find
ings, §3161(h)(7)(A). In light of this difference in formula
tion, we have held that the first six exclusions are “ ‘auto
matic,’ ” apply “regardless of the specifics of the case,” and
require no district-court findings. Bloate v. United States,
559 U. S. ___, ___, n. 1, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 1, n. 1, 6);
see also Henderson v. United States, 476 U. S. 321, 327
(1986). Tinklenberg’s incorporation of a threshold inquiry
into §3161(h)(1)(D) would make it none of these things.
Delay of trial is also ruled out by the fact that the text
is forward looking. It says that the “following periods of
delay shall be excluded in computing . . . the time within
which the trial . . . must commence.” §3161(h) (emphasis
added). This is designed to enable the determination in
advance of the date by which the trial “must commence.”
Quite obviously, if the specified delays did not count
unless and until they delayed the trial, one could not know
whether they counted until after the fact. And on that
interpretation the provision should have read, not “the
time within which the trial . . . must commence,” but
rather “the time within which the trial . . . should have
commenced.”


4

UNITED STATES v. TINKLENBERG
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

And finally, there are the administrative difficulties
that arise when “delay” is taken to mean “delay in trial,”
discussed in the Court’s opinion at pages 9–10. These are
not relevant on their own, but only because they bear upon
the meaning of the text. When one of two possible mean
ings yields impracticable results, the other meaning is
more likely correct.
Tinklenberg would invent a threshold inquiry applicable
only to §3161(h)(1)(D): If, he says, at least some delay of
the trial date has occurred, then the entire period specified
in §3161(h)(1)(D) may be excluded. This makes no sense.
First, nothing in the statute supports treating the word
“delay” as a trigger for an exclusion of an unrelated period
of time; quite the opposite, §3161(h)(1)(D) treats the period
of “delay” and the pendency of the pretrial motion equiva
lently. Second, that interpretation would ascribe different
meanings to the word “delay” as it is used throughout the
Speedy Trial Act. “[D]elay resulting from any interlocu
tory appeal,” §3161(h)(1)(C), for example, would refer to
the number of days a trial was postponed; but “delay
resulting from any pretrial motion,” §3161(h)(1)(D), would
refer to the different period specified in that paragraph.
Identical words used in different parts of a statute are pre
sumed to have the same meaning absent indication to
the contrary, and here no such indication exists. See IBP,
Inc. v. Alvarez, 546 U. S. 21, 34 (2005).
Tinklenberg also argues that his interpretation draws
support from the phrase “resulting from,” which appears
after the word “delay” in §3161(h)(1)(D). He asserts that
this phrase “underscores that Subsection (D) excludes
periods of delay that occur as a consequence of pretrial
motions, not merely the time during which such motions
are pending.” Brief for Respondent 17. That is true
enough, but it sheds no light on the meaning of the word
“delay.” Cf. Bloate, supra, at ___, n. 9 (slip op., at 8, n. 9).
There is nothing odd in saying that an interval of exclud


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of SCALIA, J.

able time under §3161(h)(1)(D) arises “as a consequence”
of a party’s having filed a pretrial motion; if no pretrial
motion is filed, no delay results.

