(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STATES v. TINKLENBERG
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–1498. Argued February 22, 2011—Decided May 26, 2011
The Speedy Trial Act of 1974 (Act) provides, inter alia, that in “any case
in which a plea of not guilty is entered, the trial . . . shall commence
within seventy days” after the arraignment, 18 U. S. C. §3161(c)(1),
but lists a number of exclusions from the 70-day period, including
“delay resulting from any pretrial motion, from the filing of the mo
tion through the conclusion of the hearing on, or other prompt dispo
sition of, such motion,” §3161(h)(1)(D).
Respondent Tinklenberg’s trial on federal drug and gun charges
began 287 days after his arraignment. The District Court denied his
motion to dismiss the indictment on the ground that the trial violated
the Act’s 70-day requirement, finding that 218 of the days fell within
various of the Act’s exclusions, leaving 69 nonexcludable days, thus
making the trial timely. On Tinklenberg’s appeal from his convic
tion, the Sixth Circuit agreed that many of the 287 days were exclud
able, but concluded that 9 days during which three pretrial motions
were pending were not, because the motions did not actually cause a
delay, or the expectation of delay, of trial. Since these 9 days were
sufficient to bring the number of nonexcludable days above 70, the
court found a violation of the Act. And given that Tinklenberg had
already served his prison sentence, it ordered the indictment dis
missed with prejudice.
Held:
1. The Act contains no requirement that the filing of a pretrial mo
tion actually caused, or was expected to cause, delay of a trial.
Rather, §3161(h)(1)(D) stops the Speedy Trial clock from running
automatically upon the filing of a pretrial motion irrespective of
whether the motion has any impact on when the trial begins. Pp. 3–
12.


2

UNITED STATES v. TINKLENBERG
Syllabus
(a) The Sixth Circuit reasoned that subparagraph (D)’s “delay resulting from” phrase, read most naturally, requires a court to apply
the exclusion provision only to motions that actually cause a trial delay, or the expectation of such a delay. While such a reading is linguistically reasonable, it is not the only reasonable interpretation.
The subparagraph falls within a general set of provisions introduced
by the phrase: “The following periods of delay shall be excluded.”
§3161(h). That phrase is followed by a list that includes “[a]ny period
of delay resulting from other proceedings concerning the defendant,
including. . . .” §3161(h)(1). This latter list is followed by a sublist,
each member (but one) of which is introduced by the phrase “delay
resulting from . . . .” Ibid. Those words are followed by a more specific description, such as “any pretrial motion” from its “filing”
“through the conclusion of the hearing on, or other prompt disposition
of, such motion.” §3161(h)(1)(D). The whole paragraph can be read
as requiring the automatic exclusion of the members of that specific
sublist, while referring to those members in general as “periods of delay” and as causing that delay, not because Congress intended the
judge to determine causation, but because, in a close to definitional
way, the words embody Congress’ own view of the matter. Thus, language alone cannot resolve the basic question presented. Pp. 4–7.
(b) Several considerations, taken together, compel the conclusion
that Congress intended subparagraph (D) to apply automatically.
First, subparagraph (D) and neighboring subparagraphs (F) and (H)
contain language that instructs courts to measure the time actually
consumed by the specified pretrial occurrence, but those subparagraphs do not mention the date on which the trial begins or was expected to begin. Second, during the 37 years since Congress enacted
the statute, every other Court of Appeals has rejected the Sixth Circuit’s interpretation. Third, the Sixth Circuit’s interpretation would
make the subparagraph (D) exclusion significantly more difficult to
administer, thereby hindering the Act’s efforts to secure fair and efficient trials. Fourth, the Court’s conclusion is reinforced by the difficulty of squaring the Sixth Circuit’s interpretation with the “automatic application” rule expressed in, e.g., Henderson v. United States,
476 U. S. 321, 327. Fifth, the legislative history also supports the
Court’s conclusion. Sixth, because all the subparagraphs but one under paragraph (1) begin with the phrase “delay resulting from,” the
Sixth Circuit’s interpretation would potentially extend well beyond
pretrial motions and encompass such matters as mental and physical
competency examinations, interlocutory appeals, consideration of
plea agreements, and the absence of essential witnesses. Pp. 7–12.
2. The Sixth Circuit also misinterpreted §3161(h)(1)(F), which excludes from the 70-day calculation “delay resulting from transporta-


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
tion of any defendant . . . to and from places of examination . . . , ex
cept that any time consumed in excess of ten days . . . shall be pre
sumed to be unreasonable.” The lower courts agreed that a total of
20 transportation days had elapsed when Tinklenberg was evaluated
for competency, and that because the Government provided no justi
fication, all days in excess of the 10 days specified in the statute were
unreasonable. However, the Sixth Circuit exempted 8 weekend days
and holidays from the count on the theory that subparagraph (F) in
corporated Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 45(a), which, at the
time, excluded such days when computing any period specified in
“rules” and “court order[s]” that was less than 11 days. Thus, the
Circuit considered only two transportation days excessive, and the
parties concede that the eight extra days were enough to make the
difference between compliance with, and violation of, the Act.
This Court exercises its discretion to consider the subsidiary sub
paragraph (F) question because doing so is fairer to Tinklenberg, who
has already served his sentence. In the Court’s view, subparagraph
(F) does not incorporate Rule 45. The Act does not say that it does so,
the Government gives no good reason for such a reading, and the
Rule itself, as it existed at the relevant time, stated it applied to rules
and court orders, but said nothing about statutes. The fact that Rule
45 is revised from time to time also argues against its direct applica
tion to subparagraph (F) because such changes, likely reflecting con
siderations other than those related to the Act, may well leave courts
treating similar defendants differently. The better reading includes
weekend days and holidays in subparagraph (F)’s 10-day period un
der the common-law rule that such days are included when counting
a statutory time period of 10 days unless a statute specifically ex
cludes them. Many courts have treated statutory time periods this
way, and Congress has tended specifically to exclude weekend days
and holidays from statutory time periods of 10 days when it intended
that result. Indeed, Rule 45 has been recently modified to require a
similar result. Pp. 12–14.
3. Although the Sixth Circuit’s interpretations of subparagraphs
(D) and (F) are both mistaken, the conclusions the court drew from
its interpretations in relevant part cancel each other out, such that
the court’s ultimate conclusion that Tinklenberg’s trial failed to com
ply with the Act’s deadline is correct. Pp. 14–15.
579 F. 3d 589, affirmed.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which KENNEDY,
GINSBURG, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined, and in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA and THOMAS, JJ., joined as to Parts I and III. SCALIA,
J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment,


4

UNITED STATES v. TINKLENBERG
Syllabus

in which ROBERTS, C. J., and THOMAS, J., joined. KAGAN, J., took no part
in the consideration or decision of the case.

