14

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

discretion within an otherwise mandatory Guidelines
regime. See S. Rep. No. 98–225, p. 167 (1983) (explaining
that the “sentencing judge is required to take the policy
statements into account in deciding what sentence to
impose,” but that departure from a policy statement is not
itself grounds for appeal); see also id., at 166 (identifying
potential use of policy statement to “offe[r] recommenda­
tions as to how” to “trea[t]” “in the future” “existing dis­
parities which are not adequately cured by the guide­
lines”).
Congress reserved binding effect for the
Commission’s “guidelines,” which the Commission was to
promulgate pursuant to a distinct statutory provision,
§994(a)(1). The Sentencing Reform Act thus drew a basic
distinction: Guidelines would bind; policy statements
would advise.
Given that distinction, it is significant that Congress
elected to use the Commission’s policy-statement power to
set limitations on the sentencing modification procedures,
rather than invoking the Commission’s Guidelines power.
The Commission is now trying to use a policy statement to
have the mandatory effect of a guideline—inverting the
Sentencing Reform Act’s original design. I find no provi­
sion within §994(a)(2) that would authorize the Commis­
sion, via a policy statement, to create a binding Guidelines
regime. With respect to the type of action the Commission
has taken, there is certainly no provision that even ap­
proximates the detailed prescriptions on the Commission’s
power we considered in Mistretta.
Moreover, not only does nothing in §994(a)(2) appear to
authorize this type of policy statement, but there is also
nothing that appears to authorize the Commission, by its
own fiat, to limit the effect of our decision in Booker.
How to respond to Booker, and whether to retain man­
datory Guidelines, was a decision for Congress—and
Congress alone. Booker expressly left “[t]he ball” “in
Congress’ court,” explaining that “[t]he National Legisla­

