6

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

derance of the evidence. By restoring the principles out­
lined in landmark cases such as In re Winship, 397 U. S.
358 (1970), Apprendi and its progeny fundamentally
changed the landscape of modern sentencing law,3 and in
so doing paved the way for Booker.
The Booker Court considered whether the Sentencing
Reform Act’s mandatory determinate sentencing scheme
infringed the jury-trial right. In the first of two opinions,
we held that the two applications of the Guidelines before
us violated the Sixth Amendment because the sentencing
judge in each case imposed a more severe sentence than
the facts found by the jury warranted. 543 U. S., at 235.
We recognized that if the Guidelines “could be read as
merely advisory provisions that recommended, rather
than required, the selection of particular sentences in
response to differing sets of facts, their use would not
implicate the Sixth Amendment.” Id., at 233. But we
rejected such an advisory reading of the Guidelines, as
they then stood. Id., at 234. To satisfy constitutional
guarantees, we explained that any fact that has the effect
of increasing the mandatory range must be “established by
a plea of guilty or . . . must be admitted by the defendant
or proved to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id., at
244. Otherwise, the sentence would violate the Sixth (and
the Fifth) Amendment.
In light of the potential for mandatory Guidelines sen­
tences to violate the Constitution, the Court had to elect
among possible remedies. As I explained in my dissent
from the Court’s second Booker opinion (the remedial one),
there was no need to find any constitutional infirmity in
any provision of the Sentencing Reform Act to provide
——————
3 See United States v. O’Brien, 560 U. S. ___, ___, and n. 1 (2010)
(STEVENS, J., concurring) (slip op., at 1–2, and n. 1) (discussing a
significant sentencing policy trend in 1970’s and 1980’s, involving a
shift to mandatory, determinate sentencing schemes based on judicial
factfinding by a preponderance standard).

