12

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

tions in our separation-of-powers jurisprudence. “So long
as Congress ‘shall lay down by legislative act an intelligi­
ble principle to which the person or body authorized to
[exercise the delegated authority] is directed to conform,
such legislative action is not a forbidden delegation of
legislative power.’ ” Mistretta, 488 U. S., at 372 (quoting J.
W. Hampton, Jr., & Co. v. United States, 276 U. S. 394,
409 (1928)). Few legislative actions have been found to
offend this principle. 488 U. S., at 373.
More than 20 years ago, the Court upheld the constitu­
tionality of the Commission’s work from just such an
attack in Mistretta. We took sanctuary then in the fact
that, in enacting the Sentencing Reform Act and creating
the Commission, Congress had “se[t] forth more than
merely an ‘intelligible principle’ or minimal standard” for
the exercise of the Commission’s discretion, and had “ ‘ex­
plain[ed] what the Commission should do and how it
should do it, and se[t] out specific directives to govern
particular situations.’ ” Id., at 379. To this end, Congress
gave the Commission clear “goals,” id., at 374; specified
the “ ‘purposes of sentencing,’ ” ibid.; “prescribed the spe­
cific tool”—“the guidelines system”—the Commission was
to use in its work, ibid.; set limits on the appropriate
Guidelines ranges the Commission was to promulgate, id.,
at 375; and set forth “seven factors” and “11 factors,”
respectively, to assist the Commission with “its formula­
tion of offense categories” and its establishment of “catego­
ries of defendants” for sentencing purposes, id., at 375–
376.
We explained that “although Congress granted the
Commission substantial discretion in formulating guide­
lines, in actuality it legislated a full hierarchy of punish­
ment—from near maximum imprisonment, to substantial
imprisonment, to some imprisonment, to alternatives—
and stipulated the most important offense and offender
characteristics to place defendants within these catego­

