Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

STEVENS, J., dissenting

ture is equipped to devise and install, long term, the sen­
tencing system, compatible with the Constitution, that
Congress judges best for the federal system of justice.”
543 U. S., at 265; see also supra, at 3–4. That Congress
has declined to disturb Booker in the five years since its
issuance demonstrates not only that JUSTICE BREYER is
more clairvoyant than I am, but also that Congress has
acquiesced to a discretionary Guidelines regime. Con­
gress’ silence has deprived the Commission of any “intelli­
gible principle[s],” J. W. Hampton, 276 U. S., at 409, by
which to steer its consideration of the appropriate re­
sponse to Booker. And without such guidance, I fear that,
in promulgating USSG §1B1.10, the Commission may
have made the type of “basic policy decisio[n]” that
JUSTICE SCALIA reminded us is the province of the Legis­
lature, Mistretta, 488 U. S., at 415 (dissenting opinion).
Prior to the Commission’s 2008 overhaul of its policy
statement in §1B1.10—and even under the applicable
policy statement in effect when the Court decided
Booker—nothing in the Guidelines, see supra, at 3–4, and
n. 2, as understood in light of Booker, would have pre­
cluded Dillon from obtaining the type of discretionary
sentence reduction he now seeks (assuming he was so
eligible). Standing in Dillon’s way presently are two pro­
visions of §1B1.10, revised contemporaneously with the
Commission’s decision to make its amendments to the
crack cocaine offense Guidelines retroactive.
There can be no question that the purpose of the Com­
mission’s amendments to its policy statement in §1B1.10
was to circumvent the Booker remedy. See Brief for Fed­
eral Public and Community Defenders et al. as Amici
Curiae 3–9 (describing history of promulgation of current
version of §1B1.10). To this end, the Commission dis­
claimed that proceedings under §3582(c)(2) “constitute a
full resentencing of the defendant.” USSG §1B1.10(a)(3).
And it advised that “the court shall not reduce the defen­

