18

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

accept that the Commission would ignore its obligations,
and would withhold retroactive application of a Guidelines
reduction, simply because a judge would have discretion
to enter a below-Guidelines sentence in a §3582(c)(2)
proceeding.
Undoubtedly, discretionary application of the Guidelines
in §3582(c)(2) proceedings would impose a greater burden
on the district courts. Such a process would require case­
specific evaluations rather than the rote, two-level reduc­
tions the Commission envisioned when it made Amend­
ment 706 retroactive. But it is important to remember
that §3582(c)(2) already requires the district court to
consider the §3553(a) factors when it determines whether
to grant a reduction, as well as the extent of the reduction.
And any additional consideration of evidence proffered to
justify a downward departure need not create a great deal
of work. Indeed, it need not create any particular adver­
sarial process at all: The Commission could simply advise
the district courts to review paper submissions, including
the original presentence report and objections, as well as
any new submissions. By now, courts are intimately
familiar with our post-Booker sentencing regime and the
discretionary application of the §3553(a) factors.
The facts of Dillon’s case show why any additional bur­
den on the courts caused by applying Booker’s remedial
holding likely pales in comparison to the benefit of achiev­
ing more tailored, proportionate sentences for those indi­
viduals currently serving terms of imprisonment that
exceed what is “necessary” to meet the goals of our sen­
tencing system, §3553(a). Dillon was 23 years old when he
was sentenced to nearly 27 years’ imprisonment for his
——————
I do not think the Commission’s authority encompasses the ability to
promulgate binding Guidelines via policy statements. And this matter
is separate from its power to promulgate Guidelines—a power unaf­
fected by our decision in Booker.

