10

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

46 (2007) (“As a result of our decision [in Booker], the
Guidelines are now advisory, and appellate review of
sentencing decisions is limited to determining whether
they are ‘reasonable’ ”); Kimbrough v. United States, 552
U. S. 85, 101 (2007) (“In sum, while the statute still re­
quires a court to give respectful consideration to the
Guidelines, Booker permits the court to tailor the sentence
in light of other statutory concerns as well” (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted)); Spears v. United
States, 555 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (per curiam) (slip op., at 5)
(“[W]e now clarify that district courts are entitled to reject
and vary categorically from the crack-cocaine Guidelines
based on a policy disagreement with those Guidelines”).6
Our case law is quite clear: The Guidelines no longer have
mandatory and binding effect, and the sentencing court
may not presume them correct or reasonable when it
considers an individual sentencing decision.
In light of this history, the limited nature of the
§3582(c)(2) proceeding is beside the point. Nothing turns
——————
6 See also Spears, 555 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 6) (“[D]istrict courts
are entitled to vary from the crack-cocaine guidelines in a mine-run
case where there are no ‘particular circumstances’ that would otherwise
justify a variance from the Guidelines’ sentencing range”); Kimbrough,
552 U. S., at 101 (“The Government acknowledges that the Guidelines
‘are now advisory’ and that, as a general matter, ‘courts may vary [from
Guidelines ranges] based solely on policy considerations, including
disagreements with the Guidelines’ ”); id., at 113–114 (SCALIA, J.,
concurring) (“[T]he district court is free to make its own reasonable
application of the §3553(a) factors, and to reject (after due considera­
tion) the advice of the Guidelines. If there is any thumb on the scales;
if the Guidelines must be followed even where the district court’s
application of the §3553(a) factors is entirely reasonable; then the
‘advisory’ Guidelines would, over a large expanse of their application,
entitle the defendant to a lesser sentence but for the presence of certain
additional facts found by judge rather than jury. This, as we said in
Booker, would violate the Sixth Amendment”); Gall, 552 U. S., at 50
(sentencing court “may not presume that the Guidelines range is
reasonable”).

