Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

STEVENS, J., dissenting

drug crimes. His attorney urged the District Court to
enter a below-Guidelines sentence because of, inter alia,
the gross disparity between sentences for crack and pow­
der cocaine offenses. App. 8–9. It would take another 14
years for this Court to agree, finally, in Kimbrough, 552
U. S. 85, that sentencing courts could consider this unjust
disparity.
But the District Court, constrained by the then­
mandatory Guidelines, increased Dillon’s sentence based
on judge-found facts by more than 10 years over the sen­
tence authorized by the jury’s verdict. See Brief for Peti­
tioner 2, and n. 2. The court could only lament: “I person­
ally don’t believe that you should be serving 322 months.
But I feel I am bound by those Guidelines and I don’t feel
there is any grounds for . . . depart[ing] from those Guide­
lines.” App. 12–13. The court acknowledged: “I don’t say
to you that these penalties are fair. I don’t think they are
fair.” Id., at 13. The court also implored Dillon to make
something of the hand he had dealt himself: “I hope that
while you are in prison . . . that you will take some time to
consider the direction that your life will take when you do
return to society. . . . It is only through people like you if
you spread the word that other young men of your age will
hesitate to get involved in [dealing drugs].” Ibid.
Dillon has done just that. He has participated in out­
reach efforts in the communities in which he has been
imprisoned, doing extensive work with adolescents to steer
them away from a life of drugs and crime. Brief for Peti­
tioner 5–6. Working with two universities, he has facili­
tated the initiation of an African-American Studies pro­
gram at Hunters Point Family, a Bay Area organization
devoted to assisting at-risk youth. He has also played a
large role in initiating a similar program at his prison
facility. Berkeley’s Prison Outreach Coordinator stated to
the District Court that “without [Dillon’s] insight and
advice, our project would not have succeeded and grown

