Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

STEVENS, J., dissenting

severed only two specific statutory sections. But there
was not, at the time, even a whisper of a suggestion that
any other mandatory provision existed or that any should
be preserved.5
Were it not clear from the foregoing discussion of Booker
itself, our post-Booker decisions have repeatedly empha­
sized the completely advisory nature of the Guidelines.
See, e.g., Cunningham v. California, 549 U. S. 270, 286–
287 (2007) (“Under the system described in JUSTICE
BREYER’s opinion for the Court in Booker, judges would no
longer be tied to the sentencing range indicated in the
Guidelines. But they would be obliged to ‘take account of’
that range along with the sentencing goals Congress
enumerated in the [Sentencing Reform Act of 1984] at 18
U. S. C. §3553(a)”); Rita v. United States, 551 U. S. 338, 

351 (2007) (“[T]he sentencing court does not enjoy the

benefit of a legal presumption that the Guidelines sen­

tence should apply”); Gall v. United States, 552 U. S. 38, 

—————— 

BREYER, J.) (“The other approach, which we now adopt, would (through 

severance and excision of two provisions) make the Guidelines system
advisory while maintaining a strong connection between the sentence
imposed and the offender’s real conduct—a connection important to the
increased uniformity of sentencing that Congress intended its Guide­
lines system to achieve” (emphasis added)); id., at 254 (“Congress would
have preferred no mandatory system to the system the dissenters
envisage”); id., at 264 (“Finally, the Act without its ‘mandatory’ provi­
sion and related language remains consistent with Congress’ initial and
basic sentencing intent. . . . The system remaining after excision, while
lacking the mandatory features that Congress enacted, retains other
features that help to further these objectives” (emphasis added)); ibid.
(“The district courts, while not bound to apply the Guidelines, must
consult those Guidelines and take them into account when sentencing”
(emphasis added)).
5 It seems, however, that at least one additional provision of the Sen­
tencing Reform Act should have been excised, but was not, in order to
accomplish the Court’s remedy. Section §3742(g)(2), prescribes that the
Guidelines are to have binding effect upon a remand for a new sentence
in a direct appeal: “The court shall not impose a sentence outside the
applicable guidelines range . . . .”

