Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

At sentencing, the District Court made additional find
ings of fact and concluded that Dillon was responsible for
1.5 kilograms of crack and 1.6 kilograms of powder co
caine. Under USSG §2D1.1, those drug quantities pro
duced a base offense level of 38. After offsetting adjust
ments for acceptance of responsibility, §3E1.1, and
reckless endangerment during flight, §3C1.2, Dillon’s total
offense level remained 38. Coupled with a criminal
history category of II,3 that offense level produced a then
mandatory Guidelines range of 262-to-327 months’ im
prisonment for the drug counts.
The court sentenced Dillon at the bottom of the Guide
lines range for those counts, followed by a mandatory 60
month sentence for the firearm count, for a total sentence
of 322 months’ imprisonment. At Dillon’s sentencing, the
court described the term of imprisonment as “entirely too
high for the crime [Dillon] committed.” App. 13. Perceiv
ing no basis for departing from the then-mandatory Sen
tencing Guidelines, the District Court felt constrained to
impose a sentence within the prescribed range. The Court
of Appeals for the Third Circuit affirmed Dillon’s convic
tions and sentence on appeal. See 100 F. 3d 949 (1996).
After the Sentencing Commission made the amendment
to the crack-cocaine Guidelines retroactive in 2008, Dillon
filed a pro se motion for a sentence reduction pursuant to
§3582(c)(2). In the motion, Dillon asked the court to grant
not just the two-level reduction authorized by the amend
ment but also a further reduction consistent with the
sentencing factors found in §3553(a). Based largely on his
postsentencing conduct, including his determined pursuit
of educational and community-outreach opportunities,
——————
3 The

Probation Office based Dillon’s criminal-history assessment on
two prior misdemeanor convictions, one for possession of marijuana and
one for resisting arrest. Dillon did not object to that calculation of his
criminal-history score.

