Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

STEVENS, J., dissenting

Even if that explanation were accurate, it should not
influence our assessment of the legal question before us.
The Commission has a statutory obligation to review and
amend Guidelines ranges. 28 U. S. C. §994(o). And Con­
gress has commanded that the Commission “shall specify
in what circumstances” an amendment is retroactive,
indicating that most, if not all, substantial amendments
are to receive some type of retroactive effect. §994(u); see
also S. Rep. No. 98–225, at 180 (“It should be noted that
the Committee does not expect that the Commission will
recommend
adjusting
existing
sentences
under
[§3582(c)(2)] when guidelines are simply refined in a way
that might cause isolated instances of existing sentences
falling above the old guidelines or when there is only a
minor downward adjustment in the guidelines”). In other
words, while Congress has left the retroactivity decision to
the Commission’s discretion, it has done so with the pre­
sumption that some form of retroactive relief is appropri­
ate when a Guidelines amendment is nontrivial.8 I cannot
——————
ments themselves would inevitably discourage the Sentencing Commis­
sion from ever authorizing sentence reductions.” Brief for United
States 37.
8 As the Court notes, I do agree that §994(u) authorizes the Commis­
sion to determine the retroactive effect of sentence reductions. Ante, at
13. I understand §994(u) as directing the Commission to prescribe the
retroactive effect, if any, of its Guidelines amendments. The power to
make retroactivity determinations is meaningfully different, however,
from the other power the Court claims for the Commission. In granting
the former power, Congress has instructed the Commission to perform
a gate keeping function by determining which individuals are eligible
for relief pursuant to §3582(c)(2). By contrast, the other power the
Court claims for the Commission today is the type of mandatory sen­
tencing authority at issue in Booker. Contrary to the Court’s conclu­
sion, the Commission after Booker does not have the power to bind the
district court in setting a particular sentence.
I also cannot accept the Court’s broad understanding of the power
the Commission derives from §994(u), see ante, at 8, because it suffers
from the same delegation concerns I discussed above, see supra, 11–16.

