Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

STEVENS, J., dissenting

ries.” Id., at 377. There was, accordingly, no “concern of
encroachment and aggrandizement that has animated our
separation-of-powers jurisprudence and aroused our vigi­
lance against the ‘hydraulic pressure inherent within each
of the separate Branches to exceed the outer limits of its
power.’ ” Id., at 382 (quoting INS v. Chadha, 462 U. S.
919, 951 (1983)).
JUSTICE SCALIA disagreed. He argued forcefully that
Congress’ creation of the Commission was itself “a pure
delegation of legislative power” and therefore an abuse of
separation of powers. 488 U. S., at 420 (dissenting opin­
ion). “Congress’ commitment of such broad policy respon­
sibility to any institution,” in JUSTICE SCALIA’s view,
violated a core principle of our governing system: that
“basic policy decisions governing society are to be made by
the Legislature.” Id., at 415.
Although we acknowledged in Mistretta that Congress
had permissibly granted substantial powers to the Com­
mission to set law and policy on sentencing generally, we
had no occasion to consider whether it had spoken with
sufficient clarity respecting the Commission’s authority to
prescribe sentence reductions. That question has now
reared its head, and in my view it raises separation-of­
powers concerns significantly more difficult than those
presented in Mistretta.
First, I am doubtful that Congress authorized the type
of “policy statement” we find in USSG §1B1.10. Congress
instructed the Commission to promulgate “general policy
statements regarding application of the guidelines or any
other aspect of sentencing or sentence implementation
that in the view of the Commission would further the
purposes set forth in section 3553(a)(2) of title 18 . . .
including the appropriate use of,” inter alia, various “sen­
tence modification provisions.” 28 U. S. C. §994(a)(2). As
envisioned by the Sentencing Reform Act, the role of policy
statements was merely to inform the judge’s exercise of

