Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

THOMAS, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

Nos. 10–9646 and 10–9647
_________________

10–9646

EVAN MILLER, PETITIONER
v.
ALABAMA

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE COURT OF CRIMINAL



APPEALS OF ALABAMA




10–9647

KUNTRELL JACKSON, PETITIONER
v.
RAY HOBBS, DIRECTOR, ARKANSAS
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTION

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT



OF ARKANSAS



[June 25, 2012] 


JUSTICE THOMAS, with whom JUSTICE SCALIA joins,
dissenting.
Today, the Court holds that “mandatory life without
parole for those under the age of 18 at the time of their
crimes violates the Eighth Amendment’s prohibition on
‘cruel and unusual punishments.’ ” Ante, at 2. To reach
that result, the Court relies on two lines of precedent. The
first involves the categorical prohibition of certain punishments for specified classes of offenders. The second
requires individualized sentencing in the capital punishment context. Neither line is consistent with the original
understanding of the Cruel and Unusual Punishments
Clause. The Court compounds its errors by combining
these lines of precedent and extending them to reach a result
that is even less legitimate than the foundation on which
it is built. Because the Court upsets the legislatively
enacted sentencing regimes of 29 jurisdictions without


2

MILLER v. ALABAMA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

constitutional warrant, I respectfully dissent.1
I
The Court first relies on its cases “adopt[ing] categorical
bans on sentencing practices based on mismatches between the culpability of a class of offenders and the severity
of a penalty.” Ante, at 6–7. Of these categorical proportionality cases, the Court places particular emphasis on
Roper v. Simmons, 543 U. S. 551 (2005), and Graham v.
Florida, 560 U. S. ___ (2010). In Roper, the Court held
that the Constitution prohibits the execution of an offender
who was under 18 at the time of his offense. 543 U. S.,
at 578. The Roper Court looked to, among other things, its
own sense of parental intuition and “scientific and sociological studies” to conclude that offenders under the age of
18 “cannot with reliability be classified among the worst
offenders.” Id., at 569. In Graham, the Court relied on
similar considerations to conclude that the Constitution
prohibits a life-without-parole sentence for a nonhomicide
offender who was under the age of 18 at the time of his
offense. 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 24).
The Court now concludes that mandatory life-withoutparole sentences for duly convicted juvenile murderers
“contraven[e] Graham’s (and also Roper’s) foundational
principle: that imposition of a State’s most severe penalties on juvenile offenders cannot proceed as though they
were not children.” Ante, at 11–12. But neither Roper nor
Graham held that specific procedural rules are required
for sentencing juvenile homicide offenders. And, the logic
of those cases should not be extended to create such a
requirement.
The Eighth Amendment, made applicable to the States
by the Fourteenth Amendment, provides that: “Excessive
——————
1 I join THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s opinion because it accurately explains
that, even accepting the Court’s precedents, the Court’s holding in
today’s cases is unsupportable.


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

THOMAS, J., dissenting

bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed,
nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.” As I have
previously explained, “the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause was originally understood as prohibiting
torturous methods of punishment—specifically methods
akin to those that had been considered cruel and unusual
at the time the Bill of Rights was adopted.” Graham,
supra, at ___ (dissenting opinion) (slip op., at 3) (internal
quotation marks and citations omitted).2 The clause does
not contain a “proportionality principle.” Ewing v. California, 538 U. S. 11, 32 (2003) (THOMAS, J., concurring in
judgment); see generally Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U. S.
957, 975–985 (1991) (opinion of SCALIA, J.). In short, it
does not authorize courts to invalidate any punishment
they deem disproportionate to the severity of the crime
or to a particular class of offenders. Instead, the clause
“leaves the unavoidably moral question of who ‘deserves’ a
particular nonprohibited method of punishment to the
judgment of the legislatures that authorize the penalty.”
Graham, supra, at ___ (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (slip op.,
at 5).
The legislatures of Arkansas and Alabama, like those of
27 other jurisdictions, ante, at 19–20, have determined
——————
2 Neither the Court nor petitioners argue that petitioners’ sentences
would have been among “the ‘modes or acts of punishment that had
been considered cruel and unusual at the time that the Bill of Rights
was adopted.’ ” Graham, 560 U. S., at ___ (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (slip
op., at 10, n. 3) (quoting Ford v. Wainwright, 477 U. S. 399, 405 (1986)).
Nor could they. Petitioners were 14 years old at the time they committed their crimes. When the Bill of Rights was ratified, 14-year-olds
were subject to trial and punishment as adult offenders. See Roper v.
Simmons, 543 U. S. 551, 609, n. 1 (2005) (SCALIA, J., dissenting).
Further, mandatory death sentences were common at that time. See
Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U. S. 957, 994–995 (1991). It is therefore
implausible that a 14-year-old’s mandatory prison sentence—of any
length, with or without parole—would have been viewed as cruel and
unusual.


4

MILLER v. ALABAMA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

that all offenders convicted of specified homicide offenses,
whether juveniles or not, deserve a sentence of life in
prison without the possibility of parole. Nothing in our
Constitution authorizes this Court to supplant that choice.
II
To invalidate mandatory life-without-parole sentences
for juveniles, the Court also relies on its cases “prohibit[ing] mandatory imposition of capital punishment.”
Ante, at 7. The Court reasons that, because Graham
compared juvenile life-without-parole sentences to the
death penalty, the “distinctive set of legal rules” that this
Court has imposed in the capital punishment context,
including the requirement of individualized sentencing, is
“relevant” here. Ante, at 12–13. But even accepting an
analogy between capital and juvenile life-without-parole
sentences, this Court’s cases prohibiting mandatory capital sentencing schemes have no basis in the original understanding of the Eighth Amendment, and, thus, cannot
justify a prohibition of sentencing schemes that mandate
life-without-parole sentences for juveniles.
A
In a line of cases following Furman v. Georgia, 408 U. S.
238 (1972) (per curiam), this Court prohibited the mandatory imposition of the death penalty. See Woodson v.
North Carolina, 428 U. S. 280 (1976) (plurality opinion);
Roberts v. Louisiana, 428 U. S. 325 (1976) (same); Sumner
v. Shuman, 483 U. S. 66 (1987). Furman first announced
the principle that States may not permit sentencers to
exercise unguided discretion in imposing the death penalty. See generally 408 U. S. 238. In response to Furman,
many States passed new laws that made the death penalty mandatory following conviction of specified crimes,
thereby eliminating the offending discretion. See Gregg
v. Georgia, 428 U. S. 153, 180–181 (1976) (joint opinion


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

THOMAS, J., dissenting

of Stewart, Powell, and Stevens, JJ.). The Court invalidated those statutes in Woodson, Roberts, and Sumner.
The Court reasoned that mandatory capital sentencing
schemes were problematic, because they failed “to allow
the particularized consideration” of “relevant facets of the
character and record of the individual offender or the
circumstances of the particular offense.” Woodson, supra,
at 303–304 (plurality opinion).3
In my view, Woodson and its progeny were wrongly
decided. As discussed above, the Cruel and Unusual
Punishments Clause, as originally understood, prohibits
“torturous methods of punishment.” See Graham, 560
U. S., at ___ (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (slip op., at 3) (internal quotation marks omitted). It is not concerned with
whether a particular lawful method of punishment—
whether capital or noncapital—is imposed pursuant to a
mandatory or discretionary sentencing regime. See Gardner v. Florida, 430 U. S. 349, 371 (1977) (Rehnquist, J.,
dissenting) (“The prohibition of the Eighth Amendment
relates to the character of the punishment, and not to the
process by which it is imposed”). In fact, “[i]n the early
days of the Republic,” each crime generally had a defined
punishment “prescribed with specificity by the legislature.” United States v. Grayson, 438 U. S. 41, 45 (1978).
Capital sentences, to which the Court analogizes, were
——————
3 The Court later extended Woodson, requiring that capital defendants be permitted to present, and sentencers in capital cases be permitted to consider, any relevant mitigating evidence, including the age of
the defendant. See, e.g., Lockett v. Ohio, 438 U. S. 586, 597–608 (1978)
(plurality opinion); Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455 U. S. 104, 110–112
(1982); Skipper v. South Carolina, 476 U. S. 1, 4–5 (1986); Johnson v.
Texas, 509 U. S. 350, 361–368 (1993). Whatever the validity of the
requirement that sentencers be permitted to consider all mitigating
evidence when deciding whether to impose a nonmandatory capital
sentence, the Court certainly was wrong to prohibit mandatory capital
sentences. See Graham v. Collins, 506 U. S. 461, 488–500 (1993)
(THOMAS, J., concurring).


6

MILLER v. ALABAMA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

treated no differently. “[M]andatory death sentences
abounded in our first Penal Code” and were “common in
the several States—both at the time of the founding and
throughout the 19th century.” Harmelin, 501 U. S., at
994–995; see also Woodson, supra, at 289 (plurality opinion) (“At the time the Eighth Amendment was adopted
in 1791, the States uniformly followed the common-law
practice of making death the exclusive and mandatory
sentence for certain specified offenses”). Accordingly, the
idea that the mandatory imposition of an otherwiseconstitutional sentence renders that sentence cruel and
unusual finds “no support in the text and history of the
Eighth Amendment.” Harmelin, supra, at 994.
Moreover, mandatory death penalty schemes were “a
perfectly reasonable legislative response to the concerns
expressed in Furman” regarding unguided sentencing
discretion, in that they “eliminat[ed] explicit jury discretion and treat[ed] all defendants equally.” Graham v.
Collins, 506 U. S. 461, 487 (1993) (THOMAS, J., concurring). And, as Justice White explained more than 30 years
ago, “a State is not constitutionally forbidden to provide
that the commission of certain crimes conclusively establishes that a criminal’s character is such that he deserves
death.” Roberts, supra, at 358 (dissenting opinion). Thus,
there is no basis for concluding that a mandatory capital sentencing scheme is unconstitutional. Because the
Court’s cases requiring individualized sentencing in the
capital context are wrongly decided, they cannot serve as a
valid foundation for the novel rule regarding mandatory
life-without-parole sentences for juveniles that the Court
announces today.
B
In any event, this Court has already declined to extend
its individualized-sentencing rule beyond the death penalty context. In Harmelin, the defendant was convicted of


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

THOMAS, J., dissenting

possessing a large quantity of drugs. 501 U. S., at 961
(opinion of SCALIA, J.). In accordance with Michigan
law, he was sentenced to a mandatory term of life in prison
without the possibility of parole. Ibid. Citing the same
line of death penalty precedents on which the Court relies
today, the defendant argued that his sentence, due to its
mandatory nature, violated the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause. Id., at 994–995 (opinion of the Court).
The Court rejected that argument, explaining that
“[t]here can be no serious contention . . . that a sentence
which is not otherwise cruel and unusual becomes so simply because it is ‘mandatory.’ ” Id., at 995. In so doing,
the Court refused to analogize to its death penalty cases.
The Court noted that those cases had “repeatedly suggested
that there is no comparable [individualized-sentencing]
requirement outside the capital context, because of the
qualitative difference between death and all other penalties.” Ibid. The Court observed that, “even where the
difference” between a sentence of life without parole and
other sentences of imprisonment “is the greatest,” such
a sentence “cannot be compared with death.” Id., at 996.
Therefore, the Court concluded that the line of cases requiring individualized sentencing had been drawn at capital cases, and that there was “no basis for extending it
further.” Ibid.
Harmelin’s reasoning logically extends to these cases.
Obviously, the younger the defendant, “the great[er]” the
difference between a sentence of life without parole and
other terms of imprisonment. Ibid. But under Harmelin’s
rationale, the defendant’s age is immaterial to the Eighth
Amendment analysis. Thus, the result in today’s cases
should be the same as that in Harmelin. Petitioners, like
the defendant in Harmelin, were not sentenced to death.
Accordingly, this Court’s cases “creating and clarifying the
individualized capital sentencing doctrine” do not apply.
Id., at 995 (internal quotation marks omitted).


8

MILLER v. ALABAMA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

Nothing about our Constitution, or about the qualitative
difference between any term of imprisonment and death,
has changed since Harmelin was decided 21 years ago.
What has changed (or, better yet, “evolved”) is this Court’s
ever-expanding line of categorical proportionality cases.
The Court now uses Roper and Graham to jettison Harmelin’s clear distinction between capital and noncapital
cases and to apply the former to noncapital juvenile offenders.4 The Court’s decision to do so is even less supportable than the precedents used to reach it.
III
As THE CHIEF JUSTICE notes, ante, at 8–9 (dissenting
opinion), the Court lays the groundwork for future incursions on the States’ authority to sentence criminals. In its
categorical proportionality cases, the Court has considered
“ ‘objective indicia of society’s standards, as expressed
in legislative enactments and state practice’ to determine
whether there is a national consensus against the sentencing practice at issue.” Graham, 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op.,
at 10) (quoting Roper, 543 U. S., at 563). In Graham, for
example, the Court looked to “[a]ctual sentencing practices” to conclude that there was a national consensus
against life-without-parole sentences for juvenile nonhomicide offenders. 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 11–14);
see also Roper, supra, at 564–565; Atkins v. Virginia, 536
U. S. 304, 316 (2002).
Today, the Court makes clear that, even though its
——————
4 In

support of its decision not to apply Harmelin to juvenile offenders, the Court also observes that “ ‘[o]ur history is replete with laws and
judicial recognition that children cannot be viewed simply as miniature
adults.’ ” Ante, at 19 (quoting J. D. B. v. North Carolina, 564 U. S. ___,
___ (2011) (slip op., at 10–11) (some internal quotation marks omitted)).
That is no doubt true as a general matter, but it does not justify usurping authority that rightfully belongs to the people by imposing a constitutional rule where none exists.


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

THOMAS, J., dissenting

decision leaves intact the discretionary imposition of lifewithout-parole sentences for juvenile homicide offenders,
it “think[s] appropriate occasions for sentencing juveniles
to [life without parole] will be uncommon.” Ante, at 17.
That statement may well cause trial judges to shy away
from imposing life without parole sentences and embolden
appellate judges to set them aside when they are imposed.
And, when a future petitioner seeks a categorical ban on
sentences of life without parole for juvenile homicide
offenders, this Court will most assuredly look to the “actual
sentencing practices” triggered by this case. The Court
has, thus, gone from “merely” divining the societal consensus of today to shaping the societal consensus of tomorrow.
*
*
*
Today’s decision invalidates a constitutionally permissible sentencing system based on nothing more than the
Court’s belief that “its own sense of morality . . . pre-empts
that of the people and their representatives.” Graham,
supra, at ___ (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (slip op., at 29).
Because nothing in the Constitution grants the Court the
authority it exercises today, I respectfully dissent.

