Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

ALITO, J., dissenting

for most juvenile defendants. Most juveniles who are
subjected to police interrogation are teenagers nearing the
age of majority.11 These defendants’ reactions to police
pressure are unlikely to be much different from the reac­
tion of a typical 18-year-old in similar circumstances. A
one-size-fits-all Miranda custody rule thus provides a
roughly reasonable fit for these defendants.
In addition, many of the concerns that petitioner raises
regarding the application of the Miranda custody rule to
minors can be accommodated by considering the unique
circumstances present when minors are questioned in
school. See Brief for Petitioner 10–11 (reciting at length
the factors petitioner believes to be relevant to the custody
determination here, including the fact that petitioner was
removed from class by a police officer, that the interview
took place in a school conference room, and that a uni­
formed officer and a vice principal were present). The
Miranda custody rule has always taken into account the
setting in which questioning occurs, restrictions on a
suspect’s freedom of movement, and the presence of police
officers or other authority figures. See Alvarado, supra, at
665; Maryland v. Shatzer, 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip
op., at 14). It can do so here as well.12
Finally, in cases like the one now before us, where the
suspect is much younger than the typical juvenile defen­
dant, courts should be instructed to take particular care to
——————
11 See

Dept of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2008
Crime in the United States (Sept. 2009), online at http://www2.fbi.gov/
ucr/cius2008/data/table_38.html (all Internet materials as visited June
8, 2011, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file) (indicating that less
than 30% of juvenile arrests in the United States are of suspects who
are under 15).
12 The Court thinks it would be “absur[d]” to consider the school set­
ting without accounting for age, ante, at 12, but the real absurdity is for
the Court to require police officers to get inside the head of a reasonable
minor while making the quick, on-the-spot determinations that
Miranda demands.

