2

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
ALITO, J., dissenting

tion that the risk of unconstitutional coercion is height­
ened when a suspect is placed under formal arrest or is
subjected to some functionally equivalent limitation on
freedom of movement. When this custodial threshold is
reached, Miranda warnings must precede police question­
ing. But in the interest of simplicity, the custody analysis
considers only whether, under the circumstances, a hypo­
thetical reasonable person would consider himself to be
confined.
Many suspects, of course, will differ from this hypotheti­
cal reasonable person. Some, including those who have
been hardened by past interrogations, may have no need
for Miranda warnings at all. And for other suspects—
those who are unusually sensitive to the pressures of
police questioning—Miranda warnings may come too late
to be of any use. That is a necessary consequence of
Miranda’s rigid standards, but it does not mean that the
constitutional rights of these especially sensitive suspects
are left unprotected. A vulnerable defendant can still turn
to the constitutional rule against actual coercion and
contend that that his confession was extracted against his
will.
Today’s decision shifts the Miranda custody determina­
tion from a one-size-fits-all reasonable-person test into an
inquiry that must account for at least one individualized
characteristic—age—that is thought to correlate with sus­
ceptibility to coercive pressures. Age, however, is in no
way the only personal characteristic that may correlate
with pliability, and in future cases the Court will be forced
to choose between two unpalatable alternatives. It may
choose to limit today’s decision by arbitrarily distinguish­
ing a suspect’s age from other personal characteristics—
such as intelligence, education, occupation, or prior ex­
perience with law enforcement—that may also correlate
with susceptibility to coercive pressures. Or, if the Court
is unwilling to draw these arbitrary lines, it will be forced

