14

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
ALITO, J., dissenting

often be different when the issue is litigated in court than
it was at the time of the interrogation.
Even after courts clear this initial hurdle, further prob­
lems will likely emerge as judges attempt to put them­
selves in the shoes of the average 16-year-old, or 15-year­
old, or 13-year-old, as the case may be. Consider, for
example, a 60-year-old judge attempting to make a cus­
tody determination through the eyes of a hypothetical,
average 15-year-old. Forty-five years of personal experi­
ence and societal change separate this judge from the days
when he or she was 15 years old. And this judge may or
may not have been an average 15-year-old. The Court’s
answer to these difficulties is to state that “no imaginative
powers, knowledge of developmental psychology, [or]
training in cognitive science” will be necessary. Ante, at
17. Judges “simply need the common sense,” the Court
assures, “to know that a 7-year-old is not a 13-year-old
and neither is an adult.” Ante, at 17. It is obvious, how­
ever, that application of the Court’s new rule demands
much more than this.
Take a fairly typical case in which today’s holding may
make a difference. A 16½-year-old moves to suppress
incriminating statements made prior to the administra­
tion of Miranda warnings. The circumstances are such
that, if the defendant were at least 18, the court would not
find that he or she was in custody, but the defendant
argues that a reasonable 16½-year-old would view the
situation differently. The judge will not have the luxury of
merely saying: “It is common sense that a 16½-year-old is
not an 18-year-old. Motion granted.” Rather, the judge
will be required to determine whether the differences
between a typical 16½-year-old and a typical 18-year-old
with respect to susceptibility to the pressures of interroga­
tion are sufficient to change the outcome of the custody
determination. Today’s opinion contains not a word of
actual guidance as to how judges are supposed to go about

