Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
a class—e.g., limitations on their ability to marry without parental
consent—exhibit the settled understanding that the differentiating
characteristics of youth are universal.
Given a history “replete with laws and judicial recognition” that
children cannot be viewed simply as miniature adults, Eddings, 455
U. S., at 115–116, there is no justification for taking a different
course here. So long as the child’s age was known to the officer at the
time of the interview, or would have been objectively apparent to a
reasonable officer, including age as part of the custody analysis re
quires officers neither to consider circumstances “unknowable” to
them, Berkemer, 468 U. S., at 430, nor to“ ‘ “anticipat[e] the frailties
or idiosyncrasies” of the particular suspect being questioned.” ’ ” Al
varado, 541 U. S., at 662. Precisely because childhood yields objec
tive conclusions, considering age in the custody analysis does not in
volve a determination of how youth affects a particular child’s
subjective state of mind. In fact, were the court precluded from tak
ing J. D. B.’s youth into account, it would be forced to evaluate the
circumstances here through the eyes of a reasonable adult, when
some objective circumstances surrounding an interrogation at school
are specific to children. These conclusions are not undermined by the
Court’s observation in Alvarado that accounting for a juvenile’s age
in the Miranda custody analysis “could be viewed as creating a sub
jective inquiry,” 541 U. S., at 668. The Court said nothing about
whether such a view would be correct under the law or whether it
simply merited deference under the Antiterrorism and Effective
Death Penalty Act of 1996, 110 Stat. 1214. So long as the child’s age
was known to the officer, or would have been objectively apparent to
a reasonable officer, including age in the custody analysis is consis
tent with the Miranda test’s objective nature. This does not mean
that a child’s age will be a determinative, or even a significant, factor
in every case, but it is a reality that courts cannot ignore. Pp. 8–14.
(c) Additional arguments that the State and its amici offer for ex
cluding age from the custody inquiry are unpersuasive. Pp. 14–18.
(d) On remand, the state courts are to address the question
whether J. D. B. was in custody when he was interrogated, taking ac
count of all of the relevant circumstances of the interrogation, includ
ing J. D. B.’s age at the time. P. 18.
363 N. C. 664, 686 S. E. 2d 135, reversed and remanded.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which KENNEDY,
GINSBURG, BREYER, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. ALITO, J., filed a dissenting
opinion, in which ROBERTS, C. J., and SCALIA and THOMAS, JJ., joined.

