Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

excluded from the custody inquiry because age is a per
sonal characteristic specific to the suspect himself rather
than an “external” circumstance of the interrogation.
Brief for Respondent 21; see also id., at 18–19 (distin
guishing “personal characteristics” from “objective facts
related to the interrogation itself” such as the location and
duration of the interrogation). Despite the supposed
significance of this distinction, however, at oral argument
counsel for the State suggested without hesitation that at
least some undeniably personal characteristics—for in
stance, whether the individual being questioned is blind—
are circumstances relevant to the custody analysis. See
Tr. of Oral Arg. 41. Thus, the State’s quarrel cannot be
that age is a personal characteristic, without more.9
The State further argues that age is irrelevant to the
custody analysis because it “go[es] to how a suspect may
internalize and perceive the circumstances of an interro
gation.” Brief for Respondent 12; see also Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 21 (hereinafter U. S. Brief) (argu
ing that a child’s age has no place in the custody analysis
because it goes to whether a suspect is “particularly sus
ceptible” to the external circumstances of the interrogation
(some internal quotation marks omitted)). But the same
can be said of every objective circumstance that the State
agrees is relevant to the custody analysis: Each circum
stance goes to how a reasonable person would “internalize
and perceive” every other. See, e.g., Stansbury, 511 U. S.,
at 325. Indeed, this is the very reason that we ask
whether the objective circumstances “add up to custody,”
——————
9 The State’s purported distinction between blindness and age—that
taking account of a suspect’s youth requires a court “to get into the
mind” of the child, whereas taking account of a suspect’s blindness does
not, Tr. of Oral Arg. 41–42—is mistaken. In either case, the question
becomes how a reasonable person would understand the circumstances,
either from the perspective of a blind person or, as here, a 13-year-old
child.

