OCTOBER TERM, 2010

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF NORTH CAROLINA
No. 09–11121.

Argued March 23, 2011—Decided June 16, 2011

Police stopped and questioned petitioner J. D. B., a 13-year-old, sev
enth-grade student, upon seeing him near the site of two home break
ins. Five days later, after a digital camera matching one of the stolen
items was found at J. D. B.’s school and seen in his possession, Inves
tigator DiCostanzo went to the school. A uniformed police officer on
detail to the school took J. D. B. from his classroom to a closed-door
conference room, where police and school administrators questioned
him for at least 30 minutes. Before beginning, they did not give him
Miranda warnings or the opportunity to call his grandmother, his le
gal guardian, nor tell him he was free to leave the room. He first de
nied his involvement, but later confessed after officials urged him to
tell the truth and told him about the prospect of juvenile detention.
DiCostanzo only then told him that he could refuse to answer ques
tions and was free to leave. Asked whether he understood, J. D. B.
nodded and provided further detail, including the location of the sto
len items. He also wrote a statement, at DiCostanzo’s request. When
the school day ended, he was permitted to leave to catch the bus
home. Two juvenile petitions were filed against J. D. B., charging
him with breaking and entering and with larceny. His public de
fender moved to suppress his statements and the evidence derived
therefrom, arguing that J. D. B. had been interrogated in a custodial
setting without being afforded Miranda warnings and that his
statements were involuntary. The trial court denied the motion.
J. D. B. entered a transcript of admission to the charges, but renewed
his objection to the denial of his motion to suppress. The court adju
dicated him delinquent, and the North Carolina Court of Appeals and
State Supreme Court affirmed. The latter court declined to find
J. D. B.’s age relevant to the determination whether he was in police
custody.

