Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

is true of judges, including those whose childhoods have
long since passed, see post, at 14. In short, officers and
judges need no imaginative powers, knowledge of devel
opmental psychology, training in cognitive science, or
expertise in social and cultural anthropology to account for
a child’s age. They simply need the common sense to
know that a 7-year-old is not a 13-year-old and neither is
an adult.
There is, however, an even more fundamental flaw with
the State’s plea for clarity and the dissent’s singular focus
on simplifying the analysis: Not once have we excluded
from the custody analysis a circumstance that we deter
mined was relevant and objective, simply to make the
fault line between custodial and noncustodial “brighter.”
Indeed, were the guiding concern clarity and nothing else,
the custody test would presumably ask only whether the
suspect had been placed under formal arrest. Berkemer,
468 U. S., at 441; see ibid. (acknowledging the “occa
siona[l] . . . difficulty” police officers confront in determin
ing when a suspect has been taken into custody). But
we have rejected that “more easily administered line,”
recognizing that it would simply “enable the police to
circumvent the constraints on custodial interrogations
established by Miranda.” Ibid.; see also ibid., n. 33.10
Finally, the State and the dissent suggest that excluding
——————
10 Contrary to the dissent’s intimation, see post, at 8, Miranda does
not answer the question whether a child’s age is an objective circum
stance relevant to the custody analysis. Miranda simply holds that
warnings must be given once a suspect is in custody, without “paus[ing]
to inquire in individual cases whether the defendant was aware of his
rights without a warning being given.” 384 U. S., at 468; see also id., at
468–469 (“Assessments of the knowledge the defendant possessed,
based on information as to age, education, intelligence, or prior contact
with authorities, can never be more than speculation; a warning is a
clearcut fact” (footnote omitted)). That conclusion says nothing about
whether age properly informs whether a child is in custody in the first
place.

