Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

ALITO, J., dissenting

tion was readily apparent to the officers at the scene, ibid.,
the Court’s analysis did not advert to this or any other
individualized consideration. Instead, the Court focused
only on the external circumstances of the interrogation
itself. The opinion concluded that a typical “traffic stop” is
akin to a “Terry stop”7 and does not qualify as the equiva­
lent of “formal arrest.” Id., at 439.
California v. Beheler, supra, is another useful example.
There, the circumstances of the interrogation were “re­
markably similar” to the facts of the Court’s earlier deci­
sion in Oregon v. Mathiason, 429 U. S. 492 (1977) (per
curiam)—the suspect was “not placed under arrest,” he
“voluntarily [came] to the police station,” and he was
“allowed to leave unhindered by police after a brief inter­
view.” 463 U. S., at 1123, 1121. A California court in
Beheler had nonetheless distinguished Mathiason because
the police knew that Beheler “had been drinking earlier in
the day” and was “emotionally distraught.” 463 U. S., at
1124–1125. In a summary reversal, this Court explained
that the fact “[t]hat the police knew more” personal infor­
mation about Beheler than they did about Mathiason was
“irrelevant.” Id., at 1125. Neither one of them was in
custody under the objective reasonable-person standard.
Ibid.; see also Alvarado, supra, at 668, 669 (experience
with law enforcement irrelevant to Miranda custody
analysis “as a de novo matter”).8
The glaring absence of reliance on personal characteris­
——————
7 See

Terry v. Ohio, 392 U. S. 1 (1968).
Court claims that “[n]ot once” have any of our cases “excluded
from the custody analysis a circumstance that we determined was
relevant and objective, simply to make the fault line between custodial
and noncustodial ‘brighter.’ ” Ante, at 17. Surely this is incorrect. The
very act of adopting a reasonable-person test necessarily excludes all
sorts of “relevant and objective” circumstances—for example, all the
objective circumstances of a suspect’s life history—that might otherwise
bear on a custody determination.
8 The

