12

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

history with law enforcement has no role to play in the
custody analysis because such experience could just as
easily lead a reasonable person to feel free to walk away
as to feel compelled to stay in place. 541 U. S., at 668.
Because the effect in any given case would be “contingent
[on the] psycholog[y]” of the individual suspect, the Court
explained, such experience cannot be considered without
compromising the objective nature of the custody analysis.
Ibid. A child’s age, however, is different. Precisely be
cause childhood yields objective conclusions like those we
have drawn ourselves—among others, that children are
“most susceptible to influence,” Eddings, 455 U. S., at 115,
and “outside pressures,” Roper, 543 U. S., at 569—
considering age in the custody analysis in no way involves
a determination of how youth “subjectively affect[s] the
mindset” of any particular child, Brief for Respondent 14.7
In fact, in many cases involving juvenile suspects, the
custody analysis would be nonsensical absent some con
sideration of the suspect’s age. This case is a prime exam
ple. Were the court precluded from taking J. D. B.’s youth
into account, it would be forced to evaluate the circum
stances present here through the eyes of a reasonable
person of average years. In other words, how would a
reasonable adult understand his situation, after being
removed from a seventh-grade social studies class by a
uniformed school resource officer; being encouraged by his
assistant principal to “do the right thing”; and being
warned by a police investigator of the prospect of juvenile
detention and separation from his guardian and primary
caretaker? To describe such an inquiry is to demonstrate
——————
7 Thus, contrary to the dissent’s protestations, today’s holding neither
invites consideration of whether a particular suspect is “unusually
meek or compliant,” post, at 9 (opinion of ALITO, J.), nor “expan[ds]” the
Miranda custody analysis, post, at 8, into a test that requires officers to
anticipate and account for a suspect’s every personal characteristic, see
post, at 11–12.

