Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

its absurdity. Neither officers nor courts can reasonably
evaluate the effect of objective circumstances that, by their
nature, are specific to children without accounting for the
age of the child subjected to those circumstances.
Indeed, although the dissent suggests that concerns
“regarding the application of the Miranda custody rule to
minors can be accommodated by considering the unique
circumstances present when minors are questioned in
school,” post, at 17 (opinion of ALITO, J.), the effect of the
schoolhouse setting cannot be disentangled from the iden
tity of the person questioned. A student—whose presence
at school is compulsory and whose disobedience at school
is cause for disciplinary action—is in a far different posi
tion than, say, a parent volunteer on school grounds to
chaperone an event, or an adult from the community on
school grounds to attend a basketball game. Without
asking whether the person “questioned in school” is a
“minor,” ibid., the coercive effect of the schoolhouse setting
is unknowable.
Our prior decision in Alvarado in no way undermines
these conclusions. In that case, we held that a state-court
decision that failed to mention a 17-year-old’s age as part
of the Miranda custody analysis was not objectively un
reasonable under the deferential standard of review set
forth by the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty
Act of 1996 (AEDPA), 110 Stat. 1214. Like the North
Carolina Supreme Court here, see 363 N. C., at 672, 686
S. E. 2d, at 140, we observed that accounting for a juve
nile’s age in the Miranda custody analysis “could be
viewed as creating a subjective inquiry,” 541 U. S., at 668.
We said nothing, however, of whether such a view would
be correct under the law. Cf. Renico v. Lett, 559 U. S. ___,
____, n. 3 (2010) (slip op., at 11, n. 3) (“[W]hether the
[state court] was right or wrong is not the pertinent ques
tion under AEDPA”). To the contrary, Justice O’Connor’s
concurring opinion explained that a suspect’s age may

