Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

otherwise applies, the common law has reflected the real
ity that children are not adults. In negligence suits, for
instance, where liability turns on what an objectively
reasonable person would do in the circumstances, “[a]ll
American jurisdictions accept the idea that a person’s
childhood is a relevant circumstance” to be considered.
Restatement (Third) of Torts §10, Comment b, p. 117
(2005); see also id., Reporters’ Note, pp. 121–122 (collect
ing cases); Restatement (Second) of Torts §283A, Com
ment b, p. 15 (1963–1964) (“[T]here is a wide basis of
community experience upon which it is possible, as a
practical matter, to determine what is to be expected of
[children]”).
As this discussion establishes, “[o]ur history is replete
with laws and judicial recognition” that children cannot be
viewed simply as miniature adults. Eddings, 455 U. S., at
115–116. We see no justification for taking a different
course here. So long as the child’s age was known to the
officer at the time of the interview, or would have been
objectively apparent to any reasonable officer, including
age as part of the custody analysis requires officers nei
ther to consider circumstances “unknowable” to them,
Berkemer, 468 U. S., at 430, nor to “anticipat[e] the frail
ties or idiosyncrasies” of the particular suspect whom they
question, Alvarado, 541 U. S., at 662 (internal quotation
marks omitted). The same “wide basis of community
experience” that makes it possible, as an objective matter,
“to determine what is to be expected” of children in other
contexts, Restatement (Second) of Torts §283A, at 15; see
supra, at 10, and n. 6, likewise makes it possible to know
what to expect of children subjected to police questioning.
In other words, a child’s age differs from other personal
characteristics that, even when known to police, have no
objectively discernible relationship to a reasonable per
son’s understanding of his freedom of action. Alvarado,
holds, for instance, that a suspect’s prior interrogation

