16

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
ALITO, J., dissenting

petitioner’s arguments. See Brief for Petitioner 16–17.
States are free to enact additional restrictions on the
police over and above those demanded by the Constitution
or Miranda. In addition, these state statutes generally
create clear, workable rules to guide police conduct. See
Brief for Petitioner 16–17 (citing statutes that require or
permit parents to be present during custodial interroga­
tion of a minor, that require minors to be advised of a
statutory right to communicate with a parent or guardian,
and that require parental consent to custodial interroga­
tion). Today’s decision, by contrast, injects a new, compli­
cating factor into what had been a clear, easily applied
prophylactic rule. See Alvarado, supra, at 668–669.10
III
The Court’s decision greatly diminishes the clarity and
administrability that have long been recognized as “prin­
cipal advantages” of Miranda’s prophylactic requirements.
See, e.g., Moran, 475 U. S., at 425. But what is worse, the
Court takes this step unnecessarily, as there are other,
less disruptive tools available to ensure that minors are
not coerced into confessing.
As an initial matter, the difficulties that the Court’s
standard introduces will likely yield little added protection
——————
10 The

Court also relies on North Carolina’s concession at oral argu­
ment that a court could take into account a suspect’s blindness as a
factor relevant to the Miranda custody determination. Ante, at 15, and
n. 9. This is a far-fetched hypothetical, and neither the parties nor
their amici cite any case in which such a problem has actually arisen.
Presumably such a case would involve a situation in which a blind
defendant was given “a typed document advising him that he [was] free
to leave.” See Brief for Juvenile Law Center as Amicus Curiae 23. In
such a case, furnishing this advice in a form calculated to be unintelli­
gible to the suspect would be tantamount to failing to provide the
advice at all. And advice by the police that a suspect is or is not free to
leave at will has always been regarded as a circumstance regarding the
conditions of the interrogation that must be taken into account in
making the Miranda custody determination.

