16

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

Keohane, 516 U. S., at 113, instead of evaluating the cir
cumstances one by one.
In the same vein, the State and its amici protest that
the “effect of . . . age on [the] perception of custody is
internal,” Brief for Respondent 20, or “psychological,” U. S.
Brief 21. But the whole point of the custody analysis is to
determine whether, given the circumstances, “a reason
able person [would] have felt he or she was . . . at liberty
to terminate the interrogation and leave.” Keohane, 516
U. S., at 112. Because the Miranda custody inquiry turns
on the mindset of a reasonable person in the suspect’s
position, it cannot be the case that a circumstance is sub
jective simply because it has an “internal” or “psychologi
cal” impact on perception. Were that so, there would be no
objective circumstances to consider at all.
Relying on our statements that the objective custody
test is “designed to give clear guidance to the police,”
Alvarado, 541 U. S., at 668, the State next argues that a
child’s age must be excluded from the analysis in order to
preserve clarity. Similarly, the dissent insists that the
clarity of the custody analysis will be destroyed unless a
“one-size-fits-all reasonable-person test” applies. Post, at
13. In reality, however, ignoring a juvenile defendant’s
age will often make the inquiry more artificial, see supra,
at 12–13, and thus only add confusion. And in any event,
a child’s age, when known or apparent, is hardly an ob
scure factor to assess. Though the State and the dissent
worry about gradations among children of different ages,
that concern cannot justify ignoring a child’s age alto
gether. Just as police officers are competent to account for
other objective circumstances that are a matter of degree
such as the length of questioning or the number of officers
present, so too are they competent to evaluate the effect of
relative age. Indeed, they are competent to do so even
though an interrogation room lacks the “reflective atmos
phere of a [jury] deliberation room,” post, at 15. The same

