4

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

stood, J. D. B. nodded and provided further detail, includ
ing information about the location of the stolen items.
Eventually J. D. B. wrote a statement, at DiCostanzo’s
request. When the bell rang indicating the end of the
schoolday, J. D. B. was allowed to leave to catch the bus
home.
B
Two juvenile petitions were filed against J. D. B., each
alleging one count of breaking and entering and one count
of larceny. J. D. B.’s public defender moved to suppress
his statements and the evidence derived therefrom, argu
ing that suppression was necessary because J. D. B. had
been “interrogated by police in a custodial setting without
being afforded Miranda warning[s],” App. 89a, and be
cause his statements were involuntary under the totality
of the circumstances test, id., at 142a; see Schneckloth v.
Bustamonte, 412 U. S. 218, 226 (1973) (due process pre
cludes admission of a confession where “a defendant’s will
was overborne” by the circumstances of the interrogation).
After a suppression hearing at which DiCostanzo and
J. D. B. testified, the trial court denied the motion, decid
ing that J. D. B. was not in custody at the time of the
schoolhouse interrogation and that his statements were
voluntary. As a result, J. D. B. entered a transcript of
admission to all four counts, renewing his objection to the
denial of his motion to suppress, and the court adjudicated
J. D. B. delinquent. 

—————— 

explicit, the trial court’s order indicates a finding that J. D. B. initially

confessed prior to DiCostanzo’s warnings. See App. 99a.
Nonetheless, both parties’ submissions to this Court suggest that
the warnings came after DiCostanzo raised the possibility of a secure
custody order but before J. D. B. confessed for the first time. See Brief
for Petitioner 5; Brief for Respondent 5. Because we remand for a
determination whether J. D. B. was in custody under the proper analy
sis, the state courts remain free to revisit whether the trial court made
a conclusive finding of fact in this respect.

