10

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
ALITO, J., dissenting

Berkemer, 468 U. S., at 442, and n. 35 (“[O]nly relevant
inquiry is how a reasonable man in the suspect’s position
would have understood his situation”). Miranda’s rigid
standards are both overinclusive and underinclusive.
They are overinclusive to the extent that they provide a
windfall to the most hardened and savvy of suspects, who
often have no need for Miranda’s protections. Compare
Miranda, supra, at 471–472 (“[N]o amount of circumstan­
tial evidence that the person may have been aware of ” his
rights can overcome Miranda’s requirements), with Orozco
v. Texas, 394 U. S. 324, 329 (1969) (White, J., dissenting)
(“Where the defendant himself [w]as a lawyer, policeman,
professional criminal, or otherwise has become aware of
what his right to silence is, it is sheer fancy to assert that
his answer to every question asked him is compelled
unless he is advised of those rights with which he is al­
ready intimately familiar”). And Miranda’s requirements
are underinclusive to the extent that they fail to account
for “frailties,” “idiosyncrasies,” and other individualized
considerations that might cause a person to bend more
easily during a confrontation with the police. See Alva
rado, 541 U. S., at 662 (internal quotation marks omitted).
Members of this Court have seen this rigidity as a major
weakness in Miranda’s “code of rules for confessions.” See
384 U. S., at 504 (Harlan, J., dissenting); Fare, 439 U. S.,
at 1314 (Rehnquist, J., in chambers) (“[T]he rigidity of
[Miranda’s] prophylactic rules was a principal weakness
in the view of dissenters and critics outside the Court”).
But if it is, then the weakness is an inescapable conse­
quence of the Miranda Court’s decision to supplement the
more holistic voluntariness requirement with a one-size­
fits-all prophylactic rule.
That is undoubtedly why this Court’s Miranda cases
have never before mentioned “the suspect’s age” or any
other individualized consideration in applying the custody
standard. See Alvarado, supra, at 666. And unless the

