2

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

residence in the neighborhood where the crimes occurred.
That same day, police also spoke to J. D. B.’s grand
mother—his legal guardian—as well as his aunt.
Police later learned that a digital camera matching the
description of one of the stolen items had been found at
J. D. B.’s middle school and seen in J. D. B.’s possession.
Investigator DiCostanzo, the juvenile investigator with
the local police force who had been assigned to the case,
went to the school to question J. D. B. Upon arrival,
DiCostanzo informed the uniformed police officer on detail
to the school (a so-called school resource officer), the assis
tant principal, and an administrative intern that he was
there to question J. D. B. about the break-ins. Although
DiCostanzo asked the school administrators to verify
J. D. B.’s date of birth, address, and parent contact in
formation from school records, neither the police offi
cers nor the school administrators contacted J. D. B.’s
grandmother.
The uniformed officer interrupted J. D. B.’s afternoon
social studies class, removed J. D. B. from the classroom,
and escorted him to a school conference room.1 There,
J. D. B. was met by DiCostanzo, the assistant principal,
and the administrative intern. The door to the conference
room was closed. With the two police officers and the two
administrators present, J. D. B. was questioned for the
next 30 to 45 minutes. Prior to the commencement of
questioning, J. D. B. was given neither Miranda warnings
nor the opportunity to speak to his grandmother. Nor was
he informed that he was free to leave the room.
Questioning began with small talk—discussion of sports
and J. D. B.’s family life. DiCostanzo asked, and J. D. B.
——————
1 Although the State suggests that the “record is unclear as to who
brought J. D. B. to the conference room, and the trial court made no
factual findings on this specific point,” Brief for Respondent 3, n. 1, the
State agreed at the certiorari stage that “the SRO [school resource
officer] escorted petitioner” to the room, Brief in Opposition 3.

