14

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

indeed “be relevant to the ‘custody’ inquiry.” Alvarado,
541 U. S., at 669.
Reviewing the question de novo today, we hold that so
long as the child’s age was known to the officer at the time
of police questioning, or would have been objectively ap
parent to a reasonable officer, its inclusion in the custody
analysis is consistent with the objective nature of that
test.8 This is not to say that a child’s age will be a deter
minative, or even a significant, factor in every case. Cf.
ibid. (O’Connor, J., concurring) (explaining that a state
court decision omitting any mention of the defendant’s age
was not unreasonable under AEDPA’s deferential stan
dard of review where the defendant “was almost 18 years
old at the time of his interview”); post, at 17 (suggesting
that “teenagers nearing the age of majority” are likely to
react to an interrogation as would a “typical 18-year-old
in similar circumstances”). It is, however, a reality that
courts cannot simply ignore.
III
The State and its amici offer numerous reasons that
courts must blind themselves to a juvenile defendant’s
age. None is persuasive.
To start, the State contends that a child’s age must be
——————
8 This approach does not undermine the basic principle that an inter
rogating officer’s unarticulated, internal thoughts are never—in and of
themselves—objective circumstances of an interrogation. See supra, at
7; Stansbury v. California, 511 U. S. 318, 323 (1994) (per curiam).
Unlike a child’s youth, an officer’s purely internal thoughts have no
conceivable effect on how a reasonable person in the suspect’s position
would understand his freedom of action. See id., at 323–325; Berkemer
v. McCarty, 468 U. S. 420, 442 (1984). Rather than “overtur[n]” that
settled principle, post, at 13, the limitation that a child’s age may
inform the custody analysis only when known or knowable simply
reflects our unwillingness to require officers to “make guesses” as to
circumstances “unknowable” to them in deciding when to give Miranda
warnings, Berkemer, 468 U. S., at 430–431.

