18

J. D. B. v. NORTH CAROLINA
ALITO, J., dissenting

ensure that incriminating statements were not obtained
involuntarily. The voluntariness inquiry is flexible and
accommodating by nature, see Schneckloth, 412 U. S., at
224, and the Court’s precedents already make clear that
“special care” must be exercised in applying the voluntari­
ness test where the confession of a “mere child” is at issue.
Haley, 332 U. S., at 599 (plurality opinion). If Miranda’s
rigid, one-size-fits-all standards fail to account for the
unique needs of juveniles, the response should be to rigor­
ously apply the constitutional rule against coercion to
ensure that the rights of minors are protected. There is no
need to run Miranda off the rails.
*
*
*
The Court rests its decision to inject personal character­
istics into the Miranda custody inquiry on the principle
that judges applying Miranda cannot “blind themselves to
. . . commonsense reality.” Ante, at 1, 8, 10–11, 14. But
the Court’s shift is fundamentally at odds with the clear
prophylactic rules that Miranda has long enforced.
Miranda frequently requires judges to blind themselves to
the reality that many un-Mirandized custodial confessions
are “by no means involuntary” or coerced. Dickerson, 530
U. S., at 444. It also requires police to provide a rote
recitation of Miranda warnings that many suspects al­
ready know and could likely recite from memory.13 Under
today’s new, “reality”-based approach to the doctrine,
perhaps these and other principles of our Miranda juris­
prudence will, like the custody standard, now be ripe for
——————
13 Surveys have shown that “[l]arge majorities” of the public are aware
that “individuals arrested for a crime” have a right to “remai[n] silent
(81%),” a right to “a lawyer (95%),” and a right to have a lawyer “ap­
pointed” if the arrestee “cannot afford one (88%).” See Belden, Russonello
& Stewart, Developing a National Message for Indigent Defense: Analy­
sis of National Survey 4 (Oct. 2001), online at http://www.nlada.org/
DMS/Documents/1211996548.53/Polling%20results%20report.pdf.

