Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

ALITO, J., dissenting

B
If the Court chooses the latter course, then a core virtue
of Miranda—the “ease and clarity of its application”—will
be lost. Moran, 475 U. S., at 425; see Fare, 442 U. S., at
718 (noting that the clarity of Miranda’s requirements
“has been thought to outweigh the burdens that the deci­
sion . . . imposes”). However, even today’s more limited
departure from Miranda’s one-size-fits-all reasonable­
person test will produce the very consequences that
prompted the Miranda Court to abandon exclusive reli­
ance on the voluntariness test in the first place: The
Court’s test will be hard for the police to follow, and it will
be hard for judges to apply. See Dickerson v. United
States, 530 U. S. 428, 444 (2000).
The Court holds that age must be taken into account
when it “was known to the officer at the time of the inter­
view,” or when it “would have been objectively apparent”
to a reasonable officer. Ante, at 11. The first half of this
test overturns the rule that the “initial determination of
custody” does not depend on the “subjective views har­
bored by . . . interrogating officers.” Stansbury, 511 U. S.,
at 323. The second half will generate time-consuming
satellite litigation over a reasonable officer’s perceptions.
When, as here, the interrogation takes place in school, the
inquiry may be relatively simple. But not all police ques­
tioning of minors takes place in schools. In many cases,
courts will presumably have to make findings as to
whether a particular suspect had a sufficiently youthful
look to alert a reasonable officer to the possibility that the
suspect was under 18, or whether a reasonable officer
would have recognized that a suspect’s I. D. was a fake.
The inquiry will be both “time-consuming and disruptive”
for the police and the courts. See Berkemer, 468 U. S., at
432 (refusing to modify the custody test based on similar
considerations). It will also be made all the more compli­
cated by the fact that a suspect’s dress and manner will

