Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

STEVENS, J., dissenting

they created a second, lesser remedy for the breach of
access rights. The drafters obviously contemplated that
some removals might be in violation of the law of the
child’s home nation, but not “wrongful” within the mean­
ing of the Convention—i.e., not in breach of “rights of
custody.” This is precisely why Article 5 carefully deline­
ates between the two types of parental rights in the first
place. And this is precisely why Article 21 exists.
Nevertheless, the Court has now decreed that whenever
an award of visitation rights triggers a statutory default
travel restriction provision, or is accompanied by a travel
restriction by judicial order, a parent possess a right of
custody within the meaning of the Convention. Such a
bright-line rule surely will not serve the best interests of
the child in many cases. See Pérez-Vera Report ¶25, at
432. It will also have surprising results. In Chile, for
example, as a result of this Court’s decision, all parents—
so long as they have the barest of visitation rights—now
also have joint custody within the meaning of the Conven­
tion and the right to utilize the return remedy.10
It bears emphasis that such a result—treating the type
——————
10 In 2003, the latest year for which statistics appear available,
Chile’s Central Authority, which is the entity responsible for adminis­
tering its obligations under the Hague Convention, made five outgoing
“access applications” under Article 21. Hague Conference on Private
International Law, International Child Abduction, N. Lowe, A Statisti­
cal Analysis of Applications Made in 2003 Under the [1980 Hague
Convention] on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction, Part
II–National Reports, p. 125 (Prelim. Doc. No. 3, 2006–2007) (hereinaf­
ter Lowe Analysis). Were the Court correct—and were the view the
Court ascribes to Chile’s interpretation of its own law also correct, see
ante, at 6–7—all of Chile’s outgoing applications under the Convention
almost certainly should have been “return applications” because any
person with rights of access under Chilean law, also has a right of
custody by virtue of the statutory ne exeat provision. It is plain that
even Chilean officials have not thought correct the Court’s interpreta­
tion of the intersection of the travel restriction in Article 49 of its
Minors Law 16,618 and the Convention.

