Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

resolutions included joint legal custody, as did over 90% of
all mediated custody agreements”); E. Maccoby & R.
Mnookin, Dividing the Child: Social and Legal Dilemmas
of Custody 107 (1992) (“[F]or 79% of our entire sample, the
[California] divorce decree provided for joint legal cus­
tody”); see generally Elrod, Reforming the System to Pro­
tect Children in High Conflict Custody Cases, 28 Wm.
Mitchell L. Rev. 495, 505–508 (2001).
Ms. Abbott gets the analysis backwards in claiming that
a ne exeat right is not a right of custody because the Con­
vention requires that any right of custody must be capable
of exercise. The Convention protects rights of custody
when “at the time of removal or retention those rights
were actually exercised, either jointly or alone, or would
have been so exercised but for the removal or retention.”
Art. 3(b), Treaty Doc., at 7. In cases like this one, a
ne exeat right is by its nature inchoate and so has no
operative force except when the other parent seeks to
remove the child from the country. If that occurs, the
parent can exercise the ne exeat right by declining consent
to the exit or placing conditions to ensure the move will be
in the child’s best interests. When one parent removes the
child without seeking the ne exeat holder’s consent, it is an
instance where the right would have been “exercised but
for the removal or retention.” Ibid.
The Court of Appeals’ conclusion that a breach of a ne
exeat right does not give rise to a return remedy would
render the Convention meaningless in many cases where
it is most needed. The Convention provides a return
remedy when a parent takes a child across international
borders in violation of a right of custody. The Convention
provides no return remedy when a parent removes a child
in violation of a right of access but requires contracting
states “to promote the peaceful enjoyment of access
rights.” Art. 21, id., at 11. For example, a court may force
the custodial parent to pay the travel costs of visitation,

