Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

STEVENS, J., dissenting

we should give respectful consideration to the interpreta­
tion of an international treaty rendered by an interna­
tional court with jurisdiction to interpret such, it has been
recognized in international law that, absent a clear and
express statement to the contrary, the procedural rules of
the forum State govern the implementation of the treaty
in that State”).
I also fail to see the international consensus—let alone
the “broad acceptance,” ante, at 12—that the Court finds
among those varied decisions from foreign courts that
have considered the effect of a similar travel restriction
within the Convention’s remedial scheme. The various
decisions of the international courts are, at best, in equi­
poise. Indeed, the Court recognizes that courts in Canada
and France have concluded that travel restrictions are not
“rights of custody” within the meaning of the Convention.
Ante, at 13–14.
And those decisions supportive of the Court’s position do
not offer nearly as much support as first meets the eye.
For example, the English High Court of Justice decision
on which the Court primarily relies, ante, at 12, appears to
have decided a different issue. True, that court considered
the effect of a similar travel restriction on both parents
following the award of “custody” to the child’s mother. C.
v. C., [1989] 1 W. L. R. 654, 656 (C. A.). But the family
court had also decreed, at the time it awarded “custody” to
the mother, that both parents would remain “ ‘joint guardi­
ans’ ” of the child. Ibid. Moreover, in the time between
the mother’s removal of the child and the father’s petition­
ing for his return, the father had returned to the Family
Court in Sydney, obtained an order for the child’s return,
and received immediate custody of the child. Ibid. Com­
parable facts do not exist in this case. Cf. Olympic Air­
ways, 540 U. S., at 655, n. 9 (noting that “we are hesitant”
to follow decisions of sister signatory courts when “there
are substantial factual distinctions between” the cases).

