2

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Opinion of the Court

profession took the couple to Hawaii, where their son
A. J. A. was born in 1995. The Abbotts moved to La
Serena, Chile, in 2002. There was marital discord, and
the parents separated in March 2003. The Chilean courts
granted the mother daily care and control of the child,
while awarding the father “direct and regular” visitation
rights, including visitation every other weekend and for
the whole month of February each year. App. 9.
Chilean law conferred upon Mr. Abbott what is com­
monly known as a ne exeat right: a right to consent before
Ms. Abbott could take A. J. A. out of Chile. See Minors
Law 16,618, art. 49 (Chile), App. to Pet. for Cert. 61a
(granting a ne exeat right to any parent with visitation
rights). In effect a ne exeat right imposes a duty on one
parent that is a right in the other. After Mr. Abbott ob­
tained a British passport for A. J. A., Ms. Abbott grew
concerned that Mr. Abbott would take the boy to Britain.
She sought and obtained a “ne exeat of the minor” order
from the Chilean family court, prohibiting the boy from
being taken out of Chile.
In August 2005, while proceedings before the Chilean
court were pending, the mother removed the boy from
Chile without permission from either the father or the
court. A private investigator located the mother and the
child in Texas. In February 2006, the mother filed for
divorce in Texas state court. Part of the relief she sought
was a modification of the father’s rights, including full
power in her to determine the boy’s place of residence and
an order limiting the father to supervised visitation in
Texas. This litigation remains pending.
Mr. Abbott brought an action in Texas state court,
asking for visitation rights and an order requiring Ms.
Abbott to show cause why the court should not allow Mr.
Abbott to return to Chile with A. J. A. In February 2006,
the court denied Mr. Abbott’s requested relief but granted
him “liberal periods of possession” of A. J. A. throughout

