12

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

16, 23 (1983) (“We refrain from concluding here that the
differing language in the two subsections has the same
meaning in each. We would not presume to ascribe this
difference to a simple mistake in draftsmanship”). There
is no reason we should presume otherwise in the context of
treaties.
Accordingly, I would give “place of residence” the loca­
tion-specific meaning its plain text connotes, irrespective
of the fact that this Convention concerns international
abduction. The right described by the Convention is the
right to decide, conclusively, where a child’s home will be.
And this makes a good deal of sense. The child lives with
the parent who has custodial rights or, in the language of
the Convention, “care of the person of the child,” Art. 5(a),
Treaty Doc., at 7. The child’s home—his or her “place of
residence”—is fixed by the custody arrangement.7 This
comports too with the Convention’s decision to privilege
the rights of custodians over the rights of those parents
with only visitation rights.
Understanding the effect of a travel restriction. So, the
question we confront is whether a travel restriction on one
parent’s right to embark on international travel with his
or her child creates in the other parent a “right to deter­
mine the child’s place of residence” or the ability “to fix
conclusively” the child’s “physical” “home.” Before answer­
ing this question, it is important to understand the nature
of the travel restriction we must classify.
The departure of a minor from Chile—including when
that child lives in a married, two-parent household—is
governed by Article 49 of §16,618 of that country’s Minors
Law. Under Chilean law, no minor is allowed outside of
——————
7 I do not mean to suggest by my view of the significance of a travel
restriction that there could not be a custody arrangement in which both
parents have the “right to determine the child’s place of residence.”
Art. 5(a), id., at 7. My view is only that the type of ne exeat provision at
issue in this case does not, by itself, confer such an affirmative right.

