14

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

the restriction Chilean law places on Ms. Abbott’s move­
ment, Mr. Abbott has no “right to determine [A. J. A.’s]
place of residence.” He cannot “conclusively” “fix,” “settle,”
or “determine” the place where A. J. A. “actually lives or
has his home.” See supra, at 9–10. True, the travel re­
striction bestows upon the noncustodial parent a limited
power to prevent his child from leaving the country with­
out his permission, but it does not grant an affirmative
power to fix or set the location of the child’s home. Mr.
Abbott has no power whatever to determine where A. J. A.
actually lives within the nearly 300,000 square miles that
compose Chile. Even more important, Mr. Abbott has no
power whatever to select another country in which A. J. A.
would live, were Mr. Abbott’s work to take him to another
country altogether. In sum, a right to object to a proposed
departure gives a parent far less authority than a right to
determine where the child shall reside. Moreover, the
right to determine where to live within a country, as well
as what country to live in, is far broader than the limited
right to object to a child’s travel abroad.
In my view, the “right” Mr. Abbott has by virtue of the
travel restriction is therefore best understood as relating
to his “rights of access,” as the Convention defines that
term—and not as a standalone “ ‘righ[t] of custody,’ ” as the
Court defines it, ante, at 1. Chile’s statutory travel re­
striction provision is plainly ancillary to the access rights
the Chilean family court granted to him as the noncusto­
dial parent. By its terms, the obligation on the custodial
parent to seek the other parent’s permission before remov­
ing the child from Chile only operates upon the award of
visitation rights; it has nothing to do with custody rights.
And it operates automatically to facilitate the noncusto­
dial parent’s ability to access the child and to exercise his
visitation rights. In the best of all possible circumstances,
Mr. Abbott’s limited veto power assures him relatively
easy access to A. J. A. so that he may continue a meaning­

