6

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

the identity he finds, or the culture and traditions she will
come to absorb.” Ante, at 7. It is not nearly as self-evident
as the Court assumes that Mr. Abbott’s veto power carries
with it any ability to decide the language A. J. A. speaks
or the cultural experiences he will have, ante, at 7–8. A. J.
A.’s mere presence in Chile does not determine any num­
ber of issues, including: whether A. J. A. learns Spanish
while there; whether he attends an American school or a
British school or a local school; whether he participates in
sports; whether he is raised Catholic or Jewish or Bud­
dhist or atheist; whether he eats a vegetarian diet; and on
and on. The travel restriction does not confer upon Mr.
Abbott affirmative power to make any number of decisions
that are vital to A. J. A.’s physical, psychological, and
cultural development. To say that a limited power to veto
a child’s travel plans confers, also, a right “relating to the
care” of that child devalues the great wealth of decisions a
custodial parent makes on a daily basis to attend to a
child’s needs and development.
The Court’s interpretation depends entirely on a broad
reading of the phrase “relating to” in the Convention’s
definition of “rights of custody.” It is, undeniably, broad
language. But, as the Court reads the term, it is so broad
as to be utterly unhelpful in interpreting what “rights of
custody” means. We “cannot forget that we ultimately are
determining the meaning of the term” rights of custody in
this case, and we should not lose sight of the import of this
term in construing the broad words that follow in its wake.
Leocal v. Ashcroft, 543 U. S. 1, 11 (2004). I suppose it
could be said that Mr. Abbott’s ability to decide whether
A. J. A. spends the night with one of his friends during a
Saturday visit is also a “right relating to the care of the
child.” Taken in the abstract—and to its most absurd—
any decision on behalf of a child could be construed as a
right “relating to” the care of a child.

