Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

STEVENS, J., dissenting

shorthand method to assess what types of rights a parent
may have. The parent responsible for determining where
and with whom a child resides, the drafters assumed,
would likely also be the parent who has the responsibility
to “care” for the child.
Yet even assuming, as the Court does, that the “right to
determine the child’s place of residence,” Art. 5(a), Treaty
Doc., at 7, is divisible from the “care” of the child, ibid., I
still fail to understand how a travel restriction on one
parent’s exercise of her custodial rights is equivalent to an
affirmative “right to determine the child’s place of resi­
dence.” Analyzing its text, in the context of the Conven­
tion’s focus on distinguishing custodial parents from non­
custodial ones, leads me to conclude that the “right to
determine the child’s place of residence” means the power
to set or fix the location of the child’s home. It does not
refer to the more abstract power to keep a child within one
nation’s borders.
“To determine” means “to fix conclusively or authorita­
tively” or “to settle a question or controversy.”4 Webster’s
616. A “place” is a “physical environment” or “a building
or locality used for a special purpose.” Id., at 1727. “Resi­
——————
4 “To determine” can also mean, as the Court observes, “ ‘to set
bounds or limits to,’ ” ante, at 7 (quoting Webster’s New International
Dictionary 711 (2d ed. 1954) (1st definition) (hereinafter Webster’s 2d)).
However, this definition of “to determine” makes little functional sense
as applied to this treaty. In the context of understanding the meaning
of rights of custody, the phrase “to determine” cannot be so indetermi­
nate as to merely set “limits to” a child’s place of residence.
Although the Court emphasizes that the definition of “to deter­
mine” on which it relies is the first such entry in Webster’s, ante, at 7, it
is worth noting that surely the Court would not rely on the first such
definition of the word “care” in that source (“suffering of mind; grief;
sorrow”) to understand the Convention’s use of that word. See Web­
ster’s 2d, at 405. Instead, the fifth definition of that word—“charge,
supervision, management”—is clearly the relevant one. The point is
only that context, as well as common sense, matters when selecting
among possible definitions.

