Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

STEVENS, J., dissenting

ful relationship with his son. But this power, standing
alone, does not transform him into a custodian for pur­
poses of the Convention’s return remedy. Instead, it au­
thorizes him, pursuant to Article 21, to seek assistance
from this country in carrying out the Chilean family
court’s visitation order.
III
Although the Court recognizes, as it must, that “ ‘[t]he
interpretation of a treaty, like the interpretation of a
statute, begins with its text,’ ” ante, at 6 (quoting Medellín,
552 U. S., at 506), the Court’s analysis is atextual—at
least as far as the Convention’s text goes. The Court first
relies on the text of the Chilean law at issue and a single
Chilean administrator’s alleged interpretation thereof.9
——————
9 Because

differences in statutory provisions, as well as cultural
differences and personal predilections, may affect the opinions of local
officials, I would attach no weight to the letter from Paula Strap
Camus, describing Article 49 of Chile’s Minors Law 16,618 as establish­
ing a shared right to determine the place of residence of a child.
Moreover, we have no obligation to defer, on questions of treaty inter­
pretation, to the nonjudicial decisions of another signatory state, let
alone a return request—a piece of advocacy—filed on behalf of Chile in
another case.
In any event, the letter cited offers much less support for the Court’s
position than meets the eye. Unlike in this case, in which a Chilean
court has already decreed Ms. Abbott to be A. J. A.’s sole custodian, in
Villegas Duran v. Beaumont, “no Judge of the Republic of Chile has
granted the custody of the child to her mother . . . .” Letter from Paula
Strap Camus, Director General, Corporation of Judicial Assistance of
the Region Metropolitana to National Center for Missing and Exploited
Children (Jan. 17, 2006), App. to Pet. for Cert. in Villegas Duran v.
Beaumont, O. T. 2008, No. 08–775, p. 36a. In other words, Ms. Camus’
letter request for the child’s return in that case depends on a provision
of Article 49 not at issue in this case: “If the custody of a legitimate
child has not been entrusted by the judge to any of his parents or to a
third party, the child may not leave without authorization of both
parents.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 61a. The travel restriction that bound
Ms. Abbott in this case, however, arose “[o]nce the court . . . decreed the
obligation to allow visits” by Mr. Abbott. Ibid. Although not before us,

