(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–645.

Argued January 12, 2010—Decided May 17, 2010

After the Abbotts, a married couple, moved to Chile and separated, the
Chilean courts granted respondent wife daily care and control of their
minor son, A. J. A., while awarding petitioner husband visitation
rights. Mr. Abbott also had a ne exeat right to consent before Ms. Ab
bott could take A. J. A. out of the country under Chile Minors Law
16,618 (Minors Law 16,618), art. 49. When Ms. Abbott brought
A. J. A. to Texas without permission from Mr. Abbott or the Chilean
family court, Mr. Abbott filed this suit in the Federal District Court,
seeking an order requiring his son’s return to Chile under the Hague
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
(Convention) and the implementing statute, the International Child
Abduction Remedies Act (ICARA), 42 U. S. C. §11601 et seq. Among
its provisions, the Convention seeks “to secure the prompt return of
children wrongfully removed or retained in any Contracting State,”
Art. 1; provides that such “removal or retention . . . is to be consid
ered wrongful where” “it is in breach of rights of custody attributed to
a person . . . under the law of the State in which the child was [there
tofore] habitually resident,” Art. 3(a), and where “those rights [had
been] actually exercised . . . or would have been so exercised but for
the removal or retention,” Art. 3(b); and defines “rights of custody” to
“include . . . the right to determine the child’s place of residence,” Art.
5(a). The District Court denied relief, holding that the father’s ne
exeat right did not constitute a “righ[t] of custody” under the Conven
tion and, thus, that the return remedy was not authorized. The Fifth
Circuit affirmed.
Held: A parent has a right of custody under the Convention by reason of
that parent’s ne exeat right. Pp. 4–17.
(a) The Convention applies because A. J. A. is under 16; he was a

