Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

ploited Children (Jan. 17, 2006), App. to Pet. for Cert. in
Villegas Duran v. Arribada Beaumont, No. 08–775, pp.
35a–37a, cert. pending.
The Convention recognizes that custody rights can be
decreed jointly or alone, see Art. 3(a), Treaty Doc., at 7;
and Mr. Abbott’s joint right to determine his son’s country
of residence is best classified as a joint right of custody, as
the Convention defines that term. The Convention defines
“rights of custody” to “include rights relating to the care of
the person of the child and, in particular, the right to
determine the child’s place of residence.” Art. 5(a), ibid.
Mr. Abbott’s ne exeat right gives him both the joint “right
to determine the child’s place of residence” and joint
“rights relating to the care of the person of the child.”
Mr. Abbott’s joint right to decide A. J. A.’s country of
residence allows him to “determine the child’s place of
residence.” The phrase “place of residence” encompasses
the child’s country of residence, especially in light of the
Convention’s explicit purpose to prevent wrongful removal
across international borders. See Convention Preamble,
Treaty Doc., at 7. And even if “place of residence” refers
only to the child’s street address within a country, a
ne exeat right still entitles Mr. Abbott to “determine” that
place. “[D]etermine” can mean “[t]o fix conclusively or
authoritatively,” Webster’s New International Dictionary
711 (2d ed. 1954) (2d definition), but it can also mean “[t]o
set bounds or limits to,” ibid. (1st definition), which is
what Mr. Abbott’s ne exeat right allows by ensuring that
A. J. A. cannot live at any street addresses outside of
Chile. It follows that the Convention’s protection of a
parent’s custodial “right to determine the child’s place of
residence” includes a ne exeat right.
Mr. Abbott’s joint right to determine A. J. A.’s country of
residence also gives him “rights relating to the care of the
person of the child.” Art. 5(a), Treaty Doc., at 7. Few
decisions are as significant as the language the child

