20

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

10504–10505.12
Putting aside any concerns arising from the fact that the
Department’s views are newly memorialized and chang­
ing, I would not in this case abdicate our responsibility to
interpret the Convention’s language. This does not seem
to be a matter in which deference to the Executive on
matters of foreign policy would avoid international con­
flict, cf. Itel Containers Int’l Corp. v. Huddleston, 507 U. S.
60, 76 (1993) (acknowledging that “the nuances of foreign
policy ‘are much more the province of the Executive
Branch and Congress than of this Court’ ” (quoting Con­
tainer Corp. of America v. Franchise Tax Bd., 463 U. S.
159, 196 (1983))); the State Department has made no such
argument. Nor is this a case in which the Executive’s
understanding of the treaty’s drafting history is particu­
——————
12 The State Department explained to the Senate at the time it sought
ratification of the Convention that the “fundamental purpose of the
Hague Convention” was “to protect children from wrongful interna­
tional removals or retentions by persons bent on obtaining their physi­
cal and/or legal custody.” Convention Analysis 10504. I find it quite
unlikely, in light of its framing of the “fundamental purpose” of the
Convention, that the State Department would have agreed at the time
that a removal was “wrongful” within the meaning of the Convention
when a parent with physical custody of a child took that child to an­
other country, even when that removal was in violation of a restriction
on the custodial parent’s travel rights. See also Brief for Eleven Law
Professors as Amici Curiae 4–5, n. 7. Even more telling, however, is
the fact that, in a response to a questionnaire used by the Convention’s
drafters in preparing the treaty, the United States characterized a
ne exeat right as one with “the purpose of preserving the jurisdiction of
the state in the custody matter and of safeguarding the visitation rights
of the other parent.” 1980 Conférence de La Haye de droit interna­
tional privé, Enlèvement d’enfants, Replies of the Governments to the
Questionnaire, in 3 Actes et Documents de la Quatorzième session, pp.
85, 88 (1982). Such a description is inconsistent with the Department’s
current position that a ne exeat clause is a freestanding right of custody
within the meaning of the Convention. See Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae 7.

