4

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

Article 3 of the Convention provides that the removal or
retention of a child is “wrongful,” and thus in violation of
the Convention, only when the removal “is in breach of the
rights of custody.” Art. 3(a), ibid. The fact that a removal
may be “wrongful” in the sense that it violates domestic
law or violates only “rights of access” does not make it
“wrongful” within the meaning of the Convention.
Only when a removal is “wrongful” under Article 3 may
the parent who possesses custody rights force the child’s
return to the country of habitual residence under the
Convention’s remedial procedures, pursuant to Articles 8
through 20. For those removals that frustrate a noncusto­
dial parent’s “rights of access,” the Convention provides
that the noncustodial parent may file an application “to
make arrangements for organizing or securing the effec­
tive exercise of rights of access”; but he may not force the
child’s return. Art. 21, id., at 11. A parent without “rights
of custody,” therefore, does not have the power granted by
Article 3 to compel the child’s return to his or her country
of habitual residence. His rights are limited to those set
forth in Article 21.
II
Mr. Abbott, claiming “rights of custody” by virtue of the
travel restriction Chilean law places on Ms. Abbott, seeks
the return of A. J. A. to Chile. Such relief is warranted
only if A. J. A.’s removal was “wrongful” within the mean­
ing of the Convention; as such, it must have been “in
breach of [Mr. Abbott’s] rights of custody.”2 Art. 3, id., at
——————
2 Indisputably,

Ms. Abbott’s removal of A. J. A. from Chile was wrong­
ful in the generic sense of the word. She violated Chilean law when she
took A. J. A. to Texas because she sought neither Mr. Abbott’s permis­
sion nor the court’s authorization before doing so. She violated both the
existing “ne exeat” order imposed by judicial decree in the couple’s
custody dispute, see ante, at 2, as well as Chilean statutory law defin­
ing the access rights of noncustodial parents, see Art. 49, Minors Law
16,618, App. to Pet. for Cert. 61a. The removal was illegal, then, but it

