Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

STEVENS, J., dissenting

could have defined the “right” at issue as “the right to
determine the child’s State of habitual residence.” But
they did not, even though they used the phrase “State of
habitual residence” no fewer than four other times else­
where within the Convention’s text.6 Moreover, the draft­
ers also explained that “reference[s] to habitual residence
in [a] State shall be construed as referring to habitual
residence in a territorial unit of that State.” Art. 31(a), id.,
at 13 (emphasis added). The point is: When the drafters
wanted to refer to a particular geographic unit, they
did so.
Instead, the drafters elected the formulation “place of
residence,” which is also utilized similarly in the definition
of “rights of access.” See Art. 5(b), id., at 7 (defining
“ ‘rights of access’ ” to include “the right to take a child for
a limited period of time to a place other than the child’s
habitual residence” (emphasis added)). And they utilized
this phrase only within one particular Article, as opposed
to their more frequent use of “State of habitual residence”
throughout the Convention. In interpreting statutory
text, we ordinarily presume that the use of different words
is purposeful and evinces an intention to convey a differ­
ent meaning. See, e.g., Russello v. United States, 464 U. S.
——————
6 See,

e.g., Preamble, Treaty Doc., at 7 (“Desiring to protect children
internationally from the harmful effects of their wrongful removal or
retention and to establish procedures to ensure their prompt return to
the State of their habitual residence” (emphasis added)); Art. 8(f),
Treaty Doc., at 9 (stating that an application for return may be accom­
panied by “a certificate . . . emanating from . . . competent authority of
the State of the child’s habitual residence” (emphasis added)); Art. 14,
id., at 10 (explaining that when determining whether a removal is
wrongful, a contracting state “may take notice directly of the law of . . .
the State of the habitual residence of the child” (emphasis added)); Art.
15, ibid. (authorizing contracting state to obtain a decree from “the
authorities of the State of the habitual residence of the child” a decision
on whether removal was wrongful before ordering return (emphasis
added)).

