16

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

See ante, at 6. While it is true that the meaning of Chile’s
statute matters to our determining whether a parent has
taken a child in “breach of rights of custody . . . under the
law of the State in which the child was habitually resident
immediately before the removal or retention,” Art. 3(a),
Treaty Doc., at 7, it does not and should not inform what
the Convention’s definition of “rights of custody” means in
the first place.
The Court also reminds us that the Convention’s terms
are to be broadly construed. See ante, at 15–16. To be
sure, the Convention’s leading interpretive authority
informs us that the Convention’s understanding of what
constitutes “rights of custody” is broad and flexible. See
Pérez-Vera Report ¶¶67, 71, 84, at 446, 447, 451–452.
And we are to apply its terms to “allo[w] the greatest
possible number of cases to be brought into consideration.”
Id., ¶67, at 446. But such breadth should not circumvent
the Convention’s text in order to sweep a travel restriction
under the umbrella of rights of custody.
A reading as broad and flexible as the Court’s eviscer­
ates the distinction the Convention draws between rights
of custody and rights of access. Indeed, the Court’s read­
ing essentially voids the Convention’s Article 21, which
provides a separate remedy for breaches of rights of ac­
cess. If a violation of this type of provision were not a
breach of the rights of access, I find it quite difficult to
imagine what the Convention’s drafters had in mind when
——————
there may be a sound basis for distinguishing the legal effect and
significance of a travel restriction in effect prior to an award of custody
to either or both parents, from one that occurs ancillary to the award of
visitation rights to a parent who has no custodial rights. Moreover, the
U. S. Department of State, at the time the Convention was ratified,
believed that the Convention would require return in these circum­
stances: “Children who are wrongfully removed or retained prior to the
entry of a custody order are protected by the Convention. There need
not be a custody order in effect in order to invoke the Convention’s
return provisions.” Convention Analysis 10505.

