Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
most needed. Any suggestion that a ne exeat right is a right of access
is atexual, as a ne exeat right is not even arguably a “right to take a
child for a limited period of time.” Art. 5(b). Ms. Abbott’s argument
that the ne exeat order in this case cannot create a right of custody is
not dispositive because Mr. Abbott asserts rights under Minors Law
16,618, which do not derive from the order. Pp. 6–11.
(2) This Court’s conclusion is strongly supported and informed by
the longstanding view of the State Department’s Office of Children’s
Issues, this country’s Convention enforcement entity, that ne exeat
rights are rights of custody. The Court owes deference to the Execu
tive Branch’s treaty interpretations. See Sumitomo Shoji America,
Inc. v. Avagliano, 457 U. S. 176, 185. There is no reason to doubt this
well-established canon here. The Executive, when dealing with deli
cate foreign relations matters like international child abductions,
possesses a great store of information on practical realities such as
the reactions from treaty partners to a particular treaty interpreta
tion and the impact that interpretation may have on the State De
partment’s ability to reclaim children abducted from this country.
Pp. 11–12.
(3) The Court’s view is also substantially informed by the views
of sister contracting states on the issue, see El Al Israel Airlines, Ltd.
v. Tsui Yuan Tseng, 525 U. S. 155, 176, particularly because the
ICARA directs that “uniform international interpretation” of the
Convention is part of its framework, see §11601(b)(3)(B). While the
Supreme Court of Canada has reached an arguably contrary view,
and French courts are divided, a review of the international law con
firms that courts and other legal authorities in England, Israel, Aus
tria, South Africa, Germany, Australia, and Scotland have accepted
the rule that ne exeat rights are rights of custody within the Conven
tion’s meaning. Scholars agree that there is an emerging interna
tional consensus on the matter. And the Convention’s history is fully
consistent with the conclusion that ne exeat rights are just one of the
many ways in which custody of children can be exercised. Pp. 12–16.
(4) The Court’s holding also accords with the Convention’s objects
and purposes. There is no reason to doubt the ability of other con
tracting states to carry out their duty to make decisions in the best
interests of the children. To interpret the Convention to permit an
abducting parent to avoid a return remedy, even when the other par
ent holds a ne exeat right, runs counter to the Convention’s purpose of
deterring child abductions to a country that provides a friendlier fo
rum. Denying such a remedy would legitimize the very action, re
moval of the child, that the Convention was designed to prevent,
while requiring return of the child in cases like this one helps deter
abductions and respects the Convention’s purpose to prevent harms

