Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

STEVENS, J., dissenting

the country without his or her parents’ authorization. Art.
49, Minors Law 16,618, App. to Pet. for Cert. 61a–62a.
Ordinarily, if the judge has entrusted custody of a child to
only one parent, the child may not leave without that
parent’s—the custodial parent’s—permission. See ibid.;
see also id., at 61a (“If the judge has entrusted custody to
one of the parents or to a third party, the legitimate child
may not leave except under authorization of the person to
whom he has been entrusted”). But the statute further
provides that if the noncustodial parent has been granted
visitation rights, the authorization of the parent with
visitation rights shall also be required: “Once the court
has decreed the obligation to allow visits pursuant to the
preceding article,[8] authorization of the father or mother
who has the right to visit a child shall also be required.”
Ibid. (footnote added). The statute provides, also, an
important backstop in the event a noncustodial parent
denies authorization “without good reason”: A Chilean
court may grant the minor or his parent permission to
leave the country. Id., at 62a. Finally, if the custodial
parent does not return the child to Chile within the time
authorized, “the judge may decree the suspension of ali­
mony that may have been decreed.” Ibid.
Returning, then, to the question at hand: By virtue of
——————
8 The “preceding article” referred to, Article 48, simply provides:
“Each time a minor is entrusted to one of the parents or a third person,
such decision must include the obligation to allow the non-custodial
parent to exercise his or her right to visit. The decision should also
specify the way in which this right will be exercised. The judge may
order ex officio, upon the parties petition or in special cases, that the
same authorization be extended, to the minor’s ascendants or siblings,
through the means and under the conditions set by the judge. Ascen­
dants and siblings should be identified.” Memorandum from Graciela I.
Rodriguez-Ferrand, Senior Legal Specialist, Law Library of Congress,
to Supreme Court Library (Apr. 1, 2010) (available in Clerk of Court’s
case file (containing English translation of Art. 48, Minors Law
16,618)).

