2

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Syllabus
habitual resident of Chile; and both Chile and the United States are
contracting states. The ICARA instructs the state or federal court in
which a petition alleging international child abduction has been filed
to “decide the case in accordance with the Convention.” §§11603(b),
(d). P. 5.
(b) That A. J. A. was wrongfully removed from Chile in violation of
a “righ[t] of custody” is shown by the Convention’s text, by the U. S.
State Department’s views, by contracting states’ court decisions, and
by the Convention’s purposes. Pp. 5–18.
(1) Chilean law determines the content of Mr. Abbott’s right,
while the Convention’s text and structure resolve whether that right
is a “righ[t] of custody.” Minors Law 16,618, art. 49, provides that
“[o]nce the court has decreed” that one of the parents has visitation
rights, that parent’s “authorization” generally “shall also be required”
before the child may be taken out of the country. Because Mr. Abbott
has direct and regular visitation rights, it follows that he has a
ne exeat right under article 49. The Convention recognizes that cus
tody rights can be decreed jointly or alone, see Art. 3(a), and Mr. Ab
bott’s ne exeat right is best classified as a “joint right of custody,”
which the Convention defines to “include rights relating to the care of
the person of the child and, in particular, the right to determine the
child’s place of residence,” Art. 5(a). Mr. Abbott’s right to decide
A. J. A.’s country of residence allows him to “determine the child’s
place of residence,” especially given the Convention’s purpose to pre
vent wrongful removal across international borders. It also gives him
“rights relating to the care of the person of the child,” in that choos
ing A. J. A.’s residence country can determine the shape of his early
and adolescent years and his language, identity, and culture and tra
ditions. That a ne exeat right does not fit within traditional physical
custody notions is beside the point because the Convention’s defini
tion of “rights of custody” controls. This uniform, text-based ap
proach ensures international consistency in interpreting the Conven
tion, foreclosing courts from relying on local usage to undermine
recognition of custodial arrangements in other countries and under
other legal traditions. In any case, this country has adopted modern
conceptions of custody e.g., joint legal custody, that accord with the
Convention’s broad definition. Ms. Abbott mistakenly claims that a
ne exeat right cannot qualify as a right of custody because the Con
vention requires that any such right be capable of “exercis[e].” When
one parent removes a child without seeking the ne exeat holder’s con
sent, it is an instance where the right would have been “exercised but
for the removal or retention,” Art. 3(b). The Fifth Circuit’s conclusion
that a breach of a ne exeat right does not give rise to a return remedy
would render the Convention meaningless in many cases where it is

