Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

STEVENS, J., dissenting

larly rich or illuminating.13 See Factor, 290 U. S., at 294–
295 (observing that “diplomatic history”—“negotiations
and diplomatic correspondence of the contracting parties
relating to the subject-matter”—is entitled to weight).
Finally, and significantly, the State Department, as the
Central Authority for administering the Convention in the
United States, has failed to disclose to the Court whether
it has facilitated the return of children to America when
the shoe is on the other foot.14 See Brief for United States
as Amicus Curiae 4, n. 3 (describing responsibilities of the
Central Authority). Thus, we have no informed basis to
assess the Executive’s postratification conduct, or the
conduct of other signatories, to aid us in understanding
the accepted meaning of potentially ambiguous terms. See
Zicherman v. Korean Air Lines Co., 516 U. S. 217, 227–228
(1996) (considering “postratification conduct of the con­
tracting parties”); Charlton v. Kelly, 229 U. S. 447, 468
(1913) (affording “much weight” to the fact that the
“United States has always construed its obligation” under
a treaty in a particular way and had acted in accord).
Instead, the Department offers us little more than its
——————
13 This only underscores what seems quite clear: Whatever contempo­
rary international consensus the Court claims has now emerged, “that
view was not generally formulated when the Convention was drafted in
1980.” Ante, at 14. I understand the Court’s reference to contemporary
consensus to depend on the views of contemporary scholars and indi­
vidual signatory states developed postratification, including the views
of the Special Commission, a voluntary post hac collective body with no
treaty-making authority, see ibid. Even assuming that the Court is
correct that consensus has emerged after the Convention was written
and ratified that ne exeat rights should be “rights of custody,” in my
view this provides no support at all for the position that the Conven­
tion’s drafters had these types of rights in mind and intended for the
Convention to treat them as rights of custody. To the contrary, I think
it tends to prove the opposite point.
14 This is somewhat surprising given that in 1999 the Department
made 212 outgoing applications for return of children to the United
States and made 85 such requests in 2003. Lowe Analysis 479.

