Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

STEVENS, J., dissenting

Such a view of the text obliterates the careful distinction
the drafters drew between the rights of custody and the
rights of access. Undoubtedly, they were aware of the
concept of joint custody. See Pérez-Vera Report ¶71, at
457 (“[C]ustody rights may have been awarded . . . to that
person in his own right or jointly. It cannot be otherwise
in an era when types of joint custody, regarded as best
suited to the general principle of sexual non­
discrimination, are gradually being introduced into inter­
nal law”). But just because rights of custody can be shared
by two parents, it does not follow that the drafters in­
tended this limited veto power to be a right of custody.
And yet this, it seems, is how the Court understands the
case: Because the drafters intended to account for joint
custodial arrangements, they intended for this travel
restriction to be joint custody because it could be said, in
some abstract sense, to relate to care of the child. I fail to
understand how the Court’s reading is faithful to the
Convention’s text and purpose, given that the text ex­
pressly contemplates two distinct classes of parental
rights. Today’s decision converts every noncustodial par­
ent with access rights—at least in Chile—into a custodial
parent for purposes of the Convention.
On this point, it is important to observe the effect of the
Court’s decision to classify the travel restriction as a right
“relating to” A. J. A.’s care. Mr. Abbott possesses no legal
authority presently to exercise care or control of A. J. A.,
or to make decisions on his behalf. The Court would nev­
ertheless read the Convention to require A. J. A.’s return
to a parent without such rights merely because the travel
restriction, in an abstract sense, could be said to relate to
A. J. A.’s care. The Court fails to explain how a parent
who otherwise possesses no legal authority to exercise
“charge,” “supervision,” or “management” over a child, see
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 338 (1986)
(hereinafter Webster’s) (5th definition of “care”), can be­

