10

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Opinion of the Court

see, e.g., Viragh v. Foldes, 415 Mass. 96, 109–111, 612
N. E. 2d 241, 249–250 (1993), or make other provisions for
the noncustodial parent to visit his or her child, see
§11603(b) (authorizing petitions to “secur[e] the effective
exercise of rights of access to a child”). But unlike rights
of access, ne exeat rights can only be honored with a return
remedy because these rights depend on the child’s location
being the country of habitual residence.
Any suggestion that a ne exeat right is a “righ[t] of
access” is illogical and atextual. The Convention defines
“rights of access” as “includ[ing] the right to take a child
for a limited period of time to a place other than the child’s
habitual residence,” Art. 5(b), Treaty Doc., at 7, and
ICARA defines that same term as “visitation rights,”
§11602(7). The joint right to decide a child’s country of
residence is not even arguably a “right to take a child for a
limited period of time” or a “visitation righ[t].” Reaching
the commonsense conclusion that a ne exeat right does not
fit these definitions of “rights of access” honors the Con­
vention’s distinction between rights of access and rights of
custody.
Ms. Abbott argues that the ne exeat order in this case
cannot create a right of custody because it merely protects
a court’s jurisdiction over the child. Even if this argument
were correct, it would not be dispositive. Ms. Abbott
contends the Chilean court’s ne exeat order contains no
parental consent provision and so awards the father no
rights, custodial or otherwise. See Brief for Respondent
22; but see 495 F. Supp. 2d, at 638, n. 3 (the District Court
treating the order as containing a consent provision); 542
F. 3d, at 1084 (same for the Court of Appeals). Even a
ne exeat order issued to protect a court’s jurisdiction pend­
ing issuance of further decrees is consistent with allowing
a parent to object to the child’s removal from the country.
This Court need not decide the status of ne exeat orders
lacking parental consent provisions, however; for here the

