Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., dissenting

7. Putting aside the effect of the travel restriction, it is
undisputed that Ms. Abbott possesses “rights of custody”
over A. J. A. while Mr. Abbott would possess “rights of
access,” as those terms are used in the Convention. Brief
for Petitioner 6; Brief for Respondent 6. The only issue in
this case, therefore, is whether Mr. Abbott also possesses
“rights of custody” within the meaning of the Convention
by virtue of the travel restriction, or ne exeat clause,3 that
Chilean law imposes on Ms. Abbott. In other words, the
question is whether the “right” of one parent to veto the
other parent’s decision to remove a child from the country,
subject to judicial override, belongs in the category of
“rights relating to the care of the person of the child and,
in particular, the right to determine the child’s place of
residence.” Art. 5(a), Treaty Doc., at 7. In my judgment,
it clearly does not, and I need look no further than to the
Convention’s text to explain why. See Medellín v. Texas,
552 U. S. 491, 506 (2008) (“The interpretation of a treaty,
like the interpretation of a statute, begins with its text”).
Rights relating to the care of the child. The Court con­
cludes that the veto power Mr. Abbott has over Ms. Ab­
bott’s travel plans is equivalent to those rights “ ‘relating
to the care of the person of the child.’ ” Ante, at 7–8. This
is so, the Court tells us, because Mr. Abbott has a limited
power to keep A. J. A. within Chile’s bounds and, there­
fore, indirectly to influence “the language the child speaks,
——————
was only wrongful within the meaning of the Convention if it was in
breach of Mr. Abbott’s rights of custody. Unfortunately, I fear the
Court’s preoccupation with deterring parental misconduct—even,
potentially, at the sake of the best interests of the child—has caused it
to minimize this important distinction.
3 The Court repeatedly refers to “ne exeat rights,” ante, at 3, 10, 11,
12, 14, 15, and 16, as if the single travel restriction at issue in this case
were on a par with the multiple rights commonly exercised by custodial
parents. Chile’s statutory ne exeat provision is better characterized as
a restriction on the travel of both the minor and the custodial parent
than as a bundle of “rights” possessed by the noncustodial parent.

