8

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Opinion of the Court

speaks, the identity he finds, or the culture and traditions
she will come to absorb. These factors, so essential to self­
definition, are linked in an inextricable way to the child’s
country of residence. One need only consider the different
childhoods an adolescent will experience if he or she grows
up in the United States, Chile, Germany, or North Korea,
to understand how choosing a child’s country of residence
is a right “relating to the care of the person of the child.”
The Court of Appeals described Mr. Abbott’s right to take
part in making this decision as a mere “veto,” 542 F. 3d, at
1087; but even by that truncated description, the father
has an essential role in deciding the boy’s country of resi­
dence. For example, Mr. Abbott could condition his con­
sent to a change in country on A. J. A.’s moving to a city
outside Chile where Mr. Abbott could obtain an astronomy
position, thus allowing the father to have continued con­
tact with the boy.
That a ne exeat right does not fit within traditional
notions of physical custody is beside the point. The Con­
vention defines “rights of custody,” and it is that definition
that a court must consult. This uniform, text-based ap­
proach ensures international consistency in interpreting
the Convention. It forecloses courts from relying on defi­
nitions of custody confined by local law usage, definitions
that may undermine recognition of custodial arrange­
ments in other countries or in different legal traditions,
including the civil-law tradition. And, in any case, our
own legal system has adopted conceptions of custody that
accord with the Convention’s broad definition. Joint legal
custody, in which one parent cares for the child while the
other has joint decisionmaking authority concerning the
child’s welfare, has become increasingly common. See
Singer, Dispute Resolution and the Postdivorce Family:
Implications of a Paradigm Shift, 47 Family Ct. Rev. 363,
366 (2009) (“[A] recent study of child custody outcomes in
North Carolina indicated that almost 70% of all custody

