Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

are “[f]irmly convinced that the interests of children are of
paramount importance in matters relating to their cus­
tody.” Convention Preamble, Treaty Doc., at 7. Interna­
tional law serves a high purpose when it underwrites
the determination by nations to rely upon their domes­
tic courts to enforce just laws by legitimate and fair
proceedings.
To interpret the Convention to permit an abducting
parent to avoid a return remedy, even when the other
parent holds a ne exeat right, would run counter to the
Convention’s purpose of deterring child abductions by
parents who attempt to find a friendlier forum for deciding
custodial disputes. Ms. Abbott removed A. J. A. from
Chile while Mr. Abbott’s request to enhance his relation­
ship with his son was still pending before Chilean courts.
After she landed in Texas, the mother asked the state
court to diminish or eliminate the father’s custodial and
visitation rights. The Convention should not be inter­
preted to permit a parent to select which country will
adjudicate these questions by bringing the child to a dif­
ferent country, in violation of a ne exeat right. Denying a
return remedy for the violation of such rights would “le­
gitimize the very action—removal of the child—that the
home country, through its custody order [or other provi­
sion of law], sought to prevent” and would allow “parents
to undermine the very purpose of the Convention.” Croll,
229 F. 3d, at 147 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). This Court
should be most reluctant to adopt an interpretation that
gives an abducting parent an advantage by coming here to
avoid a return remedy that is granted, for instance, in the
United Kingdom, Israel, Germany, and South Africa. See
supra, at 12–13.
Requiring a return remedy in cases like this one helps
deter child abductions and respects the Convention’s
purpose to prevent harms resulting from abductions. An
abduction can have devastating consequences for a child.

