18

UTAH HIGHWAY PATROL ASSN. v. AMERICAN
ATHEISTS, INC.
THOMAS, J., dissenting





“factbound.”9 This suit, which squarely implicates the
viability and application of the Lemon/endorsement test,10
is as ripe a suit for certiorari as any.11
——————
9 In

any event, respondents’ incredible assertion is belied by the fact
that, two days after respondents filed their brief in opposition to certio­
rari in our Court, respondents sued the Port Authority of New York
City and demanded removal of a cross located at Ground Zero. See
Complaint in American Atheists, Inc. v. Port Auth. of New York, No.
108670–2011 (N. Y. Sup. Ct.); Notice of Removal in American Atheists,
Inc. v. Port Auth. of New York, No. 1:11–cv–06026 (SDNY).
10 That the petition of the Association presents the question whether
the cross memorials in this suit are government speech is no obstacle to
certiorari. The Court need not grant certiorari on that question, and
the state petitioners only ask this Court to resolve the viability and
application of the endorsement test.
11 Respondents argue that this suit would be a poor vehicle to explore
the contours of a coercion-based Establishment Clause test because the
State has raised the specter of a preference for one religion over others.
In this regard, respondents point out that the State took the position
before the lower courts that it would not be able to approve the Associa­
tion’s memorials “ ‘in the same manner’ ” if the Association, as it indi­
cated it would, allowed an officer’s family to request a symbol other
than a cross. Brief in Opposition 3–4, 31.
Because no such situation has ever arisen, and because the State has
only indicated it could not approve a different marker in the same
manner as the roadside crosses, respondents distort the record by
claiming that the State has put families to the choice of “a Latin cross
or no roadside memorial at all.” Id., at 4. Moreover, it is undisputed
that the State’s position stemmed from its belief that “if [the Associa­
tion] were to change the shape of the memorial to reflect the religious
symbol of the fallen trooper, rather than the shape of the cross, the
memorial would no longer be a secular shape recognized as a symbol of
death.” App. to Brief in Opposition 9a–15a (emphasis added). That
position is entirely consistent with the Tenth Circuit’s conclusion that
the purposes of the State and Association in permitting and implement­
ing the memorial program were secular. In any event, that the State
and Association, both defending the memorial program’s constitutional­
ity, took conflicting positions about whether it was impermissibly
religious to use only crosses, or impermissibly religious to use other
symbols reflective of the deceased’s religious preference, only highlights
the confusion surrounding the Establishment Clause’s requirements.

