Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

THOMAS, J., dissenting

its workability); id., at ___ (ALITO, J., concurring in part
and concurring in judgment) (slip op., at 6) (“Assuming
that it is appropriate to apply the so-called ‘endorsement
test,’ this test would not be violated [here]”); Pinette, 515
U. S., at 768, n. 3 (plurality opinion of SCALIA, J.) (The
endorsement test “supplies no standard whatsoever”); Van
Orden, supra, at 692–693 (THOMAS, J., concurring) (“This
case would be easy if the Court were willing to abandon
the inconsistent guideposts it has adopted for addressing
Establishment Clause challenges,” citing, inter alia, the
Lemon and endorsement tests); Allegheny, 492 U. S., at
669 (KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment in part and
dissenting in part) (“[T]he endorsement test is flawed in
its fundamentals and unworkable in practice”); see also
McCreary County, 545 U. S., at 890 (2005) (SCALIA, J.,
joined in full by Rehnquist, C. J., and THOMAS, J., and in
part by KENNEDY, J., dissenting) (“[A] majority of the
Justices on the current Court . . . have, in separate opin­
ions, repudiated the brain-spun ‘Lemon test’ ”).
And yet, six years after Van Orden, our Establishment
Clause precedents remain impenetrable, and the lower
courts’ decisions—including the Tenth Circuit’s decision
below—remain incapable of coherent explanation. It is
difficult to imagine an area of the law more in need of
clarity, as the 46 amici curiae who filed briefs in support
of certiorari confirm. Respondents tell us there is no
reason to think that a case with facts similar to this one
will recur, Brief in Opposition 17, but if that counsels
against certiorari here, this Court will never again hear
another case involving an Establishment Clause challenge
to a religious display. It is this Court’s precedent that has
rendered even the most minute aesthetic details of a
religious display relevant to the constitutional question.
We should not now abdicate our responsibility to clean up
our mess because these disputes, by our own making, are

