Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

THOMAS, J., dissenting

members, sued several state officials, alleging that the
State violated the Establishment Clause of the First
Amendment, as incorporated by the Fourteenth Amend­
ment, because most of the crosses were on state property
and all of the crosses bore the Utah Highway Patrol’s
symbol. The Association, a petitioner along with the state
officials in this Court, intervened to defend the memorials.
The District Court granted summary judgment in favor of
petitioners.
A panel of the Tenth Circuit reversed. As an initial
matter, the panel noted that this Court remains “sharply
divided on the standard governing Establishment Clause
cases.” American Atheists, Inc. v. Duncan, 616 F. 3d 1145,
1156 (2010). The panel therefore looked to Circuit prece­
dent to determine the applicable standard and then ap­
plied the so-called “Lemon/endorsement test,” which asks
whether the challenged governmental practice has the
actual purpose of endorsing religion or whether it has that
effect from the perspective of a “reasonable observer.” Id.,
at 1157; see County of Allegheny v. American Civil Liberties Union, Greater Pittsburgh Chapter, 492 U. S.
573, 592–594 (1989) (modifying the three-pronged test of
Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U. S. 602 (1971), which considered
whether a government action has a secular purpose, has
the primary effect of advancing or inhibiting religion, or
fosters an excessive entanglement between government
and religion). The court concluded that, even though the
cross memorials had a secular purpose, they would none­
theless “convey to a reasonable observer that the state of
Utah is endorsing Christianity.” 616 F. 3d, at 1160. This
was so, the court concluded, because a cross is “the
preeminent symbol of Christianity,” and the crosses stood
alone, on public land, bearing the Utah Highway Patrol’s
emblem. Ibid. According to the panel, none of the other
“contextualizing facts” sufficiently reduced the memorials’
message of religious endorsement. Id., at 1161.

