16

UTAH HIGHWAY PATROL ASSN. v. AMERICAN
ATHEISTS, INC.
THOMAS, J., dissenting





were Mormons, or that Christians who revere the cross are
a minority in Utah, would have no effect on him. Id.,
at 1163–1164. Conversely, the dissenters’ reasonable
observer would have known that the crosses were chosen
by the fallen officer’s family and erected by a private group
without design approval from the State, and that most
Utahns do not revere the cross.8 637 F. 3d, at 1110 (opin­
ion of Gorsuch, J.); id., at 1105 (opinion of Kelly, J.).
To any truly “reasonable observer,” these lines of disa­
greement may seem arbitrary at best. But to be fair to the
Tenth Circuit, it is our Establishment Clause jurispru­
dence that invites this type of erratic, selective analysis of
the constitutionality of religious imagery on government
property. These cases thus illustrate why “[t]he outcome
of constitutional cases ought to rest on firmer grounds
than the personal preferences of judges.” Van Orden, 545
U. S., at 697 (THOMAS, J., concurring).
V
Even if the Court does not share my view that the Es­
tablishment Clause restrains only the Federal Govern­
ment, and that, even if incorporated, the Clause only
prohibits “ ‘actual legal coercion,’ ” see id., at 693, the
Court should be deeply troubled by what its Establish­
ment Clause jurisprudence has wrought. Indeed, five
sitting Justices have questioned or decried the Lemon/
endorsement test’s continued use. Salazar, 559 U. S.,
at ___–___ (plurality opinion of KENNEDY, J., joined in full
by ROBERTS, C. J., and in part by ALITO, J.) (slip op., at
15–18) (emphasizing criticism of the endorsement test and
——————
8 According to the statement of undisputed facts before the District
Court, approximately 57 percent of Utahns are members of the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Neither the Church nor its
members use the cross as a symbol of their religion or in their religious
practices. American Atheists, Inc. v. Duncan, 528 F. Supp. 2d 1245,
1249 (Utah 2007).

