2

UTAH HIGHWAY PATROL ASSN. v. AMERICAN
ATHEISTS, INC.
THOMAS, J., dissenting





way Patrol officers and their families.1 In 1998, the Asso­
ciation began commemorating officers who died in the line
of duty by placing memorials, in the form of 12- by 6-foot
white crosses, at or near locations where the officers were
killed. The fallen officer’s name, rank, and badge number
are emblazoned across the full length of the horizontal
beam of each memorial. The vertical beam bears the
symbol of the Utah Highway Patrol, the year of the of­
ficer’s death, and a plaque displaying the officer’s picture,
his biographical information, and details of his death. To
date, the Association has erected 13 cross memorials.
The Association chose the cross because it believed that
crosses are used both generally in cemeteries to commem­
orate the dead and specifically by uniformed services to
memorialize those who died in the line of duty. The Asso­
ciation also believed that only the cross effectively and
simultaneously conveyed the messages of death, honor,
remembrance, gratitude, sacrifice, and safety that the Asso­
ciation wished to communicate to the public. Surviving
family members of the fallen officers approved each
memorial, and no family ever requested that the Associa­
tion use a symbol other than the cross.
The private Association designed, funded, owns, and
maintains the memorials. To ensure that the memorials
would be visible to the public, safe to view, and near the
spot of the officers’ deaths, the Association requested and
received permission from the State of Utah to erect some
of the memorials on roadside public rights-of-way, at rest
areas, and on the lawn of the Utah Highway Patrol office.
In the permit, the State expressed that it “neither ap­
proves or disapproves the memorial marker.” Brief in
Opposition 3, n. 3 (internal quotation marks omitted).
Respondents, American Atheists, Inc., and some of its
——————
1 These cases were decided on a motion for summary judgment.
These facts are undisputed.

