Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

THOMAS, J., dissenting

pull over and view the crosses more thoroughly and would
have allowed their observer to view four of the memorials
located on side-streets with lower speed limits. Id., at
1109 (opinion of Gorsuch, J.).
Next, the members of the court disagreed about what a
reasonable observer would feel. The panel worried that
the use of a Christian symbol to memorialize fallen officers
would cause the observer to think the Utah Highway
Patrol and Christianity had “some connection,” leading
him to “fear that Christians are likely to receive preferen­
tial treatment from the [patrol]—both in their hiring
practices and, more generally, in the treatment that peo­
ple may expect to receive on Utah’s highways.” 616 F. 3d,
at 1160. The dissenters’ reasonable observer, however,
would not take such a “paranoid,” “conspiratorial view of
life,” “conjur[ing] up fears of religious discrimination” by a
“ ‘Christian police,’ ” especially in light of the more plausi­
ble explanation that the crosses were simply memorials.
637 F. 3d, at 1105 (opinion of Kelly, J.). The panel also
emphasized that the “massive size” of these crosses would
heighten the reasonable observer’s fear of discrimination
and proselytization, unlike the “more humble spirit of
small roadside crosses.” 616 F. 3d, at 1161–1162. The
dissenters, by contrast, insisted that the size of the crosses
was necessary to ensure that the reasonable observer
would “take notice of the display and absorb its message”
of remembrance and to ensure that the crosses could
contain all of the secular facts necessary to assuage the
reasonable observer’s fears. 637 F. 3d, at 1105–1106
(opinion of Kelly, J.).
Finally, the members of the court disputed what the
reasonable observer would know. The panel acknowledged
that the reasonable observer would recognize that the
crosses commemorated death, but he would see only that
the symbol “memorializes the death of a Christian.” 616
F. 3d, at 1161. That the designers of the cross memorials

