10

UTAH HIGHWAY PATROL ASSN. v. AMERICAN
ATHEISTS, INC.
THOMAS, J., dissenting





test is capable of consistent application”). That confidence
was misplaced. Indeed, JUSTICE KENNEDY proved presci­
ent when he observed that the endorsement test amounted
to “unguided examination of marginalia,” “using little
more than intuition and a tape measure.” Id., at 675–676
(opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting
in part).
Since the inception of the endorsement test, we have
learned that a creche displayed on government property
violates the Establishment Clause, except when it doesn’t.
Compare id., at 579–581 (opinion of Blackmun, J.) (hold­
ing unconstitutional a solitary creche, surrounded by a
“fence-and-floral frame,” bearing a plaque stating “This
Display Donated by the Holy Name Society,” and located
in the “main,” “most beautiful,” and “most public” part of a
county courthouse (internal quotation marks omitted), and
Smith v. County of Albemarle, 895 F. 2d 953, 955, and n. 2
(CA4 1990) (holding unconstitutional a creche consisting
of “large figures, easily visible, and illuminated at night,”
bearing a disclaimer reading “ ‘Sponsored and maintained
by Charlottesville-Albemarle Jaycees not by Albemarle
County,’ ” and located on the lawn of a county office build­
ing), with Lynch, 465 U. S., at 671 (upholding a creche
displaying 5-inch to 5-foot tall figures of Jesus, Mary,
Joseph, angels, shepherds, kings, and animals, surround­
ed by “a Santa Claus house, reindeer pulling Santa’s
sleigh, candy-striped poles, a Christmas tree, carolers,
cutout figures representing such characters as a clown,
an elephant, and a teddy bear, hundreds of colored
lights, [and] a large banner that rea[d] ‘SEASONS
GREETINGS,’ ” situated in a park in the “heart of the
shopping district”), American Civil Liberties Union of Ky.
v. Wilkinson, 895 F. 2d 1098, 1099, 1104 (CA6 1990) (up­
holding a 15-foot stable “furnished with a manger, two
large pottery jugs, a ladder, railings, and some straw, but
not with the figurines or statues commonly found in a

