Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

3

Opinion of the Court

policy,” the company terminated him. Ibid.
As these events were unfolding in the Williams case,
discovery was underway in Carpenter’s case. Carpenter
filed a motion to compel Mohawk to produce information
concerning his meeting with retained counsel and the
company’s termination decision. Mohawk maintained that
the requested information was protected by the attorney
client privilege.
The District Court agreed that the privilege applied to
the requested information, but it granted Carpenter’s
motion to compel disclosure after concluding that Mohawk
had implicitly waived the privilege through its representa
tions in the Williams case. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 51a.
The court declined to certify its order for interlocutory
appeal under 28 U. S. C. §1292(b). But, recognizing “the
seriousness of its [waiver] finding,” it stayed its ruling to
allow Mohawk to explore other potential “avenues to
appeal . . . , such as a petition for mandamus or appealing
this Order under the collateral order doctrine.” App. to
Pet. for Cert. 52a.
Mohawk filed a notice of appeal and a petition for a writ
of mandamus to the Eleventh Circuit. The Court of Ap
peals dismissed the appeal for lack of jurisdiction under 28
U. S. C. §1291, holding that the District Court’s ruling did
not qualify as an immediately appealable collateral order
within the meaning of Cohen, 337 U. S. 541. “Under
Cohen,” the Court of Appeals explained, “an order is ap
pealable if it (1) conclusively determines the disputed
question; (2) resolves an important issue completely sepa
rate from the merits of the action; and (3) is effectively
unreviewable on appeal from a final judgment.” 541 F. 3d
1048, 1052 (2008) (per curiam). According to the court,
the District Court’s waiver ruling satisfied the first two of
these requirements but not the third, because “a discovery
order that implicates the attorney-client privilege” can be
adequately reviewed “on appeal from a final judgment.”

