Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

7

Opinion of the Court

maintain attorney-client confidences—the sine qua non of
a meaningful attorney-client relationship—is “irreparably
destroyed absent immediate appeal” of adverse privilege
rulings. Brief for Petitioner 23.
We readily acknowledge the importance of the attorney
client privilege, which “is one of the oldest recognized
privileges for confidential communications.” Swidler &
Berlin v. United States, 524 U. S. 399, 403 (1998). By
assuring confidentiality, the privilege encourages clients
to make “full and frank” disclosures to their attorneys,
who are then better able to provide candid advice and
effective representation. Upjohn Co. v. United States, 449
U. S. 383, 389 (1981). This, in turn, serves “broader public
interests in the observance of law and administration of
justice.” Ibid.
The crucial question, however, is not whether an inter
est is important in the abstract; it is whether deferring
review until final judgment so imperils the interest as to
justify the cost of allowing immediate appeal of the entire
class of relevant orders. We routinely require litigants to
wait until after final judgment to vindicate valuable
rights, including rights central to our adversarial system.
See, e.g., Richardson-Merrell, 472 U. S., at 426 (holding an
order disqualifying counsel in a civil case did not qualify
for immediate appeal under the collateral order doctrine);
Flanagan v. United States, 465 U. S. 259, 260 (1984)
(reaching the same result in a criminal case, notwith
standing the Sixth Amendment rights at stake). In Digi
tal Equipment, we rejected an assertion that collateral
order review was necessary to promote “the public policy
favoring voluntary resolution of disputes.” 511 U. S., at
881. “It defies common sense,” we explained, “to maintain
that parties’ readiness to settle will be significantly damp
ened (or the corresponding public interest impaired) by a
rule that a district court’s decision to let allegedly barred
litigation go forward may be challenged as a matter of

