Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

11

Opinion of the Court

implications beyond the case at hand. But the same can
be said about many categories of pretrial discovery orders
for which collateral order appeals are unavailable. As
with these other orders, rulings adverse to the privilege
vary in their significance; some may be momentous, but
others are more mundane. Section 1292(b) appeals, man
damus, and appeals from contempt citations facilitate
immediate review of some of the more consequential at
torney-client privilege rulings. Moreover, protective or
ders are available to limit the spillover effects of disclosing
sensitive information. That a fraction of orders adverse to
the attorney-client privilege may nevertheless harm indi
vidual litigants in ways that are “only imperfectly repara
ble” does not justify making all such orders immediately
appealable as of right under §1291. Digital Equipment,
511 U. S., at 872.
In short, the limited benefits of applying “the blunt,
categorical instrument of §1291 collateral order appeal” to
privilege-related disclosure orders simply cannot justify
the likely institutional costs. Id., at 883. Permitting
parties to undertake successive, piecemeal appeals of all
adverse attorney-client rulings would unduly delay the
resolution of district court litigation and needlessly burden
the Courts of Appeals. See Wright & Miller §3914.23, at
123 (“Routine appeal from disputed discovery orders
would disrupt the orderly progress of the litigation, swamp
the courts of appeals, and substantially reduce the district
court’s ability to control the discovery process.”); cf. Cun
ningham v. Hamilton County, 527 U. S. 198, 209 (1999)
(expressing concern that allowing immediate appeal as of
right from orders fining attorneys for discovery violations
would result in “the very sorts of piecemeal appeals and
concomitant delays that the final judgment rule was de
signed to prevent”). Attempting to downplay such con
cerns, Mohawk asserts that the three Circuits in which
the collateral order doctrine currently applies to adverse

