(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MOHAWK INDUSTRIES, INC. v. CARPENTER
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–678.

Argued October 5, 2009—Decided December 8, 2009

When respondent Norman Carpenter informed the human resources
department of his employer, petitioner Mohawk Industries, Inc., that
the company employed undocumented immigrants, he was unaware
that Mohawk stood accused in a pending class action—the Williams
case—of conspiring to drive down its legal employees’ wages by know
ingly hiring undocumented workers. Mohawk directed Carpenter to
meet with the company’s retained counsel in Williams, who allegedly
pressured Carpenter to recant his statements. When he refused,
Carpenter maintains in this unlawful termination suit, Mohawk fired
him under false pretenses. In granting Carpenter’s motion to compel
Mohawk to produce information concerning his meeting with re
tained counsel and the company’s termination decision, the District
Court agreed with Mohawk that the requested information was pro
tected by the attorney-client privilege, but concluded that Mohawk
had implicitly waived the privilege through its disclosures in the Wil
liams case. The court declined to certify its order for interlocutory
appeal, and the Eleventh Circuit dismissed Mohawk’s appeal for lack
of jurisdiction, holding, inter alia, that the District Court’s ruling did
not qualify as an immediately appealable collateral order under
Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp., 337 U. S. 541, because a
discovery order implicating the attorney-client privilege can be ade
quately reviewed on appeal from final judgment.
Held: Disclosure orders adverse to the attorney-client privilege do not
qualify for immediate appeal under the collateral order doctrine.
Pp. 4–13.
(a) Courts of Appeals “have jurisdiction of appeals from all final de
cisions of the district courts.” 28 U. S. C. §1291. “Final decisions”
encompass not only judgments that “terminate an action,” but also a

