4

MOHAWK INDUSTRIES, INC. v. CARPENTER
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

review would “imperil” that interest); Digital Equipment,
supra, at 878–879 (noting that appealability under Cohen
turns on a “judgment about the value of the interests that
would be lost through rigorous application of a final judg
ment requirement,” and that an interest “qualifies as
‘important’ in Cohen’s sense” if it is “weightier than the
societal interests advanced by the ordinary operation of
final judgment principles”). As we recognized last Term,
however, our attempts to contain the Cohen doctrine have
not all been successful or persuasive. See Ashcroft, supra,
at ___ (slip op., at 8) (“[A]s a general matter, the collateral
order doctrine may have expanded beyond the limits
dictated by its internal logic and the strict application of
the criteria set out in Cohen”). In my view, this case pre
sents an opportunity to improve our approach.
The privilege interest at issue here is undoubtedly
important, both in its own right and when compared to
some of the interests (e.g., in bond and notice-cost rulings)
we have held to be appealable under Cohen. Accordingly,
the Court’s Cohen analysis does not rest on the privilege
order’s relative unimportance, but instead on its effective
reviewability after final judgment. Ante, at 8–12. Al
though I agree with the Court’s ultimate conclusion, I see
two difficulties with this approach. First, the Court em
phasizes that the alternative avenues of review it dis
cusses (which did not prove adequate in this case) would
be adequate where the privilege ruling at issue is “particu
larly injurious or novel.” Ante, at 9. If that is right, and it
seems to me that it is, then the opinion raises the question
why such avenues were not also adequate to address the
orders whose unusual importance or particularly injurious
nature we have held justified immediate appeal under
Cohen. See, e.g., Sell, supra, at 177. Second, the facts of
this particular case seem in several respects to undercut
the Court’s conclusion that the benefits of collateral order
review “cannot justify the likely institutional costs.” Ante,

