12

MOHAWK INDUSTRIES, INC. v. CARPENTER
Opinion of the Court

privilege rulings have seen only a trickle of appeals. But
this may be due to the fact that the practice in all three
Circuits is relatively new and not yet widely known. Were
this Court to approve collateral order appeals in the attor
ney-client privilege context, many more litigants would
likely choose that route. They would also likely seek to
extend such a ruling to disclosure orders implicating many
other categories of sensitive information, raising an array
of line-drawing difficulties.4
C
In concluding that sufficiently effective review of ad
verse attorney-client privilege rulings can be had without
resort to the Cohen doctrine, we reiterate that the class of
collaterally appealable orders must remain “narrow and
selective in its membership.” Will, 546 U. S., at 350. This
admonition has acquired special force in recent years with
the enactment of legislation designating rulemaking, “not
expansion by court decision,” as the preferred means for
determining whether and when prejudgment orders
should be immediately appealable. Swint, 514 U. S., at
48. Specifically, Congress in 1990 amended the Rules
Enabling Act, 28 U. S. C. §2071 et seq., to authorize this
Court to adopt rules “defin[ing] when a ruling of a district
court is final for the purposes of appeal under section
1291.” §2072(c). Shortly thereafter, and along similar
lines, Congress empowered this Court to “prescribe rules,
in accordance with [§2072], to provide for an appeal of an
interlocutory decision to the courts of appeals that is not
——————
4 Participating as amicus curiae in support of respondent Carpenter,
the United States contends that collateral order appeals should be
available for rulings involving certain governmental privileges “in light
of their structural constitutional grounding under the separation of
powers, relatively rare invocation, and unique importance to govern
mental functions.” Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 28. We
express no view on that issue.

