Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

5

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

at 11.* The Court responds that these case-specific argu
ments miss the point because the focus of the Cohen
analysis is whether the “entire category” or “class of
claims” at issue merits appellate review under the collat
eral order doctrine. Ante, at 6 (internal quotation marks
omitted). That is exactly right, and illustrates what in
creasingly has bothered me about making this kind of
appealability determination via case-by-case adjudication.
The exercise forces the reviewing court to subordinate the
realities of each case before it to generalized conclusions
about the “likely” costs and benefits of allowing an excep
tion to the final judgment rule in an entire “class of cases.”
The Court concedes that Congress, which holds the consti
tutional reins in this area, has determined that such value
judgments are better left to the “collective experience of
bench and bar” and the “opportunity for full airing” that
rulemaking provides. Ante, at 13. This determination is
entitled to our full respect, in deed as well as in word.
Accordingly, I would leave the value judgments the Court
makes in its opinion to the rulemaking process, and in so
doing take this opportunity to limit—effectively, predicta
bly, and in a way we should have done long ago—the
——————
* The Court concludes, for example, that in most cases final judgment
review of an erroneous privilege ruling will suffice to vindicate the
injured party’s rights because the appellate court can vacate the
adverse judgment and remand for a new trial in which the protected
material is excluded. Ante, at 8. But this case appears to involve one of
the (perhaps rare) situations in which final judgment review might not
be sufficient because it is a case in which the challenged order already
has had “implications beyond the case at hand,” namely, in the sepa
rate class action in Williams v. Mohawk Indus., Inc., No. 4:04–CV–
0003–HLM (ND Ga.). Ante, at 11. The Court also concludes that the
“likely institutional costs” of allowing collateral order review would
outweigh its benefits because, inter alia, such review would “needlessly
burden the Courts of Appeals.” Ibid. But as the Court concedes, it
must speculate on this point because the three Circuits that allow
Cohen appeals of privilege rulings have not been overwhelmed. See
ante, at 12.

