Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

9

Opinion of the Court

when they rest on factual determinations for which appel
late deference is the norm. See, e.g., Richardson-Merrell,
472 U. S., at 434 (“Most pretrial orders of district judges
are ultimately affirmed by appellate courts.”); Reise v.
Board of Regents, 957 F. 2d 293, 295 (CA7 1992) (noting
that “almost all interlocutory appeals from discovery
orders would end in affirmance” because “the district court
possesses discretion, and review is deferential”). The
breadth of the privilege and the narrowness of its excep
tions will thus tend to exert a much greater influence on
the conduct of clients and counsel than the small risk that
the law will be misapplied.2
Moreover, were attorneys and clients to reflect upon
their appellate options, they would find that litigants
confronted with a particularly injurious or novel privilege
ruling have several potential avenues of review apart from
collateral order appeal. First, a party may ask the district
court to certify, and the court of appeals to accept, an
interlocutory appeal pursuant to 28 U. S. C. §1292(b). The
preconditions for §1292(b) review—“a controlling question
of law,” the prompt resolution of which “may materially
advance the ultimate termination of the litigation”—are
most likely to be satisfied when a privilege ruling involves
a new legal question or is of special consequence, and
district courts should not hesitate to certify an interlocu
tory appeal in such cases. Second, in extraordinary cir
cumstances—i.e., when a disclosure order “amount[s] to a
judicial usurpation of power or a clear abuse of discretion,”
or otherwise works a manifest injustice—a party may
petition the court of appeals for a writ of mandamus.
Cheney v. United States Dist. Court for D. C., 542 U. S.
367, 390 (2004) (citation and internal quotation marks
——————
2 Perhaps the situation would be different if district courts were sys
tematically underenforcing the privilege, but we have no indication
that this is the case.

