2

MOHAWK INDUSTRIES, INC. v. CARPENTER
Syllabus
“small class” of prejudgment orders that are “collateral to” an action’s
merits and “too important” to be denied immediate review, Cohen,
supra, at 545–546. “That small category includes only decisions that
are . . . effectively unreviewable on appeal from the final judgment in
the underlying action.” Swint v. Chambers County Comm’n, 514
U. S. 35, 42. The decisive consideration in determining whether a
right is effectively unreviewable is whether delaying review until the
entry of final judgment “would imperil a substantial public interest”
or “some particular value of a high order.” Will v. Hallock, 546 U. S.
345, 352–353. In making this determination, the Court does not en
gage in an “individualized jurisdictional inquiry,” Coopers & Lybrand
v. Livesay, 437 U. S. 463, 473, but focuses on “the entire category to
which a claim belongs,” Digital Equipment Corp. v. Desktop Direct,
Inc., 511 U. S. 863, 868. If the class of claims, taken as a whole, can
be adequately vindicated by other means, “the chance that the litiga
tion at hand might be speeded, or a ‘particular injustic[e]’ averted,”
does not provide a basis for §1291 jurisdiction. Ibid. Pp. 4–6.
(b) Effective appellate review of disclosure orders adverse to the at
torney-client privilege can be had by means other than collateral or
der appeal, including postjudgment review. Appellate courts can
remedy the improper disclosure of privileged material in the same
way they remedy a host of other erroneous evidentiary rulings: by va
cating an adverse judgment and remanding for a new trial in which
the protected material and its fruits are excluded from evidence.
Moreover, litigants confronted with a particularly injurious or novel
privilege ruling have several potential avenues of immediate review
apart from collateral order appeal. First, a party may ask the district
court to certify, and the court of appeals to accept, an interlocutory
appeal involving “a controlling question of law” the prompt resolution
of which “may materially advance the ultimate termination of the
litigation.” §1292(b). Second, in extraordinary circumstances where
a disclosure order works a manifest injustice, a party may petition
the court of appeals for a writ of mandamus. Cheney v. United States
Dist. Court for D. C., 542 U. S. 367, 380. Another option is for a party
to defy a disclosure order and incur court-imposed sanctions that,
e.g., “direc[t] that the matters embraced in the order or other desig
nated facts be taken as established,” “prohibi[t] the disobedient party
from supporting or opposing designated claims or defenses,” or
“strik[e] pleadings in whole or in part.” Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 37(b)(2).
Alternatively, when the circumstances warrant, a district court may
issue a contempt order against a noncomplying party, who can then
appeal directly from that ruling, at least when the contempt citation
can be characterized as a criminal punishment. See, e.g., Church of
Scientology of Cal. v. United States, 506 U. S. 9, 18, n. 11. These es

