4

KPMG LLP v. COCCHI
Per Curiam

direct or derivative under Delaware law. That question of
state law is not at issue here. What is at issue is the
Court of Appeal’s apparent refusal to compel arbitration
on any of the four claims based solely on a finding that two
of them, the claim of negligent misrepresentation and the
alleged violation of the FDUTPA, were nonarbitrable.
In Dean Witter, the Court noted that the Act “provides
that written agreements to arbitrate controversies arising
out of an existing contract ‘shall be valid, irrevocable, and
enforceable, save upon such grounds as exist at law or in
equity for the revocation of any contract.’ ” 470 U. S., at
218 (quoting 9 U. S. C. §2). The Court found that by its
terms, “the Act leaves no place for the exercise of discretion by a district court, but instead mandates that district
courts shall direct the parties to proceed to arbitration on
issues as to which an arbitration agreement has been
signed.” 470 U. S., at 218 (emphasis in original). Thus,
when a complaint contains both arbitrable and nonarbitrable claims, the Act requires courts to “compel arbitration of pendent arbitrable claims when one of the parties
files a motion to compel, even where the result would be
the possibly inefficient maintenance of separate proceedings in different forums.” Id., at 217. To implement this
holding, courts must examine a complaint with care to
assess whether any individual claim must be arbitrated.
The failure to do so is subject to immediate review. See
Southland Corp. v. Keating, 465 U. S. 1, 6–7 (1984).
The Court of Appeal listed all four claims, found that
two were direct, and then refused to compel arbitration on
the complaint as a whole because the arbitral agreement
“would not apply to the direct claims.” 51 So. 3d, at 1167.
By not addressing the other two claims in the complaint,
the Court of Appeal failed to give effect to the plain meaning of the Act and to the holding of Dean Witter. The
petition for certiorari is granted. The judgment of the
Court of Appeal is vacated, and the case is remanded. On

