Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Per Curiam

So. 3d, at 1168. Thus, the court found, the arbitration
clause could only be enforced if respondents’ claims were
derivative in that they arose from the services KPMG
performed for the Tremont defendants pursuant to the
audit services agreement. Applying Delaware law, which
both parties agreed was applicable, the Court of Appeal
concluded that the negligent misrepresentation and the
violation of FDUTPA claims were direct rather than derivative. A fair reading of the opinion reveals nothing to
suggest that the court came to the same conclusion about
the professional malpractice and breach of fiduciary duty
claims. Indeed, the court said nothing about those claims
at all. Finding “the arbitral agreement upon which KPMG
relied would not apply to the direct claims made by the
individual plaintiffs,” id., at 1167, the Court of Appeal
affirmed the trial court’s denial of the motion to arbitrate.
Respondents have since amended their complaint to
add a fifth claim. Citing the Court of Appeal’s decision,
the trial court again denied KPMG’s motion to compel
arbitration.
The Federal Arbitration Act reflects an “emphatic federal policy in favor of arbitral dispute resolution.”
Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc.,
473 U. S. 614, 631 (1985); Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Constr. Corp., 460 U. S. 1, 24–25 (1983)
(noting that “questions of arbitrability [must]. . . be addressed with a healthy regard for the federal policy favoring arbitration”). This policy, as contained within the Act,
“requires courts to enforce the bargain of the parties to
arbitrate,” Dean Witter, supra, at 217, and “cannot possibly require the disregard of state law permitting arbitration by or against nonparties to the written arbitration
agreement,” Arthur Andersen LLP v. Carlisle, 556 U. S.
624, 630, n. 5 (2009) (emphasis deleted). Both parties
agree that whether the claims in the complaint are arbitrable turns on the question whether they must be deemed

