6

WONG v. SMITH
ALITO, J., dissenting

tion omitted)). Neither the trial judge’s decision to employ
the practice here nor the state appellate court’s approval
of the instruction ran afoul of clearly established federal
law.
The Ninth Circuit’s contrary decision rested in large
measure on its concern that the comments “pointed the
jury to evidence leading to a particular verdict,” while
omitting to mention other evidence favorable to Smith.
580 F. 3d, at 1081, 1083. But the common-law privilege to
comment on the evidence has never required a compendi
ous summary. Rather, the judge has traditionally enjoyed
the power to focus on the particular evidence the judge
thinks important, and to share with the jury an opinion on
that evidence. Vicksburg, supra, at 553; Quercia, 289
U. S., at 469. It was not unreasonable under this Court’s
clearly established law for the California appellate court to
approve that practice here.
The Ninth Circuit’s opinion also suggests that, when a
jury is “deadlocked,” the judge may provide only “appro
priate encouragement . . . to deliberate,” and must refrain
from providing the “judge’s selective view of the evidence.”
580 F. 3d, at 1080. None of this Court’s constitutional
cases establish such a rule. And this Court’s supervisory
power cases (which, if anything, set a more demanding
standard than the constitutional minimum) have specifi
cally upheld judicial comments that provide a particular
“view of the evidence” to an apparently deadlocked jury.
See Simmons v. United States, 142 U. S. 148, 155 (1891)
(no error where judge denied deadlocked jury’s request to
be discharged and told them “that he regarded the testi
mony as convincing”). Nothing in this Court’s clearly
established law prohibits the trial judge from offering an
opinion to a jury that is struggling to reach a verdict.
The Ninth Circuit was also troubled that the trial
judge’s comments appeared to be designed to address the
concerns of the holdout juror. 580 F. 3d, at 1082. And the

