2

WONG v. SMITH
ALITO, J., dissenting

time reaching agreement on the oral-copulation count.
Tests showed that semen recovered from the crime scene
matched Smith’s DNA, but Mrs. S. had originally identi
fied Hinex as her attacker.
On the fourth day of deliberations, one juror sent the
judge a note stating that he was unable to vote to convict
Smith on the oral-copulation count because he thought the
DNA evidence was unreliable. The trial judge then gave
the jury a modified version of an Allen charge. See Allen
v. United States, 164 U. S. 492 (1896). When further
deliberations proved fruitless, the judge decided to exer
cise the judicial authority, as recognized by the State
Constitution, to “comment on the evidence.” See Cal.
Const., Art. VI, §10.
At the outset, the judge reminded the jurors that they
were the “ ‘exclusive judges of the facts.’ ” Smith v. Curry,
580 F. 3d 1071, 1077 (CA9 2009). He explained that his
comments were not intended “ ‘to impose [his] will’ ” on the
jury, but only to review “certain evidence” that they “ ‘may
not have considered.’ ” Ibid. The judge thought it “ ‘impor
tant’ ” for the jury to consider the statements Smith and
Hinex “ ‘made to law enforcement following their arrests,’ ”
particularly the “ ‘consistencies and inconsistencies’ ”
between those statements. Ibid. The judge pointed out
that Smith told police that both he and Hinex entered the
house. Smith stated that he found Mrs. S. in a back bed
room, that Smith was armed at the time, and that Mrs. S.
gave Smith a $100 bill. Id., at 1077–1078. The judge
noted that Hinex also “ ‘said Smith went to the back of the
house . . . and closed the door.’ ” Id., at 1077. But Hinex
denied going inside the house himself. The judge played
the tapes of both defendants’ statements for the jury. He
told them to consider and discuss the statements during
deliberations. Finally, the judge reiterated that his “ ‘com
ments [were] advisory only’ ” and that the jurors remained
“ ‘the exclusive judges’ ” of the facts and the “ ‘credibility of

