Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

Nos. 09–993, 09–1039, and 09–1501
_________________

09–993

PLIVA, INC., ET AL., PETITIONERS
v.
GLADYS MENSING

ACTAVIS ELIZABETH, LLC, PETITIONER
09–1039
v.
GLADYS MENSING

09–1501

ACTAVIS, INC., PETITIONER
v.
JULIE DEMAHY

ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURTS OF
APPEALS FOR THE EIGHTH AND FIFTH CIRCUITS
[June 23, 2011]

JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG,
JUSTICE BREYER, and JUSTICE KAGAN join, dissenting.
The Court today invokes the doctrine of impossibility
pre-emption to hold that federal law immunizes generic
drug manufacturers from all state-law failure-to-warn
claims because they cannot unilaterally change their la
bels. I cannot agree. We have traditionally held defen
dants claiming impossibility to a demanding standard:
Until today, the mere possibility of impossibility had not
been enough to establish pre-emption.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) permits—
and, the Court assumes, requires—generic-drug manufac
turers to propose a label change to the FDA when they
believe that their labels are inadequate. If it agrees that
the labels are inadequate, the FDA can initiate a change


2

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

to the brand-name label, triggering a corresponding
change to the generic labels. Once that occurs, a generic
manufacturer is in full compliance with both federal law
and a state-law duty to warn. Although generic manufac
turers may be able to show impossibility in some cases,
petitioners, generic manufacturers of metoclopramide
(Manufacturers), have shown only that they might have
been unable to comply with both federal law and their
state-law duties to warn respondents Gladys Mensing and
Julie Demahy. This, I would hold, is insufficient to sus
tain their burden.
The Court strains to reach the opposite conclusion. It
invents new principles of pre-emption law out of thin air to
justify its dilution of the impossibility standard. It effec
tively rewrites our decision in Wyeth v. Levine, 555 U. S.
555 (2009), which holds that federal law does not pre-empt
failure-to-warn claims against brand-name drug manufac
turers. And a plurality of the Court tosses aside our re
peated admonition that courts should hesitate to conclude
that Congress intended to pre-empt state laws governing
health and safety. As a result of today’s decision, whether
a consumer harmed by inadequate warnings can obtain
relief turns solely on the happenstance of whether her
pharmacist filled her prescription with a brand-name or
generic drug. The Court gets one thing right: This out
come “makes little sense.” Ante, at 18.
I

A

Today’s decision affects 75 percent of all prescription
drugs dispensed in this country. The dominant position of
generic drugs in the prescription drug market is the result
of a series of legislative measures, both federal and state.
In 1984, Congress enacted the Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act, 98 Stat. 1585—
commonly known as the Hatch-Waxman Amendments to


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FDCA)—to
“make available more low cost generic drugs by establish
ing a generic drug approval procedure,” H. R. Rep. No. 98–
857, pt. 1, p. 14 (1984). As the majority explains, to ac
complish this goal the amendments establish an abbrevi
ated application process for generic drugs. Ante, at 5–6;
see also 21 U. S. C. §355(j)(2)(A). The abbreviated ap
proval process implements the amendments’ core principle
that generic and brand-name drugs must be the “same” in
nearly all respects: To obtain FDA approval, a generic
manufacturer must ordinarily show, among other things,
that its product has the same active ingredients as an
approved brand-name drug; that “the route of adminis
tration, the dosage form, and the strength of the new
drug are the same” as the brand-name drug; and that its
product is “bioequivalent” to the brand-name drug.
§§355(j)(2)(A)(ii), (iii), (iv). By eliminating the need for
generic manufacturers to prove their drugs’ safety and
efficacy independently, the Hatch-Waxman Amendments
allow generic manufacturers to bring drugs to market
much less expensively.
The States have also acted to expand consumption of
low-cost generic drugs. In the years leading up to passage
of the Hatch-Waxman Amendments, States enacted legis
lation authorizing pharmacists to substitute generic drugs
when filling prescriptions for brand-name drugs. Chris
tensen, Kirking, Ascione, Welage, & Gaither, Drug Prod
uct Selection: Legal Issues, 41 J. Am. Pharmaceutical
Assn. 868, 869 (2001). Currently, all States have some
form of generic substitution law. See ibid. Some States
require generic substitution in certain circumstances.
Dept. of Health and Human Servs., ASPE Issue Brief:
Expanding the Use of Generic Drugs 7 (2010) (hereinafter
Expanding the Use of Generic Drugs);1 see, e.g., N. Y.
——————
1 Online

at http://aspe.hhs.gov/sp/reports/2010/GenericDrugs/ib.pdf


4

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Educ. Law Ann. §6816–a (West 2010). Others permit, but
do not require, substitution. Expanding the Use of Ge
neric Drugs 7; see, e.g., Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code Ann. §4073
(West Supp. 2011). Some States require patient consent to
substitution, and all States “allow the physician to specify
that the brand name must be prescribed, although with
different levels of effort from the physician.” Expanding
the Use of Generic Drugs 7.2
These legislative efforts to expand production and con
sumption of generic drugs have proved wildly successful.
It is estimated that in 1984, when the Hatch-Waxman
Amendments were enacted, generic drugs constituted 19
percent of drugs sold in this country. Congressional Bud
get Office, How Increased Competition from Generic
Drugs Has Affected Prices and Returns in the Pharmaceu
tical Industry 27 (1998).3 Today, they dominate the mar
ket. See Expanding the Use of Generic Drugs 2 (generic
drugs constituted 75 percent of all dispensed prescription
drugs in 2009). Ninety percent of drugs for which a
generic version is available are now filled with generics.
Id., at 3–4. In many cases, once generic versions of a
drug enter the market, the brand-name manufacturer stops
selling the brand-name drug altogether. See Brief for
Marc T. Law et al. as Amici Curiae 18 (citing studies
——————
(all Internet materials as visited June 17, 2011, and available in Clerk
of Court’s case file).
2 In addition, many insurance plans are structured to promote generic
use. See Congressional Budget Office, Effects of Using Generic Drugs
on Medicare’s Prescription Drug Spending 9 (2010), online at http://
www.cbo.gov/ftpdoc/118xx/doc11838/09-15-PrescriptionDrugs.pdf.
State Medicaid programs similarly promote generic use. See Kaiser
Comm’n on Medicaid and the Uninsured, State Medicaid Outpatient
Prescription Drug Policies: Findings from a National Survey,
2005 Update 10 (2005), online at www.kff.org/medicaid/upload/state
medicaid-outpatient-prescription-drug-policies-findings-from-a-national
survey-2005-update-report.pdf.
3 Online at http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/6xx/doc655/pharm.pdf.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

showing that anywhere from one-third to one-half of
generic drugs no longer have a marketed brand-name
equivalent). Reflecting the success of their products,
many generic manufacturers, including the Manufacturers
and their amici, are huge, multinational companies. In
total, generic drug manufacturers sold an estimated $66
billion of drugs in this country in 2009. See id., at 15.
B
As noted, to obtain FDA approval a generic manufac
turer must generally show that its drug is the same as an
approved brand-name drug. It need not conduct clinical
trials to prove the safety and efficacy of the drug. This
does not mean, however, that a generic manufacturer has
no duty under federal law to ensure the safety of its prod
ucts. The FDA has limited resources to conduct postap
proval monitoring of drug safety. See Wyeth, 555 U. S., at
578. Manufacturers, we have recognized, “have superior
access to information about their drugs, especially in the
postmarketing phase as new risks emerge.” Id., at 578–
579. Federal law thus obliges drug manufacturers—both
brand-name and generic—to monitor the safety of their
products.
Under federal law, generic manufacturers must “develop
written procedures for the surveillance, receipt, evalua
tion, and reporting of postmarketing adverse drug experi
ences” to the FDA.4 21 CFR §314.80(b);5 see also §314.98
(making §314.80 applicable to generic manufacturers);
Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 6, and n. 2
(hereinafter U. S. Brief). They must review all reports
of adverse drug experiences received from “any source.”
——————
4 An adverse drug experience is defined as “[a]ny adverse event asso
ciated with the use of a drug in humans, whether or not considered
drug related.” 21 CFR §314.80(a) (2006).
5 Like the majority, I refer to the pre-2007 statutes and regulations.
See ante, at 5, n. 1.


6

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

§314.80(b). If a manufacturer receives a report of a seri
ous and unexpected adverse drug experience, it must re
port the event to the FDA within 15 days and must
“promptly investigate.” §§314.80(c)(1)(i)–(ii); see also Tr.
of Oral Arg. 8. Most other adverse drug experiences must
be reported on a quarterly or yearly basis.6 §314.80(c)(2).
Generic manufacturers must also submit to the FDA an
annual report summarizing “significant new information
from the previous year that might affect the safety, ef
fectiveness, or labeling of the drug product,” including a
“description of actions the [manufacturer] has taken or
intends to take as a result of this new information.”
§314.81(b)(2)(i); see also §314.98(c).
Generic manufacturers, the majority assumes, also bear
responsibility under federal law for monitoring the ade
quacy of their warnings. I agree with the majority’s con
clusion that generic manufacturers are not permitted
unilaterally to change their labels through the “changes
being-effected” (CBE) process or to issue additional warn
ings through “Dear Doctor” letters. See ante, at 6–9.
According to the FDA, however, that generic manufactur
——————
6 At congressional hearings on the Hatch-Waxman Amendments,
representatives of the generic drug manufacturers confirmed both their
obligation and their ability to conduct postapproval investigation of
adverse drug experiences. See Drug Legislation: Hearings on H. R.
1554 et al. before the Subcommittee on Health and the Environment of
the House Committee on Energy and Commerce, 98th Cong., 1st Sess.,
45 (1983) (statement of Kenneth N. Larsen, chairman of the Generic
Pharmaceutical Industry Association (GPhA)) (generic manufacturers
“are sensitive to the importance of looking at adverse reactions”); id., at
47–48 (“[W]e will do and provide whatever is required to be performed
to meet the regulatory requirement to provide for the safety and well
being of those that are using the drug, this is our role and responsibil
ity. This is an obligation to be in this business”); id., at 50–51 (state
ment of Bill Haddad, executive officer and president of GPhA) (“Every
single generic drug company that I know has a large research staff. It
not only researches the drug that they are copying, or bringing into the
market but it researches new drugs, researches adverse reaction[s]”).


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

ers cannot disseminate additional warnings on their own
does not mean that federal law permits them to remain
idle when they conclude that their labeling is inadequate.
FDA regulations require that labeling “be revised to in
clude a warning as soon as there is reasonable evidence of
an association of a serious hazard with a drug.” 21 CFR
§201.57(e) (2006), currently codified at 21 CFR §201.80(e)
(2010); see also Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 570–571. The FDA
construes this regulation to oblige generic manufacturers
“to seek to revise their labeling and provide FDA with
supporting information about risks” when they believe that
additional warnings are necessary.7 U. S. Brief 20.
The Manufacturers disagree. They read the FDA regu
lation to require them only to ensure that their labels
match the brand-name labels. See Brief for Petitioner
PLIVA et al. 38–41. I need not decide whether the regula
tion in fact obliges generic manufacturers to approach the
FDA to propose a label change. The majority assumes
that it does. And even if generic manufacturers do not
have a duty to propose label changes, two points remain
undisputed. First, they do have a duty under federal law
——————
7 The FDA’s construction of this regulation mirrors the guidance it
provided to generic manufacturers nearly 20 years ago in announcing
the final rule implementing the abbreviated application process for
generic drugs:
“If an ANDA [i.e., application for approval of a generic drug] applicant
believes new safety information should be added to a product’s labeling,
it should contact FDA, and FDA will determine whether the labeling
for the generic and listed drugs should be revised. After approval of an
ANDA, if an ANDA holder believes that new safety information should
be added, it should provide adequate supporting information to FDA,
and FDA will determine whether the labeling for the generic and listed
drugs should be revised.” 57 Fed. Reg. 17961 (1992).
FDA’s internal procedures recognize that the Office of Generic Drugs
will have to consult with other FDA components on “some labeling
reviews.” Manual of Policies and Procedures 5200.6, p. 1 (May 9, 2001).
Consultations involving “possible serious safety concerns” receive the
highest priority. Id., at 3.


8

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

to monitor the safety of their products. And, second, they
may approach the FDA to propose a label change when
they believe a change is required.
II
This brings me to the Manufacturers’ pre-emption de
fense. State law obliged the Manufacturers to warn of
dangers to users. See Hines v. Remington Arms Co., 94–
0455, p. 10 (La. 12/8/94), 648 So. 2d 331, 337; Frey v.
Montgomery Ward & Co., 258 N. W. 2d 782, 788 (Minn.
1977). The Manufacturers contend, and the majority
agrees, that federal law pre-empts respondents’ failure-to
warn claims because, under federal law, the Manufac
turers could not have provided additional warnings to
respondents without the exercise of judgment by the FDA.
I cannot endorse this novel conception of impossibility
pre-emption.
A
Two principles guide all pre-emption analysis. First,
“ ‘the purpose of Congress is the ultimate touchstone in
every pre-emption case.’ ” Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 565 (quoting
Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr, 518 U. S. 470, 485 (1996)). Sec
ond, “ ‘[i]n all pre-emption cases, and particularly in those
in which Congress has legislated . . . in a field which the
States have traditionally occupied, . . . we start with the
assumption that the historic police powers of the States
were not to be superseded by the Federal Act unless that
was the clear and manifest purpose of Congress.’ ” Wyeth,
555 U. S., at 565 (quoting Lohr, 518 U. S., at 485; some
internal quotation marks omitted; alterations in original).
These principles find particular resonance in these
cases. The States have traditionally regulated health and
safety matters. See id., at 485. Notwithstanding Con
gress’ “certain awareness of the prevalence of state tort
litigation” against drug manufacturers, Wyeth, 555 U. S.,


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

at 575, Congress has not expressly pre-empted state-law
tort actions against prescription drug manufacturers,
whether brand-name or generic. To the contrary, when
Congress amended the FDCA in 1962 to “enlarg[e] the
FDA’s powers to ‘protect the public health’ and ‘assure the
safety, effectiveness, and reliability of drugs,’ [it] took care
to preserve state law.” Id., at 567 (quoting 76 Stat. 780);
see Pub. L. 87–781, §202, 76 Stat. 793 (“Nothing in the
amendments made by this Act to the [FDCA] shall be
construed as invalidating any provision of State law which
would be valid in the absence of such amendments unless there is a direct and positive conflict between such
amendments and such provision of State law”). Notably,
although Congress enacted an express pre-emption provi
sion for medical devices in 1976, see Pub. L. 94–295, §521,
90 Stat. 574, 21 U. S. C. §360k(a), it included no such
provision in the Hatch-Waxman Amendments eight years
later. Cf. Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 567, 574–575. Congress’
“silence on the issue . . . is powerful evidence that [it] did
not intend FDA oversight to be the exclusive means of
ensuring drug safety and effectiveness.” Id., at 575.
B
Federal law impliedly pre-empts state law when state
and federal law “conflict”—i.e., when “it is impossible for a
private party to comply with both state and federal law” or
when state law “stands as an obstacle to the accomplish
ment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of
Congress.” Crosby v. National Foreign Trade Council, 530
U. S. 363, 372–373 (2000) (internal quotation marks omit
ted). The Manufacturers rely solely on the former ground
of pre-emption.
Impossibility pre-emption, we have emphasized, “is a de
manding defense.” Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 573. Because
pre-emption is an affirmative defense, a defendant seeking
to set aside state law bears the burden to prove impossibil


10

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

ity. See ibid.; Silkwood v. Kerr-McGee Corp., 464 U. S.
238, 255 (1984). To prevail on this defense, a defendant
must demonstrate that “compliance with both federal and
state [law] is a physical impossibility.” Florida Lime &
Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Paul, 373 U. S. 132, 142–143
(1963); see also Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 573. In other words,
there must be an “inevitable collision” between federal and
state law. Florida Lime, 373 U. S., at 143. “The existence
of a hypothetical or potential conflict is insufficient to
warrant” pre-emption of state law. Rice v. Norman Wil
liams Co., 458 U. S. 654, 659 (1982); see also Gade v.
National Solid Wastes Management Assn., 505 U. S. 88,
110 (1992) (KENNEDY, J., concurring in part and concur
ring in judgment). In other words, the mere possibility of
impossibility is not enough.
The Manufacturers contend that it was impossible for
them to provide additional warnings to respondents Men
sing and Demahy because federal law prohibited them
from changing their labels unilaterally.8 They concede,
however, that they could have asked the FDA to initiate a
label change. If the FDA agreed that a label change was
required, it could have asked, and indeed pressured, the
brand-name manufacturer to change its label, triggering
a corresponding change to the Manufacturers’ generic la
——————
8 In its decision below, the Eighth Circuit suggested that the Manu
facturers could not show impossibility because federal law merely
permitted them to sell generic drugs; it did not require them to do so.
See Mensing v. Wyeth, Inc., 588 F. 3d 603, 611 (2009) (“The generic
defendants were not compelled to market metoclopramide. If they
realized their label was insufficient but did not believe they could even
propose a label change, they could have simply stopped selling the
product”); see also Geier v. American Honda Motor Co., 529 U. S. 861,
873 (2000) (describing “a case of impossibility” as one “in which state
law penalizes what federal law requires” (emphasis added)). Respon
dents have not advanced this argument, and I find it unnecessary to
consider.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

bels.9 Thus, had the Manufacturers invoked the available
mechanism for initiating label changes, they may well
have been able to change their labels in sufficient time to
warn respondents. Having failed to do so, the Manufac
turers cannot sustain their burden (at least not without
further factual development) to demonstrate that it was
impossible for them to comply with both federal and state
law. At most, they have demonstrated only “a hypotheti
cal or potential conflict.” Rice, 458 U. S., at 659.
Like the majority, the Manufacturers focus on the fact
that they cannot change their labels unilaterally—which
distinguishes them from the brand-name-manufacturer
defendant in Wyeth. They correctly point out that in
Wyeth we concluded that the FDA’s CBE regulation au
thorized the defendant to strengthen its warnings before
receiving agency approval of its supplemental application
describing the label change. 555 U. S., at 568–571; see
also 21 CFR §314.70(c)(6). But the defendant’s label
change was contingent on FDA acceptance, as the FDA
retained “authority to reject labeling changes made pur
suant to the CBE regulation.” Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 571.
Thus, in the long run, a brand-name manufacturer’s com
pliance with a state-law duty to warn required action by
two actors: The brand-name manufacturer had to change
the label and the FDA, upon reviewing the supplemental
application, had to agree with the change.10 The need for
——————
9 At

the time respondents’ cause of action arose, the FDA did not have
authority to require a brand-name manufacturer to change its label.
(It received that authority in 2007. See Pub. L. 110–85, §901, 121
Stat. 924–926, 21 U. S. C. §355(o)(4) (2006 ed., Supp. III). It did, how
ever, have the equally significant authority to withdraw the brand-name
manufacturer’s permission to market its drug if the manufacturer
refused to make a requested labeling change. See 21 U. S. C. §355(e)
(2006 ed.); 21 CFR §314.150(b)(3).
10 A brand-name manufacturer’s ability to comply with a state-law
duty to warn would depend on its own unilateral actions only during
the period after it should have changed its label but before the FDA


12

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

FDA approval of the label change did not make compliance
with federal and state law impossible in every case. In
stead, because the defendant bore the burden to show
impossibility, we required it to produce “clear evidence
that the FDA would not have approved a change to [the]
label.” Ibid.
I would apply the same approach in these cases. State
law, respondents allege, required the Manufacturers to
provide a strengthened warning about the dangers of
long-term metoclopramide use.11 Just like the brand-name
manufacturer in Wyeth, the Manufacturers had available
to them a mechanism for attempting to comply with their
state-law duty to warn. Federal law thus “accommodated”
the Manufacturers’ state-law duties. See ante, at 18, n. 8.
It was not necessarily impossible for the Manufacturers to
comply with both federal and state law because, had they
approached the FDA, the FDA may well have agreed that
a label change was necessary. Accordingly, as in Wyeth, I
would require the Manufacturers to show that the FDA
would not have approved a proposed label change. They
have not made such a showing: They do “not argue that
[they] attempted to give the kind of warning required by
[state law] but [were] prohibited from doing so by the
FDA.” Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 572.
This is not to say that generic manufacturers could
never show impossibility. If a generic-manufacturer de
fendant proposed a label change to the FDA but the FDA
rejected the proposal, it would be impossible for that
defendant to comply with a state-law duty to warn. Like
wise, impossibility would be established if the FDA had
——————
would have approved or disapproved the label change. The claim in
Wyeth does not appear to have arisen during that period.
11 Respondents’ state-law claim is not that the Manufacturers were
required to ask the FDA for assistance in changing the labels; the role
of the FDA arises only as a result of the Manufacturers’ pre-emption
defense.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

not yet responded to a generic manufacturer’s request for
a label change at the time a plaintiff’s injuries arose. A
generic manufacturer might also show that the FDA had
itself considered whether to request enhanced warnings in
light of the evidence on which a plaintiff’s claim rests but
had decided to leave the warnings as is. (The Manufac
turers make just such an argument in these cases. See,
e.g., Brief for Petitioner Actavis et al. 11.) But these are
questions of fact to be established through discovery.
Because the burden of proving impossibility falls on the
defendant, I would hold that federal law does not render
it impossible for generic manufacturers to comply with
a state-law duty to warn as a categorical matter.
This conclusion flows naturally from the overarching prin
ciples governing our pre-emption doctrine. See supra,
at 8. Our “respect for the States as ‘independent sover
eigns in our federal system’ leads us to assume that ‘Con
gress does not cavalierly pre-empt state-law causes of
action.’ ” Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 565–566, n. 3 (quoting Lohr,
518 U. S., at 485). It is for this reason that we hold defen
dants asserting impossibility to a “demanding” standard.
Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 573. This presumption against pre
emption has particular force when the Federal Govern
ment has afforded defendants a mechanism for complying
with state law, even when that mechanism requires fed
eral agency action. (The presumption has even greater
force when federal law requires defendants to invoke that
mechanism, as the majority assumes in these cases.) In
such circumstances, I would hold, defendants will usually
be unable to sustain their burden of showing impossibility
if they have not even attempted to employ that mecha
nism. Any other approach threatens to infringe the
States’ authority over traditional matters of state inter
est—such as the failure-to-warn claims here—when Con
gress expressed no intent to pre-empt state law.


14

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

C
The majority concedes that the Manufacturers might
have been able to accomplish under federal law what state
law requires. Ante, at 12–13. To reach the conclusion that
the Manufacturers have nonetheless satisfied their bur
den to show impossibility, the majority invents a new pre
emption rule: “The question for ‘impossibility’ is whether
the private party could independently do under federal
law what state law requires of it.” Ante, at 13 (emphasis added). Because the Manufacturers could not have
changed their labels without the exercise of judgment by
the FDA, the majority holds, compliance with both state
and federal law was impossible in these cases.12
The majority’s new test has no basis in our precedents.
The majority cites only Wyeth in support of its test. As
discussed above, however, Wyeth does not stand for the
proposition that it is impossible to comply with both fed
eral and state law whenever federal agency approval is
required. To the contrary, label changes by brand-name
manufacturers such as Wyeth are subject to FDA review
and acceptance. See supra, at 11–12. And, even if Wyeth
could be characterized as turning on the fact that the
brand-name manufacturer could change its label unilater
ally, the possibility of unilateral action was, at most, a
sufficient condition for rejecting the impossibility defense
in that case. Wyeth did not hold that unilateral action is a
necessary condition in every case.
——————
12 These cases do not involve a situation where a brand-name
manufacturer itself produces generic drugs. See Okie, Multinational
Medicines—Ensuring Drug Quality in an Era of Global Manufactur
ing, 361 N. Eng. J. Med. 737, 738 (2009); see also GPhA, Frequently
Asked Questions About Generics, http://www.gphaonline.org/about
gpha/about-generics/faq (“Brand-name companies make about half of
generic drugs”). In that case, the manufacturer could independently
change the brand-name label under the CBE regulation, triggering a
corresponding change to its own generic label.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

With so little support in our case law, the majority un
derstandably turns to other rationales. None of the
rationales that it offers, however, makes any sense. First,
it offers a reductio ad absurdum: If the possibility of FDA
approval of a label change is sufficient to avoid conflict in
these cases, it warns, as a “logical conclusion” so too would
be the possibility that the FDA might rewrite its regula
tions or that Congress might amend the Hatch-Waxman
Amendments. Ante, at 14. The logic of this conclusion
escapes me. Conflict analysis necessarily turns on exist
ing law. It thus would be ridiculous to conclude that
federal and state law do not conflict on the ground that the
defendant could have asked a federal agency or Congress
to change the law. Here, by contrast, the Manufacturers’
compliance with their state-law duty to warn did not re
quire them to ask for a change in federal law, as the
majority itself recognizes. See ante, at 13 (“[F]ederal law
would permit the Manufacturers to comply with the state
labeling requirements if, and only if, the FDA and the
brand-name manufacturer changed the brand-name label
to do so”). The FDA already afforded them a mechanism
for attempting to comply with their state-law duties.
Indeed, the majority assumes that FDA regulations re
quired the Manufacturers to request a label change when
they had “reasonable evidence of an association of a seri
ous hazard with a drug.” 21 CFR §201.57(e).
Second, the majority suggests that any other approach
would render conflict pre-emption “illusory” and “meaning
less.” Ante, at 14. It expresses concern that, without a
robust view of what constitutes conflict, the Supremacy
Clause would not have “any force” except in cases of ex
press pre-emption. Ibid. To the extent the majority’s
purported concern is driven by its reductio ad absurdum,
see ante, at 14, n. 6, that concern is itself illusory, for the
reasons just stated. To the extent the majority is con
cerned that our traditionally narrow view of what consti


16

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

tutes impossibility somehow renders conflict pre-emption
as a whole meaningless, that concern simply makes no
sense: We have repeatedly recognized that conflict pre
emption may be found, even absent impossibility, where
state law “stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment
and execution of the full purposes and objectives of
Congress.” Crosby, 530 U. S., at 373 (internal quotation
marks omitted); see, e.g., Geier v. American Honda Motor
Co., 529 U. S. 861, 886 (2000); Barnett Bank of Marion
Cty., N. A. v. Nelson, 517 U. S. 25, 31 (1996); Hines v.
Davidowitz, 312 U. S. 52, 67 (1941). The majority’s ex
pansive view of impossibility is thus unnecessary to pre
vent conflict pre-emption from losing all meaning.13
Third, a plurality of the Court adopts the novel theory
that the Framers intended for the Supremacy Clause to
operate as a so-called non obstante provision. See ante, at
15–17 (citing Nelson, Preemption, 86 Va. L. Rev. 225
(2000)). According to the plurality, non obstante provi
sions in statutes “instruc[t] courts not to apply the general
presumption against implied repeals.” Ante, at 15 (inter
nal quotation marks omitted); see also ante, at 16 (stating
that when a statute contains a non obstante provision,
“ ‘courts will be less inclined against recognizing repug
nancy in applying such statutes’ ” (quoting J. Sutherland,
Statutes and Statutory Construction §147, p. 199 (1891)).
From this understanding of the Supremacy Clause, the
plurality extrapolates the principle that “courts should not
strain to find ways to reconcile federal law with seemingly
——————
13 JUSTICE

THOMAS, the author of today’s opinion, has previously ex
pressed the view that obstacle pre-emption is inconsistent with the
Constitution. See Williamson v. Mazda Motor of America, Inc., 562
U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (opinion concurring in judgment) (slip op., at 2–5);
Wyeth v. Levine, 555 U. S. 555, 604 (2009) (opinion concurring in
judgment). That position, however, has not been accepted by this
Court, and it thus should not justify the majority’s novel expansion of
impossibility pre-emption.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

conflicting state law.” Ante, at 15.
This principle would have been news to the Congress
that enacted the Hatch-Waxman Amendments in 1984:
Our precedents hold just the opposite. For more than half
a century, we have directed courts to presume that con
gressional action does not supersede “the historic police
powers of the States . . . unless that was the clear and
manifest purpose of Congress.” Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator
Corp., 331 U. S. 218, 230 (1947); see also Gade, 505 U. S.,
at 111–112 (KENNEDY, J., concurring in part and concur
ring in judgment). We apply this presumption against
pre-emption both where Congress has spoken to the pre
emption question and where it has not. See Wyeth, 555
U. S., at 566, n. 3. In the context of express pre-emption,
we read federal statutes whenever possible not to pre
empt state law. See Altria Group, Inc. v. Good, 555 U. S.
70, 77 (2008) (“[W]hen the text of a pre-emption clause
is susceptible of more than one plausible reading, courts
ordinarily ‘accept the reading that disfavors pre-emption’ ”
(quoting Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC, 544 U. S. 431,
449 (2005))); see also Cipollone v. Liggett Group, Inc., 505
U. S. 504, 518 (1992). And, when the claim is that federal
law impliedly pre-empts state law, we require a “strong”
showing of a conflict “to overcome the presumption that
state and local regulation . . . can constitutionally coexist
with federal regulation.” Hillsborough County v. Auto
mated Medical Laboratories, Inc., 471 U. S. 707, 716
(1985).
The plurality’s new theory of the Supremacy Clause is a
direct assault on these precedents.14 Whereas we have
——————
14 The author of the law review article proposing this theory of the
Supremacy Clause acknowledges as much. See Nelson, Preemption, 86
Va. L. Rev. 225, 304 (2000) (“The non obstante provision rejects an
artificial presumption that Congress did not intend to contradict any
state laws and that federal statutes must therefore be harmonized with
state law”). The plurality, on the other hand, carefully avoids discuss


18

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

long presumed that federal law does not pre-empt, or
repeal, state law, the plurality today reads the Supremacy
Clause to operate as a provision instructing courts “not to
apply the general presumption against implied repeals.”
Ante, at 15 (internal quotation marks omitted; emphasis
added). And whereas we have long required evidence of a
“clear and manifest” purpose to pre-empt, Rice, 331 U. S.,
at 230, the plurality now instructs courts to “look no fur
ther than the ordinary meaning of federal law” before
concluding that Congress must have intended to cast aside
state law, ante, at 16 (internal quotation marks and al
teration omitted).
That the plurality finds it necessary to resort to this
novel theory of the Supremacy Clause—a theory advo
cated by no party or amici in these cases—is telling.
Proper application of the longstanding presumption
against pre-emption compels the conclusion that federal
law does not render compliance with state law impossible
merely because it requires an actor to seek federal agency
approval. When federal law provides actors with a mech
anism for attempting to comply with their state-law
duties, “respect for the States as ‘independent sovereigns
in our federal system’ ” should require those actors to
attempt to comply with state law before being heard to
complain that compliance with both laws was impossible.
Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 565–566, n. 3 (quoting Lohr, 518
U. S., at 485).
III
Today’s decision leads to so many absurd consequences
that I cannot fathom that Congress would have intended
to pre-empt state law in these cases.
First, the majority’s pre-emption analysis strips generic
—————— 

ing the ramifications of its new theory for the longstanding presump

tion against pre-emption. 



Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

drug consumers of compensation when they are injured by
inadequate warnings. “If Congress had intended to de
prive injured parties of [this] long available form of com
pensation, it surely would have expressed that intent more
clearly.” Bates, 544 U. S., at 449. Given the longstanding
existence of product liability actions, including for failure
to warn, “[i]t is difficult to believe that Congress would,
without comment, remove all means of judicial recourse
for those injured by illegal conduct.” Silkwood, 464 U. S.,
at 251; see also Bruesewitz v. Wyeth LLC, 562 U. S. ___,
___ (2011) (slip op., at 16) (noting our previously expressed
“doubt that Congress would quietly preempt product
liability claims without providing a federal substitute”).
In concluding that Congress silently immunized generic
manufacturers from all failure-to-warn claims, the major
ity disregards our previous hesitance to infer congres
sional intent to effect such a sweeping change in tradi
tional state-law remedies.
As the majority itself admits, a drug consumer’s right
to compensation for inadequate warnings now turns on
the happenstance of whether her pharmacist filled her pre
scription with a brand-name drug or a generic. If a con
sumer takes a brand-name drug, she can sue the manufac
turer for inadequate warnings under our opinion in Wyeth.
If, however, she takes a generic drug, as occurs 75 percent
of the time, she now has no right to sue. The majority
offers no reason to think—apart from its new articulation
of the impossibility standard—that Congress would have
intended such an arbitrary distinction. In some States,
pharmacists must dispense generic drugs absent instruc
tion to the contrary from a consumer’s physician. Even
when consumers can request brand-name drugs, the price
of the brand-name drug or the consumers’ insurance plans
may make it impossible to do so. As a result, in many
cases, consumers will have no ability to preserve their
state-law right to recover for injuries caused by inade


20

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

quate warnings.
Second, the majority’s decision creates a gap in the
parallel federal-state regulatory scheme in a way that
could have troubling consequences for drug safety. As we
explained in Wyeth, “[s]tate tort suits uncover unknown
drug hazards and provide incentives for drug manufactur
ers to disclose safety risks promptly.” 555 U. S., at 579.
Thus, we recognized, “state law offers an additional, and
important, layer of consumer protection that complements
FDA regulation.” Ibid. Today’s decision eliminates the
traditional state-law incentives for generic manufacturers
to monitor and disclose safety risks. When a generic drug
has a brand-name equivalent on the market, the brand
name manufacturer will remain incentivized to uncover
safety risks. But brand-name manufacturers often leave
the market once generic versions are available, see supra,
at 4–5, meaning that there will be no manufacturer sub
ject to failure-to-warn liability. As to those generic drugs,
there will be no “additional . . . layer of consumer protec
tion.” Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 579.
Finally, today’s decision undoes the core principle of
the Hatch-Waxman Amendments that generic and brand
name drugs are the “same” in nearly all respects.15 See
Brief for Rep. Henry A. Waxman as Amicus Curiae 9.
The majority pins the expansion of the generic drug market
on “the special, and different, regulation of generic drugs,”
which allows generic manufacturers to produce their
drugs more cheaply. Ante, at 19. This tells only half the
story. The expansion of the market for generic drugs has
also flowed from the increased acceptance of, and trust in,
——————
15 According to the GPhA, both the FDA and the generic drug indus
try “spend millions of dollars each year . . . seeking to reassure consum
ers that affordable generic drugs really are—as federal law compels
them to be—the same as their pricier brand-name counterparts.” Brief
for GPhA as Amicus Curiae on Pet. for Cert. in Nos. 09–993, 09–1039,
pp. 2–3.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

generic drugs by consumers, physicians, and state legisla
tors alike.
Today’s decision introduces a critical distinction be
tween brand-name and generic drugs. Consumers of
brand-name drugs can sue manufacturers for inadequate
warnings; consumers of generic drugs cannot. These
divergent liability rules threaten to reduce consumer
demand for generics, at least among consumers who can
afford brand-name drugs. They may pose “an ethical
dilemma” for prescribing physicians. Brief for American
Medical Association et al. as Amici Curiae 29. And they
may well cause the States to rethink their longstanding
efforts to promote generic use through generic substitution
laws. See Brief for National Conference of State Legisla
tors as Amicus Curiae 15 (state generic substitution laws
“have proceeded on the premise that . . . generic drugs are
not, from citizens’ perspective, materially different from
brand ones, except for the lower price”). These conse
quences are directly at odds with the Hatch-Waxman
Amendments’ goal of increasing consumption of generic
drugs.
Nothing in the Court’s opinion convinces me that, in
enacting the requirement that generic labels match their
corresponding brand-name labels, Congress intended
these absurd results. The Court certainly has not shown
that such was the “clear and manifest purpose of Con
gress.” Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 565 (internal quotation marks
omitted; emphasis added). To the contrary, because fed
eral law affords generic manufacturers a mechanism for
attempting to comply with their state-law duties to warn,
I would hold that federal law does not categorically
pre-empt state-law failure-to-warn claims against generic
manufacturers. Especially in light of the presumption
against pre-emption, the burden should fall on generic
manufacturers to show that compliance was impossible on
the particular facts of their case. By holding that the


22

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

“possibility of possibility” is insufficient to “defea[t]” pre
emption in these cases, ante, at 18, n. 8, the Court contorts
our pre-emption doctrine and exempts defendants from
their burden to establish impossibility. With respect,
I dissent.

