OCTOBER TERM, 2010

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

PLIVA, INC., ET AL. v. MENSING
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–993.

Argued March 30, 2011—Decided June 23, 2011*

Five years after the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) first ap
proved metoclopramide, a drug commonly used to treat digestive
tract problems, under the brand name Reglan, generic manufacturers
such as petitioners also began producing the drug. Because of accu
mulating evidence that long-term metoclopramide use can cause
tardive dyskinesia, a severe neurological disorder, warning labels for
the drug have been strengthened and clarified several times, most re
cently in 2009.
Respondents were prescribed Reglan in 2001 and 2002, but both
received the generic drug from their pharmacists. After taking the
drug as prescribed for several years, both developed tardive dyskine
sia. In separate state-court tort actions, they sued petitioners, the
generic drug manufacturers that produced the metoclopramide they
took (Manufacturers). Each respondent alleged, inter alia, that long
term metoclopramide use caused her disorder and that the Manufac
turers were liable under state tort law for failing to provide adequate
warning labels. In both suits, the Manufacturers urged that federal
statutes and FDA regulations pre-empted the state tort claims by re
quiring the same safety and efficacy labeling for generic metoclopra
mide as was mandated at the time for Reglan. The Fifth and Eighth
Circuits rejected these arguments, holding that respondents’ claims
were not pre-empted.
Held: The judgment is reversed, and the cases are remanded.
——————
* Together with No. 09–1039, Actavis Elizabeth, LLC v. Mensing, also
on certiorari to the same court, and No. 09–1501, Actavis, Inc. v. De
mahy, on certiorari to the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth
Circuit.


2

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
Syllabus

588 F. 3d 603 and 593 F. 3d 428, reversed and remanded.
JUSTICE THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court with respect to
all but Part III–B–2, concluding that federal drug regulations appli
cable to generic drug manufacturers directly conflict with, and thus
pre-empt, these state claims. Pp. 4–14, 17–20.
(a) Because pre-emption analysis requires a comparison between
federal and state law, the Court begins by identifying the state tort
duties and federal labeling requirements applicable to the Manufac
turers. Pp. 4–10.
(1) State tort law requires a manufacturer that is, or should be,
aware of its drug’s danger to label it in a way that renders it rea
sonably safe. Respondents pleaded that the Manufacturers knew, or
should have known, both that the long-term use of their products car
ried a high risk of tardive dyskinesia and that their labels did not
adequately warn of that risk. Taking these allegations as true, the
state-law duty required the Manufacturers to use a different,
stronger label than the one they actually used. Pp. 4–5.
(2) On the other hand, federal drug regulations, as interpreted by
the FDA, prevented the Manufacturers from independently changing
their generic drugs’ safety labels. A manufacturer seeking federal
approval to market a new drug must prove that it is safe and effec
tive and that the proposed label is accurate and adequate. Although
the same rules originally applied to all drugs, the 1984 law commonly
called the Hatch-Waxman Amendments allows a generic drug manu
facturer to gain FDA approval simply by showing that its drug is
equivalent to an already-approved brand-name drug, and that the
safety and efficacy labeling proposed for its drug is the same as that
approved for the brand-name drug. Respondents contend that fed
eral law nevertheless provides avenues through which the Manufac
turers could have altered their metoclopramide labels in time to pre
vent the injuries here. These include: (1) the FDA’s “changes-being
effected” (CBE) process, which permits drug manufacturers, without
preapproval, to add or strengthen a warning label; and (2) sending
“Dear Doctor” letters providing additional warnings to prescribing
physicians and other healthcare professionals. However, the FDA
denies that the Manufacturers could have used either of these proc
esses to unilaterally strengthen their warning labels. The Court de
fers to the FDA’s views because they are not plainly erroneous or in
consistent with the regulations, and there is no other reason to doubt
that they reflect the FDA’s fair and considered judgment. Auer v.
Robbins, 519 U. S. 452, 461, 462. Assuming, without deciding, that
the FDA is correct that federal law nevertheless required the Manu
facturers to ask for the agency’s assistance in convincing the brand
name manufacturer to adopt a stronger label, the Court turns to the


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
pre-emption question. Pp. 5–10.
(b) Where state and federal law directly conflict, state law must
give way. See, e.g., Wyeth v. Levine, 555 U. S. 555, 583. Such a con
flict exists where it is “impossible for a private party to comply with
both state and federal requirements.” Freightliner Corp. v. Myrick,
514 U. S. 280, 287. Pp. 11–14, 17–20.
(1) The Court finds impossibility here. If the Manufacturers had
independently changed their labels to satisfy their state-law duty to
attach a safer label to their generic metoclopramide, they would have
violated the federal requirement that generic drug labels be the same
as the corresponding brand-name drug labels. Thus, it was impossi
ble for them to comply with both state and federal law. And even if
they had fulfilled their federal duty to ask for FDA help in strength
ening the corresponding brand-name label, assuming such a duty ex
ists, they would not have satisfied their state tort-law duty. State
law demanded a safer label; it did not require communication with
the FDA about the possibility of a safer label. Pp. 11–12.
(2) The Court rejects the argument that the Manufacturers’ pre
emption defense fails because they failed to ask the FDA for help in
changing the corresponding brand-name label. The proper question
for “impossibility” analysis is whether the private party could inde
pendently do under federal law what state law requires of it. See
Wyeth, supra, at 573. Accepting respondents’ argument would render
conflict pre-emption largely meaningless by making most conflicts be
tween state and federal law illusory. In these cases, it is possible
that, had the Manufacturers asked the FDA for help, they might
have eventually been able to strengthen their warning label. But it
is also possible that they could have convinced the FDA to reinterpret
its regulations in a manner that would have opened the CBE process
to them, persuaded the FDA to rewrite its generic drug regulations
entirely, or talked Congress into amending the Hatch-Waxman
Amendments. If these conjectures sufficed to prevent federal and
state law from conflicting, it is unclear when, outside of express pre
emption, the Supremacy Clause would have any force. That Clause—
which makes federal law “the supreme Law of the Land . . . any
Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary not
withstanding,” U. S. Const., Art. VI, cl. 2—cannot be read to permit
an approach to pre-emption that renders conflict pre-emption all but
meaningless. Here, it is enough to hold that when a party cannot
satisfy its state duties without the Federal Government’s special
permission and assistance, which is dependent on the exercise of
judgment by a federal agency, that party cannot independently sat
isfy those state duties for pre-emption purposes. Pp. 12–14, 17.
(3) Wyeth is not to the contrary. The Court there held that a


4

PLIVA, INC. v. MENSING
Syllabus
state tort action against a brand-name drug manufacturer for failure
to provide an adequate warning label was not pre-empted because it
was possible for the manufacturer to comply with both state and fed
eral law under the FDA’s CBE regulation. 555 U. S., at 572–573.
The federal statutes and regulations that apply to brand-name drug
manufacturers differ, by Congress’ design, from those applicable to
generic drug manufacturers. And different federal statutes and regu
lations may, as here, lead to different pre-emption results. This
Court will not distort the Supremacy Clause in order to create simi
lar pre-emption across a dissimilar statutory scheme. Congress and
the FDA retain authority to change the law and regulations if they so
desire. Pp. 17–20.

THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to Part III–
B–2. ROBERTS, C. J., and SCALIA and ALITO, JJ., joined that opinion in
full, and KENNEDY, J., joined as to all but Part III–B–2. SOTOMAYOR, J.,
filed a dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, BREYER, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined.

