(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BERGHUIS, WARDEN v. SMITH
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1402. Argued January 20, 2010—Decided March 30, 2010
Criminal defendants have a Sixth Amendment right to trial by an im
partial jury drawn from a fair cross section of the community. See
Taylor v. Louisiana, 419 U. S. 522. To establish a prima facie viola
tion of the fair-cross-section requirement, a defendant must prove
that: (1) a group qualifying as “distinctive” (2) is not fairly and rea
sonably represented in jury venires, and (3) “systematic exclusion” in
the jury-selection process accounts for the underrepresentation.
Duren v. Missouri, 439 U. S. 357, 364.
At voir dire in the Kent County Circuit Court trial of respondent
Smith, an African-American, the venire panel included between 60
and 100 individuals, only 3 of whom, at most, were African-American.
At that time, African-Americans constituted 7.28% of the County’s
jury-eligible population, and 6% of the pool from which potential ju
rors were drawn. The court rejected Smith’s objection to the panel’s
racial composition, an all-white jury convicted him of second-degree
murder and felony firearm possession, and the court sentenced him
to life in prison with the possibility of parole.
On order of the Michigan Court of Appeals, the trial court con
ducted an evidentiary hearing on Smith’s fair-cross-section claim.
The evidence at the hearing showed, inter alia, that under the juror
assignment order in effect when Smith’s jury was empaneled, the
County assigned prospective jurors first to local district courts, and,
only after filling local needs, made remaining persons available to the
countywide Circuit Court, which heard felony cases like Smith’s.
Smith calls this procedure “siphoning.” The month after Smith’s voir
dire, however, the County reversed course and adopted a CircuitCourt-first assignment order. It did so based on the belief that the
district courts took most of the minority jurors, leaving the Circuit


2

BERGHUIS v. SMITH
Syllabus
Court with a jury pool that did not represent the entire County. The
trial court noted two means of measuring the underrepresentation of
African-Americans on Circuit Court venires. First, the court de
scribed the “absolute disparity” test, under which the percentage of
African-Americans in the jury pool (6%) is subtracted from the per
centage of African-Americans in the local, jury-eligible population
(7.28%). According to this measure, African-Americans were under
represented by 1.28%. Next, the court set out the “comparative dis
parity” test, under which the absolute disparity (1.28%) is divided by
the percentage of African-Americans in the jury-eligible population
(7.28%). The quotient (18%) indicated that, on average, AfricanAmericans were 18% less likely, when compared to the overall jury
eligible population, to be on the jury-service list. In the 11 months
after Kent County discontinued the district-court-first assignment
policy, the comparative disparity, on average, dropped from 18% to
15.1%. The hearing convinced the trial court that African-Americans
were underrepresented on Circuit Court venires. But Smith’s evi
dence, the trial court held, was insufficient to prove that the juror
assignment order, or any other part of the jury-selection process, had
systematically excluded African-Americans. The court therefore re
jected Smith’s fair-cross-section claim.
The state intermediate appellate court reversed and ordered a new
trial with jurors selected under the Circuit-Court-first assignment
order. Reversing in turn, the Michigan Supreme Court concluded
that Smith had not established a prima facie Sixth Amendment vio
lation. This Court, the state High Court observed, has specified no
preferred method for measuring whether representation of a distinc
tive group in the jury pool is fair and reasonable. The court noted
that lower federal courts had applied three tests: the absolute and
comparative disparity tests and a standard deviation test. Adopting
a case-by-case approach allowing consideration of all three means of
measuring underrepresentation, the court found that Smith had
failed to establish a legally significant disparity under any measure
ment. Nevertheless giving Smith the benefit of the doubt on under
representation, the court determined that he had not shown system
atic exclusion.
Smith then filed a federal habeas petition. The Antiterrorism and
Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA) prohibits federal ha
beas relief unless the state court’s adjudication “resulted in a decision
that was contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application of,
clearly established Federal law, as determined by the Supreme Court
of the United States,” 28 U. S. C. §2254(d)(1), or “resulted in a deci
sion that was based on an unreasonable determination of the facts in
light of the evidence presented in the State court proceeding,”


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
§2254(d)(2). Finding no infirmity in the Michigan Supreme Court’s
decision when assessed under AEDPA’s standards, the District Court
dismissed Smith’s petition. The Sixth Circuit reversed. The Court of
Appeals ruled, first, that courts should use the comparative disparity
test to measure underrepresentation where, as here, the allegedly ex
cluded group is small. The court then held that Smith’s comparative
disparity statistics demonstrated that African-Americans’ represen
tation in County Circuit Court venires was unfair and unreasonable.
It next stated that Smith had shown systematic exclusion. In accord
with the Michigan intermediate appellate court, the Sixth Circuit be
lieved that the district-court-first assignment order significantly re
duced the number of African-Americans available for Circuit Court
venires. Smith was entitled to relief, the Sixth Circuit concluded, be
cause no important state interest supported the district-court-first al
location system.
Held: The Sixth Circuit erred in ruling that the Michigan Supreme
Court’s decision “involv[ed] an unreasonable application o[f] clearly
established Federal law,” §2254(d)(1). Duren hardly establishes—no
less “clearly” so—that Smith was denied his Sixth Amendment right
to an impartial jury drawn from a fair cross section of the commu
nity. Pp. 10–16.
(a) The Duren defendant readily met all three parts of the Court’s
prima facie test when he complained of the dearth of women in a
county’s jury pool. First, he showed that women in the county were
both “numerous and distinct from men.” 439 U. S., at 364. Second,
to establish underrepresentation, he proved that women were 54% of
the jury-eligible population, but accounted for only 26.7% of those
summoned for jury service, and only 14.5% of those on the postsum
mons weekly venires from which jurors were drawn. Id., at 364–366.
Finally, to show the “systematic” cause of the underrepresentation,
he pointed to Missouri’s law permitting any woman to opt out of jury
service and to the manner in which the county administered that
law. This Court noted that “appropriately tailored” hardship exemp
tions would likely survive a fair-cross-section challenge if justified by
an important state interest, id., at 370, but concluded that no such
interest could justify the exemption for each and every woman, id., at
369–370. Pp. 10–11.
(b) Neither Duren nor any other decision of this Court specifies the
method or test courts must use to measure underrepresentation.
Each of the three methods employed or identified by the courts be
low—absolute disparity, comparative disparity, and standard devia
tion—is imperfect. Absolute disparity and comparative disparity
measurements can be misleading where, as here, members of the dis
tinctive group compose only a small percentage of the community’s


4

BERGHUIS v. SMITH
Syllabus
jury-eligible population. And it appears that no court has relied ex
clusively on a standard deviation analysis. Even absent AEDPA’s
constraint, this Court would have no cause to take sides here on the
appropriate method or methods for measuring underrepresentation.
Although the Michigan Supreme Court concluded that Smith’s statis
tical evidence failed to establish a legally significant disparity under
either the absolute or comparative disparity tests, the court neverthe
less gave Smith the benefit of the doubt on underrepresentation in
order to reach the issue ultimately dispositive in Duren: To the extent
underrepresentation existed, was it due to “systematic exclusion”?
See Duren, 439 U. S., at 364. Pp. 11–13.
(c) Smith’s evidence gave the Michigan Supreme Court little reason
to conclude that the district-court-first assignment order had any
significant effect on the representation of African-Americans on Cir
cuit Court venires. Although the record established that some
County officials believed that the assignment order created racial
disparities, and the County reversed the order in response, the belief
was not substantiated by Smith’s evidence. He introduced no evi
dence that African-Americans were underrepresented on the Circuit
Court’s venires in significantly higher percentages than on the Dis
trict Court for Grand Rapids, which had the County’s largest AfricanAmerican population. He did not address whether Grand Rapids had
more need for jurors per capita than any other district in Kent
County. And he did not compare the African-American representa
tion levels on Circuit Court venires with those on the Federal District
Court venires for the same region. See Duren, 439 U. S., at 367,
n. 25. Smith’s best evidence of systematic exclusion was the decline
in comparative underrepresentation, from 18 to 15.1%, after Kent
County reversed its assignment order. But that evidence indicated
no large change and was, in any event, insufficient to prove that the
original assignment order had a significantly adverse impact on the
representation of African-Americans on Circuit Court venires. Pp.
13–14.
(d) In addition to renewing his “siphoning” argument, Smith urges
that a laundry list of factors—e.g., the County’s practice of excusing
prospective jurors without adequate proof of alleged hardship, and
the refusal of County police to enforce orders for prospective jurors to
appear—combined to reduce systematically the number of AfricanAmericans appearing on jury lists. No “clearly established” prece
dent of this Court supports Smith’s claim. Smith urges that one sen
tence in Duren, 439 U. S., at 368–369, places the burden of proving
causation on the State. But Smith clipped that sentence from its con
text: The sentence does not concern the demonstration of a prima face
case; instead, it speaks to what the State might show to rebut the de


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Syllabus
fendant’s prima facie case. The Michigan Supreme Court was there
fore far from “unreasonable,” §2254(d)(1), in concluding that Duren
first and foremost required Smith himself to show that the underrep
resentation complained of was due to systematic exclusion. This
Court, furthermore, has never “clearly established” that jury
selection-process features of the kind on Smith’s list can give rise to a
fair-cross-section claim. Rather, the Taylor Court “recognized broad
discretion in the States” to “prescribe relevant qualifications for their
jurors and to provide reasonable exemptions.” 419 U. S., at 537–538.
And in Duren, the Court understood that hardship exemptions re
sembling those Smith assails might well “survive a fair-cross-section
challenge.” 439 U. S., at 370. Pp. 14–16.
543 F. 3d 326, reversed and remanded.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court. THOMAS,
J., filed a concurring opinion.

