(Slip Opinion) OCTOBER TERM, 2010 Syllabus NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. Syllabus AT&T INC. ET AL. No. 09–1279. Argued January 19, 2011—Decided March 1, 2011 The Freedom of Information Act requires federal agencies to make re cords and documents publicly available upon request, subject to sev eral statutory exemptions. One of those exemptions, Exemption 7(C), covers law enforcement records the disclosure of which “could rea sonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of per sonal privacy.” 5 U. S. C. §552(b)(7)(C). CompTel, a trade associa tion, submitted a FOIA request for documents AT&T had provided to the Federal Communications Commission Enforcement Bureau dur ing an investigation of that company. The Bureau found that Ex emption 7(C) applied to individuals identified in AT&T’s submissions but not to the company itself, concluding that corporations do not have “personal privacy” interests as required by the exemption. The FCC agreed with the Bureau, but the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit did not. It held that Exemption 7(C) extends to the “personal privacy” of corporations, reasoning that “personal” is the adjective form of the term “person,” which Congress has defined, as applicable here, to include corporations, §551(2). Held: Corporations do not have “personal privacy” for the purposes of Exemption 7(C). Pp. 3–12. (a) AT&T argues that the word “personal” in Exemption 7(C) incor porates the statutory definition of “person,” which includes corpora tions, §551(2). But adjectives do not always reflect the meaning of corresponding nouns. “Person” is a defined term in the statute; “per sonal” is not. When a statute does not define a term, the Court typi States, 559 U. S. ___, ___. “Personal” ordinarily refers to individuals. People do not generally use terms such as personal characteristics or
Syllabus personal correspondence to describe the characteristics or correspon dence of corporations. In fact, “personal” is often used to mean pre cisely the opposite of business-related: We speak of personal expenses and business expenses, personal life and work life, personal opinion and a company’s view. Dictionary definitions also suggest that “per sonal” does not ordinarily relate to artificial “persons” like corpora tions. AT&T contends that its reading of “personal” is supported by the common legal usage of the word “person.” Yet while “person,” in a le gal setting, often refers to artificial entities, AT&T’s effort to ascribe a corresponding legal meaning to “personal” again elides the differ ence between “person” and “personal.” AT&T provides scant support for the proposition that “personal” denotes corporations, even in a le gal context. Regardless of whether “personal” can carry a legal meaning apart from its ordinary one, statutory language should be construed “in Exemption 7(C) refers not just to the word “personal,” but to the term “personal privacy.” “Personal” in that phrase conveys more than just “of a person”; it suggests a type of privacy evocative of human con cerns—not the sort usually associated with an entity like AT&T. AT&T does not cite any other instance in which a court has expressly referred to a corporation’s “personal privacy.” Nor does it identify any other statute that does so. While AT&T argues that this Court has recognized “privacy” interests of corporations in the Fourth Amendment and double jeopardy contexts, this case does not call for the Court to pass on the scope of a corporation’s “privacy” interests as a matter of constitutional or common law. AT&T contends that the FCC has not demonstrated that the phrase “personal privacy” neces sarily excludes corporations’ privacy. But construing statutory lan guage is not merely an exercise in ascertaining “the outer limits of [a 481, 486, and AT&T has provided no sound reason in the statutory text or context to disregard the ordinary meaning of the phrase. Pp. 3–9. (b) The meaning of “personal privacy” in Exemption 7(C) is further clarified by two pre-existing FOIA exemptions. Exemption 6, which Congress enacted eight years before Exemption 7(C), covers “person nel and medical files and similar files the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.” §552(b)(6). This Court has regularly referred to Exemption 6 as in 502 U. S. 164, 175, and Congress used in Exemption 7(C) the same phrase—“personal privacy”—used in Exemption 6. In contrast, FOIA
Syllabus Exemption 4, which protects “trade secrets and commercial or finan cial information obtained from a person and privileged or confiden tial,” §552(b)(4), clearly applies to corporations. Congress did not use any language similar to that in Exemption 4 in Exemption 7(C). Pp. 9–11. 582 F. 3d 490, reversed. ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which all other Members joined, except KAGAN, J., who took no part in the considera tion or decision of the case.