6

COMPUCREDIT CORP. v. GREENWOOD
Opinion of the Court

mand” overriding the FAA, McMahon, supra, at 226, valid
arbitration agreements covering federal causes of action
would be rare indeed. But that is not the law. In Gilmer
we enforced an arbitration agreement with respect to a
cause of action created by the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA) which read, in part: “Any
person aggrieved may bring a civil action in any court of
competent jurisdiction for such legal or equitable relief as
will effectuate the purposes of this chapter.” 29 U. S. C.
§626(c)(1).
In McMahon we enforced an arbitration
agreement with respect to a cause of action created by a
provision of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) which read, in part: “Any person
injured in his business or property by reason of a violation
of section 1962 of this chapter may sue therefor in any
appropriate United States district court and shall recover
threefold the damages he sustains and the cost of the suit
. . . .” 18 U. S. C. §1964(c). And in Mitsubishi Motors we
enforced an arbitration agreement with respect to a cause
of action created by a provision of the Clayton Act which
read, in part: “[A]ny person who shall be injured in his
business or property by reason of anything forbidden in
the antitrust laws may sue therefor in any district court of
the United States . . . and shall recover threefold the
damages by him sustained, and the cost of suit, including
a reasonable attorney’s fee.” 15 U. S. C. §15(a). Thus, we
have repeatedly recognized that contractually required
arbitration of claims satisfies the statutory prescription
of civil liability in court. See Gilmer, 500 U. S., at 28;
McMahon, 482 U. S., at 240; Mitsubishi Motors, 473 U. S.,
at 637. To be sure, none of the statutes described above
contained a nonwaiver provision, as the statute before us
does. But if a cause-of-action provision mentioning judicial enforcement does not create a right to initial judicial
enforcement, the waiver of initial judicial enforcement is
not the waiver of a “right of the consumer,” §1679f(a). It

