Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

takes a considerable stretch to regard the nonwaiver
provision as a “congressional command” that the FAA
shall not apply.3
Moreover, if one believes that §1679g’s contemplation of
court suit (combined with §1679f(a)) establishes a nonwaivable right to initial judicial enforcement, one must also
believe that it establishes a nonwaivable right to initial
judicial enforcement in any competent judicial tribunal,
since it contains no limitation. We think it clear, however,
that this mere “contemplation” of suit in any competent
court does not guarantee suit in all competent courts,
disabling the parties from adopting a reasonable forumselection clause. And just as the contemplated availability
of all judicial forums may be reduced to a single forum by
contractual specification, so also can the contemplated
availability of judicial action be limited to judicial action
compelling or reviewing initial arbitral adjudication. The
parties remain free to specify such matters, so long as the
guarantee of §1679g—the guarantee of the legal power to
impose liability—is preserved.
Respondents and the dissent maintain that if the CROA
does not create a right to a judicial forum, then the disclosure provision effectively requires that credit repair organizations mislead consumers. We think not. The disclosure
provision is meant to describe the law to consumers in a
manner that is concise and comprehensible to the layman—which necessarily means that it will be imprecise.
The required statement says, for example, that the CROA
“ ‘prohibits deceptive practices by credit repair organiza——————
3 Gilmer noted that the ADEA had been amended after conclusion of
the arbitration agreement in that case to preclude waiver of “rights
or claims that may arise after the date the waiver is executed.” 29
U. S. C. §626(f)(1)(C). The Court said in dictum that this provision “did
not explicitly preclude arbitration or other nonjudicial resolution of
claims,” 500 U. S., at 29.

