(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

COMPUCREDIT CORP. ET AL. v. GREENWOOD ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–948.

Argued October 11, 2011—Decided January 10, 2012

Although respondents’ credit card agreement required their claims to
be resolved by binding arbitration, they filed a lawsuit against petitioner CompuCredit Corporation and a division of petitioner bank, alleging, inter alia, violations of the Credit Repair Organizations Act
(CROA). The Federal District Court denied the defendants’ motion to
compel arbitration, concluding that Congress intended CROA claims
to be nonarbitrable. The Ninth Circuit affirmed.
Held: Because the CROA is silent on whether claims under the Act can
proceed in an arbitrable forum, the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA) requires the arbitration agreement to be enforced according to its
terms. Pp. 2–10.
(a) Section 2 of the FAA establishes “a liberal federal policy favoring arbitration.” Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Constr. Corp., 460 U. S. 1, 24. It requires that courts enforce arbitration
agreements according to their terms. See Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.
v. Byrd, 470 U. S. 213, 221. That is the case even when federal statutory claims are at issue, unless the FAA’s mandate has been “overridden by a contrary congressional command.” Shearson/American
Express Inc. v. McMahon, 482 U. S. 220, 226. Pp. 2–3.
(b) The CROA provides no such command. Respondents contend
that the CROA’s disclosure provision—which requires credit repair
organizations to provide consumers with a statement that includes
the sentence “ ‘You have a right to sue a credit repair organization
that violates the [Act],’ ” 15 U. S. C. §1679c(a)—gives consumers the
right to bring an action in a court of law; and that, because the CROA
prohibits the waiver of “any right of the consumer under this subchapter,” §1679f(a), the arbitration agreement’s waiver of the “right”
to bring a court action cannot be enforced. Respondents’ premise is

