4

COMPUCREDIT CORP. v. GREENWOOD
Opinion of the Court

“Any waiver by any consumer of any protection provided
by or any right of the consumer under this subchapter—
(1) shall be treated as void; and (2) may not be enforced
by any Federal or State court or any other person.”
§1679f(a).
The Ninth Circuit adopted the following line of reasoning, urged upon us by respondents here: The disclosure
provision gives consumers the “right to sue,” which “clearly involves the right to bring an action in a court of law.”
615 F. 3d, at 1208. Because the nonwaiver provision
prohibits the waiver of “any right of the consumer under
this subchapter,” the arbitration agreement—which
waived the right to bring an action in a court of law—
cannot be enforced. Id., at 1214.
The flaw in this argument is its premise: that the disclosure provision provides consumers with a right to bring an
action in a court of law. It does not. Rather, it imposes an
obligation on credit repair organizations to supply consumers with a specific statement set forth (in quotation
marks) in the statute. The only consumer right it creates
is the right to receive the statement, which is meant to
describe the consumer protections that the law elsewhere
provides. The statement informs consumers, for instance,
that they can dispute the accuracy of information in their
credit file and that “ ‘[t]he credit bureau must then reinvestigate and modify or remove inaccurate or incomplete
information.’ ” 15 U. S. C. §1679c(a). That description is
derived from §1681i(a), which sets out in great detail the
procedures to be followed by a credit bureau in the event
of challenges to the accuracy of its information. Similarly,
the required statement informs consumers that they may
“ ‘cancel your contract with any credit repair organization
for any reason within 3 business days from the date you
signed it’ ”—the right created and set forth in more detail
in §1679e. And the “right to sue” language describes the
consumer’s right to enforce the credit repair organization’s

