4

COMPUCREDIT CORP. v. GREENWOOD
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

consumer contract, credit repair organizations must give
potential customers a written statement of rights they
possess under that Act and related consumer-protection
laws. §1679c(a). Congress dictated every word of the
required notification. Credit repair organizations must
tell consumers, in plain terms, how they may enforce their
rights: “You have a right to sue a credit repair organiza­
tion that violates the Credit Repair Organization Act.”
Ibid.
The “right to sue” refers to the claim for relief Congress
afforded consumers in §1679g. “Any person” who violates
another’s rights under the CROA “shall be liable” for
actual damages and attorneys’ fees, and may be liable for
punitive damages as well. §1679g(a)(1)–(3). The Act sets
out the factors “the court shall consider” in determining
the amount of punitive damages “the court may allow”
aggrieved consumers to recover, either individually or as a
class. §1679g(a)(2) and (b). The liability created here, in
§1679g, is precisely what the consumer, in light of §1679c,
may sue to enforce.
The Act renders void and unenforceable “[a]ny waiver by
any consumer of any protection provided by or any right of
the consumer under this subchapter.” §1679f (emphasis
added).3 The rights listed in §1679c(a) rendered nonwaivable by §1679f are the “right to sue” and the “right to
cancel [a] contract . . . for any reason within 3 business
days from the date [the consumer] signed it.”4
——————
3 Section 1679f(a), omitted from the Court’s statutory appendix, ante,
at 11–14, provides in full:
“Any waiver by any consumer of any protection provided by or any
right of the consumer under this subchapter—
“(1) shall be treated as void; and
“(2) may not be enforced by any Federal or State court or any other
person.”
4 Two provisions, although described by §1679c(a) as consumer
“right[s],” are not rendered nonwaivable by §1679f because they are not
“right[s] . . . under this subchapter.” Rather, the “right to dispute

