Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

“liab[ility]” for “fail[ure] to comply with any provision of
this subchapter” provided for in §1679g(a).2 Thus, contrary to the dissent’s assertion, our interpretation does not
“[r]educ[e] the required disclosure to insignificance,” post,
at 6. The disclosure provision informs consumers of their
right to enforce liability for any failure to conform to the
statute—information they might otherwise not possess. It
is the dissent’s interpretation that effectively reduces a
portion of the CROA to a nullity. Interpreting the “right
to sue” language in §1679c(a) to “create” a right to sue in
court not only renders it strikingly out of place in a section
that is otherwise devoted to giving the consumer notice of
rights created elsewhere; it also renders the creation of the
“right to sue” elsewhere superfluous.
Respondents suggest that the CROA’s civil-liability provision, §1679g (set forth in full in the Appendix, infra),
demonstrates that the Act provides consumers with a
“right” to bring an action in court. They cite the provision’s repeated use of the terms “action,” “class action,”
and “court”—terms that they say call to mind a judicial
proceeding. These references cannot do the heavy lifting
that respondents assign them. It is utterly commonplace
for statutes that create civil causes of action to describe
the details of those causes of action, including the relief
available, in the context of a court suit. If the mere formulation of the cause of action in this standard fashion were
sufficient to establish the “contrary congressional com——————
2 Accordingly,

when a consumer sues to enforce liability under the
CROA, he does so under §1679g(a), not “in light of §1679c,” post, at 4
(GINSBURG, J., dissenting). An action under the CROA need not refer
to §1679c at all, unless it is based on the company’s failure to provide
the statement required under that section. Section 1679g(a) creates the
“right” at issue and describes it in detail not contained in §1679c’s
summary. When determining the scope of that right, it is therefore
§1679g(a)—and not §1679c—that must govern.

