Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

has restricted the use of arbitration in other contexts, it
has done so with a clarity that far exceeds the claimed
indications in the CROA. See, e.g., 7 U. S. C. §26(n)(2)
(2006 ed., Supp. IV) (“No predispute arbitration agreement shall be valid or enforceable, if the agreement requires arbitration of a dispute arising under this section”);
15 U. S. C. §1226(a)(2) (2006 ed.) (“Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, whenever a motor vehicle franchise
contract provides for the use of arbitration to resolve a
controversy arising out of or relating to such contract,
arbitration may be used to settle such controversy only if
after such controversy arises all parties to such controversy consent in writing to use arbitration to settle such
controversy”); cf. 12 U. S. C. §5518(b) (2006 ed., Supp. IV)
(granting authority to the newly created Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to regulate predispute arbitration
agreements in contracts for consumer financial products
or services).4 That Congress would have sought to achieve
the same result in the CROA through combination of the
nonwaiver provision with the “right to sue” phrase in the
disclosure provision, and the references to “action” and
——————
4 The dissent questions the relevance of these statutes, since they
postdated the CROA and since this Court’s intervening decisions
compelling arbitration “increasingly alerted Congress to the utility of
drafting antiwaiver prescriptions with meticulous care.” Post, at 8.
But as the dissent implicitly recognizes, Congress had been “alerted”
much before these post-CROA statutes were passed. The CROA itself
followed a series of this Court’s seminal decisions compelling arbitration, decisions which held that the FAA had established a “federal
policy favoring arbitration,” Gilmer v. Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp.,
500 U. S. 20, 26 (1991), and that “[t]he burden is on the party opposing
arbitration . . . to show that Congress intended to preclude a waiver of
judicial remedies,” Shearson/American Express Inc. v. McMahon, 482
U. S. 220, 227 (1987). To the extent Congress is ever “stimulated” by
this Court’s decisions, post, at 8, there is no reason to think the Congress that enacted the CROA was any less stimulated than subsequent
Congresses.

