Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

This unfortunate result is not compelled by our prece­
dents. The Court cites three decisions for the proposition,
by now uncontroversial, that the mere existence of a statutory right of action does not preclude agreements to
arbitrate disputes. See ante, at 5–6 (citing Gilmer v.
Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp., 500 U. S. 20, 28 (1991);
Shearson/American Express Inc. v. McMahon, 482 U. S.
220, 240 (1987); and Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler
Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc., 473 U. S. 614, 637 (1985)). As
the Court acknowledges, ante, at 6, none of the statutes at
issue in those cases contained a nonwaiver clause analo­
gous to §1679f. Yet the presence of such a clause would
not have affected the outcome, the Court maintains; a
nonwaiver provision would not have precluded arbitration
because the statutes conferred no underlying right to
proceed in court.
Precisely the point: The CROA differs from the statutes
we have construed in the past in just that respect. The
Act does not merely create a claim for relief. It designates
that claim as an action entailing a “right to sue”; man­
dates that consumers be informed, prior to entering any
contract, of that right; and precludes the waiver of any
“right” conferred by the Act. Neither Gilmer, McMahon,
nor Mitsubishi construed a statute of a similar order.5
III
The Court’s final point is that, elsewhere, Congress has
spoken with particular clarity in guaranteeing a judicial
——————
5 “[I]f one believes [the CROA] . . . establishes a nonwaivable right to
initial judicial enforcement,” the Court states, “one must also believe
that it establishes a nonwaivable right to initial judicial enforcement in
any competent judicial tribunal.” Ante, at 7. In Sportin’ Life’s words,
“it ain’t necessarily so.” While there is good reason to believe Congress
cared about the institutional location of consumers’ suits under the
CROA, there is no reason to think Congress sought to disturb the
personal jurisdiction and venue rules that determine in which court a
civil action may be brought.

