2

COMPUCREDIT CORP. v. GREENWOOD
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment

struction that petitioners urge. As the majority opinion
notes, the disclosure provision does not itself confer a
cause of action, and the liability provision that does is
materially indistinguishable from other statutes that we
have held not to preclude arbitration. In my mind this
leaves the parties’ arguments in equipoise, and our precedents require that petitioners prevail in this circumstance.
This is because respondents, as the opponents of arbitration, bear the burden of showing that Congress disallowed
arbitration of their claims, and because we resolve doubts
in favor of arbitration. See id., at 26. Of course, if we
have misread Congress’ intent, then Congress can correct
our error by amending the statute.
I add one more point. The majority opinion contrasts
the liability provision of the Act with other, more recently
enacted statutes that expressly disallow arbitration. I do
not understand the majority opinion to hold that Congress
must speak so explicitly in order to convey its intent to
preclude arbitration of statutory claims. We have never
said as much, and on numerous occasions have held that
proof of Congress’ intent may also be discovered in the
history or purpose of the statute in question. See ibid. (“If
such an intention exists, it will be discoverable in the text
of the [statute], its legislative history, or an ‘inherent
conflict’ between arbitration and the [statute’s] underlying
purposes”); Shearson/American Express Inc. v. McMahon,
482 U. S. 220, 227 (1987) (“If Congress did intend to limit
or prohibit waiver of a judicial forum for a particular
claim, such an intent ‘will be deducible from [the statute’s]
text or legislative history,’ or from an inherent conflict
between arbitration and the statute’s underlying purposes” (quoting Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler ChryslerPlymouth, Inc., 473 U. S. 614, 628 (1985); citation omitted)). I agree with the dissent that the statutes the
majority opinion cites shed little light on the thoughts of
the Congress that passed the Act. But the Act’s text is not

