8

COMPUCREDIT CORP. v. GREENWOOD
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

forum and proscribing arbitration, but here, it did not do
so. The two statutes the Court cites as exemplary post­
date the CROA’s enactment by 14 and 6 years, respective­
ly. (A third merely delegates regulatory authority over
certain arbitration agreements.) See ante, at 9. Notably,
these recent statutes were framed following a string of
this Court’s decisions compelling arbitration pursuant to
contractual stipulations.6 Our decisions have increasingly
alerted Congress to the utility of drafting antiwaiver
prescriptions with meticulous care. But the Congress that
drafted the CROA was not similarly stimulated, and we
cannot fairly assess that enactment in the light of subse­
quent legislative responses to developments unknown to
the CROA’s drafters. Cf. United States v. Price, 361 U. S.
304, 313 (1960) (“[T]he views of a subsequent Congress
form a hazardous basis for inferring the intent of an
earlier one.”).
Beyond question, the Federal Arbitration Act, “standing
alone,” favors the enforcement of arbitration agreements.
McMahon, 482 U. S., at 226. To depart from that rule,
however, Congress need not employ “magic words.” See
Tr. of Oral Arg. 6. In determining whether the Arbitration
Act’s general rule has been displaced by another statutory
prescription, it remains our responsibility to examine
carefully “the text of the [statute], its legislative history,”
and Congress’ “underlying purposes.” Gilmer, 500 U. S.,
at 26 (citing McMahon, 482 U. S., at 227). See also 14
Penn Plaza LLC v. Pyett, 556 U. S. 247, 258 (2009) (arbi­
tration agreements will be enforced “unless Congress itself
has evinced an intention to preclude a waiver of judicial
remedies for the statutory rights at issue” (quoting
Gilmer, 500 U. S., at 26, in turn quoting Mitsubishi, 473
U. S., at 628)). No “unmistakably clear” statement is
——————
6 See Brief for American Association for Justice as Amicus Curiae 12,
and n. 5 (listing arbitration decisions since the CROA’s enactment).

