Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

CompuCredit’s fee exactions did appear in the promotional
materials: in small print, buried amidst other information,
and removed from the clearer representation that no deposit would be required. Id., at 40–41, Complaint ¶¶12–
13. Far from improving their credit rating, plaintiffs
complained, CompuCredit knew that its card, saddled
with these fees, “would not provide any meaningful assis­
tance whatsoever with regard to rebuilding credit and
improving a credit rating.” Id., at 48, Complaint ¶41(b).
Furthermore, plaintiffs stated, CompuCredit did not
provide them with the written disclosures of their rights
required by the CROA. Id., at 42, Complaint ¶23.
Seeking damages for the alleged violations, along with
attorneys’ fees, plaintiffs requested class certification. In
the District Court and Court of Appeals, they successfully
resisted CompuCredit’s motion to compel arbitration
pursuant to a form contract that barred class proceedings.1
This Court, however, interprets the CROA to permit CompuCredit’s demand that plaintiffs proceed, if at all, before
an arbitrator.2 I read the governing statute differently.
II
Three sections of the CROA, considered together, indi­
cate Congress’ intention to preclude mandatory, creditor­
imposed, arbitration of CROA claims. See 15 U. S. C.
§§1679c(a), 1679g, and 1679f. Before entering into any
——————
1 The

contract signed by cardholders did not itself require arbitration.
Rather, it incorporated by reference an “enclosed insert” providing that
all disputes would be resolved by arbitration at the discretion of Com­
puCredit or the cardholder. App. 61–63.
2 CompuCredit’s form contract specified that arbitration was to occur
under the auspices of the National Arbitration Forum (NAF). In 2009,
after the Attorney General of Minnesota filed an action alleging that
NAF had engaged in numerous violations of consumer-protection laws,
NAF entered into a consent decree barring it from handling consumer
arbitrations. See Press Release by Lori Swanson, Attorney General of
Minnesota (July 19, 2009).

