Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

The question on which this case turns is what Congress
meant when it created a nonwaivable “right to sue.”
Recall that Congress’ target audience in the CROA is not
composed of lawyers and judges accustomed to nuanced
reading of statutory texts, but laypersons who receive a
disclosure statement in the mail. Recall, as well, Con­
gress’ findings that these individuals are often “of limited
economic means and . . . inexperienced in credit matters.”
§1679(a)(2). Attributing little importance to this context,
the Court construes the right to sue as “the legal right,
enforceable in court, to recover damages . . . without re­
gard to whether the suit in court has to be preceded by an
arbitration proceeding.” Ante, at 8. I read Congress’
words without that sophisticated gloss: The right to sue,
I would hold, means the right to litigate in court.
The Court is quite right in recognizing that consumers
“have the legal right, enforceable in court, to recover dam­
ages from credit repair organizations that violate the
CROA.” Ibid. But the Court is quite wrong, as I see it, to
characterize as merely “imprecise,” ibid., Congress’ failure
to include the caveat that access to court may be condi­
tioned upon an anterior arbitration. The “right to sue”
may well be “a colloquial method of communicating to
consumers.” See ibid. But it surely is not colloquially
understood by recipients of the required disclosures as the
right, not to adjudicate in court, but only to seek, or defend
against, court enforcement of an award rendered by the
arbitrator chosen by the credit repair organization. Few,
if any, credit repair customers would equate the “right to
——————
inaccurate information in your credit report” and the “right to obtain a
copy of your credit report” referred to in §1679c(a) are rights conferred
elsewhere in the U. S. Code. See §1681i(a), §1681j. Section 1679f also
makes nonwaivable the “protection[s] provided . . . under this subchap­
ter” (emphasis added); these protections include the prohibition of cer­
tain business practices, see §1679b, and the provision, in writing, of
certain contractual terms and conditions, see §1679d.

