OCTOBER TERM, 2011

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

HALL ET UX. v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–875.

Argued November 29, 2011—Decided May 14, 2012

Chapter 12 of the Bankruptcy Code allows farmer debtors with regular
annual income to adjust their debts subject to a reorganization plan.
The plan must provide for full payment of priority claims. 11 U. S. C.
§1222(a)(2). Under §1222(a)(2)(A), however, certain governmental
claims arising from the disposition of farm assets are stripped of priority status and downgraded to general, unsecured claims that are
dischargeable after less than full payment. That exception applies
only to claims “entitled to priority under [11 U. S. C. §507]” in the
first place. As relevant here, §507(a)(2) covers “administrative expenses allowed under §503(b),” which includes “any tax . . . incurred
by the estate.” §503(b)(B)(i).
Petitioners filed for Chapter 12 bankruptcy and then sold their
farm. They proposed a plan under which they would pay off outstanding liabilities with proceeds from the sale. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) objected, asserting a tax on the capital gains from
the sale. Petitioners then proposed treating the tax as an unsecured
claim to be paid to the extent funds were available, with the unpaid
balance being discharged. The Bankruptcy Court sustained an IRS
objection, the District Court reversed, and the Ninth Circuit reversed
the District Court. The Ninth Circuit held that because a Chapter 12
estate is not a separate taxable entity under the Internal Revenue
Code (IRC), 26 U. S. C. §§1398, 1399, it does not “incur” postpetition
federal income taxes. The Ninth Circuit concluded that because the
tax was not “incurred by the estate” under §503(b), it was not a priority claim eligible for the §1222(a)(2)(A) exception.
Held: The federal income tax liability resulting from petitioners’ postpetition farm sale is not “incurred by the estate” under §503(b) of the
Bankruptcy Code and thus is neither collectible nor dischargeable in


2

HALL v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
the Chapter 12 plan. Pp. 4−17.
(a) The phrase “incurred by the estate” bears a plain and natural
reading. A tax “incurred by the estate” is a tax for which the estate
itself is liable. Only certain estates are liable for federal income taxes. IRC §§1398 and 1399 define the division of responsibilities for the
payment of taxes between the estate and the debtor on a chapter-bychapter basis. Under those provisions, a Chapter 12 estate is not a
separately taxable entity. The debtor—not the trustee—is generally
liable for taxes and files the only tax return. The postpetition income
taxes are thus not “incurred by the estate.” Pp. 4−5.
(b) Section 346 of the Bankruptcy Code and its longstanding interplay with IRC §§1398 and 1399 reinforce that whether an estate “incurs” taxes turns on Congress’ chapter-specific guidance on which estates are separately taxable. The original §346 established that state
or local income taxes could be imposed only on the estate in an individual-debtor Chapter 7 or 11 bankruptcy, and only on the debtor in
a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Congress applied the framework of §346 to
federal taxes two years later: IRC §1398 and 1399 established that
the estate is separately taxable in individual-debtor Chapter 7 or 11
cases, and not separately taxable in Chapter 13 (and now Chapter
12) cases. The Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005 subsequently amended §346, expressly aligning its
assignment of state or local taxes with the IRC separate taxable entity rules for federal taxes. This Court assumes that Congress is
aware of existing law when it passes legislation, and the existing law
at the enactment of §1222(a)(2)(A) indicated that an estate’s liability
for taxes turned on separate taxable entity rules. Pp. 6−9.
(c) Chapter 13, on which Chapter 12 was modeled, further bolsters
this Court’s holding. Established understandings hold that postpetition income taxes are not “incurred by the [Chapter 13] estate” under
§503(b) because they are the liability of the Chapter 13 debtor alone.
The Government has also long hewed to this position. Section
1305(a)(1), which gives holders of postpetition claims the option of
collecting postpetition taxes within the bankruptcy case, would be
superfluous if postpetition tax liabilities were automatically collectible inside the bankruptcy. It is thus clear that postpetition income
taxes are not automatically collectible in a Chapter 13 plan and are
not administrative expenses under §503(b). To hold otherwise in
Chapter 12 would disrupt settled practices in Chapter 13 cases.
Pp. 9−12.
(d) None of the contrary arguments by petitioners and the dissent
overcomes the statute’s plain language, context, and structure.
There is no textual basis for giving “incurred by the estate” a temporal meaning, such that it refers to all taxes “incurred postpetition.”


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
Nor does the text support deeming a tax “incurred by the estate”
whenever it is paid by the debtor out of property of the estate. Section 503’s legislative history is not inconsistent with this Court’s
holding, and the Court has cautioned against allowing ambiguous
legislative history to muddy clear statutory language. See Milner v.
Department of Navy, 562 U. S. ___, ___. Meanwhile, any cases suggesting that postpetition taxes were treated as administrative expenses are inapposite because they involve corporate debtors, which
Congress has singled out for responsibilities paralleling those borne
by a separate taxable entity’s trustee. Finally, petitioners contend
that the purpose of §1222(a)(2)(A) was to provide debtors with robust
relief from tax debts. There may be compelling policy reasons for
treating postpetition income tax liabilities as dischargeable. But if
Congress intended petitioners’ result, it did not so provide in the
statute. Pp. 12−17.
617 F. 3d 1161, affirmed.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., joined. BREYER, J., filed a
dissenting opinion, in which KENNEDY, GINSBURG, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined.

