6

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Opinion of the Court 


framework applies to Fourth Amendment challenges.
That case addressed a rule requiring pretrial detainees
in any correctional facility run by the Federal Bureau of
Prisons “to expose their body cavities for visual inspection
as a part of a strip search conducted after every contact
visit with a person from outside the institution.” Id., at
558. Inmates at the federal Metropolitan Correctional
Center in New York City argued there was no security
justification for these searches. Officers searched guests
before they entered the visiting room, and the inmates
were under constant surveillance during the visit. Id., at
577–578 (Marshall, J., dissenting). There had been but
one instance in which an inmate attempted to sneak contraband back into the facility. See id., at 559 (majority
opinion). The Court nonetheless upheld the search policy.
It deferred to the judgment of correctional officials that
the inspections served not only to discover but also to
deter the smuggling of weapons, drugs, and other prohibited items inside. Id., at 558. The Court explained that
there is no mechanical way to determine whether intrusions on an inmate’s privacy are reasonable. Id., at 559.
The need for a particular search must be balanced against
the resulting invasion of personal rights. Ibid.
Policies designed to keep contraband out of jails and
prisons have been upheld in cases decided since Bell. In
Block v. Rutherford, 468 U. S. 576 (1984), for example, the
Court concluded that the Los Angeles County Jail could
ban all contact visits because of the threat they posed:
“They open the institution to the introduction of
drugs, weapons, and other contraband. Visitors can
easily conceal guns, knives, drugs, or other contraband in countless ways and pass them to an inmate
unnoticed by even the most vigilant observers. And
these items can readily be slipped from the clothing of
an innocent child, or transferred by other visitors

