Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

BREYER, J., dissenting

sent arrest grew out of an (erroneous) report that he had
failed to pay a minor civil fine previously assessed because
he had hindered a prosecution (by fleeing police officers
in his automobile). App. 25a–26a. He alleges that he was
held for six days in jail before being taken to a magistrate
and that he was subjected to two strip searches of the kind
in question. App. to Pet. for Cert. 3a.
Amicus briefs present other instances in which individuals arrested for minor offenses have been subjected to
the humiliations of a visual strip search. They include a
nun, a Sister of Divine Providence for 50 years, who was arrested for trespassing during an antiwar demonstration.
Brief for Sister Bernie Galvin et al. as Amici Curiae 6.
They include women who were strip-searched during
periods of lactation or menstruation. Id., at 11–12 (describing humiliating experience of female student who was
strip searched while menstruating); Archuleta v. Wagner,
523 F. 3d 1278, 1282 (CA10 2008) (same for woman lactating). They include victims of sexual violence. Brief
for Domestic Violence Legal Empowerment and Appeals
Project et al. as Amici Curiae. They include individuals
detained for such infractions as driving with a noisy muffler, driving with an inoperable headlight, failing to use a
turn signal, or riding a bicycle without an audible bell.
Brief for Petitioner 11, 25; see also Mary Beth G., supra, at
1267, n. 2 (considering strip search of a person arrested for
having outstanding parking tickets and a person arrested
for making an improper left turn); Jones v. Edwards, 770
F. 2d 739, 741 (CA8 1985) (same for violation of dog leash
law). They include persons who perhaps should never
have been placed in the general jail population in the first
place. See ante, at 2 (ALITO, J. concurring) (“admission to
general jail population, with the concomitant humiliation
of a strip search, may not be reasonable” for those “whose
detention has not been reviewed by a judicial officer and
who could not be held in available facilities apart from the

