Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of the Court

serious enough to authorize the more invasive search
protocol. Other possible classifications based on characteristics of individual detainees also might prove to be
unworkable or even give rise to charges of discriminatory
application. Most officers would not be well equipped to
make any of these legal determinations during the pressures of the intake process. Bull, 595 F. 3d, at 985–987
(Kozinski, C. J., concurring); see also Welsh v. Wisconsin,
466 U. S. 740, 761–762 (1984) (White, J., dissenting)
(“[T]he Court’s approach will necessitate a case-by-case
evaluation of the seriousness of particular crimes, a difficult task for which officers and courts are poorly
equipped”). To avoid liability, officers might be inclined
not to conduct a thorough search in any close case, thus
creating unnecessary risk for the entire jail population.
Cf. Atwater, 532 U. S., at 351, and n. 22.
The Court addressed an analogous problem in Atwater.
The petitioner in that case argued the Fourth Amendment
prohibited a warrantless arrest when being convicted of
the suspected crime “could not ultimately carry any jail
time” and there was “no compelling need for immediate
detention.” Id., at 346. That rule “promise[d] very little in
the way of administrability.” Id., at 350. Officers could
not be expected to draw the proposed lines on a moment’s
notice, and the risk of violating the Constitution would
have discouraged them from arresting criminals in any
questionable circumstances. Id., at 350–351 (“An officer
not quite sure the drugs weighed enough to warrant jail
time or not quite certain about a suspect’s risk of flight
would not arrest, even though it could perfectly well turn
out that, in fact, the offense called for incarceration and
the defendant was long gone on the day of trial”). The
Fourth Amendment did not compel this result in Atwater.
The Court held that officers who have probable cause to
believe even a minor criminal offense has been committed
in their presence may arrest the offender. See id., at 354.

