Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

increasing number of gang members who go through the
intake process. See Brief for Policemen’s Benevolent Association, Local 249, et al. as Amici Curiae 14 (hereinafter PBA Brief); New Jersey Comm’n of Investigation,
Gangland Behind Bars: How and Why Organized Criminal
Street Gangs Thrive in New Jersey’s Prisons . . . And
What Can Be Done About It 10–11 (2009). “Gang rivalries
spawn a climate of tension, violence, and coercion.” Carlson & Garrett 462. The groups recruit new members by
force, engage in assaults against staff, and give other
inmates a reason to arm themselves. Ibid. Fights among
feuding gangs can be deadly, and the officers who must
maintain order are put in harm’s way. PBA Brief 17.
These considerations provide a reasonable basis to justify
a visual inspection for certain tattoos and other signs of
gang affiliation as part of the intake process. The identification and isolation of gang members before they are
admitted protects everyone in the facility. Cf. Fraise v.
Terhune, 283 F. 3d 506, 509–510 (CA3 2002) (Alito, J.)
(describing a statewide policy authorizing the identification and isolation of gang members in prison).
Detecting contraband concealed by new detainees, furthermore, is a most serious responsibility. Weapons,
drugs, and alcohol all disrupt the safe operation of a jail.
Cf. Hudson, 468 U. S., at 528 (recognizing “the constant
fight against the proliferation of knives and guns, illicit
drugs, and other contraband”). Correctional officers have
had to confront arrestees concealing knives, scissors, razor
blades, glass shards, and other prohibited items on their
person, including in their body cavities. See Bull, 595
F. 3d, at 967, 969; Brief for New Jersey County Jail Wardens Association as Amicus Curiae 17–18 (hereinafter
New Jersey Wardens Brief). They have also found crack,
heroin, and marijuana. Brief for City and County of San
Francisco et al. as Amici Curiae 9–11 (hereinafter San
Francisco Brief). The use of drugs can embolden inmates

