Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

Petitioner claims he was also instructed to open his
mouth, lift his tongue, hold out his arms, turn around, and
lift his genitals. (It is not clear whether this last step was
part of the normal practice. See ibid.) Petitioner shared a
cell with at least one other person and interacted with
other inmates following his admission to the jail. Tr. of
Oral Arg. 17.
The Essex County Correctional Facility, where petitioner was taken after six days, is the largest county jail
in New Jersey. App. 70a. It admits more than 25,000 inmates each year and houses about 1,000 gang members at
any given time. When petitioner was transferred there,
all arriving detainees passed through a metal detector and
waited in a group holding cell for a more thorough search.
When they left the holding cell, they were instructed to
remove their clothing while an officer looked for body
markings, wounds, and contraband. Apparently without
touching the detainees, an officer looked at their ears,
nose, mouth, hair, scalp, fingers, hands, arms, armpits,
and other body openings. Id., at 57a–59a; App. to Pet.
for Cert. 137a–144a. This policy applied regardless of the
circumstances of the arrest, the suspected offense, or the
detainee’s behavior, demeanor, or criminal history. Petitioner alleges he was required to lift his genitals, turn
around, and cough in a squatting position as part of the
process. After a mandatory shower, during which his
clothes were inspected, petitioner was admitted to the
facility. App. 3a–4a, 52a, 258a. He was released the next
day, when the charges against him were dismissed.
Petitioner sued the governmental entities that operated
the jails, one of the wardens, and certain other defendants.
The suit was commenced in the United States District
Court for the District of New Jersey. Seeking relief under
42 U. S. C. §1983 for violations of his Fourth and Fourteenth Amendment rights, petitioner maintained that persons arrested for a minor offense could not be required

