2

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Syllabus


621 F. 3d 296, affirmed.
JUSTICE KENNEDY delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to
Part IV, concluding that the search procedures at the county jails
struck a reasonable balance between inmate privacy and the needs of
the institutions, and thus the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments
do not require adoption of the framework and rules petitioner proposes. Pp. 5−18, 19.
(a) Maintaining safety and order at detention centers requires the
expertise of correctional officials, who must have substantial discretion to devise reasonable solutions to problems. A regulation impinging on an inmate’s constitutional rights must be upheld “if it is reasonably related to legitimate penological interests.” Turner v. Safley,
482 U. S. 78, 89. This Court, in Bell v. Wolfish, 441 U. S. 520, 558,
upheld a rule requiring pretrial detainees in federal correctional facilities “to expose their body cavities for visual inspection as a part of
a strip search conducted after every contact visit with a person from
outside the institution[s],” deferring to the judgment of correctional
officials that the inspections served not only to discover but also to
deter the smuggling of weapons, drugs, and other prohibited items.
In Block v. Rutherford, 468 U. S. 576, 586−587, the Court upheld a
general ban on contact visits in a county jail, noting the smuggling
threat posed by such visits and the difficulty of carving out exceptions
for certain detainees. The Court, in Hudson v. Palmer, 468 U. S. 517,
522−523, also recognized that deterring the possession of contraband
depends in part on the ability to conduct searches without predictable
exceptions when it upheld the constitutionality of random searches of
inmate lockers and cells even without suspicion that an inmate is
concealing a prohibited item. These cases establish that correctional
officials must be permitted to devise reasonable search policies to detect and deter the possession of contraband in their facilities, and
that “in the absence of substantial evidence in the record to indicate
that the officials have exaggerated their response to these considerations courts should ordinarily defer to their expert judgment in such
matters,” Block, supra, at 584–585.
Persons arrested for minor offenses may be among the detainees to
be processed at jails. See Atwater v. Lago Vista, 532 U. S. 318, 354.
Pp. 5−9.
(b) The question here is whether undoubted security imperatives
involved in jail supervision override the assertion that some detainees must be exempt from the invasive search procedures at issue absent reasonable suspicion of a concealed weapon or other contraband.
Correctional officials have a significant interest in conducting a thorough search as a standard part of the intake process. The admission
of new inmates creates risks for staff, the existing detainee popula-

