8

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF 

COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

BREYER, J., dissenting 


wrote, “the County encountered three incidents of drugs
recovered from an inmate’s anal cavity and two incidents
of drugs falling from an inmate’s underwear during the
course of a strip search.” 282 F. Supp. 2d, at 69. The
court added that in four of these five instances there may
have been “reasonable suspicion” to search, leaving only
one instance in 23,000 in which the strip search policy
“arguably” detected additional contraband. Id., at 70. The
study is imperfect, for search standards changed during
the time it was conducted. Id., at 50–51. But the large
number of inmates, the small number of “incidents,” and
the District Court’s own conclusions make the study probative though not conclusive.
Similarly, in Shain v. Ellison, 273 F. 3d 56, 60 (CA2
2001), the court received data produced by the county
jail showing that authorities conducted body-cavity strip
searches, similar to those at issue here, of 75,000 new
inmates over a period of five years. Brief for PlaintiffAppellee-Cross-Appellant in No. 00–7061 etc. (CA2), p. 16
(citing to its App. 343a–493a). In 16 instances the
searches led to the discovery of contraband. The record
further showed that 13 of these 16 pieces of contraband
would have been detected in a patdown or a search of shoes
and outer-clothing. In the three instances in which contraband was found on the detainee’s body or in a body cavity,
there was a drug or felony history that would have justified a strip search on individualized reasonable suspicion.
Ibid.; Brief for National Police Accountability Project as
Amicus Curiae 10.
Second, there is the plethora of recommendations of
professional bodies, such as correctional associations, that
have studied and thoughtfully considered the matter. The
American Correctional Association (ACA)—an association
that informs our view of “what is obtainable and what is
acceptable in corrections philosophy,” Brown v. Plata, 563
U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 43)—has promulgated a

