Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

survive in jail. Others may make a quick decision to hide
unlawful substances to avoid getting in more trouble at
the time of their arrest. This record has concrete examples. Officers at the Atlantic County Correctional Facility,
for example, discovered that a man arrested for driving
under the influence had “2 dime bags of weed, 1 pack of
rolling papers, 20 matches, and 5 sleeping pills” taped
under his scrotum. Brief for Atlantic County et al. as
Amici Curiae 36 (internal quotation marks omitted). A
person booked on a misdemeanor charge of disorderly
conduct in Washington State managed to hide a lighter,
tobacco, tattoo needles, and other prohibited items in his
rectal cavity. See United States Brief 25, n. 15. San
Francisco officials have discovered contraband hidden in
body cavities of people arrested for trespassing, public
nuisance, and shoplifting. San Francisco Brief 3. There
have been similar incidents at jails throughout the country. See United States Brief 25, n. 15.
Even if people arrested for a minor offense do not themselves wish to introduce contraband into a jail, they may
be coerced into doing so by others. See New Jersey Wardens Brief 16; cf. Block, 468 U. S., at 587 (“It is not unreasonable to assume, for instance, that low security risk
detainees would be enlisted to help obtain contraband or
weapons by their fellow inmates who are denied contact
visits”). This could happen any time detainees are held in
the same area, including in a van on the way to the station
or in the holding cell of the jail. If, for example, a person
arrested and detained for unpaid traffic citations is not
subject to the same search as others, this will be well
known to other detainees with jail experience. A hardened
criminal or gang member can, in just a few minutes, approach the person and coerce him into hiding the fruits of
a crime, a weapon, or some other contraband. As an expert in this case explained, “the interaction and mingling
between misdemeanants and felons will only increase the

