Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

permitted close contact with inmates.” Id., at 586.
There were “many justifications” for imposing a general
ban rather than trying to carve out exceptions for certain
detainees. Id., at 587. Among other problems, it would be
“a difficult if not impossible task” to identify “inmates who
have propensities for violence, escape, or drug smuggling.”
Ibid. This was made “even more difficult by the brevity of
detention and the constantly changing nature of the inmate population.” Ibid.
The Court has also recognized that deterring the possession of contraband depends in part on the ability to conduct searches without predictable exceptions. In Hudson
v. Palmer, 468 U. S. 517 (1984), it addressed the question
of whether prison officials could perform random searches
of inmate lockers and cells even without reason to suspect
a particular individual of concealing a prohibited item.
Id., at 522–523. The Court upheld the constitutionality of
the practice, recognizing that “ ‘[f]or one to advocate that
prison searches must be conducted only pursuant to an
enunciated general policy or when suspicion is directed at
a particular inmate is to ignore the realities of prison
operation.’ ” Id., at 529 (quoting Marrero v. Commonwealth, 222 Va. 754, 757, 284 S. E. 2d 809, 811 (1981)).
Inmates would adapt to any pattern or loopholes they
discovered in the search protocol and then undermine the
security of the institution. 468 U. S., at 529.
These cases establish that correctional officials must be
permitted to devise reasonable search policies to detect
and deter the possession of contraband in their facilities.
See Bell, 441 U. S., at 546 (“[M]aintaining institutional
security and preserving internal order and discipline are
essential goals that may require limitation or retraction of
retained constitutional rights of both convicted prisoners
and pretrial detainees”). The task of determining whether
a policy is reasonably related to legitimate security inter-

