12

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON
BREYER, J., dissenting

that required reasonable suspicion for strip searches. And
without some such indication, I am left without an example of any instance in which contraband was found on an
individual through an inspection of their private parts or
body cavities which could not have been found under a
policy requiring reasonable suspicion. Hence, at a minimum these examples, including San Francisco’s statistics,
do not provide a significant counterweight to those presented in Dodge and Shain.
Nor do I find the majority’s lack of examples surprising.
After all, those arrested for minor offenses are often
stopped and arrested unexpectedly. And they consequently will have had little opportunity to hide things in
their body cavities. Thus, the widespread advocacy by
prison experts and the widespread application in many
States and federal circuits of “reasonable suspicion” requirements indicates an ability to apply such standards in
practice without unduly interfering with the legitimate penal
interest in preventing the smuggling of contraband.
The majority is left with the word of prison officials in
support of its contrary proposition. And though that word
is important, it cannot be sufficient. Cf. Dept. of Justice,
National Institute of Corrections, W. Collins, Jails and the
Constitution: An Overview 28–29 (2d ed. 2007) (Though
prison officials often “passionately believed” similar requirements would lead to contraband-related security
problems, once those requirements were imposed those
“problems did not develop”).
The majority also relies upon Bell, 441 U. S. 520, itself.
Ante, at 5–6. In that case, the Court considered a prison
policy requiring a strip search of all detainees after “contact visits” with unimprisoned visitors. 441 U. S., at 558.
The Court found that policy justified. Id., at 560. Contrary to the majority’s suggestion, that case does not provide precedent for the proposition that the word of prison
officials (accompanied by a “single instance” of empirical

