18

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Opinion of ENNEDY, J.
Opinion of Kthe Court 


Individual jurisdictions can of course choose “to impose
more restrictive safeguards through statutes limiting
warrantless arrests for minor offenders.” Id., at 352.
One of the central principles in Atwater applies with
equal force here. Officers who interact with those suspected of violating the law have an “essential interest in
readily administrable rules.” Id., at 347; accord, New York
v. Belton, 453 U. S. 454, 458 (1981). The officials in charge
of the jails in this case urge the Court to reject any complicated constitutional scheme requiring them to conduct less
thorough inspections of some detainees based on their
behavior, suspected offense, criminal history, and other
factors. They offer significant reasons why the Constitution must not prevent them from conducting the same
search on any suspected offender who will be admitted to
the general population in their facilities. The restrictions
suggested by petitioner would limit the intrusion on the
privacy of some detainees but at the risk of increased
danger to everyone in the facility, including the less serious offenders themselves.
IV
This case does not require the Court to rule on the types
of searches that would be reasonable in instances where,
for example, a detainee will be held without assignment to
the general jail population and without substantial contact
with other detainees. This describes the circumstances in
Atwater. See 532 U. S., at 324 (“Officers took Atwater’s
‘mug shot’ and placed her, alone, in a jail cell for about one
hour, after which she was taken before a magistrate and
released on $310 bond”). The accommodations provided in
these situations may diminish the need to conduct some
aspects of the searches at issue. Cf. United States Brief 30
(discussing the segregation, and less invasive searches, of
individuals held by the Federal Bureau of Prisons for
misdemeanors or civil contempt). The circumstances

