Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
tion, and the new detainees themselves. Officials therefore must
screen for contagious infections and for wounds or injuries requiring
immediate medical attention. It may be difficult to identify and treat
medical problems until detainees remove their clothes for a visual inspection. Jails and prisons also face potential gang violence, giving
them reasonable justification for a visual inspection of detainees for
signs of gang affiliation as part of the intake process. Additionally,
correctional officials have to detect weapons, drugs, alcohol, and
other prohibited items new detainees may possess. Drugs can make
inmates aggressive toward officers or each other, and drug trading
can lead to violent confrontations. Contraband has value in a jail’s
culture and underground economy, and competition for scarce goods
can lead to violence, extortion, and disorder. Pp. 9−13.
(c) Petitioner’s proposal―that new detainees not arrested for serious crimes or for offenses involving weapons or drugs be exempt from
invasive searches unless they give officers a particular reason to suspect them of hiding contraband―is unworkable. The seriousness of
an offense is a poor predictor of who has contraband, and it would be
difficult to determine whether individual detainees fall within the
proposed exemption. Even persons arrested for a minor offense may
be coerced by others into concealing contraband. Exempting people
arrested for minor offenses from a standard search protocol thus may
put them at greater risk and result in more contraband being
brought into the detention facility.
It also may be difficult to classify inmates by their current and prior offenses before the intake search. Jail officials know little at the
outset about an arrestee, who may be carrying a false ID or lie about
his identity. The officers conducting an initial search often do not
have access to criminal history records. And those records can be inaccurate or incomplete. Even with accurate information, officers
would encounter serious implementation difficulties. They would be
required to determine quickly whether any underlying offenses were
serious enough to authorize the more invasive search protocol. Other
possible classifications based on characteristics of individual detainees also might prove to be unworkable or even give rise to charges of
discriminatory application. To avoid liability, officers might be inclined not to conduct a thorough search in any close case, thus creating unnecessary risk for the entire jail population. While the restrictions petitioner suggests would limit the intrusion on the privacy
of some detainees, it would be at the risk of increased danger to everyone in the facility, including the less serious offenders. The Fourth
and Fourteenth Amendments do not require adoption of the proposed
framework. Pp. 13−18, 19.

