(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS 

OF COUNTY OF BURLINGTON ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 10–945.

Argued October 12, 2011—Decided April 2, 2012

Petitioner was arrested during a traffic stop by a New Jersey state
trooper who checked a statewide computer database and found a
bench warrant issued for petitioner’s arrest after he failed to appear
at a hearing to enforce a fine. He was initially detained in the Burlington County Detention Center and later in the Essex County Correctional Facility, but was released once it was determined that the
fine had been paid. At the first jail, petitioner, like every incoming
detainee, had to shower with a delousing agent and was checked for
scars, marks, gang tattoos, and contraband as he disrobed. Petitioner claims that he also had to open his mouth, lift his tongue, hold out
his arms, turn around, and lift his genitals. At the second jail, petitioner, like other arriving detainees, had to remove his clothing while
an officer looked for body markings, wounds, and contraband; had an
officer look at his ears, nose, mouth, hair, scalp, fingers, hands, armpits, and other body openings; had a mandatory shower; and had his
clothes examined. Petitioner claims that he was also required to lift
his genitals, turn around, and cough while squatting. He filed a 42
U. S. C. §1983 action in the Federal District Court against the government entities that ran the jails and other defendants, alleging
Fourth and Fourteenth Amendment violations, and arguing that persons arrested for minor offenses cannot be subjected to invasive
searches unless prison officials have reason to suspect concealment of
weapons, drugs, or other contraband. The court granted him summary judgment, ruling that “strip-searching” nonindictable offenders
without reasonable suspicion violates the Fourth Amendment. The
Third Circuit reversed.
Held: The judgment is affirmed.

