Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

BREYER, J., dissenting

example) is sufficient to support a strip search policy.
Ante, at 6. The majority correctly points out that there
was but “one instance” in which the policy had led to the
discovery of an effort to smuggle contraband. Bell, 441
U. S., at 558. But the Court understood that the prison
had been open only four months. Id., at 526. And the
Court was also presented with other examples where
inmates attempted to smuggle contraband during contact
visits. Id., at 559.
It is true that in Bell the Court found the prison justified in conducting postcontact searches even as to pretrial detainees who had been brought before a magistrate,
denied bail, and “committed to the detention facility only
because no other less drastic means [could] reasonably
assure [their] presence at trial.” 441 U. S., at 546, n. 28.
The Court recognized that those ordered detained by a
magistrate were often those “charged with serious crimes,
or who have prior records.” Ibid. For that reason, those
detainees posed at least the same security risk as convicted inmates, if not “a greater risk to jail security and
order,” and a “greater risk of escape.” Ibid. And, of
course, in Bell, both the inmates at issue and their visitors
had the time to plan to smuggle contraband in that case,
unlike those persons at issue here (imprisoned soon after
an unexpected arrest).
The Bell Court had no occasion to focus upon those
arrested for minor crimes, prior to a judicial officer’s determination that they should be committed to prison. I
share JUSTICE ALITO’s intuition that the calculus may be
different in such cases, given that “[m]ost of those arrested
for minor offenses are not dangerous, and most are released from custody prior to or at the time of their initial
appearance before a magistrate.” Ante, at 2 (concurring
opinion). As he notes, this case does not address, and
“reserves judgment on,” whether it is always reasonable
“to strip search an arrestee before the arrestee’s detention

