4

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Opinion of the Court 


to remove their clothing and expose the most private areas
of their bodies to close visual inspection as a routine part
of the intake process. Rather, he contended, officials could
conduct this kind of search only if they had reason to
suspect a particular inmate of concealing a weapon, drugs,
or other contraband. The District Court certified a class of
individuals who were charged with a nonindictable offense
under New Jersey law, processed at either the Burlington
County or Essex County jail, and directed to strip naked
even though an officer had not articulated any reasonable
suspicion they were concealing contraband.
After discovery, the court granted petitioner’s motion
for summary judgment on the unlawful search claim. It
concluded that any policy of “strip searching” nonindictable offenders without reasonable suspicion violated the
Fourth Amendment. A divided panel of the United States
Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit reversed, holding
that the procedures described by the District Court struck
a reasonable balance between inmate privacy and the
security needs of the two jails. 621 F. 3d 296 (2010). The
case proceeds on the understanding that the officers
searched detainees prior to their admission to the general
population, as the Court of Appeals seems to have assumed. See id., at 298, 311. Petitioner has not argued
this factual premise is incorrect.
The opinions in earlier proceedings, the briefs on file,
and some cases of this Court refer to a “strip search.” The
term is imprecise. It may refer simply to the instruction
to remove clothing while an officer observes from a distance of, say, five feet or more; it may mean a visual inspection from a closer, more uncomfortable distance; it
may include directing detainees to shake their heads or to
run their hands through their hair to dislodge what might
be hidden there; or it may involve instructions to raise
arms, to display foot insteps, to expose the back of the
ears, to move or spread the buttocks or genital areas, or to

