Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

ther the penal interests mentioned. And there are strong
reasons to believe they are not justified.
The lack of justification is fairly obvious with respect to
the first two penological interests advanced. The searches
already employed at Essex and Burlington include: (a)
pat-frisking all inmates; (b) making inmates go through
metal detectors (including the Body Orifice Screening
System (BOSS) chair used at Essex County Correctional
Facility that identifies metal hidden within the body); (c)
making inmates shower and use particular delousing
agents or bathing supplies; and (d) searching inmates’
clothing. In addition, petitioner concedes that detainees
could be lawfully subject to being viewed in their undergarments by jail officers or during showering (for security
purposes). Brief for Petitioner 9; Tr. of Oral Arg. 7–8
(“Showering in the presence of officers is not something
that requires reasonable suspicion”). No one here has
offered any reason, example, or empirical evidence suggesting the inadequacy of such practices for detecting
injuries, diseases, or tattoos. In particular, there is no
connection between the genital lift and the “squat and
cough” that Florence was allegedly subjected to and health
or gang concerns. See Brief for Academics on Gang Behavior as Amici Curiae; Brief for Medical Society of New
Jersey et al. as Amici Curiae.
The lack of justification for such a strip search is less
obvious but no less real in respect to the third interest,
namely that of detecting contraband. The information
demonstrating the lack of justification is of three kinds.
First, there are empirically based conclusions reached in
specific cases. The New York Federal District Court, to
which I have referred, conducted a study of 23,000 persons
admitted to the Orange County correctional facility between 1999 and 2003. Dodge, 282 F. Supp. 2d, at 69.
These 23,000 persons underwent a strip search of the kind
described, supra, at 1. Of these 23,000 persons, the court

