2

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

ALITO, J., concurring


only if the officers have a reasonable basis for thinking
that a particular arrestee may present a danger to other
detainees or members of the jail staff. But as the Court
explains, corrections officers are often in a very poor position to make such a determination, and the threat to the
health and safety of detainees and staff, should the officers miscalculate, is simply too great.
It is important to note, however, that the Court does not
hold that it is always reasonable to conduct a full strip
search of an arrestee whose detention has not been reviewed by a judicial officer and who could be held in available facilities apart from the general population. Most of
those arrested for minor offenses are not dangerous, and
most are released from custody prior to or at the time of
their initial appearance before a magistrate. In some
cases, the charges are dropped. In others, arrestees are
released either on their own recognizance or on minimal
bail. In the end, few are sentenced to incarceration. For
these persons, admission to the general jail population,
with the concomitant humiliation of a strip search, may
not be reasonable, particularly if an alternative procedure
is feasible. For example, the Federal Bureau of Prisons
(BOP) and possibly even some local jails appear to segregate temporary detainees who are minor offenders from
the general population. See, e.g., Brief for United States
as Amicus Curiae 30; Bull v. City & Cty. of San Francisco,
595 F. 3d 964, 968 (CA9 2010) (en banc).*
——————
* In its amicus brief, the United States informs us that, according to
BOP policy, prison and jail officials cannot subject persons arrested for
misdemeanor or civil contempt offenses to visual body-cavity searches
without their consent or without reasonable suspicion that they are
concealing contraband. Brief for United States 30. Those who are not
searched must be housed separately from the inmates in the general
population. Ibid. Similarly, as described by the Court of Appeals in
Bull, 595 F. 3d 964, the San Francisco County jail system distinguishes
between arrestees who are eligible for release because, for instance,
they can post bail within 12 hours and those who must be housed for an

