6

THALER v. HAYNES
Per Curiam

case, the judge who presided over the voir dire also ruled
on the Batson objections, and thus we had no occasion to
consider how Batson applies when different judges preside
over these two stages of the jury selection process. Sny
der, 552 U. S., at 475–478. The part of Snyder on which
the Court of Appeals relied concerned a very different
problem. The prosecutor in that case asserted that he had
exercised a peremptory challenge for two reasons, one of
which was based on demeanor (i.e., that the juror had
appeared to be nervous), and the trial judge overruled the
Batson objection without explanation. 552 U. S., at 478–
479. We concluded that the record refuted the explanation
that was not based on demeanor and, in light of the par
ticular circumstances of the case, we held that the per
emptory challenge could not be sustained on the de
meanor-based ground, which might not have figured in the
trial judge’s unexplained ruling. Id., at 479–486. Nothing
in this analysis supports the blanket rule on which the
decision below appears to rest.
The opinion in Snyder did note that when the explana
tion for a peremptory challenge “invoke[s] a juror’s de
meanor,” the trial judge’s “first hand observations” are of
great importance. Id., at 477. And in explaining why we
could not assume that the trial judge had credited the
claim that the juror was nervous, we noted that, because
the peremptory challenge was not exercised until some
time after the juror was questioned, the trial judge might
not have recalled the juror’s demeanor. Id., at 479. These
observations do not suggest that, in the absence of a per
——————
Appeals seems to have concluded), Snyder could not have constituted
“clearly established Federal law as determined by” this Court for
purposes of respondent’s habeas petition because we decided Snyder
nearly six years after his conviction became final and more than six
years after the relevant state-court decision. See Williams v. Taylor,
529 U. S. 362, 390 (2000) (opinion for the Court by STEVENS, J.); id., at
412 (opinion for the Court by O’Connor, J.).

