Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of the Court

Rock’s decision to sue for compliance with the CBA’s
grievance procedures on strike-related matters does not
establish an agreement, “implicit” or otherwise, to arbi
trate an issue (the CBA’s formation date) that Granite
Rock did not raise, and that Granite Rock has always (and
rightly, see Part II−C, supra) characterized as beyond the
scope of the CBA’s arbitration clause. The mere fact that
Local raised the formation date dispute as a defense to
Granite Rock’s suit does not make that dispute attribut
able to Granite Rock in the waiver or estoppel sense the
Court of Appeals suggested, see 546 F. 3d, at 1178, much
less establish that Granite Rock agreed to arbitrate it by
suing to enforce the CBA as to other matters. Accordingly,
we hold that the parties’ dispute over the CBA’s formation
date was for the District Court, not an arbitrator, to re
solve, and remand for proceedings consistent with that
conclusion.
III
We turn now to the claims available on remand. The
parties agree that Granite Rock can bring a breach-of
contract claim under LMRA §301(a) against Local as a
CBA signatory, and against IBT as Local’s agent or alter
ego. See Brief for Respondent IBT 10–13; Reply Brief for
Petitioner 12–13 and n. 11.15 The question is whether
——————
15 Although the parties concede the general availability of such a
claim against IBT, they dispute whether Granite Rock abandoned its
agency or alter ego allegations in the course of this litigation. Compare
Brief for Respondent IBT, p. 10 with Reply Brief for Petitioner 12–13,
n. 11. Granite Rock concedes that it has abandoned its claim that IBT
acted as Local’s undisclosed principal in orchestrating the ratification
response to the July 2, 2004, CBA. See Plaintiff Granite Rock’s Memo
randum of Points and Authorities in Opposition to Defendant IBT’s
Motion to Dismiss in No. 5:04–cv–02767–JW (ND Cal., Aug. 7, 2006),
Doc. 178, pp. 6, 8 (hereinafter Points and Authorities). But Granite
Rock insists that it preserved its argument that Local served as IBT’s
agent or alter ego when Local denied ratification and engaged in

