16

GRANITE ROCK CO. v. TEAMSTERS
Opinion of the Court

Local seeks to address this flaw in the Court of Appeals’
decision by arguing that in December 2004 the parties
executed a document that rendered the CBA effective as of
May 1, 2004 (the date the prior CBA expired), and that
this effective-date language rendered the CBA’s arbitra
tion clause (but not its no-strike clause) applicable to the
July strike period notwithstanding Local’s view that the
agreement was ratified in August (which ratification date
Local continues to argue controls the period during which
the no-strike clause applies). See Brief for Respondent
Local, pp. 26–27; Tr. of Oral Arg. 32, 37−39. The Court of
Appeals did not rule on the merits of this claim (i.e., it did
not decide whether the CBA’s effective date language
indeed renders some or all of the agreement’s provisions
retroactively applicable to May 2004), and we need not do
so either. Even accepting Local’s assertion that it raised
this retroactivity argument in the District Court, see Brief
for Respondent Local, p. 26,13 Local did not raise this
argument in the Court of Appeals. Nor, more importantly,
did Local’s brief in opposition to Granite Rock’s petition for
certiorari raise the argument as an alternative ground on
which this Court could or should affirm the Court of Ap
peals’ judgment finding the ratification-date dispute arbi
trable for the reasons discussed above. Accordingly, the
argument is properly “deemed waived.” This Court’s Rule
15.2; Carcieri v. Salazar, 555 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op.,
at 15−16).14
——————
13 This claim is questionable because Local’s February 2005 refer
ences to the agreement “now in effect” are not obviously equivalent to
the express retroactivity argument Local asserts in its merits brief in
this Court. See Brief for Respondent Local, pp. 26−27.
14 JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s conclusion that we should nonetheless excuse
Local’s waiver and consider the retroactivity argument, see post, at 5−6
(opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part), is flawed. This
Court’s Rule 15.2 reflects the fact that our adversarial system assigns
both sides responsibility for framing the issues in a case. The impor
tance of enforcing the Rule is evident in cases where, as here, excusing

