Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of the Court

against international unions that (like IBT) are not part of
the certified local bargaining unit they allegedly control.
On the insufficient side of the ledger Granite Rock lists
federal common-law breach-of-contract claims, which
Granite Rock says are difficult to prove against non-CBA
signatories like IBT because international unions struc
ture their relationships with local unions in a way that
makes agency or alter ego difficult to establish. Based on
these assessments, Granite Rock suggests that this case
presents us with the choice of either recognizing the fed
eral common-law tort claim Granite Rock seeks or sanc
tioning conduct inconsistent with federal labor statutes
and our own precedents. See Brief for Petitioner 13–14.
We do not believe the choice is as stark as Granite Rock
implies. It is of course true that we have construed “Sec
tion 301 [to] authoriz[e] federal courts to fashion a body of
federal law for the enforcement of collective bargaining
agreements.” Lewis v. Benedict Coal Corp., 361 U. S. 459,
470 (1960) (citing Lincoln Mills, supra). But we have also
emphasized that in developing this common law we “did
not envision any freewheeling inquiry into what the fed
eral courts might find to be the most desirable rule.”
Howard Johnson Co. v. Hotel Employees, 417 U. S. 249,
255 (1974). The balance federal statutes strike between
employer and union relations in the collective-bargaining
arena is carefully calibrated, see, e.g., NLRB v. Drivers,
362 U. S. 274, 289–290 (1960), and as the parties’ briefs
illustrate, creating a federal common-law tort cause of
action would require a host of policy choices that could
easily upset this balance, see Brief for Respondent IBT
42–44; Reply Brief for Petitioner 22–25. It is thus no
surprise that virtually all Courts of Appeals have held
that federal courts’ authority to “create a federal common
law of collective bargaining agreements under section 301”
should be confined to “a common law of contracts, not a
source of independent rights, let alone tort rights; for

