2

GRANITE ROCK CO. v. TEAMSTERS
Syllabus
of contract. But the court denied Local’s separate motion to send the
parties’ dispute over the CBA’s ratification date to arbitration, ruling
that a jury should decide whether ratification occurred on July 2, as
Granite Rock contended, or on August 22, as Local alleged. After the
jury concluded that the CBA was ratified on July 2, the court ordered
arbitration to proceed on Granite Rock’s breach-of-contract claims.
The Ninth Circuit affirmed the dismissal of the tortious interference
claims, but reversed the arbitration order, holding that the parties’
ratification-date dispute was a matter for an arbitrator to resolve un
der the CBA’s arbitration clause. The Court of Appeals reasoned that
the clause covered the ratification-date dispute because the clause
clearly covered the related strike claims; national policy favoring ar
bitration required ambiguity about the arbitration clause’s scope to
be resolved in favor of arbitrability; and, in any event, Granite Rock
had implicitly consented to arbitrate the ratification-date dispute by
suing under the contract.

Held:
1. The parties’ dispute over the CBA’s ratification date was a mat
ter for the District Court, not an arbitrator, to resolve. Pp. 6–20.
(a) Whether parties have agreed to arbitrate a particular dispute
is typically an “ ‘ issue for judicial determination,’ ” e.g., Howsam v.
Dean Witter Reynolds, Inc., 537 U. S. 79, 83, as is a dispute over an
arbitration contract’s formation, see, e.g., First Options of Chicago,
Inc. v. Kaplan, 514 U. S. 938, 944. These principles would neatly
dispose of this case if the formation dispute here were typical. But it
is not. It is based on when (not whether) the new CBA containing the
parties’ arbitration clause was ratified and thereby formed. To de
termine whether the parties’ dispute over the CBA’s ratification date
is arbitrable, it is necessary to apply the rule that a court may order
arbitration of a particular dispute only when satisfied that the par
ties agreed to arbitrate that dispute. See, e.g., id., at 943. To satisfy
itself that such agreement exists, the court must resolve any issue
that calls into question the specific arbitration clause that a party
seeks to have the court enforce. See, e.g., Rent-A-Center, West, Inc. v.
Jackson, ante, at 4–6. Absent an agreement committing them to an
arbitrator, such issues typically concern the scope and enforceability
of the parties’ arbitration clause. In addition, such issues always in
clude whether the clause was agreed to, and may include when that
agreement was formed. Pp. 6–7.
(b) In cases invoking the “federal policy favoring arbitration of
labor disputes,” Gateway Coal Co. v. Mine Workers, 414 U. S. 368,
377, courts adhere to the same framework, see, e.g., AT&T Technolo
gies, Inc. v. Communications Workers, 475 U. S. 643, and discharge
their duty to satisfy themselves that the parties agreed to arbitrate a

