Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

and thus presupposes the CBA’s existence, would seem
plainly to cover a dispute that “arises under” a specific
substantive provision of the CBA, but does not so obvi
ously cover disputes about the CBA’s own formation.
Accordingly, the Court of Appeals relied upon the ratifica
tion dispute’s relationship to Granite Rock’s claim that
Local breached the CBA’s no-strike clause (a claim the
Court of Appeals viewed as clearly “arising under” the
CBA) to conclude that “the arbitration clause is certainly
‘susceptible of an interpretation’ that covers” Local’s for
mation-date defense. 546 F. 3d, at 1177, n. 4.
The Court of Appeals overlooked the fact that this the
ory of the ratification dispute’s arbitrability fails if the
CBA was not formed at the time the unions engaged in the
acts that gave rise to Granite Rock’s strike claims. The
unions began their strike on July 6, 2004, and Granite
Rock filed its suit on July 9. If, as Local asserts, the CBA
containing the parties’ arbitration clause was not ratified,
and thus not formed, until August 22, there was no CBA
for the July no-strike dispute to “arise under,” and thus no
valid basis for the Court of Appeals’ conclusion that Gran
ite Rock’s July 9 claims arose under the CBA and were
thus arbitrable along with, by extension, Local’s formation
date defense to those claims.12 See ibid. For the foregoing
reasons, resolution of the parties’ dispute about whether
the CBA was ratified in July or August was central to
deciding Local’s arbitration demand. Accordingly, the
Court of Appeals erred in holding that it was not neces
sary for the District Court to determine the CBA’s ratifica
tion date in order to decide whether the parties agreed to
arbitrate Granite Rock’s no-strike claim or the ratification
date dispute Local raised as a defense to that claim.
——————
12 This analysis pertains only to the Court of Appeals’ decision, which
did not engage the 11th-hour retroactivity argument Local raised in its
merits brief in this Court, and that we address below.

