14

GRANITE ROCK CO. v. TEAMSTERS
Opinion of the Court

trability, when a contract is formed can be as critical as
whether it was formed. That is the case where, as here,
the date on which an agreement was ratified determines
the date the agreement was formed, and thus determines
whether the agreement’s provisions were enforceable
during the period relevant to the parties’ dispute.10
This formation date question requires judicial resolution
here because it relates to Local’s arbitration demand in
such a way that the District Court was required to decide
the CBA’s ratification date in order to determine whether
the parties consented to arbitrate the matters covered by
the demand.11 The parties agree that the CBA’s arbitra
tion clause pertains only to disputes that “arise under” the
agreement. Accordingly, to hold the parties’ ratification
date dispute arbitrable, the Court of Appeals had to decide
whether that dispute could be characterized as “arising
under” the CBA. In answering this question in the af
firmative, both Local and the Court of Appeals tied the
arbitrability of the ratification-date issue—which Local
raised as a defense to Granite Rock’s strike claims—to the
arbitrability of the strike claims themselves. See id., at
347. They did so because the CBA’s arbitration clause,
which pertains only to disputes “arising under” the CBA
——————
10 Our

conclusions about the significance of the CBA’s ratification
date to the specific arbitrability question before us do not disturb the
general rule that parties may agree to arbitrate past disputes or future
disputes based on past events.
11 In reaching this conclusion we need not, and do not, decide whether
every dispute over a CBA’s ratification date would require judicial
resolution. We recognize that ratification disputes in labor cases may
often qualify as “formation disputes” for contract law purposes because
contract law defines formation as acceptance of an offer on specified
terms, and in many labor cases ratification of a CBA is necessary to
satisfy this formation requirement. See App. 349−351. But it is not the
mere labeling of a dispute for contract law purposes that determines
whether an issue is arbitrable. The test for arbitrability remains
whether the parties consented to arbitrate the dispute in question.

