Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
particular dispute by (1) applying the presumption of arbitrability
only where a validly formed and enforceable arbitration agreement is
ambiguous about whether it covers the dispute at hand and (2) order
ing arbitration only where the presumption is not rebutted, see, e.g.,
id., at 651–652. Local is thus wrong to suggest that the presumption
takes courts outside the settled framework for determining arbitra
bility. This Court has never held that the presumption overrides the
principle that a court may submit to arbitration “only those disputes
. . . the parties have agreed to submit,” First Options, supra, at 943,
nor that courts may use policy considerations as a substitute for
party agreement, see, e.g., AT&T Technologies, supra, at 648−651.
The presumption should be applied only where it reflects, and derives
its legitimacy from, a judicial conclusion (absent a provision validly
committing the issue to an arbitrator) that arbitration of a particular
dispute is what the parties intended because their express agreement
to arbitrate was validly formed, is legally enforceable, and is best con
strued to encompass the dispute. See, e.g., First Options, supra, at
944–945. This simple framework compels reversal of the Ninth Cir
cuit’s judgment because it requires judicial resolution of two related
questions central to Local’s arbitration demand: when the CBA was
formed, and whether its arbitration clause covers the matters Local
wishes to arbitrate. Pp. 7–13.
(c) The parties characterize their ratification-date dispute as a
formation dispute because a union vote ratifying the CBA’s terms
was necessary to form the contract. For purposes of determining ar
bitrability, when a contract is formed can be as critical as whether it
was formed. That is so where, as here, an agreement’s ratification
date determines its formation date, and thus determines whether its
provisions were enforceable during the period relevant to the parties’
dispute. This formation date question requires judicial resolution
here because it relates to Local’s arbitration demand in a way that
required the District Court to determine the CBA’s ratification date
in order to decide whether the parties consented to arbitrate the mat
ters the demand covered. The CBA requires arbitration only of dis
putes that “arise under” the agreement. The parties’ ratification-date
dispute does not clearly fit that description. But the Ninth Circuit
credited Local’s argument that the ratification-date dispute should be
presumed arbitrable because it relates to a dispute (the no-strike dis
pute) that does clearly “arise under” the CBA. The Ninth Circuit
overlooked the fact that this theory of the ratification-date dispute’s
arbitrability fails if, as Local asserts, the new CBA was not formed
until August 22, because in that case there was no CBA for the July
no-strike dispute to “arise under.” Local attempts to address this
flaw in the Circuit’s reasoning by arguing that a December 2004

