Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

formed.4 And at the time the District Court considered
Local’s demand to send this issue to an arbitrator, Granite
Rock, the party resisting arbitration, conceded both the
formation and the validity of the CBA’s arbitration clause.
These unusual facts require us to reemphasize the
proper framework for deciding when disputes are arbitra
ble under our precedents. Under that framework, a court
may order arbitration of a particular dispute only where
the court is satisfied that the parties agreed to arbitrate
that dispute. See First Options, supra, at 943; AT&T
Technologies, supra, at 648−649. To satisfy itself that
such agreement exists, the court must resolve any issue
that calls into question the formation or applicability of
the specific arbitration clause that a party seeks to have
the court enforce. See, e.g., Rent-A-Center, West, Inc. v.
Jackson, ante, at 4−6 (opinion of SCALIA, J.). Where there
is no provision validly committing them to an arbitrator,
see ante, at 7, these issues typically concern the scope of
the arbitration clause and its enforceability. In addition,
these issues always include whether the clause was agreed
to, and may include when that agreement was formed.
A
The parties agree that it was proper for the District
Court to decide whether their ratification dispute was
arbitrable.5 They disagree about whether the District
Court answered the question correctly. Local contends
that the District Court erred in holding that the CBA’s
——————
4 Although a union ratification vote is not always required for the
provisions in a CBA to be considered validly formed, the parties agree
that ratification was such a predicate here. See App. 349–351.
5 Because neither party argues that the arbitrator should decide this
question, there is no need to apply the rule requiring “ ‘clear and
unmistakable’ ” evidence of an agreement to arbitrate arbitrability.
First Options of Chicago, Inc. v. Kaplan, 514 U. S. 938, 944 (1995)
(quoting AT&T Technologies, Inc. v. Communications Workers, 475
U. S. 643, 649 (1986) (alterations omitted)).

