2

GRANITE ROCK CO. v. TEAMSTERS
Opinion of the Court

I
Petitioner Granite Rock Company is a concrete and
building materials company that has operated in Califor
nia since 1900. Granite Rock employs approximately 800
employees under different labor contracts with several
unions, including respondent International Brotherhood of
Teamsters, Local 287 (Local). Granite Rock and Local
were parties to a 1999 CBA that expired in April 2004.
The parties’ attempt to negotiate a new CBA hit an im
passe and, on June 9, 2004, Local members initiated a
strike in support of their contract demands.1
The strike continued until July 2, 2004, when the par
ties reached agreement on the terms of a new CBA. The
CBA contained a no-strike clause but did not directly
address union members’ liability for any strike-related
damages Granite Rock may have incurred before the new
CBA was negotiated but after the prior CBA had expired.
At the end of the negotiating session on the new CBA,
Local’s business representative, George Netto, approached
Granite Rock about executing a separate “back-to-work”
agreement that would, among other things, hold union
members harmless for damages incurred during the June
2004 strike. Netto did not make execution of such an
agreement a condition of Local’s ratification of the CBA, or
of Local’s decision to cease picketing. Thus, Local did not
have a back-to-work or hold-harmless agreement in place
when it voted to ratify the CBA on July 2, 2004.
Respondent International Brotherhood of Teamsters
(IBT), which had advised Local throughout the CBA nego
——————
1 In deciding the arbitration question in this case we rely upon the
terms of the CBA and the facts in the District Court record. In review
ing the judgment affirming dismissal of Granite Rock’s tort claims
against respondent International Brotherhood of Teamsters (IBT) for
failure to state a claim, we rely on the facts alleged in Granite Rock’s
Third Amended Complaint. See, e.g., H. J. Inc. v. Northwestern Bell
Telephone Co., 492 U. S. 229, 250 (1989).

