Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

tract (hereinafter tortious interference) claims against
IBT.
IBT and Local both moved to dismiss. Among other
things, IBT argued that Granite Rock could not plead a
federal tort claim under §301(a) because that provision
supports a federal cause of action only for breach of con
tract. The District Court agreed and dismissed Granite
Rock’s tortious interference claims. The District Court did
not, however, grant Local’s separate motion to send the
parties’ dispute over the CBA’s ratification date to arbitra
tion.3 The District Court held that whether the CBA was
ratified on July 2 or August 22 was an issue for the court
to decide, and submitted the question to a jury. The jury
reached a unanimous verdict that Local ratified the CBA
on July 2, 2004. The District Court entered the verdict
and ordered the parties to proceed with arbitration on
Granite Rock’s breach-of-contract claims for strike-related
damages.
The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed in
part and reversed in part. See 546 F. 3d 1169 (2008). The
Court of Appeals affirmed the District Court’s dismissal of
Granite Rock’s tortious interference claims against IBT.
See id., at 1170–1175. But it disagreed with the District
Court’s determination that the date of the CBA’s ratifica
tion was a matter for judicial resolution. See id., at 1176–
1178. The Court of Appeals reasoned that the parties’
dispute over this issue was governed by the CBA’s arbitra
tion clause because the clause clearly covered the related
strike claims, the “national policy favoring arbitration”
required that any ambiguity about the scope of the parties’
arbitration clause be resolved in favor of arbitrability, and,
——————
3 The CBA’s ratification date is important to Granite Rock’s underly
ing suit for strike damages. If the District Court correctly concluded
that the CBA was ratified on July 2, Granite Rock could argue on
remand that the July work stoppage violated the CBA’s no-strike
clause.

