4

GRANITE ROCK CO. v. TEAMSTERS
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

falls within the scope of the CBA’s arbitration provision.
Ante, at 14. When it comes to answering the arbitrability
question, it is entirely irrelevant whether Local 287 rati
fied the CBA in August (as it contends) or in July (as
Granite Rock contends). In either case, the parties’ dis
pute—which postdates May 1—clearly “aris[es] under” the
CBA, which is all the arbitration provision requires to
make a dispute referable to an arbitrator. Cf. Litton
Financial Printing Div., Litton Business Systems, Inc. v.
NLRB, 501 U. S. 190, 201 (1991) (recognizing that “a
collective-bargaining agreement might be drafted so as to
eliminate any hiatus between expiration of the old and
execution of the new agreement”).2
Given the CBA’s express retroactivity, the majority errs
in treating Local 287’s ratification-date defense as a “for
mation dispute” subject to judicial resolution. Ante, at 13.
The defense simply goes to the merits of Granite Rock’s
claim: Local 287 maintains that the no-strike clause
should not be construed to apply to the July work stoppage
because it had not ratified the CBA at the time of that
action. Cf. First Options of Chicago, Inc. v. Kaplan, 514
U. S. 938, 942 (1995) (distinguishing a disagreement that
“makes up the merits of the dispute” from a disagreement
“about the arbitrability of the dispute”). Accordingly, the
defense is necessarily a matter for the arbitrator, not the
court. See AT&T, 475 U. S., at 651 (“[I]t is for the arbitra
tor to determine the relative merits of the parties’ sub
——————
2 Notably, at the time they executed the CBA in December 2004, the
parties were well aware that they disagreed about the legitimacy of the
July work stoppage. Yet they made the CBA retroactive to May and
declined to carve out their no-strike dispute from the arbitration
provision, despite expressly excluding three other classes of disputes
from arbitration. Cf. Steelworkers v. Warrior & Gulf Nav. Co., 363
U. S. 574, 584–585 (1960) (“In the absence of any express provision
excluding a particular grievance from arbitration, we think only the
most forceful evidence of a purpose to exclude the claim from arbitra
tion can prevail”).

