(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

GRANITE ROCK CO. v. INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF TEAMSTERS ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1214. Argued January 19, 2010—Decided June 24, 2010
In June 2004, respondent local union (Local), supported by its parent
international (IBT), initiated a strike against petitioner Granite
Rock, the employer of some of Local’s members, following the expira
tion of the parties’ collective-bargaining agreement (CBA) and an im
passe in their negotiations. On July 2, the parties agreed to a new
CBA containing no-strike and arbitration clauses, but could not reach
a separate back-to-work agreement holding local and international
union members harmless for any strike-related damages Granite
Rock incurred. IBT instructed Local to continue striking until Gran
ite Rock approved such a hold-harmless agreement, but the company
refused to do so, informing Local that continued strike activity would
violate the new CBA’s no-strike clause. IBT and Local responded by
announcing a company-wide strike involving numerous facilities and
workers, including members of other IBT locals.
Granite Rock sued IBT and Local, invoking federal jurisdiction
under §301(a) of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947 (LMRA),
seeking strike-related damages for the unions’ alleged breach of con
tract, and asking for an injunction against the ongoing strike because
the hold-harmless dispute was an arbitrable grievance under the new
CBA. The unions conceded §301(a) jurisdiction, but asserted that the
new CBA was never validly ratified by a vote of Local’s members,
and, thus, the CBA’s no-strike clause did not provide a basis for
Granite Rock to challenge the strike. After Granite Rock amended
its complaint to add claims that IBT tortiously interfered with the
new CBA, the unions moved to dismiss. The District Court granted
IBT’s motion to dismiss the tortious interference claims on the
ground that §301(a) supports a federal cause of action only for breach

