20

GRANITE ROCK CO. v. TEAMSTERS
Opinion of the Court

Granite Rock may also bring a federal tort claim under
§301(a) for IBT’s alleged interference with the CBA.16
Brief for Petitioner 32. The Court of Appeals joined virtu
ally all other Circuits in holding that it would not recog
nize such a claim under §301(a).
Granite Rock asks us to reject this position as inconsis
tent with federal labor law’s goal of promoting industrial
peace and economic stability through judicial enforcement
of CBAs, as well as with our precedents holding that a
federal common law of labor contracts is necessary to
further this goal. See id., at 31; see also, e.g., Textile
Workers v. Lincoln Mills of Ala., 353 U. S. 448, 451 (1957).
Explaining that IBT’s conduct in this case undermines the
very core of the bargaining relationship federal labor laws
exist to protect, Granite Rock argues that a federal
common-law tort remedy for IBT’s conduct is necessary
because other potential avenues for deterring and redress
ing such conduct are either unavailable or insufficient.
See Brief for Petitioner 32–33; Reply Brief for Petitioner
19–20. On the unavailable side of the ledger Granite Rock
lists state-law tort claims, some of which this Court has
held §301(a) pre-empts, as well as administrative (unfair
labor practices) claims, which Granite Rock says the Na
tional Labor Relations Board (NLRB) cannot entertain
——————
unauthorized strike activity in July 2004. Nothing in the record before
us unequivocally refutes this assertion. See App. 306, 311–315, 318;
Points and Authorities 6, n. 3. Accordingly, nothing in this opinion
forecloses the parties from litigating these claims on remand.
16 IBT argues that we should dismiss this question as improvidently
granted because Granite Rock abandoned its tortious interference claim
when it declared its intention to seek only contractual (as opposed to
punitive) damages on the claim. See Brief for Respondent IBT 16. We
reject this argument, which confuses Granite Rock’s decision to forgo
the pursuit of punitive damages on its claim with a decision to abandon
the claim itself. The two are not synonymous, and IBT cites no author
ity for the proposition that Granite Rock must allege more than eco
nomic damages to state a claim on which relief could be granted.

