Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

tiations and whose leadership and members supported the
June strike, opposed Local’s decision to return to work
without a back-to-work agreement shielding both Local
and IBT members from liability for strike-related dam
ages. In an effort to secure such an agreement, IBT in
structed Local’s members not to honor their agreement to
return to work on July 5, and instructed Local’s leaders to
continue the work stoppage until Granite Rock agreed to
hold Local and IBT members free from liability for the
June strike. Netto demanded such an agreement on July
6, but Granite Rock refused the request and informed
Local that the company would view any continued strike
activity as a violation of the new CBA’s no-strike clause.
IBT and Local responded by announcing a company-wide
strike that involved numerous facilities and hundreds of
workers, including members of IBT locals besides Local
287.
According to Granite Rock, IBT not only instigated this
strike; it supported and directed it. IBT provided pay and
benefits to union members who refused to return to work,
directed Local’s negotiations with Granite Rock, supported
Local financially during the strike period with a $1.2
million loan, and represented to Granite Rock that IBT
had unilateral authority to end the work stoppage in
exchange for a hold-harmless agreement covering IBT
members within and outside Local’s bargaining unit.
On July 9, 2004, Granite Rock sued IBT and Local in
the District Court, seeking an injunction against the
ongoing strike and strike-related damages. Granite Rock’s
complaint, originally and as amended, invoked federal
jurisdiction under LMRA §301(a), alleged that the July 6
strike violated Local’s obligations under the CBA’s no
strike provision, and asked the District Court to enjoin the
strike because the hold-harmless dispute giving rise to the
strike was an arbitrable grievance. See Boys Markets, Inc.
v. Retail Clerks, 398 U. S. 235, 237–238, 253–254 (1970)

