4

GRANITE ROCK CO. v. TEAMSTERS
Syllabus
document the parties executed rendered the new CBA effective as of
May 1, 2004, the date the prior CBA expired. The Court of Appeals
did not rule on this claim, and this Court need not do so either be
cause it was not raised in Local’s brief in opposition to the certiorari
petition. Pp. 13–17.
(d) Another reason to reverse the Court of Appeals’ judgment is
that the ratification-date dispute, whether labeled a formation dis
pute or not, falls outside the arbitration clause’s scope on grounds the
presumption favoring arbitration cannot cure. CBA §20 provides, in
ter alia, that “[a]ll disputes arising under this agreement shall be re
solved in accordance with the [Grievance] procedure,” which includes
arbitration. The parties’ ratification-date dispute cannot properly be
said to fall within this provision’s scope for at least two reasons.
First, the question whether the CBA was validly ratified on July 2,
2004—a question concerning the CBA’s very existence—cannot fairly
be said to “arise under” the CBA. Second, even if the “arising under”
language could in isolation be construed to cover this dispute, §20’s
remaining provisions all but foreclose such a reading by describing
that section’s arbitration requirement as applicable to labor dis
agreements that are addressed in the CBA and are subject to its re
quirement of mandatory mediation. The Ninth Circuit’s contrary
conclusion finds no support in §20’s text. That court’s only effort to
grapple with that text misses the point by focusing on whether Gran
ite Rock’s claim to enforce the CBA’s no-strike provisions could be
characterized as “arising under” the agreement, which is not the dis
positive issue here. Pp. 17–18.
(e) Local’s remaining argument in support of the Court of Ap
peals’ judgment—that Granite Rock “implicitly” consented to arbitra
tion when it sued to enforce the CBA’s no-strike and arbitrable griev
ance provisions—is similarly unavailing. Although it sought an
injunction against the strike so the parties could arbitrate the labor
grievance giving rise to it, Granite Rock’s decision to sue does not es
tablish an agreement, “implicit” or otherwise, to arbitrate an issue
(the CBA’s formation date) that the company did not raise and has
always rightly characterized as beyond the arbitration clause’s scope.
Pp. 19–20.
2. The Ninth Circuit did not err in declining to recognize a new fed
eral common-law cause of action under LMRA §301(a) for IBT’s al
leged tortious interference with the CBA. Though virtually all other
Circuits have rejected such claims, Granite Rock argues that doing so
in this case is inconsistent with federal labor law’s goal of promoting
industrial peace and economic stability through judicial enforcement
of CBAs, and with this Court’s precedents holding that a federal
common law of labor contracts is necessary to further this goal, see,

