10

GRANITE ROCK CO. v. TEAMSTERS
Opinion of the Court

certain disputes, particularly labor disputes, based on
policy grounds even where evidence of the parties’ agree
ment to arbitrate the dispute in question is lacking. See
Brief for Respondent Local, p. 16 (citing cases emphasizing
the policy favoring arbitration generally and the “impres
sive policy considerations favoring arbitration” in LMRA
cases (internal quotation marks omitted)). That is not a
fair reading of the opinions, all of which compelled arbitra
tion of a dispute only after the Court was persuaded that
the parties’ arbitration agreement was validly formed and
that it covered the dispute in question and was legally
enforceable. See, e.g., First Options, supra, at 944–945.
That Buckeye and some of our cases applying a presump
tion of arbitrability to certain disputes do not discuss each
of these requirements merely reflects the fact that in those
cases some of the requirements were so obviously satisfied
that no discussion was needed.
In Buckeye, the formation of the parties’ arbitration
agreement was not at issue because the parties agreed
that they had “concluded” an agreement to arbitrate and
memorialized it as an arbitration clause in their loan
contract. 546 U. S., at 444, n. 1. The arbitration clause’s
scope was also not at issue, because the provision ex
pressly applied to “ ‘[a]ny claim, dispute, or controversy . . .
arising from or relating to . . . the validity, enforceability,
or scope of this Arbitration Provision or the entire Agree
ment.’ ” Id., at 442. The parties resisting arbitration
(customers who agreed to the broad arbitration clause as a
condition of using Buckeye’s loan service) claimed only
that a usurious interest provision in the loan agreement
invalidated the entire contract, including the arbitration
clause, and thus precluded the Court from relying on the
clause as evidence of the parties’ consent to arbitrate
matters within its scope. See id., at 443. In rejecting this
argument, we simply applied the requirement in §2 of the
FAA that courts treat an arbitration clause as severable

