Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

C
Although the foregoing is sufficient to reverse the Court
of Appeals’ judgment, there is an additional reason to do
so: The dispute here, whether labeled a formation dispute
or not, falls outside the scope of the parties’ arbitration
clause on grounds the presumption favoring arbitration
cannot cure. Section 20 of the CBA provides in relevant
part that “[a]ll disputes arising under this agreement shall
be resolved in accordance with the [Grievance] procedure,”
which includes arbitration. App. 434 (emphasis added);
see also id., at 434–437. The parties’ ratification-date
dispute cannot properly be characterized as falling within
the (relatively narrow, cf., e.g., Drake Bakeries Inc., 370
U. S., at 256–257) scope of this provision for at least two
reasons. First, we do not think the question whether the
CBA was validly ratified on July 2, 2004—a question that
concerns the CBA’s very existence—can fairly be said to
“arise under” the CBA. Second, even if the “arising under”
language could in isolation be construed to cover this
dispute, Section 20’s remaining provisions all but foreclose
such a reading by describing that section’s arbitration
requirement as applicable to labor disagreements that are
addressed in the CBA and are subject to its requirement of
mandatory mediation. See App. 434–437 (requiring arbi
tration of disputes “arising under” the CBA, but only after
the Union and Employer have exhausted mandatory
mediation, and limiting any arbitration decision under
this provision to those “within the scope and terms of
this agreement and . . . specifically limited to the matter
submitted”).
——————
a party’s noncompliance with it would require this Court to decide, in
the first instance, a question whose resolution could affect this and
other cases in a manner that the District Court and Court of Appeals
did not have an opportunity to consider, and that the parties’ argu
ments before this Court may not fully address.

