12

GRANITE ROCK CO. v. TEAMSTERS
Opinion of the Court

Local is thus wrong to suggest that the presumption of
arbitrability we sometimes apply takes courts outside our
settled framework for deciding arbitrability. The pre
sumption simply assists in resolving arbitrability disputes
within that framework. Confining the presumption to this
role reflects its foundation in “the federal policy favoring
arbitration.” As we have explained, this “policy” is merely
an acknowledgment of the FAA’s commitment to “overrule
the judiciary’s longstanding refusal to enforce agreements
to arbitrate and to place such agreements upon the same
footing as other contracts.” Volt, 489 U. S., at 478 (inter
nal quotation marks and citations omitted). Accordingly,
we have never held that this policy overrides the principle
that a court may submit to arbitration “only those dis
putes . . . that the parties have agreed to submit.” First
Options, 514 U. S., at 943; see also Mastrobuono v. Shear
son Lehman Hutton, Inc., 514 U. S. 52, 57 (1995) (“[T]he
FAA’s proarbitration policy does not operate without
regard to the wishes of the contract parties”); AT&T Tech
nologies, 475 U. S., at 650−651 (applying the same rule to
the “presumption of arbitrability for labor disputes”). Nor
——————
emphasizes that even in LMRA cases, “courts” must construe arbitra
tion clauses because “a party cannot be required to submit to arbitra
tion any dispute which he has not agreed so to submit.” Id., at 582
(applying this rule and finding the dispute at issue arbitrable only after
determining that the parties’ arbitration clause could be construed
under standard principles of contract interpretation to cover it).
Our use of the same rules in FAA cases is also unsurprising. The
rules are suggested by the statute itself. Section 2 of the FAA requires
courts to enforce valid and enforceable arbitration agreements accord
ing to their terms. And §4 provides in pertinent part that where a
party invokes the jurisdiction of a federal court over a matter that the
court could adjudicate but for the presence of an arbitration clause,
“[t]he court shall hear the parties” and “direc[t] the parties to proceed
to arbitration in accordance with the terms of the agreement” except
“[i]f the making of the arbitration agreement or the failure, neglect, or
refusal to perform the same be in issue,” in which case “the court shall
proceed summarily to the trial thereof.” 9 U. S. C. §4.

