Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

stantive interpretations of the agreement”). Indeed, this
Court has been emphatic that “courts . . . have no business
weighing the merits of the grievance.” Steelworkers v.
American Mfg. Co., 363 U. S. 564, 568 (1960). “When the
judiciary undertakes to determine the merits of a griev
ance under the guise of interpreting the [arbitration provi
sions] of collective bargaining agreements, it usurps a
function . . . entrusted to the arbitration tribunal.” Id., at
569; see also AT&T, 475 U. S., at 649 (“[I]n deciding
whether the parties have agreed to submit a particular
grievance to arbitration, a court is not to rule on the po
tential merits of the underlying claims”); Warrior, 363
U. S., at 582, 585 (“[T]he judicial inquiry under [LMRA]
§301 must be strictly confined to the question whether the
reluctant party did agree to arbitrate the grievance”; “the
court should view with suspicion an attempt to persuade it
to become entangled in the construction of the substantive
provisions of a labor agreement”).
Attempting to sidestep this analysis, the majority de
clares that Local 287 waived its retroactivity argument by
failing in the courts below to challenge Granite Rock’s
consistent characterization of the parties’ dispute as one of
contract formation. See ante, at 16. As a result of Local
287’s omission, the District Court and Court of Appeals
proceeded under the understanding that this case pre
sented a formation question. It was not until its merits
brief in this Court that Local 287 attempted to correct this
mistaken premise by pointing to the parties’ execution of
the December 2004 CBA with its May 2004 effective date.
This Court’s rules “admonis[h] [counsel] that they have an
obligation to the Court to point out in the brief in opposi
tion [to certiorari], and not later, any perceived misstate
ment made in the petition [for certiorari]”; nonjurisdic
tional arguments not raised at that time “may be deemed
waived.” This Court’s Rule 15.2. Although it is regretta
ble and inexcusable that Local 287 did not present its

