Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

aware of any instance in which this has happened in the
five years since it began subjecting EAJA fee awards to
administrative offset. Tr. of Oral Arg. 12–13. It is not
difficult to understand why. Helping a client establish a
repayment plan would be a time-consuming endeavor
uncompensated by any fee-shifting provision, and a client
who needs such assistance is unlikely to have the funds to
pay the attorney for that service. If the Government is
instead suggesting that a lawyer can simply decline to
represent a prospective client once she knows of the cli
ent’s debtor status, that suggestion only proves my point.
Cf. NOSSCR Brief 25 (describing deterrent effect of offsets
on representation).
In the end, the Government has no compelling response
to the fact that today’s decision will make it more difficult
for the neediest litigants to find attorneys to represent
them in cases against the Government. I “find it difficult
to ascribe to Congress an intent to throw” an EAJA liti
gant “a lifeline that it knew was a foot short. . . . Given the
anomalous nature of this result, and its frustration of the
very purposes behind the EAJA itself, Congress cannot
lightly be assumed to have intended it.” Sullivan, 490
U. S., at 890.
The Government suggests that it is possible to glean
such intent from the fact that Congress did not expressly
exempt EAJA awards from administrative offset under the
DCIA. Reply Brief for Petitioner 19–20; 31 U. S. C.
§3716(c)(1)(C) (specifying certain federal payments that
are not subject to administrative offset); see also 31 CFR
§285.5(e)(2) (2009) (identifying payments that are not
subject to administrative offset because of a statutory
exemption). If “application of the offset program to such
awards will make it more difficult for Social Security
claimants or other litigants to find attorneys,” the Gov
ernment contends, the “provisions that govern the offset
program indicate that Congress is willing to bear that

