Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

tion to “refun[d]” the amount of the smaller fee to the
claimant, which reference suggests that the award belongs
to the claimant in the first place, alone undercuts Ratliff’s
reading of “receives” as implying an initial statutory pay
ment to the attorney.4 And Ratliff’s reading is in any
event irreconcilable with the textual differences between
EAJA and the SSA we discuss above. Thus, even accept
ing Ratliff’s argument that subsection (d)(1)(A) is ambigu
ous, the statutory provisions she cites resolve any ambigu
ity in favor of treating subsection (d)(1)(A) awards as
payable to the prevailing litigant, and thus subject to
offset where the litigant has relevant federal debts.
The Government’s history of paying EAJA awards di
rectly to attorneys in certain cases does not compel a
different conclusion. The Government concedes that until
——————
4 Ratliff

argues that fees awarded under 42 U. S. C. §406(b) can never
be “ ‘refund[ed]’ ” in this sense because SSA fees are “never paid initially
to the client.” Brief for Respondent 14 (emphasis in original). That is
not accurate. As we have explained, Social Security claimants and
attorneys normally enter into contingent-fee agreements that are
subject to judicial “review for reasonableness.” Gisbrecht v. Barnhart,
535 U. S. 789, 809 (2002). Where the court allows a fee, §406(b) per
mits the Commissioner to collect the approved fee out of the client’s
benefit award and to certify the fee for “payment to such attorney out
of” that award. §406(b)(1)(A). In such cases, the attorney would
“refun[d]” the fee to the client in the event that the attorney also
receives a (larger) EAJA award, because the attorney “receive[d]” the
SSA fee from the client’s funds. Similarly inaccurate is Ratliff’s sugges
tion that our construction of EAJA §206(b)’s reference to “refun[d]”
would preclude attorneys from collecting any fees from a prevailing
party until both SSA and EAJA payments are awarded. Our construc
tion does not alter or preclude what we have recognized as courts’
common practice of awarding EAJA fees at the time a court remands a
case to the Social Security Administration (Administration) for benefits
proceedings. Such awards often allow attorneys to collect EAJA fees
months before any fees are awarded under 42 U. S.C §406(b), because
§406(b) fees cannot be determined until the Administration enters a
final benefits ruling. See Shalala v. Schaefer, 509 U. S. 292, 295−302
(1993).

