10

ASTRUE v. RATLIFF
Opinion of the Court

2006, it “frequently paid EAJA fees in Social Security
cases directly to attorneys.” Reply Brief for Petitioner 13.
But this fact does not alter our interpretation of subsec
tion (d)(1)(A)’s “prevailing party” language or the Govern
ment’s rights and obligations under the statute. As the
Government explains, it most often paid EAJA fees di
rectly to attorneys in cases in which the prevailing party
had assigned its rights in the fees award to the attorney
(which assignment would not be necessary if the statute
rendered the fees award payable to the attorney in the
first instance). The fact that some such cases involved a
prevailing party with outstanding federal debts is unsur
prising given that it was not until 2005 that the Treasury
Department modified the TOP to require offsets against
“miscellaneous” payments such as attorney’s fees awards.
And as Ratliff admits, the Government has since contin
ued the direct payment practice only in cases where “the
plaintiff does not owe a debt to the government and as
signs the right to receive the fees to the attorney.” Brief
for Respondent 28 (boldface deleted). The Government’s
decision to continue direct payments only in such cases is
easily explained by the 2005 amendments to the TOP, and
nothing about the Government’s past payment practices
altered the statutory text that governs this case or es
topped the Government from conforming its payment
practices to the Treasury Department’s revised regula
tions. For all of these reasons, neither EAJA nor the SSA
supports Ratliff’s reading of subsection (d)(1)(A).
Our cases interpreting and applying 42 U. S. C. §1988,
which contains language virtually identical to the EAJA
provision we address here,5 buttress this conclusion. Our
——————
5 Section

1988(b) provides that in actions covered by the statute and
subject to exceptions not relevant here, “the court, in its discretion, may
allow the prevailing party, other than the United States, a reasonable
attorney’s fee.”

