2

ASTRUE v. RATLIFF
Syllabus
and is therefore subject to an offset to satisfy the litigant’s pre­
existing debt to the Government. Pp. 3–11.
(a) Nothing in EAJA contradicts this Court’s longstanding view
that the term “prevailing party” in attorney’s fees statutes is a “term
of art” that refers to the prevailing litigant. See, e.g., Buckhannon
Board & Care Home, Inc. v. West Virginia Dept. of Health and Hu
man Resources, 532 U. S. 598, 603. That the term has its usual
meaning in subsection (d)(1)(A) is underscored by the fact that sub­
section (d)(1)(B) and other provisions clearly distinguish the party
who receives the fees award (the litigant) from the attorney who per­
formed the work that generated the fees. The Court disagrees with
Ratliff’s assertion that subsection (d)(1)(A)’s use of the verb “award”
nonetheless renders §2412(d) fees payable directly to a prevailing
party’s attorney. The dictionaries show that, in the litigation context,
the transitive verb “award” has the settled meaning of giving or as­
signing by judicial decree. Its plain meaning in subsection (d)(1)(A) is
thus that the court shall “give or assign by . . . judicial determina­
tion” to the “prevailing party” (here, Ree) attorney’s fees in the
amount sought and substantiated under, inter alia, subsection
(d)(1)(B). That the prevailing party’s attorney may have a beneficial
interest or a contractual right in the fees does not alter this conclu­
sion. Pp. 3–6.
(b) The Court rejects Ratliff’s argument that other EAJA provi­
sions, combined with the Social Security Act (SSA) and the Govern­
ment’s practice of paying some EAJA fees awards directly to attor­
neys in Social Security cases, render §2412(d) at least ambiguous on
the question presented here, and that these other provisions resolve
the ambiguity in her favor. Even accepting that §2412(d) is ambigu­
ous¸ the provisions and practices Ratliff identifies do not alter the
Court’s conclusion. Subsection (d)(1)(B) and other provisions differ­
entiate between attorneys and prevailing parties, and treat attorneys
on par with other service providers, in a manner that forecloses the
conclusion that attorneys have a right to direct payment of subsec­
tion (d)(1)(A) awards. Nor is the necessity of such payments estab­
lished by the SSA provisions on which Ratliff relies. That SSA fees
awards are payable directly to a prevailing claimant’s attorney, see
42 U. S. C. §406(b)(1)(A), undermines Ratliff’s case by showing that
Congress knows how to create a direct fee requirement where it de­
sires to do so. Given the stark contrast between the language of the
SSA and EAJA provisions, the Court is reluctant to interpret subsec­
tion (d)(1)(A) to contain a direct fee requirement absent clear textual
evidence that such a requirement applies. Such evidence is not sup­
plied by a 1985 EAJA amendment requiring that, “where the claim­
ant’s attorney receives fees for the same work under both [42 U. S. C.

