Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

between attorneys and prevailing parties, and treat attor
neys on par with other service providers, in a manner that
forecloses the conclusion that attorneys have a right to
direct payment of subsection (d)(1)(A) awards. As noted
above, subsection (d)(1)(B) requires the prevailing party to
submit a fee application showing that she is otherwise
“eligible to receive an award” and, as a complement to that
requirement, compels the prevailing party to submit “an
itemized statement from any attorney . . . representing or
appearing in behalf of the party” that details the attorney’s
hourly rate and time the attorney spent on the case.
(Emphasis added.) This language would make little sense
if, as Ratliff contends, §2412(d)’s “prevailing party” lan
guage effectively refers to the prevailing litigant’s attor
ney. Subsection (d)(1)(B) similarly makes clear that the
“prevailing party” (not her attorney) is the recipient of the
fees award by requiring the prevailing party to demon
strate that her net worth falls within the range the statute
requires for fees awards. And EAJA’s cost provision fur
ther underscores the point. That provision uses language
identical to that in the attorney’s fees provision to allow
prevailing parties to recover “the reasonable expenses of
expert witnesses” and “any study, analysis, engineering
report, test, or project” necessary to prepare “the party’s
case,” §2412(d)(2)(A), yet Ratliff does not argue that it
makes costs payable directly to the vendors who provide
the relevant services.
Nor do the SSA provisions on which Ratliff relies estab
lish that subsection (d)(1)(A) fees awards are payable to
prevailing parties’ attorneys. It is true that the SSA
makes fees awards under that statute payable directly to a
prevailing claimant’s attorney.
See 42 U. S. C.
§406(b)(1)(A) (providing that where a claimant “who was
represented before the court by an attorney” obtains a
favorable judgment, “the court may determine and allow
as part of its judgment a reasonable fee for such represen

