8

ASTRUE v. RATLIFF
Opinion of the Court

tation, not in excess of 25 percent of” the benefits award
and may certify the full amount of the statutory fees
award “for payment to such attorney out of, and not in
addition to, the amount of” the claimant’s benefits award
(emphasis added)). But the SSA’s express authorization of
such payments undermines Ratliff’s case insofar as it
shows that Congress knows how to make fees awards
payable directly to attorneys where it desires to do so.
Given the stark contrast between the SSA’s express au
thorization of direct payments to attorneys and the ab
sence of such language in subsection (d)(1)(A), we are
reluctant to interpret the latter provision to contain a
direct fee requirement absent clear textual evidence sup
porting such an interpretation.
Ratliff contends that Congress’ 1985 amendments to
§206(b) of EAJA supply just such evidence, at least in
Social Security cases. See §3(2), 99 Stat. 186, note follow
ing 28 U. S. C. §2412. The 1985 amendments address the
fact that Social Security claimants may be eligible to
receive fees awards under both the SSA and EAJA, and
clarify the procedure that attorneys and their clients must
follow to prevent the windfall of an unauthorized double
recovery of fees for the same work. Section 206(b) pro
vides that no violation of law occurs “if, where the claim
ant’s attorney receives fees for the same work under both
[42 U. S. C. §406(b) and 28 U. S. C. §2412(d)], the claim
ant’s attorney refunds to the claimant the amount of the
smaller fee.” According to Ratliff, the fact that §206(b)
recognizes, or at least assumes, that an attorney will
sometimes “receiv[e]” fees under 28 U. S. C. §2412(d)
suggests that we should construe subsection (d)(1)(A) to
incorporate the same direct payments to attorneys that
the SSA expressly authorizes.
This argument gives more weight to §206(b)’s reference
to attorney “recei[pt]” of fees than the reference can bear.
Section 206(b)’s ensuing reference to the attorney’s obliga

