(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ASTRUE, COMMISSIONER OF SOCIAL SECURITY v. 

RATLIFF

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1322. Argued February 22, 2010—Decided June 14, 2010
Respondent Ratliff was Ruby Kills Ree’s attorney in Ree’s successful
suit against the United States Social Security Administration for So­
cial Security benefits. The District Court granted Ree’s unopposed
motion for attorney’s fees under the Equal Access to Justice Act
(EAJA), which provides, inter alia, that “a court shall award to a pre­
vailing party . . . fees and other expenses . . . in any civil action . . .
brought by or against the United States.” 28 U. S. C. §2412(d)(1)(A).
Before paying the fees award, the Government discovered that Ree
owed the United States a debt that predated the award. Accordingly,
it sought an administrative offset against the award under 31
U. S. C. §3716, which subjects to offset all “funds payable by the
United States,” §3701(a)(1), to an individual who owes certain delin­
quent federal debts, see §3701(b), unless, e.g., payment is exempted
by statute or regulation. See, e.g., §3716(e)(2). The parties to this
case have not established that any such exemption applies to
§2412(d) fees awards, which, as of 2005, are covered by the Treasury
Department’s Offset Program (TOP). After the Government notified
Ree that it would apply TOP to offset her fees award against a por­
tion of her debt, Ratliff intervened, challenging the offset on the
grounds that §2412(d) fees belong to a litigant’s attorney and thus
may not be used to satisfy the litigant’s federal debts. The District
Court held that because §2412(d) directs that fees be awarded to the
“prevailing party,” not to her attorney, Ratliff lacked standing to
challenge the offset. The Eighth Circuit reversed, holding that under
its precedent, EAJA attorney’s fees are awarded to prevailing parties’
attorneys.
Held: A §2412(d)(1)(A) attorney’s fees award is payable to the litigant

