4

ASTRUE v. RATLIFF
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

sense that increasing the risk that an attorney will not
receive a fee award will inevitably decrease the willing
ness of attorneys to undertake representation in these
kinds of cases.
Second, the Government contends that any disincentive
the fear of administrative offset may create is mitigated in
the Social Security context by the Social Security Act’s
independent provision authorizing a fee award payable
directly to the attorney. See id., at 17–18 (citing 42
U. S. C. §406(b)(1)(A)). But as the Government acknowl
edges, the “EAJA’s fee-shifting provisions are potentially
more generous than [the Social Security Act’s] in at least
three respects”: (1) A court may not award attorney’s fees
under the Social Security Act, but may under the EAJA,
when the claimant wins only a procedural victory and does
not obtain any past-due benefits; (2) fees under the Social
Security Act are limited to a percentage of benefits
awarded, while EAJA fees are calculated under the lode
star method by examining the attorney’s reasonable hours
expended and her reasonable hourly rate; and (3) in con
trast to the Social Security Act, fees may be awarded
under the EAJA in addition to, rather than out of, the
benefits awarded. Brief for Petitioner 6–7. EAJA awards
thus provide an important additional incentive for attor
neys to undertake Social Security cases.
Finally, the Government argues that lawyers can easily
determine at the outset whether a potential client owes
the Government a debt and can then assist the client in
establishing a written repayment plan that would prevent
an offset. Reply Brief for Petitioner 18. At oral argument,
however, the Government acknowledged that it was not
——————
not contest the number for Social Security cases but suggested that the
percentage of veteran’s benefits cases resulting in EAJA awards is
closer to 50% or 60%. Id., at 52. Under either estimate, these are
hardly vanishing odds of success for an attorney deciding whether to
take a client’s case.

