Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

BREYER, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

Nos. 08–1498 and 09–89
_________________

ERIC H. HOLDER, JR., ATTORNEY GENERAL, ET AL.,
PETITIONERS
08–1498
v.
HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT ET AL.
HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT, ET AL.,
PETITIONERS
09–89
v.
ERIC H. HOLDER, JR., ATTORNEY GENERAL, ET AL.
ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
[June 21, 2010]

JUSTICE BREYER, with whom JUSTICES GINSBURG and
SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
Like the Court, and substantially for the reasons it
gives, I do not think this statute is unconstitutionally
vague. But I cannot agree with the Court’s conclusion
that the Constitution permits the Government to prose
cute the plaintiffs criminally for engaging in coordinated
teaching and advocacy furthering the designated organiza
tions’ lawful political objectives. In my view, the Govern
ment has not met its burden of showing that an interpre
tation of the statute that would prohibit this speech- and
association-related activity serves the Government’s com
pelling interest in combating terrorism. And I would
interpret the statute as normally placing activity of this
kind outside its scope. See Crowell v. Benson, 285 U. S.
22, 62 (1932); Ashwander v. TVA, 297 U. S. 288, 346–347
(1936) (Brandeis, J., concurring).


2

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

I
The statute before us forbids “knowingly provid[ing]” “a
foreign terrorist organization” with “material support or
resources,” defined to include, among other things, “train
ing,” “expert advice or assistance,” “personnel,” and “ser
vice.” 18 U. S. C. §§2339B(a)(1), (g)(4); §2339A(b)(1). The
Secretary of State has designated the Kurdistan Workers’
Party (PKK) and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE) as “foreign terrorist organizations”—a designation
authorized where the organization is “foreign,” threatens
the security of the United States or its nationals, and
engages in “terrorist activity,” defined to include “any” of
such activities as “highjacking” and “assassination,” or the
“use of . . . any . . . weapon or dangerous device . . . with
intent to endanger, directly or indirectly, the safety of one
or more individuals.” 62 Fed. Reg. 52650 (1997); 8 U. S. C.
§1182(a)(3)(B)(iii); 18 U. S. C. §2339B(a)(1).
The plaintiffs, all United States citizens or associations,
now seek an injunction and declaration providing that,
without violating the statute, they can (1) “train members
of [the] PKK on how to use humanitarian and interna
tional law to peacefully resolve disputes”; (2) “engage in
political advocacy on behalf of Kurds who live in Turkey”;
(3) “teach PKK members how to petition various represen
tative bodies such as the United Nations for relief”; and (4)
“engage in political advocacy on behalf of Tamils who live
in Sri Lanka.” Humanitarian Law Project v. Mukasey, 552
F. 3d 916, 921, n. 1 (CA9 2009); ante, at 9. All these ac
tivities are of a kind that the First Amendment ordinarily
protects.
In my view, the Government has not made the strong
showing necessary to justify under the First Amendment
the criminal prosecution of those who engage in these
activities. All the activities involve the communication
and advocacy of political ideas and lawful means of achiev
ing political ends. Even the subjects the plaintiffs wish to


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

BREYER, J., dissenting

teach—using international law to resolve disputes peace
fully or petitioning the United Nations, for instance—
concern political speech. We cannot avoid the constitu
tional significance of these facts on the basis that some of
this speech takes place outside the United States and is
directed at foreign governments, for the activities also
involve advocacy in this country directed to our govern
ment and its policies. The plaintiffs, for example, wish to
write and distribute publications and to speak before the
United States Congress. App. 58–59.
That this speech and association for political purposes is
the kind of activity to which the First Amendment ordi
narily offers its strongest protection is elementary. See
New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254, 269 (1964)
(The First Amendment “ ‘was fashioned to assure unfet
tered interchange of ideas for the bringing about of politi
cal and social changes desired by the people’ ” (quoting
Roth v. United States, 354 U. S. 476, 484 (1957)); Lovell v.
City of Griffin, 303 U. S. 444, 452 (1938) (rejecting licens
ing scheme for distribution of “pamphlets and leaflets,”
“historic weapons in the defense of liberty”); R. A. V. v. St.
Paul, 505 U. S. 377, 422 (1992) (STEVENS, J., concurring in
judgment) (“Our First Amendment decisions have created
a rough hierarchy in the constitutional protection of
speech” in which “[c]ore political speech occupies the high
est, most protected position”); Hill v. Colorado, 530 U. S.
703, 787 (2000) (KENNEDY, J., dissenting) (“Laws punish
ing speech which protests the lawfulness or morality of the
government’s own policy are the essence of the tyrannical
power the First Amendment guards against”); Citizens
United v. Federal Election Comm’n, 558 U. S. ___, ___
(2010) (slip op., at 33) (“If the First Amendment has any
force, it prohibits Congress from fining or jailing citizens,
or associations of citizens, for simply engaging in political
speech”).
Although in the Court’s view the statute applies only


4

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

where the PKK helps to coordinate a defendant’s activi
ties, ante, at 21, the simple fact of “coordination” alone
cannot readily remove protection that the First Amend
ment would otherwise grant. That amendment, after all,
also protects the freedom of association. See NAACP v.
Claiborne Hardware Co., 458 U. S. 886, 911 (1982) (The
First Amendment’s protections “of speech, assembly,
association, and petition, ‘though not identical, are insepa
rable’ ” (quoting Thomas v. Collins, 323 U. S. 516, 530
(1945))); De Jonge v. Oregon, 299 U. S. 353, 364 (1937)
(describing the “right of peaceable assembly” as “a right
cognate to those of free speech and free presses and . . .
equally fundamental”); see also Roberts v. United States
Jaycees, 468 U. S. 609, 622 (1984). “Coordination” with a
political group, like membership, involves association.
“Coordination” with a group that engages in unlawful
activity also does not deprive the plaintiffs of the First
Amendment’s protection under any traditional “categori
cal” exception to its protection. The plaintiffs do not pro
pose to solicit a crime. They will not engage in fraud or
defamation or circulate obscenity. Cf. United States v.
Stevens, 559 U. S. ___ , ___ (2010) (slip op., at 5–6) (de
scribing “categories” of unprotected speech). And the First
Amendment protects advocacy even of unlawful action so
long as that advocacy is not “directed to inciting or produc
ing imminent lawless action and . . . likely to incite or
produce such action.” Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 U. S. 444,
447 (1969) (per curiam) (emphasis added). Here the plain
tiffs seek to advocate peaceful, lawful action to secure
political ends; and they seek to teach others how to do
the same. No one contends that the plaintiffs’ speech to
these organizations can be prohibited as incitement under
Brandenburg.
Moreover, the Court has previously held that a person
who associates with a group that uses unlawful means to
achieve its ends does not thereby necessarily forfeit the


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

BREYER, J., dissenting

First Amendment’s protection for freedom of association.
See Scales v. United States, 367 U. S. 203, 229 (1961)
(“[Q]uasi-political parties or other groups that may em
brace both legal and illegal aims differ from a technical
conspiracy, which is defined by its criminal purpose”); see
also NAACP, supra, at 908 (“The right to associate does
not lose all constitutional protection merely because some
members of the group may have participated in conduct or
advocated doctrine that itself is not protected”). Rather,
the Court has pointed out in respect to associating with a
group advocating overthrow of the Government through
force and violence: “If the persons assembling have com
mitted crimes elsewhere . . . , they may be prosecuted for
their . . . violation of valid laws. But it is a different mat
ter when the State, instead of prosecuting them for such
offenses, seizes upon mere participation in a peaceable
assembly and a lawful public discussion as the basis for a
criminal charge.” De Jonge, supra, at 365 (striking down
conviction for attending and assisting at Communist Party
meeting because “[n]otwithstanding [the party’s] objec
tives, the defendant still enjoyed his personal right of free
speech and to take part in peaceable assembly having a
lawful purpose”).
Not even the “serious and deadly problem” of interna
tional terrorism can require automatic forfeiture of First
Amendment rights. §301(a)(1), 110 Stat. 1247, note fol
lowing 18 U. S. C. §2339B. Cf. §2339B(i) (instructing
courts not to “constru[e] or appl[y the statute] so as to
abridge the exercise of right guaranteed under the First
Amendment”). After all, this Court has recognized that
not “ ‘[e]ven the war power . . . remove[s] constitutional
United
limitations safeguarding essential liberties.’ ”
States v. Robel, 389 U. S. 258, 264 (1967) (quoting Home
Building & Loan Assn. v. Blaisdell, 290 U. S. 398, 426
(1934)). See also Abrams v. United States, 250 U. S. 616,
628 (1919) (Holmes, J., dissenting) (“[A]s against dangers


6

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

peculiar to war, as against others, the principle of the
right to free speech is always the same”). Thus, there is
no general First Amendment exception that applies here.
If the statute is constitutional in this context, it would
have to come with a strong justification attached.
It is not surprising that the majority, in determining the
constitutionality of criminally prohibiting the plaintiffs’
proposed activities, would apply, not the kind of interme
diate First Amendment standard that applies to conduct,
but “ ‘a more demanding standard.’ ” Ante, at 23 (quoting
Texas v. Johnson, 491 U. S. 397, 403 (1989)). Indeed,
where, as here, a statute applies criminal penalties and at
least arguably does so on the basis of content-based dis
tinctions, I should think we would scrutinize the statute
and justifications “strictly”—to determine whether the
prohibition is justified by a “compelling” need that cannot
be “less restrictively” accommodated. See Houston v. Hill,
482 U. S. 451, 459 (1987) (criminal penalties); Ashcroft v.
American Civil Liberties Union, 535 U. S. 564, 573 (2002)
(content-based); Simon & Schuster, Inc. v. Members of N.
Y. State Crime Victims Bd., 502 U. S. 105, 118 (1991)
(same); Consolidated Edison Co. of N. Y. v. Public Serv.
Comm’n of N. Y., 447 U. S. 530, 540 (1980) (strict scru
tiny); First Nat. Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765,
786 (1978) (same).
But, even if we assume for argument’s sake that “strict
scrutiny” does not apply, no one can deny that we must at
the very least “measure the validity of the means adopted
by Congress against both the goal it has sought to achieve
and the specific prohibitions of the First Amendment.”
Robel, supra, 268, n. 20 (describing constitutional task
where the Court is faced “with a clear conflict between a
federal statute enacted in the interests of national security
and an individual’s exercise of his First Amendment
rights”). And here I need go no further, for I doubt that
the statute, as the Government would interpret it, can


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

survive any reasonably applicable First Amendment stan
dard. See, e.g., Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC,
520 U. S. 180, 189 (1997) (describing intermediate scru
tiny). Cf. Nixon v. Shrink Missouri Government PAC, 528
U. S. 377, 402 (2000) (BREYER, J., concurring) (examining
whether a statute worked speech-related harm “out of
proportion to the statute’s salutary effects upon” other
interests).
The Government does identify a compelling countervail
ing interest, namely, the interest in protecting the security
of the United States and its nationals from the threats
that foreign terrorist organizations pose by denying those
organizations financial and other fungible resources. I do
not dispute the importance of this interest. But I do dis
pute whether the interest can justify the statute’s criminal
prohibition. To put the matter more specifically, precisely
how does application of the statute to the protected activi
ties before us help achieve that important security-related
end? See Simon & Schuster, 502 U. S., at 118 (requiring
that “narrowly drawn” means further a “compelling state
interest” by the least restrictive means (internal quotation
marks omitted)); Turner, supra, at 189 (requiring “ad
vance[ment of] important governmental interests unre
lated to the suppression of free speech” without “bur
den[ing] substantially more speech than necessary to
further those interests”); Robel, supra, at 268, n. 20 (re
quiring measurement of the “means adopted by Congress
against . . . the [security] goal it has sought to achieve”).
See also Nixon, 528 U. S., at 402 (BREYER, J., concurring);
Federal Election Comm’n v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc.,
551 U. S. 449, 478 (2007) (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.) (“A
court . . . must ensure that [the interest justifying a stat
utory restriction] supports each application of [the]
statute”).
The Government makes two efforts to answer this ques


8

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

tion. First, the Government says that the plaintiffs’ sup
port for these organizations is “fungible” in the same sense
as other forms of banned support. Being fungible, the
plaintiffs’ support could, for example, free up other re
sources, which the organization might put to terrorist
ends. Brief for Respondents in No. 09–89, pp. 54–56 (here
inafter Government Brief).
The proposition that the two very different kinds of
“support” are “fungible,” however, is not obviously true.
There is no obvious way in which undertaking advocacy
for political change through peaceful means or teaching
the PKK and LTTE, say, how to petition the United Na
tions for political change is fungible with other resources
that might be put to more sinister ends in the way that
donations of money, food, or computer training are fungi
ble. It is far from obvious that these advocacy activities
can themselves be redirected, or will free other resources
that can be directed, towards terrorist ends. Thus, we
must determine whether the Government has come for
ward with evidence to support its claim.
The Government has provided us with no empirical
information that might convincingly support this claim.
Instead, the Government cites only to evidence that Con
gress was concerned about the “fungible” nature in general
of resources, predominately money and material goods. It
points to a congressional finding that “foreign organiza
tions that engage in terrorist activity are so tainted by
their criminal conduct that any contribution to such an
organization facilitates that conduct.” §301(a)(7), 110
Stat. 1247, note following 18 U. S. C. §2339B (emphasis
added). It also points to a House Report’s statement that
“supply[ing] funds, goods, or services” would “hel[p] defray
the cost to the terrorist organization of running the osten
sibly legitimate activities,” and “in turn fre[e] an equal
sum that can then be spent on terrorist activities.” H. R.
Rep. No. 104–383, p. 81 (1995) (emphasis added). Finally,


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

BREYER, J., dissenting

the Government refers to a State Department official’s
affidavit describing how ostensibly charitable contribu
tions have either been “redirected” to terrorist ends or,
even if spent charitably, have “unencumber[ed] funds
raised from other sources for use in facilitating violent,
terrorist activities and gaining political support for these
activities.” Declaration of Kenneth R. McKune, App. 134,
136 (emphasis added).
The most one can say in the Government’s favor about
these statements is that they might be read as offering
highly general support for its argument. The statements
do not, however, explain in any detail how the plaintiffs’
political-advocacy-related activities might actually be
“fungible” and therefore capable of being diverted to ter
rorist use. Nor do they indicate that Congress itself was
concerned with “support” of this kind. The affidavit refers
to “funds,” “financing,” and “goods”—none of which en
compasses the plaintiffs’ activities. Ibid. The statutory
statement and the House Report use broad terms like
“contributions” and “services” that might be construed as
encompassing the plaintiffs’ activities. But in context,
those terms are more naturally understood as referring to
contributions of goods, money, or training and other ser
vices (say, computer programming) that could be diverted
to, or free funding for, terrorist ends. See infra, at 15–16.
Peaceful political advocacy does not obviously fall into
these categories. And the statute itself suggests that
Congress did not intend to curtail freedom of speech or
association. See §2339B(i) (“Nothing in this section shall
be construed or applied so as to abridge the exercise of
rights guaranteed under the First Amendment”); see also
infra, at 18–19.
Second, the Government says that the plaintiffs’ pro
posed activities will “bolste[r] a terrorist organization’s
efficacy and strength in a community” and “undermin[e]
this nation’s efforts to delegitimize and weaken those


10

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

groups.” Government Brief 56 (emphasis added). In the
Court’s view, too, the Constitution permits application of
the statute to activities of the kind at issue in part because
those activities could provide a group that engages in
terrorism with “legitimacy.” Ante, at 25. The Court sug
gests that, armed with this greater “legitimacy,” these
organizations will more readily be able to obtain material
support of the kinds Congress plainly intended to ban—
money, arms, lodging, and the like. See ibid.
Yet the Government does not claim that the statute
forbids any speech “legitimating” a terrorist group.
Rather, it reads the statute as permitting (1) membership
in terrorist organizations, (2) “peaceably assembling with
members of the PKK and LTTE for lawful discussion,” or
(3) “independent advocacy” on behalf of these organiza
tions. Government Brief 66, 61, 13. The Court, too, em
phasizes that activities not “coordinated with” the terror
ist groups are not banned. See ante, at 21, 26, 31
(emphasis added). And it argues that speaking, writing,
and teaching aimed at furthering a terrorist organization’s
peaceful political ends could “mak[e] it easier for those
groups to persist, to recruit members, and to raise funds.”
Ante, at 25.
But this “legitimacy” justification cannot by itself war
rant suppression of political speech, advocacy, and asso
ciation. Speech, association, and related activities on
behalf of a group will often, perhaps always, help to le
gitimate that group. Thus, were the law to accept a “le
gitimating” effect, in and of itself and without qualifica
tion, as providing sufficient grounds for imposing such a
ban, the First Amendment battle would be lost in untold
instances where it should be won. Once one accepts this
argument, there is no natural stopping place. The argu
ment applies as strongly to “independent” as to “coordi
nated” advocacy. But see ante, at 26–27. That fact is
reflected in part in the Government’s claim that the ban


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

BREYER, J., dissenting

here, so supported, prohibits a lawyer hired by a desig
nated group from filing on behalf of that group an amicus
brief before the United Nations or even before this Court.
See Tr. of Oral Arg. 47–49, 53.
That fact is also reflected in the difficulty of drawing a
line designed to accept the legitimacy argument in some
instances but not in others. It is inordinately difficult to
distinguish when speech activity will and when it will not
initiate the chain of causation the Court suggests—a chain
that leads from peaceful advocacy to “legitimacy” to in
creased support for the group to an increased supply of
material goods that support its terrorist activities. Even
were we to find some such line of distinction, its applica
tion would seem so inherently uncertain that it would
often, perhaps always, “chill” protected speech beyond its
boundary. In short, the justification, put forward simply
in abstract terms and without limitation, must always, or
it will never, be sufficient. Given the nature of the plain
tiffs’ activities, “always” cannot possibly be the First
Amendment’s answer.
Regardless, the “legitimacy” justification itself is incon
sistent with critically important First Amendment case
law. Consider the cases involving the protection the First
Amendment offered those who joined the Communist
Party intending only to further its peaceful activities. In
those cases, this Court took account of congressional find
ings that the Communist Party not only advocated theo
retically but also sought to put into practice the overthrow
of our Government through force and violence. The Court
had previously accepted Congress’ determinations that the
American Communist Party was a “Communist action
organization” which (1) acted under the “control, direction,
and discipline” of the world Communist movement, a
movement that sought to employ “espionage, sabotage,
terrorism, and any other means deemed necessary, to
establish a Communist totalitarian dictatorship,” and (2)


12

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

“endeavor[ed]” to bring about “the overthrow of existing
governments by . . . force if necessary.” Communist Party
of United States v. Subversive Activities Control Bd., 367
U. S. 1, 5–6 (1961) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Nonetheless, the Court held that the First Amendment
protected an American’s right to belong to that party—
despite whatever “legitimating” effect membership might
have had—as long as the person did not share the party’s
unlawful purposes. See, e.g., De Jonge, 299 U. S. 353;
Scales, 367 U. S., at 228–230; Elfbrandt v. Russell, 384
U. S. 11, 17 (1966); Keyishian v. Board of Regents of Univ.
of State of N. Y., 385 U. S. 589, 605–610 (1967); Robel, 389
U. S. 258 (holding that national security interests did not
justify overbroad criminal prohibition on members of
Communist-affiliated organizations working in any de
fense-related facility). As I have pointed out, those cases
draw further support from other cases permitting pure
advocacy of even the most unlawful activity—as long as
that advocacy is not “directed to inciting or producing
imminent lawless action and . . . likely to incite or produce
such action.” Brandenburg, 395 U. S., at 447. The Gov
ernment’s “legitimating” theory would seem to apply to
these cases with equal justifying force; and, if recognized,
it would have led this Court to conclusions other than
those it reached.
Nor can the Government overcome these considerations
simply by narrowing the covered activities to those that
involve coordinated, rather than independent, advocacy.
Conversations, discussions, or logistical arrangements
might well prove necessary to carry out the speech-related
activities here at issue (just as conversations and discus
sions are a necessary part of membership in any organiza
tion). The Government does not distinguish this kind of
“coordination” from any other. I am not aware of any form
of words that might be used to describe “coordination” that


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

BREYER, J., dissenting

would not, at a minimum, seriously chill not only the kind
of activities the plaintiffs raise before us, but also the
“independent advocacy” the Government purports to per
mit. And, as for the Government’s willingness to distin
guish independent advocacy from coordinated advocacy,
the former is more likely, not less likely, to confer legiti
macy than the latter. Thus, other things being equal, the
distinction “coordination” makes is arbitrary in respect to
furthering the statute’s purposes. And a rule of law that
finds the “legitimacy” argument adequate in respect to the
latter would have a hard time distinguishing a statute
that sought to attack the former.
Consider the majority’s development of the Govern
ment’s themes. First, the majority discusses the plaintiffs’
proposal to “ ‘train members of [the] PKK on how to use
humanitarian and international law to peacefully resolve
disputes.’ ” Ante, at 31–32 (quoting 552 F. 3d, at 921, n. 1).
The majority justifies the criminalization of this activity in
significant part on the ground that “peaceful negotia
tion[s]” might just “bu[y] time . . . , lulling opponents into
complacency.” Ante, at 32. And the PKK might use its
new information about “the structures of the international
legal system . . . to threaten, manipulate, and disrupt.”
Ibid.
What is one to say about these arguments—arguments
that would deny First Amendment protection to the peace
ful teaching of international human rights law on the
ground that a little knowledge about “the international
legal system” is too dangerous a thing; that an opponent’s
subsequent willingness to negotiate might be faked, so
let’s not teach him how to try? What might be said of
these claims by those who live, as we do, in a Nation com
mitted to the resolution of disputes through “deliberative
forces”? Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357, 375 (1927)
(Brandeis, J., concurring).
In my own view, the majority’s arguments stretch the


14

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

concept of “fungibility” beyond constitutional limits.
Neither Congress nor the Government advanced these
particular hypothetical claims. I am not aware of any case
in this Court—not Gitlow v. New York, 268 U. S. 652
(1925), not Schenck v. United States, 249 U. S. 47 (1919),
not Abrams, 250 U. S. 616, not the later Communist Party
cases decided during the heat of the Cold War—in which
the Court accepted anything like a claim that speech or
teaching might be criminalized lest it, e.g., buy negotiating
time for an opponent who would put that time to bad use.
Moreover, the risk that those who are taught will put
otherwise innocent speech or knowledge to bad use is
omnipresent, at least where that risk rests on little more
than (even informed) speculation. Hence to accept this
kind of argument without more and to apply it to the
teaching of a subject such as international human rights
law is to adopt a rule of law that, contrary to the Constitu
tion’s text and First Amendment precedent, would auto
matically forbid the teaching of any subject in a case
where national security interests conflict with the First
Amendment. The Constitution does not allow all such
conflicts to be decided in the Government’s favor.
The majority, as I have said, cannot limit the scope of its
arguments through its claim that the plaintiffs remain
free to engage in the protected activity as long as it is not
“coordinated.” That is because there is no practical way to
organize classes for a group (say, wishing to learn about
human rights law) without “coordination.” Nor can the
majority limit the scope of its argument by pointing to
some special limiting circumstance present here. That is
because the only evidence the majority offers to support its
general claim consists of a single reference to a book about
terrorism, which the Government did not mention, and
which apparently says no more than that at one time the
PKK suspended its armed struggle and then returned to
it.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

BREYER, J., dissenting

Second, the majority discusses the plaintiffs’ proposal to
“ ‘teach PKK members how to petition various representa
tive bodies such as the United Nations for relief.’ ” Ante, at
32 (quoting 552 F. 3d, at 921, n. 1; emphasis added). The
majority’s only argument with respect to this proposal is
that the relief obtained “could readily include monetary
aid,” which the PKK might use to buy guns. Ante, at 32.
The majority misunderstands the word “relief.” In this
context, as the record makes clear, the word “relief” does
not refer to “money.” It refers to recognition under the
Geneva Conventions. See App. 57–58 (2003 Complaint);
id., at 79–80 (1998 Complaint); id., at 113 (Fertig Declara
tion); see also Tr. of Oral Arg. 63 (plaintiffs’ counsel deny
ing that plaintiffs seek to teach about obtaining relief in
the form of money).
Throughout, the majority emphasizes that it would
defer strongly to Congress’ “informed judgment.” See, e.g.,
ante, at 30. But here, there is no evidence that Congress
has made such a judgment regarding the specific activities
at issue in these cases. See infra, at 20–21. In any event,
“whenever the fundamental rights of free speech and
assembly are alleged to have been invaded, it must remain
open [for judicial determination] whether there actually
did exist at the time a clear danger; whether the danger, if
any, was imminent; and whether the evil apprehended
was one so substantial as to justify the stringent restric
tion interposed by the legislature.” Whitney, supra, at
378–379 (Brandeis, J., concurring). In such circum
stances, the “judicial function commands analysis of
whether the specific conduct charged falls within the
reach of the statute and if so whether the legislation is
consonant with the Constitution.” Landmark Communi
cations, Inc. v. Virginia, 435 U. S. 829, 844 (1978). Hence,
a legislative declaration “does not preclude enquiry into
the question whether, at the time and under the circum
stances, the conditions existed which are essential to


16

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

validity under the Federal Constitution.” Whitney, supra,
at 378; see also Landmark, supra, at 843 (“Deference to a
legislative finding cannot limit judicial inquiry when First
Amendment rights are at stake”).
I concede that the Government’s expertise in foreign
affairs may warrant deference in respect to many matters,
e.g., our relations with Turkey. Cf. ante, at 27–28. But it
remains for this Court to decide whether the Government
has shown that such an interest justifies criminalizing
speech activity otherwise protected by the First Amend
ment. And the fact that other nations may like us less for
granting that protection cannot in and of itself carry the
day.
Finally, I would reemphasize that neither the Govern
ment nor the majority points to any specific facts that
show that the speech-related activities before us are fun
gible in some special way or confer some special legitimacy
upon the PKK. Rather, their arguments in this respect
are general and speculative. Those arguments would
apply to virtually all speech-related support for a dual
purpose group’s peaceful activities (irrespective of whether
the speech-related activity is coordinated). Both First
Amendment logic and First Amendment case law prevent
us from “sacrific[ing] First Amendment protections for so
speculative a gain.” Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc.
v. Democratic National Committee, 412 U. S. 94, 127
(1973); see also Consolidated Edison Co., 447 U. S., at 543
(rejecting proffered state interest not supported in record
because “[m]ere speculation of harm does not constitute a
compelling state interest”).
II
For the reasons I have set forth, I believe application of
the statute as the Government interprets it would gravely
and without adequate justification injure interests of the
kind the First Amendment protects. Thus, there is “a


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

BREYER, J., dissenting

serious doubt” as to the statute’s constitutionality. Cro
well, 285 U. S., at 62. And where that is so, we must
“ascertain whether a construction of the statute is fairly
possible by which the question may be avoided.” Ibid.; see
also Ashwander, 297 U. S., at 346–348 (Brandeis, J.,
concurring); Zadvydas v. Davis, 533 U. S. 678, 689 (2001);
United States v. X-Citement Video, Inc., 513 U. S. 64, 78
(1994); United States v. Jin Fuey Moy, 241 U. S. 394, 401
(1916).
I believe that a construction that would avoid the consti
tutional problem is “fairly possible.” In particular, I would
read the statute as criminalizing First-Amendment
protected pure speech and association only when the
defendant knows or intends that those activities will assist
the organization’s unlawful terrorist actions. Under this
reading, the Government would have to show, at a mini
mum, that such defendants provided support that they
knew was significantly likely to help the organization
pursue its unlawful terrorist aims.
A person acts with the requisite knowledge if he is
aware of (or willfully blinds himself to) a significant likeli
hood that his or her conduct will materially support the
organization’s terrorist ends. See Allen v. United States,
164 U. S. 492, 496 (1896); cf. ALI, Model Penal Code
§2.02(2)(b)(ii) (1962). See also United States v. Santos, 553
U. S. 507, 521 (2008) (plurality opinion); cf. Model Penal
Code §2.02(7) (willful blindness); S. Rep. No. 95–605, pt. 1,
pp. 59–60 (1977). A person also acts with the requisite
intent if it is his “conscious objective” (or purpose) to fur
ther those same terrorist ends. See United States v. Bai
ley, 444 U. S. 394, 408 (1980); Model Penal Code
§§2.02(2)(a) and 2.02(5) (“When acting knowingly suffices
to establish an element, such element also is established if
a person acts purposely”). On the other hand, for the
reasons I have set out, see supra, at 9–12, knowledge or
intent that this assistance (aimed at lawful activities)


18

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

could or would help further terrorism simply by helping to
legitimate the organization is not sufficient.
This reading of the statute protects those who engage in
pure speech and association ordinarily protected by the
First Amendment. But it does not protect that activity
where a defendant purposefully intends it to help terror
ism or where a defendant knows (or willfully blinds him
self to the fact) that the activity is significantly likely to
assist terrorism. Where the activity fits into these catego
ries of purposefully or knowingly supporting terrorist
ends, the act of providing material support to a known
terrorist organization bears a close enough relation to
terrorist acts that, in my view, it likely can be prohibited
notwithstanding any First Amendment interest.
Cf.
Brandenburg, 395 U. S. 444. At the same time, this read
ing does not require the Government to undertake the
difficult task of proving which, as between peaceful and
nonpeaceful purposes, a defendant specifically preferred;
knowledge is enough. See Bailey, supra, at 405 (defining
specific intent).
This reading is consistent with the statute’s text. The
statute prohibits “knowingly provid[ing] material support
or resources to a foreign terrorist organization.”
§2339B(a)(1) (emphasis added). Normally we read a crimi
nal statute as applying a mens rea requirement to all of
the subsequently listed elements of the crime. See FloresFigueroa v. United States, 556 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip
op., at 6–7). So read, the defendant would have to know or
intend (1) that he is providing support or resources, (2)
that he is providing that support to a foreign terrorist
organization, and (3) that he is providing support that is
material, meaning (4) that his support bears a significant
likelihood of furthering the organization’s terrorist ends.
This fourth requirement flows directly from the statute’s
use of the word “material.” That word can mean being of a
physical or worldly nature, but it also can mean “being of


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

BREYER, J., dissenting

real importance or great consequence.” Webster’s Third
New International Dictionary 1392 (1961). Here, it must
mean the latter, for otherwise the statute, applying only to
physical aid, would not apply to speech at all. See also
§2339A(b)(1) (defining “ ‘material support or resources’ ” as
“any property, tangible or intangible” (emphasis added)).
And if the statute applies only to support that would likely
be of real importance or great consequence, it must have
importance or consequence in respect to the organization’s
terrorist activities. That is because support that is not
significantly likely to help terrorist activities, for purposes
of this statute, neither has “importance” nor is of “great
consequence.”
The statutory definition of “material support” poses no
problem. The statute defines “material support” through
reference to a list of terms, including those at issue here—
“training,” “expert advice or assistance,” “personnel,” and
“service.” §2339B(g)(4); §2339A(b)(1). Since these latter
terms all fall under the definition of the term “material
support,” these activities fall within the statute’s scope
only when they too are “material.” Cf. Stevens, 559 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 12) (citing Leocal v. Ashcroft, 543 U. S.
1, 11 (2004) (definitional phrase may take meaning from
the term to be defined)).
Thus, textually speaking, a statutory requirement that
the defendant knew the support was material can be read
to require the Government to show that the defendant
knew that the consequences of his acts had a significant
likelihood of furthering the organization’s terrorist, not
just its lawful, aims.
I need not decide whether this is the only possible read
ing of the statute in cases where “material support” takes
the form of “currency,” “property,” “monetary instru
ments,” “financial securities,” “financial services,” “lodg
ing,” “safehouses,” “false documentation or identification,”
“weapons,” “lethal substances,” or “explosives,” and the


20

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

like. §2339A(b)(1). Those kinds of aid are inherently more
likely to help an organization’s terrorist activities, either
directly or because they are fungible in nature. Thus, to
show that an individual has provided support of those
kinds will normally prove sufficient for conviction (assum
ing the statute’s other requirements are met). But where
support consists of pure speech or association, I would
indulge in no such presumption. Rather, the Government
would have to prove that the defendant knew he was
providing support significantly likely to help the organiza
tion pursue its unlawful terrorist aims (or, alternatively,
that the defendant intended the support to be so used).
The statute’s history strongly supports this reading.
That history makes clear that Congress primarily sought
to end assistance that takes the form of fungible donations
of money or goods. See, e.g., H. R. Rep. No. 104–383, at
38, 43–45, 81; supra, at 8–9. It shows that Congress,
when referring to “expert services and assistance” for
example, had in mind training that was sufficiently fungi
ble to further terrorism directly, such as an aviation ex
pert’s giving “advice” that “facilitat[es] an aircraft hijack
ing” or an accountant’s giving “advice” that will “facilitate
the concealment of funds used to support terrorist activi
ties.” Hearing on Administration’s Draft Anti-Terrorism
Act of 2001 before the House Committee on the Judiciary,
107th Cong., 1st Sess., 61 (2001).
And the Chairman of the Senate Committee on the
Judiciary, when reporting the relevant bill from Commit
tee, told the Senate:
“This bill also includes provisions making it a crime to
knowingly provide material support to the terrorist
functions of foreign groups designated by a Presiden
tial finding to be engaged in terrorist activities.” 142
Cong. Rec. S3354 (1996) (statement of Sen. Hatch)
(emphasis added).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

BREYER, J., dissenting

He then added:
“I am convinced we have crafted a narrow but effec
tive designation provision which meets these obliga
tions while safeguarding the freedom to associate,
which none of us would willingly give up.” Id., at
S3360.
Consistent with this view, the statute itself says:
“Nothing in this section shall be construed or applied
so as to abridge the exercise of rights guaranteed un
der the First Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States.” §2339B(i).
In any event, the principle of constitutional avoidance
demands this interpretation. As Part II makes clear,
there is a “serious” doubt—indeed, a “grave” doubt—about
the constitutionality of the statute insofar as it is read to
criminalize the activities before us. Crowell, 285 U. S., at
62; see also Ashwander, 297 U. S., at 346–348 (Brandeis,
J., concurring); Jin Fuey Moy, 241 U. S., at 401. We there
fore must “read the statute to eliminate” that constitu
tional “doub[t] so long as such a reading is not plainly
contrary to the intent of Congress.” X-Citement Video,
Inc., 513 U. S., at 78.
For this reason, the majority’s statutory claim that
Congress did not use the word “knowingly” as I would use
it, ante, at 12–13, and n. 3, is beside the point. Our conse
quent reading is consistent with the statute’s text; it is
consistent with Congress’ basic intent; it interprets but
does not significantly add to what the statute otherwise
contains. Cf. e.g., United States v. Thirty-seven Photo
graphs, 402 U. S. 363, 373–374 (1971) (constitutionally
compelled to add requirement that “forfeiture proceedings
be commenced within 14 days and completed within 60
days” despite absence of any statutory time limits); NLRB
v. Catholic Bishop of Chicago, 440 U. S. 490, 507 (1979)


22

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

(constitutionally compelled to interpret “employer” as
implicitly excluding “church-operated schools” despite
silence and eight other different but explicit exceptions).
We should adopt it.
III
Having interpreted the statute to impose the mens rea
requirement just described, I would remand the cases so
that the lower courts could consider more specifically the
precise activities in which the plaintiffs still wish to en
gage and determine whether and to what extent a grant of
declaratory and injunctive relief were warranted. I do not
see why the majority does not also remand the cases for
consideration of the plaintiffs’ activities relating to “advo
cating” for the organizations’ peaceful causes. See ante, at
19–20, 32–33.
The majority does not remand, apparently because it
believes the plaintiffs lose automatically in that these
“advocacy” claims are too general. It adds that the plain
tiffs did not “suggest what exactly their ‘advocacy’ would
consist of.” Ante, at 33. But the majority is wrong about
the lack of specificity. The record contains complaints and
affidavits, which describe in detail the forms of advocacy
these groups have previously engaged in and in which
they would like to continue to engage. See App. 56–63,
78–87, 95–99, 110–123.
Moreover, the majority properly rejects the Govern
ment’s argument that the plaintiffs’ speech-related activi
ties amount to “conduct” and should be reviewed as such.
Government Brief 44–57. Hence, I should think the ma
jority would wish the lower courts to reconsider this aspect
of the cases, applying a proper standard of review. See,
e.g., Philip Morris USA v. Williams, 549 U. S. 346, 357–
358 (2007); Johnson v. California 543 U. S. 499, 515
(2005); cf. Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip
op., at 25) (GINSBURG, J., dissenting) (“When this Court


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

BREYER, J., dissenting

formulates a new legal rule, the ordinary course is to
remand and allow the lower courts to apply the rule in the
first instance”).
IV
In sum, these cases require us to consider how to apply
the First Amendment where national security interests
are at stake. When deciding such cases, courts are aware
and must respect the fact that the Constitution entrusts to
the Executive and Legislative Branches the power to
provide for the national defense, and that it grants par
ticular authority to the President in matters of foreign
affairs. Nonetheless, this Court has also made clear that
authority and expertise in these matters do not automati
cally trump the Court’s own obligation to secure the pro
tection that the Constitution grants to individuals. Cf.
Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 542 U. S. 507, 536 (2004) (“We have
long since made clear that a state of war is not a blank
check . . . when it comes to the rights of th[is] Nation’s
citizens”). In these cases, for the reasons I have stated, I
believe the Court has failed to examine the Government’s
justifications with sufficient care. It has failed to insist
upon specific evidence, rather than general assertion. It
has failed to require tailoring of means to fit compelling
ends. And ultimately it deprives the individuals before us
of the protection that the First Amendment demands.
That is why, with respect, I dissent.

