(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

HOLDER, ATTORNEY GENERAL, ET AL. v. HUMANI-

TARIAN LAW PROJECT ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1498. Argued February 23, 2010—Decided June 21, 2010*
It is a federal crime to “knowingly provid[e] material support or re
sources to a foreign terrorist organization.” 18 U. S. C. §2339B(a)(1).
The authority to designate an entity a “foreign terrorist organization”
rests with the Secretary of State, and is subject to judicial review.
“[T]he term ‘material support or resources’ means any property, tan
gible or intangible, or service, including currency or monetary in
struments or financial securities, financial services, lodging, training,
expert advice or assistance, safehouses, false documentation or iden
tification, communications equipment, facilities, weapons, lethal sub
stances, explosives, personnel (1 or more individuals who may be or
include oneself), and transportation, except medicine or religious ma
terials.” §2339A(b)(1). Over the years, §2339B and the definition of
“material support or resources” have been amended, inter alia, to
clarify that a violation requires knowledge of the foreign group’s des
ignation as a terrorist organization or its commission of terrorist acts,
§2339B(a)(1); and to define the terms “training,” §2339A(b)(2), “ex
pert advice or assistance,” §2339A(b)(3), and “personnel,” §2339B(h).
Among the entities the Secretary of State has designated “foreign
terrorist organization[s]” are the Partiya Karkeran Kurdistan (PKK)
and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), which aim to es
tablish independent states for, respectively, Kurds in Turkey and
Tamils in Sri Lanka. Although both groups engage in political and
humanitarian activities, each has also committed numerous terrorist
attacks, some of which have harmed American citizens. Claiming
——————
* Together with No. 09–89, Humanitarian Law Project et al. v.
Holder, Attorney General, et al., also on certiorari to the same court.


2

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
Syllabus
they wish to support those groups’ lawful, nonviolent activities, two
U. S. citizens and six domestic organizations (hereinafter plaintiffs)
initiated this constitutional challenge to the material-support stat
ute. The litigation has had a complicated 12-year history. Ulti
mately, the District Court partially enjoined the enforcement of the
material-support statute against plaintiffs. After the Ninth Circuit
affirmed, plaintiffs and the Government cross-petitioned for certio
rari. The Court granted both petitions.
As the litigation now stands, plaintiffs challenge §2339B’s prohibi
tion on providing four types of material support—“training,” “expert
advice or assistance,” “service,” and “personnel”—asserting violations
of the Fifth Amendment’s Due Process Clause on the ground that the
statutory terms are impermissibly vague, and violations of their First
Amendment rights to freedom of speech and association. They claim
that §2339B is invalid to the extent it prohibits them from engaging
in certain specified activities, including training PKK members to use
international law to resolve disputes peacefully; teaching PKK mem
bers to petition the United Nations and other representative bodies
for relief; and engaging in political advocacy on behalf of Kurds living
in Turkey and Tamils living in Sri Lanka.

Held: The material-support statute, §2339B, is constitutional as applied
to the particular forms of support that plaintiffs seek to provide to
foreign terrorist organizations. Pp. 8–36.
(a) This preenforcement challenge to §2339B is a justiciable Article
III case or controversy. Plaintiffs face “a credible threat of prosecu
tion” and “should not be required to await and undergo a criminal
prosecution as the sole means of seeking relief.” Babbitt v. Farm
Workers, 442 U. S. 289, 298. P. 10.
(b) The Court cannot avoid the constitutional issues in this litiga
tion by accepting plaintiffs’ argument that the material-support stat
ute, when applied to speech, should be interpreted to require proof
that a defendant intended to further a foreign terrorist organization’s
illegal activities. That reading is inconsistent with §2339B’s text,
which prohibits “knowingly” providing material support and demon
strates that Congress chose knowledge about the organization’s con
nection to terrorism, not specific intent to further its terrorist activi
ties, as the necessary mental state for a violation. Plaintiffs’ reading
is also untenable in light of the sections immediately surrounding
§2339B, which—unlike §2339B—do refer to intent to further terrorist
activity. See §§2339A(a), 2339C(a)(1). Finally, there is no textual
basis for plaintiffs’ argument that the same language in §2339B
should be read to require specific intent with regard to speech, but
not with regard to other forms of material support. Pp. 10–12.
(c) As applied to plaintiffs, the material-support statute is not un


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
constitutionally vague. The Ninth Circuit improperly merged plain
tiffs’ vagueness challenge with their First Amendment claims, hold
ing that “training,” “service,” and a portion of “expert advice or assis
tance” were impermissibly vague because they applied to protected
speech—regardless of whether those applications were clear. The
Court of Appeals also contravened the rule that “[a] plaintiff who en
gages in some conduct that is clearly proscribed cannot complain of
the vagueness of the law as applied to the conduct of others.” Hoff
man Estates v. Flipside, Hoffman Estates, Inc., 455 U. S. 489, 495.
The material-support statute, in its application to plaintiffs, “pro
vide[s] a person of ordinary intelligence fair notice of what is prohib
ited.” United States v. Williams, 553 U. S. 285, 304. The statutory
terms at issue here—“training,” “expert advice or assistance,” “ser
vice,” and “personnel”—are quite different from the sorts of terms,
like “ ‘annoying’ ” and “ ‘indecent,’ ” that the Court has struck down for
requiring “wholly subjective judgments without statutory definitions,
narrowing context, or settled legal meanings.” Id., at 306. Congress
has increased the clarity of §2339B’s terms by adding narrowing
definitions, and §2339B’s knowledge requirement further reduces any
potential for vagueness, see Hill v. Colorado, 530 U. S. 703, 732.
Although the statute may not be clear in every application, the dis
positive point is that its terms are clear in their application to plain
tiffs’ proposed conduct. Most of the activities in which plaintiffs seek
to engage readily fall within the scope of “training” and “expert ad
vice or assistance.” In fact, plaintiffs themselves have repeatedly
used those terms to describe their own proposed activities. Plaintiffs’
resort to hypothetical situations testing the limits of “training” and
“expert advice or assistance” is beside the point because this litiga
tion does not concern such situations. See Scales v. United States,
367 U. S. 203, 223. Gentile v. State Bar of Nev., 501 U. S. 1030,
1049–1051, distinguished. Plaintiffs’ further contention, that the
statute is vague in its application to the political advocacy they wish
to undertake, runs afoul of §2339B(h), which makes clear that “per
sonnel” does not cover advocacy by those acting entirely independ
ently of a foreign terrorist organization, and the ordinary meaning of
“service,” which refers to concerted activity, not independent advo
cacy. Context confirms that meaning: Independently advocating for a
cause is different from the prohibited act of providing a service “to a
foreign terrorist organization.” §2339B(a)(1).
Thus, any independent advocacy in which plaintiffs wish to engage
is not prohibited by §2339B. On the other hand, a person of ordinary
intelligence would understand the term “service” to cover advocacy
performed in coordination with, or at the direction of, a foreign ter
rorist organization. Plaintiffs argue that this construction of the


4

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
Syllabus
statute poses difficult questions of exactly how much direction or co
ordination is necessary for an activity to constitute a “service.” Be
cause plaintiffs have not provided any specific articulation of the de
gree to which they seek to coordinate their advocacy with the PKK
and the LTTE, however, they cannot prevail in their preenforcement
challenge. See Washington State Grange v. Washington State Repub
lican Party, 552 U. S. 442, 454. Pp. 13–20.
(d) As applied to plaintiffs, the material-support statute does not
violate the freedom of speech guaranteed by the First Amendment.
Pp. 20–34.
(1) Both plaintiffs and the Government take extreme positions on
this question. Plaintiffs claim that Congress has banned their pure
political speech. That claim is unfounded because, under the mate
rial-support statute, they may say anything they wish on any topic.
Section 2339B does not prohibit independent advocacy or member
ship in the PKK and LTTE. Rather, Congress has prohibited “mate
rial support,” which most often does not take the form of speech. And
when it does, the statute is carefully drawn to cover only a narrow
category of speech to, under the direction of, or in coordination with
foreign groups that the speaker knows to be terrorist organizations.
On the other hand, the Government errs in arguing that the only
thing actually at issue here is conduct, not speech, and that the cor
rect standard of review is intermediate scrutiny, as set out in United
States v. O’Brien, 391 U. S. 367, 377. That standard is not used to
review a content-based regulation of speech, and §2339B regulates
plaintiffs’ speech to the PKK and the LTTE on the basis of its con
tent. Even if the material-support statute generally functions as a
regulation of conduct, as applied to plaintiffs the conduct triggering
coverage under the statute consists of communicating a message.
Thus, the Court “must [apply] a more demanding standard” than the
one described in O’Brien. Texas v. Johnson, 491 U. S. 397, 403. Pp.
20–23.
(2) The parties agree that the Government’s interest in combat
ing terrorism is an urgent objective of the highest order, but plaintiffs
argue that this objective does not justify prohibiting their speech,
which they say will advance only the legitimate activities of the PKK
and LTTE. Whether foreign terrorist organizations meaningfully
segregate support of their legitimate activities from support of terror
ism is an empirical question. Congress rejected plaintiffs’ position on
that question when it enacted §2339B, finding that “foreign organiza
tions that engage in terrorist activity are so tainted by their criminal
conduct that any contribution to such an organization facilitates that
conduct.” §301(a), 110 Stat. 1247, note following §2339B. The record
confirms that Congress was justified in rejecting plaintiffs’ view. The


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Syllabus
PKK and the LTTE are deadly groups. It is not difficult to conclude,
as Congress did, that the taint of their violent activities is so great
that working in coordination with them or at their command legiti
mizes and furthers their terrorist means. Moreover, material sup
port meant to promote peaceable, lawful conduct can be diverted to
advance terrorism in multiple ways. The record shows that desig
nated foreign terrorist organizations do not maintain organizational
firewalls between social, political, and terrorist operations, or finan
cial firewalls between funds raised for humanitarian activities and
those used to carry out terrorist attacks. Providing material support
in any form would also undermine cooperative international efforts to
prevent terrorism and strain the United States’ relationships with its
allies, including those that are defending themselves against violent
insurgencies waged by foreign terrorist groups. Pp. 23–28.
(3) The Court does not rely exclusively on its own factual infer
ences drawn from the record evidence, but considers the Executive
Branch’s stated view that the experience and analysis of Government
agencies charged with combating terrorism strongly support Con
gress’s finding that all contributions to foreign terrorist organiza
tions—even those for seemingly benign purposes—further those
groups’ terrorist activities. That evaluation of the facts, like Con
gress’s assessment, is entitled to deference, given the sensitive na
tional security and foreign relations interests at stake. The Court
does not defer to the Government’s reading of the First Amendment.
But respect for the Government’s factual conclusions is appropriate
in light of the courts’ lack of expertise with respect to national secu
rity and foreign affairs, and the reality that efforts to confront terror
ist threats occur in an area where information can be difficult to ob
tain, the impact of certain conduct can be difficult to assess, and
conclusions must often be based on informed judgment rather than
concrete evidence. The Court also finds it significant that Congress
has been conscious of its own responsibility to consider how its ac
tions may implicate constitutional concerns. Most importantly, Con
gress has avoided any restriction on independent advocacy, or indeed
any activities not directed to, coordinated with, or controlled by for
eign terrorist groups. Given the sensitive interests in national secu
rity and foreign affairs at stake, the political branches have ade
quately substantiated their determination that prohibiting material
support in the form of training, expert advice, personnel, and services
to foreign terrorist groups serves the Government’s interest in pre
venting terrorism, even if those providing the support mean to pro
mote only the groups’ nonviolent ends.
As to the particular speech plaintiffs propose to undertake, it is
wholly foreseeable that directly training the PKK on how to use in


6

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
Syllabus
ternational law to resolve disputes would provide that group with in
formation and techniques that it could use as part of a broader strat
egy to promote terrorism, and to threaten, manipulate, and disrupt.
Teaching the PKK to petition international bodies for relief also could
help the PKK obtain funding it would redirect to its violent activities.
Plaintiffs’ proposals to engage in political advocacy on behalf of
Kurds and Tamils, in turn, are phrased so generally that they cannot
prevail in this preenforcement challenge. The Court does not decide
whether any future applications of the material-support statute to
speech or advocacy will survive First Amendment scrutiny. It simply
holds that §2339B does not violate the freedom of speech as applied
to the particular types of support these plaintiffs seek to provide. Pp.
28–34.
(e) Nor does the material-support statute violate plaintiffs’ First
Amendment freedom of association. Plaintiffs argue that the statute
criminalizes the mere fact of their associating with the PKK and the
LTTE, and thereby runs afoul of this Court’s precedents. The Ninth
Circuit correctly rejected this claim because §2339B does not penalize
mere association, but prohibits the act of giving foreign terrorist
groups material support. Any burden on plaintiffs’ freedom of asso
ciation caused by preventing them from supporting designated for
eign terrorist organizations, but not other groups, is justified for the
same reasons the Court rejects their free speech challenge. Pp. 34–
35.

552 F. 3d 916, affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded.
ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which STEVENS,
SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., joined. BREYER, J., filed a
dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.

