(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

KUCANA v. HOLDER, ATTORNEY GENERAL
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–911.

Argued November 10, 2009—Decided January 20, 2010

The Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of
1996 (IIRIRA) amended the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA or
Act), codifying certain rules, earlier prescribed by the Attorney Gen
eral, that govern the process of reopening removal proceedings.
IIRIRA also added a provision stating that no court has jurisdiction
to review any action of the Attorney General “the authority for which
is specified under this subchapter to be in the discretion of the Attor
ney General.” 8 U. S. C. §1252(a)(2)(B)(ii). A regulation, amended
just months before IIRIRA’s enactment, provides that “[t]he decision
to grant or deny a motion to reopen . . . is within the discretion of the
[Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA)],” 8 CFR §1003.2(a). As adjudi
cator in immigration cases, the BIA exercises authority delegated by
the Attorney General.
Petitioner Kucana moved to reopen his removal proceedings, as
serting new evidence in support of his plea for asylum. An Immigra
tion Judge denied the motion, and the BIA sustained that ruling.
The Seventh Circuit concluded that it lacked jurisdiction to review
the administrative determination, holding that §1252(a)(2)(B)(ii) bars
judicial review not only of administrative decisions made discretion
ary by statute, but also of those made discretionary by regulation.
Held: Section 1252(a)(2)(B)’s proscription of judicial review applies only
to Attorney General determinations made discretionary by statute,
not to determinations declared discretionary by the Attorney General
himself through regulation. Pp. 6–18.
(a) The motion to reopen is an “important safeguard” intended “to
ensure a proper and lawful disposition” of immigration proceedings.
Dada v. Mukasey, 554 U. S. 1, ___. Federal-court review of adminis
trative decisions denying motions to reopen removal proceedings


2

KUCANA v. HOLDER
Syllabus
dates back to at least 1916, with the courts employing a deferential
abuse-of-discretion standard of review. While the Attorney General’s
regulation in point, 8 CFR §1003.2(a), places the reopening decision
within the BIA’s discretion, the statute does not codify that prescrip
tion or otherwise “specif[y]” that such decisions are in the Attorney
General’s discretion. Pp. 6–7.
(b) Section 1252(a)(2)(B) does not proscribe judicial review of deni
als of motions to reopen. Pp. 8–16.
(1) The amicus defending the Seventh Circuit’s judgment urges
that regulations suffice to trigger §1252(a)(2)(B)(ii)’s proscription.
She comprehends “under” in “authority . . . specified under this sub
chapter” to mean, e.g., “pursuant to,” “subordinate to.” Administra
tive regulations count for §1252(a)(2)(B) purposes, she submits, be
cause they are issued “pursuant to,” and are measures “subordinate
to,” the legislation they serve to implement. On that reading,
§1252(a)(2)(B)(ii) would bar judicial review of any decision that an
executive regulation places within the BIA’s discretion, including the
decision to deny a motion to reopen. The parties, on the other hand,
read the statutory language to mean “specified in,” or “specified by,”
the subchapter. On their reading, §1252(a)(2)(B)(ii) precludes judi
cial review only when the statute itself specifies the discretionary
character of the Attorney General’s authority. Pp. 8–9.
(2) The word “under” “has many dictionary definitions and must
draw its meaning from its context.” Ardestani v. INS, 502 U. S. 129,
135. Examining the provision at issue in statutory context, the par
ties’ position stands on firmer ground. Section 1252(a)(2)(B)(ii) is far
from IIRIRA’s only jurisdictional limitation. It is sandwiched be
tween two subsections, §1252(a)(2)(A) and §1252(a)(2)(C), both de
pendent on statutory provisions, not on any regulation, to define
their scope. Given §1252(a)(2)(B)’s statutory placement, one would
expect that it, too, would cover statutory provisions alone. Pp. 9–11.
(3) Section 1252(a)(2)(B)(i) places within the no-judicial-review
category “any judgment regarding the granting of relief under section
1182(h), 1182(i), 1229b, 1229c, or 1255.” Each of the referenced
statutory provisions addresses a different form of discretionary relief
from removal and contains language indicating that the decision is
entrusted to the Attorney General’s discretion. Clause (i) does not re
fer to any regulatory provision. The proximity of clause (i) and the
clause (ii) catchall, and the words linking them—“any other deci
sion”—suggests that Congress had in mind decisions of the same
genre, i.e., those made discretionary by legislation. Read harmoni
ously, both clauses convey that Congress barred court review of dis
cretionary decisions only when Congress itself set out the Attorney
General’s discretionary authority in the statute. Pp. 11–12.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
(4) Also significant is the character of the decisions insulated
from judicial review in §1252(a)(2)(B)(i). The listed determinations
are substantive decisions the Executive makes involving whether or
not aliens can stay in the country. Other decisions specified by stat
ute “to be in the discretion of the Attorney General,” and therefore
shielded from court oversight by §1252(a)(2)(B)(ii), are of a like kind.
See, e.g., §1157(c)(1). Decisions on reopening motions made discre
tionary by regulation, in contrast, are adjunct rulings. A court deci
sion reversing the denial of a motion to reopen does not direct the
Executive to afford the alien substantive relief; ordinarily, it touches
and concerns only the question whether the alien’s claims have been
accorded a reasonable hearing. Had Congress wanted the jurisdic
tional bar to encompass decisions specified as discretionary by regu
lation as well as by statute, moreover, Congress could easily have
said so, as it did in provisions enacted simultaneously with
§1252(a)(2)(B)(ii). See, e.g., IIRIRA, §213, 110 Stat. 3009–572.
Pp. 12–14.
(5) The history of the relevant statutory provisions corroborates
this determination. Attorney General regulations have long ad
dressed reopening requests. In enacting IIRIRA, Congress simulta
neously codified the process for filing motions to reopen and acted to
bar judicial review of a number of executive decisions regarding re
moval. But Congress did not codify the regulation delegating to the
BIA discretion to grant or deny reopening motions. This legislative
silence indicates that Congress left the matter where it was preIIRIRA: The BIA has broad discretion, conferred by the Attorney
General, “to grant or deny a motion to reopen,” 8 CFR §1003.2(a), but
courts retain jurisdiction to review the BIA’s decision. It is unsur
prising that Congress would leave in place judicial oversight of this
“important [procedural] safeguard,” Dada, 554 U. S., at ___, where,
as here, the alien’s underlying asylum claim would itself be review
able. The REAL ID Act of 2005, which further amended the INA by
adding or reformulating provisions on asylum, protection from re
moval, and even judicial review, did not disturb the unbroken line of
decisions upholding court review of administrative denials of motions
to reopen. Pp. 14–16.
(c) Any lingering doubt about §1252(a)(2)(B)(ii)’s proper interpreta
tion would be dispelled by a familiar statutory construction principle:
the presumption favoring judicial review of administrative action.
When a statute is “reasonably susceptible to divergent interpreta
tion,” this Court adopts the reading “that executive determinations
generally are subject to judicial review.” Gutierrez de Martinez v.
Lamagno, 515 U. S. 417, 434. The Court has consistently applied
this interpretive guide to legislation regarding immigration, and par


4

KUCANA v. HOLDER
Syllabus
ticularly to questions concerning the preservation of federal-court ju
risdiction. See, e.g., Reno v. Catholic Social Services, Inc., 509 U. S.
43, 63–64. Because this presumption is “ ‘well-settled,’ ” ibid., the
Court assumes that “Congress legislates with knowledge of” it,
McNary v. Haitian Refugee Center, Inc., 498 U. S. 479, 496. It there
fore takes “ ‘ “clear and convincing evidence” ’ ” to dislodge the pre
sumption. Catholic Social Services, Inc., 509 U. S., at 64. There is no
such evidence here. Finally, reading §1252(a)(2)(B)(ii) to apply to
matters where discretion is conferred on the BIA by regulation would
ignore Congress’ design to retain for itself control over federal-court
jurisdiction. The Seventh Circuit’s construction would free the Ex
ecutive to shelter its own decisions from abuse-of-discretion appellate
court review simply by issuing a regulation declaring those decisions
“discretionary.” Such an extraordinary delegation of authority can
not be extracted from the statute Congress enacted. Pp. 16–17.

533 F. 3d 534, reversed and remanded.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and STEVENS, SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. ALITO, J., filed an opinion concurring in the
judgment.

