Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

21

BREYER, J., dissenting

those who are not themselves creators.
It is not surprising that the copyright holders’ repre­
sentatives who appeared before Congress did not empha­
size this argument. (With one minor exception only those
representatives appeared, see generally Joint Hearing; the
Copyright Office did not testify, id., at 239.) Rather, they
focused on the Berne Convention itself. By that time,
Congress had already protected all new works of Berne
members. But it had not provided additional protection to
preexisting foreign works that were then in the American
public domain. Industry witnesses testified that with­
drawing such works from the American public domain
would permit foreign copyright owners to charge American
consumers more for their products; and that, as a result,
the United States would be able to persuade foreign coun­
tries to allow American holders of preexisting copyrights
to charge foreign customers more money for their prod­
ucts. See id., at 241 (statement of Eric Smith, Executive
Director and General Counsel, International Intellectual
Property Alliance) (“[F]ailure to [comply with Article 18]
will . . . undermine the ability of the United States to press
other countries to implement the same sort of protection in
their implementing legislation currently pending in many
legislatures around the globe”); id., at 253 (statement of
Matt Gerson, Vice President for Congressional Affairs,
Motion Picture Assn. of America) (similar). See also id., at
85 (statement of Xavier Becerra, House Judiciary Commit­
tee member) (“[R]etroactivity . . . is probably the best way
to ensure that some of our older American works, any­
thing from Motown, to ‘Star Trek,’ to ‘The Hardy Boys’ get
the protection in some of these emerging foreign markets.
It is important to ensure that countries no longer use our
U. S. law as an excuse for not extending retroactive copy­
right protections to some of our own works”). But see
id., at 272–279 (statement of Larry Urbanski, Chairman
of the Fairness in Copyright Coalition and President of

