16

GOLAN v. HOLDER
BREYER, J., dissenting

ers, who hoped that passage of the statute would enable
them to benefit from reciprocal treatment of American
authors abroad, infra, at 21, I cannot say that even here
the problem, while much diminished, was nonexistent.
I agree with the majority that, in doing so, this statute
does not discriminate among speakers based on their
viewpoints or subject matter. Ante, at 27. But such con­
siderations do not exhaust potential First Amendment
problems. Cf. Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc., 564 U. S. ___,
___ (2011) (slip op., at 8) (finding First Amendment prob­
lem in statute that prohibits drug manufacturers from
using publicly available prescriber-identifying information
in their marketing efforts in part because it “disfavor[ed]
specific speakers”); Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v.
FCC, 512 U. S. 622, 659 (1994) (“Regulations that discrim­
inate among media, or among different speakers within a
single medium, often present serious First Amendment
concerns”).
Taken together, these speech-related harms (e.g., re­
stricting use of previously available material; reversing
payment expectations; rewarding rent-seekers at the
public’s expense) at least show the presence of a First
Amendment interest. And that is enough. For present
purposes, I need not decide whether the harms to that
interest show a violation of the First Amendment. I need
only point to the importance of interpreting the Constitu­
tion as a single document—a document that we should not
read as setting the Copyright Clause and the First
Amendment at cross-purposes. Nor need I advocate the
application here of strict or specially heightened review. I
need only find that the First Amendment interest is im­
portant enough to require courts to scrutinize with some
care the reasons claimed to justify the Act in order to
determine whether they constitute reasonable copyright­
related justifications for the serious harms, including
speech-related harms, which the Act seems likely to

