10

GOLAN v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

expiration of a full copyright term—either in the United
States or the country of origin—receive no further protection under §514. Ibid.12 Copyrights “restored”13 under
URAA §514 “subsist for the remainder of the term of
copyright that the work would have otherwise been granted . . . if the work never entered the public domain.”
§104A(a)(1)(B). Prospectively, restoration places foreign
works on an equal footing with their U. S. counterparts;
assuming a foreign and domestic author died the same
day, their works will enter the public domain simultaneously. See §302(a) (copyrights generally expire 70 years
after the author’s death). Restored works, however, receive no compensatory time for the period of exclusivity
they would have enjoyed before §514’s enactment, had
they been protected at the outset in the United States.
Their total term, therefore, falls short of that available to
similarly situated U. S. works.
The URAA’s disturbance of the public domain hardly
escaped Congress’ attention. Section 514 imposed no
liability for any use of foreign works occurring before
restoration. In addition, anyone remained free to copy and
use restored works for one year following §514’s enactment. See 17 U. S. C. §104A(h)(2)(A). Concerns about
§514’s compatibility with the Fifth Amendment’s Takings
——————
12 Title 17 U. S. C. §104A(h)(6)(B) defines a “restored work” to exclude
“an original work of authorship” that is “in the public domain in its
source country through expiration of [its] term of protection.” This
provision tracks Berne’s denial of protection for any work that has
“fallen into the public domain in the country of origin through the
expiry of the term of protection.” Art. 18(1), 828 U. N. T. S., at 251.
13 Restoration is a misnomer insofar as it implies that all works
protected under §104A previously enjoyed protection. Each work in
the public domain because of lack of national eligibility or subjectmatter protection, and many that failed to comply with formalities,
never enjoyed U. S. copyright protection.
See, e.g., 3 Nimmer
§9A.04[A][1][b][iii], at 9A–26, and n. 29.4.

