Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

BREYER, J., dissenting

Conductors Guild et al. as Amici Curiae 11. And, as the
Court recognizes, an orchestra that once could perform
“Peter and the Wolf . . . free of charge” will now have to
buy the “right to perform it . . . in the marketplace.” Ante,
at 29. But for the case of certain “derivative” works,
§104A(d)(3), the “restored copyright” holder, like other
copyright holders, can charge what the market will bear.
If a school orchestra or other nonprofit organization can­
not afford the new charges, so be it. They will have to do
without—aggravating the already serious problem of
cultural education in the United States. See Brief for
Conductors Guild et al. as Amici Curiae 4–5, 7–8 (describ­
ing the inability of many orchestras to pay for the rental of
sheet music covered by “restored copyright[s]”).
Second, and at least as important, the statute creates
administrative costs, such as the costs of determining
whether a work is the subject of a “restored copyright,”
searching for a “restored copyright” holder, and negotiat­
ing a fee. Congress has tried to ease the administrative
burden of contacting copyright holders and negotiating
prices for those whom the statute calls “reliance part[ies],”
namely those who previously had used such works when
they were freely available in the public domain.
§104A(h)(4). But Congress has done nothing to ease the
administrative burden of securing permission from copy­
right owners that is placed upon those who want to use a
work that they did not previously use, and this is a partic­
ular problem when it comes to “orphan works”—older and
more obscure works with minimal commercial value that
have copyright owners who are difficult or impossible to
track down. Unusually high administrative costs threaten
to limit severely the distribution and use of those works—
works which, despite their characteristic lack of economic
value, can prove culturally invaluable.
There are millions of such works. For example, accord­
ing to European Union figures, there are 13 million or­

