Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

29

Opinion of the Court

Section 514, we add, does not impose a blanket prohibition on public access. Petitioners protest that fair use and
the idea/expression dichotomy “are plainly inadequate to
protect the speech and expression rights that Section 514
took from petitioners, or . . . the public”—that is, “the
unrestricted right to perform, copy, teach and distribute
the entire work, for any reason.” Brief for Petitioners 46–
47. “Playing a few bars of a Shostakovich symphony,”
petitioners observe, “is no substitute for performing the
entire work.” Id., at 47.34
But Congress has not put petitioners in this bind. The
question here, as in Eldred, is whether would-be users
must pay for their desired use of the author’s expression,
or else limit their exploitation to “fair use” of that work.
Prokofiev’s Peter and the Wolf could once be performed
free of charge; after §514 the right to perform it must be
obtained in the marketplace. This is the same marketplace, of course, that exists for the music of Prokofiev’s
U. S. contemporaries: works of Copland and Bernstein, for
example, that enjoy copyright protection, but nevertheless
appear regularly in the programs of U. S. concertgoers.
Before we joined Berne, domestic works and some foreign works were protected under U. S. statutes and bilateral international agreements, while other foreign works
were available at an artificially low (because royalty-free)
——————
public. See URAA Joint Hearing 3 (statement of Rep. Hughes); id., at
121 (app. to statement of Lehman, Commerce Dept.); id., at 141 (statement of Shapiro, USTR); id., at 145 (statement of Christopher Schroeder, DOJ). The reliance-party protections supplied by §514, see supra,
at 10–11, were meant to address such concerns. See URAA Joint
Hearing 148–149 (prepared statement of Schroeder).
34 Because Shostakovich was a pre-1973 Russian composer, his works
were not protected in the United States. See U. S. Copyright Office,
Circular No. 38A: The International Copyright Relations of the United
States 9, 11, n. 2 (2010) (copyright relations between the Soviet Union
and the United States date to 1973).

