20

GOLAN v. HOLDER
BREYER, J., dissenting

copyright protection of already existing works can help,
say, music publishers or film distributers raise prices,
produce extra profits and consequently lead them to pub­
lish or distribute works they might otherwise have ig­
nored. But ordinarily a copyright—since it is a monopoly
on copying—restricts dissemination of a work once pro­
duced compared to a competitive market. And simply
making the industry richer does not mean that the indus­
try, when it makes an ordinary forward-looking economic
calculus, will distribute works not previously distributed.
The industry experts might mean that temporary extra
profits will lead them to invest in the development of a
market, say, by advertising. But this kind of argument,
which can be made by distributers of all sorts of goods,
ranging from kiwi fruit to Swedish furniture, has little
if anything to do with the nonrepeatable costs of initial
creation, which is the special concern of copyright protec­
tion. See supra, at 2–3.
Moreover, the argument proves too much. It is the kind
of argument that the Stationers’ Company might well
have made and which the British Parliament rejected. Cf.
Patterson 154–155 (describing failed booksellers’ bill
seeking protection from foreign competition through an
extension of the copyright term). It is the kind of argu­
ment that could justify a legislature’s withdrawing from
the public domain the works, say, of Hawthorne or of Swift
or for that matter the King James Bible in order to en­
courage further publication of those works; and, it could
even more easily justify similar action in the case of lesser
known early works, perhaps those of the Venerable Bede.
The Court has not, to my knowledge, previously accepted
such a rationale—a rationale well removed from the spe­
cial economic circumstances that surround the nonrepeat­
able costs of the initial creation of a “Writing.” Supra, at
2. And I fear that doing so would read the Copyright
Clause as if it were a blank check made out in favor of

