12

GOLAN v. HOLDER
BREYER, J., dissenting

phan books in the European Union (13% of the total
number of books in-copyright there), 225,000 orphan films in
European film archives, and 17 million orphan photo­
graphs in United Kingdom museums. A. Vuopala, As­
sessment of the Orphan works issue and Costs for Rights
Clearance 19, 25 (2010), online at http://ec.europa.eu/
information_society/activities/digital_libraries/doc/reports_
orphan/anna_report.pdf (all Internet materials as visited
Jan. 13, 2012, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file).
How is a university, a film collector, a musician, a data­
base compiler, or a scholar now to obtain permission to
use any such lesser known foreign work previously in
the American public domain? Consider the questions that
any such individual, group, or institution usually must
answer: Is the work eligible for restoration under the
statute? If so, who now holds the copyright—the author?
an heir? a publisher? an association? a long-lost cousin?
Whom must we contact? What is the address? Suppose
no one answers? How do we conduct a negotiation?
To find answers to these, and similar questions, costs
money. The cost to the University of Michigan and the
Institute of Museum and Library Services, for example, to
determine the copyright status of books contained in the
HathiTrust Digital Library that were published in the
United States from 1923 to 1963 will exceed $1 million.
Brief for American Library Assn. et al. as Amici Curiae 15.
It is consequently not surprising to learn that the Los
Angeles Public Library has been unable to make its collec­
tion of Mexican folk music publicly available because of
problems locating copyright owners, that a Jewish cultural
organization has abandoned similar efforts to make avail­
able Jewish cultural music and other materials, or that
film preservers, museums, universities, scholars, database
compilers, and others report that the administrative costs
associated with trying to locate foreign copyright owners
have forced them to curtail their cultural, scholarly, or

