(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

GOLAN ET AL. v. HOLDER, ATTORNEY GENERAL, 

ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE TENTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–545.

Argued October 5, 2011—Decided January 18, 2012

The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
(Berne), which took effect in 1886, is the principal accord governing
international copyright relations. Berne’s 164 member states agree
to provide a minimum level of copyright protection and to treat authors from other member countries as well as they treat their own.
Of central importance in this case, Article 18 of Berne requires countries to protect the works of other member states unless the works’
copyright term has expired in either the country where protection is
claimed or the country of origin. A different system of transnational
copyright protection long prevailed in this country. Throughout most
of the 20th century, the only foreign authors eligible for Copyright
Act protection were those whose countries granted reciprocal rights
to American authors and whose works were printed in the United
States. Despite Article 18, when the United States joined Berne in
1989, it did not protect any foreign works lodged in the U. S. public
domain, many of them works never protected here. In 1994, however, the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights mandated implementation of Berne’s first 21 articles, on pain
of enforcement by the World Trade Organization.
In response, Congress applied the term of protection available to
U. S. works to preexisting works from Berne member countries. Section 514 of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act (URAA) grants copyright protection to works protected in their country of origin, but
lacking protection in the United States for any of three reasons: The
United States did not protect works from the country of origin at the
time of publication; the United States did not protect sound recordings fixed before 1972; or the author had not complied with certain

