14

GOLAN v. HOLDER
BREYER, J., dissenting

strictions work special harm. For one thing, the foreign
location of restored works means higher than ordinary
administrative costs. For another, the statute’s technical
requirements make it very difficult to establish whether a
work has had its copyright restored by the statute. Gard,
In the Trenches with §104A: An Evaluation of the Parties’
Arguments in Golan v. Holder as It Heads to the Supreme
Court, 64 Vand. L. Rev. En Banc 199, 216–220 (2011)
(describing difficulties encountered in compiling the in­
formation necessary to create an online tool to determine
whether the statute applies in any given case).
Worst of all, “restored copyright” protection removes
material from the public domain. In doing so, it reverses
the payment expectations of those who used, or intended
to use, works that they thought belonged to them. Were
Congress to act similarly with respect to well-established
property rights, the problem would be obvious. This stat­
ute analogously restricts, and thereby diminishes, Ameri­
cans’ preexisting freedom to use formerly public domain
material in their expressive activities.
Thus, while the majority correctly observes that the
dissemination-restricting harms of copyright normally
present problems appropriate for legislation to resolve,
ante, at 31–32, the question is whether the Copyright
Clause permits Congress seriously to exacerbate such a
problem by taking works out of the public domain without
a countervailing benefit. This question is appropriate for
judicial resolution. Indeed, unlike Eldred where the Court
had to decide a complicated line-drawing question—when
is a copyright term too long?—here an easily administra­
ble standard is available—a standard that would require
works that have already fallen into the public domain to
stay there.
The several, just mentioned features of the present
statute are important, for they distinguish it from other
copyright laws. By removing material from the public

