2

GOLAN v. HOLDER
Syllabus
U. S. statutory formalities. Works encompassed by §514 are granted
the protection they would have enjoyed had the United States maintained copyright relations with the author’s country or removed formalities incompatible with Berne. As a consequence of the barriers
to U. S. copyright protection prior to §514’s enactment, foreign works
“restored” to protection by the measure had entered the public domain in this country. To cushion the impact of their placement in
protected status, §514 provides ameliorating accommodations for
parties who had exploited affected works before the URAA was
enacted.
Petitioners are orchestra conductors, musicians, publishers, and
others who formerly enjoyed free access to works §514 removed from
the public domain. They maintain that Congress, in passing §514,
exceeded its authority under the Copyright Clause and transgressed
First Amendment limitations. The District Court granted the Attorney General’s motion for summary judgment. Affirming in part, the
Tenth Circuit agreed that Congress had not offended the Copyright
Clause, but concluded that §514 required further First Amendment
inspection in light of Eldred v. Ashcroft, 537 U. S. 186. On remand,
the District Court granted summary judgment to petitioners on the
First Amendment claim, holding that §514’s constriction of the public
domain was not justified by any of the asserted federal interests. The
Tenth Circuit reversed, ruling that §514 was narrowly tailored to fit
the important government aim of protecting U. S. copyright holders’
interests abroad.

Held:
1. Section 514 does not exceed Congress’ authority under the Copyright Clause. Pp. 13–23.
(a) The text of the Copyright Clause does not exclude application
of copyright protection to works in the public domain. Eldred is
largely dispositive of petitioners’ claim that the Clause’s confinement
of a copyright’s lifespan to a “limited Tim[e]” prevents the removal of
works from the public domain. In Eldred, the Court upheld the Copyright Term Extension Act (CTEA), which extended, by 20 years, the
terms of existing copyrights. The text of the Copyright Clause, the
Court observed, contains no “command that a time prescription, once
set, becomes forever ‘fixed’ or ‘inalterable,’ ” and the Court declined to
infer any such command. 537 U. S., at 199. The construction petitioners tender here is similarly infirm. The terms afforded works restored by §514 are no less “limited” than those the CTEA lengthened.
Nor had the “limited Tim[e]” already passed for the works at issue
here—many of them works formerly denied any U. S. copyright protection—for a period of exclusivity must begin before it may end. Petitioners also urge that the Government’s position would allow Con-

