Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

25

Opinion of the Court

marks omitted)).
The second “traditional contour,” the fair use defense, is
codified at 17 U. S. C. §107: “[T]he fair use of a copyrighted work, including such use by reproduction in copies . . . ,
for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting,
teaching (including multiple copies for classroom use),
scholarship, or research, is not an infringement of copyright.” This limitation on exclusivity “allows the public to
use not only facts and ideas contained in a copyrighted
work, but also [the author’s] expression itself in certain
circumstances.” Eldred, 537 U. S., at 219; see id., at 220
(“fair use defense affords considerable latitude for scholarship and comment, . . . even for parody” (internal quotation marks omitted)).
Given the “speech-protective purposes and safeguards”
embraced by copyright law, see id., at 219, we concluded
in Eldred that there was no call for the heightened review
petitioners sought in that case.30 We reach the same
conclusion here.31 Section 514 leaves undisturbed the
“idea/expression” distinction and the “fair use” defense.
Moreover, Congress adopted measures to ease the transition from a national scheme to an international copyright
regime: It deferred the date from which enforcement runs,
and it cushioned the impact of restoration on “reliance
parties” who exploited foreign works denied protection
before §514 took effect. See supra, at 10–11 (describing 17
U. S. C. §104A(c), (d), and (h)). See also Eldred, 537 U. S.,
at 220 (describing supplemental allowances and exemp——————
30 See Eldred, 537 U. S., at 221 (“Protection of [an author’s original
expression from unrestricted exploitation] does not raise the free speech
concerns present when the government compels or burdens the communication of particular facts or ideas.”).
31Focusing narrowly on the specific problem of orphan works,
the dissent overlooks these principal protections against “the
dissemination-restricting harms of copyright.” Post, at 14.

