Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

21

Opinion of the Court

held that the Copyright Clause does not demand that each
copyright provision, examined discretely, operate to induce
new works. Rather, we explained, the Clause “empowers
Congress to determine the intellectual property regimes
that, overall, in that body’s judgment, will serve the ends
of the Clause.” Id., at 222. And those permissible ends,
we held, extended beyond the creation of new works. See
id., at 205–206 (rejecting the notion that “ ‘the only way to
promote the progress of science [is] to provide incentives
to create new works’ ” (quoting Perlmutter, Participation in
the International Copyright System as a Means to Promote the Progress of Science and Useful Arts, 36 Loyola
(LA) L. Rev. 323, 332 (2002))).26
Even were we writing on a clean slate, petitioners’
argument would be unavailing. Nothing in the text of the
Copyright Clause confines the “Progress of Science” exclusively to “incentives for creation.” Id., at 324, n. 5 (internal quotation marks omitted). Evidence from the founding, moreover, suggests that inducing dissemination—as
opposed to creation—was viewed as an appropriate means
to promote science. See Nachbar, Constructing Copyright’s Mythology, 6 Green Bag 2d 37, 44 (2002) (“The
scope of copyright protection existing at the time of the
framing,” trained as it was on “publication, not creation,”
“is inconsistent with claims that copyright must promote
creative activity in order to be valid.” (internal quotation
marks omitted)). Until 1976, in fact, Congress made
“federal copyright contingent on publication[,] [thereby]
——————
26 The dissent also suggests, more tentatively, that at least where
copyright legislation extends protection to works previously in the
public domain, Congress must counterbalance that restriction with new
incentives to create. Post, at 8. Even assuming the public domain were
a category of constitutional significance, contra supra, at 13–19, we
would not understand “the Progress of Science” to have this contingent
meaning.

