2

GOLAN v. HOLDER
BREYER, J., dissenting

works that have already been created and already are in
the American public domain. At the same time, the stat­
ute inhibits the dissemination of those works, foreign
works published abroad after 1923, of which there are
many millions, including films, works of art, innumerable
photographs, and, of course, books—books that (in the
absence of the statute) would assume their rightful places
in computer-accessible databases, spreading knowledge
throughout the world. See infra, at 10–13. In my view,
the Copyright Clause does not authorize Congress to enact
this statute. And I consequently dissent.
I
The possibility of eliciting new production is, and always
has been, an essential precondition for American copyright
protection. The Constitution’s words, “exclusive Right,”
“limited Times,” “Progress of Science,” viewed through the
lens of history underscore the legal significance of what
the Court in Eldred referred to as the “economic philoso­
phy behind the Copyright Clause.” 537 U. S., at 212, n. 18
(brackets omitted). That philosophy understands copy­
right’s grants of limited monopoly privileges to authors as
private benefits that are conferred for a public reason—to
elicit new creation.
Yet, as the Founders recognized, monopoly is a two­
edged sword. On the one hand, it can encourage produc­
tion of new works. In the absence of copyright protection,
anyone might freely copy the products of an author’s
creative labor, appropriating the benefits without incur­
ring the nonrepeatable costs of creation, thereby deterring
authors from exerting themselves in the first place. On
the other hand, copyright tends to restrict the dissemina­
tion (and use) of works once produced either because the
absence of competition translates directly into higher
consumer prices or because the need to secure copying
permission sometimes imposes administrative costs that
make it difficult for potential users of a copyrighted work
to find its owner and strike a bargain. See W. Landes &

