8

GOLAN v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

subject member countries to tariffs or cross-sector retaliation. See Gervais, supra, at 213; 7 W. Patry, Copyright
§24:1, pp. 24–8 to 24–9 (2011). The specter of WTO enforcement proceedings bolstered the credibility of our
trading partners’ threats to challenge the United States
for inadequate compliance with Article 18. See URAA
Joint Hearing 137 (statement of Shapiro, USTR) (“It is
likely that other WTO members would challenge the
current U. S. implementation of Berne Article 18 under
[WTO] procedures.”).8
Congress’ response to the Uruguay agreements put to
rest any questions concerning U. S. compliance with Article 18. Section 514 of the URAA, 108 Stat. 4976 (codified
at 17 U. S. C. §104A, 109(a)),9 extended copyright to works
that garnered protection in their countries of origin,10 but
——————
8 Proponents of prompt congressional action urged that avoiding a
trade enforcement proceeding—potentially the WTO’s first—would be
instrumental in preserving the United States’ “reputation as a world
leader in the copyright field.” URAA Joint Hearing 241 (statement of
Eric Smith, International Intellectual Property Alliance (IIPA)). In this
regard, U. S. negotiators reported that widespread perception of U. S.
noncompliance was undermining our leverage in copyright negotiations. Unimpeachable adherence to Berne, Congress was told, would
help ensure enhanced foreign protection, and hence profitable dissemination, for existing and future U. S. works. See id., at 120 (app. to
statement of Lehman, Commerce Dept.) (“Clearly, providing for [retroactive] protection for existing works in our own law will improve our
position in future negotiations.”); id., at 268 (statement of Berman,
RIAA).
9 Title 17 U. S. C. §104A is reproduced in full in an appendix to this
opinion.
10 Works from most, but not all, foreign countries are eligible for protection under §514. The provision covers only works that have “at least
one author or rightholder who was, at the time the work was created,
a national or domiciliary of an eligible country.”
17 U. S. C.
§104A(h)(6)(D). An “eligible country” includes any “nation, other than
the United States, that—(A) becomes a WTO member country after the
date of the enactment of the [URAA]; [or] (B) on such date of enactment

