30

GOLAN v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

cost. By fully implementing Berne, Congress ensured that
most works, whether foreign or domestic, would be governed by the same legal regime. The phenomenon to
which Congress responded is not new: Distortions of the
same order occurred with greater frequency—and to the
detriment of both foreign and domestic authors—when,
before 1891, foreign works were excluded entirely from
U. S. copyright protection. See Kampelman, The United
States and International Copyright, 41 Am. J. Int’l L. 406,
413 (1947) (“American readers were less inclined to read
the novels of Cooper or Hawthorne for a dollar when they
could buy a novel of Scott or Dickens for a quarter.”).
Section 514 continued the trend toward a harmonized
copyright regime by placing foreign works in the position
they would have occupied if the current regime had been
in effect when those works were created and first published. Authors once deprived of protection are spared the
continuing effects of that initial deprivation; §514 gives
them nothing more than the benefit of their labors during
whatever time remains before the normal copyright term
expires.35
Unlike petitioners, the dissent makes much of the socalled “orphan works” problem. See post, at 11–14, 23–24.
We readily acknowledge the difficulties would-be users of
copyrightable materials may face in identifying or locating
copyright owners. See generally U. S. Copyright Office,
Report on Orphan Works 21–40 (2006). But as the dissent
concedes, see post, at 13, this difficulty is hardly peculiar
to works restored under §514. It similarly afflicts, for
——————
35 Persistently deploring “ ‘restored copyright’ protection [because it]
removes material from the public domain,” post, at 14, the dissent does
not pause to consider when and why the material came to be lodged in
that domain. Most of the works affected by §514 got there after a term
of zero or a term cut short by failure to observe U. S. formalities. See
supra, at 9.

