14

GOLAN v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

259, 266 (2007). Petitioners’ contrary argument relies
primarily on the Constitution’s confinement of a copyright’s lifespan to a “limited Tim[e].” “Removing works
from the public domain,” they contend, “violates the ‘limited [t]imes’ restriction by turning a fixed and predictable
period into one that can be reset or resurrected at any
time, even after it expires.” Brief for Petitioners 22.
Our decision in Eldred is largely dispositive of petitioners’ limited-time argument. There we addressed the
question whether Congress violated the Copyright Clause
when it extended, by 20 years, the terms of existing copyrights. 537 U. S., at 192–193 (upholding Copyright Term
Extension Act (CTEA)). Ruling that Congress acted within constitutional bounds, we declined to infer from the text
of the Copyright Clause “the command that a time prescription, once set, becomes forever ‘fixed’ or ‘inalterable.’ ”
Id., at 199. “The word ‘limited,’ ” we observed, “does not
convey a meaning so constricted.” Ibid. Rather, the term
is best understood to mean “confine[d] within certain
bounds,” “restrain[ed],” or “circumscribed.” Ibid. (internal
quotation marks omitted). The construction petitioners
tender closely resembles the definition rejected in Eldred
and is similarly infirm.
The terms afforded works restored by §514 are no less
“limited” than those the CTEA lengthened. In light of
Eldred, petitioners do not here contend that the term
Congress has granted U. S. authors—their lifetimes, plus
70 years—is unlimited. See 17 U. S. C. §302(a). Nor do
petitioners explain why terms of the same duration, as
applied to foreign works, are not equally “circumscribed”
and “confined.” See Eldred, 537 U. S., at 199. Indeed, as
earlier noted, see supra, at 2, 10, the copyrights of restored
foreign works typically last for fewer years than those of
their domestic counterparts.
The difference, petitioners say, is that the limited time
had already passed for works in the public domain. What

