Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
gress to legislate perpetual copyright terms by instituting successive
“limited” terms as prior terms expire. But as in Eldred, such hypothetical misbehavior is far afield from this case. In aligning the
United States with other nations bound by Berne, Congress can hardly be charged with a design to move stealthily toward a perpetual
copyright regime. Pp. 13–15.
(b) Historical practice corroborates the Court’s reading of the Copyright Clause to permit the protection of previously unprotected
works. In the Copyright Act of 1790, the First Congress protected
works that had been freely reproducible under State copyright laws.
Subsequent actions confirm that Congress has not understood the
Copyright Clause to preclude protection for existing works. Several
private bills restored the copyrights and patents of works and inventions previously in the public domain. Congress has also passed generally applicable legislation granting copyrights and patents to works
and inventions that had lost protection. Pp. 15–19.
(c) Petitioners also argue that §514 fails to “promote the Progress of
Science” as contemplated by the initial words of the Copyright
Clause. Specifically, they claim that because §514 affects only works
already created, it cannot meet the Clause’s objective. The creation
of new works, however, is not the sole way Congress may promote
“Science,” i.e., knowledge and learning. In Eldred, this Court rejected
a nearly identical argument, concluding that the Clause does not demand that each copyright provision, examined discretely, operate to
induce new works. Rather the Clause “empowers Congress to determine the intellectual property regimes that, overall, in that body’s
judgment, will serve the ends of the Clause.” 537 U. S., at 222.
Nothing in the text or history of the Copyright Clause, moreover, confines the “Progress of Science” exclusively to “incentives for creation.”
Historical evidence, congressional practice, and this Court’s decisions, in fact, suggest that inducing the dissemination of existing
works is an appropriate means to promote science. Pp. 20–22.
(d) Considered against this backdrop, §514 falls comfortably within
Congress’ Copyright Clause authority. Congress had reason to believe that a well-functioning international copyright system would
encourage the dissemination of existing and future works. And testimony informed Congress that full compliance with Berne would expand the foreign markets available to U. S. authors and invigorate
protection against piracy of U. S. works abroad, thus benefitting copyright-intensive industries stateside and inducing greater investment
in the creative process. This Court has no warrant to reject Congress’
rational judgment that exemplary adherence to Berne would serve
the objectives of the Copyright Clause. Pp. 22–23.
2. The First Amendment does not inhibit the restoration author-

