Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

BREYER, J., dissenting

domain, the statute, in literal terms, “abridges” a preexist­
ing freedom to speak. In practical terms, members of the
public might well have decided what to say, as well as
when and how to say it, in part by reviewing with a view
to repeating, expression that they reasonably believed
was, or would be, freely available. Given these speech
implications, it is not surprising that Congress has long
sought to protect public domain material when revising
the copyright laws. See infra, at 19 (listing instances).
And this Court has assumed the particular importance of
public domain material in roughly analogous circumstanc­
es. See Graham, 383 U. S., at 6 (“Congress may not au­
thorize the issuance of patents whose effects are to remove
existent knowledge from the public domain”); Kewanee Oil
Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U. S. 470, 484 (1974) (trade secret
protection is not incompatible with “policy that matter
once in the public domain must remain in the public do­
main”); Cox Broadcasting Corp. v. Cohn, 420 U. S. 469,
496 (1975) (First Amendment prohibits sanctioning press
for publishing material disclosed in public court docu­
ments); see also Dastar Corp. v. Twentieth Century Fox
Film Corp., 539 U. S. 23, 33 (2003) (“The right to copy . . .
once a copyright has expired . . . passes to the public”
(internal quotation marks omitted)).
Moreover, whereas forward-looking copyright laws tend
to benefit those whose identities are not yet known (the
writer who has not yet written a book, the musician who
has not yet composed a song), when a copyright law is
primarily backward looking the risk is greater that Con­
gress is trying to help known beneficiaries at the expense
of badly organized unknown users who find it difficult to
argue and present their case to Congress. In Eldred, I
thought this problem was severe. See generally 537 U. S.,
at 243–266 (dissenting opinion). And in light of the fact
that Congress, with one minor exception, heard testimony
only from the representatives of existing copyright hold­

