6

GOLAN v. HOLDER
BREYER, J., dissenting

understanding that they were “simply according formal
recognition to what was already inherent in the ‘very
nature of things’ ”); S. Stewart, International Copyright
and Neighbouring Rights 6–7 (2d ed. 1989) (describing the
European system of droit d’auteur).
This utilitarian understanding of the Copyright Clause
has long been reflected in the Court’s case law. In Mazer,
for example, the Court refers to copyright as embodying
the view that “encouragement of individual effort by personal gain is the best way to advance public welfare
through the talents of authors and inventors.” 347 U. S.,
at 219 (emphasis added). In Twentieth Century Music
Corp. v. Aiken, 422 U. S. 151 (1975), the Court says that
underlying copyright is the understanding that “[c]reative
work is to be encouraged and rewarded, but private motivation must ultimately serve the cause of promoting broad
public availability of literature, music, and the other arts.”
Id., at 156 (emphasis added). And in Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U. S. 417 (1984), the
Court, speaking of both copyrights and patents, points out
that the “monopoly privileges that Congress may author­
ize are . . . [not] primarily designed to provide a special
private benefit. Rather, the limited grant is a means by
which an important public purpose may be achieved. It is
intended to motivate the creative activity of authors . . . by
the provision of a special reward.” Id., at 429 (emphasis
added); see also, e.g., Graham v. John Deere Co. of Kansas
City, 383 U. S. 1, 6 (1966) (The “constitutional command
. . . ‘[to] promote the Progress [of Science]’ . . . is the standard expressed in the Constitution and it may not be ig­
nored”); Fox Film Corp. v. Doyal, 286 U. S. 123, 127 (1932)
(“The sole interest of the United States . . . lie[s] in the
general benefits derived by the public from the labors of
authors”).
Congress has expressed similar views in congressional
Reports on copyright legislation. Thus, for example, an

