Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment

To make matters worse, the majority’s answer to its
unasked constitutional question is not even clear. After
today, must a union undertaking a special assessment or
dues increase obtain affirmative consent to collect “any
funds” or solely to collect funds for nonchargeable expenses? May a nonmember opt not to contribute to a
special assessment, even if the assessment is levied to
fund uncontestably chargeable activities? Does the majority’s new rule allow for any distinction between nonmembers who had earlier objected to the payment of
nonchargeable expenses and those who had not? What
procedures govern this new world of fee collection?
Moreover, while the majority’s novel rule is, on its face,
limited to special assessments and dues increases, the
majority strongly hints that this line may not long endure.
The majority pronounces the Court’s explicit holding in
Machinists v. Street, 367 U. S. 740, 774 (1961)—that
“dissent is not to be presumed[,] it must affirmatively be
made known to the union by the dissenting employee”—
nothing but an “offhand remark,” made by Justices who
did not “pause to consider the broader constitutional
implications of an affirmative opt-out requirement,” ante,
at 12. The reader is told that our precedents’ “acceptance
of the opt-out approach appears to have come about more
as a historical accident than through the careful application of First Amendment principles.” Ibid. And that “[b]y
authorizing a union to collect fees from nonmembers and
permitting the use of an opt-out system for the collection
——————
majority’s view, unconstitutional. But if the Court was dissatisfied
with the scope of the questions presented here it should not have
granted certiorari in this case. Or having granted it, the Court should
have asked for supplemental briefing on the question whether an opt-in
regime is constitutionally required. What it should not have done—
cannot do under our rules—is decide that question without having
provided the parties and potential amici an opportunity to weigh in
with their own considered views.

