(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

KNOX ET AL. v. SERVICE EMPLOYEES 

INTERNATIONAL UNION, LOCAL 1000 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–1121. Argued January 10, 2012—Decided June 21, 2012
California law permits public-sector employees in a bargaining unit to
decide by majority vote to create an “agency shop” arrangement under which all the employees are represented by a union. Even employees who do not join the union must pay an annual fee for
“chargeable expenses,” i.e., the cost of nonpolitical union services related to collective bargaining. Under Abood v. Detroit Bd. of Ed., 431
U. S. 209, a public-sector union can bill nonmembers for chargeable
expenses but may not require them to fund its political or ideological
projects. Teachers v. Hudson, 475 U. S. 292, 302–311, sets out requirements that a union must meet in order to collect regular fees
from nonmembers without violating their rights.
In June 2005, respondent, a public-sector union (SEIU), sent to
California employees its annual Hudson notice, setting and capping
monthly dues and estimating that 56.35% of its total expenditures in
the coming year would be chargeable expenses. A nonmember had 30
days to object to full payment of dues but would still have to pay the
chargeable portion. The notice stated that the fee was subject to increase without further notice. That same month, the Governor called
for a special election on, inter alia, two ballot propositions opposed by
the SEIU. After the 30-day objection period ended, the SEIU sent a
letter to unit employees announcing a temporary 25% increase in
dues and a temporary elimination of the monthly dues cap, billing
the move as an “Emergency Temporary Assessment to Build a Political Fight-Back Fund.” The purpose of the fund was to help achieve
the union’s political objectives in the special election and in the upcoming November 2006 election. The union noted that the fund
would be used “for a broad range of political expenses, including tele-

