14

KNOX v. SERVICE EMPLOYEES
BREYER, J., dissenting

which, and the circumstances under which a union that
represents nonmembers in collective bargaining can require those nonmembers to help pay for the union’s (constitutionally chargeable) collective-bargaining expenses.
Twenty-three States have enacted “right to work” laws,
which, in effect, prevent unions from requiring nonmembers to pay any of those costs. See Dept. of Labor, Wage
and Hour Division, State Right-to-Work Laws (Jan. 2009),
online at http://www.dol.gov/whd/state/righttowork.htm (as
visited June 18, 2012, and available in Clerk of Court’s
case file). Other States have rejected the “right to work”
approach and permit unions to require contributions from
nonmembers, while protecting those nonmembers’ right
to opt out of supporting the union’s political activities.
E.g., Cal. Govt. Code Ann. §§3502.5(a), 3515.8. Still others
have enacted compromise laws that assume a nonmember
does not wish to pay the nonchargeable portion of the fee
unless he or she affirmatively indicates a desire to do so.
See Wash. Rev. Code §42.17A.500 (2010) (providing that a
union cannot use a nonmember’s agency fee for political
purposes “unless affirmatively authorized by the individual”). The debate about public unions’ collective-bargaining
rights is currently intense.
The question of how a nonmember indicates a desire not
to pay constitutes an important part of this debate. Must
the union assume that the nonmember does not intend to
pay unless he affirmatively indicates his desire to pay, by
“opting in”? Or, may the union assume that the nonmember is willing to pay unless the nonmember indicates a
desire not to pay, by “opting out”? Where, as here, nonchargeable political expenses are at issue, there may be a
significant number of represented nonmembers who do not
feel strongly enough about the union’s politics to indicate a
choice either way. That being so, an “opt-in” requirement
can reduce union revenues significantly, a matter of considerable importance to the union, while the additional

