2

KNOX v. SERVICE EMPLOYEES
Syllabus
vision and radio advertising, direct mail, voter registration, voter education, and get out the vote activities in our work sites and in our
communities across California.” Nonunion employees were not given
any choice as to whether they would pay into the fund.
Petitioners, on behalf of nonunion employees who paid into the
fund, brought a class action against the SEIU alleging violation of
their First Amendment rights. The Federal District Court granted
petitioners summary judgment. Ruling that the special assessment
was for entirely political purposes, it ordered the SEIU to send a new
notice giving class members 45 days to object and to provide those
who object a full refund of contributions to the fund. The Ninth Circuit reversed, concluding that Hudson prescribed a balancing test
under which the proper inquiry is whether the SEIU’s procedures
reasonably accommodated the interests of the union, the employer,
and the nonmember employees.

Held:
1. This case is not moot. Although the SEIU offered a full refund to
all class members after certiorari was granted, a live controversy remains. The voluntary cessation of challenged conduct does not ordinarily render a case moot because that conduct could be resumed as
soon as the case is dismissed. See City of Mesquite v. Aladdin’s Castle, Inc., 455 U. S. 283, 289. Since the SEIU continues to defend the
fund’s legality, it would not necessarily refrain from collecting similar
fees in the future. Even if concerns about voluntary cessation were
inapplicable because petitioners did not seek prospective relief, there
would still be a live controversy as to the adequacy of the refund notice the SEIU sent pursuant to the District Court’s order. Pp. 6−8.
2. Under the First Amendment, when a union imposes a special assessment or dues increase levied to meet expenses that were not disclosed when the regular assessment was set, it must provide a fresh
notice and may not exact any funds from nonmembers without their
affirmative consent. Pp. 8−23.
(a) A close connection exists between this Nation’s commitment
to self-government and the rights protected by the First Amendment,
see, e.g., Brown v. Hartlage, 456 U. S. 45, 52−53, which creates “an
open marketplace” in which differing ideas about political, economic,
and social issues can compete freely for public acceptance without
improper government interference, New York State Bd. of Elections v.
Lopez Torres, 552 U. S 196, 202. The government may not prohibit
the dissemination of ideas it disfavors, nor compel the endorsement
of ideas that it approves. See, e.g., R. A. V. v. St. Paul, 505 U. S. 377,
382. And the ability of like-minded individuals to associate for the
purpose of expressing commonly held views may not be curtailed.
See, e.g., Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U. S. 609, 623. Close-

