2

KNOX v. SERVICE EMPLOYEES
BREYER, J., dissenting

prior year. Those nonmembers who objected to the apportionment, believing their fee too high, could lodge an
objection with the union, proceed through arbitration, and
receive a rebate if they won. The Court found this procedure constitutionally inadequate. It thought that (1) a
rebate “does not avoid the risk that dissenters’ funds may
be used temporarily for an improper purpose,” (2) the
union had not provided the nonmembers in advance with
“sufficient information to gauge the propriety of the union’s fee,” and (3) the union did not provide objectors
with “a reasonably prompt decision by an impartial decisionmaker.” Id., at 305–307.
The Court then held that the Constitution requires that
a union collecting a fee from nonmembers provide “an
adequate explanation of the basis for the fee, a reasonably
prompt opportunity to challenge the amount of the fee
before an impartial decisionmaker, and an escrow for the
amounts reasonably in dispute while such challenges are
pending.” Id., at 310.
The Court added that it “recognize[d] that there are
practical reasons why ‘[a]bsolute precision’ in the calculation of the charge to nonmembers cannot be ‘expected or
required.’ ” Id., at 307, n. 18 (quoting Railway Clerks v.
Allen, 373 U. S. 113, 122 (1963)). It said that the union
retains the burden of proving that a given expense is
chargeable to nonmembers, the “nonmember’s ‘burden’ ” being simply that of making “his objection known.” 475 U. S.,
at 306, n. 16. And it added that the union “cannot
be faulted for calculating its fee on the basis of its expenses during the preceding year.” Id., at 307, n. 18.
For the last 25 years unions and employers across
the Nation have relied upon this Court’s statements in
Hudson in developing administratively workable systems
that (1) allow unions to pay the costs of fulfilling their
representational obligations to both members and nonmembers alike, while (2) simultaneously protecting the

