12

KNOX v. SERVICE EMPLOYEES
BREYER, J., dissenting

objections. In a word, a new opportunity to object means
time, effort, and funds set aside to deal with a new layer of
administrative procedure.
I recognize that allowing objections only once a year is
only one possible way to administer a fee-charging system.
In principle, one might allow nonmembers to pose new
objections to their dues payments biannually, or quarterly,
or even once a month, as actual expenses do, or do not,
correspond to initial union predictions. But for constitutional purposes the critical fact is that annual objection is
at least one reasonably practical way to permit the principled objector to avoid paying for politics with which he
disagrees. See Hudson, 475 U. S., at 307, n. 18. And that
is so whether ordinary or special assessments are at stake.
Further, the nonmember who did not object initially is
not likely to be a nonmember who strongly opposes the
union’s politics. That many unions take political positions and that they spend money seeking to advance those
positions is not exactly a secret. All those whom this
union represents know from history that it spends money
each year for nonchargeable purposes. And any nonmember who has significant negative views about such matters
is likely to have objected in advance. Those who did not
object initially (but do so later) likely include many whose
objection rests, not upon constitutionally protected political grounds, but simply upon a desire not to pay a higher
fee. And those who withhold fees for that reason are not
entitled to constitutional protection in doing so. Here, the
nonobjector cannot even claim that an increase in the total
fee (by the amount of the special assessment) took him by
surprise, for in its initial Hudson notice the union said
that “[d]ues are subject to change without further notice to
fee payers.” App. 98.
Finally, if the union will not let a nonmember object to a
special assessment, that nonmember has an easy remedy.
He or she can simply object the first time around. After

