4

KNOX v. SERVICE EMPLOYEES
Opinion of the Court

On July 30, shortly after the end of the 30-day objection
period for the June Hudson notice, the SEIU proposed a
temporary 25% increase in employee fees, which it billed
as an “Emergency Temporary Assessment to Build a Political Fight-Back Fund.” App. 25. The proposal stated
that the money was needed to achieve the union’s political
objectives, both in the special November 2005 election and
in the November 2006 election. Id., at 26. According to
the proposal, money in the Fight-Back Fund would be
used “for a broad range of political expenses, including
television and radio advertising, direct mail, voter registration, voter education, and get out the vote activities in
our work sites and in our communities across California.”
Ibid. The proposal specifically stated that “[t]he Fund will
not be used for regular costs of the union—such as office
rent, staff salaries or routine equipment replacement, etc.”
Ibid. It noted that “all other public worker unions are in
the process of raising the extraordinary funds needed to
defeat the Governor.” Id., at 27. And it concluded: “Each
of us must do our part to turn back these initiatives which
would allow the Governor to destroy our wages and benefits and even our jobs, and threaten the well-being of all
Californians.” Ibid. On August 27, the SEIU’s General
Council voted to implement the proposal.
On August 31, the SEIU sent out a letter addressed
to “Local 1000 Members and Fair Share Fee Payers,” announcing that, for a limited period, their fees would be
raised to 1.25% of gross monthly salary and the $45-permonth cap on regular dues would not apply. Id., at 31.
The letter explained that the union would use the fund to
“defeat Proposition 76 and Proposition 75 on November 8,”
and to “defeat another attack on [its] pension plan” in
June 2006. Ibid. The letter also informed employees that,
in the following year, the money would help “to elect a
governor and a legislature who support public employees
and the services [they] provide.” Ibid.

