Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

Objecting nonmembers therefore paid 56% of normal fees,
even though the chargeable share that year was 69%.
That is to say, they paid less than what the Constitution
considers to be their fair share. See Abood, 431 U. S., at
236–237.
Even were the underlying facts different, I can find no
constitutional basis for charging an objecting nonmember
less than the 56% that the preceding year’s audit showed
was appropriate. In general, any effort to send a new
notice and then apply special percentages to a special
midyear assessment fee runs into administrative difficulties that, as explained above, are avoided with a retrospective system. See supra, at 6. And, of course, requiring the
use of some special proportion based on predicted expenditures would contradict Hudson’s determination that prior
year, not present year, expenditures can form the basis for
the determination of that proportion. See Hudson, supra,
at 307, n. 18.
In the particular example before us these general problems are camouflaged by the fact that the union itself said
that the assessment was to be used for political purposes.
Hence it is tempting to say that 100% of the assessment
is not chargeable. But future cases are most unlikely to
be so clear; disputes will arise over union predictions (say,
that only 20% of the special assessment will be used for
political purposes); and the Court will then perhaps understand the wisdom of Hudson’s holding. In any event,
we have made clear in other cases that money is fungible.
Retail Clerks v. Schermerhorn, 373 U. S. 746, 753 (1963).
Whether a particular expenditure was funded by regular
dues or the special assessment is “of bookkeeping significance only rather than a matter of real substance.” Ibid.
And, the Court’s focus on the announced purposes of the
special assessment, rather than yearly expenditures taken
as a whole, is beside the point.
The Court’s response to these problems, particularly the

