Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of the Court

Amendment does not permit a union to extract a loan from
unwilling nonmembers even if the money is later paid
back in full. See Hudson, supra, at 305; Ellis, 466 U. S.,
at 444. Here, for nonmembers who disagreed with the
SEIU’s electoral objectives, a refund provided after the
union’s objectives had already been achieved would be cold
comfort.6
To respect the limits of the First Amendment, the union
should have sent out a new notice allowing nonmembers to
opt in to the special fee rather than requiring them to opt
out. Our cases have tolerated a substantial impingement
on First Amendment rights by allowing unions to impose
an opt-out requirement at all. Even if this burden can be
justified during the collection of regular dues on an annual
basis, there is no way to justify the additional burden of
imposing yet another opt-out requirement to collect special
fees whenever the union desires.
B
1
The SEIU’s treatment of nonmembers who opted out
——————
6 JUSTICE

SOTOMAYOR contends that a new Hudson notice should be
required only when a special assessment is imposed for political purposes. Post, at 2 (opinion concurring in judgment). But as even the
dissent acknowledges, post, at 7, such a rule would be unworkable.
First, our cases have recognized that a union’s money is fungible, so
even if the new fee were spent entirely for nonpolitical activities, it
would free up other funds to be spent for political purposes. See Retail
Clerks v. Schermerhorn, 373 U. S. 746, 753 (1963) (noting that particular fee earmarks are “of bookkeeping significance only rather than a
matter of real substance”). And second, unless we can rely on unions to
advertise the true purpose behind every special fee, it is not clear how a
court could make a timely determination of whether each new fee is
political in nature. It would be practically impossible to require the
parties to litigate the purpose of every fee merely to determine whether
notice is required.

