12

KNOX v. SERVICE EMPLOYEES
Opinion of the Court

Shouldn’t the default rule comport with the probable
preferences of most nonmembers? And isn’t it likely that
most employees who choose not to join the union that
represents their bargaining unit prefer not to pay the full
amount of union dues? An opt-out system creates a risk
that the fees paid by nonmembers will be used to further
political and ideological ends with which they do not
agree. But a “[u]nion should not be permitted to exact a
service fee from nonmembers without first establishing a
procedure which will avoid the risk that their funds will
be used, even temporarily, to finance ideological activities
unrelated to collective bargaining.” Hudson, supra, at 305
(internal quotation marks omitted).
Although the difference between opt-out and opt-in
schemes is important, our prior cases have given surprisingly little attention to this distinction. Indeed, acceptance of the opt-out approach appears to have come
about more as a historical accident than through the
careful application of First Amendment principles.
The trail begins with dicta in Street, where we considered whether a federal collective-bargaining statute authorized a union to impose compulsory fees for political
activities. 367 U. S., at 774. The plaintiffs were employees who had affirmatively objected to the way their fees
were being used, and so we took that feature of the case
for granted. We held that the statute did not authorize
the use of the objecting employees’ fees for ideological
purposes, and we stated in passing that “dissent is not
to be presumed—it must affirmatively be made known to
the union by the dissenting employee.” Ibid. In making
that offhand remark, we did not pause to consider the
broader constitutional implications of an affirmative opt-out
requirement. Nor did we explore the extent of First
Amendment protection for employees who might not qualify as active “dissenters” but who would nonetheless prefer
to keep their own money rather than subsidizing by de-

