4

KNOX v. SERVICE EMPLOYEES
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment

do not sit as self-directed boards of legal inquiry and
research, but essentially as arbiters of legal questions presented and argued by the parties before them.’ ” NASA
v. Nelson, 562 U. S. ___, ___, n. 10 (2011) (opinion for the
Court by ALITO, J.) (slip op., at 11, n. 10) (quoting Carducci v. Regan, 714 F. 2d 171, 177 (CADC 1983) (opinion for
the court by Scalia, J.)); see also Jefferson v. Upton, 560
U. S. ___, ___ (SCALIA, J., joined by THOMAS, J., dissenting)
(slip op., at 8) (The majority’s “refusal to abide by standard
rules of appellate practice is unfair to the . . . Circuit,”
which did not pass on this question, “and especially to the
respondent here, who suffers a loss in this Court without
ever having an opportunity to address the merits of the . . .
question the Court decides”). The imperative of judicial
restraint is at its zenith here, with respect to an issue of
such constitutional magnitude, for “[i]f there is one doctrine more deeply rooted than any other in the process of
constitutional adjudication, it is that we ought not to pass
on questions of constitutionality . . . unless such adjudication is unavoidable.” Clinton v. Jones, 520 U. S. 681, 690,
n. 11 (1997) (internal quotation marks omitted).2
——————
2 The majority contends that its holding “does not venture beyond
the scope of the questions on which we granted review,” pointing to the
second question presented. Ante, at 22, n. 9. The majority is mistaken.
That question concerns the chargeability of political and lobbying
activities under Lehnert v. Ferris Faculty Assn., 500 U. S. 507, 522
(1991), not the procedures by which a union may collect fees. See
Pet. for Cert. (i); id., at 20–27 (describing scope of second question presented); id., at 23 (“There is a serious split, and confusion, among the
circuits on the chargeability of union political and lobbying activities”).
Indeed, it is only petitioners’ first question presented that deals with
fee-collection procedures. And in that question, petitioners ask this
Court to hold that SEIU may not collect its special assessment without
providing a Hudson notice that offers “an opportunity to object to” the
deduction of fees for the assessment. Id., at (i) (emphasis added).
The phrase “opt in” appears not once in petitioners’ briefing. The
majority protests that it cannot but hold that an opt-in regime is
required, seeing as the opt-out regime the petitioners advocate is, in the

