18

KNOX v. SERVICE EMPLOYEES
Opinion of the Court

when the initial Hudson notice was sent also ran afoul of
the First Amendment. The SEIU required these employees to pay 56.35% of the special assessment, just as they
had been required to pay 56.35% of the regular annual
dues. But the union proclaimed that the special assessment would be used to support an electoral campaign and
would not be used for ordinary union expenses. Accordingly, there is no reason to suppose that 56.35% of the new
assessment was used for properly chargeable expenses.
On the contrary, if the union is to be taken at its word,
virtually all of the money was slated for nonchargeable
uses.
The procedure accepted in Hudson is designed for use
when a union sends out its regular annual dues notices.
The procedure is predicated on the assumption that a
union’s allocation of funds for chargeable and nonchargeable purposes is not likely to vary greatly from one year to
the next.7 No such assumption is reasonable, however,
when a union levies a special assessment or raises dues as
a result of events that were not anticipated or disclosed at
the time when a yearly Hudson notice was sent. Accordingly, use of figures based on an audit of the union’s operations during an entire previous year makes no sense.
Nor would it be feasible to devise a new breakdown of
chargeable and nonchargeable expenses for the special
assessment. Determining that breakdown is problematic
enough when it is done on a regular annual basis because
auditors typically do not make a legal determination as to
whether particular expenditures are chargeable. Instead,
——————
7 The SEIU contends that “[s]ignificant fluctuations in the chargeable
and nonchargeable proportions of a union’s spending are inevitable,”
Brief for Respondent 13, and the dissent appears to agree, post, at 10.
But if the Hudson Court had proceeded on this assumption it is doubtful that it would have found it acceptable for a union to rely solely on
the breakdown in the most recent year rather than computing the
average breakdown over a longer period.

