22

KNOX v. SERVICE EMPLOYEES
Opinion of the Court

rather than opt-in schemes when annual dues are billed,
our cases have substantially impinged upon the First
Amendment rights of nonmembers. In the new situation
presented here, we see no justification for any further
impingement. The general rule—individuals should not
be compelled to subsidize private groups or private speech—
should prevail.
Public-sector unions have the right under the First
Amendment to express their views on political and social
issues without government interference. See, e.g., Citizens
United v. Federal Election Comm’n, 558 U. S. ___ (2010).
But employees who choose not to join a union have the
same rights. The First Amendment creates a forum in
which all may seek, without hindrance or aid from the
State, to move public opinion and achieve their political
goals. “First Amendment values [would be] at serious risk
if the government [could] compel a particular citizen, or a
discrete group of citizens, to pay special subsidies for
speech on the side that [the government] favors.” United
Foods, 533 U. S., at 411. Therefore, when a public-sector
union imposes a special assessment or dues increase, the
union must provide a fresh Hudson notice and may not
exact any funds from nonmembers without their affirmative consent.9
——————
9 Contrary to JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s suggestion, our holding does not
venture beyond the scope of the questions on which we granted review
or the scope of the parties’ dispute. The second question on which we
granted review broadly asks us to determine the circumstances under
which a State may deduct from the pay of nonunion employees money
that is used by a union for general electioneering. See Pet. for Cert. (i)
(“May a State, consistent with the First and Fourteenth Amendments,
condition continued public employment on the payment of union
agency fees for purposes of financing political expenditures for ballot
measures?”). Our holding—that this may be done only when the employee affirmatively consents—falls within that question.
Our holding also addresses the primary remaining dispute between
the parties, namely, the particular procedures that must be followed on

