2

KNOX v. SERVICE EMPLOYEES
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment

507, 519 (1991); see also Locke v. Karass, 555 U. S. 207,
211 (2009) (“[N]onchargeable union activities [include]
political, public relations, or lobbying activities”). While
the union is free to pursue its ideological goals in the
political arena, it may not subsidize its efforts with objecting nonmembers’ funds, lest the objector be used as “ ‘an instrument for fostering public adherence to an ideological
point of view he finds unacceptable.’ ” Lehnert, 500 U. S.,
at 522 (plurality opinion) (quoting Wooley v. Maynard, 430
U. S. 705, 715 (1977)).
Accordingly, when a union levies a special assessment
or dues increase to fund political activities, the union may
not collect funds from nonmembers who earlier had objected to the payment of nonchargeable expenses, and may
not collect funds from other nonmembers without providing a new Hudson notice and opportunity to opt out. See
Teachers v. Hudson, 475 U. S. 292 (1986). Because SEIU
failed to follow these procedures, it did not satisfy its
constitutional obligations. That holding should end this
case; it is all petitioners asked this Court to decide.1
II
The majority agrees that SEIU’s actions were at odds
with the First Amendment. Yet it proceeds, quite unnecessarily, to reach significant constitutional issues not
contained in the questions presented, briefed, or argued.
Petitioners did not question the validity of our precedents,
which consistently have recognized that an opt-out system
——————
1 See

Pet. for Cert. (i) (questions presented); Brief for Petitioners (i)
(same); id., at 39 (“The Court should hold that . . . when a union imposes a forced-fee increase primarily or solely for political purposes between notices, it may not collect the increase from nonmembers who
have already objected, and it must not collect the increase from other
nonmembers until it has ascertained their wishes by providing them
with a new notice about the increase’s purpose and an opportunity to
opt out”); see also App. 18–19 (complaint).

