Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

a nonmember cannot make an informed choice about a
special assessment or dues increase that is unknown when
the annual notice is sent. When a union levies a special
assessment or raises dues as a result of unexpected developments, the factors influencing a nonmember’s choice
may change. In particular, a nonmember may take special
exception to the uses for which the additional funds are
sought.4
The present case provides a striking example. The
special assessment in this case was billed for use in a
broad electoral campaign designed to defeat two important
and controversial ballot initiatives and to elect sympathetic candidates in the 2006 gubernatorial and legislative
elections. There were undoubtedly nonmembers who, for
one reason or another, chose not to opt out or neglected to
do so when the standard Hudson notice was sent but who
took strong exception to the SEIU’s political objectives and
did not want to subsidize those efforts. These nonmembers might have favored one or both of the ballot initiatives; they might have wished to support the reelection of
the incumbent Governor; or they might not have wanted
to delegate to the union the authority to decide which
candidates in the 2006 elections would receive a share of
their money.
The effect on nonmembers was particularly striking
with respect to the union’s campaign against Proposition
75 because that initiative would have bolstered nonmember rights. If Proposition 75 had passed, nonmembers
would have been exempt from paying for the SEIU’s extensive political projects unless they affirmatively con——————
4 The dissent suggests that the union gave fair notice because it announced at the beginning of the year that “ ‘[d]ues are subject to change
without further notice to fee payers.’ ” Post, at 12 (opinion of BREYER,
J.). But a union cannot define the scope of its own notice obligations
simply by promulgating a clause giving itself the power to increase fees
at any time for any purpose without further notice.

