Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

fault the political agenda of a state-favored union.
In later cases such as Abood and Hudson, we assumed
without any focused analysis that the dicta from Street
had authorized the opt-out requirement as a constitutional
matter. Thus in Hudson we did not take issue with the
union’s practice of giving employees annual notice and an
opportunity to object to expected political expenditures.
At the same time, however, we made it clear that the
procedures used by a union to collect money from nonmembers must satisfy a high standard.
Contrary to the view of the Ninth Circuit panel majority, we did not call for a balancing of the “right” of the
union to collect an agency fee against the First Amendment rights of nonmembers. 628 F. 3d, at 1119–1120.
As we noted in Davenport, “unions have no constitutional
entitlement to the fees of nonmember-employees.” 551
U. S., at 185. A union’s “collection of fees from nonmembers is authorized by an act of legislative grace,” 628 F. 3d,
at 1126 (Wallace, J., dissenting)—one that we have
termed “unusual” and “extraordinary,” Davenport, supra,
at 184, 187. Far from calling for a balancing of rights or
interests, Hudson made it clear that any procedure for
exacting fees from unwilling contributors must be “carefully tailored to minimize the infringement” of free speech
rights. 475 U. S., at 303. And to underscore the meaning
of this careful tailoring, we followed that statement with a
citation to cases holding that measures burdening the
freedom of speech or association must serve a “compelling
interest” and must not be significantly broader than necessary to serve that interest.3
——————
3 The

specific citation was as follows:
“See Roberts v. United States Jaycees, [468 U. S. 609, 623 (1984)]
(Infringements on freedom of association ‘may be justified by regulations adopted to serve compelling state interests, unrelated to the
suppression of ideas, that cannot be achieved through means significantly less restrictive of associational freedoms’); Elrod v. Burns, 427

