Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

After receiving this letter, one of the plaintiffs in this
case called the SEIU’s offices to complain that the union
was levying the special assessment for political purposes
without giving employees a fair opportunity to object.
An SEIU area manager responded that “even if [the employee] objected to the payment of the full agency fee, there
was nothing he could do about the September increase for
the Assessment.” Knox v. Westly, No. 2:05–cv–02198, 2008
WL 850128, *3 (ED Cal., Mar. 28, 2008). “She also stated
that ‘we are in the fight of our lives,’ that the Assessment
was needed, and that there was nothing that could be
done to stop the Union’s expenditure of that Assessment
for political purposes.” Ibid. As a consolation, however,
those employees who had filed timely objections after the
regular June Hudson notice were required to pay only
56.35% of the temporary increase.
Petitioners filed this class-action suit on behalf of 28,000
nonunion employees who were forced to contribute money
to the Political Fight-Back Fund. Some of the class members had filed timely objections after receiving the regular
Hudson notice in June, and others had not. Those who
had objected argued that it was wrong to require them to
pay 56.35% of the temporary assessment, which had been
billed as intended for use in making political expenditures
that they found objectionable. Those who had not objected
after receiving the June Hudson notice contended that
they should have received a new opportunity to object
when the SEIU levied the special assessment for its Political Fight-Back Fund.
The District Court granted summary judgment for the
petitioners, finding that the union “fully intended to use
the 12 million additional dollars it anticipated to raise for
political purposes.” 2008 WL 850128, *7. “Even if every
cent of the assessment was not intended to be used for
entirely political purposes,” the court stated, “it is clear
that the Union’s intent was to depart drastically from its

