4

KNOX v. SERVICE EMPLOYEES
Syllabus
decrease would not fully recompense nonmembers, who would not
have paid to support the special assessment if given the choice. In
any event, even a full refund would not undo the First Amendment
violations, since the First Amendment does not permit a union to extract a loan from unwilling nonmembers even if the money is later
paid back in full. Pp. 14−17.
(d) The SEIU’s treatment of nonmembers who opted out when
the initial Hudson notice was sent also ran afoul of the First
Amendment. They were required to pay 56.35% of the special assessment even though all the money was slated for nonchargeable,
electoral uses. And the SEIU’s claim that the assessment was a
windfall because chargeable expenses turned out to be 66.26% is unpersuasive. First, the SEIU’s understanding of the breadth of
chargeable expenses is so expansive that it is hard to place much reliance on its statistics. “Lobbying the electorate,” which the SEIU
claims is chargeable, is nothing more than another term for supporting political causes and candidates. Second, even if the SEIU’s statistics are accurate, it does not follow that it was proper to charge objecting nonmembers any particular percentage of the special
assessment. If, as the SEIU argues, it is not possible to accurately
determine in advance the percentage of union funds that will be used
for an upcoming year’s chargeable purposes, there is a risk that unconsenting nonmembers will have paid too much or too little. That
risk should be borne by the side whose constitutional rights are not
at stake. If the nonmembers pay too much, their First Amendment
rights are infringed. But, if they pay too little, no constitutional right
of the union is violated because it has no constitutional right to receive any payment from those employees. Pp. 17−23.

628 F. 3d 1115, reversed and remanded.
ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
and SCALIA, KENNEDY, and THOMAS, JJ., joined. SOTOMAYOR, J., filed an
opinion concurring in the judgment, in which GINSBURG, J., joined.
BREYER, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which KAGAN, J., joined.

