Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

monthly dues at $45. Based on the most recently audited
year, the SEIU estimated that 56.35% of its total expenditures in the coming year would be dedicated to chargeable
collective-bargaining activities. Thus, if a nonunion employee objected within 30 days to payment of the full
amount of union dues, the objecting employee was required to pay only 56.35% of total dues. The SEIU’s notice
also included a feature that was not present in Hudson:
The notice stated that the agency fee was subject to increase at any time without further notice.
During this time, the citizens of the State of California
were engaged in a wide-ranging political debate regarding
state budget deficits, and in particular the budget consequences of growing compensation for public employees
backed by powerful public-sector unions. On June 13,
2005, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger called for a special
election to be held in November 2005, where voters would
consider various ballot propositions aimed at state-level
structural reforms. Two of the most controversial issues
on the ballot were Propositions 75 and 76. Proposition 75
would have required unions to obtain employees’ affirmative consent before charging them fees to be used for political purposes. Proposition 76 would have limited state
spending and would have given the Governor the ability
under some circumstances to reduce state appropriations
for public-employee compensation. The SEIU joined a
coalition of public-sector unions in vigorously opposing
these measures. Calling itself the “Alliance for a Better
California,” the group would eventually raise “more than
$10 million, with almost all of it coming from public employee unions, including $2.75 million from state worker
unions, $4.7 million from the California Teachers Association, and $700,000 from school workers unions.”1
——————
1 Marinucci & Wildermuth, Schwarzenegger Adds Prop. 75 to His
Agenda, San Francisco Chronicle, Sept. 18, 2005, p. A–17.

