Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

19

Opinion of the Court

the auditors take the union’s characterization for granted
and perform the simple accounting function of “ensur[ing]
that the expenditures which the union claims it made for
certain expenses were actually made for those expenses.”
Andrews v. Education Assn. of Cheshire, 829 F. 2d 335,
340 (CA2 1987). Thus, if a union takes a very broad view
of what is chargeable—if, for example, it believes that
supporting sympathetic political candidates is chargeable
and bases its classification on that view—the auditors will
classify these political expenditures as chargeable. Objecting employees may then contest the union’s chargeability
determinations, but the onus is on the employees to come
up with the resources to mount the legal challenge in a
timely fashion.8 See, e.g., Lehnert, 500 U. S., at 513; Jibson v. Michigan Ed. Assn., 30 F. 3d 723, 730 (CA6 1994).
This is already a significant burden for employees to bear
simply to avoid having their money taken to subsidize
speech with which they disagree, and the burden would
become insupportable if unions could impose a new assessment at any time, with a new chargeability determination to be challenged.
2
The SEIU argues that objecting nonmembers who were
required to pay 56.35% of the special assessment, far
from subsidizing the union’s political campaign, actually
received a windfall. According to the union’s statistics, the
actual percentage of regular dues and fees spent for
chargeable purposes in 2005 turned out to be quite a bit
higher (66.26%), and therefore, even if all of the money
obtained through the special assessment is classified as
nonchargeable, the union’s total expenditures for 2005
——————
8 The

dissent is comforted by the fact that the union “has offered to
pay for neutral arbitration of such disputes before the American Arbitration Association,” post, at 9, but the painful burden of initiating and
participating in such disputes cannot be so easily relieved.

