Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
ly related to compelled speech and compelled association is compelled
funding of the speech of private speakers or groups. Compulsory
subsidies for private speech are thus subject to exacting First
Amendment scrutiny and cannot be sustained unless, first, there is a
comprehensive regulatory scheme involving a “mandated association”
among those who are required to pay the subsidy, United States v.
United Foods, Inc., 533 U. S. 405, and, second, compulsory fees are
levied only insofar as they are a “necessary incident” of the “larger
regulatory purpose which justified the required association,” ibid.
Pp. 8−10.
(b) When a State establishes an “agency shop” that exacts compulsory union fees as a condition of public employment, “[t]he dissenting employee is forced to support financially an organization with
whose principles and demands he may disagree.” Ellis v. Railway
Clerks, 466 U. S. 435, 455. This form of compelled speech and association imposes a “significant impingement on First Amendment
rights.” Ibid. The justification for permitting a union to collect fees
from nonmembers—to prevent them from free-riding on the union’s
efforts—is an anomaly. Similarly, requiring objecting nonmembers
to opt out of paying the nonchargeable portion of union dues―rather
than exempting them unless they opt in―represents a remarkable
boon for unions, creating a risk that the fees nonmembers pay will be
used to further political and ideological ends with which they do not
agree. Thus, Hudson, far from calling for a balancing of rights or interests, made it clear that any procedure for exacting fees from unwilling contributors must be “carefully tailored to minimize the infringement” of free speech rights, 475 U. S. 302−303, and it cited
cases holding that measures burdening the freedom of speech or association must serve a compelling interest and must not be significantly broader than necessary to serve that interest. Pp. 10−13.
(c) There is no justification for the SEIU’s failure to provide a
fresh Hudson notice. Hudson rests on the principle that nonmembers
should not be required to fund a union’s political and ideological projects unless they choose to do so after having “a fair opportunity” to
assess the impact of paying for nonchargeable union activities. 475
U. S., at 303. The SEIU’s procedure cannot be considered to have
met Hudson’s requirement that fee-collection procedures be carefully
tailored to minimize impingement on First Amendment rights. The
SEIU argues that nonmembers who objected to the special assessment but were not given the opportunity to opt out would have been
given the chance to recover the funds by opting out when the next
annual notice was sent, and that the amount of dues payable the following year by objecting nonmembers would decrease if the special
assessment were found to be for nonchargeable purposes. But this

