Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

BREYER, J., dissenting

new objector to withhold only the portion of the fee that
will pay for nonchargeable expenses (as the logic of the
concurring Justices would suggest), the administrative
problems that I earlier discussed apply. See supra, at 6.
That is to say, unions, arbitrators, and courts will have to
determine, on the basis of a prediction, how much of the
special assessment the new objector can withhold. I concede that many administrative problems could be overcome were the new objector allowed to withhold only the
same 44% of the fee that the union here permitted initial objectors to withhold (a figure based on 2004 audited accounts). But no Member of the Court takes that
approach.
For another thing, as I have previously pointed out, the
Court would permit nonmembers who did not object at the
beginning of the year (like those who did then object) to
object to (and to pay none of) every special assessment,
including those made to raise money to pay additional
collective-bargaining expenses. This approach may avoid
the uncertainty and resulting disputes inherent in an effort to limit withholding to the nonchargeable portion of
the fee. But the price of avoiding those disputes is to
reduce the financial contribution the union will receive
even when a special assessment pays only for unexpected
but perfectly legitimate collective-bargaining expenses.
See supra, at 8–10.
Moreover, to provide a new opportunity to object requires providing for explanations, potential challenges, the
development of separate accounts, and additional administrative procedures. That means providing extra time and
extra money. By definition, however, special assessments
are special; time may matter; and unlike the annual dues
payment, the union is unlikely to be able to provide what
is here a 6-month delay (between the close of the 2004
audited year and the beginning of the next mid-2005 dues
year) that can be used to examine accounts and process

