2

TANIGUCHI v. KAN PACIFIC SAIPAN, LTD.
Syllabus
written, language. Pre-1978 legal dictionaries also generally defined
“interpreter” and “interpret” in terms of oral translation. Respondent
relies almost exclusively on a version of Webster’s Third New International Dictionary that defined “interpreter” as “one that translates;
esp: a person who translates orally for parties conversing in different
tongues.” Although the sense divider esp (for especially) indicates
that the most common meaning of the term is one “who translates
orally,” that meaning is subsumed within the more general definition
“one that translates.” That a definition is broad enough to encompass
one sense of a word does not establish, however, that the word is ordinarily understood in that sense. See Mallard v. United States Dist.
Court for Southern Dist. of Iowa, 490 U. S. 296, 301. Although all
relevant dictionaries defined “interpreter” at the time of the statute’s
enactment as including persons who translate orally, only a handful
defined the word broadly enough to encompass translators of written
materials. Notably, the Oxford English Dictionary, one of the most
authoritative, recognized that “interpreter” can mean one who translates writings, but it expressly designated that meaning as obsolete.
Any definition of a word that is absent from many dictionaries and is
deemed obsolete in others is hardly a common or ordinary meaning.
Given this survey of relevant dictionaries, the ordinary meaning of
“interpreter” does not include those who translate writings. Nothing
in the Court Interpreters Act or in §1920 hints that Congress intended to go beyond this ordinary meaning. If anything, the statutory
context suggests that “interpreter” includes only those who translate
orally. See 28 U. S. C. §1827. Moreover, Congress’ use of technical
terminology reflects the distinction in relevant professional literature
between interpreters, who are used for oral conversations, and translators, who are used for written communications. Pp. 5−11.
(c) No other tool of construction compels a departure from the ordinary meaning of “interpreter.” This Court has never held that Rule
54(d) creates a presumption in favor of the broadest possible reading
of the costs enumerated in §1920. To the contrary, the Court has
made clear that the “discretion granted by Rule 54(d) is not a power
to evade” the specific categories of costs set forth by Congress, Crawford Fitting, supra, at 442, but “is solely a power to decline to tax, as
costs, the items enumerated in §1920,” ibid. This Court’s conclusion
is in keeping with the narrow bounds of taxable costs, which are
limited by statute and modest in scope. Respondent’s extratextual
arguments―that documentary evidence is no less important than testimonial evidence and that some translation tasks are not entirely
oral or entirely written―are more properly directed at Congress. In
any event, neither argument is so compelling that Congress must
have intended to dispense with the ordinary meaning of “interpreter”

