14

TANIGUCHI v. KAN PACIFIC SAIPAN, LTD.
Opinion of the Court

ing of “interpreter” in §1920(6). First, Congress might
have distinguished between oral and written translation
out of a concern that requiring losing parties to bear
the potentially sizable costs of translating discovery documents, as opposed to the more limited costs of oral testimony, could be too burdensome and possibly unfair,
especially for litigants with limited means. Cf. Fleischmann
Distilling Corp. v. Maier Brewing Co., 386 U. S. 714, 718
(1967) (noting the argument “that since litigation is at
best uncertain one should not be penalized for merely
defending or prosecuting a lawsuit, and that the poor
might be unjustly discouraged from instituting actions to
vindicate their rights if the penalty for losing included the
fees of their opponents’ counsel”). Congress might also
have concluded that a document translator is more akin to
an expert or consultant retained by a party to decipher
documentary evidence—like, for instance, a forensic accountant—than to an interpreter whose real-time oral
translation services are necessary for communication
between litigants, witnesses, and the court.8
Second, respondent has not shown that any of the hybrid translation/interpretation tasks to which it points
actually arise with overwhelming frequency or that the
problem of drawing the line between taxable and nontaxable costs in such cases will vex the trial courts. It certainly has not shown that any such problems will be more
troublesome than the task of sifting through translated
——————
8 The dissent contends that document translation, no less than oral
translation, is essential “to equip the parties to present their case
clearly and the court to decide the merits intelligently.” Post, at 5. But
a document translator is no more important than an expert or consultant in making sense of otherwise incomprehensible documentary
evidence, yet expenses for experts and consultants are generally not
taxable as costs. To be sure, forgoing document translation can impair
a litigant’s case, but document translation is not indispensable, in the
way oral translation is, to the parties’ ability to communicate with each
other, with witnesses, and with the court.

