12

TANIGUCHI v. KAN PACIFIC SAIPAN, LTD.
Opinion of the Court

C
No other rule of construction compels us to depart from
the ordinary meaning of “interpreter.” The Court of Appeals reasoned that a broader meaning is “more compatible with Rule 54 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure,
which includes a decided preference for the award of costs
to the prevailing party.” 633 F. 3d, at 1221. But we have
never held that Rule 54(d) creates a presumption of statutory construction in favor of the broadest possible reading
of the costs enumerated in §1920. To the contrary, we
have made clear that the “discretion granted by Rule 54(d)
is not a power to evade” the specific categories of costs set
forth by Congress. Crawford Fitting, 482 U. S., at 442.
“Rather,” we have said, “it is solely a power to decline to
tax, as costs, the items enumerated in §1920.” Ibid. Rule
54(d) thus provides no sound basis for casting aside the
ordinary meaning of the various items enumerated in
the costs statute, including the ordinary meaning of
“interpreter.”
Our decision is in keeping with the narrow scope of
taxable costs. “Although ‘costs’ has an everyday meaning
synonymous with ‘expenses,’ the concept of taxable costs
under Rule 54(d) is more limited and represents those
expenses, including, for example, court fees, that a court
will assess against a litigant.” 10 C. Wright, A. Miller, &
M. Kane, Federal Practice and Procedure §2666, pp. 202–
203 (3d ed. 1998) (hereinafter Wright & Miller). Taxable
costs are limited to relatively minor, incidental expenses
as is evident from §1920, which lists such items as clerk
——————
clear that the word extends to those who translate documents. Tr. of
Oral Arg. 39; see also Brief for Petitioner 32 (“And the Code is wholly
devoid of any corresponding definition of ‘interpreter’ extending to the
translation of written documents”). As respondent acknowledged,
either the word is used in a context that strongly suggests it applies
only to oral translation or its meaning is unclear. See Tr. of Oral
Arg. 38.

