Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

fees, court reporter fees, expenses for printing and witnesses, expenses for exemplification and copies, docket
fees, and compensation of court-appointed experts. Indeed, “the assessment of costs most often is merely a
clerical matter that can be done by the court clerk.” Hair­
line Creations, Inc. v. Kefalas, 664 F. 2d 652, 656 (CA7
1981). Taxable costs are a fraction of the nontaxable
expenses borne by litigants for attorneys, experts, consultants, and investigators. It comes as little surprise, therefore, that “costs almost always amount to less than the
successful litigant’s total expenses in connection with a
lawsuit.” 10 Wright & Miller §2666, at 203. Because
taxable costs are limited by statute and are modest in
scope, we see no compelling reason to stretch the ordinary
meaning of the cost items Congress authorized in §1920.
As for respondent’s extratextual arguments, they are
more properly directed at Congress. Respondent contends
that documentary evidence is no less important than
testimonial evidence and that it would be anomalous to
require the losing party to cover translation costs for
spoken words but not for written words. Brief for Respondent 20. Respondent also observes that some translation tasks are not entirely oral or entirely written. Id., at
20–24. One task, called “ ‘sight translation,’ ” involves the
oral translation of a document. Id., at 21. Another task
involves the written translation of speech. Ibid. And a
third task, called “ ‘document comparison,’ ” involves comparing documents in the source and target language to
verify that the two are identical. Id., at 21–22. Respondent argues that a narrow definition cannot account for
these variations and that a bright-line definition of “interpreter” as someone who translates spoken and written
words would avoid complication and provide a simple,
administrable rule for district courts.
Neither of these arguments convinces us that Congress
must have intended to dispense with the ordinary mean-

