Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

preter” as “[o]ne who interprets, particularly one who
interprets words written or spoken in a foreign language,”
and “interpret” as “to translate from a foreign language”).
Against these authorities, respondent relies almost
exclusively on Webster’s Third New International Dictionary (hereinafter Webster’s Third). The version of that
dictionary in print when Congress enacted the Court
Interpreters Act defined “interpreter” as “one that translates; esp: a person who translates orally for parties conversing in different tongues.”
Webster’s Third 1182
(1976).2 The sense divider esp (for especially) indicates
that the most common meaning of the term is one “who
translates orally,” but that meaning is subsumed within
the more general definition “one that translates.” See
12,000 Words: A Supplement to Webster’s Third 15a
(1986) (explaining that esp “is used to introduce the most
common meaning included in the more general preceding
definition”). For respondent, the general definition suffices to establish that the term “interpreter” ordinarily
includes persons who translate the written word. Explaining that “the word ‘interpreter’ can reasonably encompass
a ‘translator,’ ” the Court of Appeals reached the same
conclusion. 633 F. 3d, at 1221. We disagree.
That a definition is broad enough to encompass one
sense of a word does not establish that the word is ordi­
narily understood in that sense. See Mallard v. United
States Dist. Court for Southern Dist. of Iowa, 490 U. S.
——————
2 A handful of other contemporaneous dictionaries used a similar
formulation. See Funk & Wagnalls New Comprehensive International
Dictionary of the English Language 665 (1977) (“One who interprets or
translates; specifically, one who serves as oral translator between
people speaking different languages”); 1 World Book Dictionary 1103
(C. Barnhart & R. Barnhart eds. 1977) (“a person whose business is
translating, especially orally, from a foreign language”); Cassell’s
English Dictionary 617 (4th ed. 1969) (“One who interprets, esp. one
employed to translate orally to persons speaking a foreign language”).

