10

TANIGUCHI v. KAN PACIFIC SAIPAN, LTD.
Opinion of the Court

In its current form, subsection (k) provides that interpretation “shall be in the simultaneous mode for any party . . .
and in the consecutive mode for witnesses,” unless the
court directs otherwise. The simultaneous, consecutive,
and summary modes are all methods of oral interpretation
and have nothing to do with the translation of writings.4
Taken together, these provisions are a strong contextual
clue that Congress was dealing only with oral translation
in the Court Interpreters Act and that it intended to use
the term “interpreter” throughout the Act in its ordinary
sense as someone who translates the spoken word. As we
have said before, it is a “ ‘normal rule of statutory construction’ that ‘identical words used in different parts of
the same act are intended to have the same meaning.’ ”
Gustafson v. Alloyd Co., 513 U. S. 561, 570 (1995) (quoting
Department of Revenue of Ore. v. ACF Industries, Inc., 510
U. S. 332, 342 (1994)).5
The references to technical terminology in the Court
Interpreters Act further suggest that Congress used “in——————
4 The simultaneous mode requires the interpreter “to interpret and to
speak contemporaneously with the individual whose communication is
being translated.” H. R. Rep. No. 95–1687, p. 8 (1978). The consecutive
mode requires the speaker whose communication is being translated to
pause so that the interpreter can “convey the testimony given.” Ibid.
And the summary mode “allow[s] the interpreter to condense and distill
the speech of the speaker.” Ibid.; see generally Zazueta, Attorneys
Guide to the Use of Court Interpreters, 8 U. C. D. L. Rev. 471, 477–478
(1975).
5 The dissent agrees that context should help guide our analysis, but
instead of looking to the Court Interpreters Act, it looks to “the practice
of federal courts both before and after §1920(6)’s enactment.” Post, at 4
(opinion of GINSBURG, J.). The practice of federal courts after the Act’s
enactment tells us nothing about what Congress intended at the time of
enactment. And federal court practice before the Act under other
provisions of §1920 tells us little, if anything, about what Congress
intended when it added subsection (6). We think the statutory context
in which the word “interpreter” appears is a more reliable guide to its
meaning.

