Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

terpreter” in a technical sense, and it is therefore significant that relevant professional literature draws a line
between “interpreters,” who “are used for oral conversations,” and “translators,” who “are used for written communications.” Zazueta, supra n. 4, at 477; see also M.
Frankenthaler, Skills for Bilingual Legal Personnel 67
(1982) (“While the translator deals with the written word,
the interpreter is concerned with the spoken language”);
Brislin, Introduction, in Translation: Applications and
Research 1 (R. Brislin ed. 1976) (explaining that when
both terms are used together, translation “refers to the
processing [of] written input, and interpretation to the
processing of oral input” (emphasis deleted)); J. Herbert,
Interpreter’s Handbook 1 (2d ed. 1952) (“In the presentday jargon of international organisations, the words translate, translations, translator are used when the immediate
result of the work is a written text; and the words interpret, interpreter, interpretation when it is a speech delivered orally”). That Congress specified “interpreters” but
not “translators” is yet another signal that it intended to
limit §1920(6) to the costs of oral, instead of written,
translation.6
In sum, both the ordinary and technical meanings of
“interpreter,” as well as the statutory context in which the
word is found, lead to the conclusion that §1920(6) does
not apply to translators of written materials.7
——————
6 Some

provisions within the United States Code use both “interpreter” and “translator” together, thus implying that Congress understands the terms to have the distinct meanings described above. See,
e.g., 8 U. S. C. §1555(b) (providing that appropriations for the Immigration and Naturalization Service “shall be available for payment of . . .
interpreters and translators who are not citizens of the United States”);
28 U. S. C. §530C(b)(1)(I) (providing that Department of Justice funds
may be used for “[p]ayment of interpreters and translators who are not
citizens of the United States”).
7 Our conclusion is buttressed by respondent’s concession at oral argument that there is no provision in the United States Code where it is

