Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

SCALIA, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–5327
_________________

ALBERT HOLLAND, PETITIONER v. FLORIDA
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT

[June 14, 2010] 


JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom JUSTICE THOMAS joins as to
all but Part I, dissenting.
The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of
1996 (AEDPA), establishes a 1-year limitations period for
state prisoners to seek federal habeas relief, subject to
several specific exceptions. 28 U. S. C. §2244(d). The
Court concludes that this time limit is also subject to
equitable tolling, even for attorney errors that are ordinar
ily attributable to the client. And it rejects the Court of
Appeals’ conclusion that Albert Holland is not entitled to
tolling, without explaining why the test that court applied
was wrong or what rule it should have applied instead. In
my view §2244(d) leaves no room for equitable exceptions,
and Holland could not qualify even if it did.
I
The Court is correct, ante, at 13, that we ordinarily
presume federal limitations periods are subject to equita
ble tolling unless tolling would be inconsistent with the
statute. Young v. United States, 535 U. S. 43, 49 (2002).
That is especially true of limitations provisions applicable
to actions that are traditionally governed by equitable
principles—a category that includes habeas proceedings.
See id., at 50. If §2244(d) merely created a limitations
period for federal habeas applicants, I agree that applying
equitable tolling would be appropriate.


2

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

But §2244(d) does much more than that, establishing a
detailed scheme regarding the filing deadline that ad
dresses an array of contingencies. In an ordinary case, the
clock starts when the state-court judgment becomes final
on direct review. §2244(d)(1)(A).1 But the statute delays
the start date—thus effectively tolling the limitations
period—in cases where (1) state action unlawfully im
peded the prisoner from filing his habeas application, (2)
the prisoner asserts a constitutional right newly recog
nized by this Court and made retroactive to collateral
cases, or (3) the factual predicate for the prisoner’s claim
could not previously have been discovered through due
diligence. §2244(d)(1)(B)–(D). It also expressly tolls the
limitations period during the pendency of a properly filed
application for state collateral relief. §2244(d)(2). Con
gress, in short, has considered and accounted for specific
circumstances that in its view excuse an applicant’s delay.
The question, therefore, is not whether §2244(d)’s time
——————
1 Title

28 U. S. C. §2244(d) provides:
“(1) A 1-year period of limitation shall apply to an application for a
writ of habeas corpus by a person in custody pursuant to the judgment
of a State court. The limitation period shall run from the latest of—
“(A) the date on which the judgment became final by the conclusion
of direct review or the expiration of the time for seeking such review;
“(B) the date on which the impediment to filing an application
created by State action in violation of the Constitution or laws of the
United States is removed, if the applicant was prevented from filing by
such State action;
“(C) the date on which the constitutional right asserted was initially
recognized by the Supreme Court, if the right has been newly recog
nized by the Supreme Court and made retroactively applicable to cases
on collateral review; or
“(D) the date on which the factual predicate of the claim or claims
presented could have been discovered through the exercise of due
diligence.
“(2) The time during which a properly filed application for State
post-conviction or other collateral review with respect to the pertinent
judgment or claim is pending shall not be counted toward any period of
limitation under this subsection.”


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

bar is subject to tolling, but whether it is consistent with
§2244(d) for federal courts to toll the time bar for addi
tional reasons beyond those Congress included.
In my view it is not. It is fair enough to infer, when a
statute of limitations says nothing about equitable tolling,
that Congress did not displace the default rule. But when
Congress has codified that default rule and specified the
instances where it applies, we have no warrant to extend
it to other cases. See United States v. Beggerly, 524 U. S.
38, 48–49 (1998). Unless the Court believes §2244(d)
contains an implicit, across-the-board exception that
subsumes (and thus renders unnecessary) §2244(d)(1)(B)–
(D) and (d)(2), it must rely on the untenable assumption
that when Congress enumerated the events that toll the
limitations period—with no indication the list is merely
illustrative—it implicitly authorized courts to add others
as they see fit. We should assume the opposite: that by
specifying situations in which an equitable principle ap
plies to a specific requirement, Congress has displaced
courts’ discretion to develop ad hoc exceptions. Cf. Lon
char v. Thomas, 517 U. S. 314, 326–328 (1996).
The Court’s responses are unpersuasive. It brushes
aside §2244(d)(1)(B)–(D), apparently because those subdi
visions merely delay the start of the limitations period but
do not suspend a limitations period already underway.
Ante, at 15. But the Court does not explain why that
distinction makes any difference,2 and we have described a
——————
2 The Court cites several Court of Appeals cases that support its trig
gering-tolling distinction, ante, at 15, but no case of ours that does so.
Clay v. United States, 537 U. S. 522, 529 (2003), described
§2244(d)(1)(A) as containing “triggers” for the limitations period, but it
did not distinguish delaying the start of the limitations period from
tolling. The Court of Appeals cases the Court cites, Cada v. Baxter
Healthcare Corp., 920 F. 2d 446, 450 (CA7 1990), Wolin v. Smith
Barney Inc., 83 F. 3d 847, 852 (CA7 1996), and Wims v. United States,
225 F. 3d 186, 190 (CA2 2000), rely on a distinction between accrual
rules and tolling that we have since disregarded, see TRW Inc. v.


4

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

rule that forestalls the start of a limitations period as
“effectively allow[ing] for equitable tolling.” Beggerly,
supra, at 48.
The Court does address §2244(d)(2), which undeniably
provides for poststart tolling, but dismisses it on the basis
that Congress had to resolve a contradiction between
§2244(d)’s 1-year time bar and the rule of Rose v. Lundy,
455 U. S. 509 (1982), that a federal habeas application
cannot be filed while state proceedings are pending. But
there is no contradiction to resolve unless, in the absence
of a statutory tolling provision, equitable tolling would not
apply to a state prisoner barred from filing a federal ha
beas application while he exhausts his state remedies.
The Court offers no reason why it would not, and our
holding in Young, 535 U. S., at 50–51, that tolling was
justified by the Government’s inability to pursue a claim
because of the Bankruptcy Code’s automatic stay, 11
U. S. C. §362, suggests that it would.3
II
A
Even if §2244(d) left room for equitable tolling in some
situations, tolling surely should not excuse the delay here.
Where equitable tolling is available, we have held that a
——————
Andrews, 534 U. S. 19, 27, 29 (2001).
3 The Court reads Young as support for disregarding the specific toll
ing provisions Congress included in §2244(d). Ante, at 15. But in the
pertinent passage, Young explained only that the inclusion of an
express tolling rule in a different provision regarding a different limita
tions period, 11 U. S. C. §507(a)(8)(A)(ii) (2000 ed.)—albeit a provision
within the same subparagraph as the provision at issue,
§507(a)(8)(A)(i)—did not rebut the presumption of equitable tolling.
See 535 U. S., at 53. Moreover, Young stressed that §507(a)(8)(A)(ii)
authorized tolling in instances where equity would not have allowed it,
which reinforced the presumption in favor of tolling. Ibid. Here, the
Court does not suggest that any of §2244(d)’s exceptions go beyond
what equity would have allowed.


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

litigant is entitled to it only if he has diligently pursued
his rights and—the requirement relevant here—if “ ‘some
extraordinary circumstance stood in his way.’ ” Lawrence
v. Florida, 549 U. S. 327, 336 (2007) (quoting Pace v.
DiGuglielmo, 544 U. S. 408, 418 (2005)). Because the
attorney is the litigant’s agent, the attorney’s acts (or
failures to act) within the scope of the representation are
treated as those of his client, see Link v. Wabash R. Co.,
370 U. S. 626, 633–634, and n. 10 (1962), and thus such
acts (or failures to act) are necessarily not extraordinary
circumstances.
To be sure, the rule that an attorney’s acts and over
sights are attributable to the client is relaxed where the
client has a constitutional right to effective assistance of
counsel. Where a State is constitutionally obliged to
provide an attorney but fails to provide an effective one,
the attorney’s failures that fall below the standard set
forth in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668 (1984),
are chargeable to the State, not to the prisoner. See
Murray v. Carrier, 477 U. S. 478, 488 (1986). But where
the client has no right to counsel—which in habeas pro
ceedings he does not—the rule holding him responsible for
his attorney’s acts applies with full force. See Coleman v.
Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, 752–754 (1991).4 Thus, when a
state habeas petitioner’s appeal is filed too late because of
attorney error, the petitioner is out of luck—no less than if
he had proceeded pro se and neglected to file the appeal
himself.5
——————
4 The

Court dismisses Coleman as “a case about federalism” and
therefore inapposite here. Ante, at 18 (internal quotation marks
omitted). I fail to see how federalism concerns are not implicated by
ad hoc exceptions to the statute of limitations for attempts to overturn
state-court convictions. In any event, Coleman did not invent, but
merely applied, the already established principle that an attorney’s acts
are his client’s. See 501 U. S., at 754.
5 That Holland’s counsel was appointed, rather than, like counsel in


6

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

Congress could, of course, have included errors by state
appointed habeas counsel as a basis for delaying the limi
tations period, but it did not. Nor was that an oversight:
Section 2244(d)(1)(B) expressly allows tolling for state
created impediments that prevent a prisoner from filing
his application, but only if the impediment violates the
Constitution or federal law.
If there were any doubt that equitable tolling is un
available under §2244(d) to excuse attorney error, we
eliminated it in Lawrence. The petitioner there asserted
that his attorney’s miscalculation of the limitations period
for federal habeas applications caused him to miss the
filing deadline. The attorney’s error stemmed from his
mistaken belief that—contrary to Circuit precedent (which
we approved in Lawrence)—the limitations period is tolled
during the pendency of a petition for certiorari from a
state postconviction proceeding. 549 U. S., at 336; see also
Brief for Petitioner in Lawrence v. Florida, O. T. 2006, No.
05–8820, pp. 31, 36. Assuming arguendo that equitable
tolling could ever apply to §2244(d), we held that such
attorney error did not warrant it, especially since the
petitioner was not constitutionally entitled to counsel.
Lawrence, supra, at 336–337.
Faithful application of Lawrence should make short
work of Holland’s claim. Although Holland alleges a wide
array of misconduct by his counsel, Bradley Collins, the
only pertinent part appears extremely similar, if not iden
——————
Coleman, retained, see Brief for Respondent in Coleman v. Thompson,
O. T. 1990, No. 89–7662, pp. 33–34, 40, is irrelevant. The Sixth
Amendment right to effective assistance of counsel, we have held,
applies even to an attorney the defendant himself hires. See Cuyler v.
Sullivan, 446 U. S. 335, 342–345 (1980). The basis for Coleman was
not that Coleman had hired his own counsel, but that the State owed
him no obligation to provide one. See 501 U. S., at 754. It would be
utterly perverse, of course, to penalize the State for providing habeas
petitioners with representation, when the State could avoid equitable
tolling by providing none at all.


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

SCALIA, J., dissenting

tical, to the attorney’s error in Lawrence. The relevant
time period extends at most from November 10, 2005—
when the Florida Supreme Court affirmed the denial of
Holland’s state habeas petition6—to December 15, 2005,
the latest date on which §2244(d)’s limitations period
could have expired.7 Within that period, Collins could
have alerted Holland to the Florida Supreme Court’s
decision, and either Collins or Holland himself could have
filed a timely federal habeas application. Collins did not
do so, but instead filed a petition for certiorari several
months later.
Why Collins did not notify Holland or file a timely fed
eral application for him is unclear, but none of the plausi
ble explanations would support equitable tolling. By far
the most likely explanation is that Collins made exactly
the same mistake as the attorney in Lawrence—i.e., he
assumed incorrectly that the pendency of a petition for
certiorari in this Court seeking review of the denial of
Holland’s state habeas petition would toll AEDPA’s time
bar under §2244(d)(2). In December 2002, Collins had
explained to Holland by letter that if his state habeas
petition was denied and this Court denied certiorari in
that proceeding, Holland’s claims “will then be ripe for
presentation in a petition for writ of habeas corpus in
federal court.” App. 61 (emphasis added). Holland him
self interprets that statement as proof that, at that time,
“Collins was under the belief that [Holland’s] time to file
——————
6 The Florida Supreme Court did not issue its mandate, and the limi
tations period did not resume, see Lawrence, 549 U. S., at 331, until
December 1, 2005. But once the Florida Supreme Court issued its
decision (with the mandate still to come), Collins could have notified
Holland, who in turn could have filed a pro se federal application.
7 The parties dispute when Holland’s state habeas petition was filed,
and thus when the limitations period expired. Brief for Petitioner 4–5,
and n. 4; Brief for Respondent 8, 9, n. 7. The discrepancy is immaterial,
but I give Holland the benefit of the doubt.


8

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

his federal habeas petition would continue to be tolled
until this Court denied certiorari” in his state postconvic
tion proceeding. Pet. for Cert. 12, n. 10. That misunder
standing would entirely account for Collins’s conduct—
filing a certiorari petition instead of a habeas application,
and waiting nearly three months to do so. But it would
also be insufficient, as Lawrence held it was, to warrant
tolling.
The other conceivable explanations for Collins’s failure
fare no better. It may be that Collins believed—as he
explained to Holland in a January 2006 letter, after Hol
land had informed him that a certiorari petition in a state
postconviction proceeding would not stop the clock—that
the certiorari petition in Holland’s direct appeal also did
not toll the time bar. Consequently, Collins wrote, Hol
land’s time to file a federal application had expired even
before Collins was appointed. App. 78–79. As the Court
explains, ante, at 8, this view too was wrong, but it is no
more a basis for equitable tolling than the attorney’s
misunderstanding in Lawrence.
Or it may be that Collins (despite what he wrote to
Holland) correctly understood the rule but simply ne
glected to notify Holland; perhaps he missed the state
court’s ruling in his mail, or perhaps it simply slipped his
mind. Such an oversight is unfortunate, but it amounts to
“garden variety” negligence, not a basis for equitable
tolling. Irwin v. Department of Veterans Affairs, 498 U. S.
89, 96 (1990). Surely it is no more extraordinary than the
attorney’s error in Lawrence, which rudimentary research
and arithmetic would have avoided.
The Court insists that Collins’s misconduct goes beyond
garden-variety neglect and mine-run miscalculation.
Ante, at 19. But the only differences it identifies had no
effect on Holland’s ability to file his federal application on
time. The Court highlights Collins’s nonresponsiveness
while Holland’s state postconviction motions were still


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

SCALIA, J., dissenting

pending. Ante, at 19–20. But even taken at face value,
Collins’s silence prior to November 10, 2005, did not pre
vent Holland from filing a timely federal application once
the Florida courts were finished with his case. The Court
also appears to think significant Collins’s correspondence
with Holland in January 2006, after the limitations period
had elapsed. Ante, at 5–10, 20. But unless Holland can
establish that the time-bar should be tolled due to events
before December 15, 2005, any misconduct by Collins after
the limitations period elapsed is irrelevant. Even if
Collins’s conduct before November 10 and after December
15 was “extraordinary,” Holland has not shown that it
“stood in his way and prevented timely filing.” Lawrence,
549 U. S., at 336 (internal quotation marks omitted).
For his part, Holland now asserts that Collins did not
merely forget to keep his client informed, but deliberately
deceived him. As the Court of Appeals concluded, how
ever, Holland did not allege deception in seeking equitable
tolling below. See 539 F. 3d 1334, 1339 (CA11 2008) (per
curiam).8 In any event, the deception of which he com
plains consists only of Collins’s assurance early in the
representation that he would protect Holland’s ability to
assert his claims in federal court, see App. 55, 62, coupled
with Collins’s later failure to do so. That, of course, does
not by itself amount to deception, and Holland offers no
evidence that Collins meant to mislead him. Moreover,
Holland can hardly claim to have been caught off guard.
Collins’s failures to respond to Holland’s repeated requests
for information before the State Supreme Court ruled gave
Holland even greater reason to suspect that Collins had
fallen asleep at the switch. Holland indeed was under no
——————
8 Holland insists that he did allege deception below, see Brief for Peti
tioner 31, n. 29, but cites only a conclusory allegation in an unrelated
motion (a motion for appointment of new counsel). See App. 194. His
reply to the State’s response to the order to show cause, drafted by new
counsel, did not allege deception. 1 Record, Doc. 35.


10

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

illusion to the contrary, as his repeated efforts to replace
Collins reflect.9
B
Despite its insistence that Lawrence does not control
this case, the Court does not actually hold that Holland is
entitled to equitable tolling. It concludes only that the
Eleventh Circuit applied the wrong rule and remands the
case for a re-do. That would be appropriate if the Court
identified a legal error in the Eleventh Circuit’s analysis
and set forth the proper standard it should have applied.
The Court does neither. It rejects as “too rigid,” ante, at
17, the Eleventh Circuit’s test—which requires, beyond
ordinary attorney negligence, “an allegation and proof of
bad faith, dishonesty, divided loyalty, mental impairment
or so forth on the lawyer’s part,” 539 F. 3d, at 1339. But
the Court never explains why that “or so forth” test, which
explicitly leaves room for other kinds of egregious attorney
——————
9 The

concurrence argues that Holland’s allegations suffice because
they show, if true, that Collins “essentially ‘abandoned’ ” Holland by
failing to respond to Holland’s inquiries, and therefore ceased to act as
Holland’s agent. Ante, at 6 (ALITO, J., concurring in part and concur
ring in judgment). But Collins’s failure to communicate has no bearing
unless it ended the agency relationship before the relevant window.
The concurrence does not explain why it would—does not contend, for
example, that Collins’s conduct amounted to disloyalty or renunciation
of his role, which would terminate Collins’s authority, see Restatement
(Second) of Agency §§112, 118 (1957). Collins’s alleged nonresponsive
ness did not help Holland’s cause, but it was no more “adverse to
[Holland’s] interest” or “beyond [Holland’s] control,” ante, at 6, 7 (inter
nal quotation marks omitted), and thus no more a basis for holding
Holland harmless from the consequences of his counsel’s conduct, than
mine-run attorney mistakes, cf. Irwin v. Department of Veterans Af
fairs, 498 U. S. 89, 96 (1990). The concurrence also relies upon Hol
land’s requests to replace Collins with new appointed counsel. But if
those requests could prevent imputing Collins’s acts to Holland, every
habeas applicant who unsuccessfully asks for a new state-provided
lawyer (but who does not seek to proceed pro se when that request is
denied) would not be bound by his attorney’s subsequent acts.


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

SCALIA, J., dissenting

error, is insufficiently elastic.
Moreover, even if the Eleventh Circuit had adopted an
entirely inflexible rule, it is simply untrue that, as the
Court appears to believe, ante, at 17, all general rules are
ipso facto incompatible with equity. We have rejected that
canard before, see, e.g., Grupo Mexicano de Desarrollo,
S. A. v. Alliance Bond Fund, Inc., 527 U. S. 308, 321–322
(1999), and we have relied on the existence of general
rules regarding equitable tolling in particular, see, e.g.,
Young, 535 U. S., at 53. As we observed in rejecting
ad hoc equitable restrictions on habeas relief, “the alterna
tive is to use each equity chancellor’s conscience as a
measure of equity, which alternative would be as arbitrary
and uncertain as measuring distance by the length of each
chancellor’s foot.” Lonchar, 517 U. S., at 323.
Consistent with its failure to explain the error in the
Eleventh Circuit’s test, the Court offers almost no clue
about what test that court should have applied. The Court
unhelpfully advises the Court of Appeals that its test is
too narrow, with no explanation besides the assertion that
its test left out cases where tolling might be warranted,
and no precise indication of what those cases might be.
Ante, at 18 (“[A]t least sometimes, professional misconduct
that fails to meet the Eleventh Circuit’s standard could
nonetheless amount to egregious behavior and create an
extraordinary circumstance that warrants equitable toll
ing”). The Court says that “courts can easily find prece
dents that can guide their judgments,” ibid., citing several
Court of Appeals opinions that (in various contexts) permit
tolling for attorney error—but notably omitting opinions
that disallow it, such as the Seventh Circuit’s opinion in
Powell v. Davis, 415 F. 3d 722, 727 (2005), which would
have “guide[d] . . . judgmen[t]” precisely where this court
arrived: “[A]ttorney misconduct, whether labeled negli
gent, grossly negligent, or willful, is attributable to the
client and thus is not a circumstance beyond a petitioner’s


12

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

control that might excuse an untimely petition.” Ibid.
(internal quotation marks omitted).
The only thing the Court offers that approaches sub
stantive instruction is its implicit approval of “fundamen
tal canons of professional responsibility,” articulated by an
ad hoc group of legal-ethicist amici consisting mainly of
professors of that least analytically rigorous and hence
most subjective of law-school subjects, legal ethics. Ante,
at 20. The Court does not even try to justify importing
into equity the “prevailing professional norms” we have
held implicit in the right to counsel, Strickland, 466 U. S.,
at 688. In his habeas action Holland has no right to coun
sel. I object to this transparent attempt to smuggle Strick
land into a realm the Sixth Amendment does not reach.
C
The Court’s refusal to articulate an intelligible rule
regarding the only issue actually before us stands in sharp
contrast to its insistence on deciding an issue that is not
before us: whether Holland satisfied the second prerequi
site for equitable tolling by demonstrating that he pursued
his rights diligently, see Pace, 544 U. S., at 418–419. As
the Court admits, only the District Court addressed that
question below; the Eleventh Circuit had no need to reach
it. More importantly, it is not even arguably included
within the question presented, which concerns only
whether an attorney’s gross negligence can constitute an
“extraordinary circumstance” of the kind we have held
essential for equitable tolling. Pet. for Cert. i. Whether
tolling is ever available is fairly included in that question,
but whether Holland has overcome an additional, inde
pendent hurdle to tolling is not.
The Court offers no justification for deciding this dis
tinct issue. The closest it comes is its observation that the
State “does not defend” the District Court’s ruling regard
ing diligence. Ante, at 20. But the State had no reason to


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

SCALIA, J., dissenting

do so—any more than it had reason to address the merits
of Holland’s habeas claims. Nor, contrary to the Court’s
implication, has the State conceded the issue. The foot
note of the State’s brief which the Court cites did just the
opposite: After observing that only the extraordinary
circumstance prong of the equitable-tolling test is at issue,
the State (perhaps astutely apprehensive that the Court
might ignore that fact) added that “to the extent the Court
considers the matter” of Holland’s diligence, “Respondent
relies on the findings of the district court below.” Brief for
Respondent 38, n. 19. The Court also cites a statement by
the State’s counsel at oral argument, Tr. of Oral Arg. 43,
and Holland’s counsel’s characterization of it as a conces
sion, id., at 52. But the remark, in context, shows only
that the State does not dispute diligence in this Court,
where the only issue is extraordinary circumstances:
“Well, that goes to the issue . . . of diligence, of course, 

which is not the issue we’re looking at. We’re looking

at the extraordinary circumstances, not the dili

gence. . . .

“[W]e’ll concede diligence for the moment . . . . ” Id., 

at 43. 

Notwithstanding the Court’s confidence that the District
Court was wrong, it is not even clear that Holland acted
with the requisite diligence. Although Holland repeatedly
contacted Collins and the state courts, there were other
reasonable measures Holland could have pursued. For
example, as we suggested in Pace, supra, at 416—decided
while Holland’s state habeas petition was still pending—
Holland might have filed a “ ‘protective’ ” federal habeas
application and asked the District Court to stay the fed
eral action until his state proceedings had concluded. He
also presumably could have checked the court records in
the prison’s writ room—from which he eventually learned
of the state court’s decision, 539 F. 3d, at 1337—on a more


14

HOLLAND v. FLORIDA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

regular basis. And he could have sought permission from
the state courts to proceed pro se and thus remove Collins
from the equation.10 This is not to say the District Court
was correct to conclude Holland was not diligent; but the
answer is not as obvious as the Court would make it seem.
*
*
*
The Court’s impulse to intervene when a litigant’s law
yer has made mistakes is understandable; the temptation
to tinker with technical rules to achieve what appears a
just result is often strong, especially when the client faces
——————
10 Holland made many pro se filings in state court (which were
stricken because Holland was still represented), and he sought to have
new counsel appointed in Collins’s place, but did not seek to proceed
pro se. The Court does not dispute this, nor does Holland. The most he
asserts is that one of the pro se motions he filed, if granted, would have
entitled him to proceed pro se, see Brief for Petitioner 50–51—an
assertion he appears not to have made in the District Court, see 1
Record, Doc. 35, at 15. The concurrence equates that assertion with an
allegation that he actually sought to litigate his case on his own behalf.
Ante, at 6. It is not the same. The filing Holland refers to, see Brief for
Petitioner 12, and n. 13, like his earlier filings, requested that Collins
be replaced by new counsel. App. 149–163. The motion also asked for a
hearing pursuant to Nelson v. State, 274 So. 2d 256, 259 (Fla. App.
1973), to show Collins’s poor performance, App. 149–150, but that did
not amount to a request to proceed pro se. Nelson held that a defendant
facing trial who seeks to discharge his court-appointed counsel for
ineffectiveness is entitled to a hearing to determine if new counsel is
required. 274 So. 2d, at 259. If the defendant fails to make that
showing, but “continues to demand a dismissal of his court appointed
counsel,” Nelson explained that “a trial judge may in his discretion
discharge counsel and require the defendant to proceed to trial without
representation by court appointed counsel.” Ibid.; see also Hardwick v.
State, 521 So. 2d 1071, 1074–1075 (Fla. 1988). There is no reason why
requesting that procedure in state habeas proceedings should be
construed as a request to proceed pro se. Holland, unlike a defendant
still facing trial, did not need permission to fire Collins, since there was
no right to representation to waive. Once his request for a new attor
ney was denied, Holland himself could have informed Collins that his
services were no longer required.


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

SCALIA, J., dissenting

a capital sentence. But the Constitution does not em
power federal courts to rewrite, in the name of equity,
rules that Congress has made. Endowing unelected
judges with that power is irreconcilable with our system,
for it “would literally place the whole rights and property
of the community under the arbitrary will of the judge,”
arming him with “a despotic and sovereign authority,” 1 J.
Story, Commentaries on Equity Jurisprudence §19, p. 19
(14th ed. 1918). The danger is doubled when we disregard
our own precedent, leaving only our own consciences
to constrain our discretion. Because both the statute
and stare decisis foreclose Holland’s claim, I respectfully
dissent.

