(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MINNECI ET AL. v. POLLARD ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–1104. Argued November 1, 2011—Decided January 10, 2012
Respondent Pollard sought damages from employees at a privately run
federal prison in California, claiming that they had deprived him of
adequate medical care in violation of the Eighth Amendment’s prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment. The Federal District
Court dismissed the complaint, ruling that the Eighth Amendment
does not imply an action under Bivens v. Six Unknown Fed. Narcotics
Agents, 403 U. S. 388, against a privately managed prison’s personnel. The Ninth Circuit reversed.
Held: Because in the circumstance of this case, state tort law authorizes
adequate alternative damages actions—providing both significant deterrence and compensation—no Bivens remedy can be implied here.
Pp. 3−12.
(a) Wilkie v. Robbins, 551 U. S. 537, fairly summarizes the basic
considerations the Court applies here. In deciding whether to recognize a Bivens remedy, a court must first ask “whether any alternative, existing process for protecting the [constitutionally recognized]
interest amounts to a convincing reason for the Judicial Branch to refrain from providing a new and freestanding” damages remedy. Even
absent an alternative, “a Bivens remedy is a subject of judgment: ‘the
federal courts must make the kind of remedial determination that is
appropriate for a common-law tribunal, paying particular heed . . . to
any special factors counselling hesitation before authorizing a new
kind of federal litigation.’ ” Id., at 550. In Bivens itself, the Court
held that the Fourth Amendment implicitly authorized a court to order federal agents to pay damages to a person injured by the agents’
violation of the Amendment’s strictures, 403 U. S., at 389, noting that
the Fourth Amendment prohibited conduct that state law might
permit, id., at 392–393, and that the interests protected on the one

