2

MINNECI v. POLLARD
Syllabus
hand by state “trespass” and “invasion of privacy” laws and on the
other hand by the Fourth Amendment “may be inconsistent or even
hostile,” id., at 394. It also stated that “[h]istorically, damages have
been regarded as the ordinary remedy for an invasion of personal interests in liberty,” id., at 395, and found “no special factors counselling hesitation in the absence of affirmative action by Congress.” Id.,
at 396. Bivens actions were allowed in Davis v. Passman, 442 U. S.
228, for a Fifth Amendment due process claim involving genderbased employment discrimination, and in Carlson v. Green, 446 U. S.
14, for an Eighth Amendment claim based on federal government officials’ “deliberat[e] indifferen[ce]” to a federal prisoner’s medical
needs, id., at 16, n. 1, 17. Since Carlson, this Court has declined to
imply a Bivens action in several different instances. See, e.g., Bush v.
Lucas, 462 U. S. 367, Correctional Services Corp. v. Malesko, 534
U. S. 61.
Applying Wilkie’s approach here, Pollard cannot assert a Bivens
claim, primarily because his Eighth Amendment claim focuses on a
kind of conduct that typically falls within the scope of traditional
state tort law. And in the case of a privately employed defendant,
state tort law provides an “alternative, existing process” capable of
protecting the constitutional interests at stake. Wilkie, 551 U. S., at
550. The existence of that alternative remedy constitutes a “convincing reason for the Judicial Branch to refrain from providing a new
and freestanding” damages remedy. Ibid. Pp. 3−7.
(b) Pollard’s contrary arguments are rejected. First, he claims that
Carlson authorizes an Eighth Amendment-based Bivens action here,
but Carlson involved government, not privately employed, personnel.
The potential existence of an “adequate alternative, existing process”
differs dramatically for public and private employees, as prisoners
ordinarily can bring state tort actions against private employees, but
not against public ones. Second, Pollard’s argument that this Court
should consider only whether federal laws provide adequate alternative remedies because of the “vagaries” of state tort law, Carlson, supra, at 23, was rejected in Malesko, supra, at 72−73. Third, Pollard
claims that state tort law does not provide remedies adequate to protect the constitutional interests at issue here, but California, like
every other State (as far as the Court is aware), has tort law that
provides for negligence actions for claims such as his. That the state
law may prove less generous than would a Bivens action does not
render the state law inadequate, and state remedies and a potential
Bivens remedy need not be perfectly congruent. Fourth, Pollard argues that there may be similar Eighth Amendment claims that state
tort law does not cover, but he offers no supporting cases. The possibility of a future case, where an Eighth Amendment claim or state

