Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

state law contains limitations. Prisoners bringing federal
lawsuits, for example, ordinarily may not seek damages
for mental or emotional injury unconnected with physical
injury. See 42 U. S. C. §1997e(e). And Bivens actions,
even if more generous to plaintiffs in some respects, may
be less generous in others. For example, to show an
Eighth Amendment violation a prisoner must typically
show that a defendant acted, not just negligently, but with
“deliberate indifference.” Farmer v. Brennan, 511 U. S.
825, 834 (1994). And a Bivens plaintiff, unlike a state
tort law plaintiff, normally could not apply principles of
respondeat superior and thereby obtain recovery from a
defendant’s potentially deep-pocketed employer. See Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U. S. 662, 676 (2009).
Rather, in principle, the question is whether, in general,
state tort law remedies provide roughly similar incentives
for potential defendants to comply with the Eighth
Amendment while also providing roughly similar compensation to victims of violations. The features of the two
kinds of actions just mentioned suggest that, in practice,
the answer to this question is “yes.” And we have found
nothing here to convince us to the contrary.
Fourth, Pollard argues that there “may” be similar
kinds of Eighth Amendment claims that state tort law
does not cover. But Pollard does not convincingly show
that there are such cases. Compare Brief for Respondent
Pollard 32 (questioning the availability of state tort remedies for “prisoners [who] suffer attacks by other inmates,
preventable suicides, or the denial of heat, ventilation or
movement”), with Giraldo, supra, at 248–249, 85 Cal Rptr.
3d, at 384–385 (courts have long held that prison officials
must protect, e.g., transgender inmate from foreseeable
harm by other inmates), and Restatement (Second) of
Torts §§314A(4), 320.
Regardless, we concede that we cannot prove a negative
or be totally certain that the features of state tort law

