10

UNITED STATES v. STEVENS
Opinion of the Court

To succeed in a typical facial attack, Stevens would have
to establish “that no set of circumstances exists under
which [§48] would be valid,” United States v. Salerno, 481
U. S. 739, 745 (1987), or that the statute lacks any “plainly
legitimate sweep,” Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U. S.
702, 740, n. 7 (1997) (STEVENS, J., concurring in judg
ments) (internal quotation marks omitted). Which stan
dard applies in a typical case is a matter of dispute that
we need not and do not address, and neither Salerno nor
Glucksberg is a speech case. Here the Government asserts
that Stevens cannot prevail because §48 is plainly legiti
mate as applied to crush videos and animal fighting depic
tions. Deciding this case through a traditional facial
analysis would require us to resolve whether these appli
cations of §48 are in fact consistent with the Constitution.
In the First Amendment context, however, this Court
recognizes “a second type of facial challenge,” whereby a
law may be invalidated as overbroad if “a substantial
number of its applications are unconstitutional, judged in
relation to the statute’s plainly legitimate sweep.” Wash
ington State Grange v. Washington State Republican
Party, 552 U. S. 442, 449, n. 6 (2008) (internal quotation
marks omitted). Stevens argues that §48 applies to com
mon depictions of ordinary and lawful activities, and that
these depictions constitute the vast majority of materials
subject to the statute. Brief for Respondent 22–25. The
Government makes no effort to defend such a broad ban as
constitutional. Instead, the Government’s entire defense
of §48 rests on interpreting the statute as narrowly lim
ited to specific types of “extreme” material. Brief for
United States 8. As the parties have presented the issue,
therefore, the constitutionality of §48 hinges on how
broadly it is construed. It is to that question that we now
turn.3
——————
3 The

dissent contends that because there has not been a ruling on

