12

UNITED STATES v. STEVENS
Opinion of the Court

assumption. See post, at 6, 9.) The Government bases
this argument on the definiendum, “depiction of animal
cruelty,” cf. Leocal v. Ashcroft, 543 U. S. 1, 11 (2004), and
on “ ‘the commonsense canon of noscitur a sociis.’ ” Reply
Brief 7 (quoting Williams, 553 U. S., at 294). As that
canon recognizes, an ambiguous term may be “given more
precise content by the neighboring words with which it is
associated.” Ibid. Likewise, an unclear definitional
phrase may take meaning from the term to be defined, see
Leocal, supra, at 11 (interpreting a “ ‘substantial risk’ ” of
the “us[e]” of “physical force” as part of the definition of
“ ‘crime of violence’ ”).
But the phrase “wounded . . . or killed” at issue here
contains little ambiguity. The Government’s opening brief
properly applies the ordinary meaning of these words,
stating for example that to “ ‘kill’ is ‘to deprive of life.’ ”
Brief for United States 14 (quoting Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 1242 (1993)). We agree that
“wounded” and “killed” should be read according to their
ordinary meaning. Cf. Engine Mfrs. Assn. v. South Coast
Air Quality Management Dist., 541 U. S. 246, 252 (2004).
Nothing about that meaning requires cruelty.
While not requiring cruelty, §48 does require that the
depicted conduct be “illegal.” But this requirement does
not limit §48 along the lines the Government suggests.
There are myriad federal and state laws concerning the
proper treatment of animals, but many of them are not
designed to guard against animal cruelty. Protections of
endangered species, for example, restrict even the humane
“wound[ing] or kill[ing]” of “living animal[s].” §48(c)(1).
Livestock regulations are often designed to protect the
health of human beings, and hunting and fishing rules
(seasons, licensure, bag limits, weight requirements) can
be designed to raise revenue, preserve animal populations,
or prevent accidents. The text of §48(c) draws no distinc
tion based on the reason the intentional killing of an

