Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
cruelty vary widely from place to place. Hunting is unlawful in the
District of Columbia, for example, but there is an enormous national
market for hunting-related depictions, greatly exceeding the demand
for crush videos or animal fighting depictions. Because the statute
allows each jurisdiction to export its laws to the rest of the country,
§48(a) applies to any magazine or video depicting lawful hunting that
is sold in the Nation’s Capital. Those seeking to comply with the law
face a bewildering maze of regulations from at least 56 separate ju
risdictions. Pp. 11–15.
(3) Limiting §48’s reach to crush videos and depictions of animal
fighting or other extreme cruelty, as the Government suggests, re
quires an unrealistically broad reading of the statute’s exceptions
clause. The statute only exempts material with “serious” value, and
“serious” must be taken seriously. The excepted speech must also fall
within one of §48(b)’s enumerated categories. Much speech does not.
For example, most hunting depictions are not obviously instructional
in nature. The exceptions clause simply has no adequate reading
that results in the statute’s banning only the depictions the Govern
ment would like to ban.
Although the language of §48(b) is drawn from the Court’s deci
sion in Miller v. California, 413 U. S. 15, the exceptions clause does
not answer every First Amendment objection. Under Miller, “seri
ous” value shields depictions of sex from regulation as obscenity. But
Miller did not determine that serious value could be used as a gen
eral precondition to protecting other types of speech in the first place.
Even “ ‘wholly neutral futilities . . . come under the protection of free
speech.’ ” Cohen v. California, 403 U. S. 15, 25. The First Amend
ment presumptively extends to many forms of speech that do not
qualify for §48(b)’s serious-value exception, but nonetheless fall
within §48(c)’s broad reach. Pp. 15–17.
(4) Despite the Government’s assurance that it will apply §48 to
reach only “extreme” cruelty, this Court will not uphold an unconsti
tutional statute merely because the Government promises to use it
responsibly. Nor can the Court construe this statutory language to
avoid constitutional doubt. A limiting construction can be imposed
only if the statute “is ‘readily susceptible’ to such a construction,”
Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, 521 U. S. 844, 884. To read
§48 as the Government desires requires rewriting, not just reinter
pretation. Pp. 18–19.
(5) This construction of §48 decides the constitutional question.
The Government makes no effort to defend §48 as applied beyond
crush videos and depictions of animal fighting. It argues that those
particular depictions are intrinsically related to criminal conduct or
are analogous to obscenity (if not themselves obscene), and that the

