Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

the First Amendment’s protection without any long-settled
tradition of subjecting that speech to regulation. Instead,
the Government points to Congress’s “ ‘legislative judg
ment that . . . depictions of animals being intentionally
tortured and killed [are] of such minimal redeeming value
as to render [them] unworthy of First Amendment protec
tion,’ ” Brief for United States 23 (quoting 533 F. 3d, at 243
(Cowen, J., dissenting)), and asks the Court to uphold the
ban on the same basis. The Government thus proposes
that a claim of categorical exclusion should be considered
under a simple balancing test: “Whether a given category
of speech enjoys First Amendment protection depends
upon a categorical balancing of the value of the speech
against its societal costs.” Brief for United States 8; see
also id., at 12.
As a free-floating test for First Amendment coverage,
that sentence is startling and dangerous. The First
Amendment’s guarantee of free speech does not extend
only to categories of speech that survive an ad hoc balanc
ing of relative social costs and benefits.
The First
Amendment itself reflects a judgment by the American
people that the benefits of its restrictions on the Govern
ment outweigh the costs. Our Constitution forecloses any
attempt to revise that judgment simply on the basis that
some speech is not worth it. The Constitution is not a
document “prescribing limits, and declaring that those
limits may be passed at pleasure.” Marbury v. Madison, 1
Cranch 137, 178 (1803).
To be fair to the Government, its view did not emerge
from a vacuum. As the Government correctly notes, this
Court has often described historically unprotected catego
ries of speech as being “ ‘of such slight social value as a
step to truth that any benefit that may be derived from
them is clearly outweighed by the social interest in order
and morality.’ ” R. A. V., supra, at 383 (quoting Chap
linsky, supra, at 572). In New York v. Ferber, 458 U. S.

