8

UNITED STATES v. STEVENS
Opinion of the Court

747 (1982), we noted that within these categories of unpro
tected speech, “the evil to be restricted so overwhelmingly
outweighs the expressive interests, if any, at stake, that
no process of case-by-case adjudication is required,” be
cause “the balance of competing interests is clearly
struck,” id., at 763–764. The Government derives its
proposed test from these descriptions in our precedents.
See Brief for United States 12–13.
But such descriptions are just that—descriptive. They
do not set forth a test that may be applied as a general
matter to permit the Government to imprison any speaker
so long as his speech is deemed valueless or unnecessary,
or so long as an ad hoc calculus of costs and benefits tilts
in a statute’s favor.
When we have identified categories of speech as fully
outside the protection of the First Amendment, it has not
been on the basis of a simple cost-benefit analysis. In
Ferber, for example, we classified child pornography as
such a category, 458 U. S., at 763. We noted that the
State of New York had a compelling interest in protecting
children from abuse, and that the value of using children
in these works (as opposed to simulated conduct or adult
actors) was de minimis. Id., at 756–757, 762. But our
decision did not rest on this “balance of competing inter
ests” alone. Id., at 764. We made clear that Ferber pre
sented a special case: The market for child pornography
was “intrinsically related” to the underlying abuse, and
was therefore “an integral part of the production of such
materials, an activity illegal throughout the Nation.” Id.,
at 759, 761. As we noted, “ ‘[i]t rarely has been suggested
that the constitutional freedom for speech and press ex
tends its immunity to speech or writing used as an inte
gral part of conduct in violation of a valid criminal stat
ute.’ ” Id., at 761–762 (quoting Giboney, supra, at 498).
Ferber thus grounded its analysis in a previously recog
nized, long-established category of unprotected speech,

