14

UNITED STATES v. STEVENS
ALITO, J., dissenting

was unjustified in believing that it is difficult, if not
impossible, to halt the exploitation of children by pur
suing only those who produce the photographs and
movies. . . . The most expeditious if not the only prac
tical method of law enforcement may be to dry up the
market for this material by imposing severe criminal
penalties on persons selling, advertising, or otherwise
promoting the product.” Id., at 759–760.
See also id., at 761 (“The advertising and selling of child
pornography provide an economic motive for and are thus
an integral part of the production of such materials”).
Third, the Ferber Court noted that the value of child
pornography “is exceedingly modest, if not de minimis,”
and that any such value was “overwhelmingly out
weigh[ed]” by “the evil to be restricted.” Id., at 762–763.
All three of these characteristics are shared by §48, as
applied to crush videos. First, the conduct depicted in
crush videos is criminal in every State and the District of
Columbia. Thus, any crush video made in this country
records the actual commission of a criminal act that in
flicts severe physical injury and excruciating pain and
ultimately results in death. Those who record the under
lying criminal acts are likely to be criminally culpable,
either as aiders and abettors or conspirators. And in the
tight and secretive market for these videos, some who sell
the videos or possess them with the intent to make a profit
may be similarly culpable. (For example, in some cases,
crush videos were commissioned by purchasers who speci
fied the details of the acts that they wanted to see per
formed. See H. R. Rep., at 3; Hearing on Depictions of
Animal Cruelty 27). To the extent that §48 reaches such
persons, it surely does not violate the First Amendment.
Second, the criminal acts shown in crush videos cannot
be prevented without targeting the conduct prohibited by
§48—the creation, sale, and possession for sale of depic

