16

UNITED STATES v. STEVENS
Opinion of the Court

23, “ ‘at least some minimal value,’ ” Reply Brief 6 (quoting
H. R. Rep., at 4), or anything more than “scant social
value,” Reply Brief 11, is excluded under §48(b). But the
text says “serious” value, and “serious” should be taken
seriously.
We decline the Government’s invitation—
advanced for the first time in this Court—to regard as
“serious” anything that is not “scant.” (Or, as the dissent
puts it, “ ‘trifling.’ ” Post, at 6.) As the Government recog
nized below, “serious” ordinarily means a good bit more.
The District Court’s jury instructions required value that
is “significant and of great import,” App. 132, and the
Government defended these instructions as properly
relying on “a commonly accepted meaning of the word
‘serious,’ ” Brief for United States in No. 05–2497 (CA3), p.
50.
Quite apart from the requirement of “serious” value in
§48(b), the excepted speech must also fall within one of the
enumerated categories. Much speech does not. Most
hunting videos, for example, are not obviously instruc
tional in nature, except in the sense that all life is a les
son. According to Safari Club International and the Con
gressional Sportsmen’s Foundation, many popular videos
“have primarily entertainment value” and are designed to
“entertai[n] the viewer, marke[t] hunting equipment, or
increas[e] the hunting community.” Brief for Safari Club
International et al. as Amici Curiae 12. The National
Rifle Association agrees that “much of the content of hunt
ing media . . . is merely recreational in nature.” NRA Brief
28. The Government offers no principled explanation why
these depictions of hunting or depictions of Spanish bull
fights would be inherently valuable while those of Japa
nese dogfights are not. The dissent contends that hunting
depictions must have serious value because hunting has
serious value, in a way that dogfights presumably do not.
Post, at 6–8. But §48(b) addresses the value of the depic
tions, not of the underlying activity. There is simply no

