Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

ALITO, J., dissenting

tially overbroad, for two reasons. First, as explained
above, §48 can reasonably be construed to apply only to
depictions involving acts of animal cruelty as defined by
applicable state or federal law, and anti-cruelty laws do
not ban the sorts of acts depicted in the Court’s hypotheti
cals. See, e.g., Idaho Code §25–3514 (Lexis 2000) (“No
part of this chapter [prohibiting cruelty to animals] shall
be construed as interfering with or allowing interference
with . . . [t]he humane slaughter of any animal normally
and commonly raised as food or for production of fiber . . .
[or] [n]ormal or accepted practices of . . . animal hus
bandry”); Kan. Stat. Ann. § 21–4310(b) (2007) (“The provi
sions of this section shall not apply to . . . with respect to
farm animals, normal or accepted practices of animal
husbandry, including the normal and accepted practices
for the slaughter of such animals”); Md. Crim. Law Code
Ann. §10–603 (Lexis 2002) (sections prohibiting animal
cruelty “do not apply to . . . customary and normal veteri
nary and agricultural husbandry practices, including
dehorning, castration, tail docking, and limit feeding”).
Second, nothing in the record suggests that any one has
ever created, sold, or possessed for sale a depiction of the
slaughter of food animals or of the docking of the tails of
dairy cows that would not easily qualify under the excep
tion set out in §48(b). Depictions created to show proper
methods of slaughter or tail-docking would presumably
have serious “educational” value, and depictions created to
focus attention on methods thought to be inhumane or
otherwise objectionable would presumably have either
serious “educational” or “journalistic” value or both. In
short, the Court’s examples of depictions involving the
docking of tails and humane slaughter do not show that
§48 suffers from any overbreadth, much less substantial
overbreadth.
The Court notes, finally, that cockfighting, which is
illegal in all States, is still legal in Puerto Rico, ante, at 15,

