Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

ALITO, J., dissenting

constitutionality of §48 as applied to depictions of brutal
animal fights. (For convenience, I will focus on videos of
dogfights, which appear to be the most common type of
animal fight videos.)
First, such depictions, like crush videos, record the
actual commission of a crime involving deadly violence.
Dogfights are illegal in every State and the District of
Columbia, Brief for United States 26–27, and n. 8 (citing
statutes), and under federal law constitute a felony pun
ishable by imprisonment for up to five years, 7 U. S. C.
§2156 et seq. (2006 ed. and Supp. II), 18 U. S. C. §49 (2006
ed., Supp. II).
Second, Congress had an ample basis for concluding
that the crimes depicted in these videos cannot be effec
tively controlled without targeting the videos. Like crush
videos and child pornography, dogfight videos are very
often produced as part of a “low-profile, clandestine indus
try,” and “the need to market the resulting products re
quires a visible apparatus of distribution.” Ferber, 458
U. S., at 760. In such circumstances, Congress had rea
sonable grounds for concluding that it would be “difficult,
if not impossible, to halt” the underlying exploitation of
dogs by pursuing only those who stage the fights. Id., at
759–760; see 533 F. 3d, at 246 (Cowen, J., dissenting)
(citing evidence establishing “the existence of a lucrative
market for depictions of animal cruelty,” including videos
of dogfights, “which in turn provides a powerful incentive
to individuals to create [such] videos”).
The commercial trade in videos of dogfights is “an inte
gral part of the production of such materials,” Ferber,
supra, at 761.
As the Humane Society explains,
“[v]ideotapes memorializing dogfights are integral to the
success of this criminal industry” for a variety of reasons.
Humane Society Brief 5. For one thing, some dogfighting
videos are made “solely for the purpose of selling the video
(and not for a live audience).” Id., at 9. In addition, those

