OCTOBER TERM, 2009

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STATES v. STEVENS
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 08–769.

Argued October 6, 2009—Decided April 20, 2010

Congress enacted 18 U. S. C. §48 to criminalize the commercial crea
tion, sale, or possession of certain depictions of animal cruelty. The
statute addresses only portrayals of harmful acts, not the underlying
conduct. It applies to any visual or auditory depiction “in which a liv
ing animal is intentionally maimed, mutilated, tortured, wounded, or
killed,” if that conduct violates federal or state law where “the crea
tion, sale, or possession takes place,” §48(c)(1). Another clause ex
empts depictions with “serious religious, political, scientific, educa
tional, journalistic, historical, or artistic value.”
§48(b).
The
legislative background of §48 focused primarily on “crush videos,”
which feature the torture and killing of helpless animals and are said
to appeal to persons with a specific sexual fetish. Respondent Ste
vens was indicted under §48 for selling videos depicting dogfighting.
He moved to dismiss, arguing that §48 is facially invalid under the
First Amendment. The District Court denied his motion, and Ste
vens was convicted. The Third Circuit vacated the conviction and de
clared §48 facially unconstitutional as a content-based regulation of
protected speech.
Held: Section §48 is substantially overbroad, and therefore invalid un
der the First Amendment. Pp. 5–20.
(a) Depictions of animal cruelty are not, as a class, categorically
unprotected by the First Amendment. Because §48 explicitly regu
lates expression based on content, it is “ ‘presumptively invalid,’ . . .
and the Government bears the burden to rebut that presumption.”
United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group, Inc., 529 U. S. 803,
817. Since its enactment, the First Amendment has permitted re
strictions on a few historic categories of speech—including obscenity,
defamation, fraud, incitement, and speech integral to criminal con

