2

UNITED STATES v. STEVENS
Syllabus
duct—that “have never been thought to raise any Constitutional
problem,” Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U. S. 568, 572. Depic
tions of animal cruelty should not be added to that list. While the
prohibition of animal cruelty has a long history in American law,
there is no evidence of a similar tradition prohibiting depictions of
such cruelty. The Government’s proposed test would broadly balance
the value of the speech against its societal costs to determine
whether the First Amendment even applies. But the First Amend
ment’s free speech guarantee does not extend only to categories of
speech that survive an ad hoc balancing of relative social costs and
benefits. The Amendment itself reflects a judgment by the American
people that the benefits of its restrictions on the Government out
weigh the costs. New York v. Ferber, 458 U. S. 747, distinguished.
Pp. 5–9.
(b) Stevens’s facial challenge succeeds under existing doctrine.
Pp. 9–20.
(1) In the First Amendment context, a law may be invalidated as
overbroad if “a ‘substantial number’ of its applications are unconsti
tutional, ‘ “judged in relation to the statute’s plainly legitimate
sweep.” ’ ” Washington State Grange v. Washington State Republican
Party, 552 U. S. 442, 449, n. 6. Stevens claims that common depic
tions of ordinary and lawful activities constitute the vast majority of
materials subject to §48. The Government does not defend such ap
plications, but contends that the statute is narrowly limited to spe
cific types of extreme material. Section 48’s constitutionality thus
turns on how broadly it is construed. Pp. 9–10.
(2) Section 48 creates a criminal prohibition of alarming breadth.
The statute’s definition of a “depiction of animal cruelty” does not
even require that the depicted conduct be cruel. While the words
“maimed, mutilated, [and] tortured” convey cruelty, “wounded” and
“killed” do not. Those words have little ambiguity and should be read
according to their ordinary meaning. Section 48 does require that the
depicted conduct be “illegal,” but many federal and state laws con
cerning the proper treatment of animals are not designed to guard
against animal cruelty. For example, endangered species protections
restrict even the humane wounding or killing of animals. The statute
draws no distinction based on the reason the conduct is made illegal.
Moreover, §48 applies to any depiction of conduct that is illegal
in the State in which the depiction is created, sold, or possessed, “re
gardless of whether the . . . wounding . . . or killing took place” there,
§48(c)(1). Depictions of entirely lawful conduct may run afoul of the
ban if those depictions later find their way into States where the
same conduct is unlawful. This greatly expands §48’s scope, because
views about animal cruelty and regulations having no connection to

