18

UNITED STATES v. STEVENS
ALITO, J., dissenting

who stage dogfights profit not just from the sale of the
videos themselves, but from the gambling revenue they
take in from the fights; the videos “encourage [such] gam
bling activity because they allow those reluctant to attend
actual fights for fear of prosecution to still bet on the
outcome.” Ibid.; accord, Brief for Center on the Admini
stration of Criminal Law as Amicus Curiae 12 (“Selling
videos of dogfights effectively abets the underlying crimes
by providing a market for dogfighting while allowing
actual dogfights to remain underground”); ibid. (“These
videos are part of a ‘lucrative market’ where videos are
produced by a ‘bare-boned, clandestine staff’ in order to
permit the actual location of dogfights and the perpetra
tors of these underlying criminal activities to go unde
tected” (citations omitted)). Moreover, “[v]ideo documen
tation is vital to the criminal enterprise because it
provides proof of a dog’s fighting prowess—proof de
manded by potential buyers and critical to the under
ground market.” Humane Society Brief 9. Such re
cordings may also serve as “ ‘training’ videos for other fight
organizers.” Ibid. In short, because videos depicting live
dogfights are essential to the success of the criminal dog
fighting subculture, the commercial sale of such videos
helps to fuel the market for, and thus to perpetuate the
perpetration of, the criminal conduct depicted in them.
Third, depictions of dogfights that fall within §48’s reach
have by definition no appreciable social value. As noted,
§48(b) exempts depictions having any appreciable social
value, and thus the mere inclusion of a depiction of a live
fight in a larger work that aims at communicating an idea
or a message with a modicum of social value would not run
afoul of the statute.
Finally, the harm caused by the underlying criminal
acts greatly outweighs any trifling value that the depic
tions might be thought to possess. As the Humane Society
explains:

