Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

animal is made illegal, and includes, for example, the
humane slaughter of a stolen cow.4
What is more, the application of §48 to depictions of
illegal conduct extends to conduct that is illegal in only a
single jurisdiction. Under subsection (c)(1), the depicted
conduct need only be illegal in “the State in which the
creation, sale, or possession takes place, regardless of
whether the . . . wounding . . . or killing took place in
[that] State.” A depiction of entirely lawful conduct runs
afoul of the ban if that depiction later finds its way into
another State where the same conduct is unlawful. This
provision greatly expands the scope of §48, because al
though there may be “a broad societal consensus” against
cruelty to animals, Brief for United States 2, there is
substantial disagreement on what types of conduct are
properly regarded as cruel. Both views about cruelty to
animals and regulations having no connection to cruelty
vary widely from place to place.
In the District of Columbia, for example, all hunting is
unlawful. D. C. Munic. Regs., tit. 19, §1560 (2009). Other
jurisdictions permit or encourage hunting, and there is an
enormous national market for hunting-related depictions
in which a living animal is intentionally killed. Hunting
periodicals have circulations in the hundreds of thousands
or millions, see Mediaweek, Sept. 29, 2008, p. 28, and
hunting television programs, videos, and Web sites are
equally popular, see Brief for Professional Outdoor Media
——————
4 The citations in the dissent’s appendix are beside the point. The
cited statutes stand for the proposition that hunting is not covered by
animal cruelty laws. But the reach of §48 is, as we have explained, not
restricted to depictions of conduct that violates a law specifically
directed at animal cruelty. It simply requires that the depicted conduct
be “illegal.” §48(c)(1). The Government implicitly admits as much,
arguing that “instructional videos for hunting” are saved by the stat
ute’s exceptions clause, not that they fall outside the prohibition in the
first place. Reply Brief 6.

