6

UNITED STATES v. STEVENS
ALITO, J., dissenting

n. 24. See also Williams, supra, at 307 (STEVENS, J.,
concurring) (“[T]o the extent the statutory text alone is
unclear, our duty to avoid constitutional objections makes
it especially appropriate to look beyond the text in order to
ascertain the intent of its drafters”).
Applying this canon, I would hold that §48 does not
apply to depictions of hunting. First, because §48 targets
depictions of “animal cruelty,” I would interpret that
term to apply only to depictions involving acts of animal
cruelty as defined by applicable state or federal law, not
to depictions of acts that happen to be illegal for reasons
having nothing to do with the prevention of animal cru
elty. See ante, at 12–13 (interpreting “[t]he text of §48(c)”
to ban a depiction of “the humane slaughter of a stolen
cow”). Virtually all state laws prohibiting animal cruelty
either expressly define the term “animal” to exclude
wildlife or else specifically exempt lawful hunting activi
ties,3 so the statutory prohibition set forth in §48(a) may
reasonably be interpreted not to reach most if not all
hunting depictions.
Second, even if the hunting of wild animals were other
wise covered by §48(a), I would hold that hunting depic
tions fall within the exception in §48(b) for depictions that
have “serious” (i.e., not “trifling”4) “scientific,” “educa
——————
3 See Appendix, infra (citing statutes); B. Wagman, S. Waisman, & P.
Frasch, Animal Law: Cases and Materials 92 (4th ed. 2010) (“Most anti
cruelty laws also include one or more exemptions,” which often “ex
clud[e] from coverage (1) whole classes of animals, such as wildlife or
farm animals, or (2) specific activities, such as hunting”); Note, Eco
nomics and Ethics in the Genetic Engineering of Animals, 19 Harv.
J. L. & Tech. 413, 432 (2006) (“Not surprisingly, state laws relating to
the humane treatment of wildlife, including deer, elk, and waterfowl,
are virtually non-existent”).
4 Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 2073 (1976); Random
House Dictionary of the English Language 1303 (1966). While the term
“serious” may also mean “weighty” or “important,” ibid., we should
adopt the former definition if necessary to avoid unconstitutionality.

