2

UNITED STATES v. STEVENS
Opinion of the Court

“in which a living animal is intentionally maimed, muti
lated, tortured, wounded, or killed,” if that conduct vio
lates federal or state law where “the creation, sale, or
possession takes place.” §48(c)(1). In what is referred to
as the “exceptions clause,” the law exempts from prohibi
tion any depiction “that has serious religious, political,
scientific, educational, journalistic, historical, or artistic
value.” §48(b).
The legislative background of §48 focused primarily on
the interstate market for “crush videos.” According to the
House Committee Report on the bill, such videos feature
the intentional torture and killing of helpless animals,
including cats, dogs, monkeys, mice, and hamsters. H. R.
Rep. No. 106–397, p. 2 (1999) (hereinafter H. R. Rep.).
Crush videos often depict women slowly crushing animals
to death “with their bare feet or while wearing high heeled
shoes,” sometimes while “talking to the animals in a kind
of dominatrix patter” over “[t]he cries and squeals of the
animals, obviously in great pain.” Ibid. Apparently these
depictions “appeal to persons with a very specific sexual
——————
years, or both.
“(b) EXCEPTION.—Subsection (a) does not apply to any depiction
that has serious religious, political, scientific, educational, journalistic,
historical, or artistic value.
“(c) DEFINITIONS.—In this section—
“(1) the term ‘depiction of animal cruelty’ means any visual or
auditory depiction, including any photograph, motion-picture film,
video recording, electronic image, or sound recording of conduct in
which a living animal is intentionally maimed, mutilated, tortured,
wounded, or killed, if such conduct is illegal under Federal law or the
law of the State in which the creation, sale, or possession takes place,
regardless of whether the maiming, mutilation, torture, wounding, or
killing took place in the State; and
“(2) the term ‘State’ means each of the several States, the Dis
trict of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Is
lands, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands, and any other commonwealth, territory, or possession
of the United States.”

