2

HOLDER v. MARTINEZ GUTIERREZ
Syllabus
concluded that Martinez Gutierrez qualified for relief because of his
father’s immigration history, even though Martinez Gutierrez could
not satisfy §1229b(a)(1) or §1229b(a)(2) on his own. Relying on Escobar, the BIA reversed. The Ninth Circuit then granted Martinez
Gutierrez’s petition for review and remanded the case to the Board
for reconsideration in light of its contrary decisions.
Respondent Sawyers was lawfully admitted as an LPR in October
1995, when he was 15 years old. At that time, his mother had already resided in the country for six consecutive years following a lawful entry. After Sawyers was convicted of a drug offense in August
2002, the Government began removal proceedings. The Immigration
Judge found Sawyers ineligible for cancellation of removal because he
could not satisfy §1229b(a)(2). The BIA affirmed, and Sawyers petitioned the Ninth Circuit for review. There, he argued that the Board
should have counted his mother’s years of residency while he was a
minor toward §1229b(a)(2)’s 7-year continuous-residency requirement. The Court of Appeals granted the petition and remanded the
case to the BIA.

Held: The BIA’s rejection of imputation is based on a permissible construction of §1229b(a). Pp. 6–13.
(a) The Board has required each alien seeking cancellation of removal to satisfy §1229b(a)’s requirements on his own, without relying
on a parent’s years of continuous residence or immigration status.
That position prevails if it is a reasonable construction of the statute,
whether or not it is the only possible interpretation or even the one a
court might think best. See e.g., Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U. S. 837, 843–844, and n. 11. The
BIA’s approach satisfies this standard.
The Board’s position is consistent with the statute’s text. Section
1229b(a) does not mention—much less require—imputation. Instead,
it simply calls for “the alien” to meet the prerequisites for cancellation of removal. See §§1101(a)(13)(A) and (a)(33). Respondents contend that this language does not foreclose imputation, but even if so,
that is not enough to require the Board to adopt that policy. Pp. 6–7.
(b) Neither does the statute’s history and context mandate imputation. Section 1229b(a) replaced former §212(c) of the Immigration
and Nationality Act (INA), which allowed the Attorney General to
prevent the removal of an alien with LPR status who had maintained
a “lawful unrelinquished domicile of seven consecutive years” in this
country. Like §1229b(a), §212(c) was silent on imputation. But every
Court of Appeals that confronted the question concluded that, in determining eligibility for §212(c) relief, the Board should impute a
parent’s years of domicile to his or her child. Based on this history,
Sawyers contends that Congress would have understood §1229b(a)’s

