10

HOLDER v. MARTINEZ GUTIERREZ
Opinion of the Court

cancellation of removal, regardless of the strength of their
family ties. See §1229b(a)(3). And more generally—as
these very cases show—not every alien who obtains LPR
status can immediately get the same for her spouse or
minor children. See Brief for Petitioner 31–32, and n. 9
(providing program-specific examples). We cannot read a
silent statute as requiring (not merely allowing) imputation just because that rule would be family-friendly.
Respondents’ stronger arguments take a different
tack—that we should refuse to defer to the Board’s decision even assuming Congress placed the question of imputation in its hands. Respondents offer two main reasons.
First, they contend that the Board’s approach to §1229b(a)
cannot be squared with its acceptance of imputation under
other, similar statutory provisions. This “wil[d]” and “ ‘[u]nexplained inconsistency,’ ” Sawyers asserts, is the very
“paradigm of arbitrary agency action.” Sawyers Brief
13, 41 (emphasis deleted); see Martinez Gutierrez Brief
52–54. Second, they argue that the Board did not appreciate its own discretion over whether to allow imputation.
The Board, they say, thought Congress had forbidden
imputation, and so did not bring its “ ‘experience and
expertise to bear’ ” on the issue. Id., at 31 (quoting PDK
Labs. Inc. v. DEA, 362 F. 3d 786, 797 (CADC 2004)); see
Sawyers Brief 38–39. These arguments are not insubstantial, but in the end neither persuades us to deny the Board
the usual deference we accord to agency interpretations.
Start with the claim of inconsistency. The BIA has
indeed imputed parental attributes to children under
other INA provisions that do not mention the matter.
Section 1182(k), for example, enables the Attorney General to let certain inadmissible aliens into the country if he
finds “that inadmissibility was not known to, and could
not have been ascertained by the exercise of reasonable
diligence by, the immigrant before the time of departure.”
Like §1229b(a), that provision refers to a single person

