Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

SCALIA, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 137, Orig.
_________________

STATE OF MONTANA, PLAINTIFF v. STATE OF

WYOMING AND STATE OF NORTH DAKOTA 

ON EXCEPTIONS TO THE REPORT OF THE SPECIAL MASTER
[May 2, 2011]

JUSTICE SCALIA, dissenting.
Thanks to improved irrigation techniques, Wyoming’s
farmers and cattlemen appear to consume more of the
water they divert from the Yellowstone River and its
tributaries today than they did 60 years ago—that is to
say, less of the diverted water ultimately finds its way
back into the Yellowstone. The Court interprets the Yel
lowstone River Compact (Compact), see Act of Oct. 30,
1951, ch. 629, 65 Stat. 663, to grant those Wyomans* the
right to increase their consumption so long as they do not
increase the volume of water they diverted beyond pre
1950 levels. Thus, it holds, Montana cannot complain that
the increased consumption interferes with its residents’
pre-1950 appropriative water rights. I disagree because
the Court’s analysis substitutes its none-too-confident
reading of the common law, see ante, at 7–8, and n. 5, for
the Compact’s definition of “beneficial use.”
The doctrine of appropriation allocates perpetual water
rights along a river, on a “first in time[,] . . . superior in
right” basis, Wyoming v. Colorado, 259 U. S. 419, 459
(1922), to those who divert its flow and apply the water to
a beneficial use. See Hinderlider v. La Plata River &
——————
* The dictionary-approved term is “Wyomingite,” which is also the
name of a type of lava, see Webster’s New International Dictionary
2961 (2d ed. 1957). I believe the people of Wyoming deserve better.


2

MONTANA v. WYOMING
SCALIA, J., dissenting

Cherry Creek Ditch Co., 304 U. S. 92, 98 (1938). The
“beneficial use” requirement does most of the legal work.
It marks the types of uses that confer an appropriative
right—irrigation being a paradigmatic example, see
United States v. Willow River Power Co., 324 U. S. 499,
504, n. 2 (1945); and it “measure[s]” the extent of an ap
propriator’s claim, see Ide v. United States, 263 U. S. 497,
505 (1924); A. Tarlock, Law of Water Rights and Re
sources §§5:66, 5:68–5:69, pp. 5–130.3, 5–130.9 to 5–
130.10 (2010). At common law, an appropriator claims the
volume of water diverted and “reasonably required” by his
intended use. Id., §§5:65–5:66, at 5–127, 5–130.2; see
Quinn v. John Whitaker Ranch Co., 54 Wyo. 367, 377–378,
92 P. 2d 568, 570–571 (1939).
The Compact borrows the concept of appropriation to
define the rights of pre-1950 water users along the Yel
lowstone River and its tributaries. Article V(A) promises
that “[a]ppropriative rights to the beneficial uses of the
water of the Yellowstone River System existing in each
signatory State as of January 1, 1950, shall continue to be
enjoyed in accordance with the laws governing the acquisi
tion and use of water under the doctrine of appropriation.”
65 Stat. 666. Article II(H) elaborates that a “Beneficial
Use” is one “by which the water supply of a drainage basin
is depleted when usefully employed by the activities of
man.” Id., at 665 (emphasis added).
Like the common law, this definition lays out the types
of uses that qualify as beneficial and the volume of water
an appropriator may claim through his beneficial use. But
the Compact’s focus on whether a use depletes a river’s
water supply—not whether it diverts the river’s flow—
significantly limits the volume of water to which Wyoming
is entitled. For purposes of the Compact, Wyoming may
lay claim only to its beneficial users’ net consumption of
water, that is, the volume of water diverted from the river
minus the volume that flows (or seeps) back into the


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

river’s channel.
This interpretation, and only this interpretation, gives
meaning to the definition’s use of the word “depleted.” I
cannot write off as an accident the choice of this word
rather than the word consistently used elsewhere in the
Compact: “diverted.” See Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain, 542
U. S. 692, 711, n. 9 (2004). The Compact’s authors knew
how to use “diverted” and “diversion” when they wanted
to. Those two words appear repeatedly in other provisions
of the Compact, see Arts. II(G); V(B), (C); VII(A), (C), (D),
65 Stat. 665–668; and the Compact defines them in the
sentence immediately preceding the definition of “benefi
cial use.” See Art. II(G), id., at 665. But the Compact’s
authors chose to define beneficial use in terms of deple
tion—the first and only time the Compact uses any deriva
tive of the word “deplete.” It is in my view a clear indica
tion that the Compact intends to break from the common
law’s focus on diversion.
The Court reduces the Compact’s deliberate use of “de
pleted” to an inconsequential slip of the pen. According to
today’s majority, Article II(H) speaks only to the types of
uses that confer appropriative rights. “Nothing in the
language,” it says, “suggests that ‘beneficial use’ means a
measure of the amount of water depleted.” Ante, at 17.
This is incomprehensible. On the Court’s own interpreta
tion “beneficial use” not only defines the types of uses that
confer appropriative rights, but also determines the vol
ume of water to which the rights attach—viz., only that
volume put to one of the specified types of uses. The only
question before us is whether “beneficial use” measures
the volume diverted or the volume depleted—and the
language of the Compact makes that clear.
The Court provides no plausible explanation for use of
the word “depleted” instead of “diverted.” Its best effort
is the suggestion that the word was used to ensure that
hydroelectric power generation and other disfavored,


4

MONTANA v. WYOMING
SCALIA, J., dissenting

nondepletive uses do not confer appropriative rights. See
ibid. That is highly unlikely, for two reasons. First, rely
ing on a subtle distinction between depletion and diversion
would be one of the clumsiest ways imaginable to accom
plish that simple goal, if it was not already accomplished
by other provisions of the Compact. One would instead
have expected the Compact simply to exclude the disfa
vored uses from the “usefu[l] . . . activities of man,”
Art. II(H), 65 Stat. 665, which confer appropriative rights.
Cf. Mont. Code Ann. §85–2–102(4) (2009) (listing types of
beneficial uses). Second, and even more conclusively,
hydroelectric generation, water wheels, and mill races—
the allegedly disfavored uses Wyoming and the United
States offer up to explain the word “depleted”—are already
excluded from appropriative rights (and probably from any
need for appropriative rights) by the Compact’s definition
of diversion: “the taking or removing of water from the
Yellowstone River or any tributary thereof when the water
so taken or removed is not returned directly into the
channel of the Yellowstone River or of the tributary from
which it is taken.” Art. II(G), 65 Stat. 665. The modifying
clause seems specifically designed to exclude hydroelectric
dams, water wheels and mill races, which, when they
divert water from the Yellowstone or its tributaries, “re
tur[n it] directly into the channel . . . from which it is
taken.”
The Court objects to my interpretation because the word
“depleted” lacks the “clarity” necessary to “drastically
redefine the term ‘beneficial use’ from its longstanding
meaning,” ante, at 17. According to the Court, “[t]he
amount of water put to ‘beneficial use’ has never been
defined by net water consumption.” Ibid. Before making
this statement, the Court has spent some 10 pages, ante,
at 7–16, conducting a “sensitive . . . inquiry [that] counsels
caution”; into a field (state water law) where the answer of
this Court is not conclusive and hence not ipso facto cor


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

rect (“it is not this Court’s role to guide”); resulting in the
Court’s best guess concerning “an unclear area of appro
priation doctrine”; answering a question which “ ‘[n]o
western state court [not even a lower court] appears to
have conclusively answered.’ ” Ante, at 7–8, and n. 5. The
Court calls that hitherto unanswered question “the law of
return flows,” ante, at 7, but it can more accurately be
described as the question whether the volume of water to
which an appropriator acquires rights is the entire volume
diverted for a beneficial use, or rather only the volume
depleted by the beneficial use. Which is to say that “bene
ficial use” has never had the “longstanding meaning” the
Court posits. If it has in the past been assumed to refer to
all water diverted from the stream rather than all water
depleted from the stream, that is only because the issue of
which of the two it means has never arisen. I find it quite
extraordinary that the Court should expend such heroic
efforts (imagine how many cases had to be read!) answer
ing a state water-law question that no court of any West
ern State has ever answered—a question that would cross
a Rabbi’s eyes—when the text in front of us provides
the clear answer insofar as this Compact is concerned:
“depleted.”
The Court suggests that if the Compact’s authors
wanted to break from (what it considers) the common law,
they should have defined beneficial use as the “volume by
which the water supply . . . is depleted.” Ante, at 18 (in
ternal quotation marks omitted). That objection seems to
me to have little force when the Court cannot explain what
work “depleted” is supposed to do other than indicate
precisely the same concept more concisely. And the
Court’s helpful drafting tip proves that speaking with
greater clarity is not so easy. Following the Court’s advice
would make nonsense of Article V(B) of the Compact.
That provision allocates a fixed percentage “of the unused
and unappropriated water” of various tributaries to each


6

MONTANA v. WYOMING
SCALIA, J., dissenting

State for post-1950 “storage or direct diversions for benefi
cial use on new lands or for other purposes.” 65 Stat. 666.
But if “beneficial use” in this last phrase means “the vol
ume of water by which . . . the water supply is depleted,”
the provision makes no sense. It would allocate a fixed
percentage of unused and unappropriated water for “a
volume of water by which the water supply is depleted.” It
makes perfect sense, of course, if “beneficial use” means all
uses that deplete the stream.
The Court also wonders why, “if Article V(A) were in
tended to guarantee Montana a set quantity of water,” it
did not “d[o] so as plainly as other” interstate water com
pacts “that do just that.” Ante, at 18. This is a straw man.
Montana does not demand a precise volume of water each
year; nor does it insist that its pre-1950 water users al
ways receive enough water to satisfy their pre-1950 needs.
It merely asks that its pre-1950 water users occupy the
same position relative to Wyoming’s pre-1950 users in
2011 as they did in 1950—that whatever would have
flowed back into the Yellowstone after Wyoming appro
priators’ beneficial uses in 1950 if the river then had this
year’s flow, will also flow back this year. See Tr. of Oral
Arg. 13, 16, 24. In dry years, that may mean some Mon
tanans will have to make do with less or go without.
Because I think the Court’s disposition disregards the
text of the Compact, I respectfully dissent.

