(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MONTANA v. WYOMING ET AL.
ON EXCEPTION TO REPORT OF SPECIAL MASTER
No. 137, Orig. Argued January 10, 2011—Decided May 2, 2011
Article V(A) of the Yellowstone River Compact ratified by Montana,
Wyoming, and North Dakota provides: “Appropriative rights to the
beneficial uses of the water of the Yellowstone River System existing
in each signatory State as of January 1, 1950, shall continue to be en
joyed in accordance with the laws governing the acquisition and use
of water under the doctrine of appropriation.” 65 Stat. 666. Montana
filed a bill of complaint, alleging that Wyoming breached Article V(A)
by allowing its upstream pre-1950 water users to switch from flood to
sprinkler irrigation, which increases crop consumption of water and
decreases the volume of runoff and seepage returning to the river
system. Thus, even if Wyoming’s pre-1950 users divert the same
quantity of water as before, less water reaches downstream users in
Montana. Concluding that the Compact permits more efficient irri
gation systems so long as the conserved water is used to irrigate the
same acreage watered in 1950, the Special Master found that Mon
tana’s increased-efficiency allegation failed to state a claim. Montana
has filed an exception.
Held: Because Article V(A) of the Compact incorporates the ordinary
doctrine of appropriation without significant qualification, and be
cause in Wyoming and Montana that doctrine allows appropriators to
improve their irrigation systems, even to the detriment of down
stream appropriators, Montana’s increased-efficiency allegation fails
to state a claim for breach of the Compact under Article V(A). Pp. 4–
19.
(a) Background appropriation law principles do not support Mon
tana’s position. The doctrine of appropriation provides that rights to
water for irrigation are perfected and enforced in order of seniority,
starting with the first person to divert water from a natural stream
and apply it to a “beneficial use.” Once perfected, that water right is


2

MONTANA v. WYOMING
Syllabus
senior to any later appropriators’ rights and may be fulfilled entirely
before the junior appropriators get any water. However, junior ap
propriators do acquire rights to the stream basically as it exists when
they find it. Under this no-injury rule, junior users may, subject to
the fulfillment of the senior users’ existing rights, prevent senior us
ers from enlarging their rights to the junior users’ detriment. Here,
the question is whether a switch to more efficient irrigation with less
return flow is within Wyoming’s pre-1950 users’ existing appropriat
ive rights or is an improper enlargement of that right. Although the
law of return flows is an unclear area of appropriation doctrine, the
Special Master correctly concluded that Wyoming’s pre-1950 users
may switch to sprinkler irrigation. Pp. 4–16.
(1) A change in irrigation methods does not appear to run afoul of
the no-injury rule in Montana and Wyoming, which generally con
cerns changes in the location of the diversion and the place or pur
pose of use. Thus, an appropriator may increase his consumption by
changing to a more water-intensive crop so long as he makes no
change in acreage irrigated or amount of water diverted. Ordinary,
day-to-day operational changes or repairs also do not violate the rule.
Consumption can even be increased by adding farm acreage, if that
was part of the plan from the start, and diligently pursued through
the years. Irrigation system improvements seem to be the same sort
of changes. This view is consistent with the fact that by 1950 both
States had statutes regulating certain changes to water rights, but
neither required farmers to take official action before adjusting irri
gation methods. Cases in both States frequently describe the no
injury rule as applying to changes in point of diversion, purpose of
use, and place of use. The abundance of litigation over such
changes—and the absence of any litigation over the sort of change at
issue here—strongly implies that irrigation efficiency improvements
were considered within the scope of the original appropriative right.
Pp. 8–10.
(2) The doctrine of recapture—which permits an appropriator
who has diverted water for irrigation to recapture and reuse his own
runoff and seepage before it escapes his control or his property—also
supports treating irrigation efficiency improvements as within the
original appropriative right. Montana and Wyoming cases appear to
apply this basic doctrine without any qualification based on whether
the return flow would re-enter the original stream or not. By using
sprinklers instead of flood irrigation, Wyoming’s pre-1950 water us
ers effectively recapture water. The sprinklers reduce loss from
seepage and runoff and are simply different mechanisms for increas
ing the volume of water available to crops without changing the
amount of diversion. Pp. 10–15.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
(3) This conclusion is consistent with the view of water law
scholars who have considered the question presented in this case.
Pp. 15–16.
(b) Also unpersuasive is Montana’s argument that, if background
appropriation law principles do not support its position, Article V(A)’s
“beneficial use” definition nonetheless restricts the scope of pre-1950
appropriative rights to the net volume of water that was actually be
ing consumed in 1950. Pp. 16–19.
(1) “Beneficial use” is “that use by which the water supply of a
drainage basin is depleted when usefully employed by the activities
of man.” 65 Stat. 665. Montana contends that the term means the
amount of depletion, and thus any activity increasing Wyoming’s pre
1950 depletions beyond pre-1950 levels exceeds Article V(A)’s scope.
Pp. 16–17.
(2) Nothing in the Compact’s definition suggests such an inter
pretation. A plain reading indicates that “beneficial use” is a type of
use that depletes the water supply. This view is supported by the
circumstances in the signatory States when the Compact was
drafted. At that time, Wyoming had a statutory preference for irriga
tion, a depletive use, over power generation, a nondepletive use. It
thus it makes sense for the Compact to protect irrigation uses that
were legislatively favored and represented the predominant use of
the Yellowstone River system. Montana’s reading, by contrast, would
drastically redefine the term. The amount of water put to “beneficial
use” has never been defined by net water consumption. In irrigation,
that amount has always included a measure of necessary loss, e.g.,
runoff or evaporation. If the Compact’s definition were meant to
drastically redefine “beneficial use,” this Court would expect far more
clarity. Moreover, if the Compact effected a dramatic reframing of
ordinary appropriation principles, the rest of Article V(A), which ex
pressly states that “the laws governing the acquisition and use of wa
ter under the doctrine of appropriation” control, would make little
sense. Pp. 17–18.
(3) If Article V(A) were intended to guarantee Montana a set
quantity of water, it could have done so plainly, as done in other
compacts, e.g., the Colorado River Compact of 1922. Pp. 18–19.
Exception overruled.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined. SCALIA, J., filed a dissenting opinion. KAGAN, J., took no part in
the consideration or decision of the case.

