4

SKINNER v. SWITZER
Opinion of the Court

and blood-stained blue jeans.” Id., at 536.
Investigators also retained vaginal swabs taken from
Busby.
In preparation for trial, “the State tested the blood on
[Skinner’s] clothing, blood and hair from a blanket that
partially covered one of the victims, and hairs on one
of the victim’s back and cheeks.” Skinner v. State, 122
S. W. 3d 808, 810 (Tex. Crim. App. 2003). The State also
tested fingerprint evidence. Some of this evidence—
including bloody palm prints in the room where one victim
was killed—implicated Skinner, but “fingerprints on a bag
containing one of the knives” did not. Ibid. Items left
untested included the knives found on the premises, the
axe handle, vaginal swabs, fingernail clippings, and addi­
tional hair samples. See ibid.2
In the decade following his conviction, Skinner unsuc­
cessfully sought state and federal postconviction relief.
See Skinner v. Quarterman, 576 F. 3d 214 (CA5 2009),
cert. denied, 559 U. S. ___ (2010). He also pursued infor­
mal efforts to gain access to untested biological evidence
the police had collected at the scene of the crime.3
In 2001, more than six years after Skinner’s conviction,
Texas enacted Article 64, a statute allowing prisoners to
gain postconviction DNA testing in limited circumstances.
——————
2 After Skinner’s conviction, the State performed DNA tests on cer­
tain additional materials, but Skinner took no part in the selection
of those materials or their testing. Skinner maintains that these
ex parte tests were inconclusive. See Complaint ¶19, App. 12 (this
“testing raised more questions than it answered”). But see Skinner v.
State, 122 S. W. 3d 808, 811 (Tex. Crim. App. 2003) (some findings were
“inculpatory”).
3 Skinner’s trial counsel, although aware that biological evidence
remained untested, did not request further testing. Postconviction,
Skinner sought DNA testing of vaginal swabs and finger nail clippings
taken from Busby, blood and hairs on a jacket found next to Busby’s
body, and biological material on knives and a dish towel recovered at
the crime scene. Complaint ¶22, App. 14–15.

