2

SKINNER v. SWITZER
Syllabus
Attorney who has custody of the evidence that Skinner would like to
have tested. Skinner alleged that Texas violated his Fourteenth
Amendment right to due process by refusing to provide for the DNA
testing he requested. The Magistrate Judge recommended dismissal
of the complaint for failure to state a claim, reasoning that postcon
viction requests for DNA evidence are cognizable only in habeas cor
pus, not under §1983. Adopting that recommendation, the District
Court dismissed Skinner’s suit. The Fifth Circuit affirmed.

Held: There is federal-court subject-matter jurisdiction over Skinner’s
complaint, and the claim he presses is cognizable under §1983.
Pp. 7–15.
(a) Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 8(a)(2) generally requires only a
plausible “short and plain” statement of the plaintiff’s claim, not an
exposition of his legal argument. Skinner stated his due process
claim in a paragraph alleging that the State’s refusal “to release the
biological evidence for testing . . . deprived [him] of his liberty inter
ests in utilizing state procedures to obtain reversal of his conviction
and/or to obtain a pardon or reduction of his sentence . . . .” His coun
sel has clarified that Skinner does not challenge the prosecutor’s con
duct or the CCA’s decisions; instead, he challenges Texas’ postconvic
tion DNA statute “as construed” by the Texas courts. Pp. 7–8.
(b) The Rooker-Feldman doctrine does not bar Skinner’s suit. This
Court has applied the doctrine only in the two cases from which it
takes its name, Rooker v. Fidelity Trust Co., 263 U. S. 413, District of
Columbia Court of Appeals v. Feldman, 460 U. S. 462. See Exxon
Mobil Corp. v. Saudi Basic Industries Corp., 544 U. S. 280. Given
“the narrow ground” the doctrine occupies, id., at 284, the Court has
confined Rooker-Feldman “to cases . . . brought by state-court losers
. . . inviting district court review and rejection of [a state court’s]
judgments.” Ibid. Skinner’s complaint encounters no RookerFeldman shoal. “If a federal plaintiff ‘present[s] [an] independent
claim,’ ” it is not an impediment to the exercise of federal jurisdiction
that the “same or a related question” was earlier aired between the
parties in state court. Id., at 292–293. A state-court decision is not
reviewable by lower federal courts, but a statute or rule governing
the decision may be challenged in a federal action. See, e.g.,
Feldman, 460 U. S., at 487. Because Skinner’s federal case—which
challenges not the adverse state-court decisions but the Texas statute
they authoritatively construed—falls within the latter category, there
was no lack of subject-matter jurisdiction over his federal suit.
Pp. 8–10.
(c) Measured against this Court’s prior holdings, Skinner has prop
erly invoked §1983. This Court has several times considered when a
state prisoner, complaining of unconstitutional state action, may pur

