Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011) 


7

THOMAS, J., dissenting


III 

The majority relies on Dotson to reach its conclusion. In
that case, the plaintiffs alleged due process violations in
state parole adjudications and sought injunctive relief and
“a new parole hearing conducted under constitutionally
proper procedures.” 544 U. S., at 77. We found the claims
cognizable under §1983.
Dotson does not control this case. Unlike state collateral
review, parole does not evaluate the validity of the under
lying state conviction or sentence. Collateral review per
mits prisoners to “attack their final convictions.” Osborne,
supra, at ___ (ALITO, J., concurring) (slip op., at 2). In
contrast, parole may provide release, but whether or not a
prisoner is paroled in no way relates to the validity of the
underlying conviction or sentence. Whatever the correct
ness of Dotson, parole procedures do not review the valid
ity of a conviction or sentence. For that reason, permitting
review of parole procedures does not similarly risk trans
forming §1983 into a vehicle for “challenging the validity
of outstanding criminal judgments.” Heck, 512 U. S., at
486.
Contrary to the majority’s contention, Dotson did not
reduce the question whether a claim is cognizable under
§1983 to a single inquiry into whether the prisoner’s claim
would “necessarily spell speedier release.” See ante, at 11,
12, n. 12 (internal quotation marks omitted).4 As we
recognized in Heck, evaluating the boundaries of §1983 is
not a narrow, mechanical inquiry. Even when the relief
sought was not “speedier release,” we inquired further
and returned to first principles to determine that the chal
——————
4 Because parole procedures are unrelated to the validity of a con
viction, a “necessarily spell speedier release” test may sufficiently
summarize the analysis of §1983 challenges to parole procedures. But
“necessarily spell speedier release” cannot be the only limit when a
prisoner challenges procedures used to review the validity of the
underlying conviction.

