Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
sue a civil rights claim under §1983, and when habeas corpus is the
prisoner’s sole remedy. The pathmarking decision, Heck v. Hum
phrey, 512 U. S. 477, concerned a state prisoner who brought a §1983
action for damages, alleging that he had been unlawfully investi
gated, arrested, tried, and convicted. This Court held that §1983 was
not an available remedy because any award in the plaintiff’s favor
would “necessarily imply” the invalidity of his conviction. See id., at
487. In contrast, in Wilkinson v. Dotson, 544 U. S. 74, the Court held
that prisoners who challenged the constitutionality of administrative
decisions denying them parole eligibility, could proceed under §1983,
for they sought no “injunction ordering . . . immediate or speedier re
lease into the community,” id., at 82, and “a favorable judgment
[would] not ‘necessarily imply’ the invalidity of [their] conviction[s] or
sentence[s],” ibid. Here, success in Skinner’s suit for DNA testing
would not “necessarily imply” the invalidity of his conviction. Test
results might prove exculpatory, but that outcome is hardly inevita
ble, for those results could also prove inconclusive or incriminating.
Switzer argues that, although Skinner’s immediate aim is DNA test
ing, his ultimate aim is to use the test results as a platform for at
tacking his conviction. But she has found no case in which the Court
has recognized habeas as the sole remedy where the relief sought
would not terminate custody, accelerate the date of release, or reduce
the custody level. Contrary to the fears of Switzer and her amici, in
the Circuits that currently allow §1983 claims for DNA testing, there
has been no flood of litigation seeking postconviction discovery of evi
dence associated with the questions of guilt or punishment. The pro
jected toll on federal courts is all the more implausible regarding
DNA testing claims, for Osborne has rejected substantive due process
as a basis for such claims. More generally, in the Prison Litigation
Reform Act of 1995, Congress has placed constraints on prisoner suits
in order to prevent sportive federal-court filings. Nor is there cause
for concern that the instant ruling will spill over to claims relying on
Brady v. Maryland, 373 U. S. 83. Brady, which announced a consti
tutional requirement addressed to the prosecution’s conduct pretrial,
proscribes withholding evidence “favorable to an accused” and “mate
rial to [his] guilt or to punishment.” Cone v. Bell, 556 U. S. ___, ___.
Unlike DNA testing, which may yield exculpatory, incriminating, or
inconclusive results, a successful Brady claim necessarily yields evi
dence undermining a conviction: Brady claims therefore rank within
the traditional core of habeas corpus and outside the province of
§1983. Pp. 10–14.
(d) Switzer’s several arguments why Skinner’s complaint should
fail for lack of merit, unaddressed by the courts below, are ripe for
consideration on remand. P. 14.

