6

SKINNER v. SWITZER
THOMAS, J., dissenting

ner undermines these restrictions. For example, Skinner
has never presented his current challenge to Texas’ proce
dures for postconviction relief to the Texas courts. Allow
ing Skinner to artfully plead an attack on state habeas
procedures instead of an attack on state habeas results
undercuts the restrictions Congress and this Court have
placed on federal review of state convictions. See Osborne,
supra, at ___ (ALITO, J., concurring) (slip op., at 3). To
allege that the Texas courts erred in denying him relief on
collateral review, Skinner could only file a federal habeas
petition, with its accompanying procedural restrictions
and deferential review. But a successful challenge to
Texas’ collateral review procedures under §1983 would
impeach the result of collateral review without complying
with any of the restrictions for relief in federal habeas.
The majority contends that its decision will not “spill
over to claims relying on Brady v. Maryland, 373 U. S. 83
(1963).” Ante, at 13; but cf. Osborne, supra, at ___–___
(ALITO, J., concurring) (slip op., at 3–5). In truth, the
majority provides a roadmap for any unsuccessful state
habeas petitioner to relitigate his claim under §1983: After
state habeas is denied, file a §1983 suit challenging the
state habeas process rather than the result. What pris
oner would not avail himself of this additional bite at the
apple?3
——————
3 Nor is there any reason to believe that the Court’s holding will be
cabined to collateral review procedures. The Court does not discuss
whether a State’s direct review process may be subject to challenge
under §1983, but it suggests no principled distinction between direct
and collateral review. This risks transforming §1983 into a vehicle for
direct criminal appeals. Cf. Heck v. Humphrey, 512 U. S. 477, 486
(1994). Just as any unsuccessful state habeas petitioner will now resort
to §1983 and challenge state collateral review procedures, so, too, will
unsuccessful appellants turn to §1983 to challenge the state appellate
procedures.

