(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SKINNER v. SWITZER, DISTRICT ATTORNEY FOR
31ST JUDICIAL DISTRICT OF TEXAS
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–9000. Argued October 13, 2010—Decided March 7, 2011
District Attorney’s Office for Third Judicial Dist. v. Osborne, 557 U. S.
___, ___, left unresolved the question whether a convicted state pris
oner seeking DNA testing of crime-scene evidence may assert that
claim in a civil rights action under 42 U. S. C. §1983 or may assert
the claim in federal court only in a petition for a writ of habeas cor
pus under 28 U. S. C. §2254.
A Texas jury convicted petitioner Skinner and sentenced him to
death for murdering his girlfriend and her sons. He claimed that a
potent alcohol and drug mix rendered him physically unable to com
mit the brutal murders, and he identified his girlfriend’s uncle as the
likely perpetrator. In preparation for trial, the State tested some of
the physical evidence, but left untested several items, including
knives found on the premises, an axe handle, vaginal swabs, finger
nail clippings, and certain hair samples. More than six years later,
Texas enacted Article 64, which allows prisoners to gain postconvic
tion DNA testing in limited circumstances. Invoking Article 64,
Skinner twice moved in state court for DNA testing of the untested
biological evidence. Both motions were denied. The Texas Court of
Criminal Appeals (CCA) affirmed the first denial of relief on the
ground that Skinner had not shown, as required by Article
64.03(a)(2), that he “would not have been convicted if exculpatory re
sults had been obtained through DNA testing.” The CCA affirmed
the second denial of relief on the ground that Skinner had not shown,
as required by Article 64.01(b)(1)(B), that the evidence was not previ
ously tested “through no fault” on his part.
Skinner next filed the instant federal action for injunctive relief
under §1983, naming as defendant respondent Switzer, the District

