8

SKINNER v. SWITZER
Opinion of the Court

decisions reached by the CCA in applying Article 64 to his
motions; instead, he challenges, as denying him proce­
dural due process, Texas’ postconviction DNA statute “as
construed” by the Texas courts. Tr. of Oral Arg. 56. See
also id., at 52 (Texas courts, Skinner’s counsel argued,
have “construed the statute to completely foreclose any
prisoner who could have sought DNA testing prior to
trial[,] but did not[,] from seeking testing” postconviction).8
The merits of Skinner’s federal-court complaint assail­
ing the Texas statute as authoritatively construed, and
particularly the vitality of his claim in light of Osborne,
see supra, at 2—unaddressed by the District Court or the
Fifth Circuit—are not ripe for review. We take up here
only the questions whether there is federal-court subject­
matter jurisdiction over Skinner’s complaint, and whether
the claim he presses is cognizable under §1983.
B
Respondent Switzer asserts that Skinner’s challenge is
“[j]urisdictionally [b]arred” by what has come to be known
as the Rooker-Feldman doctrine. Brief for Respondent 48–
49 (boldface deleted). In line with the courts below, we
conclude that Rooker-Feldman does not bar Skinner’s suit.
As we explained in Exxon Mobil Corp. v. Saudi Basic
Industries Corp., 544 U. S. 280 (2005), the RookerFeldman doctrine has been applied by this Court only
twice, i.e., only in the two cases from which the doctrine
takes its name: first, Rooker v. Fidelity Trust Co., 263
U. S. 413 (1923), then 60 years later, District of Columbia
——————
8 Unlike the petitioner in District Attorney’s Office for Third Judicial
Dist. v. Osborne, 557 U. S. ___ (2009), who “attempt[ed] to sidestep
state process through . . . a federal lawsuit,” id., at ___ (slip op., at 17),
Skinner first resorted to state court, see supra, at 5–6. In this respect,
Skinner is better positioned to urge in federal court “the inadequacy of
the state-law procedures available to him in state postconviction relief.”
Osborne, 557 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 18).

