12

SKINNER v. SWITZER
Opinion of the Court

order requiring DNA testing, his ultimate aim, Switzer
urges, is to use the test results as a platform for attacking
his conviction. It suffices to point out that Switzer has
found no case, nor has the dissent, in which the Court has
recognized habeas as the sole remedy, or even an available
one, where the relief sought would “neither terminat[e]
custody, accelerat[e] the future date of release from cus­
tody, nor reduc[e] the level of custody.” Dotson, 544 U. S.,
at 86 (SCALIA, J., concurring).
Respondent Switzer and her amici forecast that a “vast
expansion of federal jurisdiction . . . would ensue” were we
to hold that Skinner’s complaint can be initiated under
§1983. See Brief for National District Attorneys Associa­
tion as Amicus Curiae 8. In particular, they predict a
proliferation of federal civil actions “seeking postconviction
discovery of evidence [and] other relief inescapably associ­
ated with the central questions of guilt or punishment.”
Id., at 6. These fears, shared by the dissent, post, at 6, are
unwarranted.13
In the Circuits that currently allow §1983 claims for
DNA testing, see supra, at 1, no evidence tendered by
Switzer shows any litigation flood or even rainfall. The
——————
13 Unlike the parole determinations at issue in Wilkinson v. Dotson,
544 U. S. 74 (2005), Switzer urges, claims like Skinner’s require inquiry
into the State’s proof at trial and therefore lie at “the core of the crimi­
nal proceeding itself.” Tr. of Oral 41; see id., at 33–34. Dotson de­
clared, however, in no uncertain terms, that when a prisoner’s claim
would not “necessarily spell speedier release,” that claim does not lie at
“the core of habeas corpus,” and may be brought, if at all, under §1983.
544 U. S., at 82 (majority opinion) (internal quotation marks omitted);
see id., at 85–86 (SCALIA, J., concurring). Whatever might be said of
Switzer’s argument were we to recast our doctrine, Switzer’s position
cannot be reconciled with the line our precedent currently draws. Nor
can the dissent’s advocacy of a “retur[n] to first principles.” Post, at 7.
Given the importance of providing clear guidance to the lower courts,
“we again see no reason for moving the line our cases draw.” Dotson,
544 U. S., at 84.

