Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

THOMAS, J., dissenting

Trial procedures are used to initially convict a prisoner;
appellate procedures review the validity of that conviction
before it becomes final; and collateral review procedures
permit challenge to the conviction after it is final. For
purposes of deciding which claims fall within the bounds
of §1983, I think it makes sense to treat similarly all
constitutional challenges to procedures concerning the
validity of a conviction. See Heck, supra, at 491 (THOMAS,
J., concurring) (“[I]t is proper for the Court to devise
limitations aimed at ameliorating the conflict [between
habeas and §1983], provided that it does so in a principled
fashion”).
Second, “principles of federalism and comity [are] at
stake” when federal courts review state collateral review
procedures, just as when they review state trial proce
dures. Osborne, 557 U. S., at ___ (ALITO, J., concurring)
(slip op., at 2). An attack in federal court on any “state
judicial action” concerning a state conviction must proceed
with “proper respect for state functions,” because the
federal courts are being asked to “tr[y] the regularity of
proceedings had in courts of coordinate jurisdiction.”
Preiser, 411 U. S., at 491 (internal quotation marks and
emphasis omitted).
Because of these concerns for federal-state comity,
Congress has strictly limited the procedures for federal
habeas challenges to state convictions and state habeas
decisions. Congress requires that before a state prisoner
may seek relief in federal court, he must “exhaus[t] the
remedies available in the courts of the State.” 28 U. S. C.
§2254(b)(1)(A). And state habeas determinations receive
significant deference in subsequent federal habeas pro
ceedings. §2254(d). These requirements ensure that the
state courts have the first opportunity to correct any error
with a state conviction and that their rulings receive due
respect in subsequent federal challenges.
By bringing a procedural challenge under §1983, Skin

