Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

STEVENS, J., concurring

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1569
_________________

UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. MARTIN O’BRIEN 

AND ARTHUR BURGESS 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE FIRST CIRCUIT

[May 24, 2010] 


JUSTICE STEVENS, concurring.
A “sentencing factor” may serve two very different func
tions. As a historical matter, the term has described a fact
that a trial judge might rely upon when choosing a specific
sentence within the range authorized by the legislature.
In that setting, the judge has broad discretion in deter
mining both the significance of the factor and whether it
has been established by reliable evidence.
In the 1970’s and 1980’s, as part of a national effort to
enact tougher sentences,1 a new type of “sentencing factor”
emerged. Since then the term has been used to describe
facts, found by the judge by a preponderance of the evi
dence, that have the effect of imposing mandatory limits
on a sentencing judge’s discretion. When used as an ele
ment of a mandatory sentencing scheme, a sentencing
factor is the functional equivalent of an element of the
——————
1 “By 1990, forty-six states had enacted mandatory sentence en
hancement laws, and most states had a wide variety of these provi
sions.” Lowenthal, Mandatory Sentencing Laws: Undermining the
Effectiveness of Determinate Sentencing Reform, 81 Cal. L. Rev. 61,
64–65 (1993) (footnote omitted); see also id., at 69 (“[M]ost of the
current mandatory enhancement laws did not appear until the 1970s”);
Schulhofer, Rethinking Mandatory Minimums, 28 Wake Forest L. Rev.
199, 200–201 (1993) (discussing history of federal mandatory minimum
sentencing regime).


2

UNITED STATES v. O’BRIEN
STEVENS, J., concurring

criminal offense itself. In these circumstances, I continue
to believe the Constitution requires proof beyond a rea
sonable doubt of this “factor.”
I
We first encountered the use of a “sentencing factor” in
the mandatory minimum context in McMillan v. Pennsyl
vania, 477 U. S. 79 (1986), when we examined the consti
tutionality of Pennsylvania’s 1982 Mandatory Minimum
Sentencing Act (Act).2 The Pennsylvania statute subjected
anyone convicted of a specified felony to a mandatory
minimum 5-year sentence if the trial judge found, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the defendant “visibly
possessed a firearm” during the commission of the offense.
See id., at 81–82. In four prosecutions under the Act, the
trial judges had each held that the statute was unconstitu
tional and imposed sentences lower than the 5-year man
datory minimum, presumably because they recognized
that the statute treated the visible possession of a firearm
as the functional equivalent of an offense element. Id., at
82. On appeal, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court consoli
dated the four cases and reversed.3 Id., at 83. It reasoned
that because visible possession of a firearm was a mere
“sentencing factor,” rather than an element of any of the
specified offenses defined by the legislature, the protec
tions afforded by cases like In re Winship, 397 U. S. 358
(1970),4 did not apply.
A bare majority of the McMillan Court endorsed this
——————
2 See Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U. S. 466, 485 (2000) (“It was in
McMillan . . . that this Court, for the first time, coined the term ‘sen
tencing factor’ to refer to a fact that was not found by a jury but that
could affect the sentence imposed by the judge”).
3 Commonwealth v. Wright, 508 Pa. 25, 494 A. 2d 354 (1985).
4 In Winship, the Court “explicitly” held that “the Due Process Clause
protects the accused against conviction except upon proof beyond a
reasonable doubt of every fact necessary to constitute the crime with
which he is charged.” 397 U. S., at 364.


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., concurring

novel use of the sentencing factor concept. Five Justices
concluded that the prerequisite for a mandatory sentence
is just a “sentencing factor,” rather than an “element of
the offense,” because the factor does not “alte[r] the maxi
mum penalty for the crime” and merely “limit[s] the sen
tencing court’s discretion in selecting a penalty within the
range already available to it.” 477 U. S., at 87–88. Yet,
although the Pennsylvania Act’s 5-year mandatory sen
tence for visible possession of a firearm during the com
mission of an offense did not exceed the statutory maxi
mum that otherwise applied for the crimes of conviction, a
positive finding on the so-called sentencing factor man
dated the imposition of a sentence that exceeded the pun
ishment the defendant would have otherwise received.
See id., at 103–104 (STEVENS, J., dissenting).
The majority opinion in McMillan can fairly be de
scribed as pathmarking, but unlike one of its predecessors,
Winship, it pointed in the wrong direction. For reasons set
forth in the opinions joined by the four dissenting Justices
in McMillan, I continue to believe that McMillan was
incorrectly decided. See id., at 93–94 (Marshall, J., dis
senting); id., at 95–104 (STEVENS, J., dissenting).
II
Not only was McMillan wrong the day it was decided,
but its reasoning has been substantially undermined—if
not eviscerated—by the development of our Sixth Amend
ment jurisprudence in more recent years. We now under
stand that “ ‘[i]t is unconstitutional [under the Sixth
Amendment] for a legislature to remove from the jury the
assessment of facts that increase the prescribed range of
penalties to which a criminal defendant is exposed.’ ”
Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U. S. 466, 490 (2000) (quoting
Jones v. United States, 526 U. S. 227, 252–253 (1999)
(STEVENS, J., concurring)). Harmonizing Apprendi with
our existing Sixth Amendment jurisprudence, we ex


4

UNITED STATES v. O’BRIEN
STEVENS, J., concurring

plained that “any fact that increases the penalty for a
crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be
submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reasonable
doubt.” 530 U. S., at 490 (emphasis added). In other
words, we narrowed our holding to those facts that effec
tively raised the ceiling on the offense, but did not then
consider whether the logic of our holding applied also
to those facts necessary to set the floor of a particular
sentence.
As JUSTICE THOMAS eloquently explained in his dissent
in Harris v. United States, 536 U. S. 545, 572 (2002), the
reasoning in our decision in Apprendi applies with equal
force in the context of mandatory minimums. There is,
quite simply, no reason to distinguish between facts that
trigger punishment in excess of the statutory maximum
and facts that trigger a mandatory minimum. This case
vividly illustrates the point. It is quite plain that there is
a world of difference between the 81⁄2-year sentence and
the 7-year sentence the judge imposed on the defendants
in this case and the 30-year sentence mandated by the
machinegun finding under 18 U. S. C. §924(c)(1)(B).
Mandatory minimums may have a particularly acute
practical effect in this type of statutory scheme which
contains an implied statutory maximum of life, see ante,
at 10. There is, in this type of case, no ceiling; there is
only a floor below which a sentence cannot fall. Further
more, absent a positive finding on one of §924(c)(1)’s enu
merated factors, it is quite clear that no judge would
impose a sentence as great as the sentences commanded
by the provision at issue in this case. Indeed, it appears
that, but for those subject to the 30-year mandatory mini
mum, no defendant has ever been sentenced to a sentence
anywhere near 30 years for a §924(c) offense. See Brief for
Respondent O’Brien 46–47, and n. 15.
Apprendi should have signaled the end of McMillan,
just as it signaled the unconstitutionality of state and


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., concurring

federal determinate sentencing schemes in Blakely v.
Washington, 542 U. S. 296 (2004), and United States v.
Booker, 543 U. S. 220 (2005). But thanks to an unpersua
sive attempt to distinguish Apprendi,5 and a reluctant
Apprendi dissenter, McMillan survived over the protest of
four Members of the Court. See Harris, 536 U. S., at 569–
570 (BREYER, J., concurring in part and concurring in
judgment) (“I cannot easily distinguish Apprendi . . . from
this case in terms of logic. For that reason, I cannot agree
with the plurality’s opinion insofar as it finds such a dis
tinction. At the same time . . . I cannot yet accept [Ap
prendi’s] rule”). It appears, however, that the reluctant
Apprendi dissenter may no longer be reluctant.6
I am therefore in full agreement with JUSTICE THOMAS’
separate writing today, post, at 1–2, as I was with his
Harris dissent. McMillan and Harris should be overruled,
at least to the extent that they authorize judicial factfind
ing on a preponderance of the evidence standard of facts
that “expos[e] a defendant to [a] greater punishment than
what is otherwise legally prescribed . . .” Harris, 536
U. S., at 579 (THOMAS, J., dissenting). Any such fact is the
functional equivalent of an element of the offense.
——————
5 Consistent with the attempt in Harris v. United States, 536 U. S.
545 (2002), to distinguish Apprendi, JUSTICE KENNEDY’s fine opinion for
the Court today employs some of the same acrobatics to distinguish
Harris from the present case. Harris also involved §924(c)(1), though a
different subsection; its reading of the mandatory minimum for “bran
dishing” a firearm contained in 18 U. S. C. §924(c)(1)(A) as a sentencing
factor is not so easily distinguished from the nearly identical manda
tory minimum for possessing a “machinegun” under §924(c)(1)(B).
6 “But in Harris, I said that I thought Apprendi does cover mandatory
minimums, but I don’t accept Apprendi. Well, at some point I guess I
have to accept Apprendi, because it’s the law and has been for some
time. So if . . . if that should become an issue about whether mandatory
minimums are treated like the maximums for Apprendi purposes,
should we reset the case for argument?” Tr. of Oral Arg. 20 (question
by BREYER, J.).


6

UNITED STATES v. O’BRIEN
STEVENS, J., concurring

III
In my view, the simplest, and most correct, solution to
the case before us would be to recognize that any fact
mandating the imposition of a sentence more severe than
a judge would otherwise have discretion to impose should
be treated as an element of the offense. The unanimity of
our decision today does not imply that McMillan is safe
from a direct challenge to its foundation.

