(Slip Opinion) OCTOBER TERM, 2009 Syllabus NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. Syllabus No. 08–1569. Argued February 23, 2010—Decided May 24, 2010 Respondents O’Brien and Burgess each carried a firearm during an attempted robbery. Count three of their indictment charged them with using a firearm in furtherance of a crime of violence, which car ries a mandatory minimum 5-year prison term. 18 U. S. C. §924(c)(1)(A)(i). Count four alleged use of a machinegun (here, a pis tol that authorities believed operated as a fully automatic firearm) in furtherance of that crime, which carries a 30-year mandatory mini mum term. §924(c)(1)(B)(ii). The Government moved to dismiss the fourth count on the basis that it could not establish the count beyond a reasonable doubt, but it maintained that §924(c)(1)(B)(ii)’s ma chinegun provision was a sentencing enhancement to be determined by the District Court upon a conviction on count three. The court dismissed count four and rejected the Government’s sentencing enhancement position. Respondents then pleaded guilty to the re maining counts. The court sentenced O’Brien to a 102-month term and Burgess to an 84-month term for their §924(c) convictions. In af firming the District Court’s §924(c)(1)(B)(ii) ruling, the First Circuit held that the machinegun provision in an earlier version of §924(c) constituted an element of an offense, not a sentencing factor. The court found that Castillo was “close to binding,” absent clearer or more dramatic changes than those made by Congress’ 1998 amend ment of §924(c) or a clearer legislative history. Held: The fact that a firearm was a machinegun is an element to be proved to the jury beyond a reasonable doubt, not a sentencing factor to be proved to the judge at sentencing. Pp. 5–16. (a) Generally, a fact that “increase[s] the prescribed range of penal ties to which a criminal defendant is exposed” is an element of a
Syllabus an indictment and proved to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt, Ham sylvania, 477 U. S. 79, 91−92. Subject to this constitutional con straint, Congress determines whether a factor is an element or a sen tencing factor. When Congress is not explicit, courts look to a statute’s provisions and framework for guidance. Analysis of the cur rent machinegun provision begins with Castillo, where the Court found the bare language of §924’s prior version “neutral,” 530 U. S., at 124, but ruled that four factors—(1) language and structure, (2) tradition, (3) risk of unfairness, and (4) severity of the sentence— favored treating the machinegun provision as an element of an of fense, id., at 124−131; while a fifth factor—legislative history—did not favor either side, ibid. Pp. 5–6. (b) As relevant here, the 1998 amendment divided what was once a lengthy principal sentence into separate subparagraphs. Thus, with regard to the first Castillo factor, the Court’s observation that “Con gress placed the element ‘uses or carries a firearm’ and the word ‘ma chinegun’ in a single sentence, not broken up with dashes or sepa rated into subsections,” 530 U. S., at 124−125, no longer holds true. However, the amendment did not affect the second through fifth Cas tillo factors. Each of them, except for legislative history (which re mains relatively silent), continues to favor treating the machinegun provision as an element. The amendment’s effect on the language and structure factor requires closer examination. Pp. 6–12. (c) Given the Court’s determination in Castillo that the machine gun provision in §924’s prior version is an element, a substantive change in the statute should not be inferred “[a]bsent a clear indica 279, 290. Nothing in the 1998 amendment indicates such a change. There are three principal differences between the previous and cur rent §924(c). The first, a substantive change, shifts what were once mandatory 5-year and 30-year sentences to mandatory minimum sentences. The second, also substantive—made in direct response to carries” in §924’s preamendment version connotes “more than mere possession,” id., at 143—adds “possesses” to the “uses or carries” lan guage in §924(c)’s principal paragraph and provides sentencing en hancements for brandishing or discharging the firearm, United States, 536 U. S. 545, 552−556. Neither of these substantive changes suggests that Congress meant to transform the machinegun provision from an element into a sentencing factor. The third differ
Syllabus ence is the machinegun provision’s relocation from the principal paragraph that unmistakably lists offense elements to a separate subsection, §924(c)(1)(B), but this structural or stylistic change pro vides no “clear indication” that Congress meant to alter its treatment of machineguns as an offense element. A more logical explanation is that the restructuring was intended to break up a lengthy principal paragraph, which exceeded 250 words, into a more readable statute, which is in step with current legislative drafting guidelines. While this Court has recognized that placing factors in separate subsections is one way Congress might signal that it is treating them as sentenc ing factors rather than elements, Castillo, supra, at 124−125, it has rejected the view that such a structural consideration predominates even when other factors point in the other direction, Harris, supra, at 553. The current structure of §924(c) is more favorable to treating the machinegun provision as a sentencing factor than was true in Castillo, particularly because the machinegun provision is now posi tioned between the sentencing factors provided in (A)(ii) and (iii) and those in (C)(i) and (ii). This structural point is overcome by the sub stantial weight of the other Castillo factors and the principle that Congress would not enact so significant a change without a clear in dication of its purpose to do so. Pp. 12–16. 542 F. 3d 921, affirmed. KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J., and STEVENS, SCALIA, GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. STEVENS, J., filed a concurring opinion. THOMAS, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment.