Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

thermore, unless police officers identify themselves loudly
enough, occupants may not know who is at their doorstep.
Officers are permitted—indeed, encouraged—to identify
themselves to citizens, and “in many circumstances this
is cause for assurance, not discomfort.” United States v.
Drayton, 536 U. S. 194, 204 (2002). Citizens who are
startled by an unexpected knock on the door or by the
sight of unknown persons in plain clothes on their door­
step may be relieved to learn that these persons are police
officers. Others may appreciate the opportunity to make
an informed decision about whether to answer the door to
the police.
If respondent’s test were adopted, it would be extremely
difficult for police officers to know how loudly they may
announce their presence or how forcefully they may knock
on a door without running afoul of the police-created
exigency rule. And in most cases, it would be nearly im­
possible for a court to determine whether that threshold
had been passed. The Fourth Amendment does not re­
quire the nebulous and impractical test that respondent
proposes.5
——————
5 Contrary to respondent’s argument, see Brief for Respondent 13–18,
Johnson v. United States, 333 U. S. 10 (1948), does not require affir­
mance in this case. In Johnson, officers noticed the smell of burning
opium emanating from a hotel room. They then knocked on the door
and demanded entry. Upon seeing that Johnson was the only occupant
of the room, they placed her under arrest, searched the room, and
discovered opium and drug paraphernalia. Id., at 11.
Defending the legality of the search, the Government attempted to
justify the warrantless search of the room as a valid search incident to
a lawful arrest. See Brief for United States in Johnson v. United States,
O. T. 1947, No. 329, pp. 13, 16, 36. The Government did not contend
that the officers entered the room in order to prevent the destruction of
evidence. Although the officers said that they heard a “ ‘shuffling’ ”
noise inside the room after they knocked on the door, 333 U. S., at 12,
the Government did not claim that this particular noise was a noise
that would have led a reasonable officer to think that evidence was
about to be destroyed. Thus, Johnson is simply not a case about

