(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

KENTUCKY v. KING
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF KENTUCKY
No. 09–1272. Argued January 12, 2011—Decided May 16, 2011
Police officers in Lexington, Kentucky, followed a suspected drug dealer
to an apartment complex. They smelled marijuana outside an
apartment door, knocked loudly, and announced their presence. As
soon as the officers began knocking, they heard noises coming from
the apartment; the officers believed that these noises were consistent
with the destruction of evidence. The officers announced their intent
to enter the apartment, kicked in the door, and found respondent and
others. They saw drugs in plain view during a protective sweep of
the apartment and found additional evidence during a subsequent
search. The Circuit Court denied respondent’s motion to suppress
the evidence, holding that exigent circumstances—the need to pre
vent destruction of evidence—justified the warrantless entry. Re
spondent entered a conditional guilty plea, reserving his right to ap
peal the suppression ruling, and the Kentucky Court of Appeals
affirmed. The Supreme Court of Kentucky reversed. The court as
sumed that exigent circumstances existed, but it nonetheless invali
dated the search. The exigent circumstances rule did not apply, the
court held, because the police should have foreseen that their conduct
would prompt the occupants to attempt to destroy evidence.
Held:
1. The exigent circumstances rule applies when the police do not
create the exigency by engaging or threatening to engage in conduct
that violates the Fourth Amendment. Pp. 5–16.
(a) The Fourth Amendment expressly imposes two requirements:
All searches and seizures must be reasonable; and a warrant may not
be issued unless probable cause is properly established and the scope
of the authorized search is set out with particularity. Although
“ ‘searches and seizures inside a home without a warrant are pre
sumptively unreasonable,’ ” Brigham City v. Stuart, 547 U. S. 398,

