4

KENTUCKY v. KING
Opinion of the Court

exigent circumstances justified the warrantless entry
because the police reasonably believed that evidence
would be destroyed. The police did not impermissibly
create the exigency, the court explained, because they did
not deliberately evade the warrant requirement.
The Supreme Court of Kentucky reversed. 302 S. W. 3d
649 (2010). As a preliminary matter, the court observed
that there was “certainly some question as to whether the
sound of persons moving [inside the apartment] was suffi­
cient to establish that evidence was being destroyed.” Id.,
at 655. But the court did not answer that question. In­
stead, it “assume[d] for the purpose of argument that
exigent circumstances existed.” Ibid.
To determine whether police impermissibly created the
exigency, the Supreme Court of Kentucky announced a
two-part test. First, the court held, police cannot “deliber­
ately creat[e] the exigent circumstances with the bad faith
intent to avoid the warrant requirement.” Id., at 656
(internal quotation marks omitted). Second, even absent
bad faith, the court concluded, police may not rely on
exigent circumstances if “it was reasonably foreseeable
that the investigative tactics employed by the police would
create the exigent circumstances.” Ibid. (internal quota­
tion marks omitted). Although the court found no evi­
dence of bad faith, it held that exigent circumstances could
not justify the search because it was reasonably foresee­
able that the occupants would destroy evidence when the
police knocked on the door and announced their presence.
Ibid.
We granted certiorari. 561 U. S. ___ (2010).2
——————
2 After we granted certiorari, respondent filed a motion to dismiss the
petition as improvidently granted, which we denied. 562 U. S. ___
(2010). Respondent’s principal argument was that the case was moot
because, after the Kentucky Supreme Court reversed his conviction, the
Circuit Court dismissed the charges against him. Respondent’s argu­
ment is foreclosed by United States v. Villamonte-Marquez, 462 U. S.

