18

KENTUCKY v. KING
Opinion of the Court

Officer Cobb testified without contradiction that the offi­
cers “banged on the door as loud as [they] could” and
announced either “ ‘Police, police, police’ ” or “ ‘This is the
police.’ ” App. 22–23. This conduct was entirely consistent
with the Fourth Amendment, and we are aware of no
other evidence that might show that the officers either
violated the Fourth Amendment or threatened to do so (for
example, by announcing that they would break down the
door if the occupants did not open the door voluntarily).
Respondent argues that the officers “demanded” entry to
the apartment, but he has not pointed to any evidence in
the record that supports this assertion. He relies on a
passing statement made by the trial court in its opinion
denying respondent’s motion to suppress. See App. to Pet.
for Cert. 3a–4a. In recounting the events that preceded
the search, the judge wrote that the officers “banged on
the door of the apartment on the back left of the breeze­
way identifying themselves as police officers and demand
ing that the door be opened by the persons inside.” Ibid.
(emphasis added and deleted). However, at a later point
in this opinion, the judge stated that the officers “initially
knock[ed] on the door of the apartment unit and await[ed]
the response or consensual entry.” Id., at 9a. This later
statement is consistent with the testimony at the suppres­
sion hearing and with the findings of the state appellate
courts. See 302 S. W. 3d, at 651 (The officers “knocked
loudly on the back left apartment door and announced
‘police’ ”); App. to Pet. for Cert. 14a (The officers “knock[ed]
on the door and announc[ed] themselves as police”); App.
22–24. There is no evidence of a “demand” of any sort,
much less a demand that amounts to a threat to violate
the Fourth Amendment. If there is contradictory evidence
that has not been brought to our attention, the state court
may elect to address that matter on remand.
Finally, respondent claims that the officers “explained to
[the occupants that the officers] were going to make entry

