Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

We have taken a similar approach in other cases involv­
ing warrantless searches. For example, we have held that
law enforcement officers may seize evidence in plain view,
provided that they have not violated the Fourth Amend­
ment in arriving at the spot from which the observation of
the evidence is made. See Horton v. California, 496 U. S.
128, 136–140 (1990). As we put it in Horton, “[i]t is . . . an
essential predicate to any valid warrantless seizure of
incriminating evidence that the officer did not violate the
Fourth Amendment in arriving at the place from which
the evidence could be plainly viewed.” Id., at 136. So long
as this prerequisite is satisfied, however, it does not mat­
ter that the officer who makes the observation may have
gone to the spot from which the evidence was seen with
the hope of being able to view and seize the evidence. See
id., at 138 (“The fact that an officer is interested in an
item of evidence and fully expects to find it in the course of
a search should not invalidate its seizure”). Instead, the
Fourth Amendment requires only that the steps preceding
the seizure be lawful. See id., at 136–137.
Similarly, officers may seek consent-based encounters if
they are lawfully present in the place where the consen­
sual encounter occurs. See INS v. Delgado, 466 U. S.
210, 217, n. 5 (1984) (noting that officers who entered
into consent-based encounters with employees in a factory
building were “lawfully present [in the factory] pursuant
to consent or a warrant”). If consent is freely given, it
makes no difference that an officer may have approached
the person with the hope or expectation of obtaining con­
sent. See id., at 216 (“While most citizens will respond to
a police request, the fact that people do so, and do so
——————
stances, the exigent circumstances rule should not apply where the
police, without a warrant or any legally sound basis for a warrantless
entry, threaten that they will enter without permission unless admit­
ted. In this case, however, no such actual threat was made, and there­
fore we have no need to reach that question.

