2

KENTUCKY v. KING
Syllabus
403, this presumption may be overcome when “ ‘the exigencies of the
situation’ make the needs of law enforcement so compelling that [a]
warrantless search is objectively reasonable under the Fourth
Amendment,” Mincey v. Arizona, 437 U. S. 385, 394. One such exi
gency is the need “to prevent the imminent destruction of evidence.”
Brigham City, supra, at 403. Pp. 5–6.
(b) Under the “police-created exigency” doctrine, which lower
courts have developed as an exception to the exigent circumstances
rule, exigent circumstances do not justify a warrantless search when
the exigency was “created” or “manufactured” by the conduct of the
police. The lower courts have not agreed, however, on the test for de
termining when police impermissibly create an exigency. Pp. 7–8.
(c) The proper test follows from the principle that permits war
rantless searches: warrantless searches are allowed when the cir
cumstances make it reasonable, within the meaning of the Fourth
Amendment, to dispense with the warrant requirement. Thus, a
warrantless entry based on exigent circumstances is reasonable when
the police did not create the exigency by engaging or threatening to
engage in conduct violating the Fourth Amendment. A similar ap
proach has been taken in other cases involving warrantless searches.
For example, officers may seize evidence in plain view if they have
not violated the Fourth Amendment in arriving at the spot from
which the observation of the evidence is made, see Horton v. Califor
nia, 496 U. S. 128, 136–140; and they may seek consent-based en
counters if they are lawfully present in the place where the consen
sual encounter occurs, see INS v. Delgado, 466 U. S. 210, 217, n. 5.
Pp. 8–10.
(d) Some courts, including the Kentucky Supreme Court, have
imposed additional requirements—asking whether officers “ ‘deliber
ately created the exigent circumstances with the bad faith intent to
avoid the warrant requirement,’ ” 302 S. W. 3d 649, 656 (case below);
reasoning that police may not rely on an exigency if “ ‘it was reasona
bly foreseeable that [their] investigative tactics . . . would create the
exigent circumstances,’ ”ibid.; faulting officers for knocking on a door
when they had sufficient evidence to seek a warrant but did not do
so; and finding that officers created or manufactured an exigency
when their investigation was contrary to standard or good law en
forcement practices. Such requirements are unsound and are thus
rejected. Pp. 10–14.
(e) Respondent contends that an exigency is impermissibly cre
ated when officers engage in conduct that would cause a reasonable
person to believe that entry was imminent and inevitable, but that
approach is also flawed. The ability of officers to respond to an exi
gency cannot turn on such subtleties as the officers’ tone of voice in

