Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

ing that the police deliberately created the exigency).
This approach unjustifiably interferes with legitimate
law enforcement strategies. There are many entirely
proper reasons why police may not want to seek a search
warrant as soon as the bare minimum of evidence needed
to establish probable cause is acquired. Without attempt­
ing to provide a comprehensive list of these reasons, we
note a few.
First, the police may wish to speak with the occupants of
a dwelling before deciding whether it is worthwhile to seek
authorization for a search. They may think that a short
and simple conversation may obviate the need to apply for
and execute a warrant. See Schneckloth v. Bustamonte,
412 U. S. 218, 228 (1973). Second, the police may want to
ask an occupant of the premises for consent to search
because doing so is simpler, faster, and less burdensome
than applying for a warrant. A consensual search also
“may result in considerably less inconvenience” and em­
barrassment to the occupants than a search conducted
pursuant to a warrant. Ibid. Third, law enforcement
officers may wish to obtain more evidence before submit­
ting what might otherwise be considered a marginal war­
rant application. Fourth, prosecutors may wish to wait
until they acquire evidence that can justify a search that
is broader in scope than the search that a judicial officer is
likely to authorize based on the evidence then available.
And finally, in many cases, law enforcement may not want
to execute a search that will disclose the existence of an
investigation because doing so may interfere with the
acquisition of additional evidence against those already
under suspicion or evidence about additional but as yet
unknown participants in a criminal scheme.
We have said that “[l]aw enforcement officers are under
no constitutional duty to call a halt to criminal investiga­
tion the moment they have the minimum evidence to
establish probable cause.” Hoffa v. United States, 385

