12

KENTUCKY v. KING
Opinion of the Court

an approach would produce. Suppose that the officers in
the present case did not smell marijuana smoke and thus
knew only that there was a 50% chance that the fleeing
suspect had entered the apartment on the left rather than
the apartment on the right. Under those circumstances,
would it have been reasonably foreseeable that the occu­
pants of the apartment on the left would seek to destroy
evidence upon learning that the police were at the door?
Or suppose that the officers knew only that the suspect
had disappeared into one of the apartments on a floor with
3, 5, 10, or even 20 units? If the police chose a door at
random and knocked for the purpose of asking the occu­
pants if they knew a person who fit the description of the
suspect, would it have been reasonably foreseeable that
the occupants would seek to destroy evidence?
We have noted that “[t]he calculus of reasonableness
must embody allowance for the fact that police officers are
often forced to make split-second judgments—in circum­
stances that are tense, uncertain, and rapidly evolving.”
Graham v. Connor, 490 U. S. 386, 396–397 (1989). The
reasonable foreseeability test would create unacceptable
and unwarranted difficulties for law enforcement officers
who must make quick decisions in the field, as well as for
judges who would be required to determine after the fact
whether the destruction of evidence in response to a knock
on the door was reasonably foreseeable based on what the
officers knew at the time.
Probable cause and time to secure a warrant. Some
courts, in applying the police-created exigency doctrine,
fault law enforcement officers if, after acquiring evidence
that is sufficient to establish probable cause to search
particular premises, the officers do not seek a warrant but
instead knock on the door and seek either to speak with an
occupant or to obtain consent to search. See, e.g., Cham
bers, supra, at 569 (citing “[t]he failure to seek a warrant
in the face of plentiful probable cause” as a factor indicat­

