Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

verdict with the evidence,” only that the likelihood of a
different result is great enough to “undermine[] confidence
in the outcome of the trial.” Kyles v. Whitley, 514 U. S.
419, 434 (1995) (internal quotation marks omitted).
We have observed that evidence impeaching an eyewitness may not be material if the State’s other evidence is
strong enough to sustain confidence in the verdict. See
United States v. Agurs, 427 U. S. 97, 112–113, and n. 21
(1976). That is not the case here. Boatner’s testimony
was the only evidence linking Smith to the crime. And
Boatner’s undisclosed statements directly contradict his
testimony: Boatner told the jury that he had “[n]o doubt”
that Smith was the gunman he stood “face to face” with on
the night of the crime, but Ronquillo’s notes show Boatner
saying that he “could not ID anyone because [he] couldn’t
see faces” and “would not know them if [he] saw them.”
App. 196, 200, 308. Boatner’s undisclosed statements
were plainly material.
The State and the dissent advance various reasons why
the jury might have discounted Boatner’s undisclosed
statements. They stress, for example, that Boatner made
other remarks on the night of the murder indicating that
he could identify the first gunman to enter the house, but
not the others. That merely leaves us to speculate about
which of Boatner’s contradictory declarations the jury
would have believed. The State also contends that Boatner’s statements made five days after the crime can be
explained by fear of retaliation. Smith responds that the
record contains no evidence of any such fear. Again, the
State’s argument offers a reason that the jury could have
disbelieved Boatner’s undisclosed statements, but gives us
no confidence that it would have done so.
The police files that Smith obtained in state postconviction proceedings contain other evidence that Smith contends is both favorable to him and material to the verdict.
Because we hold that Boatner’s undisclosed statements

