Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

THOMAS, J., dissenting

Intratec or Mac-11 pistol can be used with one hand.
Smith nonetheless insists that, “as a colloquial matter,
machine pistols of the Intratec or MAC-11 type would be
considered automatic or semiautomatic weapons, rather
than handguns.” Reply Brief 18. But even assuming that
Smith is correct, he fails to explain why Leary, a firearms
expert, would have been expected to use colloquial rather
than technical terminology.8
The record also makes clear that, when Boatner used
the term “handgun,” he did not understand it to exclude
automatic or semiautomatic machine pistols. In the immediate aftermath of the murders, as well as at trial,
Boatner stated that a second perpetrator carried a “Ma[c]
10” or “Tech Nine” “Uzi” type weapon, Tr. 159, 179 (Dec. 5,
1995); 5 Record 809, 813, 866, and Boatner described that
weapon as a “handgun,” id., at 809. Moreover, Boatner’s
pretrial description of the silver or chrome “handgun” that
the first man held was consistent with Leary’s undisclosed
statement that the gun that fired the 9-millimeter ammunition found at the scene was a semiautomatic weapon. In
his station house statement, Boatner described the first
man’s weapon as a “big,” “automatic pistol.” Id., at 813,
866. Because Leary’s pretrial statement is neither impeaching nor exculpatory, Leary’s undisclosed statement
cannot form the basis of a Brady violation. See Strickler,
——————
8 Smith

argues that Leary himself considered an “[Intratec] or ‘Mac[-]
11’ ” model type to be different from a 9-millimeter handgun. Smith
relies on the fact that Leary’s pretrial statement indicated that the
ammunition recovered from the scene did not come from the handgun
recovered from Donielle Bannister, another suspect in the murders.
Id., at 18. Leary’s pretrial statement did not describe the handgun
recovered from Bannister as a 9-millimeter, contrary to Smith’s representation. More importantly, Leary’s statement suggests only that
Bannister’s handgun did not fire the 9-millimeter ammunition found at
the scene, not that Leary did not consider an “[Intratec] or ‘Mac[-]11’ ”
model type to be a handgun.

