4

SMITH v. CAIN
THOMAS, J., dissenting

Boatner “was positive this wasn’t the individual.” Id., at
97; see also 5 Record 828. A few months later, Ronquillo
presented Boatner with the array that included a photograph of Smith. Tr. 99–101 (Dec. 5, 1995). Ronquillo
testified that Boatner identified Smith “immediately,”
stating, “ ‘This is it. I’ll never forget that face.’ ” Id., at
100. Of the 84 photographs that Boatner viewed, Smith’s
photograph was the only one that Boatner identified.
Boatner identified Smith again when he was called to
the stand during Smith’s trial. Boatner testified that
Smith’s face was the “[s]ame face,” id., at 174, and that
Smith’s mouth was the “[s]ame mouth” “full of gold,” ibid.,
as that of the first man who came through the kitchen
door on the night of the attack. Boatner also testified that
Smith’s hair at trial was “shaved on the sides” as it was
during the crime, but that “the top was a little bit lower”
at the time of the murders. Id., at 165. Boatner explained that, during the attack, he had focused on the first
man through the door—who was unmasked—but that he
“didn’t notice” the faces of any of the other assailants or
whether they were masked. Id., at 154. On crossexamination, Boatner testified that he had described the
first man’s build, haircut, and gold teeth jewelry to the
police. Id., at 178.
Based on this evidence, the jury convicted Smith of firstdegree murder. Following the conclusion of direct review,
Smith petitioned the trial court for postconviction relief.
Smith argued that the State had failed to disclose various
police notes revealing favorable evidence material to
Smith’s guilt. As relevant here, those items include pretrial statements by Boatner; statements by victim Shelita
Russell and Espadron’s neighbor, Dale Mims; a pretrial
statement by firearms examiner Kenneth Leary; statements by cosuspect Robert Trackling and Trackling’s
fellow inmate, Eric Rogers; and a statement by cosuspect
Phillip Young. After holding a 4-day evidentiary hearing,

