2

SMITH v. CAIN
Opinion of the Court

police investigation of his case, including those of the lead
investigator, Detective John Ronquillo. Ronquillo’s notes
contain statements by Boatner that conflict with his testimony identifying Smith as a perpetrator. The notes from
the night of the murder state that Boatner “could not . . .
supply a description of the perpetrators other then [sic]
they were black males.” App. 252–253. Ronquillo also
made a handwritten account of a conversation he had with
Boatner five days after the crime, in which Boatner said
he “could not ID anyone because [he] couldn’t see faces”
and “would not know them if [he] saw them.” Id., at 308.
And Ronquillo’s typewritten report of that conversation
states that Boatner told Ronquillo he “could not identify
any of the perpetrators of the murder.” Id., at 259–260.
Smith requested that his conviction be vacated, arguing,
inter alia, that the prosecution’s failure to disclose Ronquillo’s notes violated this Court’s decision in Brady v.
Maryland, 373 U. S. 83 (1963). The state trial court rejected Smith’s Brady claim, and the Louisiana Court of
Appeal and Louisiana Supreme Court denied review. We
granted certiorari, 564 U. S. ___ (2011), and now reverse.
Under Brady, the State violates a defendant’s right to
due process if it withholds evidence that is favorable to the
defense and material to the defendant’s guilt or punishment. See 373 U. S., at 87. The State does not dispute
that Boatner’s statements in Ronquillo’s notes were favorable to Smith and that those statements were not disclosed to him. The sole question before us is thus whether
Boatner’s statements were material to the determination
of Smith’s guilt. We have explained that “evidence is
‘material’ within the meaning of Brady when there is a
reasonable probability that, had the evidence been disclosed, the result of the proceeding would have been different.” Cone v. Bell, 556 U. S. 449, 469–470 (2009). A
reasonable probability does not mean that the defendant
“would more likely than not have received a different

