10

SMITH v. CAIN
THOMAS, J., dissenting

statement of Russell, Ronquillo confirmed that the note
was in his handwriting, but he testified that he never
talked to Russell, that he did not know when the note was
made, and that someone else could have relayed the information to him. Tr. 415–418 (Jan. 22, 2009).5 I will
assume arguendo that, had this note been disclosed, it
would have been admissible at Smith’s trial as a dying
declaration of Russell.6 But the note would have had
minimal impeachment value because, contrary to Smith’s
assertions, it is ambiguous in light of the context in which
the statement was made. Officer Narcisse testified that
Russell was conscious and able to talk, but that she was in
“bad condition.” Id., at 20 (Dec. 4, 1995). Similarly, Reginald Harbor testified that, as Russell lay wounded, she
was “whining” and he “didn’t catch nothing [t]hat she
said.” Id., at 205 (Dec. 5, 1995). And, although Smith
contends that the note says “exactly” that the “first person
through the door had a black cloth across his face,” that
is not how the note reads. Reply Brief for Petitioner 11
(emphasis deleted; internal quotation marks omitted)
(hereinafter Reply Brief). The note first states that the
declarant “saw people barge in,” then states “one—black
——————
5 Russell did not make this statement to Officer Narcisse. He testified that Russell “was not able to give us any information or any details
of what had happened.” Id., at 20.
6 Louisiana law provides that “[a] statement made by a declarant
while believing that his death was imminent, concerning the cause or
circumstances of what he believed to be his impending death[,]” is “not
excluded by the hearsay rule if the declarant is unavailable as a witness.” La. Code Evid. Ann., Art. 804(B)(2) (West Supp. 2012). Assuming this statement was actually Russell’s, it likely qualifies as a dying
declaration. At trial, Boatner testified that, in the aftermath of the
shooting, Russell told him, “Feel like I’m about to die.” Tr. 161 (Dec. 5,
1995) (internal quotation marks omitted). Espadron also testified that
Russell told her, “I’m gonna die,” and, “Don’t let me die.” Id., at 73–74
(internal quotation marks omitted).

