Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

THOMAS, J., dissenting

can’t describe any of the other shooters besides the one
who put the gun in your face after you opened the door,”
Boatner replied, “No, I can’t.” Ibid. In his brief, Smith
cites this station house statement as an example of favorable, undisclosed evidence. But this statement actually
corroborates Boatner’s trial testimony that he saw and
described the first perpetrator to police and that he did not
get a good look at the other assailants. Moreover, the
description Boatner provided was consistent with Smith’s
appearance. The Court completely ignores Boatner’s
station house statement, but our cases instruct us to
evaluate “the net effect of the evidence withheld by the
State” in assessing materiality. See Kyles, supra, at 421–
422.
The evidence not only shows that Boatner described the
first perpetrator twice in the immediate aftermath of the
crime, but also that Boatner described him again three
weeks later when he viewed a photograph array and eliminated a similar-looking individual. The evidence before
the jury further indicated that, several months after the
crime, Boatner confidently identified Smith in an array,
after evincing a discriminating, careful eye over a 4-month
investigative period. What is more, the reliability of
Boatner’s out-of-court identification was extensively tested
during cross-examination at Smith’s trial. In particular,
Boatner was asked whether the fact that he saw Smith’s
picture in a newspaper article naming Smith as a suspect
had tainted his identification. Boatner did not waiver,
responding, “I picked out the person I seen come in that
house that held a gun to my head and under my chin and
the person that was there when all my friends died.” Tr.
190 (Dec. 5, 1995). That Boatner credibly rejected defense
counsel’s “suggestion” theory is supported by the fact that
Boatner did not identify cosuspect Robert Trackling—
whose photograph was included in a separate array shown
to Boatner on the same day that Boatner identified

