16

SMITH v. CAIN
THOMAS, J., dissenting

record material, I have not found, nor have the parties
cited, a single reference to anyone named “Robert Home.”
If the jury had heard Rogers’ postconviction testimony
that police asked him to implicate Smith and that Trackling’s description of the murders did not include Smith, Tr.
284–285 (Jan. 13, 2009), it would have weighed Rogers’
allegation against Trackling’s own statement to the police
that Smith had participated in the murders at Espadron’s
home, 5 Record 832. The prosecution also would have
called Smith’s sister, Trinieze Smith, to testify that she
believed her brother was known as “Short Dog,” as she did
at the postconviction hearing. Tr. 371 (Jan. 14, 2009). On
this record, the undisclosed statements by Rogers and
Trackling actually strengthen rather than weaken confidence in the jury’s guilty verdict.10
E
Finally, Smith argues that an undisclosed handwritten
note by Ronquillo documenting a statement by Phillip
Young—the man found injured at the scene and suspected
of having participated in the crime—is also material evidence warranting a new trial. At trial, Ronquillo testified
that he met with Young while Young was hospitalized as a
result of permanent brain damage suffered in the shoot——————
10 Detective Byron Adams, who took Rogers’ statement, did not testify
at the postconviction hearing because he had died in the meantime. He
thus had no opportunity to address Rogers’ recantation or his newly
minted allegation that Detective Adams asked Rogers to implicate
Smith. Smith argues that “there is no reason to believe that . . . Adams
would have contradicted Rogers—much less that the jury would have
believed [him] if [he] did.” Reply Brief 21. But Smith offers no support
for his dubious assertion that Detective Adams would have admitted to
framing Smith, or that, had the detective denied the allegation, the jury
would have believed Rogers—a convicted murderer who never explained any motive Adams would have had to frame Smith—over the
detective.

