Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

THOMAS, J., dissenting

cloth across face—first one through door—[no further
statement].” 13 Record 2556 (emphasis added). It is at
least as logical to read this statement as indicating only
that “one” of the “people” had a “black cloth across [his]
face.” Russell, suffering from fatal wounds, said nothing
further after “first one through door,” and it is impossible
to know whether the “first one” was also the “one” with a
“black cloth across [his] face.”
The second statement Smith identifies is that of Dale
Mims, who lived down the street from Espadron’s home
and who heard the shooting. A note by Ronquillo states
that Mims saw four males fleeing Espadron’s home, “all
wearing mask[s].” Id., at 2518. Like Russell’s purported
statement, this statement has minimal impeachment
value in light of the record. Mims’ undisclosed statement
does not address whether some or all of the perpetrators
were masked inside Espadron’s home.7 Moreover, had
Mims been called as a witness at trial, he presumably
would have testified, as he did at the postconviction hearing, that he was “positive” that he only saw three perpetrators fleeing, and that, of those three, only two were
masked. Tr. 269, 271–273, 275 (Jan. 13, 2009).
Both Russell’s purported statement and Mims’ testimony are consistent with Boatner’s testimony that he did not
know whether any of the other perpetrators were masked,
id., at 154 (Dec. 5, 1995), and with Officer Narcisse’s and
Espadron’s testimony that the single perpetrator whom
Espadron observed was wearing some sort of face cover——————
7 Smith ridicules the “exceedingly peculiar” notion that the perpetrators would have remained unmasked inside Espadron’s home, only to
mask themselves before leaving the scene. Reply Brief 12–13. But that
notion is eminently reasonable if the perpetrators intended to massacre
the witnesses who were inside the home—as they did—and were
concerned only with disguising themselves from neighbors outside who
might see or hear the burglary.

