6

SMITH v. CAIN
THOMAS, J., dissenting

statements do not warrant a new trial.
The evidence showed that, notwithstanding Ronquillo’s
on-scene note, Boatner offered a description of the perpetrator at the scene. Officer Narcisse testified that Boatner
provided him with a description of the perpetrator that
Boatner saw. Narcisse’s testimony thus corroborated
Boatner’s trial testimony that he saw the first man and
described him to police.3 Narcisse’s testimony also mitigated the impeachment value of Ronquillo’s on-scene note
by indicating that, although Boatner may have provided
no detailed description to Ronquillo at the scene, Boatner
had described the first man to another officer.4
In any event, Ronquillo’s notes reflect that Boatner
provided a description of the first perpetrator at the police
station only a few hours after the shootings occurred. Tr.
403 (Jan. 22, 2009). Boatner was asked if he could “describe the subjects wh[o] shot the people in the house.” 5
Record 866. He responded: “I can tell you about one, the
one who put the pistol in my face, he was a black male
with a low cut, gold[s] in his mouth . . . about my complexion, brown skinned.” Ibid. When asked, “[Y]ou say you
——————
3 In

a pretrial hearing, Boatner testified that he “gave a description
to the officer that came to the scene.” Tr. 24 (Oct. 27, 1995). Boatner
responded negatively when asked whether this officer was Detective
Ronquillo. Ibid. Boatner further testified that he told the officer that
the first man through the door was “heavy built with his hair with a
fade, with a little small top with a lot of gold teeth in his mouth.” Ibid.
That testimony was consistent with the testimony that Boatner and
Officer Narcisse gave at trial.
4 Moreover, Boatner’s reticence toward Ronquillo at the scene of the
crime was entirely understandable. As Ronquillo noted at the postconviction hearing, “there were dead bodies everywhere,” and Boatner was
“a little shook up.” Id., at 402–403 (Jan. 22, 2009). Similarly, Narcisse
testified at trial that Boatner, while “not as frantic” as Espadron, was a
“bit emotional” when Narcisse encountered him at the scene. Id., at 34
(Dec. 4, 1995).

