8

SMITH v. CAIN
THOMAS, J., dissenting

Smith—even though Trackling’s picture was next to
Smith’s in the same newspaper article. 5 Record 833, 835.
When weighed against Boatner’s repeated and consistent descriptions and confident out-of-court and in-court
identifications, Boatner’s March 6 statement is also immaterial. As an initial matter, Ronquillo’s note of his March
6 conversation with Boatner contains an internal contradiction that undercuts its impeachment value. Although
the note states that Boatner “didn’t see anyone,” it also
states that Boatner “glanced at 1st one—saw man—
through door.” 13 id., at 2515. The latter part is consistent with Boatner’s repeated statements that he only
saw the first man through the door. Moreover, the jury
would have evaluated any equivocation in Boatner’s
statement in light of the fact that he made it a mere five
days after a traumatic shooting, when the perpetrators
were still at large. The jury would have considered Boatner’s trial testimony that, following the murders of his
friends, he began having nightmares, had difficulty sleeping, quit his job, and began drinking heavily—so much so
that he checked into a hospital for substance abuse treatment and grief counseling. Tr. 162–163, 170–171, 182
(Dec. 5, 1995). Any impeachment value in the March 6
note would have been further mitigated by the fact that,
as Ronquillo explained, “on the night of the incident
[Boatner] said that he could [identify someone] and he
gave a description that was very close to Mr. Smith’s
description.” Id., at 401 (Jan. 22, 2009). And, following
his March 6 conversation with Ronquillo, Boatner viewed
numerous photograph arrays, described the first perpetrator, and ultimately identified him as Smith.
Of course, had the jury been presented with Ronquillo’s
notes of Boatner’s on-scene and March 6 statements, it
might have believed that Boatner could not identify any of
the perpetrators, but a possibility of a different verdict is
insufficient to establish a Brady violation. See Strickler v.

