Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

THOMAS, J., dissenting

New Orleans police officer Joseph Narcisse was a first
responder to the scene of the shooting. He testified at trial
that he encountered Boatner in the bathroom of Espadron’s home, where Boatner was attempting to care for the
laceration to his head. According to Narcisse, “Mr. Boatner . . . had let inside the perpetrators and did see them.”
Id., at 21 (Dec. 4, 1995). Narcisse further explained that
Boatner “had a description” of the person that he saw, the
details of which Narcisse could not recall. Id., at 32.
Detective John Ronquillo, the lead investigator of the
shootings, testified that Boatner had described the first
man through the kitchen door as having a “short-type
haircut,” “a lot of golds in his teeth,” and “brown-ski[n].”2
Id., at 115 (Dec. 5, 1995). Ronquillo further testified that
Boatner could describe no other perpetrator, but that
Boatner had viewed the first man twice: once when the
man initially came through the door and again when
Boatner was ordered to stand up and the man held a gun
to his chin. Id., at 117–118.
Ronquillo also testified that, during the four months
following the shootings, Boatner viewed 14 six-person
photograph arrays of potential suspects—only one of
which contained a picture of Smith. Id., at 89–100. Three
weeks after the crime, Ronquillo presented Boatner with
one of the arrays that did not include a picture of Smith.
Ronquillo recalled that Boatner noted that one man in the
array had a “similar haircut” and “a similar expression on
his face” as the “gentleman that came into the house
initially with the gun that [Boatner] confronted,” but that
——————
as a result of being shot. 1 Record 49.
2 “Golds” are permanent or removable mouth jewelry, also referred to
as “grills.” See Mouth Jewelry Wearers Love Gleam of the Grill, South
Florida Sun-Sentinel, Feb. 4, 2007, p. 5, 2007 WLNR 2187080. See also
A. Westbrook, Hip Hoptionary 59 (2002) (defining a “grill” as a “teeth
cover, usually made of gold and diamonds”).

