OCTOBER TERM, 2009

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STATES v. STEVENS
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 08–769.

Argued October 6, 2009—Decided April 20, 2010

Congress enacted 18 U. S. C. §48 to criminalize the commercial crea
tion, sale, or possession of certain depictions of animal cruelty. The
statute addresses only portrayals of harmful acts, not the underlying
conduct. It applies to any visual or auditory depiction “in which a liv
ing animal is intentionally maimed, mutilated, tortured, wounded, or
killed,” if that conduct violates federal or state law where “the crea
tion, sale, or possession takes place,” §48(c)(1). Another clause ex
empts depictions with “serious religious, political, scientific, educa
tional, journalistic, historical, or artistic value.”
§48(b).
The
legislative background of §48 focused primarily on “crush videos,”
which feature the torture and killing of helpless animals and are said
to appeal to persons with a specific sexual fetish. Respondent Ste
vens was indicted under §48 for selling videos depicting dogfighting.
He moved to dismiss, arguing that §48 is facially invalid under the
First Amendment. The District Court denied his motion, and Ste
vens was convicted. The Third Circuit vacated the conviction and de
clared §48 facially unconstitutional as a content-based regulation of
protected speech.
Held: Section §48 is substantially overbroad, and therefore invalid un
der the First Amendment. Pp. 5–20.
(a) Depictions of animal cruelty are not, as a class, categorically
unprotected by the First Amendment. Because §48 explicitly regu
lates expression based on content, it is “ ‘presumptively invalid,’ . . .
and the Government bears the burden to rebut that presumption.”
United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group, Inc., 529 U. S. 803,
817. Since its enactment, the First Amendment has permitted re
strictions on a few historic categories of speech—including obscenity,
defamation, fraud, incitement, and speech integral to criminal con


2

UNITED STATES v. STEVENS
Syllabus
duct—that “have never been thought to raise any Constitutional
problem,” Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U. S. 568, 572. Depic
tions of animal cruelty should not be added to that list. While the
prohibition of animal cruelty has a long history in American law,
there is no evidence of a similar tradition prohibiting depictions of
such cruelty. The Government’s proposed test would broadly balance
the value of the speech against its societal costs to determine
whether the First Amendment even applies. But the First Amend
ment’s free speech guarantee does not extend only to categories of
speech that survive an ad hoc balancing of relative social costs and
benefits. The Amendment itself reflects a judgment by the American
people that the benefits of its restrictions on the Government out
weigh the costs. New York v. Ferber, 458 U. S. 747, distinguished.
Pp. 5–9.
(b) Stevens’s facial challenge succeeds under existing doctrine.
Pp. 9–20.
(1) In the First Amendment context, a law may be invalidated as
overbroad if “a ‘substantial number’ of its applications are unconsti
tutional, ‘ “judged in relation to the statute’s plainly legitimate
sweep.” ’ ” Washington State Grange v. Washington State Republican
Party, 552 U. S. 442, 449, n. 6. Stevens claims that common depic
tions of ordinary and lawful activities constitute the vast majority of
materials subject to §48. The Government does not defend such ap
plications, but contends that the statute is narrowly limited to spe
cific types of extreme material. Section 48’s constitutionality thus
turns on how broadly it is construed. Pp. 9–10.
(2) Section 48 creates a criminal prohibition of alarming breadth.
The statute’s definition of a “depiction of animal cruelty” does not
even require that the depicted conduct be cruel. While the words
“maimed, mutilated, [and] tortured” convey cruelty, “wounded” and
“killed” do not. Those words have little ambiguity and should be read
according to their ordinary meaning. Section 48 does require that the
depicted conduct be “illegal,” but many federal and state laws con
cerning the proper treatment of animals are not designed to guard
against animal cruelty. For example, endangered species protections
restrict even the humane wounding or killing of animals. The statute
draws no distinction based on the reason the conduct is made illegal.
Moreover, §48 applies to any depiction of conduct that is illegal
in the State in which the depiction is created, sold, or possessed, “re
gardless of whether the . . . wounding . . . or killing took place” there,
§48(c)(1). Depictions of entirely lawful conduct may run afoul of the
ban if those depictions later find their way into States where the
same conduct is unlawful. This greatly expands §48’s scope, because
views about animal cruelty and regulations having no connection to


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
cruelty vary widely from place to place. Hunting is unlawful in the
District of Columbia, for example, but there is an enormous national
market for hunting-related depictions, greatly exceeding the demand
for crush videos or animal fighting depictions. Because the statute
allows each jurisdiction to export its laws to the rest of the country,
§48(a) applies to any magazine or video depicting lawful hunting that
is sold in the Nation’s Capital. Those seeking to comply with the law
face a bewildering maze of regulations from at least 56 separate ju
risdictions. Pp. 11–15.
(3) Limiting §48’s reach to crush videos and depictions of animal
fighting or other extreme cruelty, as the Government suggests, re
quires an unrealistically broad reading of the statute’s exceptions
clause. The statute only exempts material with “serious” value, and
“serious” must be taken seriously. The excepted speech must also fall
within one of §48(b)’s enumerated categories. Much speech does not.
For example, most hunting depictions are not obviously instructional
in nature. The exceptions clause simply has no adequate reading
that results in the statute’s banning only the depictions the Govern
ment would like to ban.
Although the language of §48(b) is drawn from the Court’s deci
sion in Miller v. California, 413 U. S. 15, the exceptions clause does
not answer every First Amendment objection. Under Miller, “seri
ous” value shields depictions of sex from regulation as obscenity. But
Miller did not determine that serious value could be used as a gen
eral precondition to protecting other types of speech in the first place.
Even “ ‘wholly neutral futilities . . . come under the protection of free
speech.’ ” Cohen v. California, 403 U. S. 15, 25. The First Amend
ment presumptively extends to many forms of speech that do not
qualify for §48(b)’s serious-value exception, but nonetheless fall
within §48(c)’s broad reach. Pp. 15–17.
(4) Despite the Government’s assurance that it will apply §48 to
reach only “extreme” cruelty, this Court will not uphold an unconsti
tutional statute merely because the Government promises to use it
responsibly. Nor can the Court construe this statutory language to
avoid constitutional doubt. A limiting construction can be imposed
only if the statute “is ‘readily susceptible’ to such a construction,”
Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, 521 U. S. 844, 884. To read
§48 as the Government desires requires rewriting, not just reinter
pretation. Pp. 18–19.
(5) This construction of §48 decides the constitutional question.
The Government makes no effort to defend §48 as applied beyond
crush videos and depictions of animal fighting. It argues that those
particular depictions are intrinsically related to criminal conduct or
are analogous to obscenity (if not themselves obscene), and that the


4

UNITED STATES v. STEVENS
Syllabus
ban on such speech would satisfy the proper level of scrutiny. But
the Government nowhere extends these arguments to other depic
tions, such as hunting magazines and videos, that are presumptively
protected by the First Amendment but that remain subject to §48.
Nor does the Government seriously contest that these presumptively
impermissible applications of §48 far outnumber any permissible
ones. The Court therefore does not decide whether a statute limited
to crush videos or other depictions of extreme animal cruelty would
be constitutional. Section 48 is not so limited but is instead substan
tially overbroad, and therefore invalid under the First Amendment.
Pp. 19–20.

533 F. 3d 218, affirmed.
ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which STEVENS,
SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined. ALITO, J., filed a dissenting opinion.

