(Slip Opinion) OCTOBER TERM, 2009 Syllabus NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. Syllabus No. 08–678. Argued October 5, 2009—Decided December 8, 2009 When respondent Norman Carpenter informed the human resources department of his employer, petitioner Mohawk Industries, Inc., that the company employed undocumented immigrants, he was unaware that Mohawk stood accused in a pending class action—the Williams case—of conspiring to drive down its legal employees’ wages by know ingly hiring undocumented workers. Mohawk directed Carpenter to meet with the company’s retained counsel in Williams, who allegedly pressured Carpenter to recant his statements. When he refused, Carpenter maintains in this unlawful termination suit, Mohawk fired him under false pretenses. In granting Carpenter’s motion to compel Mohawk to produce information concerning his meeting with re tained counsel and the company’s termination decision, the District Court agreed with Mohawk that the requested information was pro tected by the attorney-client privilege, but concluded that Mohawk had implicitly waived the privilege through its disclosures in the Wil liams case. The court declined to certify its order for interlocutory appeal, and the Eleventh Circuit dismissed Mohawk’s appeal for lack of jurisdiction, holding, inter alia, that the District Court’s ruling did not qualify as an immediately appealable collateral order under discovery order implicating the attorney-client privilege can be ade quately reviewed on appeal from final judgment. Held: Disclosure orders adverse to the attorney-client privilege do not qualify for immediate appeal under the collateral order doctrine. Pp. 4–13. (a) Courts of Appeals “have jurisdiction of appeals from all final de cisions of the district courts.” 28 U. S. C. §1291. “Final decisions” encompass not only judgments that “terminate an action,” but also a
Syllabus “small class” of prejudgment orders that are “collateral to” an action’s merits and “too important” to be denied immediate review, Cohen, supra, at 545–546. “That small category includes only decisions that are . . . effectively unreviewable on appeal from the final judgment in U. S. 35, 42. The decisive consideration in determining whether a right is effectively unreviewable is whether delaying review until the entry of final judgment “would imperil a substantial public interest” 345, 352–353. In making this determination, the Court does not en gage in an “individualized jurisdictional inquiry,” Coopers & Lybrand Inc., 511 U. S. 863, 868. If the class of claims, taken as a whole, can be adequately vindicated by other means, “the chance that the litiga tion at hand might be speeded, or a ‘particular injustic[e]’ averted,” does not provide a basis for §1291 jurisdiction. Ibid. Pp. 4–6. (b) Effective appellate review of disclosure orders adverse to the at torney-client privilege can be had by means other than collateral or der appeal, including postjudgment review. Appellate courts can remedy the improper disclosure of privileged material in the same way they remedy a host of other erroneous evidentiary rulings: by va cating an adverse judgment and remanding for a new trial in which the protected material and its fruits are excluded from evidence. Moreover, litigants confronted with a particularly injurious or novel privilege ruling have several potential avenues of immediate review apart from collateral order appeal. First, a party may ask the district court to certify, and the court of appeals to accept, an interlocutory appeal involving “a controlling question of law” the prompt resolution of which “may materially advance the ultimate termination of the litigation.” §1292(b). Second, in extraordinary circumstances where a disclosure order works a manifest injustice, a party may petition Dist. Court for D. C., 542 U. S. 367, 380. Another option is for a party to defy a disclosure order and incur court-imposed sanctions that, e.g., “direc[t] that the matters embraced in the order or other desig nated facts be taken as established,” “prohibi[t] the disobedient party from supporting or opposing designated claims or defenses,” or Alternatively, when the circumstances warrant, a district court may issue a contempt order against a noncomplying party, who can then appeal directly from that ruling, at least when the contempt citation can be characterized as a criminal punishment. See, e.g., Church of
Syllabus tablished appellate review mechanisms not only provide assurances to clients and counsel about the security of their confidential commu nications; they also go a long way toward addressing Mohawk’s con cern that, absent collateral order appeals of adverse attorney-client privilege rulings, some litigants may experience severe hardship. The limited benefits of applying “the blunt, categorical instrument of §1291 collateral order appeal” to privilege-related disclosure orders simply cannot justify the likely institutional costs, Digital Equip ment, supra, at 883, including unduly delaying the resolution of dis trict court litigation and needlessly burdening the courts of appeals, (c) The admonition that the class of collaterally appealable orders must remain “narrow and selective in its membership,” Will, supra, at 350, has acquired special force in recent years with the enactment of legislation designating rulemaking, “not expansion by court deci sion,” as the preferred means for determining whether and when pre judgment orders should be immediately appealable, Swint, supra, at 48. Any further avenue for immediate appeal of adverse attorney client privilege rulings should be furnished, if at all, through rule making, with the opportunity for full airing it provides. Pp. 12–13. 541 F. 3d 1048, affirmed. SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J., and STEVENS, SCALIA, KENNEDY, GINSBURG, BREYER, and ALITO, JJ., joined, and in which THOMAS, J., joined, as to Part II–C. THOMAS, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.