2

MICROSOFT CORP. v. i4i LTD. PARTNERSHIP
Syllabus

Held: Section 282 requires an invalidity defense to be proved by clear
and convincing evidence. Pp. 5–20.
(a) The Court rejects Microsoft’s contention that a defendant need
only persuade the jury of a patent invalidity defense by a preponder
ance of the evidence. Where Congress has prescribed the governing
standard of proof, its choice generally controls. Steadman v. SEC,
450 U. S. 91, 95. Congress has made such a choice here. While §282
includes no express articulation of the standard of proof, where Con
gress uses a common-law term in a statute, the Court assumes the
“term . . . comes with a common law meaning.” Safeco Ins. Co. of
America v. Burr, 551 U. S. 47, 58. Here, by stating that a patent is
“presumed valid,” §282, Congress used a term with a settled common
law meaning. Radio Corp. of America v. Radio Engineering Labora
tories, Inc., 293 U. S. 1 (RCA), is authoritative. There, tracing nearly
a century of case law, the Court stated, inter alia, that “there is a
presumption of [patent] validity [that is] not to be overthrown except
by clear and cogent evidence,” id., at 2. Microsoft’s contention that
the Court’s pre-Act precedents applied a clear-and-convincing stan
dard only in two limited circumstances is unavailing, given the ab
sence of those qualifications from the Court’s cases. Also unpersua
sive is Microsoft’s argument that the Federal Circuit’s interpretation
must fail because it renders superfluous §282’s additional statement
that “[t]he burden of establishing invalidity . . . shall rest on the
party asserting” it. The canon against superfluity assists only where
a competing interpretation gives effect “ ‘to every clause and word of
a statute.’ ” Duncan v. Walker, 533 U. S. 167, 174. Here, no inter
pretation of §282 avoids excess language because, under either of Mi
crosoft’s alternative theories—that the presumption only allocates
the burden of production or that it shifts both the burdens of produc
tion and persuasion—the presumption itself would be unnecessary in
light of §282’s additional statement as to the challenger’s burden.
Pp. 5–13.
(b) Also rejected is Microsoft’s argument that a preponderance
standard must at least apply where the evidence before the factfinder
was not before the PTO during the examination process. It is true
enough that, in these circumstances, “the rationale underlying the
presumption—that the PTO, in its expertise, has approved the
claim—seems much diminished,” KSR Int’l Co. v. Teleflex Inc., 550
U. S. 398, 426, though other rationales may still animate the pre
sumption. But the question remains whether Congress has specified
the applicable standard of proof. As established here today, Congress
did just that by codifying the common-law presumption of patent va
lidity and, implicitly, the heightened standard of proof attached to it.
The Court’s pre-Act cases never adopted or endorsed Microsoft’s fluc

