Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

standard of proof. As established, Congress did just that
by codifying the common-law presumption of patent valid
ity and, implicitly, the heightened standard of proof at
tached to it.
Our pre-1952 cases never adopted or endorsed the kind
of fluctuating standard of proof that Microsoft envisions.
And they do not indicate, even in dicta, that anything less
than a clear-and-convincing standard would ever apply to
an invalidity defense raised in an infringement action. To
the contrary, the Court spoke on this issue directly in
RCA, stating that because the heightened standard of
proof applied where the evidence before the court was
“different” from that considered by the PTO, it applied
even more clearly where the evidence was identical. 293
U. S., at 8. Likewise, the Court’s statement that a “dubi
ous preponderance” will never suffice to sustain an inva
lidity defense, ibid., admitted of no apparent exceptions.
Finally, this Court often applied the heightened standard
of proof without any mention of whether the relevant
prior-art evidence had been before the PTO examiner, in
circumstances strongly suggesting it had not. See, e.g.,
Smith, 301 U. S., at 227, 233.9
Nothing in §282’s text suggests that Congress meant to
——————
9 Microsoft

cites numerous court of appeals decisions as support for
its claim that a preponderance standard must apply in the event that
the evidence in the infringement action varies from that considered by
the PTO. We see no hint of the hybrid standard of proof that Microsoft
advocates in these cases. Indeed, in some of these cases it appears that
the court even evaluated the evidence according to a heightened stan
dard of proof. See Jacuzzi Bros., Inc. v. Berkeley Pump Co., 191 F. 2d
632, 634 (CA9 1951) (“Although it is not expressly stated that th[e]
conclusion [of invalidity] is based upon evidence establishing the thesis
beyond a reasonable doubt, the Trial Court expressed no doubt. And
the record shows that such conclusion was supported by substantial
evidence”); Western Auto Supply Co. v. American-National Co., 114
F. 2d 711, 713 (CA6 1940) (concluding that the patent was invalid
where the court “entertain[ed] no doubt” on the question).

