Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

general rule that a common-law term comes with its
common-law meaning, we cannot conclude that Congress
intended to “drop” the heightened standard proof from
the presumption simply because §282 fails to reiterate it
expressly. Neder v. United States, 527 U. S. 1, 23 (1999);
see also id., at 21 (“ ‘Where Congress uses terms that have
accumulated settled meaning under . . . the common law,
[we] must infer, unless the statute otherwise dictates, that
Congress means to incorporate the established meaning of
those terms.’ ” (quoting Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Dar
den, 503 U. S. 318, 322 (1992))); Standard Oil Co. of N. J.
v. United Sates, 221 U. S. 1, 59 (1911) (“[W]here words are
employed in a statute which had at the time a well-known
meaning at common law or in the law of this country they
are presumed to have been used in that sense . . .”). “On
the contrary, we must presume that Congress intended to
incorporate” the heightened standard of proof, “unless the
statute otherwise dictates.” Neder, 527 U. S., at 23 (inter
nal quotation marks omitted).
We recognize that it may be unusual to treat a presump
tion as alone establishing the governing standard of proof.
See, e.g., J. Thayer, Preliminary Treatise on Evidence at
the Common Law 336–337 (1898) (hereinafter Thayer)
(“When . . . we read that the contrary of any particular
presumption must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt, . . .
it is to be recognized that we have something superadded
to the rule of presumption, namely, another rule as to
the amount of evidence which is needed to overcome the
presumption”). But given how judges, including Justice
Cardozo, repeatedly understood and explained the pre
sumption of patent validity, we cannot accept Microsoft’s
argument that Congress used the words “presumed valid”
to adopt only a procedural device for “shifting the burden
of production,” or for “shifting both the burden of produc
tion and the burden of persuasion.” Brief for Petitioner
21–22 (emphasis deleted). Whatever the significance of a

