6

MICROSOFT CORP. v. i4i LTD. PARTNERSHIP
Opinion of the Court

apply at least when an invalidity defense rests on evidence
that was never considered by the PTO in the examination
process. We reject both contentions.3
A
Where Congress has prescribed the governing standard
of proof, its choice controls absent “countervailing consti
tutional constraints.” Steadman v. SEC, 450 U. S. 91, 95
(1981). The question, then, is whether Congress has made
such a choice here.
As stated, the first paragraph of §282 provides that
“[a] patent shall be presumed valid” and “[t]he burden of
establishing invalidity of a patent or any claim thereof
shall rest on the party asserting such invalidity.” Thus, by
its express terms, §282 establishes a presumption of pat
ent validity, and it provides that a challenger must over
come that presumption to prevail on an invalidity defense.
But, while the statute explicitly specifies the burden of
proof, it includes no express articulation of the standard of
proof.4
——————
3 i4i contends that Microsoft forfeited the first argument by failing to
raise it until its merits brief in this Court. The argument, however, is
within the scope of the question presented, and because we reject it on
its merits, we need not decide whether it has been preserved.
4 A preliminary word on terminology is in order. As we have said,
“[t]he term ‘burden of proof’ is one of the ‘the slipperiest members of
the family of legal terms.’ ” Schaffer v. Weast, 546 U. S. 49, 56 (2005)
(quoting 2 J. Strong, McCormick on Evidence §342, p. 433 (5th ed.
1999) (alteration omitted)). Historically, the term has encompassed two
separate burdens: the “burden of persuasion” (specifying which party
loses if the evidence is balanced), as well as the “burden of production”
(specifying which party must come forward with evidence at various
stages in the litigation). Ibid. Adding more confusion, the term “bur
den of proof” has occasionally been used as a synonym for “standard of
proof.” E.g., Grogan v. Garner, 498 U. S. 279, 286 (1991).
Here we use “burden of proof” interchangeably with “burden of per
suasion” to identify the party who must persuade the jury in its favor to
prevail. We use the term “standard of proof” to refer to the degree of
certainty by which the factfinder must be persuaded of a factual conclu

