(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MICROSOFT CORP. v. I4I LIMITED PARTNERSHIP 

ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
No. 10–290.

Argued April 18, 2011—Decided June 9, 2011

In asserting patent invalidity as a defense to an infringement action, an
alleged infringer must contend with §282 of the Patent Act of 1952
(Act), under which “[a] patent shall be presumed valid” and “[t]he
burden of establishing invalidity . . . shall rest on the party asserting”
it. Since 1984, the Federal Circuit has read §282 to require a defen
dant seeking to overcome the presumption to persuade the factfinder
of its invalidity defense by clear and convincing evidence.
Respondents (collectively, i4i) hold the patent at issue, which
claims an improved method for editing computer documents. After
i4i sued petitioner Microsoft Corp. for willful infringement of that
patent, Microsoft counterclaimed and sought a declaration that the
patent was invalid under §102(b)’s on-sale bar, which precludes pat
ent protection for any “invention” that was “on sale in this country”
more than one year prior to the filing of a patent application. The
parties agreed that, more than a year before filing its patent applica
tion, i4i had sold a software program known as S4 in the United
States, but they disagreed over whether that software embodied the
invention claimed in i4i’s patent. Relying on the undisputed fact that
the S4 software was never presented to the Patent and Trademark
Office (PTO) during its examination of the patent application, Micro
soft objected to i4i’s proposed jury instruction that the invalidity de
fense must be proved by clear and convincing evidence. The District
Court nevertheless gave that instruction, rejecting Microsoft’s alter
native instruction proposing a preponderance of the evidence stan
dard. The jury found that Microsoft willfully infringed the i4i patent
and had failed to prove the patent’s invalidity. The Federal Circuit
affirmed, relying on its settled interpretation of §282.

