10

MICROSOFT CORP. v. i4i LTD. PARTNERSHIP
Opinion of the Court

presumption in the abstract, basic principles of statutory
construction require us to assume that Congress meant to
incorporate “the cluster of ideas” attached to the common
law term it adopted. Beck, 529 U. S., at 501 (internal
quotation marks omitted). And RCA leaves no doubt that
attached to the common-law presumption of patent valid
ity was an expression as to its “force,” 293 U. S., at 7—that
is, the standard of proof required to overcome it.6
Resisting the conclusion that Congress adopted the
heightened standard of proof reflected in our pre-1952
cases, Microsoft contends that those cases applied a clear
and-convincing standard of proof only in two limited
circumstances, not in every case involving an invalidity
defense. First, according to Microsoft, the heightened
standard of proof applied in cases “involving oral testi
mony of prior invention,” simply to account for the unreli
ability of such testimony. Brief for Petitioner 25. Second,
Microsoft tells us, the heightened standard of proof ap
plied to “invalidity challenges based on priority of inven
tion,” where that issue had previously been litigated
between the parties in PTO proceedings. Id., at 28.
Squint as we may, we fail to see the qualifications that
Microsoft purports to identify in our cases. They certainly
make no appearance in RCA’s explanation of the presump
——————
6 Microsoft objects that this reading of §282 “conflicts with the usual
understanding of presumptions.” Reply Brief for Petitioner 4. In sup
port, it relies on the “understanding” reflected in Federal Rule of
Evidence 301, which explains the ordinary effect of a presumption in
federal civil actions. That Rule, however, postdates the 1952 Act by
nearly 30 years, and it is not dispositive of how Congress in 1952
understood presumptions generally, much less the presumption of pat
ent validity. In any event, the word “presumption” has often been
used when another term might be more accurate. See Thayer 335
(“Often . . . maxims and ground principles get expressed in this form of
a presumption perversely and inaccurately”). And, to the extent
Congress used the words “presumed valid” in an imprecise way, we
cannot fault it for following our lead.

