8

MICROSOFT CORP. v. i4i LTD. PARTNERSHIP
Opinion of the Court

the assailant connects himself in some way with the
title of the true inventor, it is so a fortiori where he is
a stranger to the invention, without claim of title of
his own. If it is true where the assailant launches his
attack with evidence different, at least in form, from
any theretofore produced in opposition to the patent,
it is so a bit more clearly where the evidence is
even verbally the same.” Id., at 8 (internal citation
omitted).5
The common-law presumption, in other words, reflected
the universal understanding that a preponderance stan
dard of proof was too “dubious” a basis to deem a patent
invalid. Ibid.; see also id., at 7 (“[A] patent . . . is pre
sumed to be valid until the presumption has been over
come by convincing evidence of error”).
Thus, by the time Congress enacted §282 and declared
that a patent is “presumed valid,” the presumption of
patent validity had long been a fixture of the common law.
According to its settled meaning, a defendant raising an
invalidity defense bore “a heavy burden of persuasion,”
requiring proof of the defense by clear and convincing
evidence. Id., at 8. That is, the presumption encompassed
not only an allocation of the burden of proof but also an
imposition of a heightened standard of proof. Under the
——————
5 Among other cases, Justice Cardozo cited Cantrell v. Wallick, 117
U. S. 689, 695–696 (1886) (“Not only is the burden of proof to make
good this defence upon the party setting it up, but . . . every reasonable
doubt should be resolved against him” (internal quotation marks
omitted)); Coffin v. Ogden, 18 Wall. 120, 124 (1874) (“The burden of
proof rests upon [the defendant], and every reasonable doubt should be
resolved against him”); The Barbed Wire Patent, 143 U. S. 275, 285
(1892) (“[This] principle has been repeatedly acted upon in the different
circuits”); and Washburn v. Gould, 29 F. Cas. 312, 320 (No. 17,214) (CC
Mass. 1844) (charging jury that “[i]f it should so happen, that your
minds are led to a reasonable doubt on the question, inasmuch as it is
incumbent on the defendant to satisfy you beyond that doubt, you will
find for the plaintiff”).

