Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
tuating standard of proof. And they do not indicate, even in dicta,
that anything less than a clear-and-convincing standard would ever
apply to an invalidity defense. In fact, the Court indicated to the con
trary. See RCA, 293 U. S., at 8. Finally, the Court often applied the
heightened standard of proof without mentioning whether the rele
vant prior-art evidence had been before the PTO examiner, in cir
cumstances strongly suggesting it had not. See, e.g., Smith v. Hall,
301 U. S. 216, 227, 233. Nothing in §282’s text suggests that Con
gress meant to depart from that understanding to enact a standard of
proof that would rise and fall with the facts of each case. Indeed, had
Congress intended to drop the heightened standard of proof where
the evidence before the jury varied from that before the PTO, it pre
sumably would have said so expressly. Those pre-Act cases where
various Courts of Appeals observed that the presumption is weak
ened or dissipated where the evidence was never considered by the
PTO should be read to reflect the commonsense principle that if the
PTO did not have all material facts before it, its considered judgment
may lose significant force. Cf. KSR, 550 U. S., at 427. Consistent
with that principle, a jury may be instructed to evaluate whether the
evidence before it is materially new, and if so, to consider that fact
when determining whether an invalidity defense has been proved by
clear and convincing evidence. Pp. 14–18.
(c) This Court is in no position to judge the comparative force of the
parties’ policy arguments as to the wisdom of the clear-and
convincing-evidence standard that Congress adopted.
Congress
specified the applicable standard of proof in 1952 when it codified the
common-law presumption of patent validity. During the nearly 30
years that the Federal Circuit has interpreted §282 as the Court does
today, Congress has often amended §282 and other patent laws, but
apparently has never considered any proposal to lower the standard
of proof. Indeed, Congress has left the Federal Circuit’s interpreta
tion in place despite ongoing criticism, both from within the Federal
Government and without. Accordingly, any recalibration of the stan
dard of proof remains in Congress’ hands. Pp. 18–20.
598 F. 3d 831, affirmed.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which SCALIA,
KENNEDY, GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. BREYER,
J., filed a concurring opinion, in which SCALIA and ALITO, JJ., joined.
THOMAS, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment. ROBERTS,
C. J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.

