(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CARACHURI-ROSENDO v. HOLDER, ATTORNEY 

GENERAL

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–60. Argued March 31, 2010—Decided June 14, 2010
Petitioner, a lawful permanent resident of the United States, faced de
portation after committing two misdemeanor drug offenses in Texas.
For the first, possession of a small amount of marijuana, he received
20 days in jail. For the second, possession without a prescription of
one antianxiety tablet, he received 10 days. Texas law, like federal
law, authorized a sentencing enhancement if the State proved that
petitioner had been previously convicted of a similar offense, but
Texas did not seek such an enhancement here. After the second con
viction, the Federal Government initiated removal proceedings. Peti
tioner conceded that he was removable, but claimed that he was eli
gible for discretionary cancellation of removal under the Immigration
and Nationality Act (INA) because he had not been convicted of any
“aggravated felony,” 8 U. S. C. §1229b(a)(3). Section 1101(a)(43)(B)
defines that term to include, inter alia, “illicit trafficking in a con
trolled substance . . . including a drug trafficking crime” as defined in
18 U. S. C. §924(c), which, in turn, defines a “drug trafficking crime”
as a “felony punishable under,” inter alia, “the Controlled Substances
Act (21 U. S. C. 801 et seq.).” A felony is a crime for which the
“maximum term of imprisonment authorized” is “more than one
year.” §3559(a). Simple possession offenses are ordinarily misde
meanors punishable with shorter sentences, but a conviction “after a
prior conviction under this subchapter [or] the law of any State . . .
has become final”—a “recidivist” simple possession offense—is “pun
ishable” as a “felony” under §924(c)(2) and subject to a 2-year sen
tence. Only this “recidivist” simple possession category might be an
“aggravated felony” under 8 U. S. C. §1101(a)(43). A prosecutor must
charge the existence of the prior conviction.
See 21 U. S. C.


2

CARACHURI-ROSENDO v. HOLDER
Syllabus
§851(a)(1). Notice and an opportunity to challenge its validity,
§§851(b)–(c), are mandatory prerequisites to obtaining a punishment
based on the fact of the prior conviction and necessary prerequisites
to “authorize” a felony punishment, 18 U. S. C. §3559(a), for the sim
ple possession offense at issue.
Here, the Immigration Judge held that petitioner’s second simple
possession conviction was an “aggravated felony” that made him in
eligible for cancellation of removal. The Board of Immigration Ap
peals and Fifth Circuit affirmed. Relying on the holding in Lopez v.
Gonzales, 549 U. S. 47, 56—that to be an “aggravated felony” for im
migration law purposes, a state drug conviction must be punishable
as a felony under federal law—the court used a “hypothetical ap
proach,” concluding that because petitioner’s “conduct” could have
been prosecuted as a recidivist simple possession under state law, it
could have also been punished as a felony under federal law.

Held: Second or subsequent simple possession offenses are not aggra
vated felonies under §1101(a)(43) when, as in this case, the state con
viction is not based on the fact of a prior conviction. Pp. 9–19.
(a) Considering the disputed provisions’ terms and their “common
sense conception,” Lopez, 549 U. S., at 53, it would be counterintui
tive and “unorthodox” to apply an “aggravated felony” or “illicit traf
ficking” label to petitioner’s recidivist possession, see id., at 54. The
same is true for his penalty. One does not usually think of a 10-day
sentence for unauthorized possession of one prescription pill as an
“aggravated felony.” This Court must be very wary in this case be
cause the Government seeks a result that “the English language tells
[the Court] not to expect.” Ibid. Pp. 9–11.
(b) The Government’s position—that “conduct punishable as a fel
ony” should be treated as the equivalent of a felony conviction when
the underlying conduct could have been a felony under federal law—
is unpersuasive. First, it ignores the INA’s text, which limits the At
torney General’s cancellation power only when, inter alia, a nonciti
zen “has . . . been convicted of a[n] aggravated felony.” 8 U. S. C.
§1229b(a)(3). Thus, the conviction itself is the starting place, not
what might have or could have been charged. Under the Controlled
Substances Act, simple possession offenses carry only a 1-year sen
tence unless a prosecutor elects to charge the defendant as a recidi
vist and the defendant receives notice and an opportunity to defend
against that charge. Here, petitioner’s record of conviction contains
no finding of the fact of his prior drug offense. An immigration court
cannot, ex post, enhance the state offense of record just because facts
known to it would have authorized a greater penalty. The Govern
ment contends that had petitioner been prosecuted in federal court
under identical circumstances, he would have committed an “aggra


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
vated felony” for immigration law purposes. But his circumstances
were not identical to the Government’s hypothesis. And the Govern
ment’s approach cannot be reconciled with 8 U. S. C. §1229b(a)(3),
which requires an “aggravated felony” conviction—not that the non
citizen merely could have been convicted of a felony but was not.
Second, the Government’s position fails to effectuate 21 U. S. C.
§851’s mandatory notice and process requirements, which have great
practical significance with respect to the conviction itself and are in
tegral to the structure and design of federal drug laws. They author
ize prosecutors to exercise discretion when electing whether to pur
sue a recidivist enhancement. So do many state criminal codes,
including Texas’. Permitting an immigration judge to apply his own
recidivist enhancement after the fact would denigrate state prosecu
tors’ independent judgment to execute such laws. Third, the Fifth
Circuit misread Lopez. This Court never used a “hypothetical ap
proach” in its analysis. By focusing on facts known to the immigra
tion court that could have but did not serve as the basis for the state
conviction and punishment, the Circuit’s approach introduces a level
of conjecture that has no basis in Lopez. Fourth, the Government’s
argument is inconsistent with common practice in the federal courts,
for it is quite unlikely that petitioner’s conduct would have been pun
ished as a felony in federal court. Finally, as the Court noted in Leo
cal v. Ashcroft, 543 U. S. 1, 11, n. 8, ambiguities in criminal statutes
referenced in immigration laws should be construed in the nonciti
zen’s favor. Notably, here, the question whether petitioner has com
mitted an “aggravated felony” is relevant to the type of relief he may
obtain from a removal order, but not to whether he is in fact remov
able. Thus, any relief he may obtain still depends on the Attorney
General’s discretion. Pp. 11–18.
570 F. 3d 263, reversed.
STEVENS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined. SCALIA, J., and THOMAS, J., filed opinions concurring in the
judgment.

