NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press. No. 09–60 [June 14, 2010]  JUSTICE STEVENS delivered the opinion of the Court. Petitioner Jose Angel Carachuri-Rosendo, a lawful permanent resident who has lived in the United States since he was five years old, faced deportation under fed eral law after he committed two misdemeanor drug pos session offenses in Texas. For the first, possession of less than two ounces of marijuana, he received 20 days in jail. For the second, possession without a prescription of one tablet of a common antianxiety medication, he received 10 days in jail. After this second offense, the Federal Gov ernment initiated removal proceedings against him. He conceded that he was removable, but claimed he was eligible for discretionary relief from removal under 8 U. S. C. §1229b(a). To decide whether Carachuri-Rosendo is eligible to seek cancellation of removal or waiver of inadmissibility under §1229b(a), we must decide whether he has been convicted of an “aggravated felony,” §1229b(a)(3), a category of crimes singled out for the harshest deportation conse quences. The Court of Appeals held that a simple drug possession offense, committed after the conviction for a
first possession offense became final, is always an aggra vated felony. We now reverse and hold that second or subsequent simple possession offenses are not aggravated felonies under §1101(a)(43) when, as in this case, the state conviction is not based on the fact of a prior conviction. Under the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), 66 Stat. 163, as amended, 8 U. S. C. §1101 et seq., a lawful permanent resident subject to removal from the United States may apply for discretionary cancellation of removal if, inter alia, he “has not been convicted of any aggravated felony,” §1229b(a)(3). The statutory definition of the term “aggravated felony” includes a list of numerous federal offenses,1 one of which is “illicit trafficking in a controlled substance . . . including a drug trafficking crime (as de fined in section 924(c) of title 18).” §1101(a)(43)(B). Sec tion 924(c)(2), in turn, defines a “drug trafficking crime” to mean “any felony punishable under,” inter alia, “the Con trolled Substances Act (21 U. S. C. 801 et seq.).” A felony is a crime for which the “maximum term of imprisonment authorized” is “more than one year.” 18 U. S. C. §3559(a).2 The maze of statutory cross-references continues. Sec tion 404 of the Controlled Substances Act criminalizes simple possession offenses, the type of offense at issue in this case. But it prescribes punishment for both misde meanor and felony offenses. Except for simple possession of crack cocaine or flunitrazepam, a first-time simple possession offense is a federal misdemeanor; the maxi
mum term authorized for such a conviction is less than one year. 21 U. S. C. §844(a). However, a conviction for a simple possession offense “after a prior conviction under this subchapter [or] under the law of any State . . . has become final”—what we will call recidivist simple posses sion3—may be punished as a felony, with a prison sen tence of up to two years. Ibid.4 Thus, except for simple possession offenses involving isolated categories of drugs not presently at issue, only recidivist simple possession offenses are “punishable” as a federal “felony” under the Controlled Substances Act, 18 U. S. C. §924(c)(2). And thus only a conviction within this particular category of simple possession offenses might, conceivably, be an “ag gravated felony” under 8 U. S. C. §1101(a)(43). For a subsequent simple possession offense to be eligible for an enhanced punishment, i.e., to be punishable as a felony, the Controlled Substances Act requires that a prosecutor charge the existence of the prior simple posses
sion conviction before trial, or before a guilty plea. See 21 U. S. C. §851(a)(1).5 Notice, plus an opportunity to chal lenge the validity of the prior conviction used to enhance the current conviction, §§851(b)–(c), are mandatory pre requisites to obtaining a punishment based on the fact of a prior conviction.6 And they are also necessary prerequi sites under federal law to “authorize” a felony punish ment, 18 U. S. C. §3559(a), for the type of simple posses sion offense at issue in this case. Neither the definition of an “illicit trafficking” offense under 8 U. S. C. §1101(a)(43)(B) nor that of a “drug traf ficking crime” under 18 U. S. C. §924(c)(2) describes or references any state offenses. The “aggravated felony” definition does explain that the term applies “to an offense described in this paragraph whether in violation of Fed 549 U. S. 47, 56 (2006), we determined that, in order to be
an “aggravated felony” for immigration law purposes, a state drug conviction must be punishable as a felony under federal law. We held that “a state offense consti tutes a ‘felony punishable under the Controlled Sub stances Act’ only if it proscribes conduct punishable as a felony under that federal law.” Id., at 60. Despite the fact that the Lopez petitioner had been punished as a felon under state law—and, indeed, received a 5-year sen tence—the conduct of his offense was not punishable as a felony under federal law, and this prevented the state conviction from qualifying as an aggravated felony for immigration law purposes. Id., at 55 (“Unless a state offense is punishable as a federal felony it does not count”). In the case before us, the Government argues that Cara churi-Rosendo, despite having received only a 10-day sentence for his Texas misdemeanor simple possession offense, nevertheless has been “convicted” of an “aggra vated felony” within the meaning of the INA. This is so, the Government contends, because had CarachuriRosendo been prosecuted in federal court instead of state court, he could have been prosecuted as a felon and re ceived a 2-year sentence based on the fact of his prior simple possession offense. Our holding in Lopez teaches that, for a state conviction to qualify as an “aggravated felony” under the INA, it is necessary for the underlying conduct to be punishable as a federal felony. Id., at 60. We now must determine whether the mere possibility, no matter how remote, that a 2-year sentence might have been imposed in a federal trial is a sufficient basis for concluding that a state misdemeanant who was not charged as a recidivist has been “convicted” of an “aggra vated felony” within the meaning of §1229b(a)(3). Carachuri-Rosendo was born in Mexico in 1978. He
came to the United States with his parents in 1983 and has been a lawful permanent resident of Texas ever since. His common-law wife and four children are American citizens, as are his mother and two sisters. Like so many in this country, Carachuri-Rosendo has gotten into some trouble with our drug laws. In 2004, he pleaded guilty to possessing less than two ounces of mari juana, a Class B misdemeanor, and was sentenced to confinement for 20 days by a Texas court. See App. 19a– 22a; Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. §§481.121(a) and (b)(1) (West 2003). In 2005, he pleaded nolo contendere to possessing less than 28 grams—one tablet—of alprazolam (known commercially as Xanax) without a prescription, a Class A misdemeanor. See App. 31a–34a; Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. §§481.117(a) and (b). Although Texas law, like federal law, authorized a sentencing enhance ment if the prosecutor proved that Carachuri-Rosendo had been previously convicted of an offense of a similar class, the State did not elect to seek an enhancement based on his criminal history. App. 32a. In 2006, on the basis of Carachuri-Rosendo’s second possession offense, the Federal Government initiated removal proceedings against him. Appearing pro se before the Immigration Judge, Carachuri-Rosendo did not dis pute that his conviction for possessing one tablet of Xanax without a prescription made him removable,7 but he ap plied for a discretionary cancellation of removal pursuant to 8 U. S. C. §1229b(a). Under that statutory provision, the Attorney General may cancel an order of removal or an order of inadmissibility so long as, inter alia, the non citizen “has not been convicted of a[n] aggravated felony.” §1229b(a)(3). The Immigration Judge held that peti
tioner’s second simple possession conviction was an “ag gravated felony” that made him ineligible for cancellation of removal. The Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) followed Cir cuit precedent and affirmed that decision, but it disagreed with the Immigration Judge’s legal analysis. In its en banc opinion, the BIA ruled that in cases arising in Cir cuits in which the question had not yet been decided, the BIA would not treat a second or successive misdemeanor conviction as an aggravated felony unless the conviction contained a finding that the offender was a recidivist. In re Carachuri-Rosendo, 24 I. & N. Dec. 382, 387, 391 (2007). The BIA explained that the statutory question is com plicated by the fact that “ ‘recidivist possession’ ” is not a “discrete offense under Federal law.” Id., at 388. While most federal offenses are defined by elements that must be proved to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt, recidivist possession is an “amalgam of elements, substantive sen tencing factors, and procedural safeguards.” Id., at 389. Section 844(a) defines simple possession by reference to statutory elements, but “facts leading to recidivist felony punishment, such as the existence of a prior conviction, do not qualify as ‘elements’ in the traditional sense.” Ibid. The BIA observed, however, that “21 U. S. C. §851 precludes a Federal judge from enhancing a drug of fender’s sentence on the basis of recidivism absent compli ance with a number of safeguards that, among other things, serve to protect the right of the accused to notice and an opportunity to be heard as to the propriety of an increased punishment based on prior convictions.” Ibid. Therefore, these requirements “are part and parcel of what it means for a crime to be a ‘recidivist’ offense.” Id., at 391. “[U]nless the State successfully sought to impose punishment for a recidivist drug conviction,” the BIA concluded, a state simple possession “conviction cannot
‘proscribe conduct punishable as’ recidivist possession” under federal law. Ibid. On review, the Court of Appeals affirmed the BIA’s decision in Carachuri-Rosendo’s case, reading our decision in Lopez as dictating its outcome. “[I]f the conduct pro scribed by the state offense could have been prosecuted as a felony” under the Controlled Substances Act, the court reasoned, then the defendant’s conviction qualifies as an aggravated felony. 570 F. 3d 263, 267 (CA5 2009) (citing Lopez, 549 U. S., at 60). The court deemed its analysis “the hypothetical approach,” a term it derived from its understanding of our method of analysis in Lopez. 570 ing the “hypothetical-federal-felony approach”). Under this approach, as the Court of Appeals understood it, courts “g[o] beyond the state statute’s elements to look at the hypothetical conduct a state statute proscribes.” 570 F. 3d, at 266, n. 3. Accordingly, any “conduct” that “hypo thetically” “could have been punished as a felony” “had [it] been prosecuted in federal court” is an “aggravated felony” for federal immigration law purposes. Id., at 265. In applying this hypothetical approach, the Court of Appeals did not discuss the §851 procedural requirements. In stead, it concluded that because Carachuri-Rosendo’s “conduct” could have been prosecuted as simple possession with a recidivist enhancement under state law—even though it was not—it could have also been punished as a felony under federal law. Thus, in the Court of Appeals’ view, his conviction for simple possession under state law, without a recidivist enhancement, was an “aggravated felony” for immigration law purposes.8
We granted certiorari to resolve the conflict among the Courts of Appeals over whether subsequent simple posses sion offenses are aggravated felonies.9 558 U. S. ____ (2009). When interpreting the statutory provisions under dis pute, we begin by looking at the terms of the provisions and the “commonsense conception” of those terms. Lopez, 549 U. S., at 53. Carachuri-Rosendo is ineligible for can cellation of removal only if he was “convicted of a[n] ag gravated felony,” 8 U. S. C. §1229b(a), which, in this case, could only be a conviction for “illicit trafficking in a con trolled substance . . . . including a drug trafficking crime,” §1101(a)(43)(B). A recidivist possession offense such as CarachuriRosendo’s does not fit easily into the “everyday under standing” of those terms, Lopez, 549 U. S., at 53. This type of petty simple possession offense is not typically thought of as an “aggravated felony” or as “illicit traffick ing.” We explained in Lopez that “ordinarily ‘trafficking’ means some sort of commercial dealing.” Id., at 53–54 (citing Black’s Law Dictionary 1534 (8th ed. 2004)). And just as in Lopez, “[c]ommerce . . . was no part of” Cara
churi-Rosendo’s possessing a single tablet of Xanax, “and certainly it is no element of simple possession.” 549 U. S., at 54. As an initial matter, then, we observe that a read ing of this statutory scheme that would apply an “aggra vated” or “trafficking” label to any simple possession of fense is, to say the least, counterintuitive and “unorthodox,” ibid. The same is true for the type of penalty at issue. We do not usually think of a 10-day sentence for the unauthor ized possession of a trivial amount of a prescription drug as an “aggravated felony.” A “felony,” we have come to understand, is a “serious crime usu[ally] punishable by imprisonment for more than one year or by death.” Black’s Law Dictionary 694 (9th ed. 2009) (hereinafter Black’s). An “aggravated” offense is one “made worse or more serious by circumstances such as violence, the pres ence of a deadly weapon, or the intent to commit another crime.” Id., at 75. The term “aggravated felony” is unique to Title 8, which covers immigration matters; it is not a term used elsewhere within the United States Code. Our statutory criminal law classifies the most insignificant of federal felonies—“Class E” felonies—as carrying a sen tence of “less than five years but more than one year.” 18 U. S. C. §3559(a)(5). While it is true that a defendant’s criminal history might be seen to make an offense “worse” by virtue thereof, Black’s 75, it is nevertheless unorthodox to classify this type of petty simple possession recidivism as an “aggravated felony.” Of course, as Justice Souter observed in his opinion for the Court in Lopez, Congress, like “Humpty Dumpty,” has the power to give words unorthodox meanings. 549 U. S., at 54. But in this case the Government argues for a result that “the English language tells us not to expect,” so we must be “very wary of the Government’s position.” Ibid. Because the English language tells us that most aggra vated felonies are punishable by sentences far longer than
10 days, and that mere possession of one tablet of Xanax does not constitute “trafficking,” Lopez instructs us to be doubly wary of the Government’s position in this case.10 The Government’s position, like the Court of Appeals’ “hypothetical approach,” would treat all “conduct punish able as a felony” as the equivalent of a “conviction” of a felony whenever, hypothetically speaking, the underlying conduct could have received felony treatment under fed eral law. We find this reasoning—and the “hypothetical approach” itself—unpersuasive for the following reasons. First, and most fundamentally, the Government’s posi tion ignores the text of the INA, which limits the Attorney General’s cancellation power only when, inter alia, a noncitizen “has . . . been convicted of a[n] aggravated felony.” 8 U. S. C. §1229b(a)(3) (emphasis added). The text thus indicates that we are to look to the conviction itself as our starting place, not to what might have or could have been charged. And to be convicted of an aggra vated felony punishable as such under the Controlled
Substances Act, the “maximum term of imprisonment authorized” must be “more than one year,” 18 U. S. C. §3559(a)(5). Congress, recall, chose to authorize only a 1 year sentence for nearly all simple possession offenses, but it created a narrow exception for those cases in which a prosecutor elects to charge the defendant as a recidivist and the defendant receives notice and an opportunity to defend against that charge. See 21 U. S. C. §851; Part I, supra. Indisputably, Carachuri-Rosendo’s record of conviction contains no finding of the fact of his prior drug offense. Carachuri-Rosendo argues that even such a finding would be insufficient, and that a prosecutorial charge of recidi vism and an opportunity to defend against that charge also would be required before he could be deemed “con victed” of a felony punishable under the Controlled Sub stances Act. In the absence of any finding of recidivism, we need not, and do not, decide whether these additional procedures would be necessary. Although a federal immi gration court may have the power to make a recidivist finding in the first instance, see, e.g., Almendarez-Torres ex post, enhance the state offense of record just because facts known to it would have authorized a greater penalty under either state or federal law.11 Carachuri-Rosendo
was not actually “convicted,” §1229b(a)(3), of a drug pos session offense committed “after a prior conviction . . . has become final,” §844(a), and no subsequent development can undo that history.12 The Government contends that if Carachuri-Rosendo had been prosecuted in federal court for simple possession under 21 U. S. C. §844(a) under identical circumstances, he would have committed an “aggravated felony” for im migration law purposes. Tr. of Oral Arg. 36–37. This is
so, the Government suggests, because the only statutory text that matters is the word “punishable” in 18 U. S. C. §924(c)(2): Whatever conduct might be “punishable” as a felony, regardless of whether it actually is so punished or not, is a felony for immigration law purposes. But for the reasons just stated, the circumstances of CarachuriRosendo’s prosecution were not identical to those hypothe sized by the Government. And the Government’s ab stracted approach to §924(c)(2) cannot be reconciled with the more concrete guidance of 8 U. S. C. §1229b(a)(3), which limits the Attorney General’s cancellation authority only when the noncitizen has actually been “convicted of a[n] aggravated felony”—not when he merely could have been convicted of a felony but was not. Second, and relatedly, the Government’s position fails to give effect to the mandatory notice and process require ments contained in 21 U. S. C. §851. For federal law purposes, a simple possession offense is not “punishable” as a felony unless a federal prosecutor first elects to charge a defendant as a recidivist in the criminal informa tion. The statute, as described in Part I, supra, at 3–4, speaks in mandatory terms, permitting “[n]o person” to be subject to a recidivist enhancement—and therefore, in this case, a felony sentence—“unless” he has been given notice of the Government’s intent to prove the fact of a prior conviction. Federal law also gives the defendant an oppor tunity to challenge the fact of the prior conviction itself. §§851(b)–(c). The Government would dismiss these proce dures as meaningless, so long as they may be satisfied during the immigration proceeding. But these procedural requirements have great practical significance with respect to the conviction itself and are integral to the structure and design of our drug laws. They authorize prosecutors to exercise discretion when electing whether to pursue a recidivist enhancement. See
(“Whereas the prior version of [§851(a)] made enhance ments for prior offenses mandatory, the new statutory scheme gave prosecutors discretion whether to seek en hancements based on prior convictions”). Because the procedures are prerequisites to an enhanced sentence, §851 allows federal prosecutors to choose whether to seek a conviction that is “punishable” as a felony under §844(a). Underscoring the significance of the §851 procedures, the United States Attorney’s Manual places decisions with respect to seeking recidivist enhancements on par with the filing of a criminal charge against a defendant. See Dept. of Justice, United States Attorneys’ Manual §9–27.300(B) comment. (1997), online at http://www.justice.gov/usao/eousa/foia_reading_room/ usam/title9/27mcrm.htm#9-27.300 (as visited June 3, 2010, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file). (“Every prosecutor should regard the filing of an information under 21 U. S. C. §851 . . . as equivalent to the filing of charges”). Many state criminal codes, like the federal scheme, afford similar deference to prosecutorial discretion when prescribing recidivist enhancements. Texas is one such State. See, e.g., Tex. Penal Code Ann. §§12.42, 12.43 (West 2003) (recidivist enhancement is available “[i]f it is shown on the trial” that defendant was previously con victed of identified categories of felonies and misdemean ors). And, in this case, the prosecutor specifically elected to “[a]bandon” a recidivist enhancement under state law. App. 32a (reproducing state judgment). Were we to permit a federal immigration judge to apply his own recidivist enhancement after the fact so as to make the noncitizen’s offense “punishable” as a felony for immigration law pur poses, we would denigrate the independent judgment of state prosecutors to execute the laws of those sovereigns. Third, the Court of Appeals’ hypothetical felony ap proach is based on a misreading of our decision in Lopez.
We never used the term “hypothetical” to describe our analysis in that case. We did look to the “proscribe[d] conduct” of a state offense to determine whether it is “punishable as a felony under that federal law.” 549 U. S., at 60. But the “hypothetical approach” employed by the Court of Appeals introduces a level of conjecture at the outset of this inquiry that has no basis in Lopez. It ig nores both the conviction (the relevant statutory hook), and the conduct actually punished by the state offense. Instead, it focuses on facts known to the immigration court that could have but did not serve as the basis for the state conviction and punishment. As the Sixth Circuit has explained, this approach is really a “ ‘hypothetical to a (2008). Not only does the Government wish us to consider a fictional federal felony—whether the crime for which Carachuri-Rosendo was actually convicted would be a felony under the Controlled Substances Act—but the Government also wants us to consider facts not at issue in the crime of conviction (i.e., the existence of a prior convic tion) to determine whether Carachuri-Rosendo could have been charged with a federal felony. This methodology is far removed from the more focused, categorical inquiry employed in Lopez. Fourth, it seems clear that the Government’s argument is inconsistent with common practice in the federal courts. It is quite unlikely that the “conduct” that gave rise to Carachuri-Rosendo’s conviction would have been punished as a felony in federal court. Under the United States Sentencing Guidelines, Carachuri-Rosendo’s recom mended sentence, based on the type of controlled sub stance at issue, would not have exceeded one year and very likely would have been less than 6 months. See United States Sentencing Commission, Guidelines Manual was true in Lopez, the Government has provided us with
no empirical data suggesting that “even a single eager Assistant United States Attorney” has ever sought to prosecute a comparable federal defendant as a felon. 549 U. S., at 57–58. The Government’s “hypothetical” ap proach to this case is therefore misleading as well as speculative, in that Carachuri-Rosendo’s federal-court counterpart would not, in actuality, have faced any felony charge. 11, n. 8 (2004), ambiguities in criminal statutes referenced in immigration laws should be construed in the nonciti zen’s favor. And here the critical language appears in a criminal statute, 18 U. S. C. §924(c)(2). We note that whether a noncitizen has committed an “aggravated felony” is relevant, inter alia, to the type of relief he may obtain from a removal order, but not to whether he is in fact removable. In other words, to the extent that our rejection of the Government’s broad un derstanding of the scope of “aggravated felony” may have any practical effect on policing our Nation’s borders, it is a limited one. Carachuri-Rosendo, and others in his posi tion, may now seek cancellation of removal and thereby avoid the harsh consequence of mandatory removal. But he will not avoid the fact that his conviction makes him, in the first instance, removable. Any relief he may obtain depends upon the discretion of the Attorney General. * * * In sum, the Government is correct that to qualify as an “aggravated felony” under the INA, the conduct prohibited by state law must be punishable as a felony under federal law. See Lopez, 549 U. S., at 60. But as the text and structure of the relevant statutory provisions demon strate, the defendant must also have been actually con victed of a crime that is itself punishable as a felony under federal law. The mere possibility that the defendant’s
conduct, coupled with facts outside of the record of convic tion, could have authorized a felony conviction under federal law is insufficient to satisfy the statutory com mand that a noncitizen be “convicted of a[n] aggravated felony” before he loses the opportunity to seek cancellation of removal. 8 U. S. C. §1229b(a)(3). The Court of Appeals, as well as the Government, made the logical error of as suming that a necessary component of an aggravated felony is also sufficient to satisfy its statutory definition. We hold that when a defendant has been convicted of a simple possession offense that has not been enhanced based on the fact of a prior conviction, he has not been “convicted” under §1229b(a)(3) of a “felony punishable” as such “under the Controlled Substances Act,” 18 U. S. C. §924(c)(2). The prosecutor in Carachuri-Rosendo’s case declined to charge him as a recidivist. He has, therefore, not been convicted of a felony punishable under the Con trolled Substances Act. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed. It is so ordered.
——————
1 The

term “aggravated felony” “applies to an offense . . . whether in
violation of Federal or State law” (or, in certain circumstances, “the law
of a foreign country”). 8 U. S. C. § 1101(a)(43).
2 The Controlled Substances Act itself defines the term “felony” as
“any Federal or State offense classified by applicable Federal or State
law as a felony.” 21 U. S. C. §802(13). The Government concedes that
the classification of felonies under 18 U. S. C. §3559(a) controls in this
case. Brief for Respondent 4.


——————
3 Although

§844(a) does not expressly define a separate offense of
“recidivist simple possession,” the fact of a prior conviction must none
theless be found before a defendant is subject to a felony sentence.
True, the statutory scheme comports with Almendarez-Torres v. United
States, 523 U. S. 224, 247 (1998), in which we explained that the
Constitution does not require treating recidivism as an element of the
offense. In other words, Congress has permissibly set out a criminal
offense for simple possession whereby a recidivist finding by the judge,
by a preponderance of the evidence, authorizes a punishment that
exceeds the statutory maximum penalty for a simple possession offense.
But the fact of a prior conviction must still be found—if only by a judge
and if only by a preponderance of the evidence—before a defendant is
subject to felony punishment. For present purposes, we therefore view
§844(a)’s felony simple possession provision as separate and distinct
from the misdemeanor simple possession offense that section also
prescribes.
4 The statute provides in relevant part: “Any person who violates this
subsection may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than 1 year . . . except that if he commits such offense after a prior
conviction . . . he shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment for not
less than 15 days but not more than 2 years . . . .” 21 U. S. C. §844(a).


——————
5 This subsection provides: “No person who stands convicted of an
offense under this part shall be sentenced to increased punishment by
reason of one or more prior convictions, unless before trial, or before
entry of a plea of guilty, the United States attorney files an information
with the court (and serves a copy of such information on the person or
counsel for the person) stating in writing the previous convictions to be
relied upon.” §851(a)(1).
6 We have previously recognized the mandatory nature of these re
quirements, as have the courts of appeals. See United States v. LaBonte, 520 U. S. 751, 754, n. 1 (1997) (“We note that imposition of an
enhanced penalty [for recidivism] is not automatic. . . . If the Govern
ment does not file such notice [under 21 U. S. C. §851(a)(1)] . . . the
lower sentencing range will be applied even though the defendant may
otherwise be eligible for the increased penalty”); see also, e.g., United
States v. Beasley, 495 F. 3d 142, 148 (CA4 2007); United States v.
Ceballos, 302 F. 3d 679, 690–692 (CA7 2002); United States v. Dodson,
288 F. 3d 153, 159 (CA5 2002); United States v. Mooring, 287 F. 3d 725,
727–728 (CA8 2002). Although §851’s procedural safeguards are not
constitutionally compelled, see Almendarez-Torres, 523 U. S., at 247,
they are nevertheless a mandatory feature of the Controlled Substances
Act and a prerequisite to securing a felony conviction under §844(a) for
a successive simple possession offense.


——————
7 But for trivial marijuana possession offenses (such as CarachuriRosendo’s 2004 state offense), virtually all drug offenses are grounds
for removal under 8 U. S. C. §1227(a)(2)(B)(i).


——————
8 Since the Court of Appeals issued its decision in this case, Cara
churi-Rosendo has been removed. Brief for Respondent 10–11. Neither
party, however, has suggested that this case is now moot. If Carachuri


——————
Rosendo was not convicted of an “aggravated felony,” and if he contin
ues to satisfy the requirements of 8 U. S. C. §1229b(a), he may still seek
cancellation of removal even after having been removed. See §1229b(a)
(“The Attorney General may cancel removal in the case of an alien who
is inadmissible or deportable from the United States if the alien” meets
several criteria).
9 Compare 570 F. 3d 263 (CA5 2009) (holding state conviction for
simple possession after prior conviction for simple possession is a felony
under the Controlled Substances Act and thus an aggravated felony),
and Fernandez v. Mukasey, 544 F. 3d 862 (CA7 2008) (same), with
Berhe v. Gonzales, 464 F. 3d 74 (CA1 2006) (taking contrary view),
Alsol v. Mukasey, 548 F. 3d 207 (CA2 2008) (same), Gerbier v. Holmes,
280 F. 3d 297 (CA3 2002) (same), and Rashid v. Mukasey, 531 F. 3d 438
(CA6 2008) (same).


——————
10 The Court stated in Lopez that “recidivist possession, see 21
U. S. C. §844(a), clearly fall[s] within the definitions used by Congress
in 8 U. S. C. §1101(a)(43)(B) and 18 U. S. C. §924(c)(2), regardless of
whether these federal possession felonies or their state counterparts
constitute ‘illicit trafficking in a controlled substance’ or ‘drug traffick
ing’ as those terms are used in ordinary speech.” 549 U. S., at 55, n. 6.
Our decision today is not in conflict with this footnote; it is still true
that recidivist simple possession offenses charged and prosecuted as
such “clearly fall” within the definition of an aggravated felony. What
we had no occasion to decide in Lopez, and what we now address, is
what it means to be convicted of an aggravated felony. Lopez teaches
us that it is necessary that the conduct punished under state law
correspond to a felony punishable under the Controlled Substances Act
to be an aggravated felony under §1101(a)(43)(B). But it does not
instruct as to whether the mere possibility that conduct could be—but
is not—charged as an offense punishable as a felony under federal law
is sufficient.


——————
11 Our decision last Term in Nijhawan v. Holder, 557 U. S. ___ (2009),
also relied upon by the Government, is not to the contrary. In that
case, we rejected the so-called categorical approach employed in cases
like United States v. Rodriquez, 553 U. S. 377 (2008), when assessing
whether, under 8 U. S. C. §1101(a)(43)(M)(i), a noncitizen has commit
ted “an offense that . . . involves fraud or deceit in which the loss to the
. . . victims exceeds $10,000.” Our analysis was tailored to the “circum
stance-specific” language contained in that particular subsection of the
aggravated felony definition. Nijhawan, 557 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
8). And we specifically distinguished the “generic” categories of aggra
vated felonies for which a categorical approach might be appropriate—
including the “illicit trafficking” provision—from the “circumstance


——————
specific” offense at hand. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 6–7, 8). Moreover,
unlike the instant case, there was no debate in Nijhawan over whether
the petitioner actually had been “convicted” of fraud; we only consid
ered how to calculate the amount of loss once a conviction for a particu
lar category of aggravated felony has occurred.
12 Linking our inquiry to the record of conviction comports with how
we have categorized convictions for state offenses within the definition
of generic federal criminal sanctions under the Armed Career Criminal
Act (ACCA), 18 U. S. C. §924(e). The United States urges that our
decision in Rodriquez, 553 U. S. 377, an ACCA case, supports its
position in this case. Brief for Respondent 29–30. To the extent that
Rodriquez is relevant to the issue at hand, we think the contrary is
true. In that decision we considered whether a recidivist finding under
state law that had the effect of increasing the “maximum term of
imprisonment” to 10 years, irrespective of the actual sentence imposed,
made the offense a “serious drug offense” within the meaning of 18
U. S. C. §924(e)(1) and therefore an ACCA predicate offense. 553 U. S.,
at 382. We held that a recidivist finding could set the “maximum term
of imprisonment,” but only when the finding is a part of the record of
conviction. Id., at 389. Indeed, we specifically observed that “in those
cases in which the records that may properly be consulted do not show
that the defendant faced the possibility of a recidivist enhancement, it
may well be that the Government will be precluded from establishing
that a conviction was for a qualifying offense.” Ibid. In other words,
when the recidivist finding giving rise to a 10-year sentence is not
apparent from the sentence itself, or appears neither as part of the
“judgment of conviction” nor the “formal charging document,” ibid., the
Government will not have established that the defendant had a prior
conviction for which the maximum term of imprisonment was 10 years
or more (assuming the recidivist finding is a necessary precursor to
such a sentence).

