Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., dissenting

“The underlying idea . . . is that the State with all its
resources and power should not be allowed to make re
peated attempts to convict an individual for an alleged
offense, thereby subjecting him to embarrassment, ex
pense and ordeal and compelling him to live in a continu
ing state of anxiety and insecurity, as well as enhancing
the possibility that even though innocent he may be found
guilty.” Green v. United States, 355 U. S. 184, 187–188
(1957).9
We have come over the years to recognize that jury
coercion poses a serious threat to jurors and defendants
alike, and that the accused’s interest in a single proceed
ing must sometimes yield “to the public’s interest in fair
trials designed to end in just judgments,” Wade, 336 U. S.,
at 689; and we have therefore carved out exceptions to the
common-law rule. But the exceptions are narrow. For a
mistrial to be granted at the prosecutor’s request, “the
prosecutor must shoulder the burden of justifying the
mistrial if he is to avoid the double jeopardy bar. His
burden is a heavy one.” Washington, 434 U. S., at 505. A
judge who acts sua sponte in declaring a mistrial must
similarly make sure, and must enable a reviewing court to
confirm, that there is a “ ‘manifest necessity’ ” to deprive
the defendant of his valued right. Ibid.
In this case, the trial judge did not meet that burden.
The record suggests that she discharged the jury without
considering any less extreme courses of action, and the
record makes quite clear that she did not fully appreciate
the scope or significance of the ancient right at stake. The
Michigan Supreme Court’s decision rejecting Reginald
Lett’s double jeopardy claim was just as clearly in error.
——————
9 As Justice Harlan observed, “[a] power in government to subject the
individual to repeated prosecutions for the same offense would cut
deeply into the framework of procedural protections which the Consti
tution establishes for the conduct of a criminal trial.” United States v.
Jorn, 400 U. S. 470, 479 (1971) (plurality opinion).

