Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

STEVENS, J., dissenting

was manifestly necessary to discharge the jury.14
The judge then steered the conversation back to the
issue of deadlock, asking: “ ‘Are you going to reach a unani
mous verdict, or not?’ ” Ante, at 3. After the foreperson
hesitated, the judge persisted: “ ‘Yes or no?’ ” Ibid. The
foreperson replied: “ ‘No, Judge.’ ” Ibid. Two aspects of
this interchange are also notable. First, the judge’s ques
tion, though “very direct,” was “actually rather ambigu
ous,” because it gave the foreperson no temporal or legal
context within which to understand what was being asked.
507 F. Supp. 2d, at 787. “The foreperson could have easily
thought the judge meant, ‘Are you going to reach a
unanimous verdict in the next hour?’ or ‘before the lunch
recess?’ or ‘by the end of the day?’ ” Ibid. (emphasis de
leted). Even if the foreperson assumed no time constraint,
she could have easily thought the judge meant, “Are you,
in your estimation, more likely than not to reach a unani
mous verdict?” An affirmative answer to that question
would likewise fall far short of manifest necessity.
Second, the foreperson’s hesitation suggests a lack of
confidence in her position. That alone ought to have called
into question the propriety of a mistrial order. But the
judge bore down and demanded an unqualified answer,
“ ‘Yes or no.’ ” Most of the time when we worry about
judicial coercion of juries, we worry about judges pressur
ing them, in the common-law manner, to keep deliberating
until they return a verdict they may not otherwise have
——————
14 Another reading of the foreperson’s reply is available: Her state
ment,“ ‘The majority of us don’t believe that,’ ” may have been a com
plete sentence. In other words, she may have meant to convey, “The
majority of us don’t believe that we are hopelessly deadlocked.” The
trial-court transcript places an em dash rather than a period after the
word “that,” but this is hardly dispositive evidence of intonation or
intent. However, the trial judge’s contemporaneous reaction, the fact
that the foreperson was not permitted to consult with the other jurors
on the issue of deadlock, and respondent’s failure to advance this
reading undercut its plausibility.

