Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

Court’s decision upholding the trial judge’s exercise of
discretion—while not necessarily correct—was not objec
tively unreasonable.3 Not only are there a number of
plausible ways to interpret the record of Lett’s trial, but
the standard applied by the Michigan Supreme Court—
whether the judge exercised sound discretion—is a general
one, to which there is no “plainly correct or incorrect”
answer in this case. Yarborough, 541 U. S., at 664; see
also Knowles, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 11). The Court of
Appeals’ ruling in Lett’s favor failed to grant the Michigan
courts the dual layers of deference required by AEDPA
and our double jeopardy precedents.
The Court of Appeals also erred in a second respect. It
relied upon its own decision in Fulton v. Moore, 520 F. 3d
522 (CA6 2008), for the proposition “that Arizona v. Wash
ington sets forth three factors that determine whether a
judge has exercised sound discretion in declaring a mis
trial: whether the judge (1) heard the opinions of the
parties’ counsel about the propriety of the mistrial; (2)
considered the alternatives to a mistrial; and (3) acted
deliberately, instead of abruptly.” 316 Fed. Appx., at 426.
It then cited Fulton’s interpretation of Washington to
buttress its conclusion that the Michigan Supreme Court
erred in concluding that the trial judge had exercised
sound discretion. 316 Fed. Appx., at 428.
The Fulton decision, however, does not constitute
“clearly established Federal law, as determined by the
——————
3 It is not necessary for us to decide whether the Michigan Supreme
Court’s decision—or, for that matter, the trial judge’s declaration of a
mistrial—was right or wrong. The latter question, in particular, is a
close one. As Lett points out, at a hearing before the Michigan Court of
Appeals, the state prosecutor expressed the view that the judge had in
fact erred in dismissing the jury and declaring a mistrial. The Michi
gan Supreme Court declined to accept this confession of error, People v.
Lett, 463 Mich. 939, 620 N. W. 2d 855 (2000), and in any event—for the
reasons we have explained—whether the trial judge was right or wrong
is not the pertinent question under AEDPA.

