2

RENICO v. LETT
Syllabus
Michigan Supreme Court’s rejection of his double jeopardy claim was
“an unreasonable application of . . . clearly established Federal law,
as determined by the Supreme Court of the United States,” 28
U. S. C. §2254(d)(1), and thus that he was not barred by the Antiter
rorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA) from ob
taining federal habeas relief. The District Court granted the writ,
and the Sixth Circuit affirmed.

Held: Because the Michigan Supreme Court’s decision in this case was
not unreasonable under AEDPA, the Sixth Circuit erred in granting
Lett habeas relief. Pp. 5–12.
(a) The question under AEDPA is whether the Michigan Supreme
Court’s determination was “an unreasonable application of . . . clearly
established Federal law,” §2254(d)(1), not whether it was an incorrect
application of that law, see Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362, 410.
AEDPA imposes a “highly deferential standard for evaluating state
court rulings,” Lindh v. Murphy, 521 U. S. 320, 333, n. 7, and “de
mands that [they] be given the benefit of the doubt,” Woodford v. Vis
ciotti, 537 U. S. 19, 24 (per curiam). Pp. 5–6.
(b) Here, the “clearly established Federal law” is largely undis
puted. When a judge discharges a jury on the grounds that the jury
cannot reach a verdict, the Double Jeopardy Clause does not bar a
new trial for the defendant before a new jury, Perez, 9 Wheat., at
579–580. Trial judges may declare a mistrial when, “in their opinion,
taking all the circumstances into consideration, there is a manifest
necessity” for doing so, id., at 580, i.e., a “high degree” of necessity,
Washington, supra, at 506. The decision whether to grant a mistrial
is reserved to the “broad discretion” of the trial judge, Illinois v.
Somerville, 410 U. S. 458, 462, and the discretion “to declare a mis
trial [for a deadlocked jury] is . . . accorded great deference by a re
viewing court,” Washington, supra, at 510, although this deference is
not absolute. This Court has expressly declined to require the “me
chanical application” of any “rigid formula,” Wade v. Hunter, 336
U. S. 684, 690–691, when a trial judge decides to declare a mistrial
due to jury deadlock, and it has explicitly held that the judge is not
required to make explicit findings of “manifest necessity” or “articu
late on the record all the factors” informing his discretion, Washing
ton, supra, at 517. The Court has never required a judge in these cir
cumstances to force the jury to deliberate for a minimum period of
time, to question the jurors individually, to consult with counsel, to
issue a supplemental jury instruction, or to consider any other means
of breaking the impasse. Moreover, the legal standard applied by the
Michigan Supreme Court is a general one—whether there was an
abuse of the “broad discretion” reserved to the trial judge, Somerville,
supra, at 462. Because AEDPA authorizes a federal court to grant

