Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

STEVENS, J., dissenting

she exercised sound discretion. For example, the judge did
not poll the jurors, give an instruction ordering further
deliberations, query defense counsel about his thoughts on
continued deliberations, or indicate on the record why a
mistrial declaration was necessary.” Lett, 466 Mich., at
227–228, 644 N. W. 2d, at 755 (Cavanagh, J., dissenting).
Nor did the judge invite any argument or input from the
prosecutor, make any findings of fact or provide any
statements illuminating her thought process, follow up on
the foreperson’s final response, or give any evident consid
eration to the ends of public justice or the balance between
the defendant’s rights and the State’s interests. The
manner in which this discharge decision was made con
travened standard trial-court guidelines.15 The judge may
not have had a constitutional obligation to take any one of
——————
15 See,

e.g., ABA Standards for Criminal Justice, Discovery and Trial
by Jury 15–5.4, pp. 256–257 (3d ed. 1996) (“A trial judge should be able
to send the jury back for further deliberations notwithstanding its
indication that it has been unable to agree. The general view is that a
court may send the jury back for additional deliberations even though
the jury has indicated once, twice, or several times that it cannot agree
or even after jurors have requested that they be discharged. . . . [I]t is
believed that a jury should not be permitted to avoid a reasonable
period of deliberation merely by repeated indications that it is unhappy
over its inability to agree”); Federal Judicial Center, Manual on Recur
ring Problems in Criminal Trials 162 (5th ed. 2001) (“Before declaring a
mistrial, a trial judge must consider all the procedural alternatives to a
mistrial, and, after finding none of them to be adequate, make a finding
of manifest necessity for the declaration of a mistrial”); National
Conference of State Trial Judges of the Judicial Administration Divi
sion of the American Bar Association and the National Judicial College,
The Judge’s Book 220 (2d ed. 1994) (“The jury should be given full
opportunity to decide the case, considering the number of days of
evidence it heard”); State Justice Institute, National Center for State
Courts & National Judicial College, Jury Trial Management for the
21st
Century
§3,
Module
#3
(2009),
online
at
http://www.icmelearning.com/jtm (as visited Apr. 30, 2010, and avail
able in Clerk of Court’s case file) (“ ‘Deliberating jurors should be
offered assistance when apparent impasse is reported’ ”).

