8

RENICO v. LETT
Opinion of the Court

application” of any “rigid formula” when trial judges de
cide whether jury deadlock warrants a mistrial. Wade v.
Hunter, 336 U. S. 684, 691, 690 (1949). We have also
explicitly held that a trial judge declaring a mistrial is not
required to make explicit findings of “ ‘manifest necessity’ ”
nor to “articulate on the record all the factors which in
formed the deliberate exercise of his discretion.” Washing
ton, supra, at 517. And we have never required a trial
judge, before declaring a mistrial based on jury deadlock,
to force the jury to deliberate for a minimum period of
time, to question the jurors individually, to consult with
(or obtain the consent of) either the prosecutor or defense
counsel, to issue a supplemental jury instruction, or to
consider any other means of breaking the impasse. In
1981, then-Justice Rehnquist noted that this Court had
never “overturned a trial court’s declaration of a mistrial
after a jury was unable to reach a verdict on the ground
that the ‘manifest necessity’ standard had not been met.”
Winston v. Moore, 452 U. S. 944, 947 (opinion dissenting
from denial of certiorari). The same remains true today,
nearly 30 years later.
The legal standard applied by the Michigan Supreme
Court in this case was whether there was an abuse of the
“broad discretion” reserved to the trial judge. Somerville,
supra, at 462; Washington, supra, at 509. This type of
general standard triggers another consideration under
AEDPA. When assessing whether a state court’s applica
tion of federal law is unreasonable, “the range of reason
able judgment can depend in part on the nature of the
relevant rule” that the state court must apply. Yarbor
ough v. Alvarado, 541 U. S. 652, 664 (2004). Because
AEDPA authorizes federal courts to grant relief only when
state courts act unreasonably, it follows that “[t]he more
general the rule” at issue—and thus the greater the poten
tial for reasoned disagreement among fair-minded
judges—“the more leeway [state] courts have in reaching

