16

RENICO v. LETT
STEVENS, J., dissenting

though it would have been preferable if Lett had tried to
lodge an objection, defense counsel was given no meaning
ful opportunity to do so—the judge discharged the jury
simultaneously with her mistrial order, counsel received
no advance notice of either action, and he may not even
have been informed of the content of the jury’s notes. See
ante, at 2; 316 Fed. Appx., at 428 (“At no point before the
actual declaration of the mistrial was it even mentioned
on the record as a potential course of action by the court.
The summary nature of the trial court’s actions . . . ren
dered an objection both unlikely and meaningless” (inter
nal quotation marks omitted)). Counsel’s failure to object
is therefore legally irrelevant.17 And, as detailed above,
the foreperson’s remarks were far more equivocal and
ambiguous, in context, than the Michigan Supreme Court
allowed.
The Michigan Supreme Court’s defense of the trial
court’s actions is thus weak on its own terms. It collapses
entirely under the weight of the many defects in the trial
court’s process, virtually all of which the court either
overlooked or discounted.
The unreasonableness of the Michigan Supreme Court’s
decision is highlighted by the decisions of the three other
courts that have addressed Lett’s double jeopardy claim,
each of which ruled in his favor, as well as the dissent
filed by two Michigan Supreme Court Justices and the
——————
17 See

Jorn, 400 U. S., at 487 (plurality opinion) (“[I]ndeed, the trial
judge acted so abruptly in discharging the jury that, had the . . . defen
dant [been disposed] to object to the discharge of the jury, there would
have been no opportunity to do so”); see also Lett, 2000 WL 33423221,
*2 (noting that failure to object to the jury’s discharge does not consti
tute consent under Michigan law). While a defendant’s affirmative
request for or consent to a mistrial may be relevant to the double
jeopardy inquiry, see, e.g., Jorn, 400 U. S., at 485 (plurality opinion), we
have never suggested that defendants must object to such orders to
preserve a claim, much less object to an order issued sua sponte and
without any advance notice.

