Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
relief only when a state court’s application of federal law was unrea
sonable, it follows that “[t]he more general the rule” at issue—and
thus the greater the potential for reasoned disagreement among fair
minded judges—“the more leeway [state] courts have in reaching out
comes in case-by-case determinations.” Yarborough v. Alvarado, 541
U. S. 652, 664. Pp. 6–9.
(c) The Michigan Supreme Court’s adjudication involved a straight
forward application of this Court’s longstanding precedents to the
facts of Lett’s case. The state court cited this Court’s double jeopardy
cases—from Perez to Washington—applying those precedents to the
particular facts before it and finding no abuse of discretion in light of
the length of deliberations following a short, uncomplicated trial, the
jury’s notes to the judge, and the fact that the foreperson stated that
the jury could not reach a verdict. It was thus reasonable for the
court to determine that the trial judge had exercised sound discretion
in declaring a mistrial. The Sixth Circuit concluded otherwise be
cause it disagreed with the inferences that the Michigan Supreme
Court had drawn from the facts. The Circuit Court’s interpretation is
not implausible, but other reasonable interpretations of the record
are also possible. It was not objectively unreasonable for the Michi
gan Supreme Court to conclude that the trial judge’s exercise of dis
cretion was sound, both in light of what happened at trial and the
fact that the relevant legal standard is a general one, to which there
is no “plainly correct or incorrect” answer in this case. Yarborough,
supra, at 664. The Sixth Circuit failed to grant the Michigan courts
the dual layers of deference required by AEDPA and this Court’s dou
ble jeopardy precedents. Pp. 9–11.
(d) The Sixth Circuit also erred in relying on its own Fulton v.
Moore decision for the proposition that Arizona v. Washington sets
forth three specific factors that determine whether a judge has exer
cised sound discretion. Because Fulton does not constitute “clearly
established Federal law, as determined by the Supreme Court,”
§2254(d)(1), failure to apply it does not independently authorize ha
beas relief under AEDPA. Nor can Fulton be understood merely to il
luminate this Court’s decision in Washington, as Washington did not
set forth any such test to determine whether a trial judge has exer
cised sound discretion in declaring a mistrial. Pp. 11–12.
(e) The Court does not deny that the trial judge in this case could
have been more thorough before declaring a mistrial. Nonetheless,
the steps that the Sixth Circuit thought she should have taken were
not required—either under this Court’s double jeopardy precedents
or, by extension, under AEDPA. Pp. 12.
316 Fed. Appx. 421, reversed and remanded.

