(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

RENICO, WARDEN v. LETT
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–338.

Argued March 29, 2010—Decided May 3, 2010

From jury selection to jury instructions in a Michigan court, respondent
Lett’s first trial for, inter alia, first-degree murder took less than nine
hours. During approximately four hours of deliberations, the jury
sent the trial court seven notes, including one asking what would
happen if the jury could not agree. The judge called the jury and the
attorneys into the courtroom and questioned the foreperson, who said
that the jury was unable to reach a unanimous verdict. The judge
then declared a mistrial, dismissed the jury, and scheduled a new
trial. At Lett’s second trial, after deliberating for only 3 hours and 15
minutes, a new jury found him guilty of second-degree murder. On
appeal, Lett argued that because the judge in his first trial had an
nounced a mistrial without any manifest necessity to do so, the Dou
ble Jeopardy Clause barred the State from trying him a second time.
Agreeing, the Michigan Court of Appeals reversed the conviction.
The Michigan Supreme Court reversed. It concluded that, under
United States v. Perez, 9 Wheat. 579, 580, a defendant may be retried
following the discharge of a deadlocked jury so long as the trial court
exercised its “sound discretion” in concluding that the jury was dead
locked and thus that there was a “manifest necessity” for a mistrial;
and that, under Arizona v. Washington, 434 U. S. 497, 506–510, an
appellate court must generally defer to a trial judge’s determination
that a deadlock has been reached. It then found that the judge at
Lett’s first trial had not abused her discretion in declaring the mis
trial, observing that the jury had deliberated a sufficient amount of
time following a short, noncomplex trial; that the jury had sent sev
eral notes, including one appearing to indicate heated discussions;
and that the foreperson had stated that the jury could not reach a
verdict. In Lett’s federal habeas petition, he contended that the

