4

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH

AND SCHOOL v. EEOC 

ALITO, J., concurring


existence is dedicated to the collective expression and
propagation of shared religious ideals. See Employment
Div., Dept. of Human Resources of Ore. v. Smith, 494 U. S.
872, 882 (1990) (noting that the constitutional interest in
freedom of association may be “reinforced by Free Exercise
Clause concerns”). As the Court notes, the First Amendment “gives special solicitude to the rights of religious
organizations,” ante, at 14, but our expressive-association
cases are nevertheless useful in pointing out what those
essential rights are. Religious groups are the archetype
of associations formed for expressive purposes, and their
fundamental rights surely include the freedom to choose
who is qualified to serve as a voice for their faith.
When it comes to the expression and inculcation of
religious doctrine, there can be no doubt that the messenger matters. Religious teachings cover the gamut from
moral conduct to metaphysical truth, and both the content
and credibility of a religion’s message depend vitally on
the character and conduct of its teachers. A religion cannot depend on someone to be an effective advocate for its
religious vision if that person’s conduct fails to live up to
the religious precepts that he or she espouses. For this
reason, a religious body’s right to self-governance must
include the ability to select, and to be selective about,
those who will serve as the very “embodiment of its message” and “its voice to the faithful.” Petruska v. Gannon
Univ., 462 F. 3d 294, 306 (CA3 2006). A religious body’s
control over such “employees” is an essential component of
its freedom to speak in its own voice, both to its own members and to the outside world.
The connection between church governance and the free
dissemination of religious doctrine has deep roots in our
legal tradition:
“The right to organize voluntary religious associations
to assist in the expression and dissemination of any

