2

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH

AND SCHOOL v. EEOC 

Syllabus

a portion of Perich’s health insurance premiums in exchange for her
resignation as a called teacher. Perich refused to resign. In February, Perich presented herself at the school and refused to leave until
she received written documentation that she had reported to work.
The principal later called Perich and told her that she would likely be
fired. Perich responded that she had spoken with an attorney and intended to assert her legal rights. In a subsequent letter, the chairman of the school board advised Perich that the congregation would
consider whether to rescind her call at its next meeting. As grounds
for termination, the letter cited Perich’s “insubordination and disruptive behavior,” as well as the damage she had done to her “working
relationship” with the school by “threatening to take legal action.”
The congregation voted to rescind Perich’s call, and Hosanna-Tabor
sent her a letter of termination.
Perich filed a charge with the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, claiming that her employment had been terminated in
violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act. The EEOC brought
suit against Hosanna-Tabor, alleging that Perich had been fired in
retaliation for threatening to file an ADA lawsuit. Perich intervened
in the litigation. Invoking what is known as the “ministerial exception,” Hosanna-Tabor argued that the suit was barred by the First
Amendment because the claims concerned the employment relationship between a religious institution and one of its ministers. The
District Court agreed and granted summary judgment in HosannaTabor’s favor. The Sixth Circuit vacated and remanded. It recognized the existence of a ministerial exception rooted in the First
Amendment, but concluded that Perich did not qualify as a “minister”
under the exception.

Held:
1. The Establishment and Free Exercise Clauses of the First
Amendment bar suits brought on behalf of ministers against their
churches, claiming termination in violation of employment discrimination laws. Pp. 6–15.
(a) The First Amendment provides, in part, that “Congress shall
make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting
the free exercise thereof.” Familiar with life under the established
Church of England, the founding generation sought to foreclose the
possibility of a national church. By forbidding the “establishment of
religion” and guaranteeing the “free exercise thereof,” the Religion
Clauses ensured that the new Federal Government—unlike the English Crown—would have no role in filling ecclesiastical offices. Pp. 6–
10.
(b) This Court first considered the issue of government interference with a church’s ability to select its own ministers in the context

