Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

ALITO, J., concurring

of religious groups, both here in the United States and
abroad, has often served as a shield against oppressive
civil laws. To safeguard this crucial autonomy, we have
long recognized that the Religion Clauses protect a private
sphere within which religious bodies are free to govern
themselves in accordance with their own beliefs. The
Constitution guarantees religious bodies “independence
from secular control or manipulation—in short, power to
decide for themselves, free from state interference, matters of church government as well as those of faith and
doctrine.” Kedroff v. Saint Nicholas Cathedral of Russian
Orthodox Church in North America, 344 U. S. 94, 116
(1952).
Religious autonomy means that religious authorities
must be free to determine who is qualified to serve in
positions of substantial religious importance. Different
religions will have different views on exactly what qualifies as an important religious position, but it is nonetheless possible to identify a general category of “employees”
whose functions are essential to the independence of practically all religious groups. These include those who serve
in positions of leadership, those who perform important
functions in worship services and in the performance of
religious ceremonies and rituals, and those who are entrusted with teaching and conveying the tenets of the faith
to the next generation.
Applying the protection of the First Amendment to roles
of religious leadership, worship, ritual, and expression
focuses on the objective functions that are important for
the autonomy of any religious group, regardless of its
beliefs. As we have recognized in a similar context,
“[f]orcing a group to accept certain members may impair
[its ability] to express those views, and only those views,
that it intends to express.” Boy Scouts of America v. Dale,
530 U. S. 640, 648 (2000). That principle applies with
special force with respect to religious groups, whose very

