4

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH

AND SCHOOL v. EEOC 

Opinion of the Court 


chairman Scott Salo sent Perich a letter stating that
Hosanna-Tabor was reviewing the process for rescinding
her call in light of her “regrettable” actions. Id., at 229.
Salo subsequently followed up with a letter advising
Perich that the congregation would consider whether to
rescind her call at its next meeting. As grounds for termination, the letter cited Perich’s “insubordination and
disruptive behavior” on February 22, as well as the damage she had done to her “working relationship” with the
school by “threatening to take legal action.” Id., at 55.
The congregation voted to rescind Perich’s call on April 10,
and Hosanna-Tabor sent her a letter of termination the
next day.
B
Perich filed a charge with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, alleging that her employment had
been terminated in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 104 Stat. 327, 42 U. S. C. §12101 et seq.
(1990). The ADA prohibits an employer from discriminating against a qualified individual on the basis of disability.
§12112(a). It also prohibits an employer from retaliating
“against any individual because such individual has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by [the ADA] or
because such individual made a charge, testified, assisted,
or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under [the ADA].” §12203(a).1
——————
1 The ADA itself provides religious entities with two defenses to
claims of discrimination that arise under subchapter I of the Act. The
first provides that “[t]his subchapter shall not prohibit a religious
corporation, association, educational institution, or society from giving
preference in employment to individuals of a particular religion to
perform work connected with the carrying on by such [entity] of its
activities.” §12113(d)(1) (2006 ed., Supp. III). The second provides that
“[u]nder this subchapter, a religious organization may require that all
applicants and employees conform to the religious tenets of such
organization.” §12113(d)(2). The ADA’s prohibition against retaliation,

