Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

exercise thereof,” the Religion Clauses ensured that the
new Federal Government—unlike the English Crown—
would have no role in filling ecclesiastical offices. The
Establishment Clause prevents the Government from
appointing ministers, and the Free Exercise Clause prevents it from interfering with the freedom of religious
groups to select their own.
This understanding of the Religion Clauses was reflected in two events involving James Madison, “ ‘the leading
architect of the religion clauses of the First Amendment.’ ”
Arizona Christian School Tuition Organization v. Winn,
563 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 13) (quoting Flast v.
Cohen, 392 U. S. 83, 103 (1968)). The first occurred in
1806, when John Carroll, the first Catholic bishop in the
United States, solicited the Executive’s opinion on who
should be appointed to direct the affairs of the Catholic
Church in the territory newly acquired by the Louisiana
Purchase. After consulting with President Jefferson, thenSecretary of State Madison responded that the selection
of church “functionaries” was an “entirely ecclesiastical”
matter left to the Church’s own judgment. Letter from
James Madison to Bishop Carroll (Nov. 20, 1806), reprinted in 20 Records of the American Catholic Historical Society 63 (1909). The “scrupulous policy of the Constitution
in guarding against a political interference with religious
affairs,” Madison explained, prevented the Government
from rendering an opinion on the “selection of ecclesiastical individuals.” Id., at 63–64.
The second episode occurred in 1811, when Madison was
President. Congress had passed a bill incorporating the
Protestant Episcopal Church in the town of Alexandria in
what was then the District of Columbia. Madison vetoed
the bill, on the ground that it “exceeds the rightful authority to which Governments are limited, by the essential
distinction between civil and religious functions, and
violates, in particular, the article of the Constitution of the

