Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
of disputes over church property. This Court’s decisions in that area
confirm that it is impermissible for the government to contradict a
church’s determination of who can act as its ministers. See Watson v.
Jones, 13 Wall. 679; Kedroff v. Saint Nicholas Cathedral of Russian
Orthodox Church in North America, 344 U. S. 94; Serbian Eastern
Orthodox Diocese for United States and Canada v. Milivojevich, 426
U. S. 696. Pp. 10–12.
(c) Since the passage of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
and other employment discrimination laws, the Courts of Appeals
have uniformly recognized the existence of a “ministerial exception,”
grounded in the First Amendment, that precludes application of such
legislation to claims concerning the employment relationship between a religious institution and its ministers. The Court agrees that
there is such a ministerial exception. Requiring a church to accept or
retain an unwanted minister, or punishing a church for failing to do
so, intrudes upon more than a mere employment decision. Such action interferes with the internal governance of the church, depriving
the church of control over the selection of those who will personify its
beliefs. By imposing an unwanted minister, the state infringes the
Free Exercise Clause, which protects a religious group’s right to
shape its own faith and mission through its appointments. According
the state the power to determine which individuals will minister to
the faithful also violates the Establishment Clause, which prohibits
government involvement in such ecclesiastical decisions.
The EEOC and Perich contend that religious organizations can defend against employment discrimination claims by invoking their
First Amendment right to freedom of association. They thus see no
need—and no basis—for a special rule for ministers grounded in the
Religion Clauses themselves. Their position, however, is hard to
square with the text of the First Amendment itself, which gives special solicitude to the rights of religious organizations. The Court
cannot accept the remarkable view that the Religion Clauses have
nothing to say about a religious organization’s freedom to select its
own ministers.
The EEOC and Perich also contend that Employment Div., Dept. of
Human Resources of Ore. v. Smith, 494 U. S. 872, precludes recognition of a ministerial exception. But Smith involved government regulation of only outward physical acts. The present case, in contrast,
concerns government interference with an internal church decision
that affects the faith and mission of the church itself. Pp. 13–15.
2. Because Perich was a minister within the meaning of the ministerial exception, the First Amendment requires dismissal of this employment discrimination suit against her religious employer. Pp. 15–
21.

