8

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH

AND SCHOOL v. EEOC 

Opinion of the Court 


land. The charter creating the province of Pennsylvania
contained no clause establishing a religion. See S. Cobb,
The Rise of Religious Liberty in America 440–441 (1970).
Colonists in the South, in contrast, brought the Church
of England with them. But even they sometimes chafed at
the control exercised by the Crown and its representatives
over religious offices. In Virginia, for example, the law
vested the governor with the power to induct ministers
presented to him by parish vestries, 2 Hening’s Statutes
at Large 46 (1642), but the vestries often refused to make
such presentations and instead chose ministers on their
own. See H. Eckenrode, Separation of Church and State
in Virginia 13–19 (1910). Controversies over the selection
of ministers also arose in other Colonies with Anglican
establishments, including North Carolina. See C. Antieau, A. Downey, & E. Roberts, Freedom from Federal
Establishment: Formation and Early History of the First
Amendment Religion Clauses 10–11 (1964). There, the
royal governor insisted that the right of presentation lay
with the Bishop of London, but the colonial assembly
enacted laws placing that right in the vestries. Authorities in England intervened, repealing those laws as inconsistent with the rights of the Crown. See id., at 11;
Weeks, Church and State in North Carolina, Johns Hopkins U. Studies in Hist. & Pol. Sci., 11th Ser., Nos. 5–6,
pp. 29–36 (1893).
It was against this background that the First Amendment was adopted. Familiar with life under the established Church of England, the founding generation sought
to foreclose the possibility of a national church. See 1
Annals of Cong. 730–731 (1789) (noting that the Establishment Clause addressed the fear that “one sect might
obtain a pre-eminence, or two combine together, and
establish a religion to which they would compel others to
conform” (remarks of J. Madison)). By forbidding the
“establishment of religion” and guaranteeing the “free

