Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

Ibid. As we would put it later, our opinion in Watson
“radiates . . . a spirit of freedom for religious organizations, an independence from secular control or manipulation—in short, power to decide for themselves, free from
state interference, matters of church government as well
as those of faith and doctrine.” Kedroff v. Saint Nicholas
Cathedral of Russian Orthodox Church in North America,
344 U. S. 94, 116 (1952).
Confronting the issue under the Constitution for the
first time in Kedroff, the Court recognized that the
“[f]reedom to select the clergy, where no improper methods
of choice are proven,” is “part of the free exercise of religion” protected by the First Amendment against government interference. Ibid. At issue in Kedroff was the right
to use a Russian Orthodox cathedral in New York City.
The Russian Orthodox churches in North America had
split from the Supreme Church Authority in Moscow, out
of concern that the Authority had become a tool of the
Soviet Government.
The North American churches
claimed that the right to use the cathedral belonged to an
archbishop elected by them; the Supreme Church Authority claimed that it belonged instead to an archbishop appointed by the patriarch in Moscow. New York’s highest
court ruled in favor of the North American churches,
based on a state law requiring every Russian Orthodox
church in New York to recognize the determination of the
governing body of the North American churches as authoritative. Id., at 96–97, 99, n. 3, 107, n. 10.
This Court reversed, concluding that the New York law
violated the First Amendment. Id., at 107. We explained
that the controversy over the right to use the cathedral
was “strictly a matter of ecclesiastical government, the
power of the Supreme Church Authority of the Russian
Orthodox Church to appoint the ruling hierarch of the
archdiocese of North America.” Id., at 115. By “pass[ing]
the control of matters strictly ecclesiastical from one

