Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of the Court

“preach the Word of God boldly.” Brief for Lutheran
Church-Missouri Synod as Amicus Curiae 15.
Perich held herself out as a minister of the Church by
accepting the formal call to religious service, according to
its terms. She did so in other ways as well. For example,
she claimed a special housing allowance on her taxes that
was available only to employees earning their compensation “ ‘in the exercise of the ministry.’ ” App. 220 (“If you
are not conducting activities ‘in the exercise of the ministry,’ you cannot take advantage of the parsonage or
housing allowance exclusion” (quoting Lutheran ChurchMissouri Synod Brochure on Whether the IRS Considers
Employees as a Minister (2007)). In a form she submitted
to the Synod following her termination, Perich again
indicated that she regarded herself as a minister at
Hosanna-Tabor, stating: “I feel that God is leading me to
serve in the teaching ministry . . . . I am anxious to be in
the teaching ministry again soon.” App. 53.
Perich’s job duties reflected a role in conveying the
Church’s message and carrying out its mission. HosannaTabor expressly charged her with “lead[ing] others toward
Christian maturity” and “teach[ing] faithfully the Word of
God, the Sacred Scriptures, in its truth and purity and as
set forth in all the symbolical books of the Evangelical
Lutheran Church.” Id., at 48. In fulfilling these responsibilities, Perich taught her students religion four days a
week, and led them in prayer three times a day. Once a
week, she took her students to a school-wide chapel service, and—about twice a year—she took her turn leading
it, choosing the liturgy, selecting the hymns, and delivering a short message based on verses from the Bible. During her last year of teaching, Perich also led her fourth
graders in a brief devotional exercise each morning. As a
source of religious instruction, Perich performed an important role in transmitting the Lutheran faith to the next
generation.

