(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN 

CHURCH AND SCHOOL v. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT 

OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–553.

Argued October 5, 2011—Decided January 11, 2012

Petitioner Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church and School is
a member congregation of the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod.
The Synod classifies its school teachers into two categories: “called”
and “lay.” “Called” teachers are regarded as having been called to
their vocation by God. To be eligible to be considered “called,” a
teacher must complete certain academic requirements, including a
course of theological study. Once called, a teacher receives the formal
title “Minister of Religion, Commissioned.” “Lay” teachers, by contrast, are not required to be trained by the Synod or even to be Lutheran. Although lay and called teachers at Hosanna-Tabor generally performed the same duties, lay teachers were hired only when
called teachers were unavailable.
After respondent Cheryl Perich completed the required training,
Hosanna-Tabor asked her to become a called teacher. Perich accepted the call and was designated a commissioned minister. In addition
to teaching secular subjects, Perich taught a religion class, led her
students in daily prayer and devotional exercises, and took her students to a weekly school-wide chapel service. Perich led the chapel
service herself about twice a year.
Perich developed narcolepsy and began the 2004–2005 school year
on disability leave. In January 2005, she notified the school principal
that she would be able to report to work in February. The principal
responded that the school had already contracted with a lay teacher
to fill Perich’s position for the remainder of the school year. The
principal also expressed concern that Perich was not yet ready to return to the classroom. The congregation subsequently offered to pay

