Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

ALITO, J., concurring

would dangerously undermine the religious autonomy that
lower court case law has now protected for nearly four
decades. In order to probe the real reason for respondent’s
firing, a civil court—and perhaps a jury—would be required to make a judgment about church doctrine. The
credibility of Hosanna-Tabor’s asserted reason for terminating respondent’s employment could not be assessed
without taking into account both the importance that the
Lutheran Church attaches to the doctrine of internal
dispute resolution and the degree to which that tenet
compromised respondent’s religious function. If it could be
shown that this belief is an obscure and minor part of
Lutheran doctrine, it would be much more plausible for
respondent to argue that this doctrine was not the real
reason for her firing. If, on the other hand, the doctrine is
a central and universally known tenet of Lutheranism,
then the church’s asserted reason for her discharge would
seem much more likely to be nonpretextual. But whatever
the truth of the matter might be, the mere adjudication of
such questions would pose grave problems for religious
autonomy: It would require calling witnesses to testify
about the importance and priority of the religious doctrine
in question, with a civil factfinder sitting in ultimate
judgment of what the accused church really believes,
and how important that belief is to the church’s overall
mission.
At oral argument, both respondent and the United
States acknowledged that a pretext inquiry would sometimes be prohibited by principles of religious autonomy,
and both conceded that a Roman Catholic priest who is
dismissed for getting married could not sue the church
and claim that his dismissal was actually based on a
ground forbidden by the federal antidiscrimination laws.
See Tr. of Oral Arg. 38–39, 50. But there is no principled
basis for proscribing a pretext inquiry in such a case while
permitting it in a case like the one now before us. The

