2

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH

AND SCHOOL v. EEOC 

Opinion of the Court 


The Synod classifies teachers into two categories:
“called” and “lay.” “Called” teachers are regarded as
having been called to their vocation by God through a
congregation. To be eligible to receive a call from a congregation, a teacher must satisfy certain academic
requirements. One way of doing so is by completing a
“colloquy” program at a Lutheran college or university. The
program requires candidates to take eight courses of
theological study, obtain the endorsement of their local
Synod district, and pass an oral examination by a faculty
committee. A teacher who meets these requirements may
be called by a congregation. Once called, a teacher receives the formal title “Minister of Religion, Commissioned.” App. 42, 48. A commissioned minister serves for
an open-ended term; at Hosanna-Tabor, a call could be
rescinded only for cause and by a supermajority vote of the
congregation.
“Lay” or “contract” teachers, by contrast, are not required to be trained by the Synod or even to be Lutheran.
At Hosanna-Tabor, they were appointed by the school
board, without a vote of the congregation, to one-year
renewable terms. Although teachers at the school generally performed the same duties regardless of whether they
were lay or called, lay teachers were hired only when
called teachers were unavailable.
Respondent Cheryl Perich was first employed by
Hosanna-Tabor as a lay teacher in 1999. After Perich completed her colloquy later that school year, Hosanna-Tabor
asked her to become a called teacher. Perich accepted the
call and received a “diploma of vocation” designating her a
commissioned minister. Id., at 42.
Perich taught kindergarten during her first four years
at Hosanna-Tabor and fourth grade during the 2003–2004
school year. She taught math, language arts, social studies, science, gym, art, and music. She also taught a religion class four days a week, led the students in prayer and

