16

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
AND SCHOOL v. EEOC
Opinion of the Court

for us to conclude, in this our first case involving the
ministerial exception, that the exception covers Perich,
given all the circumstances of her employment.
To begin with, Hosanna-Tabor held Perich out as a
minister, with a role distinct from that of most of its members. When Hosanna-Tabor extended her a call, it issued
her a “diploma of vocation” according her the title “Minister of Religion, Commissioned.” App. 42. She was tasked
with performing that office “according to the Word of God
and the confessional standards of the Evangelical Lutheran Church as drawn from the Sacred Scriptures.” Ibid.
The congregation prayed that God “bless [her] ministrations to the glory of His holy name, [and] the building of
His church.” Id., at 43. In a supplement to the diploma,
the congregation undertook to periodically review Perich’s
“skills of ministry” and “ministerial responsibilities,” and
to provide for her “continuing education as a professional
person in the ministry of the Gospel.” Id., at 49.
Perich’s title as a minister reflected a significant degree
of religious training followed by a formal process of commissioning. To be eligible to become a commissioned
minister, Perich had to complete eight college-level courses in subjects including biblical interpretation, church
doctrine, and the ministry of the Lutheran teacher. She
also had to obtain the endorsement of her local Synod
district by submitting a petition that contained her academic transcripts, letters of recommendation, personal
statement, and written answers to various ministryrelated questions. Finally, she had to pass an oral examination by a faculty committee at a Lutheran college. It
took Perich six years to fulfill these requirements. And
when she eventually did, she was commissioned as a
minister only upon election by the congregation, which
recognized God’s call to her to teach. At that point, her
call could be rescinded only upon a supermajority vote of
the congregation—a protection designed to allow her to

