12

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
AND SCHOOL v. EEOC
Opinion of the Court

church authority to another,” the New York law intruded
the “power of the state into the forbidden area of religious freedom contrary to the principles of the First Amendment.” Id., at 119. Accordingly, we declared the law
unconstitutional because it “directly prohibit[ed] the free
exercise of an ecclesiastical right, the Church’s choice of its
hierarchy.” Ibid.
This Court reaffirmed these First Amendment principles in Serbian Eastern Orthodox Diocese for United States
and Canada v. Milivojevich, 426 U. S. 696 (1976), a case
involving a dispute over control of the American-Canadian
Diocese of the Serbian Orthodox Church, including its
property and assets. The Church had removed Dionisije
Milivojevich as bishop of the American-Canadian Diocese
because of his defiance of the church hierarchy. Following
his removal, Dionisije brought a civil action in state court
challenging the Church’s decision, and the Illinois Supreme Court “purported in effect to reinstate Dionisije as
Diocesan Bishop,” on the ground that the proceedings
resulting in his removal failed to comply with church laws
and regulations. Id., at 708.
Reversing that judgment, this Court explained that the
First Amendment “permit[s] hierarchical religious organizations to establish their own rules and regulations for
internal discipline and government, and to create tribunals for adjudicating disputes over these matters.” Id., at
724. When ecclesiastical tribunals decide such disputes,
we further explained, “the Constitution requires that civil
courts accept their decisions as binding upon them.” Id.,
at 725. We thus held that by inquiring into whether the
Church had followed its own procedures, the State Supreme Court had “unconstitutionally undertaken the
resolution of quintessentially religious controversies
whose resolution the First Amendment commits exclusively to the highest ecclesiastical tribunals” of the Church.
Id., at 720.

