18

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
AND SCHOOL v. EEOC
Opinion of the Court

In light of these considerations—the formal title given
Perich by the Church, the substance reflected in that title,
her own use of that title, and the important religious
functions she performed for the Church—we conclude
that Perich was a minister covered by the ministerial
exception.
In reaching a contrary conclusion, the Court of Appeals
committed three errors. First, the Sixth Circuit failed to
see any relevance in the fact that Perich was a commissioned minister. Although such a title, by itself, does not
automatically ensure coverage, the fact that an employee
has been ordained or commissioned as a minister is surely
relevant, as is the fact that significant religious training
and a recognized religious mission underlie the description
of the employee’s position. It was wrong for the Court of
Appeals—and Perich, who has adopted the court’s view,
see Perich Brief 45—to say that an employee’s title does
not matter.
Second, the Sixth Circuit gave too much weight to the
fact that lay teachers at the school performed the same
religious duties as Perich. We express no view on whether
someone with Perich’s duties would be covered by the
ministerial exception in the absence of the other considerations we have discussed. But though relevant, it cannot
be dispositive that others not formally recognized as ministers by the church perform the same functions—
particularly when, as here, they did so only because
commissioned ministers were unavailable.
Third, the Sixth Circuit placed too much emphasis on
Perich’s performance of secular duties. It is true that her
religious duties consumed only 45 minutes of each workday, and that the rest of her day was devoted to teaching
secular subjects. The EEOC regards that as conclusive,
contending that any ministerial exception “should be
limited to those employees who perform exclusively religious functions.” Brief for Federal Respondent 51. We

