Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

19

Opinion of the Court

cannot accept that view. Indeed, we are unsure whether
any such employees exist. The heads of congregations
themselves often have a mix of duties, including secular
ones such as helping to manage the congregation’s finances, supervising purely secular personnel, and overseeing
the upkeep of facilities.
Although the Sixth Circuit did not adopt the extreme
position pressed here by the EEOC, it did regard the
relative amount of time Perich spent performing religious
functions as largely determinative. The issue before us,
however, is not one that can be resolved by a stopwatch.
The amount of time an employee spends on particular
activities is relevant in assessing that employee’s status,
but that factor cannot be considered in isolation, without
regard to the nature of the religious functions performed
and the other considerations discussed above.
Because Perich was a minister within the meaning of
the exception, the First Amendment requires dismissal of
this employment discrimination suit against her religious
employer. The EEOC and Perich originally sought an
order reinstating Perich to her former position as a called
teacher. By requiring the Church to accept a minister it
did not want, such an order would have plainly violated
the Church’s freedom under the Religion Clauses to select
its own ministers.
Perich no longer seeks reinstatement, having abandoned
that relief before this Court. See Perich Brief 58. But that
is immaterial. Perich continues to seek frontpay in lieu of
reinstatement, backpay, compensatory and punitive damages, and attorney’s fees. An award of such relief would
operate as a penalty on the Church for terminating an
unwanted minister, and would be no less prohibited by the
First Amendment than an order overturning the termination. Such relief would depend on a determination that
Hosanna-Tabor was wrong to have relieved Perich of her
position, and it is precisely such a ruling that is barred by

