Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

devotional exercises each day, and attended a weekly
school-wide chapel service. Perich led the chapel service
herself about twice a year.
Perich became ill in June 2004 with what was eventually diagnosed as narcolepsy. Symptoms included sudden
and deep sleeps from which she could not be roused.
Because of her illness, Perich began the 2004–2005 school
year on disability leave. On January 27, 2005, however,
Perich notified the school principal, Stacey Hoeft, that she
would be able to report to work the following month.
Hoeft responded that the school had already contracted
with a lay teacher to fill Perich’s position for the remainder of the school year. Hoeft also expressed concern that
Perich was not yet ready to return to the classroom.
On January 30, Hosanna-Tabor held a meeting of its
congregation at which school administrators stated that
Perich was unlikely to be physically capable of returning
to work that school year or the next. The congregation
voted to offer Perich a “peaceful release” from her call,
whereby the congregation would pay a portion of her
health insurance premiums in exchange for her resignation as a called teacher. Id., at 178, 186. Perich refused to
resign and produced a note from her doctor stating that
she would be able to return to work on February 22. The
school board urged Perich to reconsider, informing her
that the school no longer had a position for her, but Perich
stood by her decision not to resign.
On the morning of February 22—the first day she was
medically cleared to return to work—Perich presented
herself at the school. Hoeft asked her to leave but she
would not do so until she obtained written documentation
that she had reported to work. Later that afternoon, Hoeft
called Perich at home and told her that she would likely be
fired. Perich responded that she had spoken with an
attorney and intended to assert her legal rights.
Following a school board meeting that evening, board

