4

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH

AND SCHOOL v. EEOC 

Syllabus

(a) The ministerial exception is not limited to the head of a religious congregation. The Court, however, does not adopt a rigid formula for deciding when an employee qualifies as a minister. Here, it
is enough to conclude that the exception covers Perich, given all the
circumstances of her employment. Hosanna-Tabor held her out as a
minister, with a role distinct from that of most of its members. That
title represented a significant degree of religious training followed by
a formal process of commissioning. Perich also held herself out as a
minister by, for example, accepting the formal call to religious service. And her job duties reflected a role in conveying the Church’s
message and carrying out its mission: As a source of religious instruction, Perich played an important part in transmitting the Lutheran faith.
In concluding that Perich was not a minister under the exception,
the Sixth Circuit committed three errors. First, it failed to see any
relevance in the fact that Perich was a commissioned minister. Although such a title, by itself, does not automatically ensure coverage,
the fact that an employee has been ordained or commissioned as a
minister is surely relevant, as is the fact that significant religious
training and a recognized religious mission underlie the description
of the employee’s position. Second, the Sixth Circuit gave too much
weight to the fact that lay teachers at the school performed the same
religious duties as Perich. Though relevant, it cannot be dispositive
that others not formally recognized as ministers by the church perform the same functions—particularly when, as here, they did so only
because commissioned ministers were unavailable. Third, the Sixth
Circuit placed too much emphasis on Perich’s performance of secular
duties. Although the amount of time an employee spends on particular activities is relevant in assessing that employee’s status, that factor cannot be considered in isolation, without regard to the other considerations discussed above. Pp. 15–19.
(b) Because Perich was a minister for purposes of the exception,
this suit must be dismissed. An order reinstating Perich as a called
teacher would have plainly violated the Church’s freedom under the
Religion Clauses to select its own ministers. Though Perich no longer
seeks reinstatement, she continues to seek frontpay, backpay, compensatory and punitive damages, and attorney’s fees. An award of
such relief would operate as a penalty on the Church for terminating
an unwanted minister, and would be no less prohibited by the First
Amendment than an order overturning the termination. Such relief
would depend on a determination that Hosanna-Tabor was wrong to
have relieved Perich of her position, and it is precisely such a ruling
that is barred by the ministerial exception.
Any suggestion that Hosanna-Tabor’s asserted religious reason for

