8

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH

AND SCHOOL v. EEOC 

ALITO, J., concurring


the school chapel, choosing liturgies, hymns, and readings, and composing and delivering a message based on
Scripture.
It makes no difference that respondent also taught
secular subjects. While a purely secular teacher would not
qualify for the “ministerial” exception, the constitutional
protection of religious teachers is not somehow diminished
when they take on secular functions in addition to their
religious ones. What matters is that respondent played an
important role as an instrument of her church’s religious
message and as a leader of its worship activities. Because
of these important religious functions, Hosanna-Tabor had
the right to decide for itself whether respondent was religiously qualified to remain in her office.
Hosanna-Tabor discharged respondent because she
threatened to file suit against the church in a civil court.
This threat contravened the Lutheran doctrine that disputes among Christians should be resolved internally
without resort to the civil court system and all the legal
wrangling it entails.5 In Hosanna-Tabor’s view, respondent’s disregard for this doctrine compromised her religious
function, disqualifying her from serving effectively as a
voice for the church’s faith. Respondent does not dispute
that the Lutheran Church subscribes to a doctrine of
internal dispute resolution, but she argues that this was a
mere pretext for her firing, which was really done for
nonreligious reasons.
For civil courts to engage in the pretext inquiry that
respondent and the Solicitor General urge us to sanction
——————
5 See The Lutheran Church—Missouri Synod, Commission on Theology and Church Relations, 1 Corinthians 6:1–11: An Exegetical Study,
p. 10 (Apr. 1991) (stating that instead of suing each other, Christians
should seek “an amicable settlement of differences by means of a
decision by fellow Christians”). See also 1 Corinthians 6:1–7 (“If any of
you has a dispute with another, dare he take it before the ungodly for
judgment instead of before the saints?”).

