14

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
AND SCHOOL v. EEOC
Opinion of the Court

According the state the power to determine which individuals will minister to the faithful also violates the Establishment Clause, which prohibits government involvement
in such ecclesiastical decisions.
The EEOC and Perich acknowledge that employment
discrimination laws would be unconstitutional as applied
to religious groups in certain circumstances. They grant,
for example, that it would violate the First Amendment for
courts to apply such laws to compel the ordination of
women by the Catholic Church or by an Orthodox Jewish
seminary. Brief for Federal Respondent 31; Brief for
Respondent Perich 35–36. According to the EEOC and
Perich, religious organizations could successfully defend
against employment discrimination claims in those circumstances by invoking the constitutional right to freedom
of association—a right “implicit” in the First Amendment.
Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U. S. 609, 622
(1984). The EEOC and Perich thus see no need—and no
basis—for a special rule for ministers grounded in the
Religion Clauses themselves.
We find this position untenable. The right to freedom of
association is a right enjoyed by religious and secular
groups alike. It follows under the EEOC’s and Perich’s
view that the First Amendment analysis should be the
same, whether the association in question is the Lutheran
Church, a labor union, or a social club. See Perich Brief
31; Tr. of Oral Arg. 28. That result is hard to square with
the text of the First Amendment itself, which gives special solicitude to the rights of religious organizations. We
cannot accept the remarkable view that the Religion
Clauses have nothing to say about a religious organization’s freedom to select its own ministers.
The EEOC and Perich also contend that our decision in
Employment Div., Dept. of Human Resources of Ore. v.
Smith, 494 U. S. 872 (1990), precludes recognition of a
ministerial exception. In Smith, two members of the

