2

PREMO v. MOORE
Syllabus
Circuit. Pp. 4–17.
(a) Under 28 U. S. C. §2254(d), federal habeas relief may not be
granted with respect to any claim a state court has adjudicated on
the merits unless, among other exceptions, the state-court decision
denying relief involves “an unreasonable application” of “clearly es
tablished Federal law, as determined by” this Court. The relevant
federal law is the standard for ineffective assistance of counsel under
Strickland, which requires a showing of “both deficient performance
by counsel and prejudice.” Knowles v. Mirzayance, 556 U. S. ___, ___.
Pp. 4–6.
(b) The state-court decision was not an unreasonable application of
either part of the Strickland rule. Pp. 6–16.
(1) The state court would not have been unreasonable to accept
as a justification for counsel’s action that suppression would have
been futile in light of Moore’s other admissible confession to two wit
nesses. This explanation confirms that counsel’s representation was
adequate under Strickland, so it is unnecessary to consider the rea
sonableness of his other justification—that a suppression motion
would have failed. Plea bargains involve complex negotiations suf
fused with uncertainty, and defense counsel must make strategic
choices in balancing opportunities—pleading to a lesser charge and
obtaining a lesser sentence—and risks—that the plea bargain might
come before the prosecution finds its case is getting weaker, not
stronger. Failure to respect the latitude Strickland requires can cre
ate at least two problems. First, the potential for distortions and im
balance that can inhere in a hindsight perspective may become all too
real; and habeas courts must be mindful of their limited role, to as
sess deficiency in light of information then available to counsel. Sec
ond, ineffective-assistance claims that lack necessary foundation may
bring instability to the very process the inquiry seeks to protect be
cause prosecutors must have assurances that a plea will not be un
done in court years later. In applying and defining the Strickland
standard—reasonable competence in representing the accused—
substantial deference must be accorded to counsel’s judgment. The
absence of a developed and extensive record and well-defined prose
cution or defense case creates a particular risk at the early plea
stage. Here, Moore’s prospects at trial were anything but certain.
Counsel knew that the two witnesses presented a serious strategic
concern and that delaying the plea for further proceedings might al
low the State to uncover additional incriminating evidence in support
of a capital prosecution. Under these circumstances, counsel made a
reasonable choice. At the very least, the state court would not have
been unreasonable to so conclude. The Court of Appeals relied fur
ther on Fulminante, but a state-court adjudication of counsel’s per

