(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

PREMO, SUPERINTENDENT, OREGON STATE 

PENITENTIARY v. MOORE 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–658.

Argued October 12, 2010—Decided January 19, 2011

Respondent Moore and two accomplices attacked and bloodied Kenneth
Rogers, tied him up, and threw him in the trunk of a car before driv
ing into the Oregon countryside, where Moore fatally shot him. Af
terwards, Moore and one accomplice told Moore’s brother and the ac
complice’s girlfriend that they had intended to scare Rogers, but that
Moore had accidentally shot him. Moore and the accomplice repeated
this account to the police. On the advice of counsel, Moore agreed to
plead no contest to felony murder in exchange for the minimum sen
tence for that offense. He later sought postconviction relief in state
court, claiming that he had been denied effective assistance of coun
sel. He complained that his lawyer had not moved to suppress his
confession to police in advance of the lawyer’s advice that Moore con
sidered before accepting the plea offer. The court concluded the sup
pression motion would have been fruitless in light of Moore’s other
admissible confession to two witnesses. Counsel gave that as his rea
son for not making the motion. He added that he had advised Moore
that, because of the abuse Rogers suffered before the shooting, Moore
could be charged with aggravated murder. That crime was punish
able by death or life in prison without parole. These facts led the
state court to conclude Moore had not established ineffective assis
tance of counsel under Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668.
Moore sought federal habeas relief, renewing his ineffective
assistance claim. The District Court denied the petition, but the
Ninth Circuit reversed, holding that the state court’s conclusion was
an unreasonable application of clearly established law in light of
Strickland and was contrary to Arizona v. Fulminante, 499 U. S. 279.
Held: Moore was not entitled to the habeas relief ordered by the Ninth

