Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

art of negotiation is at least as nuanced as the art of trial
advocacy and it presents questions farther removed from
immediate judicial supervision. There are, moreover,
special difficulties in evaluating the basis for counsel’s
judgment: An attorney often has insights borne of past
dealings with the same prosecutor or court, and the record
at the pretrial stage is never as full as it is after a trial. In
determining how searching and exacting their review
must be, habeas courts must respect their limited role
in determining whether there was manifest deficiency in
light of information then available to counsel. Lockhart v.
Fretwell, 506 U. S. 364, 372 (1993). AEDPA compounds
the imperative of judicial caution.
Second, ineffective-assistance claims that lack necessary
foundation may bring instability to the very process the
inquiry seeks to protect. Strickland allows a defendant “to
escape rules of waiver and forfeiture,” Richter, ante, at 15.
Prosecutors must have assurance that a plea will not be
undone years later because of infidelity to the require­
ments of AEDPA and the teachings of Strickland. The
prospect that a plea deal will afterwards be unraveled
when a court second-guesses counsel’s decisions while
failing to accord the latitude Strickland mandates or
disregarding the structure dictated by AEDPA could lead
prosecutors to forgo plea bargains that would benefit
defendants, a result favorable to no one.
Whether before, during, or after trial, when the Sixth
Amendment applies, the formulation of the standard is the
same: reasonable competence in representing the accused.
Strickland, 466 U. S., at 688. In applying and defining
this standard substantial deference must be accorded to
counsel’s judgment. Id., at 689. But at different stages of
the case that deference may be measured in different
ways.
In the case of an early plea, neither the prosecution nor
the defense may know with much certainty what course

