Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

not less, on Moore. Then, too, the accomplices themselves
might have decided to implicate Moore to a greater extent
than his own confession did, say by indicating that Moore
shot the victim deliberately, not accidentally. All these
possibilities are speculative. What counsel knew at the
time was that the existence of the two witnesses to an
additional confession posed a serious strategic concern.
Moore’s prospects at trial were thus anything but cer­
tain. Even now, he does not deny any involvement in the
kidnaping and killing. In these circumstances, and with a
potential capital charge lurking, Moore’s counsel made a
reasonable choice to opt for a quick plea bargain. At the
very least, the state court would not have been unreason­
able to so conclude. Cf. Yarborough v. Alvarado, 541 U. S.
652, 664 (2004) (explaining that state courts enjoy “more
leeway” under AEDPA in applying general standards).
The Court of Appeals’ contrary holding rests on a case
that did not involve ineffective assistance of counsel:
Arizona v. Fulminante, 499 U. S. 279 (1991). To reach
that result, it transposed that case into a novel context;
and novelty alone—at least insofar as it renders the rele­
vant rule less than “clearly established”—provides a rea­
son to reject it under AEDPA. See Yarborough, supra, at
666 (“Section 2254(d)(1) would be undermined if habeas
courts introduced rules not clearly established under the
guise of extensions to existing law . . .[, although c]ertain
principles are fundamental enough that when new factual
permutations arise, the necessity to apply the earlier rule
will be beyond doubt”). And the transposition is improper
even on its own terms. According to the Court of Appeals,
“Fulminante stands for the proposition that the admission
of an additional confession ordinarily reinforces and cor­
roborates the others and is therefore prejudicial.” 574
F. 3d, at 1111. Based on that reading, the Court of Ap­
peals held that the state court’s decision “was contrary to
Fulminante.” Id., at 1102. But Fulminante may not be so

