8

PREMO v. MOORE
Opinion of the Court

think a motion to suppress would have failed, which is the
relevant question under Strickland. See Kimmelman v.
Morrison, 477 U. S. 365, 382 (1986); Richter, ante, at 19–
20. It is unnecessary to consider whether counsel’s second
justification was reasonable, however, since the first and
independent explanation—that suppression would have
been futile—confirms that his representation was ade­
quate under Strickland, or at least that it would
have been reasonable for the state court to reach that
conclusion.
Acknowledging guilt and accepting responsibility by an
early plea respond to certain basic premises in the law and
its function. Those principles are eroded if a guilty plea is
too easily set aside based on facts and circumstances not
apparent to a competent attorney when actions and advice
leading to the plea took place. Plea bargains are the
result of complex negotiations suffused with uncertainty,
and defense attorneys must make careful strategic choices
in balancing opportunities and risks. The opportunities, of
course, include pleading to a lesser charge and obtaining a
lesser sentence, as compared with what might be the
outcome not only at trial but also from a later plea offer if
the case grows stronger and prosecutors find stiffened
resolve. A risk, in addition to the obvious one of losing the
chance for a defense verdict, is that an early plea bargain
might come before the prosecution finds its case is getting
weaker, not stronger. The State’s case can begin to fall
apart as stories change, witnesses become unavailable,
and new suspects are identified.
These considerations make strict adherence to the
Strickland standard all the more essential when reviewing
the choices an attorney made at the plea bargain stage.
Failure to respect the latitude Strickland requires can
create at least two problems in the plea context. First, the
potential for the distortions and imbalance that can inhere
in a hindsight perspective may become all too real. The

