Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

in plea negotiations described above: The stakes for defen­
dants are high, and many elect to limit risk by forgoing
the right to assert their innocence. A defendant who
accepts a plea bargain on counsel’s advice does not neces­
sarily suffer prejudice when his counsel fails to seek sup­
pression of evidence, even if it would be reversible error
for the court to admit that evidence.
The state court here reasonably could have determined
that Moore would have accepted the plea agreement even
if his second confession had been ruled inadmissible. By
the time the plea agreement cut short investigation of
Moore’s crimes, the State’s case was already formidable
and included two witnesses to an admissible confession.
Had the prosecution continued to investigate, its case
might well have become stronger. At the same time,
Moore faced grave punishments. His decision to plead no
contest allowed him to avoid a possible sentence of life
without parole or death. The bargain counsel struck was
thus a favorable one—the statutory minimum for the
charged offense—and the decision to forgo a challenge to
the confession may have been essential to securing that
agreement.
Once again the Court of Appeals reached a contrary
conclusion by pointing to Fulminante: “The state court’s
finding that a motion to suppress a recorded confession to
the police would have been ‘fruitless’ . . . was without
question contrary to clearly established federal law as set
forth in Fulminante.” 574 F. 3d, at 1112. And again there
is no sense in which the state court’s finding could be
contrary to Fulminante, for Fulminante says nothing
about prejudice for Strickland purposes, nor does it con­
template prejudice in the plea bargain context.
The Court of Appeals appears to have treated Fulmi
nante as a per se rule of prejudice, or something close to
it, in all cases involving suppressible confessions. It is
not. In Fulminante five Justices made the uncontroversial

