10

PREMO v. MOORE
Opinion of the Court

the case may take. It follows that each side, of necessity,
risks consequences that may arise from contingencies or
circumstances yet unperceived. The absence of a devel­
oped or an extensive record and the circumstance that
neither the prosecution nor the defense case has been well
defined create a particular risk that an after-the-fact
assessment will run counter to the deference that must be
accorded counsel’s judgment and perspective when the
plea was negotiated, offered, and entered.
Prosecutors in the present case faced the cost of litiga­
tion and the risk of trying their case without Moore’s
confession to the police. Moore’s counsel could reasonably
believe that a swift plea bargain would allow Moore to
take advantage of the State’s aversion to these hazards.
And whenever cases involve multiple defendants, there is
a chance that prosecutors might convince one defendant
to testify against another in exchange for a better deal.
Moore’s plea eliminated that possibility and ended an
ongoing investigation. Delaying the plea for further pro­
ceedings would have given the State time to uncover
additional incriminating evidence that could have formed
the basis of a capital prosecution. It must be remem­
bered, after all, that Moore’s claim that it was an accident
when he shot the victim through the temple might be
disbelieved.
It is not clear how the successful exclusion of the confes­
sion would have affected counsel’s strategic calculus. The
prosecution had at its disposal two witnesses able to relate
another confession. True, Moore’s brother and the girl­
friend of his accomplice might have changed their ac­
counts in a manner favorable to Moore. But the record
before the state court reveals no reason to believe that
either witness would violate the legal obligation to convey
the content of Moore’s confession. And to the extent that
his accomplice’s girlfriend had an ongoing interest in the
matter, she might have been tempted to put more blame,

