Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

ended the government’s investigation well before trial, yet
the evidence against Moore was strong. The accounts of
Moore’s second confession to his brother and his accom­
plice’s girlfriend corroborated each other, were given to
people without apparent reason to lie, and were reported
without delay.
The State gave no indication that its felony-murder
prosecution depended on the admission of the police con­
fession, and Moore does not now deny that he kidnaped
and killed Rogers. Given all this, an unconstitutional
admission of Moore’s confession to police might well have
been found harmless even on direct review if Moore had
gone to trial after the denial of a suppression motion.
Other than for its discussion of the basic proposition
that a confession is often powerful evidence, Fulminante is
not relevant to the present case. The state postconviction
court reasonably could have concluded that Moore was
not prejudiced by counsel’s actions. Under AEDPA, that
finding ends federal review. See Richter, ante, at 19.
Judge Berzon’s concurring opinion in the Court of Ap­
peals does not provide a basis for issuance of the writ. The
concurring opinion would have found the state court’s
prejudice determination unreasonable in light of Kimmel
man. It relied on Kimmelman to find that Moore suffered
prejudice for Strickland purposes because there was
a reasonable possibility that he would have obtained a
better plea agreement but for his counsel’s errors. But
Kimmelman concerned a conviction following a bench
trial, so it did not establish, much less clearly establish,
the appropriate standard for prejudice in cases involving
plea bargains. See 477 U. S., at 389. That standard was
established in Hill, which held that a defendant who
enters a plea agreement must show “a reasonable prob­
ability that, but for counsel’s errors, he would not have
pleaded guilty and would have insisted on going to trial.”
474 U. S., at 59. Moore’s failure to make that showing

