14

PREMO v. MOORE
Opinion of the Court

observation that many confessions are powerful evidence.
See, e.g., 499 U. S., at 296. Fulminante’s prejudice analy­
sis arose on direct review following an acknowledged
constitutional error at trial. The State therefore had the
burden of showing that it was “clear beyond a reasonable
doubt that a rational jury would have found the defendant
guilty absent the error.” Neder v. United States, 527 U. S.
1, 18 (1999) (paraphrasing Fulminante, supra). That
standard cannot apply to determinations of whether in­
adequate assistance of counsel prejudiced a defendant who
entered into a plea agreement. Many defendants reasona­
bly enter plea agreements even though there is a signifi­
cant probability—much more than a reasonable doubt—
that they would be acquitted if they proceeded to trial.
Thus, the question in the present case is not whether
Moore was sure beyond a reasonable doubt that he would
still be convicted if the extra confession were suppressed.
It is whether Moore established the reasonable probability
that he would not have entered his plea but for his coun­
sel’s deficiency, Hill, supra, at 59, and more to the point,
whether a state court’s decision to the contrary would be
unreasonable.
To the extent Fulminante’s application of the harmless­
error standard sheds any light on the present case, it
suggests that the state court’s prejudice determination
was reasonable. Fulminante found that an improperly
admitted confession was not harmless under Chapman v.
California, 386 U. S. 18 (1967) because the remaining
evidence against the defendant was weak. The additional
evidence consisted primarily of a second confession that
Fulminante had made to the informant’s fiancée. But
many of its details were not corroborated, the fiancée had
not reported the confession for a long period of time, the
State had indicated that both confessions were essential to
its case, and the fiancée potentially “had a motive to lie.”
499 U. S., at 300. Moore’s plea agreement, by contrast,

