(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

TALK AMERICA, INC. v. MICHIGAN BELL TELE-

PHONE CO. DBA AT&T MICHIGAN 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–313.

Argued March 30, 2011—Decided June 9, 2011*

The Telecommunications Act of 1996 requires incumbent local ex
change carriers (LECs)—i.e., providers of local telephone service—to
share their physical networks with competitive LECs at cost-based
rates in two ways relevant here. First, 47 U. S. C. §251(c)(3) requires
an incumbent LEC to lease “on an unbundled basis”—i.e., a la carte—
network elements specified by the Federal Communications Commis
sion (FCC) to allow a competitor to create its own network without
having to build every element from scratch. In identifying those ele
ments, the FCC must consider whether access is “necessary” and
whether failing to provide it would “impair” the competitor’s provi
sion of service. §251(d)(2). Second, §251(c)(2) mandates that incum
bent LECs “provide . . . interconnection” between their networks and
competitive LECs’ to ensure that a competitor’s customers can call
the incumbent’s customers, and vice versa. The interconnection duty
is independent of the unbundling rules and not subject to impairment
analysis.
In 2003, the FCC issued its Triennial Review Order deciding, con
trary to previous orders, that §251(c)(3) did not require an incumbent
LEC to provide a competitive LEC with cost-based unbundled access
to existing “entrance facilities”—i.e., transmission facilities (typically
wires or cables) that connect the two LECs’ networks—because such
facilities are not network elements at all. The FCC noted, however,
that entrance facilities are used for both interconnection and back
hauling, and it emphasized that its order did not alter incumbent
——————
* Together with No. 10–329, Isiogu et al. v. Michigan Bell Telephone
Co. dba AT&T Michigan, also on certiorari to the same court.


2

TALK AMERICA, INC. v. MICHIGAN BELL 

TELEPHONE CO.
Syllabus 





LECs’ §251(c)(2) obligation to provide for interconnection. Thus, the
practical effect of the order was only that incumbent LECs were not
obligated to unbundle entrance facilities for backhauling purposes.
In 2005, following D. C. Circuit review, the FCC issued its Trien
nial Review Remand Order. The FCC retreated from the view that
entrance facilities are not network elements, but adhered to its pre
vious position that cost-based unbundled access to such facilities
need not be provided under §251(c)(3). Treating entrance facilities as
network elements, the FCC concluded that competitive LECs are not
impaired without access to such facilities. The FCC again empha
sized that competitive LECs’ §251(c)(2) right to obtain interconnec
tion had not been altered.
In the Remand Order’s wake, respondent AT&T notified competi
tive LECs that it would no longer provide entrance facilities at cost
based rates for either backhauling or interconnection, but would in
stead charge higher rates. Competitive LECs complained to the
Michigan Public Service Commission that AT&T was unlawfully ab
rogating their §251(c)(2) right to cost-based interconnection. The
Michigan Public Service Commission agreed and ordered AT&T to
continue providing entrance facilities for interconnection at cost
based rates. AT&T challenged the ruling. Relying on the Remand
Order, the Federal District Court ruled in AT&T’s favor. The Sixth
Circuit affirmed, declining to defer to the FCC’s argument that the
order did not change incumbent LECs’ interconnection obligations,
including the obligation to lease entrance facilities for interconnec
tion.
Held: The FCC has advanced a reasonable interpretation of its regula
tions—i.e., that to satisfy its duty under §251(c)(2), an incumbent
LEC must make its existing entrance facilities available to competi
tors at cost-based rates if the facilities are to be used for interconnec
tion—and this Court defers to the FCC’s views. Pp. 6–16.
(a) No statute or regulation squarely addresses the question. Pp.
6–7.
(b) Absent an unambiguous statute or regulation, the Court turns
to the FCC’s interpretation of its regulations in its amicus brief. See,
e.g., Chase Bank USA, N. A. v. McCoy, 562 U. S. ___, ___. The FCC
proffers a three-step argument why its regulations require AT&T to
provide access at cost-based rates to existing entrance facilities for
interconnection purposes. Pp. 7–10.
(1) Interpreting 47 CFR §51.321(a), the FCC first contends that
an incumbent LEC must lease “technically feasible” facilities for in
terconnection. Pp. 8–9.
(2) The FCC contends, second, that existing entrance facilities
are part of an incumbent LEC’s network, 47 CFR §51.319(e), and


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
therefore are among the facilities that an incumbent LEC must lease
for interconnection, if technically feasible. P. 9.
(3) Third, says the FCC, it is technically feasible to provide ac
cess to the particular entrance facilities at issue in these cases—a
point AT&T does not dispute. P. 10.
(c) Contrary to AT&T’s arguments, the FCC’s interpretation is not
“plainly erroneous or inconsistent with the regulation[s]. ” Auer v.
Robbins, 519 U. S. 452, 461. First, it is perfectly sensible to read the
FCC’s regulations to include entrance facilities as part of incumbent
LECs’ networks. Second, the FCC’s views do not conflict with 47
CFR §51.5’s definition of interconnection as “the linking of two net
works for the mutual exchange of traffic[, but not] the transport and
termination of traffic.” Pp. 10–12.
(d) Nor is there any other “reason to suspect that the [FCC’s] in
terpretation does not reflect the agency’s fair and considered judg
ment on the matter in question.” Auer, supra, at 462. AT&T incor
rectly suggests that the FCC is attempting to require under
§251(c)(2) what courts have prevented it from requiring under
§251(c)(3) and what the FCC itself said was not required in the Re
mand Order. Pp. 12–16.
597 F. 3d 370, reversed.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which all other
Members joined, except KAGAN, J., who took no part in the considera
tion or decision of the cases. SCALIA, J., filed a concurring opinion.

