4

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC v. MAINE PUB. 

UTIL. COMM’N
STEVENS, J., dissenting 





tioned the Mobile-Sierra doctrine without reiterating that
it is premised on the existence of a voluntary contract
between the parties.” Ibid. But, the Court asks, “[I]f
FERC itself must presume just and reasonable a contract
rate resulting from fair, arms-length negotiations, how can
it be maintained that noncontracting parties nevertheless
may escape that presumption?” Ante, at 9. This Court’s
understanding of Sierra provides an answer. “Sierra was
grounded in the commonsense notion that ‘[i]n wholesale
markets, the party charging the rate and the party
charged [are] often sophisticated businesses enjoying
presumptively equal bargaining power, who could be
expected to negotiate a “just and reasonable” rate as be
tween the two of them.’ ” Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 17) (quoting Verizon Communications Inc. v.
FCC, 535 U. S. 467, 479 (2002); emphasis added). This
“commonsense notion” supports the rule requiring FERC
to apply a presumption against letting a party out of its
own contract, as the D. C. Circuit recognized. 520 F. 3d,
at 478 (“The Mobile-Sierra doctrine applies a more defer
ential standard of review to preserve the terms of the
bargain as between the contracting parties”). It does not,
however, support a rule requiring FERC to apply a pre
sumption against abrogating any rate set by contract,
even when, as in this case, a noncontracting party may be
required in practice to pay a rate it did not agree to.
The Court further reasons that “confinement of MobileSierra to rate challenges by contracting parties diminishes
the animating purpose of the doctrine,” which is ensuring
the stability of contract-based supply arrangements. Ante,
at 9. Maybe so, but applying Mobile-Sierra to rate chal
lenges by noncontracting parties loses sight of the animat
ing purpose of the FPA, which is “the protection of the
public interest.” Sierra, 350 U. S., at 355. That interest is
—————— 

challenge rates.” 520 F. 3d, at 478. 


