8

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC v. MAINE PUB. 

UTIL. COMM’N
Opinion of the Court 





___ (slip op., at 1–2); see id., at 19–20. Answering no to
the first question and yes to the second, the Court empha­
sized the essential role of contracts as a key factor foster­
ing stability in the electricity market, to the longrun bene­
fit of consumers. Id., at ___, ___ (slip op., at 19, 22); see,
e.g., Market-Based Rates ¶6, 72 Fed. Reg. 39906 (2007)
(noting chilling effect on investments caused by “uncer­
tainties regarding rate stability and contract sanctity”);
Nevada Power Co. v. Duke Energy Trading & Marketing,
L. L. C., 99 FERC ¶61,047, pp. 61,184, 61,190 (2002)
(“Competitive power markets simply cannot attract the
capital needed to build adequate generating infrastructure
without regulatory certainty, including certainty that the
Commission will not modify market-based contracts
unless there are extraordinary circumstances.”).
Morgan Stanley did not reach the question presented
here: Does Mobile-Sierra’s public interest standard apply
to challenges to contract rates brought by noncontracting
parties? But Morgan Stanley’s reasoning strongly sug­
gests that the D. C. Circuit’s negative answer misperceives
the aim, and diminishes the force, of the Mobile-Sierra
doctrine.
In unmistakably plain language, Morgan Stanley re­
stated Mobile-Sierra’s instruction to the Commission:
FERC “must presume that the rate set out in a freely
negotiated wholesale-energy contract meets the ‘just and
reasonable’ requirement imposed by law. The presump­
tion may be overcome only if FERC concludes that the
contract seriously harms the public interest.” 554 U. S., at
___ (slip op., at 1). As our instruction to FERC in Morgan
Stanley conveys, the public interest standard is not, as the
D. C. Circuit presented it, a standard independent of, and
sometimes at odds with, the “just and reasonable” stan­
dard, see 520 F. 3d, at 478; rather, the public interest
standard defines “what it means for a rate to satisfy the
just-and-reasonable standard in the contract context.”

