Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., dissenting

tract.” Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 3)
(STEVENS, J., dissenting) (internal quotation marks omit
ted; emphasis deleted). And the Mobile-Sierra line of
cases did not “mandate a ‘serious harm’ standard of re
view,” much less “require any assumption that high rates
and low rates impose symmetric burdens on the public
interest.” Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 7)
(STEVENS, J., dissenting). Instead, “the statement in
Permian Basin about ‘unequivocal public necessity,’ 390
U. S., at 822, speaks to the difficulty of establishing injury
to the public interest in the context of a low-rate chal
lenge,” i.e., one brought by sellers of electricity. Id., at ___
(slip op., at 8). It does not establish a new standard that
applies as well to a “high-rate challenge” brought by pur
chasers. Ibid.
But even accepting Morgan Stanley as the law, the
Court unwisely goes further today. In this third chapter of
the Mobile-Sierra story, the Court applies a rule—one
designed initially to protect the enforceability of freely
negotiated contracts against parties who seek a release
from their obligations—to impose a special burden on
third parties exercising their statutory right to object to
unjust and unreasonable rates. This application of the
rule represents a quantum leap from the modest origin set
forth in the first chapter of this tale. As the Court of
Appeals correctly concluded in the opinion that the Court
sets aside today: “This case is clearly outside the scope of
the Mobile-Sierra doctrine.” Maine Pub. Util. Comm’n v.
FERC, 520 F. 3d 464, 477 (CADC 2008) (per curiam).
As the D. C. Circuit noted,2 “[c]ourts have rarely men
——————
2 Because the D. C. Circuit’s opinion was written before this Court’s
decision in Morgan Stanley, that court’s purported error in describing
the Mobile-Sierra doctrine as an “exception” to the just-and-reasonable
standard, 520 F. 3d, at 477, is understandable. As that court recog
nized, and the majority does not change today, the Mobile-Sierra
standard in fact “makes it harder for [respondents] to successfully

