2

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC v. MAINE PUB. 

UTIL. COMM’N
Syllabus 





ties. It applies, as well, to challenges initiated by noncontracting
parties. Pp. 5–11.
(a) Morgan Stanley did not reach the question presented here, but
its reasoning strongly suggests that the D. C. Circuit’s holding mis
perceives the aim, and diminishes the force, of the Mobile-Sierra doc
trine. Announced three months after the Court of Appeals’ disposi
tion in this case, Morgan Stanley reaffirmed Mobile-Sierra’s
instruction to FERC to “presume that the rate set out in a freely ne
gotiated . . . contract meets the ‘just and reasonable’ requirement”
unless “FERC concludes that the contract seriously harms the public
interest.” 554 U. S., at ___. The Morgan Stanley opinion makes it
unmistakably clear that the public interest standard is not, as the
D. C. Circuit suggested, independent of, and sometimes at odds with,
the “just and reasonable” standard. Rather, the public interest stan
dard defines “what it means for a rate to satisfy the just-and
reasonable standard in the contract context.” Id., at ___. And if
FERC itself must presume just and reasonable a contract rate result
ing from fair, arms-length negotiations, noncontracting parties may
not escape that presumption. Moreover, the Mobile-Sierra doctrine
does not neglect third-party interests; it directs FERC to reject a con
tract rate that “seriously harms the consuming public.” 554 U. S., at
___. Finally, the D. C. Circuit’s confinement of Mobile-Sierra to rate
challenges by contracting parties diminishes the doctrine’s animating
purpose: promotion of “the stability of supply arrangements which all
agree is essential to the health of the [energy] industry.” Mobile, 350
U. S., at 344. A presumption applicable to contracting parties only,
and inoperative as to everyone else—consumers, advocacy groups,
state utility commissions, elected officials acting parens patriae—
could scarcely provide the stability Mobile-Sierra aimed to secure.
Pp. 5–10.
(b) Whether the rates at issue qualify as “contract rates” for Mo
bile-Sierra purposes, and, if not, whether FERC had discretion to
treat them analogously are questions raised before, but not ruled
upon by, the D. C. Circuit. They remain open for that court’s consid
eration on remand. Pp. 10–11.
520 F. 3d 464, reversed in part and remanded.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR,
JJ., joined. STEVENS, J., filed a dissenting opinion.

