6

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC v. MAINE PUB. 

UTIL. COMM’N
STEVENS, J., dissenting 





the public.4 Otherwise, it would hardly serve to protect
contract stability better than the plain vanilla just-and
reasonable standard and the Court’s decision in Morgan
Stanley would have little effect. Furthermore, the Court
today reiterates that the doctrine poses a high bar. See
ante, at 7–8.
It was sensible to require a contracting party to show
something more than its own desire to get out of what
proved to be a bad bargain before FERC could abrogate
the parties’ bargain. It is not sensible, nor authorized by
the statute, for the Court to change the de facto standard
of review whenever a rate is set by private contract, based
solely on the Court’s view that contract stability should be
——————
4 In my view, “whether a rate is ‘just and reasonable’ is measured
against the public interest, not the private interests of regulated
[parties].” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 7). But I note the Court’s assertion
that the Mobile-Sierra doctrine protects “third-party interests,” ante, at
9, is a new twist on the “public interest standard” as traditionally
understood. As the Court recognized in Morgan Stanley, one conse
quence of applying Mobile-Sierra is that “ ‘the sole concern of the
Commission’ ” is the public interest, and FERC cannot consider, for
example, whether a rate guarantees a sufficient rate of return to a
regulated entity. 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 4) (quoting FPC v. Sierra
Pacific Power Co., 350 U. S. 348, 355 (1956)); see also Morgan Stanley,
554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 17, n. 3). In addition to requiring that
FERC find some greater degree of harm to the public than would be
required under the ordinary just-and-reasonable standard, therefore,
the Mobile-Sierra doctrine leaves little room for respondents—at least
one of which did not negotiate the rate but must nonetheless purchase
electricity at that price in the forward capacity market unless it self
supplies its capacity—to assert their private interest in making a rate
challenge. The Court suggests that FERC could set aside a rate under
the public interest standard if the contract established favorable rates
between allied businesses to the detriment of other wholesale custom
ers, ante, at 9, but has not spelled out whether a challenger would still
have to show that circumstance harmed the public interest. It remains
unclear whether a noncontracting party that must purchase or sell
electricity at a rate it did not negotiate could argue that a rate fails the
“public interest standard” because the rate is detrimental to that
entity’s private interest.

