Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., dissenting

“the interest of consumers in paying ‘ “the lowest possible
reasonable rate consistent with the maintenance of ade
quate service in the public interest.” ’ ” Morgan Stanley,
554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 7) (STEVENS, J., dissenting)
(quoting Permian Basin, 390 U. S., at 793). I do not doubt
that stable energy markets are important to the public
interest, but “under the FPA, Congress has charged
FERC, not the courts, with balancing the short-term and
long-term interests of consumers” under the just-and
reasonable standard of review. Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 9) (STEVENS, J., dissenting). The Court
today imposes additional limits upon FERC’s ability to
protect that interest. If a third-party wholesale buyer can
show a rate harms the public interest (perhaps because it
is too high to be just and reasonable under normal review),
but cannot show it seriously harms the public, FERC may
do nothing about it.3
The Court assures respondents that the “public interest
standard” does not “overlook third-party interests” and is
“framed with a view to their protection.” Ante, at 8, 9.
Perhaps in practice the Mobile-Sierra doctrine will protect
third parties’ interests, and the public interest, just as
well as the so-called “ordinary” just-and-reasonable stan
dard. But respondents are rightly skeptical. The MobileSierra doctrine, as interpreted by the Court in Morgan
Stanley, must pose a higher bar to respondents’ rate chal
lenge—that is, it requires them to show greater harm to
——————
3 FERC agrees with petitioners that the public interest standard
“govern[s] all challenges to the rates set by contract, regardless of the
identity of the challenger.” Reply Brief for FERC 4. But “not even
FERC has the authority to endorse [this] rule.” Morgan Stanley, 554
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 9) (STEVENS, J., dissenting). “The FPA does not
indulge, much less require, a ‘practically insurmountable’ presumption,
see Papago Tribal Util. Auth. v. FERC, 723 F. 2d 950, 954 (CADC 1983)
(opinion for the court by Scalia, J.), that all rates set by contract com
port with the public interest and are therefore just and reasonable.”
Id., at ___ (slip op., at 9–10).

