Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of BREYER, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1151
_________________

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC., 

PETITIONER v. FLORIDA DEPARTMENT OF 

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF

FLORIDA

[June 17, 2010] 


JUSTICE BREYER, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG joins,
concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
I agree that no unconstitutional taking of property
occurred in this case, and I therefore join Parts I, IV, and
V of today’s opinion. I cannot join Parts II and III, how
ever, for in those Parts the plurality unnecessarily ad
dresses questions of constitutional law that are better left
for another day.
In Part II of its opinion, see ante, at 7–10, the plurality
concludes that courts, including federal courts, may review
the private property law decisions of state courts to de
termine whether the decisions unconstitutionally take
“private property” for “public use without just compensa
tion.” U. S. Const., Amdt. 5. And in doing so it finds
“irrelevant” that the “particular state actor” that takes
private property (or unconstitutionally redefines state
property law) is the judicial branch, rather than the ex
ecutive or legislative branch. Ante, at 10; cf. Hughes v.
Washington, 389 U. S. 290, 296–298 (1967) (Stewart, J.,
concurring).
In Part III, the plurality determines that it is “not obvi
ously appropriate” to apply this Court’s “ ‘fair and substan
tial basis’ ” test, familiar from our adequate and independ
ent state ground jurisprudence, when evaluating whether


2

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Opinion of BREYER, J. 


a state-court property decision enacts an unconstitutional
taking. Ante, at 21. The plurality further concludes that a
state-court decision violates the Takings Clause not when
the decision is “unpredictab[le]” on the basis of prior law,
but rather when the decision takes private property rights
that are “established.” Ante, at 23–24. And finally, it
concludes that all those affected by a state-court property
law decision can raise a takings claim in federal court, but
for the losing party in the initial state-court proceeding,
who can only raise her claim (possibly for the first time) in
a petition for a writ of certiorari here. Ante, at 23.
I do not claim that all of these conclusions are unsound.
I do not know. But I do know that, if we were to express
our views on these questions, we would invite a host of
federal takings claims without the mature consideration of
potential procedural or substantive legal principles that
might limit federal interference in matters that are pri
marily the subject of state law. Property owners litigate
many thousands of cases involving state property law in
state courts each year. Each state-court property decision
may further affect numerous nonparty property owners as
well. Losing parties in many state-court cases may well
believe that erroneous judicial decisions have deprived
them of property rights they previously held and may
consequently bring federal takings claims. And a glance
at Part IV makes clear that such cases can involve state
property law issues of considerable complexity. Hence, the
approach the plurality would take today threatens to open
the federal court doors to constitutional review of many,
perhaps large numbers of, state-law cases in an area of
law familiar to state, but not federal, judges. And the
failure of that approach to set forth procedural limitations
or canons of deference would create the distinct possibility
that federal judges would play a major role in the shaping
of a matter of significant state interest—state property
law.


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of BREYER, J.

The plurality criticizes me for my cautious approach,
and states that I “cannot decide that petitioner’s claim
fails without first deciding what a valid claim would con
sist of.” Ante, at 12. But, of course, courts frequently find
it possible to resolve cases—even those raising constitu
tional questions—without specifying the precise standard
under which a party wins or loses. See, e.g., Smith v.
Spisak, 558 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 16) (“With or
without such deference, our conclusion is the same”);
Quilloin v. Walcott, 434 U. S. 246, 256 (1978) (rejecting an
equal protection claim “[u]nder any standard of review”);
Mercer v. Theriot, 377 U. S. 152, 156 (1964) (per curiam)
(finding evidence sufficient to support a verdict “under any
standard”). That is simply what I would do here.
In the past, Members of this Court have warned us that,
when faced with difficult constitutional questions, we
should “confine ourselves to deciding only what is neces
sary to the disposition of the immediate case.” Whitehouse
v. Illinois Central R. Co., 349 U. S. 366, 373 (1955); see
also Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective Assn.,
485 U. S. 439, 445 (1988) (“A fundamental and longstand
ing principle of judicial restraint requires that courts
avoid reaching constitutional questions in advance of the
necessity of deciding them”); Ashwander v. TVA, 297 U. S.
288, 346–347 (1936) (Brandeis, J., concurring) (“The Court
will not anticipate a question of constitutional law in
advance of the necessity of deciding it. It is not the habit
of the Court to decide questions of a constitutional nature
unless absolutely necessary to a decision of the case”
(citations and internal quotation marks omitted)). I heed
this advice here. There is no need now to decide more
than what the Court decides in Parts IV and V, namely,
that the Florida Supreme Court’s decision in this case did
not amount to a “judicial taking.”

