Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1151
_________________

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC., 

PETITIONER v. FLORIDA DEPARTMENT OF 

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF

FLORIDA

[June 17, 2010] 


JUSTICE KENNEDY, with whom JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR
joins, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
The Court’s analysis of the principles that control own
ership of the land in question, and of the rights of peti
tioner’s members as adjacent owners, is correct in my
view, leading to my joining Parts I, IV, and V of the
Court’s opinion. As JUSTICE BREYER observes, however,
this case does not require the Court to determine whether,
or when, a judicial decision determining the rights of
property owners can violate the Takings Clause of the
Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution. This
separate opinion notes certain difficulties that should be
considered before accepting the theory that a judicial
decision that eliminates an “established property right,”
ante, at 21, constitutes a violation of the Takings Clause.
The Takings Clause is an essential part of the constitu
tional structure, for it protects private property from
expropriation without just compensation; and the right to
own and hold property is necessary to the exercise and
preservation of freedom. The right to retain property
without the fact or even the threat of that sort of expro
priation is, of course, applicable to the States under the
Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Chi
cago, B. & Q. R. Co. v. Chicago, 166 U. S. 226, 239 (1897).


2

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Opinion of KENNEDY, J. 


The right of the property owner is subject, however, to
the rule that the government does have power to take
property for a public use, provided that it pays just com
pensation.
See First English Evangelical Lutheran
Church of Glendale v. County of Los Angeles, 482 U. S.
304, 314–315 (1987). This is a vast governmental power.
And typically, legislative bodies grant substantial discre
tion to executive officers to decide what property can be
taken for authorized projects and uses. As a result, if an
authorized executive agency or official decides that Black
acre is the right place for a fire station or Greenacre is the
best spot for a freeway interchange, then the weight and
authority of the State are used to take the property, even
against the wishes of the owner, who must be satisfied
with just compensation.
In the exercise of their duty to protect the fisc, both the
legislative and executive branches monitor, or should
monitor, the exercise of this substantial power. Those
branches are accountable in their political capacity for the
proper discharge of this obligation.
To enable officials to better exercise this great power in
a responsible way, some States allow their officials to take
a second look after property has been condemned and a
jury returns a verdict setting the amount of just compen
sation. See, e.g., Cal. Civ. Proc. Code Ann. §1268.510
(2007).
If the condemning authority, usually acting
through the executive, deems the compensation too high to
pay for the project, it can decide not to take the property
at all. The landowner is reimbursed for certain costs and
expenses of litigation and the property remains in his or
her hands. See, e.g., §1268.610(a).
This is just one aspect of the exercise of the power to
select what property to condemn and the responsibility to
ensure that the taking makes financial sense from the
State’s point of view. And, as a matter of custom and
practice, these are matters for the political branches—the


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

legislature and the executive—not the courts. See First
English, supra, at 321 (“[T]he decision to exercise the
power of eminent domain is a legislative function”).
If a judicial decision, as opposed to an act of the execu
tive or the legislature, eliminates an established property
right, the judgment could be set aside as a deprivation of
property without due process of law. The Due Process
Clause, in both its substantive and procedural aspects, is a
central limitation upon the exercise of judicial power. And
this Court has long recognized that property regulations
can be invalidated under the Due Process Clause. See,
e.g., Lingle v. Chevron U. S. A. Inc., 544 U. S. 528, 542
(2005); Goldblatt v. Hempstead, 369 U. S. 590, 591, 592–
593 (1962); Demorest v. City Bank Farmers Trust Co., 321
U. S. 36, 42–43 (1944); Broad River Power Co. v. South
Carolina ex rel. Daniel, 281 U. S. 537, 539, 540–541
(1930); Washington ex rel. Seattle Title Trust Co. v.
Roberge, 278 U. S. 116, 121 (1928); Nectow v. Cambridge,
277 U. S. 183, 188 (1928); Village of Euclid v. Ambler
Realty Co., 272 U. S. 365, 395 (1926); see also Pennsyl
vania Coal Co. v. Mahon, 260 U. S. 393, 413 (1922) (there
must be limits on government’s ability to diminish prop
erty values by regulation “or the contract and due process
clauses are gone”). It is thus natural to read the Due
Process Clause as limiting the power of courts to eliminate
or change established property rights.
The Takings Clause also protects property rights, and it
“operates as a conditional limitation, permitting the gov
ernment to do what it wants so long as it pays the charge.”
Eastern Enterprises v. Apfel, 524 U. S. 498, 545 (1998)
(KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment and dissenting in
part). Unlike the Due Process Clause, therefore, the
Takings Clause implicitly recognizes a governmental
power while placing limits upon that power. Thus, if the
Court were to hold that a judicial taking exists, it would
presuppose that a judicial decision eliminating established


4

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Opinion of KENNEDY, J. 


property rights is “otherwise constitutional” so long as the
State compensates the aggrieved property owners. Ibid.
There is no clear authority for this proposition.
When courts act without direction from the executive or
legislature, they may not have the power to eliminate
established property rights by judicial decision. “Given
that the constitutionality” of a judicial decision altering
property rights “appears to turn on the legitimacy” of
whether the court’s judgment eliminates or changes estab
lished property rights “rather than on the availability of
compensation, . . . the more appropriate constitutional
analysis arises under general due process principles
rather than under the Takings Clause.” Ibid. Courts,
unlike the executive or legislature, are not designed to
make policy decisions about “the need for, and likely effec
tiveness of, regulatory actions.” Lingle, supra, at 545.
State courts generally operate under a common-law tradi
tion that allows for incremental modifications to property
law, but “this tradition cannot justify a carte blanch judi
cial authority to change property definitions wholly free of
constitutional limitations.” Walston, The Constitution and
Property: Due Process, Regulatory Takings, and Judicial
Takings, 2001 Utah L. Rev. 379, 435.
The Court would be on strong footing in ruling that a
judicial decision that eliminates or substantially changes
established property rights, which are a legitimate expec
tation of the owner, is “arbitrary or irrational” under the
Due Process Clause. Lingle, 544 U. S., at 542; see id., at
548–549 (KENNEDY, J., concurring); see also Perry v.
Sindermann, 408 U. S. 593, 601 (1972) (“ ‘[P]roperty’ ”
interests protected by the Due Process Clauses are those
“that are secured by ‘existing rules or understandings’ ”
(quoting Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth, 408
U. S. 564, 577 (1972))). Thus, without a judicial takings
doctrine, the Due Process Clause would likely prevent a
State from doing “by judicial decree what the Takings


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

Clause forbids it to do by legislative fiat.” Ante, at 8. The
objection that a due process claim might involve close
questions concerning whether a judicial decree extends
beyond what owners might have expected is not a sound
argument; for the same close questions would arise with
respect to whether a judicial decision is a taking. See
Apfel, supra, at 541 (opinion of KENNEDY, J.) (“Cases
attempting to decide when a regulation becomes a taking
are among the most litigated and perplexing in current
law”); Penn Central Transp. Co. v. New York City, 438
U. S. 104, 123 (1978) (“The question of what constitutes a
‘taking’ for purposes of the Fifth Amendment has proved
to be a problem of considerable difficulty”).
To announce that courts too can effect a taking when
they decide cases involving property rights, would raise
certain difficult questions. Since this case does not require
those questions to be addressed, in my respectful view, the
Court should not reach beyond the necessities of the case
to announce a sweeping rule that court decisions can be
takings, as that phrase is used in the Takings Clause. The
evident reason for recognizing a judicial takings doctrine
would be to constrain the power of the judicial branch. Of
course, the judiciary must respect private ownership. But
were this Court to say that judicial decisions become
takings when they overreach, this might give more power
to courts, not less.
Consider the instance of litigation between two property
owners to determine which one bears the liability and
costs when a tree that stands on one property extends its
roots in a way that damages adjacent property. See, e.g.,
Fancher v. Fagella, 274 Va. 549, 650 S. E. 2d 519 (2007).
If a court deems that, in light of increasing urbanization,
the former rule for allocation of these costs should be
changed, thus shifting the rights of the owners, it may
well increase the value of one property and decrease the
value of the other. This might be the type of incremental


6

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Opinion of KENNEDY, J. 


modification under state common law that does not violate
due process, as owners may reasonably expect or antici
pate courts to make certain changes in property law. The
usual due process constraint is that courts cannot abandon
settled principles. See, e.g., Rogers v. Tennessee, 532 U. S.
451, 457 (2001) (citing Bouie v. City of Columbia, 378 U. S.
347, 354 (1964)); Apfel, 524 U. S., at 548–549 (opinion of
KENNEDY, J.); see also Perry, supra, at 601; Roth, supra,
at 577.
But if the state court were deemed to be exercising the
power to take property, that constraint would be removed.
Because the State would be bound to pay owners for tak
ings caused by a judicial decision, it is conceivable that
some judges might decide that enacting a sweeping new
rule to adjust the rights of property owners in the context
of changing social needs is a good idea. Knowing that the
resulting ruling would be a taking, the courts could go
ahead with their project, free from constraints that would
otherwise confine their power. The resulting judgment as
between the property owners likely could not be set aside
by some later enactment. See Plaut v. Spendthrift Farm,
Inc., 514 U. S. 211, 217 (1995) (leaving open whether
legislation reopening final judgments violates Due Process
Clause). And if the litigation were a class action to decide,
for instance, whether there are public rights of access that
diminish the rights of private ownership, a State might
find itself obligated to pay a substantial judgment for the
judicial ruling. Even if the legislature were to subse
quently rescind the judicial decision by statute, the State
would still have to pay just compensation for the tempo
rary taking that occurred from the time of the judicial
decision to the time of the statutory fix. See First English,
482 U. S., at 321.
The idea, then, that a judicial takings doctrine would
constrain judges might just well have the opposite effect.
It would give judges new power and new assurance that


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

changes in property rights that are beneficial, or thought
to be so, are fair and proper because just compensation
will be paid. The judiciary historically has not had the
right or responsibility to say what property should or
should not be taken.
Indeed, it is unclear whether the Takings Clause was
understood, as a historical matter, to apply to judicial
decisions. The Framers most likely viewed this Clause as
applying only to physical appropriation pursuant to the
power of eminent domain. See Lucas v. South Carolina
Coastal Council, 505 U. S. 1003, 1028, n. 15 (1992). And it
appears these physical appropriations were traditionally
made by legislatures. See 3 J. Story, Commentaries on
the Constitution of the United States §1784, p. 661 (1833).
Courts, on the other hand, lacked the power of eminent
domain. See 1 W. Blackstone, Commentaries 135 (W.
Lewis ed. 1897). The Court’s Takings Clause jurispru
dence has expanded beyond the Framers’ understanding,
as it now applies to certain regulations that are not physi
cal appropriations. See Lucas, supra, at 1014 (citing
Mahon, 260 U. S. 393). But the Court should consider
with care the decision to extend the Takings Clause in
a manner that might be inconsistent with historical
practice.
There are two additional practical considerations that
the Court would need to address before recognizing judi
cial takings. First, it may be unclear in certain situations
how a party should properly raise a judicial takings claim.
“[I]t is important to separate out two judicial actions—the
decision to change current property rules in a way that
would constitute a taking, and the decision to require
compensation.”
Thompson, Judicial Takings, 76 Va.
L. Rev. 1449, 1515 (1990). In some contexts, these issues
could arise separately. For instance, assume that a state
court opinion explicitly holds that it is changing state
property law, or that it asserts that is not changing the


8

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Opinion of KENNEDY, J. 


law but there is no “fair or substantial basis” for this
statement. Broad River, 281 U. S., at 540. (Most of these
cases may arise in the latter posture, like inverse condem
nation claims where the State says it is not taking prop
erty and pays no compensation.) Call this Case A. The
only issue in Case A was determining the substance of
state property law. It is doubtful that parties would raise
a judicial takings claim on appeal, or in a petition for a
writ of certiorari, in Case A, as the issue would not have
been litigated below. Rather, the party may file a sepa
rate lawsuit—Case B—arguing that a taking occurred in
light of the change in property law made by Case A. After
all, until the state court in Case A changes the law, the
party will not know if his or her property rights will have
been eliminated. So res judicata probably would not bar
the party from litigating the takings issue in Case B.
Second, it is unclear what remedy a reviewing court
could enter after finding a judicial taking. It appears
under our precedents that a party who suffers a taking is
only entitled to damages, not equitable relief: The Court
has said that “[e]quitable relief is not available to enjoin
an alleged taking of private property for a public use . . .
when a suit for compensation can be brought against the
sovereign subsequent to the taking,” Ruckelshaus v. Mon
santo Co., 467 U. S. 986, 1016 (1984), and the Court sub
sequently held that the Takings Clause requires the avail
ability of a suit for compensation against the States, First
English, supra, at 321–322. It makes perfect sense that
the remedy for a Takings Clause violation is only dam
ages, as the Clause “does not proscribe the taking of prop
erty; it proscribes taking without just compensation.”
Williamson County Regional Planning Comm’n v. Hamil
ton Bank of Johnson City, 473 U. S. 172, 194 (1985).
It is thus questionable whether reviewing courts could
invalidate judicial decisions deemed to be judicial takings;
they may only be able to order just compensation. In the


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

posture discussed above where Case A changes the law
and Case B addresses whether that change is a taking, it
is not clear how the Court, in Case B, could invalidate the
holding of Case A. If a single case were to properly ad
dress both a state court’s change in the law and whether
the change was a taking, the Court might be able to give
the state court a choice on how to proceed if there were a
judicial taking. The Court might be able to remand and
let the state court determine whether it wants to insist on
changing its property law and paying just compensation or
to rescind its holding that changed the law. Cf. First
English, 482 U. S., at 321 (“Once a court determines that a
taking has occurred, the government retains the whole
range of options already available—amendment of the
regulation, withdrawal of the invalidated regulation, or
exercise of eminent domain”). But that decision would
rest with the state court, not this Court; so the state court
could still force the State to pay just compensation. And
even if the state court decided to rescind its decision that
changed the law, a temporary taking would have occurred
in the interim. See ibid.
These difficult issues are some of the reasons why the
Court should not reach beyond the necessities of the case
to recognize a judicial takings doctrine. It is not wise,
from an institutional standpoint, to reach out and decide
questions that have not been discussed at much length by
courts and commentators. This Court’s dicta in William
son County, supra, at 194–197, regarding when regulatory
takings claims become ripe, explains why federal courts
have not been able to provide much analysis on the issue
of judicial takings. See San Remo Hotel, L. P. v. City and
County of San Francisco, 545 U. S. 323, 351 (2005)
(Rehnquist, C. J., concurring in judgment) (“Williamson
County’s state-litigation rule has created some real
anomalies, justifying our revisiting the issue”). Until
Williamson County is reconsidered, litigants will have to


10

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Opinion of KENNEDY, J. 


press most of their judicial takings claims before state
courts, which are “presumptively competent . . . to adjudi
cate claims arising under the laws of the United States.”
Tafflin v. Levitt, 493 U. S. 455, 458 (1990). If and when
future cases show that the usual principles, including
constitutional principles that constrain the judiciary like
due process, are somehow inadequate to protect property
owners, then the question whether a judicial decision can
effect a taking would be properly presented. In the mean
time, it seems appropriate to recognize that the substan
tial power to decide whose property to take and when to
take it should be conceived of as a power vested in the
political branches and subject to political control.

