10

HEMI GROUP, LLC v. CITY OF NEW YORK
BREYER, J., dissenting

defendants. The plaintiff claimed that the defendants
falsely told state officials that they did not owe sales tax.
The plaintiff added that, had the defendants paid the tax
they owed, the defendants would have had less money
available to run their business, and the plaintiff conse­
quently would have been able to compete against them
more effectively. 547 U. S., at 454, 457–458.
Again, in Anza the kind of harm that the plaintiff al­
leged is not the kind of harm that the tax statutes primar­
ily seek to prevent. Rather, it alleged a kind of harm
(competitive injury) that tax violations do not ordinarily
cause and which ordinarily flows from the regular opera­
tion of a competitive marketplace. Thus, in both Holmes
and Anza, unlike the present case, plaintiffs alleged spe­
cial harm, neither squarely within the class of harms at
which the relevant statutes were directed, nor of a kind
that typical violators would intend or even foresee.
Bridge, which the majority seeks to distinguish, ante, at
11–12, is a more closely analogous case. The defendants
in that case directed agents to misrepresent to a county
that they qualified as independent bidders at a county-run
property auction. They consequently participated in the
auction. And the plaintiffs, facing additional bidders, lost
some of the property that they otherwise would have
won—all to their financial disadvantage. 553 U. S., at
___–___ (slip op., at 3–4). The harm was foreseeable; it
was intended; and it was precisely the kind of harm that
the county’s bidding rules sought to prevent. Thus this
Court held that the harm was “a foreseeable and natural
consequence of [the defendants’] scheme.” Id., at ___ (slip
op., at 18).
In sum, the majority recognizes that “[p]roximate cause
for RICO purposes . . . should be evaluated in light of its
common law foundations,” ante, at 6, but those founda­
tions do not support the majority’s view. Moreover, the
majority’s rationale would free from RICO liability defen­

