Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

Indeed, in its entire brief on the merits, the City never
uses the word “opportunity” (or anything similar) to de­
scribe its injury.
Perhaps the City articulated its argument in terms of
the lost revenue itself to meet Hemi’s contention that an
injury to the mere “opportunity to collect” taxes fell short
of RICO’s injury to “property” requirement. Brief for
Petitioners 25 (“The opportunity to collect taxes from
those who did owe them . . . falls within a class of expecta­
tion interests that do not qualify as injury to business or
property and therefore do not confer civil RICO standing”
(internal quotation marks omitted)); see Cleveland v.
United States, 531 U. S. 12, 15 (2000) (“It does not suffice
. . . that the object of the fraud may become property in the
recipient’s hands; for purposes of the mail fraud statute,
the thing obtained must be property in the hands of the
victim”).
That is not to say, however, that the City would fare any
better on the causation question had it framed its argu­
ment in terms of a lost opportunity. Hemi’s filing obliga­
tion would still be to the State, and any harm to the City
would still be caused directly by the customers’ failure to
pay their taxes. See 541 F. 3d, at 461 (Winter, J., dissent­
ing). Whatever the City’s reasons for framing its merits
arguments as it has, we will not reformulate them for it
now.2
——————
2 The

dissent recognizes that its position poses the troubling specter
of turning RICO into a tax collection statute. Post, at 11–12 (opinion of
BREYER, J.). The dissent’s answer looks largely to prosecution policy set
forth in the Federal Department of Justice Guidelines, which are, of
course, not only changeable, but have no applicability whatever to state
or local governments. Under the decision below and the dissent’s
position, RICO could be used as a tax collection device based solely on
the failure to file reports under the Jenkins Act, which itself provides
quite limited remedies. See 15 U. S. C. §377 (providing that a violation
of the Jenkins Act may be punished as a misdemeanor with a fine up to
$1,000 and imprisonment for no more than six months). And that

