4

HEMI GROUP, LLC v. CITY OF NEW YORK
Opinion of the Court

§1964(c) provides a private cause of action. Record A980.
Invoking that private cause of action, the City asserts that
it has suffered injury in the form of lost tax revenue—its
“business or property” in RICO terms—“by reason of”
Hemi’s fraud.
Hemi does not contest the City’s characterization of the
Jenkins Act violations as predicate offenses actionable
under §1964(c). (We therefore assume, without deciding,
that failure to file Jenkins Act material can serve as a
RICO predicate offense.) Instead, Hemi argues that the
City’s asserted injury—lost tax revenue—is not “business
or property” under RICO, and that the City cannot show
that it suffered any injury “by reason of” the failure to file
Jenkins Act reports.
The District Court dismissed the City’s RICO claims,
determining that Hemi owner and officer Kai Gachupin
did not have an individual duty to file Jenkins Act reports,
and thus could not have committed the alleged predicate
acts. City of New York v. Nexicon, Inc., No. 03 CV 383
(DAB), 2006 WL 647716, *7–*8 (SDNY, Mar. 15, 2006).
The District Court therefore held that the City could not
establish that Hemi and Gachupin formed an “enterprise”
as required to establish RICO liability. Id., at *7–*10.
Because it dismissed on that ground, the District Court
did not address whether the City’s loss of tax revenue
constitutes an injury to its “business or property” under
§1964, or whether that injury was caused “by reason of”
Hemi’s failure to file the Jenkins Act reports.
The Second Circuit vacated the District Court’s judg­
ment and remanded for further proceedings. The Court of
Appeals held that the City had established that Gachupin
and Hemi operated as an “enterprise” and that the enter­
prise committed the predicate RICO acts of mail and wire
fraud, based on the failure to file the Jenkins Act material
with the State. 541 F. 3d, at 447–448. The court also
determined that the City’s asserted injury, lost tax reve­

