12

HEMI GROUP, LLC v. CITY OF NEW YORK
BREYER, J., dissenting

sales tax returns”).
In a related context, however, the Department of Justice
has taken steps to avoid the “tax collection agency” prob­
lem without reading all tax-related frauds out of similar
federal criminal statutes. The Department’s prosecution
guidelines require prosecutors considering a tax-related
mail fraud or wire fraud or bank fraud prosecution (or a
related RICO prosecution) to obtain approval from high­
level Department officials. And those guidelines specify
that the Department will grant that approval only where
there is at issue “a large fraud loss or a substantial
pattern of conduct” and will not do so, absent “unusual
circumstances,” in cases involving simply “one person’s
tax liability.” Dept. of Justice, United States Attorneys’
Manual §6–4.210(A) (2007), online at http://www.justice.
gov/usao/eousa/foia_reading_room/usam/title6/4mtax.htm
(as visited Jan. 20, 2010, and available in Clerk of Court’s
case file); see also §6–4.210(B) (explaining that the De­
partment “will not authorize the use of mail, wire or bank
fraud charges to convert routine tax prosecutions into
RICO . . . cases”).
This case involves an extensive pattern of fraudulent
conduct, large revenue losses, and many different unre­
lated potential taxpayers. The Department’s guidelines
would appear to authorize prosecution in these circum­
stances. And limiting my consideration to these circum­
stances, I would find that this RICO complaint asserts a
valid harm to “business or property.” I need not and do
not express a view as to how or whether RICO’s civil
action provisions apply to simpler instances of individual
tax liability.
This conclusion is virtually compelled by Pasquantino v.
United States, 544 U. S. 349 (2005), a case that we decided
only five years ago. We there pointed out that the right to
uncollected taxes is an “entitlement to collect money . . . ,
the possession of which is ‘something of value.’ ” Id., at

