14

HEMI GROUP, LLC v. CITY OF NEW YORK
Opinion of the Court

In a final effort to save its claim, the City has shifted
course before this Court. In its second amended complaint
and RICO statement, the City relied solely on Hemi’s
failure to file Jenkins Act reports with the State to form
the basis of the predicate act mail and wire frauds. See
Second Amended Compl. ¶¶99, 101, 118, 125; Record
A980–A982. Before this Court, however, the City con­
tends that Hemi made affirmative misrepresentations to
City residents, which, the City now argues, comprise part
of the RICO predicate mail and wire frauds. See Brief for
Respondent 42–43. The City’s counsel pressed the point at
oral argument, asserting that the City’s injury was
“caused by the seller’s misrepresentation, which encour­
ages the purchasers not to pay taxes.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 44.
The City, however, affirmatively disavowed below any
reliance on misrepresentations to form the predicate RICO
violation. The alleged false statements, the City there
stated, “are evidence of the scheme to defraud, but are not
part of the fraud itself. . . . [T]he scheme to defraud would
exist even absent the statements.” Record A980. The City
reiterated the point: “The scheme consists of the interstate
sale of cigarettes and the failure to file Jenkins Act reports
indentifying those sales.” Ibid. “Related to the fraud, but
not a circumstance ‘constituting’ the fraud, the defendants
inform customers that [their] purchases will be concealed,
and also seek to convince their customers that no taxes are
owed by claiming, falsely, that the sales are tax-free.” Id.,
at A982. Not only did the City disclaim any reliance upon
misrepresentations to the customers to form the predicate
acts under RICO, but the City made clear in its second
amended complaint that its two RICO claims rested solely
on the Jenkins Act violations as the predicate acts. See
—————— 

device would be available not only to the State, to which the reports

were due, but also to the City, to which Hemi owed no duty under the 

Act and to which it owed no taxes.


