12

HEMI GROUP, LLC v. CITY OF NEW YORK
Opinion of the Court

prohibited bidders from using such agents. Ibid.
A losing bidder alleged that a competitor had defrauded
the county by employing shadow bidders to secure a
greater proportion of liens than it was due. We held that
the bidder-plaintiff had met RICO’s causation require­
ment. Distinguishing that claim from the one at issue in
Anza, we noted that the plaintiff’s theory of causation in
Bridge was “straightforward”: Because of the zero-sum
nature of the auction, and because the county awarded
bids on a rotational basis, each time a fraud-induced bid
was awarded, a particular legitimate bidder was necessar­
ily passed over. 553 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 18). The
losing bidders, moreover, “were the only parties injured by
petitioners’ misrepresentations.” Ibid. The county was
not; it received the same revenue regardless of which
bidder prevailed.
The City’s theory in this case is anything but straight­
forward: Multiple steps, as we have detailed, separate the
alleged fraud from the asserted injury. And in contrast to
Bridge, where there were “no independent factors that
account[ed] for [the plaintiff’s] injury,” ibid., here there
certainly were: The City’s theory of liability rests on the
independent actions of third and even fourth parties.
The City at various points during the proceedings below
described its injury as the lost “opportunity to tax” rather
than “lost tax revenue.” It is not clear that there is a
substantive distinction between the two descriptions. In
any event, before this Court, the City’s argument turned
on lost revenue, not a lost opportunity to collect it. See,
e.g., Brief for Respondent i (“Counter-Question Pre­
sented[:] Does the City of New York have standing under
RICO because lost tax revenue constitutes a direct injury
to the City’s ‘business or property’ in accord with the
statute, 18 U. S. C. §1964(c), and this Court’s authority?”);
id., at 40 (“[T]he City alleges that it has been injured (the
loss of tax revenues) by defendants’ RICO violations”).

