2

HEMI GROUP, LLC v. CITY OF NEW YORK
Syllabus
(a) To establish that an injury came about “by reason of” a RICO
violation, a plaintiff must show that a predicate offense “not only was
a ‘but for’ cause of his injury, but was the proximate cause as well.”
Holmes v. Securities Investor Protection Corporation, 503 U. S. 258,
268. Proximate cause for RICO purposes should be evaluated in light
of its common-law foundations; it thus requires “some direct relation
between the injury asserted and the injurious conduct alleged.” Ibid.
A link that is “too remote,” “purely contingent,” or “indirec[t]” is in
sufficient. Id., at 271, 274.
The City’s causal theory cannot satisfy RICO’s direct relationship
requirement. Indeed, the causal link here is far more attenuated
than the one the Court rejected as “purely contingent” and “too re
mote” in Holmes. Id., at 271. According to the City, Hemi committed
fraud by selling cigarettes to city residents and failing to submit the
required customer information to the State. Without the reports
from Hemi, the State could not pass on the information to the City,
even if it had been so inclined. Some of the customers legally obli
gated to pay the cigarette tax to the City failed to do so. Because the
City did not receive the customer information, it could not determine
which customers had failed to pay the tax. The City thus could not
pursue those customers for payment. The City thereby was injured
in the amount of the portion of back taxes that were never collected.
As the Court reiterated in Holmes, “[t]he general tendency of the law,
in regard to damages at least, is not to go beyond the first step,” id.,
at 271–272, and that “general tendency” applies with full force to
proximate cause inquiries under RICO, e.g., ibid. Because the City’s
causation theory requires the Court to move well beyond the first
step, that theory cannot satisfy RICO’s direct relationship require
ment.
The City’s claim suffers from the same defect as the RICO claim re
jected in Anza v. Ideal Steel Supply Corp., 547 U. S. 451, 458–461,
where the conduct directly causing the harm was distinct from the
conduct giving rise to the fraud, see id., at 458. Indeed, the discon
nect between the asserted injury and the alleged fraud in this case is
even sharper. In Anza, the same party had both engaged in the
harmful conduct and committed the fraudulent act. Here, the City’s
theory of liability rests not just on separate actions, but separate ac
tions carried out by separate parties. The City’s theory thus requires
that the Court extend RICO liability to situations where the defen
dant’s fraud on the third party (the State) has made it easier for a
fourth party (the taxpayer) to cause harm to the plaintiff (the City).
Indeed, the fourth-party taxpayers here only caused harm to the City
in the first place if they decided not to pay taxes they were legally ob
ligated to pay. Put simply, Hemi’s obligation was to file Jenkins Act

