Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

BREYER, J., dissenting

that Hemi tried to defraud the State, not the City. Ante,
at 8–9. Hemi, however, sought to defraud both. Third
Amended RICO Statement ¶d (explaining that “[e]very
other State or local government that imposes a use tax on
cigarettes and whose residents purchase cigarettes” from
Hemi is a victim of its scheme to defraud). Hemi sought to
prevent the State from collecting state taxes; and it sought
to prevent the City from collecting city taxes. Here we are
concerned only with the latter. In respect to the latter, the
State was an information conduit. The fact that state
taxes were also involved is beside the point.
The two Supreme Court cases to which the majority
refers involve significantly different causal circumstances.
Ante, at 5–8. The predicate acts in Holmes—the defen­
dant’s acts that led to the plaintiff’s harm—consisted of
securities frauds. The defendant misrepresented the
prospects of one company and misled the investing public
into falsely believing that it could readily buy and sell the
stock of another. When the truth came out, stock prices
fell, investors (specifically, stockbrokers) lost money, and
since the stockbrokers could not pay certain creditors,
those creditors also lost money. 503 U. S., at 262–263.
Claiming subrogation to stand in the shoes of the credi­
tors, the Securities Investor Protection Corporation sued.
Id., at 270–271.
Since the creditors had not bought the securities, there
was little reason to believe the defendant intended their
harm. And the securities statutes seek, first and foremost,
to protect investors, not creditors of those who sell stock to
those investors. The latter harm (a broker’s creditor’s
loss) differs in kind from the harm that the “predicate act”
statute primarily seeks to avoid and that its violation
would ordinarily cause (namely, investors’ stock-related
monetary losses). As Part II–A, supra, points out, neither
of these circumstances is present here.
In Anza, the plaintiff was a business competitor of the

