8

HEMI GROUP, LLC v. CITY OF NEW YORK
Opinion of the Court

cause of Ideal’s harm was “a set of actions (offering lower
prices) entirely distinct from the alleged RICO violation
(defrauding the State).” Ibid. The alleged violation there­
fore had not “led directly to the plaintiff’s injuries,” and
Ideal accordingly had failed to meet RICO’s “requirement
of a direct causal connection” between the predicate of­
fense and the alleged harm. Id., at 460–461.
The City’s claim suffers from the same defect as the
claim in Anza. Here, the conduct directly responsible for
the City’s harm was the customers’ failure to pay their
taxes. And the conduct constituting the alleged fraud was
Hemi’s failure to file Jenkins Act reports. Thus, as in
Anza, the conduct directly causing the harm was distinct
from the conduct giving rise to the fraud. See id., at 458.
Indeed, the disconnect between the asserted injury and
the alleged fraud in this case is even sharper than in
Anza. There, we viewed the point as important because
the same party—National Steel—had both engaged in the
harmful conduct and committed the fraudulent act. We
nevertheless found the distinction between the relevant
acts sufficient to defeat Ideal’s RICO claim. Here, the
City’s theory of liability rests not just on separate actions,
but separate actions carried out by separate parties.
The City’s theory thus requires that we extend RICO
liability to situations where the defendant’s fraud on the
third party (the State) has made it easier for a fourth
party (the taxpayer) to cause harm to the plaintiff (the
City). Indeed, the fourth-party taxpayers here only caused
harm to the City in the first place if they decided not to
pay taxes they were legally obligated to pay. Put simply,
Hemi’s obligation was to file the Jenkins Act reports with
the State, not the City, and the City’s harm was directly
caused by the customers, not Hemi. We have never before
stretched the causal chain of a RICO violation so far, and
we decline to do so today. See id., at 460–461; cf. Associ
ated Gen. Contractors, supra, at 541, n. 46 (finding no

