(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

HEMI GROUP, LLC, ET AL. v. CITY OF NEW YORK, 

NEW YORK

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 08–969.

Argued November 3, 2009—Decided January 25, 2010

Respondent New York City taxes the possession of cigarettes. Peti
tioner Hemi Group, based in New Mexico, sells cigarettes online to
residents of the City. Neither state nor city law requires out-of-state
sellers such as Hemi to charge, collect, or remit the City’s tax; in
stead, the City must recover its tax on out-of-state sales directly from
the purchasers. But the Jenkins Act, 15 U. S. C. §§375–378, requires
out-of-state sellers to submit customer information to the States into
which they ship cigarettes, and New York State has agreed to for
ward that information to the City. That information helps the City
track down cigarette purchasers who do not pay their taxes. Against
that backdrop, the City filed this lawsuit under the Racketeer Influ
enced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), alleging that Hemi’s
failure to file the Jenkins Act reports with the State constituted mail
and wire fraud, which are defined as “racketeering activit[ies],” 18
U. S. C. §1961(1), subject to enforcement under civil RICO, §1964(c).
The District Court dismissed the claims, but the Second Circuit va
cated the judgment and remanded. Among other things, the Court of
Appeals held that the City’s asserted injury—lost tax revenue—came
about “by reason of” the predicate mail and wire frauds. It accord
ingly determined that the City had stated a valid RICO claim.
Held: The judgment is reversed, and the case is remanded.
541 F. 3d 425, reversed and remanded.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS delivered the opinion of the Court in part,
concluding that because the City cannot show that it lost tax revenue
“by reason of” the alleged RICO violation, it cannot state a RICO
claim. Pp. 5–15.

