Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

proximate cause in the antitrust context where the plain­
tiff’s “harm stems most directly from the conduct of per­
sons who are not victims of the conspiracy”).
One consideration we have highlighted as relevant to
the RICO “direct relationship” requirement is whether
better situated plaintiffs would have an incentive to sue.
See Holmes, supra, at 269–270. The State certainly is
better situated than the City to seek recovery from Hemi.
And the State has an incentive to sue—the State imposes
its own $2.75 per pack tax on cigarettes possessed within
the State, nearly double what the City charges. N. Y. Tax
Law Ann. §471(1) (West Supp. 2009). We do not opine on
whether the State could bring a RICO action for any lost
tax revenue. Suffice it to say that the State would have
concrete incentives to try. See Anza, supra, at 460 (“Ideal
accuses the Anzas of defrauding the State of New York out
of a substantial amount of money. If the allegations are
true, the State can be expected to pursue appropriate
remedies”).
The dissent would have RICO’s proximate cause re­
quirement turn on foreseeability, rather than on the exis­
tence of a sufficiently “direct relationship” between the
fraud and the harm. It would find that the City has satis­
fied that requirement because “the harm is foreseeable; it
is a consequence that Hemi intended, indeed desired; and
it falls well within the set of risks that Congress sought to
prevent.” Post, at 6 (opinion of BREYER, J.). If this line of
reasoning sounds familiar, it should. It is precisely the
argument lodged against the majority opinion in Anza.
There, the dissent criticized the majority’s view for “per­
mit[ting] a defendant to evade liability for harms that are
not only foreseeable, but the intended consequences of
the defendant’s unlawful behavior.” 547 U. S., at 470
(THOMAS, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).
But the dissent there did not carry the day, and no one
has asked us to revisit Anza.

