6

HEMI GROUP, LLC v. CITY OF NEW YORK
Opinion of the Court

261. When the conspiracy by the stock manipulators was
detected, stock prices collapsed, and two broker-dealers
were unable to meet their obligations to their customers.
SIPC, as insurer against that loss, ultimately was on the
hook for nearly $13 million to cover the customers’ claims.
The Court held that SIPC could not recover against the
conspirators because it could not establish that it was
injured “by reason of” the alleged fraud, as that phrase is
used in RICO.
We explained that, to state a claim under civil RICO,
the plaintiff is required to show that a RICO predicate
offense “not only was a ‘but for’ cause of his injury, but
was the proximate cause as well.” Id., at 268. Proximate
cause for RICO purposes, we made clear, should be evalu­
ated in light of its common-law foundations; proximate
cause thus requires “some direct relation between the
injury asserted and the injurious conduct alleged.” Ibid.
A link that is “too remote,” “purely contingent,” or “indi­
rec[t]” is insufficient. Id., at 271, 274.
Applying that standard, we rejected SIPC’s RICO claim.
The alleged conspiracy, we held, directly harmed only the
broker-dealers; SIPC’s injury, on the other hand, was
“purely contingent” on that harm. Id., at 271. The con­
nection between the alleged conspiracy and SIPC’s injury
was therefore “too remote” to satisfy RICO’s direct rela­
tionship requirement. Ibid.
The City’s causal theory is far more attenuated than the
one we rejected in Holmes. According to the City, Hemi
committed fraud by selling cigarettes to city residents and
failing to submit the required customer information to the
State. Without the reports from Hemi, the State could not
pass on the information to the City, even if it had been so
inclined. Some of the customers legally obligated to pay
the cigarette tax to the City failed to do so. Because the
City did not receive the customer information, the City
could not determine which customers had failed to pay the

