Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment

is to allow the parties to determine the defendant’s sen
tence, when the agreement itself employs the particular
Guidelines sentencing range applicable to the charged
offenses in establishing the term of imprisonment, the
defendant is eligible to have his sentence reduced under
§3582(c)(2).4 In such cases, the district court’s reduction of
the sentence does not rewrite the plea agreement; instead,
it enforces the agreement’s terms.
Like the plurality, I am not persuaded by the Govern
ment’s argument that allowing a term of imprisonment
imposed pursuant to a (C) agreement to be reduced under
§3582(c)(2) deprives the Government of the benefit of the
bargain it struck with the defendant. When a (C) agree
ment explicitly employs a particular Guidelines sentenc
ing range to establish the term of imprisonment, the
agreement itself demonstrates the parties’ intent that
the imposed term of imprisonment will be based on that
range, as required for sentence reduction under the stat
ute.5
The Government’s concern that application of
——————
Freeman. See United States v. Garcia, 606 F. 3d 209, 214 (CA5 2010)
(per curiam); United States v. Cobb, 584 F. 3d 979, 985 (CA10 2009).
4 The dissent contends that, even when a (C) agreement expressly
uses a Guidelines sentencing range to establish the term of imprison
ment, the district court imposing a sentence pursuant to that agree
ment does not “appl[y]” that range within the meaning of the appli
cable Guidelines policy statement. See post, at 4–5 (citing USSG
§1B1.10(b)(1) (Nov. 2010)). But in so arguing, the dissent—like the
Government—would have courts ignore the agreement’s express terms,
which the court “applie[s]” when imposing the term of imprisonment.
5 The plurality asserts that “[t]here is no good reason to extend the
benefit [of sentence reduction] only to an arbitrary subset of defendants
. . . based on whether their plea agreements refer to the Guidelines.”
Ante, at 10. But the “good reason” is evident: Rule 11(c)(1)(C)’s entire
purpose is to allow the parties’ intent to determine sentencing out
comes. See supra, at 3–4. If a (C) agreement does not indicate the
parties’ intent to base the term of imprisonment on a particular Guide
lines range subsequently lowered by the Commission, then §3582(c)(2)
simply does not apply.

