6

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

lines. See USSG §6B1.2. That policy statement forbids
the district judge to accept an 11(c)(1)(C) agreement with
out first evaluating the recommended sentence in light
of the defendant’s applicable sentencing range. The com
mentary to §6B1.2 advises that a court may accept an
11(c)(1)(C) agreement “only if the court is satisfied either
that such sentence is an appropriate sentence within the
applicable guideline range or, if not, that the sentence de
parts from the applicable guideline range for justifiable
reasons.” Cf. Stinson v. United States, 508 U. S. 36 (1993)
(Guidelines commentary is authoritative). Any bargain
between the parties is contingent until the court accepts
the agreement. The Guidelines require the district judge
to give due consideration to the relevant sentencing range,
even if the defendant and prosecutor recommend a specific
sentence as a condition of the guilty plea.
This approach finds further support in the policy state
ment that applies to §3582(c)(2) motions. See USSG
§1B1.10. It instructs the district court in modifying a
sentence to substitute only the retroactive amendment
and then leave all original Guidelines determinations in
place. §1B1.10(b)(1). In other words, the policy statement
seeks to isolate whatever marginal effect the since
rejected Guideline had on the defendant’s sentence. Work
ing backwards from this purpose, §3582(c)(2) modification
proceedings should be available to permit the district
court to revisit a prior sentence to whatever extent the
sentencing range in question was a relevant part of the
analytic framework the judge used to determine the sen
tence or to approve the agreement. This is the only rule
consistent with the governing policy statement, a state
ment that rests on the premise that a Guideline range
may be one of many factors that determine the sentence
imposed.
Thus, the text and purpose of the three relevant
sources—the statute, the Rule, and the governing policy

