8

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment

§3582(c)(2) to (C) agreements will result in certain defen
dants receiving an “unjustified windfall” is therefore mis
placed. See Brief for United States 40, 43.
Furthermore, in cases where the Government believes
that even the limited sentence reduction authorized by
§3582(c)(2) and USSG §1B1.10 improperly benefits the
defendant, it can argue to the district court that the court
should not exercise its discretion under the statute to
reduce the sentence.6 See Dillon, 560 U. S., at ___ (slip
op., at 9) (noting that, in applying §3582(c)(2), the court
must “consider whether the authorized reduction is war
ranted, either in whole or in part, according to the factors
set forth in [18 U. S. C.] §3553(a)”).
Finally, if the Government wants to ensure ex ante that
a particular defendant’s term of imprisonment will not be
reduced later, the solution is simple enough: Nothing
prevents the Government from negotiating with a defen
dant to secure a waiver of his statutory right to seek sen
tence reduction under §3582(c)(2), just as it often does
with respect to a defendant’s rights to appeal and collater
ally attack the conviction and sentence.7 See 18 U. S. C.
§3742; 28 U. S. C. §2255 (2006 ed., Supp. III); see also
App. 28a–29a (provision in Freeman’s agreement ex
pressly waiving both rights). In short, application of
——————
6 For example, the district court might decline to reduce the term of
imprisonment of an eligible defendant in light of the Government’s
argument that it made significant concessions in the agreement—such
as dropping a charge or forgoing a future charge—and therefore it
would not have agreed to a lower sentence at the time the agreement
was made.
7 The opposite would not necessarily be true, however, under the
reading of §3582(c)(2) proposed by the Government and the dissent. If
a district court has no statutory authority to reduce a term of impris
onment imposed pursuant to a (C) agreement—because such a term is
never “based on” a Guidelines sentencing range within the meaning of
§3582(c)(2)—it is not clear how the parties could effectively confer that
authority upon the court by the terms of their agreement.

