10

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment

46-month figure at the bottom end of this sentencing range,
in combination with the 60-month mandatory minimum
sentence under §924(c)(1)(A), to establish his 106-month
sentence.9 Thus the first of §3582(c)(2)’s conditions is
satisfied—Freeman’s term of imprisonment is “based on” a
Guidelines sentencing range.
In 2007 the Commission amended the Guidelines provi
sions applicable to cocaine base offenses, such that the
offense level applicable to the quantity of drugs for which
Freeman was charged was lowered from 22 to 20. See
App. 142a–143a (Sealed); USSG Supp. App. C, Amdt. 706.
Taking into account the three-level reduction for accep
tance of responsibility, Freeman’s recalculated offense
level is 17, resulting in an amended sentencing range of 37
to 46 months. Thus there can be no doubt that the Guide
lines sentencing range originally used to establish Free
man’s term of imprisonment “has subsequently been
——————
9 The dissent asks whether Freeman would be eligible for sentence
reduction if the agreement had called for a 53-month term of impris
onment. See post, at 7. Though that question is not presented by the
facts of this case, the answer is evident from the foregoing discussion: If
the agreement itself made clear that the parties arrived at the 53
month term of imprisonment by determining the sentencing range ap
plicable to Freeman’s offenses and then halving the 106-month figure
at its low end, he would have been eligible under §3582(c)(2). See
United States v. Franklin, 600 F. 3d 893, 897 (CA7 2010) (noting that a
(C) agreement would not foreclose relief under §3582(c)(2) if it provided
that the term of imprisonment was to be 40 percent below the low end
of the applicable sentencing range).
Of course, if a (C) agreement “does not contain any references to the
Guidelines,” post, at 8 (ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting), there is no way of
knowing whether the agreement “use[d] a Guidelines sentencing range
to establish the term of imprisonment,” supra, at 6, and a prisoner
sentenced under such an agreement would not be eligible. It is there
fore unclear why the dissent believes that the straightforward inquiry
called for by the rule I apply today will “foster confusion” among the
lower courts. Post, at 7. This approach is consistent with the one
already taken by most Courts of Appeals, see n. 3, supra, and there
is no indication that they have found it unpalatable, cf. post, at 9.

