2

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

tenced to a term of imprisonment “based on” a subse­
quently reduced sentencing range.
I agree with JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR that “the term of im­
prisonment imposed pursuant to a (C) agreement is, for
purposes of §3582(c)(2), ‘based on’ the agreement itself.”
Ante, at 3. In this case, Freeman executed a written plea
agreement in which the parties “agree[d] that a sentence
of 106 months’ incarceration [was] the appropriate disposi­
tion.” App. 26a. Because the plea agreement was entered
pursuant to Rule 11(c)(1)(C), that proposed sentence be­
came binding on the District Court once it accepted the
agreement. See Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 11(c)(1)(C) (the
parties’ “request” for “a specific sentence” “binds the court
once the court accepts the plea agreement”). As a result,
when determining the sentence to impose on Freeman, the
District Court needed to consult one thing and one thing
only—the plea agreement. See ante, at 2 (opinion of
SOTOMAYOR, J.) (“At the moment of sentencing, the court
simply implements the terms of the agreement it has al­
ready accepted”).
I also agree with JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR that the “term of
imprisonment imposed by the sentencing judge is dictated
by the terms of the agreement entered into by the par­
ties, not the judge’s Guidelines calculation,” and that
“[a]l-lowing district courts later to reduce a term of impris­
onment simply because the court itself considered the
Guidelines in deciding whether to accept the agreement
would transform §3582(c)(2) into a mechanism by which
courts could rewrite the terms of (C) agreements in ways
not contemplated by the parties.” Ante, at 3.
But then comes the O. Henry twist: After cogently ex­
plaining why a Rule 11(c)(1)(C) sentence is based on the
plea agreement, JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR diverges from that
straightforward conclusion and holds that Freeman never­
theless satisfies the threshold requirement in §3582(c)(2).
According to her opinion, if a Rule 11(c)(1)(C) “agreement

