Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

vised to determine whether and to what extent a sentence
reduction is warranted in any particular case. They may,
when considering a §3582(c)(2) motion, take into account
a defendant’s decision to enter into an 11(c)(1)(C) agree
ment. If the district court, based on its experience and
informed judgment, concludes the agreement led to a more
lenient sentence than would otherwise have been imposed,
it can deny the motion, for the statute permits but does
not require the court to reduce a sentence. This discretion
ensures that §3582(c)(2) does not produce a windfall.
As noted, the opinion concurring in the judgment sug
gests an intermediate position. That opinion argues that
in general defendants sentenced following 11(c)(1)(C)
agreements are ineligible for §3582(c)(2) relief, but relief
may be sought where the plea agreement itself contem
plates sentence reduction. The statute, however, calls for
an inquiry into the reasons for a judge’s sentence, not the
reasons that motivated or informed the parties. If, as the
Government suggests, the judge’s decision to impose a
sentence is based on the agreement, then §3582(c)(2)
does not apply. The parties cannot by contract upset an
otherwise-final sentence. And the consequences of this
erroneous rule would be significant. By allowing modifica
tion only when the terms of the agreement contemplate it,
the proposed rule would permit the very disparities the
Sentencing Reform Act seeks to eliminate.
The Act aims to create a comprehensive sentencing
scheme in which those who commit crimes of similar
severity under similar conditions receive similar sen
tences.
See 18 U. S. C. §3553(a)(6); K. Stith & J.
Cabranes, Fear of Judging 104–105 (1998).
Section
3582(c)(2) contributes to that goal by ensuring that district
courts may adjust sentences imposed pursuant to a range
that the Commission concludes are too severe, out of step
with the seriousness of the crime and the sentencing
ranges of analogous offenses, and inconsistent with the

