Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment

(C) agreement does not mean that the term of imprison
ment imposed by the court is “based on” a particular
Guidelines sentencing range. The term of imprisonment
imposed by the sentencing judge is dictated by the terms
of the agreement entered into by the parties, not the
judge’s Guidelines calculation. In short, the term of im
prisonment imposed pursuant to a (C) agreement is, for
purposes of §3582(c)(2), “based on” the agreement itself.
To hold otherwise would be to contravene the very pur
pose of (C) agreements—to bind the district court and
allow the Government and the defendant to determine
what sentence he will receive. Although district courts
ordinarily have significant discretion in determining the
appropriate sentence to be imposed on a particular defen
dant, see Gall, 552 U. S., at 46, under Rule 11(c)(1)(C) it
is the parties’ agreement that determines the sentence to
be imposed, see Advisory Committee’s Notes on 1999
Amendments to Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 11, 18 U. S. C. App.,
p. 1570 (2000 ed.) (noting that, under a (C) agreement,
“the government and defense have actually agreed on
what amounts to an appropriate sentence . . . . [T]his
agreement is binding on the court once the court accepts
it”). To be sure, the court “retains absolute discretion
whether to accept a plea agreement,” ibid., but once it
does it is bound at sentencing to give effect to the parties’
agreement as to the appropriate term of imprisonment.
Allowing district courts later to reduce a term of im
prisonment simply because the court itself considered
the Guidelines in deciding whether to accept the agree
ment would transform §3582(c)(2) into a mechanism by
which courts could rewrite the terms of (C) agreements in
ways not contemplated by the parties. At the time that
§3582(c)(2) was enacted in 1984, it was already well un
derstood that, under Rule 11, the term of imprisonment
stipulated in a (C) agreement bound the district court once
it accepted the agreement. See Fed. Rule Crim. Proc.

