Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
place, §1B1.10(b)(1). Pp. 5–7.
(b) Petitioner’s sentencing hearing transcript reveals that the Dis
trict Court expressed its independent judgment that the sentence
was appropriate in light of the applicable Guidelines range. Its deci
sion was therefore “based on” that range within §3582(c)(2)’s mean
ing. P. 7.
(c) The Government’s argument that sentences that follow an
11(c)(1)(C) agreement are based only on the agreement itself and not
the Guidelines, and are therefore ineligible for §3582(c)(2) reduction,
must be rejected. Even when a defendant enters into an 11(c)(1)(C)
agreement, the judge’s decision to accept the plea and impose the
recommended sentence is likely to be based on the Guidelines; and
when it is, the defendant should be eligible to seek §3582(c)(2) relief.
Pp. 7–10.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR concluded that if an agreement under Federal
Rule of Criminal Procedure 11(c)(1)(C) ((C) agreement) expressly uses
a Guidelines sentencing range applicable to the charged offense to es
tablish the term of imprisonment, and that range is subsequently
lowered by the Sentencing Commission, the prison term is “based on”
the range employed and the defendant is eligible for sentence reduc
tion under 18 U. S. C. §3582(c)(2). Pp. 1–11.
(a) The term of imprisonment imposed by a district court pursuant
to a (C) agreement is “based on” the agreement itself, not on the
judge’s calculation of the Guidelines sentencing range. To hold oth
erwise would be to contravene the very purpose of (C) agreements—to
bind the district court and allow the Government and the defendant
to determine what sentence he will receive. Pp. 1–5.
(b) This does not mean, however, that a term of imprisonment im
posed under a (C) agreement can never be reduced under §3582(c)(2).
Because the very purpose of a (C) agreement is to allow the parties to
determine the defendant’s sentence, when the agreement itself em
ploys a particular Guidelines sentencing range applicable to the
charged offenses in establishing the term of imprisonment imposed
by the district court, the defendant is eligible to have his sentence re
duced under §3582(c)(2). Pp. 5–9.
(c) Freeman is eligible. The offense level and criminal history cate
gory set forth in his (C) agreement produce a sentencing range of 46
to 57 months; it is evident that the parties combined the 46-month
figure at the low end of the range with the 60-month mandatory
minimum sentence under §924(c)(1)(A) to establish the 106-month
sentence called for in the agreement. Under the amended Guide
lines, however, the applicable sentencing range is now 37 to 46
months. Therefore, Freeman’s prison term is “based on” a sentencing
range that “has subsequently been lowered by the Sentencing Com

