2

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
Because the amendment’s effect was to reduce Freeman’s applicable
sentencing range to 37 to 46 months plus the consecutive 60-month
mandatory minimum, he moved for a sentence reduction under
§3582(c)(2). However, the District Court denied the motion, and the
Sixth Circuit affirmed because its precedent rendered defendants
sentenced pursuant to 11(c)(1)(C) agreements ineligible for
§3582(c)(2) relief, barring a miscarriage of justice or mutual mistake.

Held: The judgment is reversed, and the case is remanded.
355 Fed. Appx. 1, reversed and remanded.
JUSTICE KENNEDY, joined by JUSTICE GINSBURG, JUSTICE BREYER,
and JUSTICE KAGAN, concluded that defendants who enter into
11(c)(1)(C) agreements that specify a particular sentence as a condi
tion of the guilty plea may be eligible for relief under §3582(c)(2). Pp.
5–10.
(a) The text and purpose of the statute, Rule 11(c)(1)(C), and the
governing Guidelines policy statements compel the conclusion that
the district court has authority to entertain §3582(c)(2) motions when
sentences are imposed in light of the Guidelines, even if the defen
dant enters into an 11(c)(1)(C) agreement. The district judge must,
in every case, impose “a sentence sufficient, but not greater than nec
essary, to comply with” the purposes of federal sentencing, in light of
the Guidelines and other relevant factors. §3553(a). The Guidelines
provide a framework or starting point—a basis, in the term’s com
monsense meaning—for the judge’s exercise of discretion. Rule
11(c)(1)(C) permits the defendant and the prosecutor to agree on a
specific sentence, but that agreement does not discharge the district
court’s independent obligation to exercise its discretion. In the usual
sentencing, whether following trial or plea, the judge’s reliance on the
Guidelines will be apparent when the judge uses the Guidelines
range as the starting point in the analysis and imposes a sentence
within the range. Gall v. United States, 552 U. S. 38, 49. Even
where the judge varies from the recommended range, id., at 50, if the
judge uses the sentencing range as the beginning point to explain the
deviation, then the Guidelines are in a real sense a basis for the sen
tence. The parties’ recommended sentence binds the court “once the
court accepts the plea agreement,” Rule 11(c)(1)(C), but the relevant
policy statement forbids the judge to accept an agreement without
first giving due consideration to the applicable Guidelines sentencing
range, even if the parties recommend a specific sentence as a condi
tion of the guilty plea, see U. S. Sentencing Commission, Guidelines
Manual §6B1.2. This approach finds further support in the policy
statement applicable to §3582(c)(2) motions, which instructs the dis
trict court in modifying a sentence to substitute the retroactive
amendment, but to leave all original Guidelines determinations in

