4

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

According to the concurrence, if the parties simply “con­
sider[ ] the Guidelines” or “negotiate . . . by reference”
to them, the defendant is not eligible for a sentence reduc­
tion. Ante, at 4. If, however, the agreement sets forth a
specific term but it is somehow “clear that the basis for the
specified term is a Guidelines sentencing range,” then the
defendant is eligible for a sentence reduction. Ante, at 6.
This head-scratching distinction between negotiating by
reference to the Guidelines and using them as a basis for
the specified term makes for an unworkable test that can
yield only arbitrary results.
The confusion is compounded by the varying standards
in the concurrence. Sometimes the test is whether an
agreement “expressly uses” a Guidelines sentencing range,
ante, at 1, 6; see ante, at 7 (“explicitly employs”). Other
times the test is whether such use is “evident,” ante, at 6,
9; see ante, at 10, n. 9 (“clear”). A third option is whether
the agreement “indicate[s] the parties’ intent to base the
term of imprisonment on a particular Guideline range.”
Ante, at 7, n. 5 (emphasis added).
The error in the concurring opinion is largely attribut­
able to a mistaken shift in analysis. In the first half of the
opinion, the inquiry properly looks to what the judge does:
He is, after all, the one who imposes the sentence. After
approving the agreement, the judge considers only the
fixed term in the agreement, so the sentence he actually
imposes is not “based on” the Guidelines.
In the second half of the opinion, however, the analysis
suddenly shifts, and focuses on the parties: Did they “use”
or “employ” the Guidelines in arriving at the term in their
agreement?
But §3582(c)(2) is concerned only with
whether a defendant “has been sentenced to a term of
imprisonment based on a sentencing range.” Only a court
can sentence a defendant, so there is no basis for examin­
ing why the parties settled on a particular prison term.
This conclusion dovetails with USSG §1B1.10(b)(1)—

