Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment

§3582(c)(2) to an eligible defendant does not—and will
not—deprive the Government of the benefit of its bargain.
III
In order to conclude that Freeman is eligible for sen
tence reduction under §3582(c)(2), the plea agreement
between Freeman and the Government must use a Guide
lines sentencing range that has subsequently been low
ered by the Sentencing Commission to establish the term
of imprisonment imposed by the District Court. Free
man’s agreement does.
The agreement states that Freeman “agrees to have his
sentence determined pursuant to the Sentencing Guide
lines,” App. 28a, and that 106 months is the total term of
imprisonment to be imposed, id., at 26a. The agreement
also makes clear that the §924(c)(1)(A) count to which
Freeman agrees to plead guilty carries a minimum sen
tence of 60 months, “which must be served consecutively
to” any other sentence imposed. Id., at 27a. This leaves
46 months unaccounted for. The agreement sets Free
man’s offense level at 19, as determined by the quantity of
drugs and his acceptance of responsibility, and states that
the parties anticipate a criminal history category of IV.
Id., at 27a–28a. Looking to the Sentencing Guidelines,
an offense level of 19 and a criminal history category of
IV produce a sentencing range of 46 to 57 months.8 See
USSG ch. 5, pt. A (sentencing table). Therefore, contrary
to the dissent’s curious suggestion that “there is no way
of knowing what th[e] sentence was ‘based on,’ ” post, at 6,
it is evident that Freeman’s agreement employed the
——————
8 Because it is the parties’ agreement that controls in the (C) agree
ment context, see supra, at 3–4, even if the District Court had calcu
lated the range differently than the parties, see post, at 8 (ROBERTS,
C. J., dissenting), Freeman would still be eligible for resentencing, as
long as the parties’ chosen range was one that was “subsequently . . .
lowered by the Sentencing Commission,” §3582(c)(2).

