Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

the Sentencing Commission’s policy statement governing
whether a defendant is eligible for a reduction under
§3582(c)(2). As we explained last Term, §3582(c)(2) re­
quires a district court “to follow the Commission’s instruc­
tions in §1B1.10 to determine the prisoner’s eligibility
for a sentence modification.” Dillon v. United States,
560 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 9). According to
§1B1.10(b)(1), the court must first determine “the
amended guideline range that would have been applicable
to the defendant” if the retroactively amended provision
had been in effect at the time of his sentencing. “In mak­
ing such determination, the court shall substitute only
the amendments . . . for the corresponding guideline pro­
visions that were applied when the defendant was sen
tenced.” USSG §1B1.10(b)(1), p. s. (emphasis added).
As noted, the District Court sentenced Freeman pursu­
ant to the term specified by his plea agreement; it never
“applied” a Guidelines provision in imposing his term of
imprisonment. The fact that the court may have “use[d]
the Guidelines as a yardstick in deciding whether to ac­
cept a (C) agreement does not mean that the term of im­
prisonment imposed by the court is ‘based on’ a particular
Guidelines sentencing range.” Ante, at 2–3 (opinion of
SOTOMAYOR, J.). Even if the Guidelines were “used” or
“employed” by the parties in arriving at the Rule
11(c)(1)(C) sentencing term, they were not “applied when
the defendant was sentenced.” Once the District Court
accepted the agreement, all that was later “applied” was
the sentence set forth in that agreement.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR is wrong to assert that her stan­
dard “does not rewrite the plea agreement” but rather
“enforces the agreement’s terms.” Ante, at 7. According to
the concurrence, “[w]hen a (C) agreement explicitly em­
ploys a particular Guidelines sentencing range to establish
the term of imprisonment, the agreement itself demon­
strates the parties’ intent that the imposed term of im­

