8

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

What if the plea agreement does not contain any refer­
ences to the Guidelines—not even the partial and tenta­
tive Guidelines calculations in Freeman’s agreement—but
the binding sentence selected by the parties corresponds
exactly to the low end of the applicable Guidelines range?
Is it “evident” in that case that the agreement is based on
a sentencing range?
What if the District Court calculates the applicable
Guidelines range differently than the parties? This is no
academic hypothetical. See, e.g., United States v. Frank
lin, 600 F. 3d 893, 896–897 (CA7 2010) (noting that “the
district court settled on a higher guidelines range than
that contemplated in the [Rule 11(c)(1)(C)] plea agree­
ment”). Is a Rule 11(c)(1)(C) sentence still subject to
reduction if the parties relied on the wrong sentencing
range? JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s surprising answer is “yes,”
see ante, at 9, n. 8, even though the governing Guide­
lines provision specifies that a defendant is only eligible
for sentence reduction if the amended Guideline has “the
effect of lowering the defendant’s applicable guideline
range”—presumably the correct applicable guideline
range. See USSG §1B1.10(a)(2), p. s. Relying on error is
just one unforeseen consequence of looking not to the
specified term in a Rule 11(c)(1)(C) agreement, but instead
trying to reconstruct what led the parties to agree to that
term in the first place.
This confusion will invite the very thing JUSTICE
SOTOMAYOR claims to disavow: a “free-ranging search” by
district courts “through the parties’ negotiating history in
search of a Guidelines sentencing range that might have
been relevant to the agreement.” Ante, at 5. This is par­
——————
clear” that the parties arrived at the 53-month figure by determining
the sentencing range and then halving the range’s low end—106
months—then the sentence could be reduced. Ante, at 10, n. 9. Does
the 53-month figure itself make that clear? What if the figure is 26½
months?

