OCTOBER TERM, 2010

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–10245.

Argued February 23, 2011—Decided June 23, 2011

In order to reduce unwarranted federal sentencing disparities, the Sen
tencing Reform Act of 1984 authorizes the United States Sentencing
Commission to create, and to retroactively amend, Sentencing Guide
lines to inform judicial discretion. Title 18 U. S. C. §3582(c)(2) per
mits a defendant who was sentenced to a term of imprisonment
“based on” a Guidelines sentencing range that has subsequently been
lowered by retroactive amendment to move for a sentence reduction.
This case concerns §3582(c)(2)’s application to cases in which the de
fendant and the Government have entered into a plea agreement un
der Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 11(c)(1)(C), which permits
the parties to “agree that a specific sentence or sentencing range is
the appropriate disposition of the case,” and “binds the court [to the
agreed-upon sentence] once [it] accepts the plea agreement.”
Petitioner Freeman was indicted for various crimes, including pos
sessing with intent to distribute cocaine base. 21 U. S. C. §841(a)(1).
He entered into an 11(c)(1)(C) agreement to plead guilty to all
charges; in return the Government agreed to a 106-month sentence.
The agreement states that the parties independently reviewed the
applicable Guidelines, noted that Freeman agreed to have his sen
tence determined under the Guidelines, and reflected the parties’ un
derstanding that the agreed-to sentence corresponded with the
minimum sentence suggested by the applicable Guidelines range of
46 to 57 months, along with a consecutive mandatory minimum of 60
months for possessing a firearm in furtherance of a drug-trafficking
crime under 18 U. S. C. §924(c)(1)(A). Three years after the District
Court accepted the plea agreement, the Commission issued a retroac
tive Guidelines amendment to remedy the significant disparity be
tween the penalties for cocaine base and powder cocaine offenses.

