(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

DEPIERRE v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIRST CIRCUIT
No. 09–1533. Argued February 28, 2011—Decided June 9, 2011
In 1986, increasing public concern over the dangers of illicit drugs—in
particular, the new phenomenon of crack cocaine—prompted Con
gress to revise the penalties for criminal offenses involving cocaine
related substances. Following several hearings, Congress enacted
the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 (ADAA). The statute provides a
mandatory 10-year minimum sentence for certain drug offenses in
volving “(ii) 5 kilograms or more of a mixture or substance containing
a detectable amount of . . . (II) cocaine, its salts, optical and geometric
isomers, and salts of isomers, [or] (iii) 50 grams or more of a mixture
or substance described in clause (ii) which contains cocaine base.” 21
U. S. C. §841(b)(1)(A). The statute similarly provides a 5-year sen
tence for offenses involving 500 grams of a substance enumerated in
clause (ii) or 5 grams of one outlined in clause (iii). §841(b)(1)(B).
In 2005, petitioner DePierre was indicted for distribution of 50
grams or more of cocaine base under §§841(a)(1) and (b)(1)(A)(iii).
The District Court declined DePierre’s request that the jury be in
structed that, in order to find DePierre guilty of distribution of “co
caine base,” it must find that his offense involved crack cocaine.
DePierre was convicted, and the court sentenced him to the 120
months in prison mandated by the statute. The First Circuit af
firmed, rejecting DePierre’s argument that §841(b)(1)(A)(iii) should
be read only to apply to offenses involving crack cocaine. Instead, it
adhered to its precedent holding that “cocaine base” refers to all
forms of cocaine base.
Held: “[C]ocaine base,” as used in §841(b)(1), means not just “crack co
caine,” but cocaine in its chemically basic form. Pp. 7–18.
(a) The most natural reading of “cocaine base” in clause (iii) is co
caine in its chemically basic form—i.e., the molecule found in crack


2

DEPIERRE v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
cocaine, freebase, and coca paste. On its plain terms, then, “cocaine
base” reaches more broadly than just crack cocaine. In arguing to the
contrary, DePierre urges the Court to stray far from the statute’s
text, which nowhere contains the term “crack cocaine.” The Govern
ment’s reading, on the other hand, follows the words Congress chose
to use. DePierre is correct that “cocaine base” is technically redun
dant—chemically speaking, cocaine is a base. But Congress had good
reason to use “cocaine base”—to make clear that clause (iii) does not
apply to offenses involving cocaine hydrochloride (i.e., powder co
caine) or other nonbasic cocaine-related substances. At the time the
statute was enacted, “cocaine” was commonly used to refer to powder
cocaine, and the scientific and medical literature often uses “cocaine”
to refer to all cocaine-related substances, including ones that are not
chemically basic. Pp. 7–10.
(b) This reading of “cocaine base” is also consistent with
§841(b)(1)’s somewhat confusing structure. Subsection (b)(1)(A)(ii)(II)
lists “cocaine,” along with “its salts, optical and geometric isomers,
and salts of isomers,” as elements subject to clause (ii)’s higher quan
tity threshold. DePierre is correct that, because “cocaine” and “co
caine base” both refer to chemically basic cocaine, offenses involving
a substance containing such cocaine will always be penalized accord
ing to the lower quantity threshold of clause (iii), and never the
higher threshold clause (ii) establishes for mixtures and substances
containing “cocaine.” But the Court does not agree that the term “co
caine” in clause (ii) is therefore superfluous—in light of the structure
of subclause (II), “cocaine” is needed as the reference point for “salts”
and “isomers,” which would otherwise be meaningless.
The term “cocaine” in clause (ii) also performs another critical func
tion. Clause (iii) penalizes offenses involving a mixture or substance
“described in clause (ii) which contains cocaine base.” Thus, clause
(ii) imposes a penalty for offenses involving cocaine-related sub
stances generally, and clause (iii) imposes a higher penalty for a sub
set of those substances—the ones that “contai[n] cocaine base.” For
this structure to work, however, §841(b)(1) must “describ[e] in clause
(ii)” substances containing chemically basic cocaine, which then com
prise the subset described in clause (iii). Congress thus had good
reason to include the term “cocaine” in clause (ii), and the slight in
consistency created by its use of “cocaine base” in clause (iii) is insuf
ficient reason to adopt DePierre’s interpretation. Pp. 10–13.
(c) DePierre’s additional arguments are unpersuasive. First, the
records of the 1986 congressional hearings do not support his conten
tion that Congress was exclusively concerned with offenses involving
crack cocaine. Second, reading “cocaine base” to mean chemically ba
sic cocaine, rather than crack cocaine, does not lead to an absurd re


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
sult. Third, the fact that “cocaine base” in the Federal Sentencing
Guidelines is defined as “crack” does not require that the statutory
term be interpreted the same way. Fourth, the statute is sufficiently
clear that the rule of lenity does not apply in DePierre’s favor.
Pp. 13–18.
599 F. 3d 25, affirmed.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, THOMAS, GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, and KAGAN,
JJ., joined, and in which SCALIA, J., joined except for Part III–A.
SCALIA, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the
judgment.

