(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF MICHIGAN
No. 09–150.

Argued October 5, 2010—Decided February 28, 2011

Michigan police dispatched to a gas station parking lot found Anthony
Covington mortally wounded. Covington told them that he had been
shot by respondent Bryant outside Bryant’s house and had then
driven himself to the lot. At trial, which occurred before Crawford v.
Washington, 541 U. S. 36, and Davis v. Washington, 547 U. S. 813,
were decided, the officers testified about what Covington said. Bry
ant was found guilty of, inter alia, second-degree murder. Ulti
mately, the Michigan Supreme Court reversed his conviction, holding
that the Sixth Amendment’s Confrontation Clause, as explained in
Crawford and Davis, rendered Covington’s statements inadmissible
testimonial hearsay.
Held: Covington’s identification and description of the shooter and the
location of the shooting were not testimonial statements because they
had a “primary purpose . . . to enable police assistance to meet an on
going emergency.” Davis, 547 U. S., at 822. Therefore, their admis
sion at Bryant’s trial did not violate the Confrontation Clause. Pp. 5–
32.
(a) In Crawford, this Court held that in order for testimonial evi
dence to be admissible, the Sixth Amendment “demands . . . unavail
ability and a prior opportunity for cross-examination.” 541 U. S., at
68. Crawford did not “spell out a comprehensive definition of ‘testi
monial,’ ” but it noted that testimonial evidence includes, among
other things, “police interrogations.” Ibid. Thus, Sylvia Crawford’s
statements during a station-house interrogation about a stabbing
were testimonial, and their admission when her husband, the ac
cused, had “no opportunity” for cross-examination due to spousal
privilege made out a Sixth Amendment violation. In Davis and
Hammon, both domestic violence cases, the Court explained that
“[s]tatements are nontestimonial when made in the course of police


2

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Syllabus
interrogation under circumstances objectively indicating that the [in
terrogation’s] primary purpose . . . is to enable police assistance to
meet an ongoing emergency,” but they “are testimonial when the cir
cumstances objectively indicate that there is no such ongoing emer
gency, and that the [interrogation’s] primary purpose is to establish
or prove past events potentially relevant to later criminal prosecu
tion.” 547 U. S., at 822. Thus, a recording of a 911 call describing an
ongoing domestic disturbance was nontestimonial in Davis, where
the victim’s “elicited statements were necessary to be able to resolve
[the ongoing] emergency,” and the statements were not formal. Id.,
at 827. But the statements in Hammon were testimonial, where the
victim was interviewed after the event in a room separate from her
husband and “deliberately recounted, in response to police question
ing” the past events. Id., at 830. Here, the context is a nondomestic
dispute, with the “ongoing emergency” extending beyond an initial
victim to a potential threat to the responding police and the public.
This context requires additional clarification of what Davis meant by
“the primary purpose of the interrogation is to enable police assis
tance to meet an ongoing emergency.” Id., at 822. Pp. 5–12.
(b) To make the “primary purpose” determination, the Court must
objectively evaluate the circumstances in which the encounter be
tween the individual and the police occurs and the parties’ state
ments and actions. Pp. 12–23.
(1) The primary purpose inquiry is objective. The circumstances
in which an encounter occurs—e.g., at or near a crime scene versus at
a police station, during an ongoing emergency or afterwards—are
clearly matters of objective fact. And the relevant inquiry into the
parties’ statements and actions is not the subjective or actual purpose
of the particular parties, but the purpose that reasonable partici
pants would have had, as ascertained from the parties’ statements
and actions and the circumstances in which the encounter occurred.
P. 13.
(2) The existence of an “ongoing emergency” at the time of the
encounter is among the most important circumstances informing the
interrogation’s “primary purpose.” See, e.g., Davis, 547 U. S., at 828–
830. An emergency focuses the participants not on “prov[ing] past
events potentially relevant to later criminal prosecution,” id., at 822,
but on “end[ing] a threatening situation,” id., at 832. The Michigan
Supreme Court failed to appreciate that whether an emergency exists
and is ongoing is a highly context-dependent inquiry. An assessment
of whether an emergency threatening the police and public is ongoing
cannot narrowly focus on whether the threat to the first victim has
been neutralized because the threat to the first responders and public
may continue. The State Supreme Court also did not appreciate that


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
an emergency’s duration and scope may depend in part on the type of
weapon involved; the court below relied on Davis and Hammon,
where the assailants used their fists, as controlling the scope of an
emergency involving a gun. A victim’s medical condition is important
to the primary purpose inquiry to the extent that it sheds light on the
victim’s ability to have any purpose at all in responding to police
questions and on the likelihood that any such purpose would be a tes
timonial one. It also provides important context for first responders
to judge the existence and magnitude of a continuing threat to the
victim, themselves, and the public. This does not mean that an
emergency lasts the entire time that a perpetrator is on the loose, but
trial courts can determine in the first instance when an interrogation
transitions from nontestimonial to testimonial. Finally, whether an
ongoing emergency exists is simply one factor informing the ultimate
inquiry regarding an interrogation’s “primary purpose.” Another is
the encounter’s informality. Formality suggests the absence of an
emergency, but informality does not necessarily indicate the presence
of an emergency or the lack of testimonial intent. The facts here—
the questioning occurred in an exposed, public area, before emer
gency medical services arrived, and in a disorganized fashion—
distinguish this case from Crawford’s formal station-house interroga
tion. Pp. 14–20.
(3) The statements and actions of both the declarant and interro
gators also provide objective evidence of the interrogation’s primary
purpose. Looking to the contents of both the questions and the an
swers ameliorates problems that could arise from looking solely to
one participant, since both interrogators and declarants may have
mixed motives. Police officers’ dual responsibilities as both first re
sponders and criminal investigators may lead them to act with differ
ent motives simultaneously or in quick succession. And during an
ongoing emergency, victims may want the threat to end, but may not
envision prosecution. Alternatively, a severely injured victim may
have no purpose at all in answering questions. Taking into account
such injuries does not make the inquiry subjective. The inquiry still
focuses on the understanding and purpose of a reasonable victim in
the actual victim’s circumstances, which prominently include the vic
tim’s physical state. Objectively ascertaining the primary purpose of
the interrogation by examining the statements and actions of all par
ticipants is also consistent with this Court’s prior holdings. E.g.,
Davis, 547 U. S., at 822–823, n. 1. Pp. 20–23.
(c) Here, the circumstances of the encounter as well as the state
ments and actions of Covington and the police objectively indicate
that the interrogation’s “primary purpose” was “to enable police as
sistance to meet an ongoing emergency,” 547 U. S., at 822. The cir


4

MICHIGAN v. BRYANT
Syllabus
cumstances of the interrogation involved an armed shooter, whose
motive for and location after the shooting were unknown and who
had mortally wounded Covington within a few blocks and a few min
utes of the location where police found Covington. Unlike the emer
gencies in Davis and Hammon, this dispute’s potential scope and
thus the emergency encompassed a potential threat to the police and
the public. And since this case involved a gun, the physical separa
tion that was sufficient to end the emergency in Hammon was not
necessarily sufficient to end the threat here. Informed by the circum
stances of the ongoing emergency, the Court now turns to determin
ing the “primary purpose of the interrogation” as evidenced by the
statements and actions of Covington and the police. The circum
stances of the encounter provide important context for understanding
Covington’s statements to the police. When he responded to their
questions, he was lying in a gas station parking lot bleeding from a
mortal gunshot wound, and his answers were punctuated with ques
tions about when emergency medical services would arrive. Thus,
this Court cannot say that a person in his situation would have had a
“primary purpose” “to establish or prove past events potentially rele
vant to later criminal prosecution.” Ibid. For their part, the police
responded to a call that a man had been shot. They did not know
why, where, or when the shooting had occurred; the shooter’s loca
tion; or anything else about the crime. They asked exactly the type of
questions necessary to enable them “to meet an ongoing emergency.”
Ibid. Nothing in Covington’s responses indicated to the police that
there was no emergency or that the emergency had ended. Finally,
this situation is more similar to the informal, harried 911 call in
Davis than to the structured, station-house interview in Crawford.
The officers all arrived at different times; asked, upon arrival, what
had happened; and generally did not conduct a structured interroga
tion. The informality suggests that their primary purpose was to ad
dress what they considered to be an ongoing emergency, and the cir
cumstances lacked a formality that would have alerted Covington to
or focused him on the possible future prosecutorial use of his state
ments. Pp. 23–32.

483 Mich. 132, 768 N. W. 2d 65, vacated and remanded.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, BREYER, and ALITO, JJ., joined. THOMAS, J., filed
an opinion concurring in the judgment. SCALIA, J., and GINSBURG, J.,
filed dissenting opinions. KAGAN, J., took no part in the consideration
or decision of the case.

