OCTOBER TERM, 2011

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

REICHLE ET AL. v. HOWARDS
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE TENTH CIRCUIT
No. 11–262.

Argued March 21, 2012—Decided June 4, 2012

Petitioners Reichle and Doyle were members of a Secret Service detail
protecting Vice President Richard Cheney while he greeted members
of the public at a shopping mall. Agent Doyle overheard respondent
Howards, who was speaking into his cell phone, state that he “was
going to ask [the Vice President] how many kids he’s killed today.”
Doyle and other agents observed Howards enter the line to meet the
Vice President, tell the Vice President that his “policies in Iraq are
disgusting,” and touch the Vice President’s shoulder as the Vice President was leaving. After being briefed by Doyle, Agent Reichle interviewed and then arrested Howards, who was charged with harassment. After that charge was dismissed, Howards brought an action
against petitioners and others under 42 U. S. C. §1983 and Bivens v.
Six Unknown Fed. Narcotics Agents, 403 U. S. 388. Howards claimed
that he was arrested and searched without probable cause, in violation of the Fourth Amendment, and that the arrest violated the First
Amendment because it was made in retaliation for Howards’ criticism of the Vice President. Petitioners moved for summary judgment
on the ground that they were entitled to qualified immunity, but the
Federal District Court denied the motion. On appeal, the Tenth Circuit reversed the immunity ruling with respect to the Fourth
Amendment claim because petitioners had probable cause to arrest
Howards, but the court affirmed with regard to the First Amendment
claim. In doing so, the court rejected petitioners’ argument that, under Hartman v. Moore, 547 U. S. 250, probable cause to arrest defeats
a First Amendment retaliatory arrest claim. It concluded instead
that Hartman applied only to retaliatory prosecution claims and thus
did not upset prior Tenth Circuit precedent holding that a retaliatory
arrest violates the First Amendment even if supported by probable


2

REICHLE v. HOWARDS
Syllabus
cause.

Held: Petitioners are entitled to qualified immunity because, at the
time of Howards’ arrest, it was not clearly established that an arrest
supported by probable cause could give rise to a First Amendment violation. Pp. 5−12.
(a) Courts may grant qualified immunity on the ground that a purported right was not “clearly established” by prior case law. Pearson
v. Callahan, 555 U. S. 223, 236. To be clearly established, a right
must be sufficiently clear “that every ‘reasonable official would [have
understood] that what he is doing violates that right.’ ” Ashcroft v. alKidd, 563 U. S. ___, ___. Pp. 5−6.
(b) The “clearly established” standard is not satisfied here. This
Court has never recognized a First Amendment right to be free from
a retaliatory arrest that is supported by probable cause; nor was such
a right otherwise clearly established at the time of Howards’ arrest.
P. 6.
(c) At that time, Hartman’s impact on the Tenth Circuit’s precedent
was far from clear. Although Hartman’s facts involved only a retaliatory prosecution, reasonable law enforcement officers could have
questioned whether its rule also applied to arrests. First, Hartman
was decided against a legal backdrop that treated retaliatory arrest
claims and retaliatory prosecution claims similarly. It resolved a
Circuit split concerning the impact of probable cause on retaliatory
prosecution claims, but some of the conflicting cases involved both retaliatory prosecution and retaliatory arrest claims and made no distinction between the two when considering the relevance of probable
cause. Second, a reasonable official could have interpreted Hartman’s rationale to apply to retaliatory arrests. Like in retaliatory
prosecution cases, evidence of the presence or absence of probable
cause for the arrest will be available in virtually all retaliatory arrest
cases, and the causal link between the defendant’s alleged retaliatory
animus and the plaintiff’s injury may be tenuous. Finally, decisions
from other Circuits in the wake of Hartman support the conclusion
that, for qualified immunity purposes, it was at least arguable at the
time of Howards’ arrest that Hartman extended to retaliatory arrests. Pp. 7−12.
634 F. 3d 1131, reversed and remanded.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. GINSBURG, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which BREYER,
J., joined. KAGAN, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the
case.

