(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SACKETT ET VIR v. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

AGENCY ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–1062. Argued January 9, 2012—Decided March 21, 2012
The Clean Water Act prohibits “the discharge of any pollutant by any
person,” 33 U. S. C. §1311, without a permit, into “navigable waters,”
§1344. Upon determining that a violation has occurred, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) may either issue a compliance
order or initiate a civil enforcement action. §1319(a)(3). The resulting civil penalty may not “exceed [$37,500] per day for each violation.” §1319(d). The Government contends that the amount doubles
to $75,000 when the EPA prevails against a person who has been issued a compliance order but has failed to comply.
The Sacketts, petitioners here, received a compliance order from
the EPA, which stated that their residential lot contained navigable
waters and that their construction project violated the Act. The
Sacketts sought declarative and injunctive relief in the Federal District Court, contending that the compliance order was “arbitrary
[and] capricious” under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 5
U. S. C. §706(2)(A), and that it deprived them of due process in violation of the Fifth Amendment. The District Court dismissed the
claims for want of subject-matter jurisdiction. The Ninth Circuit affirmed, concluding that the Clean Water Act precluded preenforcement judicial review of compliance orders and that such preclusion did not violate due process.
Held: The Sacketts may bring a civil action under the APA to challenge
the issuance of the EPA’s order. Pp. 4–10.
(a) The APA provides for judicial review of “final agency action for
which there is no other adequate remedy in a court.” 5 U. S. C. §704.
The compliance order here has all the hallmarks of APA finality.
Through it, the EPA “determined” “rights or obligations,” Bennett v.


2

SACKETT v. EPA
Syllabus
Spear, 520 U. S. 154, 178, requiring the Sacketts to restore their
property according to an agency-approved plan and to give the EPA
access. Also, “legal consequences . . . flow” from the order, ibid.,
which, according to the Government’s litigating position, exposes the
Sacketts to double penalties in future enforcement proceedings. The
order also severely limits their ability to obtain a permit for their fill
from the Army Corps of Engineers, see 33 U. S. C. §1344; 33 CFR
§326.3(e)(1)(iv). Further, the order’s issuance marks the “consummation” of the agency’s decisionmaking process, Bennett, supra, at 178,
for the EPA’s findings in the compliance order were not subject to
further agency review. The Sacketts also had “no other adequate
remedy in a court,” 5 U. S. C. §704. A civil action brought by the EPA
under 33 U. S. C. §1319 ordinarily provides judicial review in such
cases, but the Sacketts cannot initiate that process. And each day
they wait, they accrue additional potential liability. Applying to the
Corps of Engineers for a permit and then filing suit under the APA if
that permit is denied also does not provide an adequate remedy for
the EPA’s action. Pp. 4–6.
(b) The Clean Water Act is not a statute that “preclude[s] judicial
review” under the APA, 5 U. S. C. §701(a)(1). The APA creates a
“presumption favoring judicial review of administrative action.”
Block v. Community Nutrition Institute, 467 U. S. 340, 349. While
this presumption “may be overcome by inferences of intent drawn
from the statutory scheme as a whole,” ibid., the Government’s arguments do not support an inference that the Clean Water Act’s statutory scheme precludes APA review. Pp. 7–10.

622 F. 3d 1139, reversed and remanded.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court. GINSBURG,
J., and ALITO, J., filed concurring opinions.

