Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash­
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–1062
_________________

CHANTELL SACKETT, ET VIR, PETITIONERS v. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY, ET AL.
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
[March 21, 2012]

JUSTICE SCALIA delivered the opinion of the Court.
We consider whether Michael and Chantell Sackett may
bring a civil action under the Administrative Procedure
Act, 5 U. S. C. §500 et seq., to challenge the issuance by
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) of an admin­
istrative compliance order under §309 of the Clean Water
Act, 33 U. S. C. §1319. The order asserts that the Sack­
etts’ property is subject to the Act, and that they have
violated its provisions by placing fill material on the prop­
erty; and on this basis it directs them immediately to
restore the property pursuant to an EPA work plan.
I
The Clean Water Act prohibits, among other things, “the
discharge of any pollutant by any person,” §1311, without
a permit, into the “navigable waters,” §1344—which the
Act defines as “the waters of the United States,” §1362(7).
If the EPA determines that any person is in violation of
this restriction, the Act directs the agency either to issue
a compliance order or to initiate a civil enforcement action.
§1319(a)(3). When the EPA prevails in a civil action, the
Act provides for “a civil penalty not to exceed [$37,500] per


2

SACKETT v. EPA
Opinion of the Court

day for each violation.”1 §1319(d). And according to the
Government, when the EPA prevails against any person
who has been issued a compliance order but has failed
to comply, that amount is increased to $75,000—up to
$37,500 for the statutory violation and up to an additional
$37,500 for violating the compliance order.
The particulars of this case flow from a dispute about
the scope of “the navigable waters” subject to this en­
forcement regime. Today we consider only whether the
dispute may be brought to court by challenging the com­
pliance order—we do not resolve the dispute on the merits.
The reader will be curious, however, to know what all
the fuss is about. In United States v. Riverside Bayview
Homes, Inc., 474 U. S. 121 (1985), we upheld a regulation
that construed “the navigable waters” to include “freshwa­
ter wetlands,” id., at 124, themselves not actually naviga­
ble, that were adjacent to navigable-in-fact waters. Later,
in Solid Waste Agency of Northern Cook Cty. v. Army
Corps of Engineers, 531 U. S. 159 (2001), we held that an
abandoned sand and gravel pit, which “seasonally ponded”
but which was not adjacent to open water, id., at 164, was
not part of the navigable waters. Then most recently, in
Rapanos v. United States, 547 U. S. 715 (2006), we consid­
ered whether a wetland not adjacent to navigable-in-fact
waters fell within the scope of the Act. Our answer was
no, but no one rationale commanded a majority of the
Court. In his separate opinion, THE CHIEF JUSTICE ex­
pressed the concern that interested parties would lack
——————
1 The

original statute set a penalty cap of $25,000 per violation per
day. The Federal Civil Penalties Inflation Adjustment Act of 1990, 104
Stat. 890, note following 28 U. S. C. §2461, as amended by the Debt
Collection Improvement Act of 1996, §3720E, 110 Stat. 1321–373, note
following 28 U. S. C. §2461, p. 1315 (Amendment), authorizes the EPA
to adjust that maximum penalty for inflation. On the basis of that
authority, the agency has raised the cap to $37,500. See 74 Fed. Reg.
626, 627 (2009).


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

guidance “on precisely how to read Congress’ limits on the
reach of the Clean Water Act” and would be left “to feel
their way on a case-by-case basis.” Id., at 758 (concurring
opinion).
The Sacketts are interested parties feeling their way.
They own a 2⁄3-acre residential lot in Bonner County,
Idaho. Their property lies just north of Priest Lake, but is
separated from the lake by several lots containing perma­
nent structures. In preparation for constructing a house,
the Sacketts filled in part of their lot with dirt and rock.
Some months later, they received from the EPA a compli­
ance order. The order contained a number of “Findings
and Conclusions,” including the following:
“1.4 [The Sacketts’ property] contains wetlands with­
in the meaning of 33 C. F. R. §328.4(8)(b); the wet­
lands meet the criteria for jurisdictional wetlands in
the 1987 ‘Federal Manual for Identifying and Deline­
ating Jurisdictional Wetlands.’
“1.5 The Site’s wetlands are adjacent to Priest Lake
within the meaning of 33 C. F. R. §328.4(8)(c). Priest
Lake is a ‘navigable water’ within the meaning of sec­
tion 502(7) of the Act, 33 U. S. C. §1362(7), and ‘wa­
ters of the United States’ within the meaning of 40
C. F. R. §232.2.
“1.6 In April and May, 2007, at times more fully
known to [the Sacketts, they] and/or persons acting on
their behalf discharged fill material into wetlands at
the Site. [They] filled approximately one half acre.
.
.
.
.
.
“1.9 By causing such fill material to enter waters of
the United States, [the Sacketts] have engaged, and
are continuing to engage, in the ‘discharge of pollu­
tants’ from a point source within the meaning of sec­
tions 301 and 502(12) of the Act, 33 U. S. C. §§1311
and 1362(12).
.
.
.
.
.


4

SACKETT v. EPA
Opinion of the Court

“1.11 [The Sacketts’] discharge of pollutants into wa­
ters of the United States at the Site without [a] per­
mit constitutes a violation of section 301 of the Act, 33
U. S. C. §1311.” App. 19–20.
On the basis of these findings and conclusions, the order
directs the Sacketts, among other things, “immediately
[to] undertake activities to restore the Site in accordance
with [an EPA-created] Restoration Work Plan” and to “provide and/or obtain access to the Site . . . [and] access to
all records and documentation related to the conditions at
the Site . . . to EPA employees and/or their designated
representatives.” Id., at 21–22, ¶¶2.1, 2.7.
The Sacketts, who do not believe that their property is
subject to the Act, asked the EPA for a hearing, but that
request was denied. They then brought this action in the
United States District Court for the District of Idaho,
seeking declaratory and injunctive relief. Their complaint
contended that the EPA’s issuance of the compliance order
was “arbitrary [and] capricious” under the Administrative
Procedure Act (APA), 5 U. S. C. §706(2)(A), and that it
deprived them of “life, liberty, or property, without due
process of law,” in violation of the Fifth Amendment. The
District Court dismissed the claims for want of subject­
matter jurisdiction, and the United States Court of Ap­
peals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed, 622 F. 3d 1139
(2010).
It concluded that the Act “preclude[s] pre­
enforcement judicial review of compliance orders,” id., at
1144, and that such preclusion does not violate the Fifth
Amendment’s due process guarantee, id., at 1147. We
granted certiorari. 564 U. S. ___ (2011).
II
The Sacketts brought suit under Chapter 7 of the APA,
which provides for judicial review of “final agency action
for which there is no other adequate remedy in a court.” 5
U. S. C. §704. We consider first whether the compliance


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

order is final agency action. There is no doubt it is agency
action, which the APA defines as including even a “failure
to act.” §§551(13), 701(b)(2). But is it final? It has all of
the hallmarks of APA finality that our opinions establish.
Through the order, the EPA “ ‘determined’ ” “ ‘rights or ob­
ligations.’ ” Bennett v. Spear, 520 U. S. 154, 178 (1997)
(quoting Port of Boston Marine Terminal Assn. v. Rederiaktiebolaget Transatlantic, 400 U. S. 62, 71 (1970)).
By reason of the order, the Sacketts have the legal obliga­
tion to “restore” their property according to an agency­
approved Restoration Work Plan, and must give the EPA
access to their property and to “records and documentation
related to the conditions at the Site.” App. 22, ¶2.7. Also,
“ ‘legal consequences . . . flow’ ” from issuance of the order.
Bennett, supra, at 178 (quoting Marine Terminal, supra,
at 71). For one, according to the Government’s current
litigating position, the order exposes the Sacketts to dou­
ble penalties in a future enforcement proceeding.2 It also
severely limits the Sacketts’ ability to obtain a permit for
their fill from the Army Corps of Engineers, see 33 U. S. C.
§1344. The Corps’ regulations provide that, once the EPA
has issued a compliance order with respect to certain
property, the Corps will not process a permit application
for that property unless doing so “is clearly appropriate.”
33 CFR §326.3(e)(1)(iv) (2011).3
The issuance of the compliance order also marks the
“ ‘consummation’ ” of the agency’s decisionmaking process.
——————
2 We do not decide today that the Government’s position is correct,
but assume the consequences of the order to be what the Government
asserts.
3 The regulation provides this consequence for “enforcement litigation
that has been initiated by other Federal . . . regulatory agencies.” 33
CFR §326.3(e)(1)(iv) (2011). The Government acknowledges, however,
that EPA’s issuance of a compliance order is considered by the Corps to
fall within the provision. Brief for Respondents 31. Here again, we
take the Government at its word without affirming that it represents a
proper interpretation of the regulation.


6

SACKETT v. EPA
Opinion of the Court

Bennett, supra, at 178 (quoting Chicago & Southern Air
Lines, Inc. v. Waterman S. S. Corp., 333 U. S. 103, 113
(1948)). As the Sacketts learned when they unsuccessfully
sought a hearing, the “Findings and Conclusions” that the
compliance order contained were not subject to further
agency review. The Government resists this conclusion,
pointing to a portion of the order that invited the Sacketts
to “engage in informal discussion of the terms and re­
quirements” of the order with the EPA and to inform the
agency of “any allegations [t]herein which [they] believe[d]
to be inaccurate.” App. 22–23, ¶2.11. But that confers no
entitlement to further agency review. The mere possibil­
ity that an agency might reconsider in light of “informal
discussion” and invited contentions of inaccuracy does not
suffice to make an otherwise final agency action nonfinal.
The APA’s judicial review provision also requires that
the person seeking APA review of final agency action have
“no other adequate remedy in a court,” 5 U. S. C. §704. In
Clean Water Act enforcement cases, judicial review ordi­
narily comes by way of a civil action brought by the EPA
under 33 U. S. C. §1319. But the Sacketts cannot initiate
that process, and each day they wait for the agency to drop
the hammer, they accrue, by the Government’s telling, an
additional $75,000 in potential liability. The other possi­
ble route to judicial review—applying to the Corps of
Engineers for a permit and then filing suit under the APA
if a permit is denied—will not serve either. The remedy
for denial of action that might be sought from one agency
does not ordinarily provide an “adequate remedy” for action already taken by another agency. The Government,
to its credit, does not seriously contend that other availa­
ble remedies alone foreclose review under §704. Instead,
the Government relies on §701(a)(1) of the APA, which
excludes APA review “to the extent that [other] statutes
preclude judicial review.” The Clean Water Act, it says, is
such a statute.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

III
Nothing in the Clean Water Act expressly precludes
judicial review under the APA or otherwise. But in de­
termining “[w]hether and to what extent a particular
statute precludes judicial review,” we do not look “only [to]
its express language.” Block v. Community Nutrition
Institute, 467 U. S. 340, 345 (1984). The APA, we have
said, creates a “presumption favoring judicial review of
administrative action,” but as with most presumptions,
this one “may be overcome by inferences of intent drawn
from the statutory scheme as a whole.” Id., at 349. The
Government offers several reasons why the statutory
scheme of the Clean Water Act precludes review.
The Government first points to 33 U. S. C. §1319(a)(3),
which provides that, when the EPA “finds that any person
is in violation” of certain portions of the Act, the agency
“shall issue an order requiring such person to comply
with [the Act], or . . . shall bring a civil action [to enforce
the Act].” The Government argues that, because Congress
gave the EPA the choice between a judicial proceeding and
an administrative action, it would undermine the Act to
allow judicial review of the latter. But that argument
rests on the question-begging premise that the relevant
difference between a compliance order and an enforcement
proceeding is that only the latter is subject to judicial
review. There are eminently sound reasons other than
insulation from judicial review why compliance orders
are useful. The Government itself suggests that they
“provid[e] a means of notifying recipients of potential vio­
lations and quickly resolving the issues through voluntary compliance.” Brief for Respondents 39. It is entirely
consistent with this function to allow judicial review when
the recipient does not choose “voluntary compliance.” The
Act does not guarantee the EPA that issuing a compliance
order will always be the most effective choice.
The Government also notes that compliance orders are


8

SACKETT v. EPA
Opinion of the Court

not self-executing, but must be enforced by the agency in
a plenary judicial action. It suggests that Congress there­
fore viewed a compliance order “as a step in the delibera­
tive process[,] . . . rather than as a coercive sanction that
itself must be subject to judicial review.” Id., at 38. But
the APA provides for judicial review of all final agency
actions, not just those that impose a self-executing sanc­
tion. And it is hard for the Government to defend its claim
that the issuance of the compliance order was just “a step
in the deliberative process” when the agency rejected the
Sacketts’ attempt to obtain a hearing and when the next
step will either be taken by the Sacketts (if they comply
with the order) or will involve judicial, not administrative,
deliberation (if the EPA brings an enforcement action). As
the text (and indeed the very name) of the compliance
order makes clear, the EPA’s “deliberation” over whether
the Sacketts are in violation of the Act is at an end; the
agency may still have to deliberate over whether it is
confident enough about this conclusion to initiate litiga­
tion, but that is a separate subject.
The Government further urges us to consider that Con­
gress expressly provided for prompt judicial review, on the
administrative record, when the EPA assesses administra­
tive penalties after a hearing, see §1319(g)(8), but did not
expressly provide for review of compliance orders. But if
the express provision of judicial review in one section of
a long and complicated statute were alone enough to overcome the APA’s presumption of reviewability for all final
agency action, it would not be much of a presumption at
all.
The cases on which the Government relies simply are
not analogous. In Block v. Community Nutrition Institute,
supra, we held that the Agricultural Marketing Agree­
ment Act of 1937, which expressly allowed milk handlers
to obtain judicial review of milk market orders, precluded
review of milk market orders in suits brought by milk


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

consumers. 467 U. S., at 345–348. Where a statute pro­
vides that particular agency action is reviewable at the
instance of one party, who must first exhaust administra­
tive remedies, the inference that it is not reviewable at the
instance of other parties, who are not subject to the admin­
istrative process, is strong. In United States v. Erika, Inc.,
456 U. S. 201 (1982), we held that the Medicare statute,
which expressly provided for judicial review of awards
under Part A, precluded review of awards under Part B.
Id., at 206–208. The strong parallel between the award
provisions in Part A and Part B of the Medicare statute
does not exist between the issuance of a compliance order
and the assessment of administrative penalties under the
Clean Water Act. And in United States v. Fausto, 484
U. S. 439 (1988), we held that the Civil Service Reform
Act, which expressly excluded certain “nonpreference”
employees from the statute’s review scheme, precluded
review at the instance of those employees in a separate
Claims Court action. Id., at 448–449. Here, there is no
suggestion that Congress has sought to exclude compli­
ance-order recipients from the Act’s review scheme; quite
to the contrary, the Government’s case is premised on the
notion that the Act’s primary review mechanisms are open
to the Sacketts.
Finally, the Government notes that Congress passed the
Clean Water Act in large part to respond to the inefficien­
cy of then-existing remedies for water pollution. Compli­
ance orders, as noted above, can obtain quick remediation
through voluntary compliance. The Government warns
that the EPA is less likely to use the orders if they are
subject to judicial review. That may be true—but it will be
true for all agency actions subjected to judicial review.
The APA’s presumption of judicial review is a repudiation
of the principle that efficiency of regulation conquers all.
And there is no reason to think that the Clean Water Act
was uniquely designed to enable the strong-arming of


10

SACKETT v. EPA
Opinion of the Court

regulated parties into “voluntary compliance” without the
opportunity for judicial review—even judicial review of the
question whether the regulated party is within the EPA’s
jurisdiction. Compliance orders will remain an effective
means of securing prompt voluntary compliance in those
many cases where there is no substantial basis to question
their validity.
*
*
*
We conclude that the compliance order in this case is
final agency action for which there is no adequate remedy
other than APA review, and that the Clean Water Act does
not preclude that review. We therefore reverse the judg­
ment of the Court of Appeals and remand the case for
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

