2

HARPER v. MAVERICK RECORDING CO.
ALITO, J., dissenting

term “phonorecords” is defined as including only “material
objects.”1
There is a strong argument that §402(d) does not apply
in a case involving the downloading of digital music files.
This provision was adopted in 1988, well before digital
music files became available on the Internet. See Berne
Convention Implementation Act, §7, 102 Stat. 2857. The
theory of §402(d) appears to be that a person who copies
music from a material object bearing the prescribed copy
right notice is deemed to have “reason to believe that his
or her acts constituted an infringement,” §504(c)(2). But a
person who downloads a digital music file generally does
not see any material object bearing a copyright notice, and
accordingly there is force to the argument that §402(d)
does not apply. In such a case, the question would simply
be whether the infringer “was . . . aware and had . . .
reason to believe,” §504(c)(2), that the downloading was
illegal.
The Court of Appeals in the present case adopted a very
different interpretation of §402(d). The court held that the
innocent infringer defense was “foreclose[d] . . . as a mat
ter of law” because (1) respondents “provided proper notice
on each of the published phonorecords from which the
audio files were taken” before they were made available on
a file-sharing network and (2) petitioner relied solely on
§504(c)(2) and did not dispute her “access” to the phonore
cords under §402(d). 598 F. 3d 193, 198–199 (CA5 2010).
Under this interpretation, it is not necessary that the
——————
1 Specifically,

17 U. S. C. §101 provides:
“ ‘Phonorecords’ are material objects in which sounds, other than
those accompanying a motion picture or other audiovisual work, are
fixed by any method now known or later developed, and from which the
sounds can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated,
either directly or with the aid of a machine or device. The term
‘phonorecords’ includes the material object in which the sounds are first
fixed.”

