Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

determining guilt or innocence,” Neder, supra, at 9 (em
phasis deleted).
Moreover, while the rights at issue in this case are
important, they do not differ significantly in importance
from the constitutional rights at issue in other cases
where we have insisted upon a showing of individual
prejudice. See Fulminante, supra, at 306–307 (collecting
cases). Indeed, we have said that “if the defendant had
counsel and was tried by an impartial adjudicator, there is
a strong presumption that any other errors that may have
occurred” are not “structural errors.” Rose, supra, at 579.
No one here denies that defendant had counsel and was
tried by an impartial adjudicator.
In any event, the Second Circuit’s approach also cannot
be reconciled with this Court’s fourth “plain error” crite
rion, which permits an appeals court to recognize “plain
error” only if the error “seriously affect[s] the fairness,
integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings.”
Johnson, 520 U. S., at 467 (internal quotation marks
omitted). In cases applying this fourth criterion, we have
suggested that, in most circumstances, an error that does
not affect the jury’s verdict does not significantly impugn
the “fairness,” “integrity,” or “public reputation” of the
judicial process. Ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted);
Cotton, 535 U. S., at 633. The Second Circuit’s “any possi
bility, no matter how unlikely” standard, however, would
require finding a “plain error” in a case where the evi
dence supporting a conviction consisted of, say, a few days
of preenactment conduct along with several continuous
years of identical postenactment conduct. Given the tiny
risk that the jury would have based its conviction upon
those few preenactment days alone, a refusal to recognize
such an error as a “plain error” (and to set aside the ver
dict) is most unlikely to cast serious doubt on the “fair
ness,” “integrity,” or “public reputation” of the judicial
system.

