2

UNITED STATES v. MARCUS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

request had been made, it is clear that an appropriate
instruction would have been given. Indeed, it is equally
clear that the judge would have given such an instruction
sua sponte if she had been aware of the effective date of
the statute. No one disputes that error was committed in
the way Marcus was charged and tried, and the error was
sufficiently plain to be considered on appeal.
The record demonstrates that Marcus’ sex trafficking
conviction likely violated the ex post facto rule, as applied
to trial proceedings through the Due Process Clause, see
ante, at 6, because the postenactment evidence appears to
have been insufficient to prove guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt. See 538 F. 3d, at 105–106 (Sotomayor, J., concur
ring). Whether his forced labor conviction is invalid for
the same reason is not clear. What is clear, however, is
that neither the Second Circuit nor this Court has to
determine that an error of constitutional magnitude oc
curred for Marcus to be eligible for relief. The question
under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 52(b) is
whether the trial error was sufficiently weighty to affect
“substantial rights,” and in my view this error surely was.
The Court notes that the error “created a risk that the
jury would convict respondent solely on the basis of con
duct that was not criminal when the defendant engaged in
that conduct.” Ante, at 5. That is true, and it is of funda
mental concern because imposing criminal sanctions for
nonproscribed conduct has always been considered a
hallmark of tyranny—no matter how morally reprehensi
ble the prosecuted party.
But in addition to the very real possibility that the jury
convicted Marcus of sex trafficking solely on the basis of
preenactment conduct, the error created another risk:
namely, that both verdicts, returned after seven days of
deliberation, rested in part on the jury’s incorrect belief
that the conduct before October 28, 2000, was unlawful.
The error committed at trial not only prevented the jury

