6

UNITED STATES v. MARCUS
Opinion of the Court

so labeled as special, “structural,” errors that warrant
reversal without a showing of prejudice. See Brief for
Respondent 27–29. But we cannot accept this argument.
As an initial matter, we note that the Government has
never claimed that the TVPA retroactively criminalizes
preenactment conduct, see Brief for United States 16, and
that Marcus and the Second Circuit were thus incorrect to
classify the error at issue here as an Ex Post Facto Clause
violation, see Marks v. United States, 430 U. S. 188, 191
(1977) (“The Ex Post Facto Clause is a limitation upon the
powers of the Legislature, and does not of its own force
apply to the Judicial Branch of government” (citation
omitted)). Rather, if the jury, which was not instructed
about the TVPA’s enactment date, erroneously convicted
Marcus based exclusively on noncriminal, preenactment
conduct, Marcus would have a valid due process claim. Cf.
Bouie v. City of Columbia, 378 U. S. 347, 353–354 (1964)
(applying Due Process Clause to ex post facto judicial
decisions). In any event, however Marcus’ claim is la
beled, we see no reason why this kind of error would
automatically “affect substantial rights” without a show
ing of individual prejudice.
That is because errors similar to the one at issue in this
case—i.e., errors that create a risk that a defendant will be
convicted based exclusively on noncriminal conduct—come
in various shapes and sizes. The kind and degree of harm
that such errors create can consequently vary. Sometimes
a proper jury instruction might well avoid harm; other
times, preventing the harm might only require striking or
limiting the testimony of a particular witness. And some
times the error might infect an entire trial, such that a
jury instruction would mean little. There is thus no rea
son to believe that all or almost all such errors always
“affec[t] the framework within which the trial proceeds,”
Fulminante, supra, at 310, or “necessarily render a crimi
nal trial fundamentally unfair or an unreliable vehicle for

