(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STATES v. MARCUS
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 08–1341. Argued February 24, 2010—Decided May 24, 2010
Respondent Marcus was convicted of engaging in forced labor and sex
trafficking between January 1999 and October 2001. On appeal, he
pointed out for the first time that the federal statutes he violated did
not become law until October 2000. Thus, he claimed, the indictment
and evidence permitted at trial allowed a jury to convict him exclu
sively on the basis of preenactment conduct in violation of the Ex Post
Facto Clause. He conceded that he had not raised this objection in
the District Court, but argued that because the constitutional error
was plain, his conviction must be set aside. The Second Circuit
agreed and vacated the conviction. In doing so, the court held that,
even in the case of a continuing offense, retrial is necessary if there is
“any possibility, no matter how unlikely, that the jury could have
convicted based exclusively on pre-enactment conduct.” The court
noted that this was “true even under plain error review.”
Held: The Second Circuit’s plain-error standard conflicts with this
Court’s interpretation of the plain-error rule. An appellate court may
recognize a “plain error that affects substantial rights,” even if that
error was “not brought” to the district court’s “attention.” Fed. Rule
Crim. Proc. 52(b). This Court’s cases interpret this rule such that an
appellate court may, in its discretion, correct an error not raised at
trial only when the appellant demonstrates that (1) there is an error;
(2) the error is clear or obvious; (3) the error affected the appellant’s
substantial rights; and (4) the error seriously affects the fairness, in
tegrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings.
The standard the Second Circuit applied in this case is inconsistent
with the third and fourth of these criteria. To begin, it is irreconcil
able with the criterion that the error “affec[t] the appellant’s substan

