2

UNITED STATES v. MARCUS
Syllabus
tial rights,” Puckett v. United States, 556 U. S. ___, ___. This condi
tion requires the error to be prejudicial, meaning that there is a rea
sonable probability that the error affected the trial’s outcome, not
that there is “any possibility,” however remote, that the jury could
have convicted based exclusively on preenactment conduct.
Nor does this error fall within the category of “structural errors”
that may “affect substantial rights” regardless of their actual impact
on an appellant’s trial. Id., at ___. Here, a jury instruction might
have minimized or eliminated the risk that Marcus would have been
convicted based solely on preenactment conduct. A reviewing court
should find it no more difficult to assess the failure to give such an
instruction than to assess numerous other instructional errors previ
ously found nonstructural, see, e.g., Hedgpeth v. Pulido, 555 U. S. ___
(per curiam). The Court further rejects Marcus’ argument that the
error at issue should be labeled an Ex Post Facto Clause violation,
and that all such violations should be treated as special, structural
errors warranting reversal without a showing of prejudice. As an ini
tial matter, the Government never argued that the statute that
criminalized Marcus’ conduct applied retroactively, and Marcus’
claim is thus properly brought under the Due Process, and not the
Ex Post Facto, Clause. Moreover, we see no reason why errors simi
lar to the one at issue in this case, taken as a class, would automati
cally affect substantial rights without a showing of prejudice.
In any event, the Second Circuit’s “any possibility,” however re
mote, standard also cannot be reconciled with the criterion that “the
error seriously affec[t] the fairness, integrity or public reputation of
judicial proceedings.” Puckett, supra, at ___ (internal quotation
marks omitted). Under the Second Circuit’s approach, a retrial
would be required even where the evidence supporting conviction
consists of a few days of preenactment conduct along with several
continuous years of identical postenactment conduct. Given the tiny
risk that a jury would base its conviction in these circumstances on
the few preenactment days alone, such an error is most unlikely to
cast serious doubt on the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of
the judicial system. Pp. 3–8.

538 F. 3d 97, reversed and remanded.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, GINSBURG, and ALITO, JJ., joined.
STEVENS, J., filed a dissenting opinion. SOTOMAYOR, J., took no part in
the consideration or decision of the case.

