Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., dissenting

from focusing on the relevant time period, but it also
distorted the jury’s perception of Marcus’ actions. By
arguing that its preenactment evidence showed a violation
of the TVPA, the Government effectively mischaracterized
all of that evidence as descriptions of illegal behavior. And
by giving the jury the impression that Marcus committed
a much larger amount of criminal conduct than he really
did, the error may have tipped the scales in favor of the
prosecution, when the actual evidence of guilt would not
have persuaded the jury to convict.
There is no need to decide whether the Government’s
arguments or the trial court’s failure to give a curative
instruction reached a level of unfairness sufficient to
violate the Due Process Clause. For the foregoing reasons,
I am convinced that the error prejudiced Marcus and
seriously undermined the integrity of the proceedings.
While I do not endorse the reasoning in the Court of Ap
peals’ opinion,* I would therefore affirm its judgment.

——————
* The per curiam opinion contained a curious wrinkle, apart from
misclassifying the trial error. See ante, at 6. The per curiam applied a
standard from earlier Second Circuit cases that asked whether there
was any possibility the jury convicted the defendant exclusively on the
basis of preenactment conduct. 538 F. 3d 97, 101 (CA2 2008) (citing
United States v. Torres, 901 F. 2d 205, 229 (1990), United States v.
Monaco, 194 F. 3d 381, 386 (1999), and United States v. Harris, 79
F. 3d 223, 229 (1996)). As I read the Second Circuit precedents, how
ever, they used that standard to determine whether an ex post facto
violation occurred, not to determine whether that violation warranted
vacatur of the conviction pursuant to Federal Rule of Criminal Proce
dure 52(b). Torres is the only one of the cited cases that even consid
ered Rule 52(b), and its holding rested on a combination of factors,
including that “the defendants brought the general ex post facto ques
tion to the attention of the district court,” albeit imprecisely, and that a
mandatory life sentence was imposed. 901 F. 2d, at 229. It is thus
unclear why the Court of Appeals believed itself foreclosed from con
ducting a regular “plain error” review.

