Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
States v. Vogel Fertilizer Co., 455 U. S. 16, 24. Since then, however,
the Court has found Chevron deference appropriate “when it appears
that Congress delegated authority to the agency generally to make
rules carrying the force of law, and that the agency interpretation
claiming deference was promulgated in the exercise of that author
ity.” United States v. Mead Corp., 533 U. S. 218, 226–227. Chevron
and Mead provide the appropriate framework for evaluating the full
time employee rule. The Department issued the rule pursuant to an
explicit authorization to prescribe needful rules and regulations, and
only after notice-and-comment procedures. The Court has recognized
these to be good indicators of a rule meriting Chevron deference,
Mead, 533 U. S., at 229–231. Pp. 7–12.
(c) The rule easily satisfies Chevron’s second step. Mayo accepts
the Treasury Department’s determination that an individual may not
qualify for the student exception unless the educational aspect of his
relationship with his employer predominates over the service aspect
of that relationship, but objects to the Department’s conclusion that
residents working more than 40 hours per week categorically cannot
satisfy that requirement. Mayo argues that the Treasury Depart
ment should be required to engage in a case-by-case inquiry into
what each employee does and why he does it, and that the Depart
ment has arbitrarily distinguished between hands-on training and
classroom instruction. But regulation, like legislation, often requires
drawing lines. The Department reasonably sought to distinguish be
tween workers who study and students who work. Focusing on the
hours spent working and those spent in studies is a sensible way to
accomplish that goal. The Department thus has drawn a distinction
between education and service, not between classroom instruction
and hands-on training. The Treasury Department also reasonably
concluded that its full-time employee rule would “improve adminis
trability,” 69 Fed. Reg. 76405, and thereby “has avoided the wasteful
litigation and continuing uncertainty that would inevitably accom
pany [a] case-by-case approach” like the one Mayo advocates, United
States v. Correll, 389 U. S. 299, 302. Moreover, the rule reasonably
takes into account the Social Security Administration’s concern that
exempting residents from FICA would deprive them and their fami
lies of vital social security disability and survivorship benefits.
Pp. 12–15.
568 F. 3d 675, affirmed.
ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which all other
Members joined, except KAGAN, J., who took no part in the considera
tion or decision of the case.

