2

MAYO FOUNDATION FOR MEDICAL ED. AND RESEARCH v.
UNITED STATES
Syllabus
structional, or training aspect.” Ibid. The rule offers as an example a
medical resident whose normal schedule requires him to perform ser
vices 40 or more hours per week, and concludes that the resident is
not a student.
Mayo filed suit asserting that this rule was invalid, and the Dis
trict Court agreed. It found the full-time employee rule inconsistent
with §3121’s unambiguous text and concluded that the factors gov
erning this Court’s analysis in National Muffler Dealers Assn., Inc. v.
United States, 440 U. S. 472, also indicated that the rule was invalid.
The Eighth Circuit reversed. Applying Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v. Natu
ral Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U. S. 837, the Court of Ap
peals concluded that the Department’s regulation was a permissible
interpretation of an ambiguous statute.

Held: The Treasury Department’s full-time employee rule is a reason
able construction of §3121(b)(10). Pp. 6–15.
(a) Under Chevron’s two-part framework, the Court first asks
whether Congress has “directly addressed the precise question at is
sue.” 467 U. S., at 842-843. Congress has not done so here; the stat
ute does not define “student” or otherwise attend to the question
whether medical residents are subject to FICA. Pp. 6–7.
(b) The parties debate whether the Court should next apply Chev
ron step two or the multi-factor analysis used to review a tax regula
tion in National Muffler. Absent a justification to do so, this Court is
not inclined to apply a less deferential framework to evaluate Treas
ury Department regulations than it uses to review rules adopted by
any other agency. The Court has “[r]ecogniz[ed] the importance of
maintaining a uniform approach to judicial review of administrative
action.” Dickinson v. Zurko, 527 U. S. 150, 154. And the principles
underlying Chevron apply with full force in the tax context. Chevron
recognized that an agency’s power “ ‘to administer a congressionally
created . . . program necessarily requires the formulation of policy
and the making of rules to fill any gap left . . . by Congress.’ ” 467
U. S., at 843. Filling gaps in the Internal Revenue Code plainly re
quires the Treasury Department to make interpretive choices for
statutory implementation at least as complex as the ones made by
other agencies in administering their statutes.
It is true that the full-time employee rule, like the rule at issue in
National Muffler, was promulgated under the Department’s general
authority to “prescribe all needful rules and regulations for the en
forcement” of the Internal Revenue Code. 26 U. S. C. §7805(a). It is
also true that this Court, in opinions predating Chevron, stated that
it owed less deference to a rule adopted under that general grant of
authority than it would afford rules issued pursuant to more specific
grants. See Rowan Cos. v. United States, 452 U. S. 247, 253; United

