Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

Petitioners 6–7 (quoting Treas. Reg. §31.3121(b)(10)–
2(d)(3)(i), 26 CFR §31.3121(b)(10)–2(d)(3)(i)). Mayo ob
jects, however, to the Department’s conclusion that resi
dents who work more than 40 hours per week categorically
cannot satisfy that requirement. Because residents’ em
ployment is itself educational, Mayo argues, the hours a
resident spends working make him “more of a student, not
less of one.” Reply Brief for Petitioners 15, n. 3 (emphasis
deleted). Mayo contends that the Treasury Department
should be required to engage in a case-by-case inquiry into
“what [each] employee does [in his service] and why” he
does it. Id., at 7. Mayo also objects that the Department
has drawn an arbitrary distinction between “hands-on
training” and “classroom instruction.” Brief for Petition
ers 35.
We disagree. Regulation, like legislation, often requires
drawing lines. Mayo does not dispute that the Treasury
Department reasonably sought a way to distinguish be
tween workers who study and students who work, see IRS
Letter Ruling 9332005 (May 3, 1993). Focusing on the
hours an individual works and the hours he spends in
studies is a perfectly sensible way of accomplishing that
goal. The Department explained that an individual’s
service and his “course of study are separate and distinct
activities” in “the vast majority of cases,” and reasoned
that “[e]mployees who are working enough hours to be
considered full-time employees . . . have filled the conven
tional measure of available time with work, and not
study.” 69 Fed. Reg. 8607. The Department thus did not
distinguish classroom education from clinical training but
rather education from service. The Department reasona
bly concluded that its full-time employee rule would “im
prove administrability,” id., at 76405, and it thereby “has
avoided the wasteful litigation and continuing uncertainty
that would inevitably accompany any purely case-by-case
approach” like the one Mayo advocates, United States v.

