10 MAYO FOUNDATION FOR MEDICAL ED. AND RESEARCH v.
UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

223 (1989) (declining to apply “a different and stricter
nondelegation doctrine in cases where Congress delegates
discretionary authority to the Executive under its taxing
power”).
The principles underlying our decision in Chevron apply
with full force in the tax context. Chevron recognized that
“[t]he power of an administrative agency to administer a
congressionally created . . . program necessarily requires
the formulation of policy and the making of rules to fill
any gap left, implicitly or explicitly, by Congress.” 467
U. S., at 843 (internal quotation marks omitted). It ac
knowledged that the formulation of that policy might
require “more than ordinary knowledge respecting the
matters subjected to agency regulations.” Id., at 844
(internal quotation marks omitted). Filling gaps in the
Internal Revenue Code plainly requires the Treasury
Department to make interpretive choices for statutory
implementation at least as complex as the ones other
agencies must make in administering their statutes. Cf.
Bob Jones Univ. v. United States, 461 U. S. 574, 596
(1983) (“[I]n an area as complex as the tax system, the
agency Congress vests with administrative responsibility
must be able to exercise its authority to meet changing
conditions and new problems”). We see no reason why our
review of tax regulations should not be guided by agency
expertise pursuant to Chevron to the same extent as our
review of other regulations.
As one of Mayo’s amici points out, however, both the
full-time employee rule and the rule at issue in National
Muffler were promulgated pursuant to the Treasury De
partment’s general authority under 26 U. S. C. §7805(a) to
“prescribe all needful rules and regulations for the en
forcement” of the Internal Revenue Code. See Brief for
Carlton M. Smith 4–7. In two decisions predating Chev
ron, this Court stated that “we owe the [Treasury Depart
ment’s] interpretation less deference” when it is contained

