(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

THOMPSON v. NORTH AMERICAN STAINLESS, LP
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–291.

Argued December 7, 2010—Decided January 24, 2011

After petitioner Thompson’s fiancée, Miriam Regalado, filed a sex dis­
crimination charge with the Equal Employment Opportunity Com­
mission (EEOC) against their employer, respondent North American
Stainless (NAS), NAS fired Thompson. He filed his own charge and a
subsequent suit under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, claiming that
NAS fired him to retaliate against Regalado for filing her charge.
The District Court granted NAS summary judgment on the ground
that third-party retaliation claims were not permitted by Title VII,
which prohibits discrimination against an employee “because he has
made a [Title VII] charge,” 42 U. S. C. §2000e–3(a), and which per­
mits, inter alia, a “person claiming to be aggrieved . . . by [an] alleged
employment practice” to file a civil action, §2000e–5(f)(1). The en
banc Sixth Circuit affirmed, reasoning that Thompson was not enti­
tled to sue NAS for retaliation because he had not engaged in any ac­
tivity protected by the statute.
Held:
1. If the facts Thompson alleges are true, his firing by NAS consti­
tuted unlawful retaliation. Title VII’s antiretaliation provision must
be construed to cover a broad range of employer conduct. Burlington
N. & S. F. R. Co. v. White, 548 U. S. 53. It prohibits any employer ac­
tion that “ ‘well might have “dissuaded a reasonable worker from
making or supporting a [discrimination] charge,” ’ ” id., at 68. That
test must be applied in an objective fashion, to “avoi[d] the uncertain­
ties and unfair discrepancies that can plague a judicial effort to de­
termine a plaintiff’s unusual subjective feelings.” Id., at 68–69. A
reasonable worker obviously might be dissuaded from engaging in
protected activity if she knew that her fiancé would be fired. Pp. 2–4.
2. Title VII grants Thompson a cause of action. Pp. 4–7.


2

THOMPSON v. NORTH AMERICAN STAINLESS, LP
Syllabus
(a) For Title VII standing purposes, the term “person aggrieved”
must be construed more narrowly than the outer boundaries of Arti­
cle III. Dictum in Trafficante v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 409 U. S.
205, suggesting that Title VII’s aggrievement requirement reaches as
far as Article III permits, is too expansive and the Court declines to
follow it. At the other extreme, limiting “person aggrieved” to the
person who was the subject of unlawful retaliation is an artificially
narrow reading. A common usage of the term “person aggrieved”
avoids both of these extremes. The Administrative Procedure Act,
which authorizes suit to challenge a federal agency by any “person
. . . adversely affected or aggrieved . . . within the meaning of a rele­
vant statute,” 5 U. S. C. §702, establishes a regime under which a
plaintiff may not sue unless he “falls within the ‘zone of interests’
sought to be protected by the statutory provision whose violation
forms the legal basis for his complaint,” Lujan v. National Wildlife
Federation, 497 U. S. 871, 883. Title VII’s term “aggrieved” incorpo­
rates that test, enabling suit by any plaintiff with an interest “ ‘ar­
guably [sought] to be protected’ by the statutes,” National Credit Un
ion Admin. v. First Nat. Bank & Trust Co., 522 U. S. 479, 495, while
excluding plaintiffs who might technically be injured in an Article III
sense but whose interests are unrelated to Title VII’s statutory pro­
hibitions. Pp. 4–7.
(b) Applying that test here, Thompson falls within the zone of in­
terests protected by Title VII. He was an employee of NAS, and Title
VII’s purpose is to protect employees from their employers’ unlawful
actions. Moreover, accepting the facts as alleged, Thompson is not an
accidental victim of the retaliation. Hurting him was the unlawful
act by which NAS punished Regalado. Thus, Thompson is a person
aggrieved with standing to sue under Title VII. P. 7.

567 F. 3d 804, reversed and remanded.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which all other
Members joined, except KAGAN, J., who took no part in the considera­
tion or decision of the case. GINSBURG, J., filed a concurring opinion, in
which BREYER, J., joined.

