Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

SCALIA, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

Nos. 11–5683 and 11–5721
_________________

11–5683

EDWARD DORSEY, SR., PETITIONER
v.
UNITED STATES

11–5721

COREY A. HILL, PETITIONER
v.
UNITED STATES

ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
APPEALS FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
[June 21, 2012]

JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE,
JUSTICE THOMAS, and JUSTICE ALITO join, dissenting.
In the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010, 124 Stat. 2372,
Congress increased the threshold quantities of crack cocaine required to trigger the 5- and 10-year mandatory
minimum penalties associated with offenses involving
the manufacture, distribution, or dispensation of the drug,
and eliminated the 5-year mandatory minimum previously
associated with simple possession of it. The Act is silent
as to whether these changes apply to defendants who
committed their offenses before, but whose sentencing
proceedings occurred after, its August 3, 2010, effective
date. In my view, the general saving statute, 1 U. S. C.
§109, dictates that the new, more lenient mandatory
minimum provisions do not apply to such pre-enactment
offenders.
I
The Court starts off on the right foot by acknowledging,
ante, at 10–11, that the ameliorative amendments at issue


2

DORSEY v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., dissenting

here trigger application of the general saving statute.
Enacted in 1871 to reverse the common-law rule that the
repeal or amendment of a criminal statute would abate all
nonfinal convictions under the repealed or amended statute, see Warden v. Marrero, 417 U. S. 653, 660 (1974), the
saving statute provides in relevant part:
“The repeal of any statute shall not have the effect
to release or extinguish any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under such statute, unless the repealing Act shall so expressly provide, and such statute
shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purpose of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for
the enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture, or liability.” 1 U. S. C. §109.
By reducing the statutory penalties for crack cocaine
offenses, the Fair Sentencing Act “repeal[ed]” the former
penalties; for defendants who committed their offenses
(and hence “incurred” the penalties) while the prior law
was in force, §109 directs that the prior law “shall be
treated as still remaining in force.”
Although §109 purports to require that subsequent
legislation opting out of its default rule must do so “expressly,” the Court correctly observes, ante, at 12, that
express-statement requirements of this sort are ineffective. See Lockhart v. United States, 546 U. S. 142, 147–
150 (2005) (SCALIA, J., concurring). Because “one legislature cannot abridge the powers of a succeeding legislature,” Fletcher v. Peck, 6 Cranch 87, 135 (1810), a statute
is “alterable when the legislature shall please to alter it,”
Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch 137, 177 (1803). Consequently, the express-statement requirement of §109 is
itself subject to repeal on the same terms as any other
statute, which is to say that a repeal may be accomplished
by implication. See, e.g., Marrero, supra, at 659–660,
n. 10; Great Northern R. Co. v. United States, 208 U. S.


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

452, 465 (1908).
Understanding the interpretive problem posed by these
cases as one of implied repeal helps to explain the Court’s
observation, ante, at 13, that what is required to override
§109’s default rule is a clear demonstration of congressional intent to do so. Admittedly, our cases have not
spoken with the utmost clarity on this point. In Marrero,
for example, we suggested that a “fair implication” from
a subsequently enacted statute would suffice, 417 U. S.,
at 660, n. 10, while in Hertz v. Woodman, 218 U. S. 205
(1910), we used the phrase “clear implication,” id., at 218
(emphasis added); see also ibid. (“plain implication”). In
Great Northern R. Co., we split the difference, stating at
one point that §109 controls unless Congress expresses a
contrary intention “either expressly or by necessary implication in a subsequent enactment,” 208 U. S., at 465 (emphasis added), but suggesting at another point that a “fair
implication,” id., at 466, would do. In my view, the “fair
implication” formulation understates the burden properly
imposed on a defendant who would claim an implicit
exception from §109’s terms. Because the effect of such
an exception is to work a pro tanto repeal of §109’s application to the defendant’s case, the implication from the
subsequently enacted statute must be clear enough to
overcome our strong presumption against implied repeals.
See, e.g., Matsushita Elec. Industrial Co. v. Epstein, 516
U. S. 367, 381 (1996); Posadas v. National City Bank, 296
U. S. 497, 503 (1936). Thus, we should conclude that
Congress has deviated from §109 (or any similar statute
establishing a background interpretive principle) only
when the “plain import of a later statute directly conflicts”
with it. Lockhart, supra, at 149 (SCALIA, J., concurring)
(emphasis added).


4

DORSEY v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., dissenting

II

A

The considerations relied upon by the Court do not come
close to satisfying the demanding standard for repeal by
implication. As an initial matter, there is no persuasive
force whatever to the Court’s observation that continuing
to apply the prior mandatory minimums to pre-enactment
offenders would “involve imposing upon the pre-Act offender a pre-Act sentence at a time after Congress had
specifically found in the Fair Sentencing Act that such a
sentence was unfairly long.” Ante, at 15. That is true
whenever Congress reduces a criminal penalty, and so is a
consequence that Congress affirmatively embraced when it
said in §109 that ameliorative amendments to criminal
statutes do not apply to pre-enactment conduct. Nor does
it matter that Congress has instructed district courts,
when applying the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, to apply the version in force on the date of sentencing, with
the object of reducing disparities in sentences between
similar defendants who are sentenced for the same conduct at the same time. See 18 U. S. C. §3553(a)(4)(A)(ii).
The presumption against implied repeals requires us to
give effect, if possible, to both §3553(a)(4)(A)(ii) and §109.
“The courts are not at liberty to pick and choose among
congressional enactments, and when two statutes are capable of co-existence, it is the duty of the courts, absent
a clearly expressed congressional intention to the contrary, to regard each as effective.” Morton v. Mancari, 417
U. S. 535, 551 (1974). We may readily do so here by holding that §3553(a)(4)(A)(ii) applies to Guidelines amendments, and §109 to statutory ones.
The Court also stresses that the Fair Sentencing Act
instructs the Sentencing Commission to promulgate “as
soon as practicable” (and not later than 90 days after
August 3, 2010) “such conforming amendments” to the
Sentencing Guidelines “as the Commission determines


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

necessary to achieve consistency with other guideline
provisions and applicable law.” §8, 124 Stat. 2374. The
argument goes that, because the Commission implemented
this directive by reducing the Guidelines ranges for
crack cocaine offenses to track the 18-to-1 crack-to-powder
ratio reflected in the new mandatory minimums, see 75
Fed. Reg. 66191 (2010), and because the general rule is
that a sentencing court should apply the version of the
Guidelines in effect at the time of sentencing, see 18
U. S. C. §3553(a)(4)(A)(ii), Congress must have understood
that the new mandatory minimums would apply immediately, since otherwise there would be a mismatch between
the statutory penalties and Guidelines ranges.
That conclusion simply does not follow. For one thing,
the argument begs the very question presented here: What
is the “applicable law” relevant to pre-enactment offenders
who are sentenced after enactment? The Commission
could well have answered this question by concluding that,
in light of §109, the law applicable to such offenders is
the pre-Act mandatory minimums. It might therefore have
retained, as to those offenders, the existing Guidelines
ranges reflecting a higher crack-to-powder ratio. Although
rare, it is not unheard of for the Commission to establish
Guidelines whose application turns on the date of commission of the defendant’s offense. See United States Sentencing Commission, Guidelines Manual §5E1.1(g)(1)
(Nov. 2011) (governing restitution for offenses committed
on or after November 1, 1997, and providing that the prior
version of the Guideline shall govern all other cases); id.,
§8B1.1(f)(1) (same for restitution obligations of organizational defendants). Of course, the Commission did not
interpret the Fair Sentencing Act’s directive in this manner. But the possibility that it could (not to mention
the probability that it should) have done so illustrates the
folly of basing inferences about what Congress intended
when it passed the Fair Sentencing Act on decisions the


6

DORSEY v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., dissenting

Commission would not make until several months later.1
Moreover, even if one takes it as given that the Commission’s new crack cocaine Guidelines would apply the
lower 18-to-1 ratio to all defendants sentenced after the
new Guidelines were put in place, it would not follow that
Congress necessarily expected the new mandatory minimums to apply to pre-enactment offenders. The directive
to update the Guidelines on an emergency basis is equally
consistent with Congress’s seeking to avoid a mismatch
between the Guidelines and the statutory penalties for
post-enactment offenders sentenced shortly after the Act’s
effective date.
Petitioners and the Government discount this explanation, noting that because of the lags associated with investigating and prosecuting drug offenses, most of the
defendants sentenced on the 91st day after the Fair
Sentencing Act’s enactment were sure to be pre-Act offenders. If Congress did not expect the new mandatory
minimums to apply to such offenders, they say, there
would have been no need to ensure that revised Guidelines
were in place so quickly. But most is not all, and it would
have been entirely sensible for Congress to worry that
some post-Act offenders—offenders clearly subject to the
new mandatory minimums—would nonetheless be sentenced under outdated Guidelines if the Guidelines were
not revised in short order.
The 11-month median time between indictment and
——————
1 Congressional reliance on future Commission action might be plausible if the Commission had a settled practice of tying reductions in
statutory mandatory minimums to immediately applicable reductions
in Guidelines ranges, without any distinction based on the timing of
the defendant’s offense. But the Court does not cite any such settled
practice, and I am not aware of any. Presumably there has been no
occasion for a practice to develop either way, since congressional
legislation reducing criminal penalties is, in this day and age, very
rare.


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

SCALIA, J., dissenting

sentencing for non-marijuana federal drug offenses, see
Administrative Office of United States Courts, Judicial
Business of the United States Courts, p. 272 (2010) (Table
D–10), does not establish that prompt issuance of new
Guidelines for post-Act offenders could not have been a
pressing concern. Because that is a median figure, it shows
that half of all drug defendants are sentenced sooner
than 11 months after being indicted. And it is only an
aggregate figure. For drug possession offenses—relevant
here because the Fair Sentencing Act eliminated the
mandatory minimum sentence previously applicable to
simple possession of crack cocaine, see §3, 124 Stat.
2372—the equivalent figure was just 5.4 months from
indictment to sentencing. The pace of criminal cases also
varies considerably from district to district. In the Eastern District of Virginia, for instance, the median time from
indictment to sentencing for all criminal cases was just 3.6
months. See Judicial Business, supra, at 252 (Table D–6).
What is more, without the Fair Sentencing Act’s emergency directive, amendments to the Guidelines to implement
the Act likely would not have been put in place until more
than a year after its passage.2 In the interim, a great
——————
2 In the ordinary course, the Commission may submit proposed
Guidelines amendments to Congress “at or after the beginning of a
regular session of Congress, but not later than the first day of May.” 28
U. S. C. §994(p).
Unless disapproved by Congress, the proposed
amendments “take effect on a date specified by the Commission, which
shall be no earlier than 180 days after being so submitted and no
later than the first day of November of the calendar year in which
the amendment . . . is submitted.” Ibid. As a matter of practice, the
Commission has adopted November 1 as the default effective date for
its proposed amendments. See United States Sentencing Commission,
Rules of Practice and Procedure, Rule 4.1 (amended Aug. 2007).
Because the Fair Sentencing Act was enacted on August 3, 2010—after
May 1—there would have been no opportunity for the Commission to
submit proposed amendments to Congress until January 2011. Given
the 180-day waiting period, the amendments could not have gone into
force until the very end of June 2011 at the earliest. And in all likeli-


8

DORSEY v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., dissenting

many post-Act offenders might have been sentenced under
the outdated Guidelines, even though they were clearly
entitled to take advantage of the statutory amendments.
Because the emergency authority conferred on the Commission can reasonably be understood as directed at this
mismatch problem, it creates no clear implication that
Congress expected the new statutory penalties to apply to
pre-enactment offenders.
The Court’s last argument is that continuing to apply
the prior mandatory minimums to pre-enactment offenders would lead to anomalous, disproportionate sentencing
results. It is true enough, as the Court notes, ante, at 16–
18, that applying the prior mandatory minimums in tandem with the new Guidelines provisions—which track the
new, more lenient mandatory minimums—leads to a
series of “cliffs” at the mandatory minimum thresholds.
But this does not establish that Congress clearly meant
the new mandatory minimums to apply to pre-enactment
offenders. As noted above, supra, at 5–6, there is no reason to take the Guidelines amendments ultimately promulgated by the Commission as a given when evaluating
what Congress would have understood when the Fair
Sentencing Act was enacted. The Commission could have
promulgated amendments that ameliorated this problem
by retaining the old Guidelines ranges for pre-enactment
offenders.
Moreover, although the cliffs produced by the mismatch
between Guidelines and statutory penalties are admittedly
inconsistent with the premise of the Guidelines system
that sentences should vary in proportion to the gravity
of the offense and the culpability of the offender, see 18
U. S. C. §3553(a)(1), (a)(2)(A), the same objection can be
lodged against any mandatory minimum that trumps an
otherwise applicable Guidelines range. And it is not as
—————— 

hood, they would not have been effective until November 1, 2011.



Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

SCALIA, J., dissenting

though the results of continuing to apply the pre-Act
statutory penalties are so senseless as to establish that
Congress must not have intended them. Retaining the old
mandatory minimums ensures at least rough equivalence
in sentences for defendants who committed their crimes at
the same time, but were sentenced at different times—
even as it leads to disparities for defendants who are sentenced at the same time, but committed their offenses
at different times. In light of this plausible basis for continuing to apply the prior law to pre-enactment offenders,
there is no reason to conclude that Congress necessarily
expected the new statutory penalties to apply.
B
Petitioners and the Government press a handful of additional arguments which require only brief discussion.
They first contend that an intention to apply the new
mandatory minimums to pre-enactment offenders can be
inferred from §10 of the Fair Sentencing Act, 124 Stat.
2375, which instructs the Commission to study the effects
of the new law and make a report to Congress within five
years. The suggestion is that, if the statutory penalties do
not apply to pre-enactment offenders, then the Act would
have no effect on many defendants sentenced during
the study period, which would in turn undermine Congress’s goal of compiling useful data. This is makeweight.
Whether or not the new mandatory minimums are held
applicable to pre-enactment offenders, they will be applied
to many post-enactment offenders during the study period,
and the Commission will have the opportunity to collect
useful data. The study provision simply has nothing to
say about the question at issue here.
The Government also notes that the Senate bill that
ultimately became the Fair Sentencing Act was based on
an earlier bill which contained a provision that would
have delayed the Act’s effective date until 180 days after


10

DORSEY v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., dissenting

passage, and specifically provided that “[t]here shall be no
retroactive application of any portion of this Act.” H. R.
265, 111th Cong., 1st Sess., §11 (2009). Even if one is
inclined to base inferences about statutory meaning on
unenacted versions of the relevant bill, but see Hamdan v.
Rumsfeld, 548 U. S. 557, 668 (2006) (SCALIA, J., dissenting), this argument from drafting history is unpersuasive.
That Congress considered and rejected a proposal that
would have delayed application of the Act until 180 days
after passage says nothing about whether the version
finally enacted applies to defendants whose criminal conduct pre-dated the Act. Moreover, the same bill would
have provided permissive authority for the Commission to
promulgate amended Guidelines on an emergency basis,
see §8(a), notwithstanding its delayed effective date provision. This point undercuts the argument that emergency
amendment authority and immediate application of the
new statutory penalties go hand-in-hand.
Petitioners finally appeal to the rule of lenity and the
canon of constitutional avoidance. But the rule of lenity
has no application here, because the background principle
supplied by §109 serves to remove the ambiguity that is a
necessary precondition to invocation of the rule. See Deal
v. United States, 508 U. S. 129, 135 (1993). The canon
of constitutional avoidance also has no application here.
Although many observers viewed the 100-to-1 crack-topowder ratio under the prior law as having a racially
disparate impact, see, e.g., United States Sentencing
Commission, Special Report to Congress: Cocaine and
Federal Sentencing Policy 8 (Apr. 1997), only intentional
discrimination may violate the equal protection component
of the Fifth Amendment’s Due Process Clause. See Ar­
lington Heights v. Metropolitan Housing Development
Corp., 429 U. S. 252, 264–265 (1977); Adarand Construc­
tors, Inc. v. Peña, 515 U. S. 200, 217 (1995). There is thus
no constitutional doubt triggered by application of the


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

SCALIA, J., dissenting

prior mandatory minimums, much less the sort of “serious
constitutional doub[t]” required to invoke the avoidance
canon. Clark v. Martinez, 543 U. S. 371, 381 (2005).
*
*
*
In the end, the mischief of the Court’s opinion is not the
result in this particular case, but rather the unpredictability it injects into the law for the future. The Court’s decision is based on “[s]ix considerations, taken together,”
ante, at 11, and we are not told whether any one of these
considerations might have justified the Court’s result in
isolation, or even the relative importance of the various
considerations. One of them (the Commission’s emergency
authority to issue conforming amendments to the Guidelines) is a particular feature of the statute at issue in these
cases, but another (the fact that applying the prior statutory penalties alongside the new Guidelines leads to a
mismatch) is a general feature of a sentencing scheme
that calibrates Guidelines ranges to the statutory mandatory minimums for a given offense. Are we to conclude
that, after the Sentencing Reform Act, §109 has no further
application to criminal penalties, at least when statutory
amendments lead to modification of the Guidelines? Portions of the Court’s opinion could be understood to suggest that result, but the Court leaves us in suspense.
That is most unfortunate, because the whole point of
§109, as well as other provisions of the Dictionary Act, see
1 U. S. C. §§1–8, and the definitional provisions of the
federal criminal law, see 18 U. S. C. §§5–27 (2006 ed. and
Supp. IV), is to provide a stable set of background principles that will promote effective communication between
Congress and the courts. In this context, stability is ensured by a healthy respect for our presumption against
implied repeals, which demands a clear showing before we
conclude that Congress has deviated from one of these
background interpretive principles. Because the Court’s


12

DORSEY v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., dissenting

result cannot be reconciled with this approach, I respectfully dissent.

