Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

FSIA.2 The FSIA provides that a “foreign state shall be
immune from the jurisdiction” of both federal and state
courts except as provided in the Act, 28 U. S. C. §1604,
and the District Court noted that none of the parties had
argued that any exception was applicable, App. to Pet. for
Cert. 46a–47a. Although characterizing the statute as
silent on its applicability to the officials of a foreign state,
the District Court followed appellate decisions holding
that a foreign state’s sovereign immunity under the Act
extends to “ ‘an individual acting in his official capacity on
behalf of a foreign state,’ ” but not to “ ‘an official who acts
beyond the scope of his authority.’ ” Id., at 47a (quoting
Velasco v. Government of Indonesia, 370 F. 3d 392, 398,
399 (CA4 2004)). The court rejected respondents’ argu
ment that petitioner was necessarily acting beyond the
scope of his authority because he allegedly violated inter
national law.3
The Court of Appeals reversed, rejecting the District
Court’s ruling that the FSIA governs petitioner’s immu
nity from suit. It acknowledged “the majority view”
——————
2 Petitioner

argued that, in addition to his immunity under the FSIA,
the complaint should be dismissed on a number of other grounds, which
the District Court did not reach. See id., at 45a, n. 11.
3 Because we hold that the FSIA does not govern whether an individ
ual foreign official enjoys immunity from suit, we need not reach
respondents’ argument that an official is not immune under the FSIA
for acts of torture and extrajudicial killing. See Brief for Respondents
51–53. We note that in determining petitioner had not acted beyond
the scope of his authority, the District Court afforded great weight to
letters from the Somali Transitional Federal Government (TFG) to the
State Department, App. to Pet. for Cert. 55a, in which the TFG sup
ported petitioner’s claim of immunity and stated “the actions attributed
to [petitioner] in the lawsuit . . . would have been taken by [petitioner]
in his official capacities,” App. 104. Although the District Court de
scribed the TFG as “recognized by the United States as the governing
body in Somalia,” App. to Pet. for Cert. 54a, the United States does not
recognize the TFG (or any other entity) as the government of Somalia,
see Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 5.

