18

SAMANTAR v. YOUSUF
Opinion of the Court

Finally, our reading of the FSIA will not “in effect make
the statute optional,” as some Courts of Appeals have
feared, by allowing litigants through “artful pleading . . .
to take advantage of the Act’s provisions or, alternatively,
choose to proceed under the old common law,” Chuidian v.
Philippine Nat. Bank, 912 F. 2d 1095, 1102 (CA9 1990).
Even if a suit is not governed by the Act, it may still be
barred by foreign sovereign immunity under the common
law. And not every suit can successfully be pleaded
against an individual official alone.20 Even when a plain
tiff names only a foreign official, it may be the case that
the foreign state itself, its political subdivision, or an
agency or instrumentality is a required party, because
——————
of the State Department. H. R. Rep., at 6. The Department sought and
supported the elimination of its role with respect to claims against
foreign states and their agencies or instrumentalities. See Hearings on
H. R. 11315 before the Subcommittee on Administrative Law and
Governmental Relations of the House of Representatives Committee on
the Judiciary, 94th Cong., 2d Sess., 34 (1976) (testimony of Monroe
Leigh, Legal Adviser, Dept. of State) (“[I]t is our judgment . . . that the
advantages of having a judicial determination greatly outweigh the
advantage of being able to intervene in a lawsuit”). But the Depart
ment has from the time of the FSIA’s enactment understood the Act to
leave intact the Department’s role in official immunity cases. See
Digest 1020 (“These decisions [of the Department regarding the immu
nity of officials] may be of some future significance, because the Foreign
Sovereign Immunities Act does not deal with the immunity of individ
ual officials, but only that of foreign states and their political subdivi
sions, agencies and instrumentalities”).
20 Furthermore, a plaintiff seeking to sue a foreign official will not be
able to rely on the Act’s service of process and jurisdictional provisions.
Thus, a plaintiff will have to establish that the district court has
personal jurisdiction over an official without the benefit of the FSIA
provision that makes personal jurisdiction over a foreign state auto
matic when an exception to immunity applies and service of process has
been accomplished in accordance with 28 U. S. C. §1608. See §1330(b)
(“Personal jurisdiction over a foreign state shall exist as to every claim
for relief over which the district courts have jurisdiction under subsec
tion (a),” i.e., claims for which the foreign state is not entitled to immu
nity, “where service has been made under section 1608 of this title”).

