12

SAMANTAR v. YOUSUF
Opinion of the Court

agent” thereof).11 If the term “foreign state” by definition
includes an individual acting within the scope of his office,
the phrase “or of any official or employee . . .” in 28
U. S. C. §1605(a)(5) would be unnecessary. See Dole Food
Co., 538 U. S., at 476–477 (“[W]e should not construe the
statute in a manner that is strained and, at the same
time, would render a statutory term superfluous”).
Other provisions of the statute also point away from
reading “foreign state” to include foreign officials. Con
gress made no express mention of service of process on
individuals in §1608(a), which governs service upon a
foreign state or political subdivision. Although some of the
methods listed could be used to serve individuals—for
example, by delivery “in accordance with an applicable
international convention,” §1608(a)(2)—the methods
specified are at best very roundabout ways of serving an
individual official. Furthermore, Congress made specific
remedial choices for different types of defendants. See
§1606 (allowing punitive damages for an agency or in
strumentality but not for a foreign state); §1610 (affording
a plaintiff greater rights to attach the property of an
agency or instrumentality as compared to the property of a
foreign state). By adopting petitioner’s reading of “foreign
state,” we would subject claims against officials to the
more limited remedies available in suits against states,
——————
11 Petitioner argues that §1605A abrogates immunity for certain acts
by individual officials, which would be superfluous if the officials were
not otherwise immune. See Brief for Petitioner 41–43. But the import
of §1605A is precisely the opposite. First, §1605A(a)(1) eliminates the
immunity of the state for certain acts of its officers; it says a “foreign
state shall not be immune” in a suit “in which money damages are
sought against a foreign state.” As it does not expressly refer to the
immunity of individual officers, it adds nothing to petitioner’s argu
ment. Second, the creation of a cause of action against both the “for
eign state” and “any official, employee, or agent” thereof, §1605A(c),
reinforces the idea that “foreign state” does not by definition include
foreign officials.

