2

SAMANTAR v. YOUSUF
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

judgment).
The Court’s introduction of legislative history serves no
purpose except needlessly to inject into the opinion a mode
of analysis that not all of the Justices consider valid. And
it does so, to boot, in a fashion that does not isolate the
superfluous legislative history in a section that those of us
who disagree categorically with its use, or at least dis
agree with its superfluous use, can decline to join. I there
fore do not join the opinion, and concur only in the result.
The Court relies on legislative history to support three
of its positions. First, after explaining why the phrase
“agency or instrumentality” in the definition of “foreign
state,” see §1603(a), (b), does not refer to natural persons,
ante, at 9–10, the Court says “[n]or does anything in the
legislative history suggest that Congress intended the
term ‘agency or instrumentality’ to include individuals,”
ante, at 10, n. 9. According to the Court, “the legislative
history, like the statute, speaks in terms of entities.” Ibid.
Apparently, the legislative history must be consulted, not
to show that it supports the Court’s textual analysis, or
even to explain why its seeming contradiction of the
Court’s analysis is inconsequential, but to show nothing
more than that it contains the same ambiguous language
as the text. This is beyond all reason.
Second, after concluding its review of the statute’s text,
the Court states that the “legislative history makes clear
that Congress did not intend the [Foreign Sovereign Im
munities Act of 1976] to address position-based individual
immunities such as diplomatic and consular immunity,”
ante, at 13, n. 12. See also ante, at 17. It cites for this
proposition a House Committee Report that we have no
reason to believe was read (much less approved) by the
Senate—or, indeed, by the Members of the House who
were not on the Committee—or even, for that matter, by
the members of the Committee, who never voted on the
Report. In any case, the quoted excerpt does not address

