16

SAMANTAR v. YOUSUF
Opinion of the Court

And historically, the Government sometimes suggested
immunity under the common law for individual officials
even when the foreign state did not qualify. See, e.g.,
Greenspan v. Crosbie, No. 74 Civ. 4734 (GLG), 1976 WL
841 (SDNY, Nov. 23, 1976). There is therefore little rea
son to presume that when Congress set out to codify state
immunity, it must also have, sub silentio, intended to
codify official immunity.
Petitioner urges that a suit against an official must
always be equivalent to a suit against the state because
acts taken by a state official on behalf of a state are acts of
the state. See Brief for Petitioner 26. We have recog
nized, in the context of the act of state doctrine, that an
official’s acts can be considered the acts of the foreign
state, and that “the courts of one country will not sit in
judgment” of those acts when done within the territory of
the foreign state. See Underhill v. Hernandez, 168 U. S.
250, 252, 254 (1897). Although the act of state doctrine is
distinct from immunity, and instead “provides foreign
states with a substantive defense on the merits,” Altmann,
541 U. S., at 700, we do not doubt that in some circum
stances the immunity of the foreign state extends to an
individual for acts taken in his official capacity. But it
does not follow from this premise that Congress intended
to codify that immunity in the FSIA. It hardly furthers
Congress’ purpose of “clarifying the rules that judges
should apply in resolving sovereign immunity claims,” id.,
at 699, to lump individual officials in with foreign states
without so much as a word spelling out how and when
individual officials are covered.17
——————
17 The courts of appeals have had to develop, in the complete absence
of any statutory text, rules governing when an official is entitled to
immunity under the FSIA. For example, Courts of Appeals have
applied the rule that foreign sovereign immunity extends to an individ
ual official “for acts committed in his official capacity” but not to “an
official who acts beyond the scope of his authority.” Chuidian, 912

