Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

Petitioner argues that because state and official immu
nities are coextensive, Congress must have codified official
immunity when it codified state immunity. See Brief for
Petitioner 26–30. But the relationship between a state’s
immunity and an official’s immunity is more complicated
than petitioner suggests, although we need not and do not
resolve the dispute among the parties as to the precise
scope of an official’s immunity at common law. The very
authority to which petitioner points us, and which we have
previously found instructive, see, e.g., Permanent Mission,
551 U. S., at 200, states that the immunity of individual
officials is subject to a caveat not applicable to any of the
other entities or persons15 to which the foreign state’s
immunity extends. The Restatement provides that the
“immunity of a foreign state . . . extends to . . . any other
public minister, official, or agent of the state with respect
to acts performed in his official capacity if the effect of
exercising jurisdiction would be to enforce a rule of law
against the state.” Restatement §66 (emphasis added).16
——————
and his argument that foreign relations and the reciprocal protection of
United States officials abroad would be undermined if we do not adopt
his reading of the Act. Because we are not deciding that the FSIA bars
petitioner’s immunity but rather that the Act does not address the
question, we need not determine whether declining to afford immunity
to petitioner would be consistent with international law.
15 The Restatement does not apply this caveat to the head of state,
head of government, or foreign minister. See Restatement §66.
Whether petitioner may be entitled to head of state immunity, or any
other immunity, under the common law is a question we leave open for
remand. See 552 F. 3d 371, 383 (CA4 2009). We express no view on
whether Restatement §66 correctly sets out the scope of the common
law immunity applicable to current or former foreign officials.
16 Respondents contend that this caveat refers to “the compulsive
effect of the judgment on the state,” Brief for Respondents 42, but
petitioner disputes that meaning, Reply Brief for Petitioner 17–18. We
need not resolve their dispute, as it is enough for present purposes that
the Restatement indicates a foreign official’s immunity may turn upon
a requirement not applicable to any other type of defendant.

