2

SAMANTAR v. YOUSUF
Opinion of the Court

bers of the Somali military forces who tortured, killed, or
arbitrarily detained them or members of their families;
that petitioner knew or should have known of the abuses
perpetrated by his subordinates; and that he aided and
abetted the commission of these abuses.1 Respondents’
complaint sought damages from petitioner pursuant to the
Torture Victim Protection Act of 1991, 106 Stat. 73, note
following 28 U. S. C. §1350, and the Alien Tort Statute, 28
U. S. C. §1350. Petitioner, who was in charge of Somalia’s
armed forces before its military regime collapsed, fled
Somalia in 1991 and is now a resident of Virginia. The
United States has not recognized any entity as the gov
ernment of Somalia since the fall of the military regime.
See Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 4.
Respondents filed their complaint in November 2004,
and petitioner promptly moved to dismiss. The District
Court stayed the proceedings to give the State Depart
ment an opportunity to provide a statement of interest
regarding petitioner’s claim of sovereign immunity. Each
month during the ensuing two years, petitioner advised
the court that the State Department had the matter “ ‘still
under consideration.’ ” No. 1:04cv1360 (ED Va., Aug. 1,
2007), App. to Pet. for Cert. 44a. In 2007, having received
no response from the State Department, the District Court
reinstated the case on its active docket. The court con
cluded that it did not have subject-matter jurisdiction and
granted petitioner’s motion to dismiss.
The District Court’s decision rested squarely on the
——————
1 Although we do not set out respondents’ allegations in detail, the
District Court’s written opinion contains a comprehensive summary,
describing not only the abuses respondents suffered but also the his
torical context in which the abuses occurred, as well as some of the
attempts to establish a stable government in Somalia in recent years.
See No. 1:04cv1360 (ED Va., Aug. 1, 2007), App. to Pet. for Cert. 31a–
43a.

