2

SAMANTAR v. YOUSUF
Syllabus
to the courts. §1602. This Act now governs the determination
whether a foreign state is entitled to sovereign immunity. Pp. 4–7.
(b) Reading the FSIA as a whole, there is nothing to suggest that
“foreign state” should be read to include an official acting on behalf of
that state. The Act specifies that a foreign state “includes a political
subdivision . . . or an agency or instrumentality” of that state,
§1603(a), and specifically delimits what counts as an “agency or in
strumentality,” §1603(b). Textual clues in the “agency or instrumen
tality” definition—“any entity” matching three specified characteris
tics, ibid.—cut against reading it to include a foreign official.
“Entity” typically refers to an organization; and the required statu
tory characteristics—e.g., “separate legal person,” §1603(b)(1)—apply
awkwardly, if at all, to individuals. Section 1603(a)’s “foreign state”
definition is also inapplicable. The list set out there, even if illustra
tive rather than exclusive, does not suggest that officials are in
cluded, since the listed defendants are all entities. The Court’s con
clusion is also supported by the fact that Congress expressly
mentioned officials elsewhere in the FSIA when it wished to count
their acts as equivalent to those of the foreign state. Moreover, other
FSIA provisions—e.g., §1608(a)—point away from reading “foreign
state” to include foreign officials. Pp. 7–13.
(c) The FSIA’s history and purposes also do not support petitioner’s
argument that the Act governs his immunity claim. There is little
reason to presume that when Congress codified state immunity, it in
tended to codify, sub silentio, official immunity. The canon of con
struction that statutes should be interpreted consistently with the
common law does not help decide the question whether, when a stat
ute’s coverage is ambiguous, Congress intended it to govern a par
ticular field. State and official immunities may not be coextensive,
and historically, the Government has suggested common-law immu
nity for individual officials even when the foreign state did not qual
ify. Though a foreign state’s immunity may, in some circumstances,
extend to an individual for official acts, it does not follow that Con
gress intended to codify that immunity in the FSIA. Official immu
nity was simply not the problem that Congress was addressing when
enacting that Act. The Court’s construction of the Act should not be
affected by the risk that plaintiffs may use artful pleading to attempt
to select between application of the FSIA or the common law. This
case, where respondents have sued petitioner in his personal capacity
and seek damages from his own pockets, is governed by the common
law because it is not a claim against a foreign state as defined by the
FSIA. Pp. 13–19.
(d) Whether petitioner may be entitled to common-law immunity
and whether he may have other valid defenses are matters to be ad

