(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SAMANTAR v. YOUSUF ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1555. Argued March 3, 2010—Decided June 1, 2010
Respondents, who were persecuted by the Somali government during
the 1980’s, filed a damages action alleging that petitioner, who then
held high level government positions, exercised command and control
over the military forces committing the abuses; that he knew or
should have known of these acts; and that he aided and abetted in
their commission. The District Court concluded that it lacked sub
ject-matter jurisdiction and granted petitioner’s motion to dismiss the
suit, resting its decision on the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of
1976 (FSIA or Act), which provides that a “foreign state shall be im
mune from the jurisdiction” of both federal and state courts except as
provided in the Act, 28 U. S. C. §1604. The Fourth Circuit reversed,
holding that the FSIA does not apply to officials of a foreign state.
Held: The FSIA does not govern petitioner’s claim of immunity. Pp. 4–
20.
(a) Under the common-law doctrine of foreign sovereign immunity,
see Schooner Exchange v. McFaddon, 7 Cranch 116, if the State De
partment granted a sovereign’s diplomatic request for a “suggestion
of immunity,” the district court surrendered its jurisdiction, Ex parte
Peru, 318 U. S. 573, 581, 587. If the State Department refused, the
court could decide the immunity issue itself. Id., at 587. In 1952, the
State Department moved from a policy of requesting immunity in
most actions against friendly sovereigns to a “restrictive” theory that
confined immunity “to suits involving the foreign sovereign’s public
acts.” Verlinden B. V. v. Central Bank of Nigeria, 461 U. S. 480, 487.
Inconsistent application of sovereign immunity followed, leading to
the FSIA, whose primary purposes are (1) to endorse and codify the
restrictive theory, and (2) to transfer primary responsibility for decid
ing “claims of foreign states to immunity” from the State Department

