Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

without so much as a whisper from Congress on the sub
ject. (And if we were instead to adopt petitioner’s other
textual argument, we would subject those claims to the
different, more expansive, remedial scheme for agencies).
The Act’s careful calibration of remedies among the listed
types of defendants suggests that Congress did not mean
to cover other types of defendants never mentioned in the
text.
In sum, “[w]e do not . . . construe statutory phrases in
isolation; we read statutes as a whole.” United States v.
Morton, 467 U. S. 822, 828 (1984). Reading the FSIA as a
whole, there is nothing to suggest we should read “foreign
state” in §1603(a) to include an official acting on behalf of
the foreign state, and much to indicate that this meaning
was not what Congress enacted.12 The text does not ex
pressly foreclose petitioner’s reading, but it supports the
view of respondents and the United States that the Act
does not address an official’s claim to immunity.
IV
Petitioner argues that the FSIA is best read to cover his
claim to immunity because of its history and purpose. As
discussed at the outset, one of the primary purposes of the
FSIA was to codify the restrictive theory of sovereign
immunity, which Congress recognized as consistent with
extant international law. See §1602. We have observed
——————
12 Nor

is it the case that the FSIA’s “legislative history does not even
hint of an intent to exclude individual officials,” Chuidian, 912 F. 2d, at
1101. The legislative history makes clear that Congress did not intend
the FSIA to address position-based individual immunities such as
diplomatic and consular immunity. H. R. Rep., at 12 (“The bill is not
intended . . . . to affect either diplomatic or consular immunity”). It also
suggests that general “official immunity” is something separate from
the subject of the bill. See id., at 23 (“The bill does not attempt to deal
with questions of discovery. . . . [I]f a plaintiff sought to depose a
diplomat in the United States or a high-ranking official of a foreign
government, diplomatic and official immunity would apply”).

