14

SAMANTAR v. YOUSUF
Opinion of the Court

that a related purpose was “codification of international
law at the time of the FSIA’s enactment,” Permanent
Mission of India to United Nations v. City of New York,
551 U. S. 193, 199 (2007), and have examined the relevant
common law and international practice when interpreting
the Act, id., at 200–201. Because of this relationship
between the Act and the common law that it codified,
petitioner argues that we should construe the FSIA con
sistently with the common law regarding individual im
munity, which—in petitioner’s view—was coextensive with
the law of state immunity and always immunized a for
eign official for acts taken on behalf of the foreign state.
Even reading the Act in light of Congress’ purpose of
codifying state sovereign immunity, however, we do not
think that the Act codified the common law with respect to
the immunity of individual officials.
The canon of construction that statutes should be inter
preted consistently with the common law helps us inter
pret a statute that clearly covers a field formerly governed
by the common law.13 But the canon does not help us to
decide the antecedent question whether, when a statute’s
coverage is ambiguous, Congress intended the statute to
govern a particular field—in this case, whether Congress
intended the FSIA to supersede the common law of official
immunity.14
——————
13 Congress “is understood to legislate against a background of com
mon-law . . . principles,” Astoria Fed. Sav. & Loan Assn. v. Solimino,
501 U. S. 104, 108 (1991), and when a statute covers an issue previ
ously governed by the common law, we interpret the statute with the
presumption that Congress intended to retain the substance of the
common law. See Isbrandtsen Co. v. Johnson, 343 U. S. 779, 783 (1952)
(“Statutes which invade the common law . . . are to be read with a
presumption favoring the retention of long-established and familiar
principles, except when a statutory purpose to the contrary is evident”).
14 We find similarly inapposite petitioner’s invocation of the canon
that a statute should be interpreted in compliance with international
law, see Murray v. Schooner Charming Betsy, 2 Cranch 64, 118 (1804),

