Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

Petitioner would have a stronger case if there were any
indication that Congress’ intent to enact a comprehensive
solution for suits against states extended to suits against
individual officials. But to the extent Congress contem
plated the Act’s effect upon officials at all, the evidence
points in the opposite direction. As we have already men
tioned, the legislative history points toward an intent to
leave official immunity outside the scope of the Act. See
n. 12, supra. And although questions of official immunity
did arise in the pre-FSIA period, they were few and far
between.18 The immunity of officials simply was not the
particular problem to which Congress was responding
when it enacted the FSIA. The FSIA was adopted, rather,
to address “a modern world where foreign state enter
prises are every day participants in commercial activities,”
and to assure litigants that decisions regarding claims
against states and their enterprises “are made on purely
legal grounds.” H. R. Rep., at 7. We have been given no
reason to believe that Congress saw as a problem, or
wanted to eliminate, the State Department’s role in de
terminations regarding individual official immunity.19
——————
F. 2d, at 1103, 1106. That may be correct as a matter of common-law
principles, but it does not derive from any clarification or codification
by Congress. Furthermore, if Congress intended the FSIA to reach
individuals, one would expect the Act to have addressed whether former
officials are covered, an issue it settled with respect to instrumentali
ties, see Dole Food Co. v. Patrickson, 538 U. S. 468, 478 (2003)
(“[I]nstrumentality status [must] be determined at the time suit is
filed”).
18 A study that attempted to gather all of the State Department deci
sions related to sovereign immunity from the adoption of the restrictive
theory in 1952 to the enactment of the FSIA reveals only four decisions
related to official immunity, and two related to head of state immunity,
out of a total of 110 decisions. Sovereign Immunity Decisions of the
Dept. of State, May 1952 to Jan. 1977 (M. Sandler, D. Vagts, & B.
Ristau eds.), in Digest of U. S. Practice in Int’l Law 1020, 1080 (1977)
(hereinafter Digest).
19 The FSIA was introduced in accordance with the recommendation

