Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

After the enactment of the FSIA, the Act—and not the
pre-existing common law—indisputably governs the de
termination of whether a foreign state is entitled to sover
eign immunity.
What we must now decide is whether the Act also covers
the immunity claims of foreign officials. We begin with
the statute’s text and then consider petitioner’s reliance on
its history and purpose.
III
The FSIA provides that “a foreign state shall be immune
from the jurisdiction of the courts of the United States and
of the States” except as provided in the Act. §1604. Thus,
if a defendant is a “foreign state” within the meaning of
the Act, then the defendant is immune from jurisdiction
unless one of the exceptions in the Act applies. See
§§1605–1607 (enumerating exceptions). The Act, if it
applies, is the “sole basis for obtaining jurisdiction over a
foreign state in federal court.” Argentine Republic v.
Amerada Hess Shipping Corp., 488 U. S. 428, 439 (1989).
The question we face in this case is whether an individual
sued for conduct undertaken in his official capacity is a
“foreign state” within the meaning of the Act.
The Act defines “foreign state” in §1603 as follows:
“(a) A ‘foreign state’ . . . includes a political subdivi
——————
pose,” reads as follows:
“The Congress finds that the determination by United States courts
of the claims of foreign states to immunity from the jurisdiction of such
courts would serve the interests of justice and would protect the rights
of both foreign states and litigants in United States courts. Under
international law, states are not immune from the jurisdiction of
foreign courts insofar as their commercial activities are concerned, and
their commercial property may be levied upon for the satisfaction of
judgments rendered against them in connection with their commercial
activities. Claims of foreign states to immunity should henceforth be
decided by courts of the United States and of the States in conformity
with the principles set forth in this chapter.”

