(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CIGNA CORP. ET AL. v. AMARA ET AL., INDIVIDUALLY 

AND ON BEHALF OF ALL OTHERS SIMILARLY SITUATED

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 09–804.

Argued November 30, 2010—Decided May 16, 2011

Until 1998, petitioner CIGNA Corporation’s pension plan provided a
retiring employee with an annuity based on preretirement salary and
length of service. Its new plan replaced that annuity with a cash
balance based on a defined annual contribution from CIGNA, in
creased by compound interest. The new plan translated already
earned benefits under the old plan into an opening amount in the
cash balance account. Respondents, on behalf of beneficiaries of the
CIGNA Pension Plan (also a petitioner), challenged the new plan’s
adoption, claiming, as relevant here, that CIGNA’s notice of the
changes was improper, particularly because the new plan in certain
respects provided them with less generous benefits. The District
Court found that CIGNA’s disclosures violated its obligations under
§§102(a), 104(b), and 204(h) of the Employee Retirement Income Se
curity Act of 1974 (ERISA). In determining relief, it found that
CIGNA’s notice defects had caused the employees “likely harm.” It
then reformed the new plan and ordered CIGNA to pay benefits ac
cordingly, finding its authority in ERISA §502(a)(1)(B), which author
izes a plan “participant or beneficiary” to bring a “civil action” to “re
cover benefits due . . . under the terms of his plan.” The Second
Circuit affirmed.
Held:
1. Although §502(a)(1)(B) did not give the District Court authority
to reform CIGNA’s plan, relief is authorized by §502(a)(3), which al
lows a participant, beneficiary, or fiduciary “to obtain other appropri
ate equitable relief” to redress violations of ERISA “or the [plan’s]
terms.” Pp. 12–20.
(a) The court ordered relief in two steps. Step 1: It ordered the


2

CIGNA CORP. v. AMARA
Syllabus
terms of the plan reformed. Step 2: It ordered CIGNA to enforce the
plan as reformed. Step 2 orders recovery of the benefits provided by
the “terms of [the reformed] plan” and is thus consistent with
§502(a)(1)(B). However, that provision—which speaks of “enforc[ing]”
the plan’s terms, not changing them—does not suggest that it author
izes a court to alter those terms here, where the change, akin to re
forming a contract, seems less like the simple enforcement of a con
tract as written and more like an equitable remedy. Nor can the
Court accept the Solicitor General’s alternative rationale: that the
District Court enforced the summary plan descriptions and that they
are plan terms. That reading cannot be squared with ERISA §102(a),
which obliges plan administrators to furnish summary plan descrip
tions, but does not suggest that information about the plan provided
by those disclosures is itself part of the plan.
Nothing in
§502(a)(1)(B) suggests the contrary. The Solicitor General’s reading
also cannot be squared with the statute’s division of authority be
tween a plan’s sponsor—who, like a trust’s settlor, creates the plan’s
basic terms and conditions, executes a written instrument containing
those terms and conditions, and provides in that instrument a proce
dure for making amendments—and the plan’s administrator—a trus
tee-like fiduciary who manages the plan, follows its terms in doing so,
and provides participants with the summary plan descriptions. ERISA carefully distinguishes these roles, and there is no reason to be
lieve that the statute intends to mix the responsibilities by giving the
administrator the power to set plan terms indirectly in the summa
ries, even when, as here, the administrator is also the plan sponsor.
Finally, it is difficult to reconcile an interpretation that would make a
summary’s language legally binding with the basic summary plan
description objective of clear, simple communication. Pp. 12–15.
(b) This Court has interpreted §502(a)(3)’s phrase “appropriate
equitable relief” as referring to “ ‘those categories of relief ’ ” that, be
fore the merger of law and equity,“ ‘were typically available in eq
uity.’ ” Sereboff v. Mid Atlantic Medical Services, Inc., 547 U. S. 356,
361. This case—concerning a beneficiary’s suit against a plan fiduci
ary (whom ERISA typically treats as a trustee) about the terms of a
plan (which ERISA typically treats as a trust)—is the kind of lawsuit
that, before the merger, could have been brought only in an equity
court, where the remedies available were traditionally considered eq
uitable remedies. The District Court’s injunctions obviously fall
within this category. The other relief it ordered closely resembles
three forms of traditional equitable relief. First, what the court did
here may be regarded as the reformation of the plan’s terms, in order
to remedy false or misleading information CIGNA provided. The
power to reform contracts is a traditional power of an equity court


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
and is used to prevent fraud. Second, the part of the remedy holding
CIGNA to its promise that the new plan would not take from its em
ployees previously accrued benefits resembles estoppel, also a tradi
tional equitable remedy. Third, the injunctions require the plan ad
ministrator to pay already retired beneficiaries money owed them
under the plan as reformed. Equity courts possessed the power to
provide monetary “compensation” for a loss resulting from a trustee’s
breach of duty, or to prevent the trustee’s unjust enrichment. That
surcharge remedy extended to a breach of trust committed by a fidu
ciary encompassing any violation of duty imposed on that fiduciary.
Pp. 16–20.
2. Because §502(a)(3) authorizes “appropriate equitable relief” for
violations of ERISA, the relevant standard of harm will depend on
the equitable theory by which the District Court provides relief. That
court is to conduct the analysis in the first instance, but there are
several equitable principles that it might apply on remand. Neither
ERISA’s relevant substantive provisions nor §502(a)(3) sets a particu
lar standard for determining harm. And equity law provides no gen
eral principle that “detrimental reliance” must be proved before a
remedy is decreed. To the extent any such requirement arises, it is
because the specific remedy being contemplated imposes that re
quirement. Thus, when a court exercises authority under §502(a)(3)
to impose a remedy equivalent to estoppel, a showing of detrimental
reliance must be made. However, equity courts did not insist on a
detrimental reliance showing where they ordered reformation where
a fraudulent suppression, omission, or insertion materially affected
the substance of a contract. Nor did they require a detrimental reli
ance showing when they ordered surcharge. They simply ordered a
trust or beneficiary made whole following a trustee’s breach of trust.
This flexible approach belies a strict detrimental reliance require
ment. To be sure, a fiduciary can be surcharged under §502(a)(3)
only upon a showing of actual harm, and such harm may consist of
detrimental reliance. But it might also come from the loss of a right
protected by ERISA or its trust-law antecedents. It is not difficult to
imagine how the failure to provide proper summary information here,
in violation of ERISA, injured employees even if they did not them
selves act in reliance on the summaries. Thus, to obtain relief by
surcharge for violations of §§102(a) and 104(b), a plan participant or
beneficiary must show that the violation caused injury, but need
show only actual harm and causation, not detrimental reliance.
Pp. 20–22.
348 Fed. Appx. 627, vacated and remanded.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,


4

CIGNA CORP. v. AMARA
Syllabus

C. J., and KENNEDY, GINSBURG, ALITO, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. SCALIA,
J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which THOMAS, J.,
joined. SOTOMAYOR, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of
the case.

