2

HARDT v. RELIANCE STANDARD LIFE INS. CO.
Opinion of the Court

in January 2003.
In August 2003, Hardt sought long-term disability
benefits from Dan River’s Group Long-Term Disability
Insurance Program Plan (Plan). Dan River administers
the Plan, which is subject to ERISA, but respondent Reli
ance Standard Life Insurance Company decides whether a
claimant qualifies for benefits under the Plan and under
writes any benefits awarded. Reliance provisionally ap
proved Hardt’s claim, telling her that final approval
hinged on her performance in a functional capacities
evaluation intended to assess the impact of her carpal
tunnel syndrome and neck pain on her ability to work.
Hardt completed the functional capacities evaluation in
October 2003. The evaluator summarized Hardt’s medical
history, observed her resulting physical limitations, and
ultimately found that Hardt could perform some amount
of sedentary work. Based on this finding, Reliance con
cluded that Hardt was not totally disabled within the
meaning of the Plan and denied her claim for disability
benefits. Hardt filed an administrative appeal. Reliance
reversed itself in part, finding that Hardt was totally
disabled from her regular occupation, and was therefore
entitled to temporary disability benefits for 24 months.
While her administrative appeal was pending, Hardt
began experiencing new symptoms in her feet and calves,
including tingling, pain, and numbness. One of her physi
cians diagnosed her with small-fiber neuropathy, a condi
tion that increased her pain and decreased her physical
capabilities over the ensuing months.
Hardt eventually applied to the Social Security Admini
stration for disability benefits under the Social Security
Act. Her application included questionnaires completed
by two of her treating physicians, which described Hardt’s
symptoms and stated the doctors’ conclusion that Hardt
could not return to full gainful employment because of her
neuropathy and other ailments. In February 2005, the

