(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

HARDT v. RELIANCE STANDARD LIFE INSURANCE

CO. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–448.

Argued April 26, 2010—Decided May 24, 2010

After medical problems forced petitioner Hardt to stop working, she
filed for long-term disability benefits under her employer’s long-term
disability plan. Upon exhausting her administrative remedies, Hardt
sued respondent Reliance, her employer’s disability insurance car
rier, alleging that it had violated the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) by wrongfully denying her benefits
claim. The District Court denied Reliance summary judgment, find
ing that because the carrier had acted on incomplete medical infor
mation, the benefits denial was not based on substantial evidence.
Though also denying Hardt summary judgment, the court stated that
it found “compelling evidence” in the record that she was totally dis
abled and that it was inclined to rule in her favor, but concluded that
it would be unwise to do so without giving Reliance the chance to ad
dress the deficiencies in its approach. The court therefore remanded
to Reliance, giving it 30 days to consider all the evidence and to act
on Hardt’s application, or else the court would enter judgment in
Hardt’s favor. Reliance did as instructed and awarded Hardt bene
fits. Hardt then filed a motion under 29 U. S. C. §1132(g)(1), a fee
shifting statute that applies in most ERISA lawsuits and provides
that “the court in its discretion may allow a reasonable attorney’s fee
and costs . . . to either party.” Granting the motion, the District
Court applied the Circuit’s framework governing attorney’s fee re
quests in ERISA cases, concluding, inter alia, that Hardt had at
tained the requisite “prevailing party” status. The Fourth Circuit va
cated the fees award, holding that Hardt had failed to establish that
she qualified as a “prevailing party” under the rule set forth in Buck
hannon Board & Care Home, Inc. v. West Virginia Dept. of Health

