4

HARDT v. RELIANCE STANDARD LIFE INS. CO.
Opinion of the Court

viewed some, but not all, of Hardt’s medical records.
Based on that review, the physician produced a report in
which he opined that Hardt’s health was expected to
improve. His report, however, did not mention Hardt’s
pain medications or the questionnaires that Hardt’s at
tending physicians had completed as part of her applica
tion for Social Security benefits. The vocational rehabili
tation counselor, in turn, performed a labor market study
(based on Hardt’s health in 2003) that identified eight
employment opportunities suitable for Hardt. After re
viewing the physician’s report, the labor market study,
and the results of the 2003 functional capacities evalua
tion, Reliance concluded that its decision to terminate
Hardt’s benefits was correct. It advised Hardt of this
decision in March 2006.
After exhausting her administrative remedies, Hardt
sued Reliance in the United States District Court for the
Eastern District of Virginia. She alleged that Reliance
violated ERISA by wrongfully denying her claim for long
term disability benefits. See §1132(a)(1)(B). The parties
filed cross-motions for summary judgment, both of which
the District Court denied.
The court first rejected Reliance’s request for summary
judgment affirming the denial of benefits, finding that
“Reliance’s decision to deny benefits was based on incom
plete information.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 42a. Most
prominently, none of the functional capacities evaluations
to which Hardt had submitted had “assessed the impact of
neuropathy and neuropathic pain on Ms. Hardt.” Ibid. In
addition, the reviewing physician’s report “was itself
incomplete”; the basis for the physician’s “medical conclu
sions [wa]s extremely vague and conclusory,” ibid., and
the physician had “failed to cite any medical evidence to
support his conclusions,” id., at 43a, or “to address the
treating physicians’ contradictory medical findings,” id., at
44a. The court also found that Reliance had “improperly

