Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

Social Security Administration granted Hardt’s applica
tion and awarded her disability benefits.
About two months later, Reliance told Hardt that her
Plan benefits would expire at the end of the 24-month
period. Reliance explained that under the Plan’s terms,
only individuals who are “totally disabled from all occupa
tions” were eligible for benefits beyond that period, App. to
Pet. for Cert. 36a, and adhered to its conclusion that,
based on its review of Hardt’s records, Hardt was not
“totally disabled” as defined by the Plan. Reliance also
demanded that Hardt pay Reliance $14,913.23 to offset
the disability benefits she had received from the Social
Security Administration. (The Plan contains a provision
coordinating benefits with Social Security payments.)
Hardt paid Reliance the offset.
Hardt then filed another administrative appeal. She
gave Reliance all of her medical records, the question
naires she had submitted to the Social Security Admini
stration, and an updated questionnaire from one of her
physicians. Reliance asked Hardt to supplement this
material with another functional capacities evaluation.
When Reliance referred Hardt for the updated evaluation,
it did not ask the evaluator to review Hardt for neuro
pathic pain, even though it knew that Hardt had been
diagnosed with neuropathy after her first evaluation.
Hardt appeared for the updated evaluation in December
2005, and appeared for another evaluation in January
2006. The evaluators deemed both evaluations invalid
because Hardt’s efforts were “submaximal.” Id., at 37a.
One evaluator recorded that Hardt “refused multiple tests
. . . for fear of nausea/illness/further pain complaints.”
Ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted).
Lacking an updated functional capacities evaluation,
Reliance hired a physician and a vocation rehabilitation
counselor to help it resolve Hardt’s administrative appeal.
The physician did not examine Hardt; instead, he re

