Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

rejected much of the evidence that Ms. Hardt submitted,”
id., at 45a, and had “further ignored the substantial
amount of pain medication Ms. Hardt’s treating physi
cians had prescribed to her,” id., at 46a. Accordingly, the
court thought it “clear that Reliance’s decision to deny Ms.
Hardt long-term disability benefits was not based on
substantial evidence.” Id., at 47a.
The District Court then denied Hardt’s motion for sum
mary judgment, which contended that Reliance’s decision
to deny benefits was unreasonable as a matter of law. In
so doing, however, the court found “compelling evidence”
in the record that “Ms. Hardt [wa]s totally disabled due to
her neuropathy.” Id., at 48a. Although it was “inclined to
rule in Ms. Hardt’s favor,” the court concluded that “it
would be unwise to take this step without first giving
Reliance the chance to address the deficiencies in its ap
proach.” Ibid. In the District Court’s view, a remand to
Reliance was warranted because “[t]his case presents one
of those scenarios where the plan administrator has failed
to comply with the ERISA guidelines,” meaning “Ms.
Hardt did not get the kind of review to which she was
entitled under applicable law.” Ibid. Accordingly, the
court instructed “Reliance to act on Ms. Hardt’s applica
tion by adequately considering all the evidence” within 30
days; “[o]therwise,” it warned, “judgment will be issued in
favor of Ms. Hardt.” Id., at 49a.
Reliance did as instructed.
After conducting that
review, Reliance found Hardt eligible for long-term dis
ability benefits and paid her $55,250 in accrued, past-due
benefits.
Hardt then moved for attorney’s fees and costs under
§1132(g)(1). The District Court assessed her motion under
the three-step framework that governed fee requests in
ERISA cases under Circuit precedent. At step one of that
framework, a district court asks whether the fee claimant
is a “ ‘prevailing party.’ ” Id., at 15a–16a (quoting Martin

