Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Per Curiam

taking you so long to give us the money.” Id., at 217–218.
Williams was “cussing [Walker] out, telling him he’d
give it to him when he felt like it and he ain’t scared of
[Walker].” Id., at 218. A fight ensued, which ended
when Williams beat Walker with a broomstick in front
of the crowd of people that had gathered.
After the fight, Doubs testified, Walker “was mad, because he got beat by a crackhead. . . . He was saying, yo,
that crackhead beat me. I’m going to kill that crackhead.
I’m going to kill that kid. . . . He was hot. He was heated.”
Id., at 220–221. Johnson was present when Walker made
these statements. Later that afternoon, Doubs recounted
the beating to others, who laughed at Walker. Walker
“repeated it for a while that I’m going to kill that kid.
That kid must think I’m some type of joke. I’m going to
kill that kid. Who he think he is[?]” Id., at 222. Once
again, Johnson was present for these statements.
Another witness was Carla Brown, a friend of the victim,
who testified that she was at the Midnight Special Bar
on the night of December 14–15, where she saw Walker,
Johnson, and Williams engaged in a heated argument.
Although she could not hear what they were saying, she
could tell they were arguing because they were making “a
lot of arm movements.” Id., at 104. The bouncer soon told
them to leave, and Brown followed them into the street
because she “wanted to know what was going on.” Ibid.
Brown observed the three men walking in a single-file
line, with Walker in front, Williams in the middle, and
Johnson in the back. Walker was wearing a long leather
coat, walking as if he had something concealed underneath it. Brown followed the three men to an alleyway, at
which point Williams recognized Brown and told her to “go
ahead” and pass. Id., at 107. Walker then entered the
alleyway, followed by Williams, while Johnson remained
standing at the entrance. As Brown walked past the alley,
she heard a loud “boom,” causing her to run away. Id., at

