Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

tion for purposes of the Sixth Amendment right to effective assistance of counsel.” 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
16). It also rejected the argument made by petitioner in
this case that a knowing and voluntary plea supersedes
errors by defense counsel. Cf. Brief for Respondent in
Padilla v. Kentucky, O. T. 2009, No. 08–651, p. 27 (arguing
Sixth Amendment’s assurance of effective assistance “does
not extend to collateral aspects of the prosecution” because
“knowledge of the consequences that are collateral to the
guilty plea is not a prerequisite to the entry of a knowing
and intelligent plea”).
In the case now before the Court the State, as petitioner,
points out that the legal question presented is different
from that in Hill and Padilla. In those cases the claim
was that the prisoner’s plea of guilty was invalid because
counsel had provided incorrect advice pertinent to the
plea. In the instant case, by contrast, the guilty plea that
was accepted, and the plea proceedings concerning it in
court, were all based on accurate advice and information
from counsel. The challenge is not to the advice pertaining to the plea that was accepted but rather to the course
of legal representation that preceded it with respect to
other potential pleas and plea offers.
To give further support to its contention that the instant
case is in a category different from what the Court considered in Hill and Padilla, the State urges that there is no
right to a plea offer or a plea bargain in any event. See
Weatherford v. Bursey, 429 U. S. 545, 561 (1977). It claims
Frye therefore was not deprived of any legal benefit to
which he was entitled. Under this view, any wrongful or
mistaken action of counsel with respect to earlier plea
offers is beside the point.
The State is correct to point out that Hill and Padilla
concerned whether there was ineffective assistance leading to acceptance of a plea offer, a process involving a
formal court appearance with the defendant and all coun-

