Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
breach of duty. Pp. 8–11.
3. To show prejudice where a plea offer has lapsed or been rejected
because of counsel’s deficient performance, defendants must demonstrate a reasonable probability both that they would have accepted
the more favorable plea offer had they been afforded effective assistance of counsel and that the plea would have been entered without
the prosecution’s canceling it or the trial court’s refusing to accept it,
if they had the authority to exercise that discretion under state law.
This application of Strickland to uncommunicated, lapsed pleas does
not alter Hill’s standard, which requires a defendant complaining
that ineffective assistance led him to accept a plea offer instead of going to trial to show “a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s
errors, he would not have pleaded guilty and would have insisted on
going to trial.” 474 U. S., at 59. Hill correctly applies in the context
in which it arose, but it does not provide the sole means for demonstrating prejudice arising from counsel’s deficient performance during plea negotiations. Because Frye argues that with effective assistance he would have accepted an earlier plea offer as opposed to
entering an open plea, Strickland’s inquiry into whether “the result
of the proceeding would have been different,” 466 U. S., at 694, requires looking not at whether the defendant would have proceeded to
trial but at whether he would have accepted the earlier plea offer.
He must also show that, if the prosecution had the discretion to cancel the plea agreement or the trial court had the discretion to refuse
to accept it, there is a reasonable probability neither the prosecution
nor the trial court would have prevented the offer from being accepted or implemented. This further showing is particularly important
because a defendant has no right to be offered a plea, see Weatherford
v. Bursey, 429 U. S. 545, 561, nor a federal right that the judge accept
it, Santobello v. New York, 404 U. S. 257, 262. Missouri, among other
States, appears to give the prosecution some discretion to cancel a
plea agreement; and the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, some
state rules, including Missouri’s, and this Court’s precedents give trial courts some leeway to accept or reject plea agreements. Pp. 11–13.
4. Applying these standards here, the Missouri court correctly concluded that counsel’s failure to inform Frye of the written plea offer
before it expired fell below an objective reasonableness standard, but
it failed to require Frye to show that the plea offer would have been
adhered to by the prosecution and accepted by the trial court. These
matters should be addressed by the Missouri appellate court in the
first instance. Given that Frye’s new offense for driving without a license occurred a week before his preliminary hearing, there is reason
to doubt that the prosecution would have adhered to the agreement
or that the trial court would have accepted it unless they were re-

