4

MISSOURI v. FRYE
SCALIA, J., dissenting

before the hearing at which the agreement would have
been presented; but they assuredly will not be easy in the
mine run of cases.
The Court says “[i]t can be assumed that in most jurisdictions prosecutors and judges are familiar with the
boundaries of acceptable plea bargains and sentences.”
Ante, at 13. Assuredly it can, just as it can be assumed
that the sun rises in the west; but I know of no basis for
the assumption. Virtually no cases deal with the standards for a prosecutor’s withdrawal from a plea agreement
beyond stating the general rule that a prosecutor may
withdraw any time prior to, but not after, the entry of a
guilty plea or other action constituting detrimental reliance on the defendant’s part. See, e.g., United States v.
Kuchinski, 469 F. 3d 853, 857–858 (CA9 2006). And cases
addressing trial courts’ authority to accept or reject plea
agreements almost universally observe that a trial court
enjoys broad discretion in this regard. See, e.g., Missouri
v. Banks, 135 S. W. 3d 497, 500 (Mo. App. 2004) (trial
court abuses its discretion in rejecting a plea only if the
decision “is so arbitrary and unreasonable that it shocks
the sense of justice and indicates a lack of careful consideration” (internal quotation marks omitted)). Of course
after today’s opinions there will be cases galore, so the
Court’s assumption would better be cast as an optimistic
prediction of the certainty that will emerge, many years
hence, from our newly created constitutional field of pleabargaining law. Whatever the “boundaries” ultimately
devised (if that were possible), a vast amount of discretion
will still remain, and it is extraordinary to make a defendant’s constitutional rights depend upon a series of retrospective mind-readings as to how that discretion, in
prosecutors and trial judges, would have been exercised.
The plea-bargaining process is a subject worthy of regulation, since it is the means by which most criminal convictions are obtained. It happens not to be, however, a

