2

MISSOURI v. FRYE
SCALIA, J., dissenting

tunity to accept a plea bargain to which he had no entitlement in the first place. So little entitlement that, had
he known of and accepted the bargain, the prosecution
would have been able to withdraw it right up to the point
that his guilty plea pursuant to the bargain was accepted.
See 311 S. W. 3d 350, 359, and n. 4 (Mo. App. 2010).
The Court acknowledges, moreover, that Frye’s conviction was untainted by attorney error: “[T]he guilty plea
that was accepted, and the plea proceedings concerning it
in court, were all based on accurate advice and information from counsel.” Ante, at 5. Given the “ultimate
focus” of our ineffective-assistance cases on “the fundamental fairness of the proceeding whose result is being
challenged,” Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668, 696
(1984), that should be the end of the matter. Instead,
here, as in Lafler, the Court mechanically applies an
outcome-based test for prejudice, and mistakes the possibility of a different result for constitutional injustice. As
I explain in Lafler, post, p. ___ (dissenting opinion), that
approach is contrary to our precedents on the right to
effective counsel, and for good reason.
The Court announces its holding that “as a general rule,
defense counsel has the duty to communicate formal offers
from the prosecution” as though that resolves a disputed
point; in reality, however, neither the State nor the Solicitor General argued that counsel’s performance here was
adequate. Ante, at 9. The only issue was whether the inadequacy deprived Frye of his constitutional right to a
fair trial. In other cases, however, it will not be so clear
that counsel’s plea-bargaining skills, which must now
meet a constitutional minimum, are adequate. “[H]ow to
define the duty and responsibilities of defense counsel in
the plea bargain process,” the Court acknowledges, “is a
difficult question,” since “[b]argaining is, by its nature,
defined to a substantial degree by personal style.” Ante, at
8. Indeed. What if an attorney’s “personal style” is to

