14

MISSOURI v. FRYE
Opinion of the Court

would have adhered to the agreement and that it would
have been accepted by the trial court. Frye can show he
would have accepted the offer, but there is strong reason
to doubt the prosecution and the trial court would have
permitted the plea bargain to become final.
There appears to be a reasonable probability Frye would
have accepted the prosecutor’s original offer of a plea
bargain if the offer had been communicated to him, because he pleaded guilty to a more serious charge, with no
promise of a sentencing recommendation from the prosecutor. It may be that in some cases defendants must show
more than just a guilty plea to a charge or sentence harsher than the original offer. For example, revelations between plea offers about the strength of the prosecution’s
case may make a late decision to plead guilty insufficient
to demonstrate, without further evidence, that the defendant would have pleaded guilty to an earlier, more generous plea offer if his counsel had reported it to him. Here,
however, that is not the case. The Court of Appeals did
not err in finding Frye’s acceptance of the less favorable
plea offer indicated that he would have accepted the earlier (and more favorable) offer had he been apprised of it;
and there is no need to address here the showings that
might be required in other cases.
The Court of Appeals failed, however, to require Frye to
show that the first plea offer, if accepted by Frye, would
have been adhered to by the prosecution and accepted by
the trial court. Whether the prosecution and trial court
are required to do so is a matter of state law, and it is not
the place of this Court to settle those matters. The Court
has established the minimum requirements of the Sixth
Amendment as interpreted in Strickland, and States have
the discretion to add procedural protections under state
law if they choose. A State may choose to preclude the
prosecution from withdrawing a plea offer once it has been
accepted or perhaps to preclude a trial court from rejecting

