6

MISSOURI v. FRYE
Opinion of the Court

sel present. Before a guilty plea is entered the defendant’s
understanding of the plea and its consequences can be
established on the record. This affords the State substantial protection against later claims that the plea was the
result of inadequate advice. At the plea entry proceedings
the trial court and all counsel have the opportunity to
establish on the record that the defendant understands
the process that led to any offer, the advantages and
disadvantages of accepting it, and the sentencing consequences or possibilities that will ensue once a conviction is
entered based upon the plea. See, e.g., Fed. Rule Crim.
Proc. 11; Mo. Sup. Ct. Rule 24.02 (2004). Hill and Padilla
both illustrate that, nevertheless, there may be instances
when claims of ineffective assistance can arise after the
conviction is entered. Still, the State, and the trial court
itself, have had a substantial opportunity to guard against
this contingency by establishing at the plea entry proceeding that the defendant has been given proper advice or, if
the advice received appears to have been inadequate, to
remedy that deficiency before the plea is accepted and the
conviction entered.
When a plea offer has lapsed or been rejected, however,
no formal court proceedings are involved. This underscores that the plea-bargaining process is often in flux,
with no clear standards or timelines and with no judicial
supervision of the discussions between prosecution and
defense. Indeed, discussions between client and defense
counsel are privileged. So the prosecution has little or no
notice if something may be amiss and perhaps no capacity
to intervene in any event. And, as noted, the State insists
there is no right to receive a plea offer. For all these
reasons, the State contends, it is unfair to subject it to the
consequences of defense counsel’s inadequacies, especially
when the opportunities for a full and fair trial, or, as here,
for a later guilty plea albeit on less favorable terms, are
preserved.

