12

MISSOURI v. FRYE
Opinion of the Court

counsel’s errors, he would not have pleaded guilty and
would have insisted on going to trial.” Hill, 474 U. S., at
59. Hill was correctly decided and applies in the context
in which it arose. Hill does not, however, provide the sole
means for demonstrating prejudice arising from the deficient performance of counsel during plea negotiations.
Unlike the defendant in Hill, Frye argues that with effective assistance he would have accepted an earlier plea
offer (limiting his sentence to one year in prison) as opposed to entering an open plea (exposing him to a maximum sentence of four years’ imprisonment). In a case,
such as this, where a defendant pleads guilty to less favorable terms and claims that ineffective assistance of
counsel caused him to miss out on a more favorable earlier
plea offer, Strickland’s inquiry into whether “the result of
the proceeding would have been different,” 466 U. S., at
694, requires looking not at whether the defendant would
have proceeded to trial absent ineffective assistance but
whether he would have accepted the offer to plead pursuant to the terms earlier proposed.
In order to complete a showing of Strickland prejudice,
defendants who have shown a reasonable probability they
would have accepted the earlier plea offer must also show
that, if the prosecution had the discretion to cancel it or
if the trial court had the discretion to refuse to accept it,
there is a reasonable probability neither the prosecution
nor the trial court would have prevented the offer from
being accepted or implemented. This further showing is of
particular importance because a defendant has no right to
be offered a plea, see Weatherford, 429 U. S., at 561, nor a
federal right that the judge accept it, Santobello v. New
York, 404 U. S. 257, 262 (1971). In at least some States,
including Missouri, it appears the prosecution has some
discretion to cancel a plea agreement to which the defendant has agreed, see, e.g., 311 S. W. 3d, at 359 (case below);
Ariz. Rule Crim. Proc. 17.4(b) (Supp. 2011). The Federal

