(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MISSOURI v. FRYE
CERTIORARI TO THE COURT OF APPEALS OF MISSOURI, WESTERN DISTRICT
No. 10–444.

Argued October 31, 2011—Decided March 21, 2012

Respondent Frye was charged with driving with a revoked license. Because he had been convicted of the same offense three times before,
he was charged, under Missouri law, with a felony carrying a maximum 4-year prison term. The prosecutor sent Frye’s counsel a letter,
offering two possible plea bargains, including an offer to reduce the
charge to a misdemeanor and to recommend, with a guilty plea, a 90day sentence. Counsel did not convey the offers to Frye, and they expired. Less than a week before Frye’s preliminary hearing, he was
again arrested for driving with a revoked license. He subsequently
pleaded guilty with no underlying plea agreement and was sentenced
to three years in prison. Seeking postconviction relief in state court,
he alleged his counsel’s failure to inform him of the earlier plea offers
denied him the effective assistance of counsel, and he testified that
he would have pleaded guilty to the misdemeanor had he known of
the offer. The court denied his motion, but the Missouri appellate
court reversed, holding that Frye met both of the requirements for
showing a Sixth Amendment violation under Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668. Specifically, the court found that defense counsel
had been ineffective in not communicating the plea offers to Frye and
concluded that Frye had shown that counsel’s deficient performance
caused him prejudice because he pleaded guilty to a felony instead of
a misdemeanor.
Held:
1. The Sixth Amendment right to effective assistance of counsel extends to the consideration of plea offers that lapse or are rejected.
That right applies to “all ‘critical’ stages of the criminal proceedings.”
Montejo v. Louisiana, 556 U. S. 778, 786. Hill v. Lockhart, 474 U. S.
52, established that Strickland’s two-part test governs ineffective-

