Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

establish a reputation as a hard bargainer by, for example,
advising clients to proceed to trial rather than accept
anything but the most favorable plea offers? It seems
inconceivable that a lawyer could compromise his client’s
constitutional rights so that he can secure better deals for
other clients in the future; does a hard-bargaining “personal style” now violate the Sixth Amendment? The Court
ignores such difficulties, however, since “[t]his case presents neither the necessity nor the occasion to define the
duties of defense counsel in those respects.” Ante, at 8.
Perhaps not. But it does present the necessity of confronting the serious difficulties that will be created by constitutionalization of the plea-bargaining process. It will not do
simply to announce that they will be solved in the sweet
by-and-by.
While the inadequacy of counsel’s performance in this
case is clear enough, whether it was prejudicial (in the
sense that the Court’s new version of Strickland requires)
is not. The Court’s description of how that question is
to be answered on remand is alone enough to show how
unwise it is to constitutionalize the plea-bargaining process. Prejudice is to be determined, the Court tells us, by
a process of retrospective crystal-ball gazing posing as
legal analysis. First of all, of course, we must estimate
whether the defendant would have accepted the earlier
plea bargain. Here that seems an easy question, but as
the Court acknowledges, ante, at 14, it will not always be.
Next, since Missouri, like other States, permits accepted
plea offers to be withdrawn by the prosecution (a reality
which alone should suffice, one would think, to demonstrate that Frye had no entitlement to the plea bargain),
we must estimate whether the prosecution would have
withdrawn the plea offer. And finally, we must estimate
whether the trial court would have approved the plea
agreement. These last two estimations may seem easy in
the present case, since Frye committed a new infraction

