2

MISSOURI v. FRYE
Syllabus
assistance claims in the plea bargain context. There, the defendant
had alleged that his counsel had given him inadequate advice about
his plea, but he failed to show that he would have proceeded to trial
had he received the proper advice. 474 U. S., at 60. In Padilla v.
Kentucky, 559 U. S. ___, where a plea offer was set aside because
counsel had misinformed the defendant of its immigration consequences, this Court made clear that “the negotiation of a plea bargain
is a critical” stage for ineffective-assistance purposes, id., at ___, and
rejected the argument made by the State in this case that a knowing
and voluntary plea supersedes defense counsel’s errors. The State
attempts to distinguish Hill and Padilla from the instant case. It
notes that Hill and Padilla concerned whether there was ineffective
assistance leading to acceptance of a plea offer, a process involving a
formal court appearance with the defendant and all counsel present,
while no formal court proceedings are involved when a plea offer has
lapsed or been rejected; and it insists that there is no right to receive
a plea offer in any event. Thus, the State contends, it is unfair to
subject it to the consequences of defense counsel’s inadequacies when
the opportunities for a full and fair trial, or for a later guilty plea albeit on less favorable terms, are preserved. While these contentions
are neither illogical nor without some persuasive force, they do not
suffice to overcome the simple reality that 97 percent of federal convictions and 94 percent of state convictions are the result of guilty
pleas. Plea bargains have become so central to today’s criminal justice system that defense counsel must meet responsibilities in the
plea bargain process to render the adequate assistance of counsel
that the Sixth Amendment requires at critical stages of the criminal
process. Pp. 3–8.
2. As a general rule, defense counsel has the duty to communicate
formal prosecution offers to accept a plea on terms and conditions
that may be favorable to the accused. Any exceptions to this rule
need not be addressed here, for the offer was a formal one with a
fixed expiration date. Standards for prompt communication and consultation recommended by the American Bar Association and adopted by numerous state and federal courts, though not determinative,
serve as important guides. The prosecution and trial courts may
adopt measures to help ensure against late, frivolous, or fabricated
claims. First, a formal offer’s terms and processing can be documented. Second, States may require that all offers be in writing. Third,
formal offers can be made part of the record at any subsequent plea
proceeding or before trial to ensure that a defendant has been fully
advised before the later proceedings commence. Here, as the result of
counsel’s deficient performance, the offers lapsed. Under Strickland,
the question then becomes what, if any, prejudice resulted from the

