6

ALLEN v. LAWHORN
SCALIA, J., dissenting

have resulted in a mistrial and empanelling of a new
sentencing jury. See Ala. Code §§13A–5–46(f), (g), 13A–5–
47(e) (2006).) But it cannot be deduced from the existence
of a single dissenting juror that a closing argument would
have persuaded other jurors not to recommend a death
sentence. That there was one juror against a recommen
dation of death does not establish that this was a close
mitigation case, much less that a closing argument would
have made the difference for other jurors.
The Eleventh Circuit provided several examples of
statements Lawhorn’s counsel could have made. Closing
argument might “have refreshed the jury’s memory of the
evidence of substantial domination presented during the
guilt phase.” 519 F. 3d, at 1297. Counsel “could have . . .
argued for the mitigation of Lawhorn’s age at the time of
the offense and his troubled family background,” and could
have asked the jury for mercy. Ibid. But merely identify
ing statements counsel could have made (there will always
be statements counsel could have made) does not establish
what Strickland requires: that those statements would
probably have made a difference. All the facts relevant to
the Eleventh Circuit’s hypothesized closing argument had
already come out in the sentencing phase. And a plea for
mercy had been made in the sentencing phase by Lawhorn
himself.
The hypothesized closing argument falls even further
short of establishing what AEDPA requires: that it was
not merely incorrect but unreasonable for the Alabama
courts to conclude that probability of a different outcome
had not been shown. It was, to the contrary, well within
the bounds of reasonable judgment for the Alabama Court
of Criminal Appeals to conclude that “in this situation
with these particular facts, closing argument by defense
counsel would have had little impact.” 756 So. 2d, at 987.
In sum, the outcome imposed upon the Alabama courts
by the Eleventh Circuit is not remotely required by clearly
established Supreme Court precedent.

