Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

tions.” Renico, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 8–9) (internal
quotation marks omitted).
Strickland requires the defendant to show that there is
a “reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofes
sional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been
different.” 466 U. S., at 694. The trial judge, who wit
nessed the proceedings and imposed Lawhorn’s death
sentence, concluded that Lawhorn had not made that
showing. He explained that “[t]rial counsel did not pre
sent a complicated case in mitigation that needed to be
explained to the jury”; that counsel had “presented Law
horn’s family background and pleas for mercy in mitiga
tion,” making closing argument on those matters unneces
sary; and that “this was a horrible crime and the jury
would not have been swayed by a closing argument con
sidering the facts of this case.” 756 So. 2d, at 987 (internal
quotation marks omitted). The Alabama Court of Crimi
nal Appeals quoted those findings and agreed that “in this
situation with these particular facts, closing argument by
defense counsel would have had little impact.” Ibid.
This was not an unreasonable application of Strickland.
Counsel’s closing statement is rhetorical argument, not
evidence. Reconstructing what that argument might have
been, and how the jury might have reacted to it—a jury
that had already heard opening argument and a proces
sion of mitigation witnesses—is an exercise in guesswork.
The Eleventh Circuit’s reasons for finding prejudice are
unpersuasive.
The Eleventh Circuit observed that one juror had voted
to recommend life; and because a vote of 10 to 2 was re
quired to recommend a death sentence, counsel “needed
only to convince two other jurors to alter the outcome of
the proceedings.” 519 F. 3d, at 1297. (Apart from the fact
that the jury’s recommendation is in any event not binding
on the sentencing judge, a 9–to–3 vote would not have
produced recommendation of a life sentence, but would

