(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

LAFLER v. COOPER
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–209.

Argued October 31, 2011—Decided March 21, 2012

Respondent was charged under Michigan law with assault with intent
to murder and three other offenses. The prosecution offered to dis­
miss two of the charges and to recommend a 51-to-85-month sentence
on the other two, in exchange for a guilty plea. In a communication
with the court, respondent admitted his guilt and expressed a will­
ingness to accept the offer. But he rejected the offer, allegedly after
his attorney convinced him that the prosecution would be unable to
establish intent to murder because the victim had been shot below
the waist. At trial, respondent was convicted on all counts and re­
ceived a mandatory minimum 185-to-360-month sentence. In a sub­
sequent hearing, the state trial court rejected respondent’s claim that
his attorney’s advice to reject the plea constituted ineffective assis­
tance. The Michigan Court of Appeals affirmed, rejecting the ineffec­
tive-assistance claim on the ground that respondent knowingly and
intelligently turned down the plea offer and chose to go to trial. Re­
spondent renewed his claim in federal habeas. Finding that the state
appellate court had unreasonably applied the constitutional effective­
assistance standards laid out in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S.
668, and Hill v. Lockhart, 474 U. S. 52, the District Court granted a
conditional writ and ordered specific performance of the original plea
offer. The Sixth Circuit affirmed. Applying Strickland, it found that
counsel had provided deficient performance by advising respondent of
an incorrect legal rule, and that respondent suffered prejudice be­
cause he lost the opportunity to take the more favorable sentence of­
fered in the plea.
Held:
1. Where counsel’s ineffective advice led to an offer’s rejection, and
where the prejudice alleged is having to stand trial, a defendant must


2

LAFLER v. COOPER
Syllabus
show that but for the ineffective advice, there is a reasonable proba­
bility that the plea offer would have been presented to the court, that
the court would have accepted its terms, and that the conviction or
sentence, or both, under the offer’s terms would have been less severe
than under the actual judgment and sentence imposed. Pp. 3–11.
(a) Because the parties agree that counsel’s performance was de­
ficient, the only question is how to apply Strickland’s prejudice test
where ineffective assistance results in a rejection of the plea offer and
the defendant is convicted at the ensuing trial. Pp. 3–4.
(b) In that context, the Strickland prejudice test requires a de­
fendant to show a reasonable possibility that the outcome of the plea
process would have been different with competent advice. The Sixth
Circuit and other federal appellate courts have agreed with the
Strickland prejudice test for rejected pleas adopted here by this
Court. Petitioner and the Solicitor General propose a narrow view—
that Strickland prejudice cannot arise from plea bargaining if the de­
fendant is later convicted at a fair trial—but their reasoning is un­
persuasive. First, they claim that the Sixth Amendment’s sole pur­
pose is to protect the right to a fair trial, but the Amendment actually
requires effective assistance at critical stages of a criminal proceed­
ing, including pretrial stages. This is consistent with the right to ef­
fective assistance on appeal, see, e.g., Halbert v. Michigan, 545 U. S.
605, and the right to counsel during sentencing, see, e.g., Glover v.
United States, 531 U. S. 198, 203–204. This Court has not followed a
rigid rule that an otherwise fair trial remedies errors not occurring at
trial, but has instead inquired whether the trial cured the particular
error at issue. See, e.g., Vasquez v. Hillery, 474 U. S. 254, 263. Se­
cond, this Court has previously rejected petitioner’s argument that
Lockhart v. Fretwell, 506 U. S. 364, modified Strickland and does so
again here. Fretwell and Nix v. Whiteside, 475 U. S. 157, demon­
strate that “it would be unjust to characterize the likelihood of a dif­
ferent outcome as legitimate ‘prejudice,’ ” Williams v. Taylor, 529
U. S. 362, 391–392, where defendants would receive a windfall as a
result of the application of an incorrect legal principle or a defense
strategy outside the law. Here, however, respondent seeks relief
from counsel’s failure to meet a valid legal standard. Third, petition­
er seeks to preserve the conviction by arguing that the Sixth
Amendment’s purpose is to ensure a conviction’s reliability, but this
argument fails to comprehend the full scope of the Sixth Amendment
and is refuted by precedent. Here, the question is the fairness or re­
liability not of the trial but of the processes that preceded it, which
caused respondent to lose benefits he would have received but for
counsel’s ineffective assistance. Furthermore, a reliable trial may not
foreclose relief when counsel has failed to assert rights that may have


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
altered the outcome. See Kimmelman v. Morrison, 477 U. S. 365,
379. Petitioner’s position that a fair trial wipes clean ineffective as­
sistance during plea bargaining also ignores the reality that criminal
justice today is for the most part a system of pleas, not a system of
trials. See Missouri v. Frye, ante, at ___. Pp. 4–11.
2. Where a defendant shows ineffective assistance has caused the
rejection of a plea leading to a more severe sentence at trial, the rem­
edy must “neutralize the taint” of a constitutional violation, United
States v. Morrison, 449 U. S. 361, 365, but must not grant a windfall
to the defendant or needlessly squander the resources the State
properly invested in the criminal prosecution, see United States v.
Mechanik, 475 U. S. 66, 72. If the sole advantage is that the defend­
ant would have received a lesser sentence under the plea, the court
should have an evidentiary hearing to determine whether the de­
fendant would have accepted the plea. If so, the court may exercise
discretion in determining whether the defendant should receive the
term offered in the plea, the sentence received at trial, or something
in between. However, resentencing based on the conviction at trial
may not suffice, e.g., where the offered guilty plea was for less serious
counts than the ones for which a defendant was convicted after trial,
or where a mandatory sentence confines a judge’s sentencing discre­
tion. In these circumstances, the proper remedy may be to require
the prosecution to reoffer the plea. The judge can then exercise dis­
cretion in deciding whether to vacate the conviction from trial and
accept the plea, or leave the conviction undisturbed. In either situa­
tion, a court must weigh various factors. Here, it suffices to give two
relevant considerations. First, a court may take account of a defend­
ant’s earlier expressed willingness, or unwillingness, to accept re­
sponsibility for his or her actions. Second, it is not necessary here to
decide as a constitutional rule that a judge is required to disregard
any information concerning the crime discovered after the plea offer
was made. Petitioner argues that implementing a remedy will open
the floodgates to litigation by defendants seeking to unsettle their
convictions, but in the 30 years that courts have recognized such
claims, there has been no indication that the system is overwhelmed
or that defendants are receiving windfalls as a result of strategically
timed Strickland claims. In addition, the prosecution and trial courts
may adopt measures to help ensure against meritless claims. See
Frye, ante, at ___. Pp. 11–14.
3. This case arises under the Antiterrorism and Effective Death
Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), but because the Michigan Court of Ap­
peals’ analysis of respondent’s ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claim
was contrary to clearly established federal law, AEDPA presents no
bar to relief. Respondent has satisfied Strickland’s two-part test.


4

LAFLER v. COOPER
Syllabus
The parties concede the fact of deficient performance. And respond­
ent has shown that but for that performance there is a reasonable
probability he and the trial court would have accepted the guilty plea.
In addition, as a result of not accepting the plea and being convicted
at trial, he received a minimum sentence 3½ times greater than he
would have received under the plea. As a remedy, the District Court
ordered specific performance of the plea agreement, but the correct
remedy is to order the State to reoffer the plea. If respondent accepts
the offer, the state trial court can exercise its discretion in determin­
ing whether to vacate respondent’s convictions and resentence pur­
suant to the plea agreement, to vacate only some of the convictions
and resentence accordingly, or to leave the conviction and sentence
resulting from the trial undisturbed. Pp. 14–16.

376 Fed. Appx. 563, vacated and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which GINSBURG,
BREYER, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. SCALIA, J., filed a dissent­
ing opinion, in which THOMAS, J., joined, and in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
joined as to all but Part IV. ALITO, J., filed a dissenting opinion.

