2

DOLAN v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
tory language, to the relevant context, and to what they reveal about
the deadline’s purposes. A “jurisdictional” deadline’s expiration pre
vents a court from permitting or taking the action to which the stat
ute attached the deadline. The prohibition is absolute. It cannot be
waived or extended for equitable reasons. See John R. Sand &
Gravel Co. v. United States, 552 U. S. 130, 133–134. Other deadlines
are “claims-processing rules,” which do not limit a court’s jurisdiction,
but regulate the timing of motions or claims brought before the court.
Unless a party points out that another litigant has missed such a
deadline, the party forfeits the deadline’s protection. See, e.g., Kon
trick v. Ryan, 540 U. S. 443, 454–456. In other instances, a deadline
seeks speed by creating a time-related directive that is legally en
forceable but does not deprive the judge or other public official of the
power to take the action even if the deadline is missed. See, e.g.,
United States v. Montalvo-Murillo, 495 U. S. 711, 722. In light of its
language, context, and purposes, the statute at issue sets forth this
third kind of limitation. The fact that a sentencing court misses the
90-day deadline, even through its own or the Government’s fault,
does not deprive the court of the power to order restitution. Pp. 3–5.
(b) Several considerations lead to this conclusion. First, where, as
here, a statute “does not specify a consequence for noncompliance
with” its “timing provisions,” “federal courts will not” ordinarily “im
pose their own coercive sanction.” United States v. James Daniel
Good Real Property, 510 U. S. 43, 63. A statute’s use of “shall” alone,
see §3664(d)(5), does not necessarily bar judges from taking the ac
tion to which the missed deadline refers. Second, the statute places
primary weight on, and emphasizes the importance of, imposing res
titution upon those convicted of certain federal crimes. See §3663A.
Third, the statute’s procedural provisions reinforce this substantive
purpose. They reveal that the statute seeks speed primarily to help
crime victims secure prompt restitution, not to provide defendants
with certainty as to the amount of their liability. Fourth, to read the
statute as depriving the sentencing court of the power to order resti
tution would harm the victims, who likely bear no responsibility for
the deadline’s being missed and whom the statute seeks to benefit.
That kind of harm to third parties provides a strong indication that
Congress did not intend a missed deadline to work a forfeiture. See
Brock v. Pierce County, 476 U. S. 253, 262. Fifth, the Court has in
terpreted similar statutes, such as the Bail Reform Act of 1984, simi
larly. See Montalvo-Murillo, supra, at 721. Sixth, the defendant nor
mally can mitigate potential harm by telling the court that he fears
the deadline will be, or just has been, missed, and the court will
likely set a timely hearing or take other statutorily required action.
Pp. 5–10.

