8

DOLAN v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

J. Singer, Sutherland on Statutory Construction §57:19,
pp. 73–74 (7th ed. 2008) (hereinafter Singer, Statutory
Construction) (missing a deadline does not remove power
to exercise a duty where there is no “language denying
performance after a specified time,” and especially “where
a mandatory construction might do great injury to persons
not at fault, as in a case where slight delay on the part of a
public officer might prejudice private rights or the public
interest” (footnote omitted)).
Fifth, we have previously interpreted similar statutes
similarly. In Montalvo-Murillo, 495 U. S. 711, for exam
ple, we considered the Bail Reform Act of 1984, which
states that a “judicial officer shall hold a hearing” to de
termine whether to grant bail to an arrested person and
that “hearing shall be held immediately upon the person’s
first appearance before the judicial officer.” (A continuance
of up to five days may also be granted.) 18 U. S. C.
§3142(f) (emphasis added). The judicial officer missed this
deadline, but the Court held that the judicial officer need
not release the detained person. Rather, “once the Gov
ernment discovers that the time limits have expired, it
may [still] ask for a prompt detention hearing and make
its case to detain based upon the requirements set forth in
the statute.” 495 U. S., at 721.
The Court reasoned that “a failure to comply” with the
hearing deadline “does not so subvert the procedural
scheme . . . as to invalidate the hearing.” Id., at 717.
Missing the deadline did not diminish the strength of the
Government’s interest in preventing release to avert the
likely commission of crimes—the very objective of the Act.
Id., at 720. Nor would mandatory release of the detained
person “proportion[ately]” repair the “inconvenience and
uncertainty a timely hearing would have spared him.” Id.,
at 721.
Here, as in Montalvo-Murillo, neither the language nor
the structure of the statute requires denying the victim

