Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

in the sentence following the language we have just
quoted, the statute continues:
“If the victim subsequently discovers further losses,
the victim shall have 60 days after discovery of those
losses in which to petition the court for an amended
restitution order.” Ibid.
The sentence imposes no time limit on the victim’s subse
quent discovery of losses. Consequently, a court might
award restitution for those losses long after the original
sentence was imposed and the 90-day time limit has ex
pired. That fact, along with the Act’s main substantive
objectives, is why we say that the Act’s efforts to secure
speedy determination of restitution is primarily designed
to help victims of crime secure prompt restitution rather
than to provide defendants with certainty as to the
amount of their liability. Cf. S. Rep. No. 104–179, p. 20
(1995) (recognizing “the need for finality and certainty in
the sentencing process,” but also stating that the “sole due
process interest of the defendant being protected . . . is the
right not to be sentenced on the basis of invalid premises
or inaccurate information”); see also ibid. (“[J]ustice can
not be considered served until full restitution is made”).
Fourth, to read the statute as depriving the sentencing
court of the power to order restitution would harm those—
the victims of crime—who likely bear no responsibility for
the deadline’s being missed and whom the statute also
seeks to benefit. Cf. §3664(g)(1) (“No victim shall be re
quired to participate in any phase of a restitution order”).
The potential for such harm—to third parties—normally
provides a strong indication that Congress did not intend
a missed deadline to work a forfeiture, here depriving a
court of the power to award restitution to victims. See
Brock, 476 U. S., at 262 (parties concede and court as
sumes that official can “proceed after the deadline” where
“inaction” would hurt third party); see also 3 N. Singer &

