Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

ity later to fill in that blank, in the absence of a statute
specifically providing otherwise. See post, at 1–4 (opinion
of ROBERTS, C. J.). Thus, the sentencing judge would
either have to (1) forgo the specific dollar amount or poten
tial condition, or (2) wait to enter any judgment until all of
the relevant information is at hand. The former alterna
tive would sometimes deprive judges of the power to enter
components of a sentence they may consider essential.
The latter alternative would require the defendant to
wait—perhaps months—before taking an appeal.
As we have pointed out, our precedents do not currently
place the sentencing judge in any such dilemma. See
supra, at 5, 8–9. And we need not now depart from those
precedents when this case does not require us to do so;
when the issue has not been adequately briefed; when the
lower court had no opportunity to consider the argument
(which the petitioner may well have forfeited); and when
the rule would foreclose the current practices of some
district courts and unnecessarily cabin the discretion they
properly exercise over scheduling and sentencing matters.
Cf., e.g., United States v. Stevens, supra, at 3; United
States v. Cheal, supra, at 47 (illustrating district court
practices).
Certainly there is no need to create this rule in the
context of restitution, for provisions to which the dissent
refers are silent about whether restitution can or cannot
be ordered after an initial sentencing. See, e.g., §§3551(b),
(c) (“A sanction authorized by [criminal forfeiture and
restitution statutes] may be imposed in addition to the
[rest of the] sentence”); §3663A(c)(1) (mandatory orders of
restitution “shall apply in all sentencing proceedings [for
specified offenses]”). And even on the dissent’s theory, the
statute elsewhere provides the necessary substantive
authorization: “Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, when sentencing a defendant convicted of [a specified]
offense . . . , the court shall order . . . that the defendant

