(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

DOLAN v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE TENTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–367.

Argued April 20, 2010—Decided June 14, 2010

Petitioner Dolan pleaded guilty to assault resulting in serious bodily
injury and entered into a plea agreement, which stated that the Dis
trict Court could order restitution for his victim. Dolan’s presentence
report also noted that restitution was required, but did not recom
mend an amount because of a lack of information on hospital costs
and lost wages. The Mandatory Victims Restitution Act provides
that “if the victim’s losses are not ascertainable by the date that is 10
days prior to sentencing,” the court “shall set a date for the final de
termination of the victim’s losses, not to exceed 90 days after sentenc
ing.” 18 U. S. C. §3664(d)(5). On July 30, the District Court held a
sentencing hearing and imposed a sentence of imprisonment and su
pervised release. On August 8, the court entered a judgment, stating
that restitution was “applicable” but leaving open the amount of res
titution given that no information had yet “been received regarding
possible restitution payments.” On October 5, 67 days later, an ad
dendum documenting the restitution amount was added to the pre
sentence report. The court did not set a hearing until February 4,
about three months after the 90-day deadline had expired. At the
hearing, Dolan argued that because that deadline had passed, the
law no longer authorized restitution. Disagreeing, the court ordered
restitution, and the Tenth Circuit affirmed.
Held: A sentencing court that misses the 90-day deadline nonetheless
retains the power to order restitution—at least where, as here, that
court made clear prior to the deadline’s expiration that it would order
restitution, leaving open (for more than 90 days) only the amount.
Pp. 3–15.
(a) To determine the consequences of a missed deadline where, as
here, the statute does not specify them, this Court looks to the statu

