Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
(c) This Court has not understated the potential harm to a defen
dant of a missed deadline. Petitioner claims that because the sen
tence will not be a “final judgment” for appeal purposes without a de
finitive determination of the restitution amount, to delay that
determination beyond the deadline is to delay his ability to appeal.
But a defendant who knows that restitution will be ordered and is
aware of the amount can usually avoid additional delay by asking for
a timely hearing; if the court refuses, he could seek mandamus. And
in the unlikely instance that delay causes the defendant prejudice, he
remains free to ask the appellate court to take that fact and any
other equitable considerations into account on review. This does not
mean that the Court accepts petitioner’s premise that a sentencing
judgment is not “final” until the restitution amount is determined.
Although that question need not be decided here, strong arguments
favor the appealability of the initial judgment irrespective of the de
lay in determining the restitution amount. A judgment imposing
“ ‘discipline’ ” may still be “freighted with sufficiently substantial in
dicia of finality to support an appeal.” Corey v. United States, 375
U. S. 169, 174. And several statutes say that a “judgment of convic
tion” that “includes” “imprisonment” is a “final judgment.” E.g., 18
U. S. C. §3582(b). Moreover, §3664(o) provides that a “sentence that
imposes an order of restitution,” such as the later restitution order
here, “is a final judgment.” Even assuming that the rule of lenity
could be applied to a statutory time provision in the criminal context,
here there is no statutory ambiguity sufficiently grievous to warrant
its application in this case. Muscarello v. United States, 524 U. S.
125, 139. Pp. 10–15.
571 F. 3d 1022, affirmed.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which THOMAS,
GINSBURG, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. ROBERTS, C. J., filed a
dissenting opinion, in which STEVENS, SCALIA, and KENNEDY, JJ.,
joined.

