12

DOLAN v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

See Tr. of Oral Arg. 33–34.
Moreover, §3664(o) provides that a “sentence that im
poses an order of restitution,” such as the later restitution
order here, “is a final judgment.” Thus, it is not surprising
to find instances where a defendant has appealed from the
entry of a judgment containing an initial sentence that
includes a term of imprisonment; that same defendant has
subsequently appealed from a later order setting forth the
final amount of restitution; and the Court of Appeals has
consolidated the two appeals and decided them together.
See, e.g., United States v. Stevens, supra; United States v.
Maung, 267 F. 3d 1113, 1117 (CA11 2001); cf. United
States v. Cheal, 389 F. 3d 35, 51–53 (CA1 2004).
That the defendant can appeal from the earlier sentenc
ing judgment makes sense, for otherwise the statutory 90
day restitution deadline, even when complied with, could
delay appeals for up to 90 days. Defendants, that is,
would be forced to wait three months before seeking re
view of their conviction when they could ordinarily do so
within 14 days. See Fed. Rule App. Proc. 4(b). Nonethe
less, in light of the fact that the interaction of restitution
orders with appellate time limits could have consequences
extending well beyond cases like the present case (where
there was no appeal from the initial conviction and sen
tence), we simply note the strength of the arguments
militating against the second step of petitioner’s argument
without deciding whether or when a party can, or must,
appeal. We leave all such matters for another day.
The dissent, however, creates a rule that could ad
versely affect not just restitution, but other sentencing
practices beyond the narrow circumstances presented
here. Consider, for example, a judge who (currently lack
ing sufficient information) wishes to leave open, say, the
amount of a fine, or a special condition of supervised re
lease. In the dissent’s view, the entry of any such judg
ment would immediately deprive the judge of the author

