Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

ing §3663A(a)(1); emphasis in Court’s opinion). But the
issue before us is when restitution should be ordered, so
the language the Court should underscore is “when sen
tencing.” This provision plainly confers no power to act
after sentencing. Any such power attaches only by virtue
of §3663A(d), which incorporates the procedures of §3664,
including the limited 90-day exception. See also §3556
(“The procedures under section 3664 shall apply to all
orders of restitution under this section”).
The Court puts greater emphasis on its reading of the
statute’s purpose, namely to provide restitution to victims
of crime. Certainly that was a purpose Congress sought to
promote. But “no legislation pursues its purposes at all
costs,” and “it frustrates rather than effectuates legislative
intent simplistically to assume that whatever furthers the
statute’s primary objective must be the law.” Rodriguez v.
United States, 480 U. S. 522, 525–526 (1987) (per curiam).
Congress had to balance against the interest in restitu
tion the contrary interest in promptly determining the
defendant’s sentence. The balance struck was clearly set
forth in the statute: determine the victim’s losses by a date
“not to exceed 90 days after sentencing.” §3664(d)(5).
Whether or not that limit was “primarily designed to help
victims of crime,” ante, at 7, it does not cease to be law
when invoked by defendants.
Nor can the Court find any support in the second sen
tence of §3664(d)(5). See ante, at 14–15. That provision
addresses a distinct issue—what to do about newly discov
ered losses—and sets a higher “good cause” standard. The
fact that Congress struck the balance between restitution
and finality differently in that context does not justify
overriding the balance it struck here.
The Court also analogizes the 90-day limit to other
provisions discussed in our precedents, most of which have
nothing to do with the rights of criminal defendants (for
whom procedural protections are of heightened impor

