14

DOLAN v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

make restitution to the victim of the offense.” §3663A(a)(1)
(emphasis added). The dissent cannot explain why a
separate statutory provision regarding procedures as to
when a “court shall set a date for the final determination
of the victim’s losses,” §3664(d)(5), automatically divests a
court of this distinct substantive authority. While of
course that provision does not “plainly” confer “power to
act after sentencing,” post, at 5 (emphasis deleted), neither
does it “plainly” remove it or require that all sentencing
matters be concluded at one point in time. (And the dis
sent’s assertion, see post, at 6—that it uses the term “au
thority” not in its “jurisdictional” sense, but rather in the
sense that a court lacks “authority” to “impose a sentence
above the maximum”—introduces a tenuous analogy that
may well confuse this Court’s precedents regarding the
term “jurisdictional.” See supra, at 3–4.)
In any event, unless one reads the relevant statute’s 90
day deadline as an ironclad limit upon the judge’s author
ity to make a final determination of the victim’s losses, the
statute before us itself provides adequate authority to do
what the sentencing judge did here—essentially fill in an
amount-related blank in a judgment that made clear that
restitution was “applicable.” App. 49 (boldface deleted).
Since the sentencing judge’s later order did not “correct”
an “error” in the sentence, Rule 35 does not apply. Com
pare Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 35(a) with post, at 2–3. Hence
the dissent’s claim that there is no other statute that
creates authority (even were we to assume all else in its
favor, which we do not) is merely to restate the question
posed in this case, not to answer it.
Moreover, the dissent’s reading creates a serious statu
tory anomaly. It reads the statute as permitting a sen
tencing judge to order restitution for a “victim” who “sub
sequently discovers further losses” a month, a year, or 10
years after entry of the original judgment, while at the
same time depriving that judge of the power to award

