Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

SCALIA, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–1001
_________________

LUIS MARIANO MARTINEZ, PETITIONER v.

CHARLES L. RYAN, DIRECTOR, ARIZONA

DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[March 20, 2012]


JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom JUSTICE THOMAS joins,
dissenting.
I

A

Let me get this straight: Out of concern for the values of
federalism; to preserve the ability of our States to provide
prompt justice; and in light of our longstanding jurisprudence holding that there is no constitutional right to
counsel in state collateral review; the Court, in what it
portrays as an admirable exercise of judicial restraint,
abstains from holding that there is a constitutional right
to counsel in initial-review state habeas. After all, that
would have meant, in a case such as the one before us,
that failing to provide assistance of counsel, or providing
assistance of counsel that falls below the Strickland
standard, would constitute cause for excusing procedural
default. See Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668
(1984). Instead of taking that radical step, the Court
holds that, for equitable reasons, in a case such as the one
before us, failing to provide assistance of counsel, or
providing assistance of counsel that falls below the Strickland standard, constitutes cause for excusing procedural
default. The result, of course, is precisely the same.


2

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
SCALIA, J., dissenting

Ah, but perhaps the explanation of why the Court’s
action today amounts to praiseworthy self-restraint is this:
It pronounces this excuse from the usual rule of procedural default only in initial-review state habeas raising an
ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claim. But it could
have limited its invention of a new constitutional right to
collateral-review counsel in precisely the same fashion—
and with precisely the same consequences. Moreover, no
one really believes that the newly announced “equitable”
rule will remain limited to ineffective-assistance-of-trialcounsel cases. There is not a dime’s worth of difference
in principle between those cases and many other cases in
which initial state habeas will be the first opportunity for
a particular claim to be raised: claims of “newly discovered” prosecutorial misconduct, for example, see Brady v.
Maryland, 373 U. S. 83 (1963), claims based on “newly
discovered” exculpatory evidence or “newly discovered”
impeachment of prosecutorial witnesses, and claims asserting ineffective assistance of appellate counsel. The
Court’s soothing assertion, ante, at 14, that its holding
“addresses only the constitutional claims presented in this
case,” insults the reader’s intelligence.1
——————
1 The Court also seeks to restrict its holding to cases in which the
State has “deliberately cho[sen]” to move the asserted claim “outside of
the direct-appeal process,” ante, at 10. That line lacks any principled
basis, and will not last. Is there any relevant difference between cases
in which the State says that certain claims can only be brought on
collateral review and cases in which those claims by their nature can
only be brought on collateral review, since they do not manifest themselves until the appellate process is complete? Our cases establish that
to constitute cause for failure to raise an issue on direct review, the
excuse must be “an objective factor external to the defense.” See infra,
at 7. That the factual basis for a claim was not available until the
collateral-review stage is no less such a factor than a State’s requiring
that a claim be brought on collateral review. See Murray v. Carrier,
477 U. S. 478, 488 (1986). The Court’s asserted limitation makes sense
only if the opinion means that a State has “deliberately chos[en]” to
move newly-arisen claims “outside of the direct-appeal process” if it


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

Moreover, even if today’s holding could (against all
logic) be restricted to ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel
claims, it would have essentially the same practical consequences as a holding that collateral-review counsel is
constitutionally required. Despite the Court’s suggestion
to the contrary, see ante, at 13, the rule it adopts calls into
question the common state practice of not appointing
counsel in all first collateral proceedings, see ante, at 11–
12. It does not, to be sure, call into question the lawfulness of that practice; only its sanity. For if the prisoner
goes through state collateral proceedings without counsel,
and fails to raise an ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel
claim which is, because of that failure, defaulted, the
default will not preclude federal habeas review of the
merits of that claim. And since ineffective assistance of
trial counsel is a monotonously standard claim on federal
habeas (has a duly convicted defendant ever been effectively represented?), whoever advises the State would himself
be guilty of ineffective assistance if he did not counsel
the appointment of state-collateral-review counsel in all
cases—lest the failure to raise that claim in the state proceedings be excused and the State be propelled into federal
habeas review of the adequacy of trial-court representation that occurred many years ago.2 Which is to say that
——————
fails to reopen the direct-appeal process in order to entertain such
claims. Such a radical change in what we require of the States surely
ought to be prescribed by language clearer than what today’s opinion
contains.
2 The Court says that to establish cause a prisoner must demonstrate
that the ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claim is “substantial,”
which apparently means the claim has at least some merit. See ante, at
11. The Court does not explain where this substantiality standard
comes from, and how it differs from the normal rule that a prisoner
must demonstrate actual prejudice to avoid the enforcement of a
procedural default, see Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, 750
(1991). But whatever the standard, examination of the adequacy of


4

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
SCALIA, J., dissenting

the Court’s pretended avoidance of requiring States to appoint collateral-review counsel is a sham.3
Of course even the appointment of state-collateralreview counsel will not guarantee that the State’s criminal
proceeding can be concluded without years-long federal
retrial. Appointment of counsel may, as I have said, avoid
federal review of the adequacy of representation that
occurred years ago, at the original trial. But since, under
today’s opinion, the condition for exclusion of federal
habeas is the very same condition that would apply if
appointment of state-collateral-review counsel were constitutionally required, it will remain to be determined in
federal habeas review whether the state-appointed counsel
was effective. Thus, as a consequence of today’s decision
the States will always be forced to litigate in federal habeas, for all defaulted ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel
claims (and who knows what other claims), either (1) the
validity of the defaulted claim (where collateral-review
counsel was not appointed), or (2) the effectiveness of
collateral-review counsel (where collateral-review counsel
was appointed). The Court notes that many States already provide for the appointment of counsel in first col——————
years-ago representation has been substituted for summary dismissal
by reason of procedural default.
3 The Court also claims, ante, at 13, that its “equitable” ruling, unlike
a constitutional ruling, will not require “a reversal in all state collateral
cases on direct review from state courts” where counsel has not been
appointed. Surely the Court does not mean to suggest that an unconstitutional failure to appoint counsel on collateral review, like an
unconstitutional failure to appoint counsel at trial, would require the
entire conviction to be set aside. That is inconceivable. So either one of
two things would happen: Either the reviewing state court would be
able to inquire into prejudice (which is an improvement over having the
federal habeas court make that inquiry, as the Court’s “equitable”
solution requires); or else the appellate state court will remand for a
collateral proceeding with counsel (which is, as we have said, just what
the Court’s “equitable” ruling effectively requires anyway). So the
Court’s “equitable” ruling is no boon to the States.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

lateral challenges—as though this proves that what the
Court forces the States to do today is eminently reasonable. But what the Court fails to point out is that currently, when state-appointed counsel does not raise an ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claim, that is the end of the
matter: The issue has been procedurally defaulted. By
virtue of today’s opinion, however, all those cases can (and
where capital punishment is at issue assuredly will) proceed to federal habeas on the issue of whether stateappointed counsel was ineffective in failing to raise the
ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel issue. That is the
meaning of the Court’s (supposedly comforting) statement:
“It is likely that most of the attorneys appointed by
the courts are qualified to perform, and do perform,
according to prevailing professional norms; and, where
that is so, the States may enforce a procedural default
in federal habeas proceedings.” Ante, at 12 (emphasis
added).
To be more precise, the Court should have said “where
that is so, and where federal habeas courts have finally
rejected claims that it is not so, the States may enforce a
procedural default in federal habeas proceedings.”
I cannot possibly imagine the basis for the Court’s confidence, ante, at 12–13, that all this will not put a significant strain on state resources. The principal escape route
from federal habeas—existence of an “adequate and independent state ground”—has been closed.4 Whether
——————
4 See N. King, F. Cheesman, & B. Ostrom, Final Technical Report:
Habeas Litigation in U. S. District Courts 45–49 (2007) (documenting
the percentage of habeas petitions that included claims dismissed for
various procedural reasons); Administrative Office of the United States
Courts, Habeas Corpus Petitions Disposed of Procedurally During the
12-Month Period Ending September 30, 2011 (reporting that for appeals in noncapital state-prisoner habeas cases, procedural default
accounted for the largest percentage of procedural dispositions, with
the exception of the denial of a certificate of appealability) (available in


6

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
SCALIA, J., dissenting

counsel appointed for state collateral review raises the
ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claim or not, federal
habeas review will proceed. In practical effect, that may
not make much difference in noncapital cases (except for
the squandering of state taxpayers’ money): The defendant
will stay in prison, continuing to serve his sentence, while
federal habeas review grinds on. But in capital cases, it will
effectively reduce the sentence, giving the defendant as
many more years to live, beyond the lives of the innocent
victims whose life he snuffed out, as the process of federal
habeas may consume. I guarantee that an assertion of
ineffective assistance of trial counsel will be made in all
capital cases from this date on, causing (because of today’s
holding) execution of the sentence to be deferred until
either that claim, or the claim that appointed counsel was
ineffective in failing to make that claim, has worked its
way through the federal system.
B
The Court would have us believe that today’s holding
is no more than a “limited qualification” to Coleman v.
Thompson, 501 U. S. 722 (1991). Ante, at 12. It is much
more than that: a repudiation of the longstanding principle governing procedural default, which Coleman and
other cases consistently applied. Coleman itself involved a
habeas petitioner’s contention that his attorney’s failure to
file a timely notice of appeal in his state habeas proceeding, which resulted in procedural default of the claims
raised in that proceeding, was cause to excuse that default
in federal habeas. 501 U. S., at 752. The petitioner in
that case contended that whether a violation of his constitutional right to effective counsel had occurred was of no
consequence, so long as the attorney’s conduct fell short of
the effectiveness standard set forth in Strickland. See 501
—————— 

Clerk of Court’s case file). 



Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

SCALIA, J., dissenting

U. S., at 753. Whereas Coleman flatly repudiated that
claim as being inconsistent with our precedent, see ibid.,
today’s majority wholeheartedly embraces it, ante, at 11.
Rejection of the argument in Coleman was compelled by
our jurisprudence pertaining to cause for excusing procedural default, and in particular Murray v. Carrier, 477
U. S. 478 (1986). See Coleman, supra, at 752–753. Carrier involved the failure of a defendant’s attorney to raise a
claim on direct appeal. 477 U. S., at 482. This failure did
not constitute cause, we explained, because it was not an
“objective factor external to the defense.” Id., at 488 (emphasis added). This external-factor requirement reflects
the judgment that States should not be forced to undergo
federal habeas review of a defaulted claim unless a factor
not attributable to the prisoner obstructed his compliance
with state procedures. See id., at 487–488.
Although this externality requirement has been the
North Star of our excuse-for-cause jurisprudence, today’s
opinion does not whisper its name—no doubt because it is
impossible to say that Martinez’s procedural default was
caused by a factor external to his defense. Coleman and
Carrier set forth in clear terms when it is that attorney
error constitutes an external factor: Attorney error by itself does not, because when an attorney acts (or fails to
act) in furtherance of the litigation, he is acting as the
petitioner’s agent. Coleman, supra, at 753; Carrier, supra,
at 492. Any other rule would be inconsistent with our
system of representative litigation, under which “each
party is deemed bound by the acts of his lawyer-agent.”
Irwin v. Department of Veterans Affairs, 498 U. S. 89, 92
(1990) (internal quotation marks omitted). But when
attorney error amounts to constitutionally ineffective
assistance of counsel, that error is imputed to the State
(for the State has failed to comply with the constitutional
requirement to provide effective counsel), rendering the
error external to the petitioner. Coleman, supra, at 754;


8

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
SCALIA, J., dissenting

Carrier, supra, at 488. Accordingly, as Martinez himself
appears to recognize, see Brief for Petitioner 22, our cases
require that absent a determination that Arizona violated
the Constitution by failing to provide effective counsel,
attorney error cannot provide cause to excuse his procedural default. Rather than apply that rule here, the Court
adopts the very approach Coleman explicitly addressed
and rejected.
The Court essentially disclaims any need to give full
consideration to the principle of stare decisis because
Coleman did not involve an initial-review collateral proceeding for a claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel. See ante, at 12. That is rather like saying that Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch 137 (1803), does not establish
our authority to review the constitutionality of a new
federal statute because it involved a different enactment.
Just as the reasoning of Marbury was categorical, so was
the reasoning of Coleman and Carrier: Attorney error is
not an external factor constituting cause for excusing
default unless the State has a constitutional obligation to
provide effective counsel. Had the majority seriously
considered the relevant stare decisis factors, see, e.g.,
Montejo v. Louisiana, 556 U. S. 778, 792–793 (2009), it
would have had difficulty justifying today’s decision. Nor
can it escape the demands of stare decisis by saying that
our rules regarding the excuse of procedural default reflect
an “equitable judgment” that is “elaborated in the exercise
of the Court’s discretion.” Ante, at 10. Equity is not lawlessness, and discretion is not license to cast aside established jurisprudence reaffirmed this very Term. See Maples v. Thomas, 565 U. S. ___, ___ (2012) (slip op., at 12)
(“Negligence on the part of a prisoner’s postconviction
attorney does not qualify as ‘cause’ ” (quoting Coleman,
supra, at 753)). “ ‘[C]ourts of equity must be governed by
rules and precedents no less than courts of law.’ ” Lonchar
v. Thomas, 517 U. S. 314, 323 (1996) (quoting Missouri


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

SCALIA, J., dissenting

v. Jenkins, 515 U. S. 70, 127 (1995) (THOMAS, J.,
concurring)).
Noticeably absent from the Court’s equitable analysis,
moreover, is any consideration of the very reason for a
procedural-default rule: the comity and respect that federal courts must accord state-court judgments.
See
Edwards v. Carpenter, 529 U. S. 446, 451 (2000). The
procedural-default doctrine reflects the understanding that
federal review of defaulted claims may “circumvent the
jurisdictional limits of direct review and ‘undermine the
State’s interest in enforcing its laws.’ ” Lee v. Kemna, 534
U. S. 362, 388 (2002) (KENNEDY, J., dissenting) (quoting
Coleman, supra, at 731). Unlike today’s decision, Carrier
and Coleman took account of the significant costs federal
habeas review imposes on States, including the “reduction
in the finality of litigation and the frustration of ‘both the
States’ sovereign power to punish offenders and their
good-faith attempts to honor constitutional rights.’ ” Carrier, supra, at 487 (quoting Engle v. Isaac, 456 U. S. 107,
128 (1982)). Criminal conviction ought to be final before
society has forgotten the crime that justifies it. When a
case arrives at federal habeas, the state conviction and
sentence at issue (never mind the underlying crime) are
already a dim memory, on average more than 6 years old
(7 years for capital cases).5 I would adhere to the precedents that prevent a bad situation from becoming worse.
II
We granted certiorari on, and the parties addressed
their arguments to, the following question:
“Whether a defendant in a state criminal case who is
——————
5 See

King, Cheesman, & Ostrom, Final Technical Report, at 21–22
(reporting the average interval between state judgment and federal
habeas filing for a sample of federal habeas cases filed in the early-tomid 2000’s).


10

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
SCALIA, J., dissenting

prohibited by state law from raising on direct appeal
any claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel, but
who has a state-law right to raise such a claim in a
first post-conviction proceeding, has a federal constitutional right to effective assistance of first postconviction counsel specifically with respect to his
ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claim.” Pet. for
Cert. i.
While the Court’s decision not to answer the question did
not avoid the costs a constitutional holding would have
imposed on States, it did avoid the Court’s need to confront the established rule that there is no right to counsel
in collateral proceedings. To avoid his procedural default,
Martinez advocates in favor of an exception to this rule
where the prisoner seeks the right to counsel in an initialreview collateral proceeding—an argument we have previously declined to address. See Coleman, 501 U. S., at 755.
The argument is quite clearly foreclosed by our precedent. In Pennsylvania v. Finley, 481 U. S. 551 (1987), and
Murray v. Giarratano, 492 U. S. 1 (1989), we stated unequivocally that prisoners do not “have a constitutional
right to counsel when mounting collateral attacks upon
their convictions.” Finley, supra, at 555. See also Giarratano, 492 U. S., at 10 (plurality opinion) (“[T]he rule
of Pennsylvania v. Finley should apply no differently
in capital cases than in noncapital cases”); id., at 14
(KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment) (indicating that
the Constitution does not categorically require States to
provide counsel to death-row inmates seeking state habeas
review). Though Finley may have involved only claims
that could have been raised on direct review, see 481 U. S.,
at 553; Giarratano, supra, at 24 (Stevens, J., dissenting),
the Court was no doubt aware that States often limit “the
collateral review process [to] issues that have not previously been litigated or argued on the direct appeal.” Brief


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

SCALIA, J., dissenting

for Respondent in Finley, O. T. 1986, No. 85–2099, p. 11,
n. 5. And Giarratano, which involved a class action filed
under 42 U. S. C. §1983, addressed the general assertion
that the Constitution requires the appointment of counsel
for collateral attacks on capital convictions. See 492 U. S.,
at 3–4 (plurality opinion). The Court rejected that assertion without qualification. The dissenting opinion, moreover, made the precise argument Martinez now asserts:
under state law “some claims [including ineffective assistance of trial counsel] ordinarily heard on direct review
will be relegated to postconviction proceedings.” Id., at 24
(Stevens, J., dissenting). See also Brief for Respondents in
Giarratano, O. T. 1988, No. 88–411, p. 29, n. 8 (“In [Virginia capital habeas] proceedings, Death Row inmates
seek to assert claims that have not been, and could not
have been addressed on direct appeal . . . ”). Thus, in
announcing a categorical rule in Finley, see Giarratano,
supra, at 12 (plurality opinion), and then reaffirming it in
Giarratano, the Court knew full well that a collateral
proceeding may present the first opportunity for a prisoner to raise a constitutional claim. I would follow that rule
in this case and reject Martinez’s argument that there is a
constitutional right to counsel in initial-review collateral
proceedings.
*
*
*
Far from avoiding the consequences a constitutional
holding would have imposed on the States, today’s holding
as a practical matter requires States to appoint counsel in
initial-review collateral proceedings—and, to boot, eliminates the pre-existing assurance of escaping federalhabeas review for claims that appointed counsel fails to
present. Despite the Court’s protestations to the contrary,
the decision is a radical alteration of our habeas jurisprudence that will impose considerable economic costs on the
States and further impair their ability to provide justice in


12

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
SCALIA, J., dissenting

a timely fashion. The balance it strikes between the finality of criminal judgments and the need to provide for
review of defaulted claims of ineffective assistance of trial
counsel grossly underestimates both the frequency of such
claims in federal habeas, and the incentives to argue
(since it is a free pass to federal habeas) that appointed
counsel was ineffective in failing to raise such claims. The
balance might have been close (though it would disregard
our established jurisprudence) if the Court merely held
that uncounseled failure to raise ineffective assistance of
trial counsel would not constitute default. But in adding
to that the rule that counseled failure to raise it may also
provide an excuse, the Court creates a monstrosity. For
these reasons, I respectfully dissent.

