(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MARTINEZ v. RYAN, DIRECTOR, ARIZONA DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–1001. Argued October 4, 2011—Decided March 20, 2012
Arizona prisoners may raise claims of ineffective assistance of trial
counsel only in state collateral proceedings, not on direct review. In
petitioner Martinez’s first state collateral proceeding, his counsel did
not raise such a claim. On federal habeas review with new counsel,
Martinez argued that he received ineffective assistance both at trial
and in his first state collateral proceeding. He also claimed that he
had a constitutional right to an effective attorney in the collateral
proceeding because it was the first place to raise his claim of ineffective assistance at trial. The District Court denied the petition, finding that Arizona’s preclusion rule was an adequate and independent
state-law ground barring federal review, and that under Coleman v.
Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, the attorney’s errors in the postconviction
proceeding did not qualify as cause to excuse the procedural default.
The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed.
Held:
1. Where, under state law, ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel
claims must be raised in an initial-review collateral proceeding, a
procedural default will not bar a federal habeas court from hearing
those claims if, in the initial-review collateral proceeding, there was
no counsel or counsel in that proceeding was ineffective. Pp. 5–14.
(a) Given that the precise question here is whether ineffective
assistance in an initial-review collateral proceeding on an ineffectiveassistance-at-trial claim may provide cause for a procedural default
in a federal habeas proceeding, this is not the case to resolve the
question left open in Coleman: whether a prisoner has a constitutional right to effective counsel in initial-review collateral proceedings.
However, to protect prisoners with potentially legitimate ineffective-


2

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
Syllabus
assistance claims, it is necessary to recognize a narrow exception to
Coleman’s unqualified statement that an attorney’s ignorance or inadvertence in a postconviction proceeding does not qualify as cause to
excuse a procedural default, namely, that inadequate assistance of
counsel at initial-review collateral proceedings may establish cause.
Pp. 5–6.
(b) A federal court can hear Martinez’s ineffective-assistance
claim only if he can establish cause to excuse the procedural default
and prejudice from a violation of federal law. Coleman held that a
postconviction attorney’s negligence “does not qualify as ‘cause,’ ” because “the attorney is the prisoner’s agent,” and “the principal bears
the risk of ” his agent’s negligent conduct, Maples v. Thomas, ante, at
12. However, in Coleman, counsel’s alleged error was on appeal from
an initial-review collateral proceeding. Thus, his claims had been
addressed by the state habeas trial court. This marks a key difference between initial-review collateral proceedings and other collateral proceedings. Here, where the initial-review collateral proceeding
is the first designated proceeding for a prisoner to raise the ineffective-assistance claim, the collateral proceeding is the equivalent of a
prisoner’s direct appeal as to that claim because the state habeas
court decides the claim’s merits, no other court has addressed the
claim, and defendants “are generally ill equipped to represent themselves” where they have no brief from counsel and no court opinion
addressing their claim. Halbert v. Michigan, 545 U. S. 605, 617. An
attorney’s errors during an appeal on direct review may provide
cause to excuse a procedural default; for if the attorney appointed by
the State is ineffective, the prisoner has been denied fair process and
the opportunity to comply with the State’s procedures and obtain an
adjudication on the merits of his claim. Without adequate representation in an initial-review collateral proceeding, a prisoner will have
similar difficulties vindicating a substantial ineffective-assistance-attrial claim. The same would be true if the State did not appoint an
attorney for the initial-review collateral proceeding. A prisoner’s inability to present an ineffective-assistance claim is of particular concern because the right to effective trial counsel is a bedrock principle
in this Nation’s justice system.
Allowing a federal habeas court to hear a claim of ineffective assistance at trial when an attorney’s errors (or an attorney’s absence)
caused a procedural default in an initial-review collateral proceeding
acknowledges, as an equitable matter, that a collateral proceeding, if
undertaken with no counsel or ineffective counsel, may not have been
sufficient to ensure that proper consideration was given to a substantial claim. It thus follows that, when a State requires a prisoner to
raise a i claim of ineffective assistance at trial in a collateral proceed-


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
ing, a prisoner may establish cause for a procedural default of such
claim in two circumstances: where the state courts did not appoint
counsel in the initial-review collateral proceeding for an ineffectiveassistance-at-trial claim; and where appointed counsel in the initialreview collateral proceeding, where that claim should have been
raised, was ineffective under Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S.
668. To overcome the default, a prisoner must also demonstrate that
the underlying ineffective-assistance-at-trial claim is substantial.
Most jurisdictions have procedures to ensure counsel is appointed for
substantial ineffective-assistance claims. It is likely that such attorneys are qualified to perform, and do perform, according to prevailing
professional norms. And where that is so, States may enforce a procedural default in federal habeas proceedings. Pp. 6–12.
(c) This limited qualification to Coleman does not implicate stare
decisis concerns. Coleman’s holding remains true except as to initialreview collateral proceedings for claims of ineffective assistance at
trial. The holding in this case should not put a significant strain on
state resources. A State facing the question of cause for an apparent
default may answer that the ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel
claim is insubstantial. The limited circumstances recognized here also reflect the importance of the right to effective assistance at trial.
Other claims may not implicate the same fundamentals of the adversary system. The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of
1996 does not speak to the question presented here, and thus does
not bar Martinez from asserting attorney error as cause for a procedural default. Pp. 12–14.
2. Whether Martinez’s attorney in his first collateral proceeding
was ineffective and whether his ineffective-assistance-at-trial claim
is substantial, as well as the question of prejudice, are questions that
remain open for a decision on remand. P. 15.
623 F. 3d 731, reversed and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined. SCALIA, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which THOMAS, J.,
joined.

