Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash­
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–1001
_________________

LUIS MARIANO MARTINEZ, PETITIONER v.

CHARLES L. RYAN, DIRECTOR, ARIZONA

DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[March 20, 2012]


JUSTICE KENNEDY delivered the opinion of the Court.
The State of Arizona does not permit a convicted person
alleging ineffective assistance of trial counsel to raise that
claim on direct review. Instead, the prisoner must bring
the claim in state collateral proceedings. In the instant
case, however, petitioner’s postconviction counsel did not
raise the ineffective-assistance claim in the first collateral
proceeding, and, indeed, filed a statement that, after
reviewing the case, she found no meritorious claims help­
ful to petitioner. On federal habeas review, and with new
counsel, petitioner sought to argue he had received ineffec­
tive assistance of counsel at trial and in the first phase of
his state collateral proceeding. Because the state collat­
eral proceeding was the first place to challenge his conviction on grounds of ineffective assistance, petitioner
maintained he had a constitutional right to an effective
attorney in the collateral proceeding. While petitioner
frames the question in this case as a constitutional one, a
more narrow, but still dispositive, formulation is whether
a federal habeas court may excuse a procedural default of


2

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
Opinion of the Court

an ineffective-assistance claim when the claim was not
properly presented in state court due to an attorney’s
errors in an initial-review collateral proceeding.
I
A jury convicted petitioner, Luis Mariano Martinez, of
two counts of sexual conduct with a minor under the age
of 15. The prosecution introduced a videotaped forensic
interview with the victim, Martinez’s 11-year-old step­
daughter. It also put in evidence the victim’s nightgown,
with traces of Martinez’s DNA. As part of his defense,
Martinez introduced evidence of the victim’s recantations,
including testimony from the victim’s grandmother and
mother and a second videotaped interview in which the
victim denied any abuse. The victim also denied any
abuse when she testified at trial. App. to Pet. for Cert.
38a–39a. To explain the inconsistencies, a prosecution
expert testified that recantations of child-abuse accusa­
tions are caused often by reluctance on the part of the
victim’s mother to lend support to the child’s claims. Pet.
for Cert. 3. After considering the conflicting evidence, the
jury convicted Martinez. He was sentenced to two consec­
utive terms of life imprisonment with no possibility of
parole for 35 years. App. to Pet. for Cert. 39a.
The State appointed a new attorney to represent Mar­
tinez in his direct appeal. Ibid.; Pet. for Cert. 4. She
made numerous arguments on Martinez’s behalf, includ­
ing a claim that the evidence was insufficient and that
newly discovered evidence warranted a new trial. App. to
Pet. for Cert. 39a. Arizona law, however, did not permit
her to argue on direct appeal that trial counsel was inef­
fective. State v. Spreitz, 202 Ariz. 1, 3, 39 P. 3d 525, 527
(2002). Arizona instead requires claims of ineffective
assistance at trial to be reserved for state collateral
proceedings.
While Martinez’s direct appeal was pending, the attor­


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

ney began a state collateral proceeding by filing a “Notice
of Post-Conviction Relief.” Martinez v. Schriro, 623 F. 3d
731, 733–734 (CA9 2010); Ariz. Rule Crim. Proc. 32.4(a)
(2011). Despite initiating this proceeding, counsel made
no claim trial counsel was ineffective and later filed a
statement asserting she could find no colorable claims at
all. 623 F. 3d, at 734. Cf. State v. Smith, 184 Ariz. 456,
459, 910 P. 2d 1, 4 (1996).
The state trial court hearing the collateral proceeding
gave Martinez 45 days to file a pro se petition in support of
postconviction relief and to raise any claims he believed
his counsel overlooked. 623 F. 3d, at 734; see Smith,
supra, at 459, 910 P. 2d, at 4. Martinez did not respond.
He later alleged that he was unaware of the ongoing col­
lateral proceedings and that counsel failed to advise him
of the need to file a pro se petition to preserve his rights.
The state trial court dismissed the action for postconvic­
tion relief, in effect affirming counsel’s determination that
Martinez had no meritorious claims. 623 F. 3d, at 734.
The Arizona Court of Appeals affirmed Martinez’s convic­
tion, and the Arizona Supreme Court denied review. Id.,
at 733.
About a year and a half later, Martinez, now represent­
ed by new counsel, filed a second notice of postconviction
relief in the Arizona trial court. Id., at 734. Martinez
claimed his trial counsel had been ineffective for failing to
challenge the prosecution’s evidence. He argued, for ex­
ample, that his trial counsel should have objected to the
expert testimony explaining the victim’s recantations or
should have called an expert witness in rebuttal. Mar­
tinez also faulted trial counsel for not pursuing an excul­
patory explanation for the DNA on the nightgown. App. to
Brief in Opposition B–6 to B–12. Martinez’s petition was
dismissed, in part in reliance on an Arizona Rule barring
relief on a claim that could have been raised in a previous
collateral proceeding. Id., at B–27; see Ariz. Rule Crim.


4

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
Opinion of the Court

Proc. 32.2(a)(3). Martinez, the theory went, should have
asserted the claims of ineffective assistance of trial coun­
sel in his first notice for postconviction relief. The Arizona
Court of Appeals agreed. It denied Martinez relief be­
cause he failed to raise his claims in the first collateral
proceeding. 623 F. 3d, at 734. The Arizona Supreme
Court declined to review Martinez’s appeal.
Martinez then sought relief in United States District
Court for the District of Arizona, where he filed a petition
for a writ of habeas corpus, again raising the ineffective­
assistance-of-trial-counsel claims. Martinez acknowledged
the state courts denied his claims by relying on a well­
established state procedural rule, which, under the doc­
trine of procedural default, would prohibit a federal court
from reaching the merits of the claims. See, e.g., Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U. S. 72, 84–85, 90–91 (1977). He
could overcome this hurdle to federal review, Martinez
argued, because he had cause for the default: His first
postconviction counsel was ineffective in failing to raise
any claims in the first notice of postconviction relief and in
failing to notify Martinez of her actions. See id., at 84–85.
On the Magistrate Judge’s recommendation, the District
Court denied the petition, ruling that Arizona’s preclusion
rule was an adequate and independent state-law ground
to bar federal review. App. to Pet. for Cert. 36a. Martinez
had not shown cause to excuse the procedural default,
the District Court reasoned, because under Coleman v.
Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, 753–754 (1991), an attorney’s
errors in a postconviction proceeding do not qualify as
cause for a default. See id., at 754–755.
The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed.
The Court of Appeals relied on general statements in
Coleman that, absent a right to counsel in a collateral
proceeding, an attorney’s errors in the proceeding do not
establish cause for a procedural default. Expanding on
the District Court’s opinion, the Court of Appeals, citing


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

Coleman, noted the general rule that there is no constitu­
tional right to counsel in collateral proceedings. 623 F. 3d,
at 736. The Court of Appeals recognized that Coleman
reserved ruling on whether there is “an exception” to this
rule in those cases “where ‘state collateral review is the
first place a prisoner can present a challenge to his convic­
tion.’ ” 623 F. 3d, at 736 (quoting Coleman, supra, at 755).
It concluded, nevertheless, that the controlling cases
established no basis for the exception. Certiorari was
granted. 563 U. S. ___ (2011).
II
Coleman v. Thompson, supra, left open, and the Court of
Appeals in this case addressed, a question of constitution­
al law: whether a prisoner has a right to effective counsel
in collateral proceedings which provide the first occasion
to raise a claim of ineffective assistance at trial. These
proceedings can be called, for purposes of this opinion,
“initial-review collateral proceedings.” Coleman had suggested, though without holding, that the Constitution
may require States to provide counsel in initial-review
collateral proceedings because “in [these] cases . . . state
collateral review is the first place a prisoner can present a
challenge to his conviction.” Id., at 755. As Coleman
noted, this makes the initial-review collateral proceeding a
prisoner’s “one and only appeal” as to an ineffective­
assistance claim, id., at 756 (emphasis deleted; internal
quotation marks omitted), and this may justify an excep­
tion to the constitutional rule that there is no right to
counsel in collateral proceedings. See id., at 755; Douglas
v. California, 372 U. S. 353, 357 (1963) (holding States
must appoint counsel on a prisoner’s first appeal).
This is not the case, however, to resolve whether that
exception exists as a constitutional matter. The precise question here is whether ineffective assistance in an
initial-review collateral proceeding on a claim of ineffective


6

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
Opinion of the Court

assistance at trial may provide cause for a procedural
default in a federal habeas proceeding. To protect prison­
ers with a potentially legitimate claim of ineffective assis­
tance of trial counsel, it is necessary to modify the unqual­
ified statement in Coleman that an attorney’s ignorance
or inadvertence in a postconviction proceeding does not
qualify as cause to excuse a procedural default. This
opinion qualifies Coleman by recognizing a narrow excep­
tion: Inadequate assistance of counsel at initial-review
collateral proceedings may establish cause for a prisoner’s
procedural default of a claim of ineffective assistance at
trial.
A
Federal habeas courts reviewing the constitutionality of
a state prisoner’s conviction and sentence are guided by
rules designed to ensure that state-court judgments are
accorded the finality and respect necessary to preserve the
integrity of legal proceedings within our system of federal­
ism. These rules include the doctrine of procedural de­
fault, under which a federal court will not review the
merits of claims, including constitutional claims, that a
state court declined to hear because the prisoner failed to
abide by a state procedural rule. See, e.g., Coleman, supra, at 747–748; Sykes, supra, at 84–85. A state court’s
invocation of a procedural rule to deny a prisoner’s claims
precludes federal review of the claims if, among other
requisites, the state procedural rule is a nonfederal
ground adequate to support the judgment and the rule is
firmly established and consistently followed. See, e.g.,
Walker v. Martin, 562 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 7–
8); Beard v. Kindler, 558 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at
7). The doctrine barring procedurally defaulted claims
from being heard is not without exceptions. A prisoner
may obtain federal review of a defaulted claim by showing
cause for the default and prejudice from a violation of


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

federal law. See Coleman, 501 U. S., at 750. There is no
dispute that Arizona’s procedural bar on successive peti­
tions is an independent and adequate state ground. Thus,
a federal court can hear Martinez’s ineffective-assistance
claim only if he can establish cause to excuse the proce­
dural default.
Coleman held that “[n]egligence on the part of a prison­
er’s postconviction attorney does not qualify as ‘cause.’ ”
Maples v. Thomas, 565 U. S ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at
12). Coleman reasoned that “because the attorney is the
prisoner’s agent . . . under ‘well-settled principles of agen­
cy law,’ the principal bears the risk of negligent conduct on
the part of his agent.” Maples, supra, at ___ (slip op., at
12).
Coleman, however, did not present the occasion to apply
this principle to determine whether attorney errors in
initial-review collateral proceedings may qualify as cause
for a procedural default. The alleged failure of counsel in
Coleman was on appeal from an initial-review collateral
proceeding, and in that proceeding the prisoner’s claims
had been addressed by the state habeas trial court. See
501 U. S., at 755.
As Coleman recognized, this marks a key difference
between initial-review collateral proceedings and other
kinds of collateral proceedings. When an attorney errs in
initial-review collateral proceedings, it is likely that no
state court at any level will hear the prisoner’s claim.
This Court on direct review of the state proceeding could
not consider or adjudicate the claim. See, e.g., Fox Film
Corp. v. Muller, 296 U. S. 207 (1935); Murdock v. Memphis, 20 Wall. 590 (1875); cf. Coleman, supra, at 730–731.
And if counsel’s errors in an initial-review collateral pro­
ceeding do not establish cause to excuse the procedural
default in a federal habeas proceeding, no court will re­
view the prisoner’s claims.
The same is not true when counsel errs in other kinds of


8

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
Opinion of the Court

postconviction proceedings. While counsel’s errors in
these proceedings preclude any further review of the
prisoner’s claim, the claim will have been addressed by
one court, whether it be the trial court, the appellate court
on direct review, or the trial court in an initial-review
collateral proceeding. See, e.g., Coleman, supra, at 756.
Where, as here, the initial-review collateral proceeding
is the first designated proceeding for a prisoner to raise a
claim of ineffective assistance at trial, the collateral pro­
ceeding is in many ways the equivalent of a prisoner’s
direct appeal as to the ineffective-assistance claim. This
is because the state habeas court “looks to the merits of
the clai[m]” of ineffective assistance, no other court has
addressed the claim, and “defendants pursuing first-tier
review . . . are generally ill equipped to represent them­
selves” because they do not have a brief from counsel or an
opinion of the court addressing their claim of error. Halbert v. Michigan, 545 U. S. 605, 617 (2005); see Douglas,
372 U. S., at 357–358.
As Coleman recognized, an attorney’s errors during an
appeal on direct review may provide cause to excuse a
procedural default; for if the attorney appointed by the
State to pursue the direct appeal is ineffective, the prison­
er has been denied fair process and the opportunity to
comply with the State’s procedures and obtain an adjudi­
cation on the merits of his claims. See 501 U. S., at 754;
Evitts v. Lucey, 469 U. S. 387, 396 (1985); Douglas, supra,
at 357–358. Without the help of an adequate attorney,
a prisoner will have similar difficulties vindicating a
substantial ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claim.
Claims of ineffective assistance at trial often require
investigative work and an understanding of trial strategy.
When the issue cannot be raised on direct review, moreover, a prisoner asserting an ineffective-assistance-of-trial­
counsel claim in an initial-review collateral proceeding
cannot rely on a court opinion or the prior work of an


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

attorney addressing that claim. Halbert, 545 U. S., at 619.
To present a claim of ineffective assistance at trial in
accordance with the State’s procedures, then, a prisoner
likely needs an effective attorney.
The same would be true if the State did not appoint an
attorney to assist the prisoner in the initial-review collat­
eral proceeding. The prisoner, unlearned in the law, may
not comply with the State’s procedural rules or may mis­
apprehend the substantive details of federal constitutional
law. Cf., e.g., id., at 620–621 (describing the educational
background of the prison population). While confined to
prison, the prisoner is in no position to develop the eviden­
tiary basis for a claim of ineffective assistance, which often
turns on evidence outside the trial record.
A prisoner’s inability to present a claim of trial error is
of particular concern when the claim is one of ineffective
assistance of counsel. The right to the effective assistance
of counsel at trial is a bedrock principle in our justice
system. It is deemed as an “obvious truth” the idea that
“any person haled into court, who is too poor to hire a
lawyer, cannot be assured a fair trial unless counsel is
provided for him.” Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U. S. 335,
344 (1963). Indeed, the right to counsel is the foundation
for our adversary system. Defense counsel tests the pros­
ecution’s case to ensure that the proceedings serve the
function of adjudicating guilt or innocence, while protect­
ing the rights of the person charged. See, e.g., Powell v.
Alabama, 287 U. S. 45, 68–69 (1932) (“[The defendant]
requires the guiding hand of counsel at every step in the
proceedings against him. Without it, though he be not
guilty, he faces the danger of conviction because he does
not know how to establish his innocence”). Effective trial
counsel preserves claims to be considered on appeal, see,
e.g., Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 52(b), and in federal habeas
proceedings, Edwards v. Carpenter, 529 U. S. 446 (2000).
This is not to imply the State acted with any impropri­


10

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
Opinion of the Court

ety by reserving the claim of ineffective assistance for a
collateral proceeding. See Massaro v. United States, 538
U. S. 500, 505 (2003). Ineffective-assistance claims often
depend on evidence outside the trial record. Direct ap­
peals, without evidentiary hearings, may not be as effec­
tive as other proceedings for developing the factual basis
for the claim. Ibid. Abbreviated deadlines to expand the
record on direct appeal may not allow adequate time for
an attorney to investigate the ineffective-assistance claim.
See Primus, Structural Reform in Criminal Defense, 92
Cornell L. Rev. 679, 689, and n. 57 (2004) (most rules give
between 5 and 30 days from the time of conviction to file a
request to expand the record on appeal). Thus, there are
sound reasons for deferring consideration of ineffective­
assistance-of-trial-counsel claims until the collateral­
review stage, but this decision is not without consequences
for the State’s ability to assert a procedural default in
later proceedings. By deliberately choosing to move trial­
ineffectiveness claims outside of the direct-appeal process,
where counsel is constitutionally guaranteed, the State
significantly diminishes prisoners’ ability to file such
claims. It is within the context of this state procedural
framework that counsel’s ineffectiveness in an initial­
review collateral proceeding qualifies as cause for a proce­
dural default.
The rules for when a prisoner may establish cause to
excuse a procedural default are elaborated in the exercise
of the Court’s discretion. McCleskey v. Zant, 499 U. S.
467, 490 (1991); see also Coleman, supra, at 730–731;
Sykes, 433 U. S., at 83; Reed v. Ross, 468 U. S. 1, 9 (1984);
Fay v. Noia, 372 U. S. 391, 430 (1963), overruled in part
by Sykes, supra. These rules reflect an equitable judg­
ment that only where a prisoner is impeded or obstructed
in complying with the State’s established procedures will a
federal habeas court excuse the prisoner from the usual
sanction of default. See, e.g., Strickler v. Greene, 527 U. S.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

263, 289 (1999); Reed, supra, at 16. Allowing a federal
habeas court to hear a claim of ineffective assistance of
trial counsel when an attorney’s errors (or the absence of
an attorney) caused a procedural default in an initial­
review collateral proceeding acknowledges, as an equitable
matter, that the initial-review collateral proceeding, if
undertaken without counsel or with ineffective counsel,
may not have been sufficient to ensure that proper consid­
eration was given to a substantial claim. From this it
follows that, when a State requires a prisoner to raise an
ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claim in a collateral
proceeding, a prisoner may establish cause for a default of
an ineffective-assistance claim in two circumstances. The
first is where the state courts did not appoint counsel in
the initial-review collateral proceeding for a claim of inef­
fective assistance at trial. The second is where appointed
counsel in the initial-review collateral proceeding, where
the claim should have been raised, was ineffective under
the standards of Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668
(1984). To overcome the default, a prisoner must also
demonstrate that the underlying ineffective-assistance-of­
trial-counsel claim is a substantial one, which is to say
that the prisoner must demonstrate that the claim has
some merit. Cf. Miller-El v. Cockrell, 537 U. S. 322 (2003)
(describing standards for certificates of appealability to
issue).
Most jurisdictions have in place procedures to ensure
counsel is appointed for substantial ineffective-assistance
claims. Some States, including Arizona, appoint counsel
in every first collateral proceeding. See, e.g., Alaska Stat.
18.85.100(c) (2010); Ariz. Rule Crim. Proc. 32.4(c)(2)
(2011); Conn. Gen. Stat. §51–296(a) (2011); Me. Rules
Crim. Proc. 69, 70(c) (2010); N. C. Gen. Stat. Ann. §7A–
451(a)(2) (2009); N. J. Ct. Rule 3:22–6(b) (2012); R. I. Gen.
Laws §10–9.1–5 (Lexis 1997); Tenn. Code Ann. §8–14–205
(2011). Some States appoint counsel if the claims require


12

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
Opinion of the Court

an evidentiary hearing, as claims of ineffective assistance
often do. See, e.g., Ky. Rule Crim. Proc. 11.42(5) (2011);
La. Code Crim. Proc. Ann., Art. 930.7(C) (West 2008);
Mich. Rule Crim. Proc. 6.505(A) (2011); S. C. Rule Civ.
Proc. 71.1(d) (2011). Other States appoint counsel if the
claims have some merit to them or the state habeas trial
court deems the record worthy of further development.
See, e.g., Ark. Rule Crim. Proc. 37.3(b) (2011); Colo. Rule
Crim. Proc. 35(b) (2011); Del. Super. Ct. Rule Crim. Proc.
61(e)(1) (2011); Indiana Rule Post-Conviction Remedies
Proc. 1, §9(a) (rev. 2011); Kan. Stat. Ann. §22–4506 (2007);
N. M. Dist. Ct. Rule Crim. Proc. 5–802 (2011); Hust v.
State, 147 Idaho 682, 683–684, 214 P. 3d 668, 669–670
(2009); Hardin v. Arkansas, 350 Ark. 299, 301, 86 S. W. 3d
384, 385 (2007) (per curiam); Jensen v. State, 2004 ND
200, ¶13, 688 N. W. 2d 374, 378; Wu v. United States, 798
A. 2d 1083, 1089 (D. C. 2002); Kostal v. People, 167 Colo.
317, 447 P. 2d 536 (1968). It is likely that most of the
attorneys appointed by the courts are qualified to perform, and do perform, according to prevailing professional
norms; and, where that is so, the States may enforce a
procedural default in federal habeas proceedings.
B
This limited qualification to Coleman does not implicate
the usual concerns with upsetting reliance interests pro­
tected by stare decisis principles. Cf., e.g., Montejo v.
Louisiana, 556 U. S. 778, 792–793 (2009). Coleman held
that an attorney’s negligence in a postconviction proceed­
ing does not establish cause, and this remains true except
as to initial-review collateral proceedings for claims of
ineffective assistance of counsel at trial. Coleman itself
did not involve an occasion when an attorney erred in an
initial-review collateral proceeding with respect to a claim
of ineffective trial counsel; and in the 20 years since Coleman was decided, we have not held Coleman applies in


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

circumstances like this one.
The holding here ought not to put a significant strain on
state resources. When faced with the question whether
there is cause for an apparent default, a State may answer
that the ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claim is in­
substantial, i.e., it does not have any merit or that it is
wholly without factual support, or that the attorney in the
initial-review collateral proceeding did not perform below
constitutional standards.
This is but one of the differences between a constitu­
tional ruling and the equitable ruling of this case. A
constitutional ruling would provide defendants a free­
standing constitutional claim to raise; it would require the
appointment of counsel in initial-review collateral proceed­
ings; it would impose the same system of appointing coun­
sel in every State; and it would require a reversal in all
state collateral cases on direct review from state courts if
the States’ system of appointing counsel did not conform to
the constitutional rule. An equitable ruling, by contrast,
permits States a variety of systems for appointing counsel
in initial-review collateral proceedings. And it permits a
State to elect between appointing counsel in initial-review
collateral proceedings or not asserting a procedural de­
fault and raising a defense on the merits in federal habeas
proceedings. In addition, state collateral cases on direct
review from state courts are unaffected by the ruling in
this case.
The rule of Coleman governs in all but the limited cir­
cumstances recognized here. The holding in this case does
not concern attorney errors in other kinds of proceedings,
including appeals from initial-review collateral proceed­
ings, second or successive collateral proceedings, and
petitions for discretionary review in a State’s appellate
courts. See 501 U. S., at 754; Carrier, 477 U. S., at 488. It
does not extend to attorney errors in any proceeding be­
yond the first occasion the State allows a prisoner to raise


14

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
Opinion of the Court

a claim of ineffective assistance at trial, even though that
initial-review collateral proceeding may be deficient for
other reasons.
In addition, the limited nature of the qualification to
Coleman adopted here reflects the importance of the right
to the effective assistance of trial counsel and Arizona’s
decision to bar defendants from raising ineffective­
assistance claims on direct appeal. Our holding here
addresses only the constitutional claims presented in this
case, where the State barred the defendant from raising
the claims on direct appeal.
Arizona contends that the Antiterrorism and Effective
Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), 28 U. S. C. §2254,
bars Martinez from asserting attorney error as cause for
a procedural default. AEDPA refers to attorney error in
collateral proceedings, but it does not speak to the ques­
tion presented in this case. Section 2254(i) provides that
“the ineffectiveness or incompetence of counsel during
Federal or State collateral post-conviction proceedings
shall not be a ground for relief.” “Cause,” however, is not
synonymous with “a ground for relief.” A finding of cause
and prejudice does not entitle the prisoner to habeas relief.
It merely allows a federal court to consider the merits of
a claim that otherwise would have been procedurally de­
faulted. In this case, for example, Martinez’s “ground for
relief ” is his ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claim, a
claim that AEDPA does not bar. Martinez relies on the
ineffectiveness of his postconviction attorney to excuse his
failure to comply with Arizona’s procedural rules, not as
an independent basis for overturning his conviction. In
short, while §2254(i) precludes Martinez from relying on
the ineffectiveness of his postconviction attorney as a
“ground for relief,” it does not stop Martinez from using it
to establish “cause.” Holland v. Florida, 560 U. S. ___, ___
(2010) (slip op., at 18).


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

III
Where, under state law, claims of ineffective assistance
of trial counsel must be raised in an initial-review collat­
eral proceeding, a procedural default will not bar a federal
habeas court from hearing a substantial claim of ineffec­
tive assistance at trial if, in the initial-review collateral
proceeding, there was no counsel or counsel in that pro­
ceeding was ineffective.
In this case Martinez’s attorney in the initial-review
collateral proceeding filed a notice akin to an Anders brief,
in effect conceding that Martinez lacked any meritorious
claim, including his claim of ineffective assistance at trial.
See Anders v. California, 386 U. S. 738 (1967). Martinez
argued before the federal habeas court that filing the
Anders brief constituted ineffective assistance. The Court
of Appeals did not decide whether that was so. Rather, it
held that because Martinez did not have a right to an
attorney in the initial-review collateral proceeding, the
attorney’s errors in the initial-review collateral proceeding
could not establish cause for the failure to comply with the
State’s rules. Thus, the Court of Appeals did not deter­
mine whether Martinez’s attorney in his first collateral
proceeding was ineffective or whether his claim of ineffec­
tive assistance of trial counsel is substantial. And the
court did not address the question of prejudice. These
issues remain open for a decision on remand.
*
*
*
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed, and
the case is remanded for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

