Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

1

KENNEDY, J., concurring

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–992
_________________

JEFFREY A. BEARD, SECRETARY, PENNSYLVANIA

DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS, ET AL.,

PETITIONERS v. JOSEPH J. KINDLER 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT

[December 8, 2009] 


JUSTICE KENNEDY, with whom JUSTICE THOMAS joins,
concurring.
Due consideration of the phrasing in the question pre
sented and of the arguments and concessions by counsel
leads to the conclusion that this case should be vacated
and remanded, and I join the Court’s opinion. The appar
ent difficulty the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit
found in accepting the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania’s
procedural bar conclusion, however, invites this further
comment.
The adequate state ground doctrine cannot be applied
without consideration of the purposes it is designed to
serve. By refraining from deciding cases that rest on an
adequate and independent state ground, federal courts
show proper respect for state courts and avoid rendering
advisory opinions. Michigan v. Long, 463 U. S. 1032, 1040
(1983). The claimed adequate and independent state
ground at issue in this case is a state procedural rule. We
have not allowed state courts to bar review of federal
claims by invoking new procedural rules without adequate
notice to litigants who, in asserting their federal rights,
have in good faith complied with existing state procedural
law. “Novelty in procedural requirements cannot be per
mitted to thwart review in this Court applied for by those


2

BEARD v. KINDLER
KENNEDY, J., concurring

who, in justified reliance upon prior decisions, seek vindi
cation in state courts of their federal constitutional
rights.” NAACP v. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U. S.
449, 457–458 (1958). We have also been mindful of the
danger that novel state procedural requirements will be
imposed for the purpose of evading compliance with a
federal standard. See, e.g., NAACP v. Alabama ex rel.
Flowers, 377 U. S. 288, 293–302 (1964).
Neither of these concerns applies here. First, no one
could seriously entertain the notion that Kindler acted in
“justified reliance” when he fled beyond the jurisdiction of
the Pennsylvania courts. Even if a hypothetical escapee
studiously examined the case law before making an in
formed decision that flight was worth it, that is not the
reliance the law should be required to consider. There is
no justification for an unlawful escape, which “operates as
an affront to the dignity of [a] court’s proceedings.” Or
tega-Rodriguez v. United States, 507 U. S. 234, 246 (1993).
And if some prior court rulings allowed a former escapee
to reinstate forfeited claims, there is no convincing reason
to say a future escapee is entitled to similar treatment.
Nor is there any indication that the Supreme Court of
Pennsylvania adopted its forfeiture rule out of any hostil
ity toward legitimate constitutional claims.
It is most doubtful that, in light of its underlying pur
poses, the adequate state ground doctrine ought to prevent
a State from adopting, and enforcing, a sensible rule that
the escaped felon forfeits any pending postverdict motions.
The law is entitled to protect the regularity and predict
ability of its own processes, and its own interest in the
prompt adjudication of disputed issues, by imposing a rule
of waiver quite without regard to some notion of express or
constructive reliance by the one who escapes. And if that
principle had not been fully explicated in prior decisions, it
seems to me that the State can establish a new baseline
without later having its procedural bar ignored by the


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

3

KENNEDY, J., concurring

federal courts. This should be true even if the principles
barring the postverdict motions are first elaborated in the
instant case.
The process of elaborating, defining, and then shaping a
State’s decisional law after considering the competing
arguments in a specific case rests on this premise: Novel
facts and circumstances may disclose principles that,
while consistent with the logic and rationality the law
seeks and in that sense predictable, still have not yet been
defined with precision in earlier cases. This is the dy
namic of the case system we rely upon to explain the law.
The adequate state ground doctrine ought not to fore
close the case process in the separate States. A too
rigorous or demanding insistence that procedural re
quirements be established in all of their detail before they
can be given effect in federal court would deprive the
States of the case law decisional dynamic that the Judici
ary of the United States finds necessary and appropriate
for the elaboration of its own procedural rules. See, e.g.,
Smith v. United States, 94 U. S. 97 (1876). Save where
there is exclusive jurisdiction or federal supremacy, a
proper constitutional balance ought not give federal courts
latitude in the interpretation and elaboration of its law
that it then withholds from the States. There is no sense
in applying the adequate state ground rule without its
being informed by these principles.
Whether the structure of this case either permits or
requires consideration of these matters is not clear at this
stage. In a proper case, however, these concerns should be
addressed. It seems most doubtful that this Court can or
should require federal courts to disregard a state proce
dural ground that was not in all respects explicit before
the case when it was first announced, absent a showing of
a purpose or pattern to evade constitutional guarantees.
And this is particularly so when the state procedural
requirement arose from the necessity, in new circum


4

BEARD v. KINDLER
KENNEDY, J., concurring

stances, to prevent a travesty of the State’s own respected
system. In this context, the objecting party ought not to
have the power to block federal courts from honoring
state-law determinations that were otherwise valid, en
forceable, and consistent with constitutional guarantees.

