(Slip Opinion) OCTOBER TERM, 2009 Syllabus NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. Syllabus No. 08–351. Argued October 14, 2009—Decided December 8, 2009 Illinois law provides for forfeiture of movable personal property used to facilitate a drug crime, permits police to seize the property without a warrant, and allows the State to keep the property nearly five months before beginning judicial forfeiture proceedings. Respon dents, six individuals who had cars and cash seized under that law, brought this federal civil rights action, claiming that the failure of the State to provide a speedy postseizure hearing violated the federal Due Process Clause. The District Court dismissed the case based on Circuit precedent, but, on appeal, the Seventh Circuit departed from that precedent and ruled for respondents. This Court granted certio rari to review the Seventh Circuit’s due process determination, but at oral argument the Court learned that all of the actual property disputes between the parties had been resolved. Held: 1. The case is moot. The Constitution permits this Court to decide legal questions only in the context of actual “Cases” or “Controver sies,” Art. III, §2, and an actual controversy must exist at all stages of U. S. 395, 401. Here there is no longer any actual controversy re garding ownership or possession of the underlying property. There is no claim for damages before this Court; there is no properly certified class or dispute over class certification; and this case does not fit within the category of cases that are “capable of repetition” while “evading review.” Only an abstract dispute about the law remains. Pp. 4–6. 2. The judgment below is vacated. In moot cases, this Court nor mally vacates the lower court judgment, which clears the path for re
Syllabus litigation of the issues and preserves the rights of the parties, while prejudicing none by a preliminary decision. Munsingwear, Inc., 340 U. S. 36, 40. Where mootness is the result of settlement rather than happenstance, however, the losing party for Bonner Mall Partnership, 513 U. S. 18, 25. This case more closely re sembles mootness through happenstance than through settlement. In Bancorp, the party seeking review caused the mootness by volun tarily settling the issue contested throughout the litigation. Here, the Court believes that the presence of the federal case played no significant role in the termination of plaintiffs’ state-court forfeiture proceedings. Plaintiffs’ forfeiture cases took place with no procedural link to the case before this Court; apparently terminated on substan tive grounds in their ordinary course; and, to the Court’s knowledge, no one raised the procedural question at issue here in those cases. This Court therefore concludes that it should follow its ordinary prac tice and order vacatur. Pp. 6–9. 524 F. 3d 834, vacated and remanded. BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, GINSBURG, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined, and in which STEVENS, J., joined as to Parts I and II. STEVENS, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part.