Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–382
_________________

UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. JICARILLA 

APACHE NATION 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT

[June 13, 2011] 


JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, dissenting.
Federal Indian policy, as established by a network of
federal statutes, requires the United States to act strictly
in a fiduciary capacity when managing Indian trust fund
accounts. The interests of the Federal Government as
trustee and the Jicarilla Apache Nation (Nation) as bene
ficiary are thus entirely aligned in the context of Indian
trust fund management. Where, as here, the governing
statutory scheme establishes a conventional fiduciary
relationship, the Government’s duties include fiduciary
obligations derived from common-law trust principles.
Because the common-law rationales for the fiduciary
exception fully support its application in this context, I
would hold that the Government may not rely on the
attorney-client privilege to withhold from the Nation
communications between the Government and its attor
neys relating to trust fund management.
The Court’s decision to the contrary rests on false fac
tual and legal premises and deprives the Nation and other
Indian tribes of highly relevant evidence in scores of pend
ing cases seeking relief for the Government’s alleged
mismanagement of their trust funds. But perhaps more
troubling is the majority’s disregard of our settled prece
dent that looks to common-law trust principles to define
the scope of the Government’s fiduciary obligations to


2

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Indian tribes. Indeed, aspects of the majority’s opinion
suggest that common-law principles have little or no re
levance in the Indian trust context, a position this Court
rejected long ago. Although today’s holding pertains only
to a narrow evidentiary issue, I fear the upshot of the
majority’s opinion may well be a further dilution of the
Government’s fiduciary obligations that will have broader
negative repercussions for the relationship between the
United States and Indian tribes.
I

A

Federal Rule of Evidence 501 provides in relevant part
that “the privilege of a . . . government . . . shall be gov
erned by the principles of the common law as they may be
interpreted by the courts of the United States in the light
of reason and experience.” Rule 501 “was adopted pre
cisely because Congress wished to leave privilege ques
tions to the courts rather than attempt to codify them.”
United States v. Weber Aircraft Corp., 465 U. S. 792, 804,
n. 25 (1984).
As the majority notes, the purpose of the attorney-client
privilege “is to encourage full and frank communication
between attorneys and their clients and thereby promote
broader public interests in the observance of law and
administration of justice.” Upjohn Co. v. United States,
449 U. S. 383, 389 (1981). But the majority neglects to
explain that the privilege is a limited exception to the
usual rules of evidence requiring full disclosure of relevant
information. See 8 J. Wigmore, Evidence §2192, p. 64 (3d
ed. 1940) (common law recognizes “fundamental maxim
that the public . . . has a right to every man’s evidence”
and that “any exemptions which may exist are distinctly
exceptional, being so many derogations from a positive
general rule”). Because it “has the effect of withholding
relevant information from the factfinder,” courts construe


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

the privilege narrowly. Fisher v. United States, 425 U. S.
391, 403 (1976). It applies “only where necessary to
achieve its purpose,” ibid.; “[w]here this purpose ends, so
too does the protection of the privilege,” Wachtel v. Health
Net, Inc., 482 F. 3d 225, 231 (CA3 2007).
The fiduciary exception to the attorney-client privilege
has its roots in 19th-century English common-law cases
holding that, “when a trustee obtained legal advice relat
ing to his administration of the trust, and not in antici
pation of adversarial legal proceedings against him, the
beneficiaries of the trust had the right to the production of
that advice.” Ibid. (collecting cases). The fiduciary excep
tion is now well recognized in the jurisprudence of both
federal and state courts,1 and has been applied in a wide
variety of contexts, including in litigation involving com
mon-law trusts, see, e.g., Riggs Nat. Bank of Washington,
D. C. v. Zimmer, 355 A. 2d 709 (Del. Ch. 1976), disputes
between corporations and shareholders, see, e.g., Garner v.
Wolfinbarger, 430 F. 2d 1093 (CA5 1970), and ERISA
enforcement actions, see, e.g., United States v. Doe, 162
F. 3d 554 (CA9 1999).
The majority correctly identifies the two rationales
courts have articulated for applying the fiduciary excep
tion, ante, at 8–9, but its description of those rationales
omits a number of important points. With regard to the
first rationale, courts have characterized the trust benefi
ciary as the “real client” of legal advice relating to trust
——————
1 See, e.g., Solis v. Food Employers Labor Relations Assn., __ F. 3d __,
2011 WL 1663597, *4–5 (CA4 2011); Wachtel v. Health Net, Inc., 482
F. 3d 225, 232–234 (CA3 2007); Bland v. Fiatallis North America, Inc.,
401 F. 3d 779, 787–788 (CA7 2005); United States v. Mett, 178 F. 3d
1058, 1062–1064 (CA9 1999); In re Long Island Lighting Co., 129 F. 3d
268, 271–272 (CA2 1997); Wildbur v. ARCO Chemical Co., 974 F. 2d
631, 645 (CA5 1992); Fausek v. White, 965 F. 2d 126, 132–133 (CA6
1992); see also Restatement (Third) of Trusts §82, Comment f and
Reporter’s Notes on §82, pp. 187–188, 198–204 (2005); Restatement of
Law (Third) Governing Lawyers §84 (1998).


4

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

administration because such advice, provided to a trustee
to assist in his management of the trust, is ultimately for
the benefit of the trust beneficiary, rather than for the
trustee in his personal capacity. See, e.g., United States v.
Mett, 178 F. 3d 1058, 1063 (CA9 1999) (“ ‘[A]s a represen
tative for the beneficiaries of the trust which he is admin
istering, the trustee is not the real client in the sense that
he is personally being served’ ” (quoting United States v.
Evans, 796 F. 2d 264, 266 (CA9 1986) (per curiam)));
Riggs, 355 A. 2d, at 713 (same). The majority places
heavy emphasis on the source of payment for the legal
advice, see ante, at 8, 15, but it is well settled that who
pays for the legal advice, although “potentially relevant,”
“is not determinative in resolving issues of privilege.”
Restatement (Third) of Trusts §82, Comment f, p. 188
(2005) (hereinafter Third Restatement). Instead, the
lynchpin of the “real client” inquiry is the identity of the
ultimate beneficiary of the legal advice. See Wachtel, 482
F. 3d, at 232 (“[O]f central importance . . . [i]s the fiduci
ary’s lack of a legitimate personal interest in the legal
advice obtained”). If the advice was rendered for the
benefit of the beneficiary and not for the trustee in any
personal capacity, the “real client” of the advice is the
beneficiary.
As to the second rationale for the fiduciary exception—
rooted in the trustee’s fiduciary duty to disclose all infor
mation related to trust management—the majority glosses
over the fact that this duty of disclosure is designed “to
enable the beneficiary to prevent or redress a breach of
trust and otherwise to enforce his or her rights under the
trust.” Third Restatement §82, Comment a(2), at 184. As
the leading American case on the fiduciary exception
explains, “[i]n order for the beneficiaries to hold the trus
tee to the proper standards of care and honesty and pro
cure for themselves the benefits to which they are entitled,
their knowledge of the affairs and mechanics of the trust


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

management is crucial.” Riggs, 355 A. 2d, at 712. Courts
justifying the fiduciary exception under this rationale
have thus concluded that “[t]he policy of preserving the
full disclosure necessary in the trustee-beneficiary rela
tionship is . . . ultimately more important than the pro
tection of the trustees’ confidence in the attorney for the
trust.” Id., at 714; see Mett, 178 F. 3d, at 1063 (under this
rationale, “the fiduciary exception can be understood as an
instance of the attorney-client privilege giving way in the
face of a competing legal principle”). The majority fails to
appreciate the important oversight and accountability
interests that underlie this rationale for the fiduciary ex
ception, or explain why they operate with any less force in
the Indian trust context.
B
The question in this case is whether the fiduciary excep
tion applies in the Indian trust context such that the
Government may not rely on the attorney-client privilege
to withhold from the Nation communications between the
Government and its attorneys relating to the administra
tion of the Nation’s trust fund accounts. Answering that
question requires a proper understanding of the nature of
the Government’s trust relationship with Indian tribes,
particularly with regard to its management of Indian trust
funds.
Since 1831, this Court has recognized the existence of a
general trust relationship between the United States and
Indian tribes. See Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, 5 Pet. 1, 17
(1831) (Marshall, C. J.). Our decisions over the past cen
tury have repeatedly reaffirmed this “distinctive obliga
tion of trust incumbent upon the Government” in its deal
ings with Indians. Seminole Nation v. United States, 316
U. S. 286, 296 (1942); see United States v. Mitchell, 463
U. S. 206, 225–226 (1983) (Mitchell II) (collecting cases
and noting “the undisputed existence of a general trust


6

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

relationship between the United States and the Indian
people”). Congress, too, has recognized the general trust
relationship between the United States and Indian tribes.
Indeed, “[n]early every piece of modern legislation dealing
with Indian tribes contains a statement reaffirming the
trust relationship between tribes and the federal govern
ment.” F. Cohen, Handbook of Federal Indian Law
§5.04[4][a], pp. 420–421 (2005 ed.) (hereinafter Cohen).2
Against this backdrop, Congress has enacted federal
statutes that “define the contours of the United States’
fiduciary responsibilities” with regard to its management
of Indian tribal property and other trust assets. Mitchell
II, 463 U. S., at 224. The Nation’s claims as relevant in
this case concern the Government’s alleged mismanage
ment of its tribal trust fund accounts. See ante, at 3.
The system of trusteeship and federal management of
Indian funds originated with congressional enactments in
the 19th century directing the Government to hold and
manage Indian tribal funds in trust. See, e.g., Act of June
9, 1837, 5 Stat. 135; see also Misplaced Trust: The Bureau
of Indian Affairs’ Mismanagement of the Indian Trust
Fund, H. R. Rep. No. 102–449, p. 6 (1992) (hereinafter
Misplaced Trust). Through these and later congressional
enactments, the United States has come to manage almost
$3 billion in tribal funds and collects close to $380 million
per year on behalf of tribes. Cohen §5.03[3][b], at 407.3
——————
2 See,

e.g., 25 U. S. C. §458cc(a) (directing Secretary of the Interior to
enter into funding agreements with Indian tribes “in a manner consis
tent with the Federal Government’s laws and trust relationship to and
responsibility for the Indian people”); §3701 (finding that the Govern
ment “has a trust responsibility to protect, conserve, utilize, and
manage Indian agricultural lands consistent with its fiduciary obliga
tion and its unique relationship with Indian tribes”); 20 U. S. C. §7401
(“It is the policy of the United States to fulfill the Federal Government’s
unique and continuing trust relationship with and responsibility to the
Indian people for the education of Indian children”).
3 Trust fund accounts are “comprised mainly of money received


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Today, numerous statutes outline the Federal Govern
ment’s obligations as trustee in managing Indian trust
funds. In particular, the Secretary of the Treasury, at the
request of the Secretary of the Interior, must invest “[a]ll
funds held in trust by the United States . . . to the credit of
Indian tribes” in certain securities “suitable to the needs
of the fund involved.” 25 U. S. C. §161a(a). The Secretary
of the Interior may deposit in the Treasury and pay manda
tory interest on Indian trust funds when “the best inter
ests of the Indians will be promoted by such deposits, in
lieu of investments.” §161. Similarly, the Secretary of the
Interior may invest tribal trust funds in certain public
debt instruments “if he deems it advisable and for the best
interest of the Indians.” §162a(a). And Congress has set
forth a nonexhaustive list of the Secretary of the Interior’s
“trust responsibilities” with respect to Indian trust funds,
which include a series of accounting, auditing, manage
ment, and disclosure obligations. §162a(d). These and
other statutory provisions4 give the United States “full
responsibility to manage Indian [trust fund accounts] for
the benefit of the Indians.” Mitchell II, 463 U. S., at 224.
“[A] fiduciary relationship necessarily arises when the
Government assumes such elaborate control over [trust
assets] belonging to Indians.” Id., at 225. Under the
——————
through the sale or lease of trust lands and include timber stumpage,
oil and gas royalties, and agriculture fees,” as well as “judgment funds
awarded to tribes.” H. R. Rep. No. 103–778, p. 9 (1994). The Nation’s
claims involve proceeds derived from the Government’s management of
the Nation’s timber, gravel, and other resources and leases of reserva
tion lands. The Government has held these funds in trust for the
Nation since the late 1880’s. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 98a–100a, 105a.
4 See, e.g., 25 U. S. C. §4011(a) (requiring Secretary of the Interior to
account “for the daily and annual balance of all funds held in trust by
the United States for the benefit of an Indian tribe”); §4041(1) (creating
the Office of Special Trustee for American Indians “to provide for more
effective management of, and accountability for the proper discharge of,
the Secretary’s trust responsibilities to Indian tribes”).


8

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

statutory regime described above, the Government has
extensive managerial control over Indian trust funds,
exercises considerable discretion with respect to their in
vestment, and has assumed significant responsibilities to
account to the tribal beneficiaries. As a result, “[a]ll of the
necessary elements of a common-law trust are present:
a trustee (the United States), a beneficiary (the Indian
[Tribe]), and a trust corpus (Indian . . . funds).” Ibid.
Unlike in other contexts where the statutory scheme
creates only a “bare trust” entailing only limited responsi
bilities, United States v. Navajo Nation, 537 U. S. 488, 505
(2003) (Navajo I) (internal quotation marks omitted),5 the
statutory regime governing the United States’ obligations
with regard to Indian trust funds “bears the hallmarks of
a conventional fiduciary relationship,” United States v.
Navajo Nation, 556 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (Navajo II ) (slip
op., at 14) (internal quotation marks omitted); see Lincoln
v. Vigil, 508 U. S. 182, 194 (1993) (“[T]he law is ‘well
established that the Government in its dealings with
Indian tribal property acts in a fiduciary capacity’ ” (quot
——————
5 For

example, in United States v. Mitchell, 445 U. S. 535 (1980)
(Mitchell I), this Court held that a federal statute which authorized the
President to allot a specified number of acres to individual Indians
residing on reservation lands did not “provide that the United States
has undertaken full fiduciary responsibilities as to the management of
allotted lands.” Id., at 542. Under the statute, “the Indian allottee, and
not a representative of the United States, is responsible for using the
land for agricultural or grazing purposes.” Id., at 542–543. Accord
ingly, we concluded that Congress did not intend to “impose upon the
Government all fiduciary duties ordinarily placed by equity upon a
trustee” because the statute “created only a limited trust relationship
between the United States and the allottee.” Id., at 542; see also
Navajo I, 537 U. S., at 507–508 (concluding that Secretary of the
Interior did not assume “fiduciary duties” under the relevant statutory
scheme because “[t]he Secretary is neither assigned a comprehensive
managerial role nor, . . . expressly invested with responsibility to secure
the needs and best interests of the Indian owner and his heirs” (inter
nal quotation marks omitted)).


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

ing United States v. Cherokee Nation of Okla., 480 U. S.
700, 707 (1987)).
II
In light of Federal Rule of Evidence 501 and the Gov
ernment’s role as a conventional fiduciary in managing
Indian trust fund accounts, I would hold as a matter of
federal common law that the fiduciary exception is appli
cable in the Indian trust context, and thus the Govern
ment may not rely on the attorney-client privilege to
withhold communications related to trust management.
As explained below, the twin rationales for the fiduciary
exception fully support its application in this context. The
majority’s conclusion to the contrary rests on flawed fac
tual and legal premises.
A
When the Government seeks legal advice from a gov
ernment attorney on matters relating to the management
of the Nation’s trust funds, the “real client” of that advice
for purposes of the fiduciary exception is the Nation, not
the Government. The majority’s rejection of that conclu
sion is premised on its erroneous view that the Govern
ment, in managing the Nation’s trust funds, “has its own
independent interest in the implementation of federal
Indian policy” that diverges from the interest of the Na
tion as beneficiary. Ante, at 18; see also ante, at 1
(GINSBURG, J., concurring in judgment).
The majority correctly notes that, as a general matter,
the Government has sovereign interests in managing
Indian trusts that distinguish it from a private trustee.
See, e.g., United States v. Minnesota, 270 U. S. 181, 194
(1926). Throughout the history of the Federal Govern
ment’s dealings with Indian tribes, Congress has altered
and administered the trust relationship “as an instrument
of federal policy.” Ante, at 17, n. 8 (detailing shifts in


10

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

policy); see generally Cobell v. Norton, 240 F. 3d 1081,
1086–1088 (CADC 2001) (same, and describing that his
tory as “contentious and tragic”).
In the specific context of Indian trust fund management,
however, federal Indian policy entirely aligns the interests
of the Government as trustee and the Indian tribe as
beneficiary. As explained above, Congress has enacted an
extensive network of statutes regulating the Government’s
management of Indian trust fund accounts. That statu
tory framework establishes a “conventional fiduciary re
lationship” in the context of Indian trust fund admini
stration. Navajo Nation II, 556 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
14) (internal quotation marks omitted); see supra, at 7–9.
As a conventional fiduciary, the Government’s manage
ment of Indian trust funds must “be judged by the most
exacting fiduciary standards.” Seminole Nation, 316 U. S.,
at 296–297. Among the most fundamental fiduciary obli
gations of a trustee is “to administer the trust solely in the
interest of the beneficiaries.” 2A A. Scott & W. Fratcher,
Law of Trusts §170, p. 311 (4th ed. 1987); see Meinhard v.
Salmon, 249 N. Y. 458, 464, 164 N. E. 545, 546 (1928)
(Cardozo, C. J.) (“Not honesty alone, but the punctilio of
an honor the most sensitive,” is “the standard of behavior”
for trustees “bound by fiduciary ties”). Although Indian
trust funds are deposited in the United States Treasury,
“they are not part of the federal government’s general
funds and can be used only for the benefit of the tribe.”
Cohen §5.03[3][b], at 408, and n. 140 (citing Quick Bear v.
Leupp, 210 U. S. 50, 80–81 (1908)).
Because federal Indian policy requires the Government
to act strictly as a conventional fiduciary in managing the
Nation’s trust funds, the Government acts in a “represen
tative” rather than “persona[l]” capacity when managing
the Nation’s trust funds. Riggs, 355 A. 2d, at 713. By law,
the Government cannot pursue any “independent” inter
est, ante, at 18, distinct from its responsibilities as a fidu


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

ciary. See Cohen §5.03[3][b], at 408, and n. 141 (“Federal
statutes forbid use of Indian tribal funds in any man
ner not authorized by treaty or express provisions of
law” (citing 25 U. S. C. §§122, 123)). In other words, any
uniquely sovereign interest the Government may have in
other contexts of its trust relationship with Indian tribes
does not exist in the specific context of Indian trust fund
administration. It naturally follows, then, that when the
Government seeks legal advice from government attorneys
relating to the management of the Nation’s trust funds,
the “real client” of the advice for purposes of the fiduciary
exception is the Nation, not the Government.
This conclusion holds true even though government
attorneys are “paid out of congressional appropriations
at no cost to the [Nation].” Ante, at 15. As noted above,
although the source of funding for legal advice may be
relevant, the ultimate inquiry is for whose benefit the
legal advice was rendered. See supra, at 4. And, for all
the emphasis the majority places on the funding source
here, see ante, at 8, 15, the majority never suggests that
the fiduciary exception would apply if Congress amended
federal law to permit Indian tribes to pay government
attorneys out of their own trust funds.6
The majority also suggests that, even if the interests of
the United States and Indian tribes may be equivalent in
some contexts, that “equivalence” “breaks down” when
there are “multiple interests” involved in a trust relation
ship. Ante, at 18. According to the majority, “the Gov
ernment has too many competing legal concerns to allow a
case-by-case inquiry into the purpose of each communica
——————
6 The majority also states that ownership of the requested documents
is “a significant factor” in deciding whether the fiduciary exception
applies, ante, at 23, but the only case it cites as support deals with the
source of payment for the legal advice, not the ownership of the docu
ments. See ibid. (citing Riggs Nat. Bank of Washington, D. C. v.
Zimmer, 355 A. 2d 709, 712 (Del. Ch. 1976)).


12

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

tion.” Ibid. As a result, the majority concludes that the
fiduciary exception should not be applied at all in the
Indian trust context. Ibid.
Preliminarily, while the Government in certain circum
stances may have sovereign obligations that conflict with
its duties as a fiduciary for Indian tribes, see, e.g., Nevada
v. United States, 463 U. S. 110 (1983),7 the existence of
competing interests is not unique to the Government as
trustee. Indeed, the issue of competing interests arises
frequently in the private trust context. See, e.g., Third
Restatement §78, Comment c, at 97–103 (describing duties
of trustee with respect to “transactions that involve con
flicting fiduciary and personal interests”); id., §79,
Comment b, at 128–129 (describing trustee’s duty of impar
tiality in “balancing . . . competing interests” of multiple
beneficiaries). In such circumstances, “a trustee—and
ultimately a court—may need to provide some response
that offers a compromise between the confidentiality or
privacy concerns of some and the interest-protection needs
——————
7 In Nevada, the Government represented certain tribes in litigation
involving water rights even though it was also required by statute to
represent the water rights of a reclamation project. See 463 U. S., at
128 (noting that Congress delegated to the Secretary of the Interior
“both the responsibility for the supervision of the Indian tribes and the
commencement of reclamation projects in areas adjacent to reservation
lands”). Because of this dual litigating responsibility, we noted that “it
is simply unrealistic to suggest that the Government may not perform
its obligation to represent Indian tribes in litigation when Congress has
obliged it to represent other interests as well.” Ibid. We thus observed
in the context of that case that “the Government cannot follow the
fastidious standards of a private fiduciary, who would breach his duties
to his single beneficiary solely by representing potentially conflicting
interests without the beneficiary’s consent.” Ibid. We expressly distin
guished the context “where only a relationship between the Govern
ment and the tribe is involved.” Id., at 142. In that context, we ac
knowledged that “the law respecting obligations between a trustee and
a beneficiary in private litigation will in many, if not all, respects
adequately describe the duty of the United States.” Ibid.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

of others.” Id., §82, Comment f, at 188. The majority
provides no reason why federal courts applying the fiduci
ary exception in the Indian trust context could not simi
larly adopt a workable framework that adequately takes
into account any unique governmental interests that bear
on the application of the fiduciary exception in any given
circumstance. See Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 26(b)(2)(C) (au
thorizing courts to set limits on discovery based on equita
ble concerns).
The majority’s categorical rejection of the fiduciary
exception in the Indian trust context sweeps far broader
than necessary. This case involves only the Government’s
alleged mismanagement of the Nation’s trust fund ac
counts, and the Government did not claim below that the
attorney-client communications at issue relate to any
competing governmental obligations. See App. to Pet. for
Cert. 18a–19a. To the extent the United States in other
contexts has competing interests, the Government and its
attorneys already have to identify those interests in de
termining how to balance them against their obligations to
Indian tribes, and attorney-client communications relating
to those interests may properly be withheld or redacted
consistent with application of the fiduciary exception. See
88 Fed. Cl. 1, 13 (2009) (observing that redactions “allo[w]
the privilege and exception to reign supreme within their
respective spheres”).
The majority’s categorical approach fails to appreciate
that privilege determinations are by their very nature
made on a case-by-case—indeed, document-by-document—
basis. Government attorneys, like private counsel, must
review each requested document and make an individual
ized assessment of privilege, and courts reviewing privi
lege logs and challenges must do the same. “While such a
‘case-by-case’ basis may to some slight extent undermine
desirable certainty in the boundaries of the attorney-client
privilege, it obeys the spirit of” of Rule 501, Upjohn, 449


14

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

U. S., at 396–397, which “ ‘provide[s] the courts with the
flexibility to develop rules of privilege on a case-by-case
basis,’ ” Trammel v. United States, 445 U. S. 40, 47 (1980)
(quoting 120 Cong. Rec. 40891 (1974) (statement of Rep.
Hungate)); see S. Rep. No. 93–1277, p. 13 (1974) (“[T]he
recognition of a privilege based on a confidential relation
ship . . . should be determined on a case-by-case basis”).
Rather than fashioning a blanket rule against applica
tion of the fiduciary exception in the Indian trust context,
I would, consistent with Rule 501 and principles of judicial
restraint, decide the question solely on the facts before us.
See Upjohn, 449 U. S., at 386 (noting that “we sit to decide
concrete cases and not abstract propositions of law” and
“declin[ing] to lay down a broad rule or series of rules to
govern all conceivable future questions in this area”). On
those facts, the fiduciary exception applies to the commu
nications in this case.
B
Like the “real client” rationale, the second rationale for
the fiduciary exception, rooted in a trustee’s fiduciary duty
to disclose all matters relevant to trust administration to
the beneficiary, fully supports disclosure of the communi
cations in this case. As explained above, courts relying on
this second rationale have recognized that “[t]he policy of
preserving the full disclosure necessary in the trustee
beneficiary relationship is . . . ultimately more important
than the protection of the trustees’ confidence in the at
torney for the trust.” Riggs, 355 A. 2d, at 714. Because
the statutory scheme requires the Government to act as a
conventional fiduciary in managing the Nation’s trust
funds, the Government’s fiduciary duty to keep the Nation
informed of matters relating to trust administration in
cludes the concomitant duty to disclose attorney-client
communications relating to trust fund management. See
Third Restatement §82, Comment f, at 187–188; Restate


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

ment of the Law (Third) Governing Lawyers §84, pp. 627–
628 (1998).
Notably, the majority does not suggest that the Nation
needs less information than a private beneficiary to exer
cise effective oversight over the Government as trustee.
Instead, the majority contends that the Nation is entitled
to less disclosure because the Government’s disclosure
obligations are more limited than a private trustee. In
particular, the majority states that the Government “as
sumes Indian trust responsibilities only to the extent it
expressly accepts those responsibilities by statute,” and
thus the Nation “must point to a right conferred by statute
or regulation in order to obtain otherwise privileged in
formation from the Government against its wishes.” Ante,
at 14. The majority cites a single statutory provision and
its implementing regulations as “defin[ing] the Govern
ment’s disclosure obligation to the [Nation].” Ante, at 22;
see ante, at 21–22 (citing 25 U. S. C. §162a(d)(5) and 25
CFR §§115.801–115.803 (2010)). Because those “narrowly
defined disclosure obligations” do not provide Indian tribes
with a specific statutory right to disclosure of attorney
client communications relating to trust administration,
ante, at 22, the majority concludes that the Government
has no duty to disclose those communications to the
Nation.
The majority’s conclusion employs a fundamentally
flawed legal premise. We have never held that all of the
Government’s trust responsibilities to Indians must be set
forth expressly in a specific statute or regulation. To the
contrary, where, as here, the statutory framework estab
lishes that the relationship between the Government and
an Indian tribe “bears the hallmarks of a conventional
fiduciary relationship,” Navajo II, 556 U. S., at __ (slip op.,
at 14) (internal quotation marks omitted), we have consis
tently looked to general trust principles to flesh out the
Government’s fiduciary obligations.


16

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

For example, in United States v. White Mountain
Apache Tribe, 537 U. S. 465 (2003), we construed a statute
that vested the Government with discretionary authority
to “use” trust property for certain purposes as imposing a
concomitant duty to preserve improvements that had
previously been made to the land. Id., at 475 (quoting 74
Stat. 8). Even though the statute did not “expressly sub
ject the Government to duties of management and conser
vation,” we construed the Government’s obligations under
the statute by reference to “elementary trust law,” which
“confirm[ed] the commonsense assumption that a fiduciary
actually administering trust property may not allow it to
fall into ruin on his watch.” 537 U. S., at 475. Similarly,
in Seminole Nation, we relied on general trust principles
to conclude that the Government had a fiduciary duty to
prevent misappropriation of tribal trust funds by corrupt
members of a tribe, even though no specific statutory or
treaty provision expressly imposed such a duty. See 316
U. S., at 296.8
——————
8 To be sure, in decisions involving the jurisdiction of the Court of
Federal Claims under the Tucker Act, we have explained that the
jurisdictional analysis “must train on specific rights-creating or duty
imposing statutory or regulatory prescriptions.” Navajo I, 537 U. S., at
506. But even assuming arguendo that those jurisdictional decisions
have relevance here, they do not stand for the proposition that the
Government’s fiduciary duties are defined exclusively by express
statutory provisions. Indeed, those decisions relied specifically on
general trust principles to determine whether the relevant statutory
scheme permitted a damages remedy, a prerequisite for jurisdiction
under the Tucker Act. See, e.g., Mitchell II, 463 U. S., at 226 (noting
that common-law trust sources establish that “a trustee is accountable
in damages for breaches of trust” and that, “[g]iven the existence of a
trust relationship, it naturally follows that the Government should be
liable in damages for the breach of its fiduciary duties”); see also
Navajo II, 556 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 14) (affirming that general
“trust principles . . . could play a role in inferring that the trust obliga
tion is enforceable by damages” (internal quotation marks and brackets
omitted)).


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Accordingly, although the “general ‘contours’ of the
government’s obligations” are defined by statute, the “in
terstices must be filled in through reference to general
trust law.” Cobell, 240 F. 3d, at 1101 (quoting Mitchell II,
463 U. S., at 224). This approach accords with our recog
nition in other trust contexts that “the primary function of
the fiduciary duty is to constrain the exercise of discre
tionary powers which are controlled by no other specific
duty imposed by the trust instrument or the legal regime.”
Varity Corp. v. Howe, 516 U. S. 489, 504 (1996) (emphasis
deleted); cf. Central States, Southeast & Southwest Areas
Pension Fund v. Central Transport, Inc., 472 U. S. 559,
570 (1985) (“[R]ather than explicitly enumerating all of
the powers and duties of trustees and other fiduciaries,
Congress invoked the common law of trusts to define the
general scope of their authority and responsibility”).
Indeed, “[i]f the fiduciary duty applied to nothing more
than activities already controlled by other specific legal
duties, it would serve no purpose.” Howe, 516 U. S., at
504.
The majority pays lip service to these precedents, ac
knowledging that “[w]e have looked to common-law prin
ciples to inform our interpretation of statutes and to de
termine the scope of liability that Congress has imposed.”
Ante, at 13. But despite its assurance that it “will apply
common-law trust principles where Congress has indi
cated it is appropriate to do so,” ante, at 14, the majority
inexplicably rejects the application of common-law trust
principles in this case. In doing so, the majority states
that “[t]he common law of trusts does not override the
specific trust-creating statute and regulations that apply
here.” Ante, at 21–22 (referring to §162a(d)(5) and 25 CFR
§§115.801–115.803). That statement evidences the major
ity’s fundamental misunderstanding of the way in which
common-law principles operate in the context of a conven
tional fiduciary relationship.


18

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Contrary to the majority’s view, the Government’s dis
closure obligations are not limited solely to the “narrowly
defined disclosure obligations” set forth in §162a(d)(5) and
its implementing regulations, ante, at 22; rather, given
that the statutory regime requires the Government to act
as a conventional fiduciary in managing Indian trust
funds, the Government’s disclosure obligations include
those of a fiduciary under common-law trust principles.
See supra, at 15–17. Instead of “overrid[ing]” the specific
disclosure duty set forth in §162a(d)(5) and its implement
ing regulations, general trust principles flesh out the
Government’s disclosure obligations under the broader
statutory regime, consistent with its role as a conventional
fiduciary in this context.
This conclusion, moreover, is supported by the plain text
of the very statute cited by the majority. Section 162a(d),
which was enacted as part of the American Indian Trust
Fund Management Reform Act of 1994 (1994 Act), 108
Stat. 4239, sets forth eight “trust responsibilities of the
United States.” But that provision also specifically states
that the Secretary of the Interior’s “proper discharge of the
trust responsibilities of the United States shall include
(but are not limited to)” those specified duties. 25 U. S. C.
§162a(d) (emphasis added). By expressly including the
italicized language, Congress recognized that the Govern
ment has pre-existing trust responsibilities that arise out
of the broader statutory scheme governing the manage
ment of Indian trust funds.9 Indeed, Title I of the 1994
——————
9 The

majority invokes the canon against superfluity and argues that
the “catchall” phrase (by which it means the “shall include (but are not
limited to)” language) cannot be read to “include a general common-law
duty to disclose all information related to the administration of Indian
trusts” because doing so would “impose general obligations that would
include those specifically enumerated.” Ante, at 22. But the flaw in the
majority’s argument is that it misperceives the function of the relevant
language. Rather than serving as a “catchall” provision that affirma


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Act is entitled “Recognition of Trust Responsibility,” 108
Stat. 4240 (emphasis added), and courts have similarly
observed that the Act “recognized and reaffirmed . . . that
the government has longstanding and substantial trust
obligations to Indians.” Cobell, 240 F. 3d, at 1098; see also
H. R. Rep. No. 103–778, p. 9 (1994) (“The responsibility for
management of Indian Trust Funds by the [Government]
has been determined through a series of court decisions,
treaties, and statutes”). That conclusion accords with
common sense as not even the Government argues that it
had no disclosure obligations with respect to Indian trust
funds prior to the enactment of the 1994 Act.10
The majority requires the Nation to “point to a right
conferred by statute” to the attorney-client communica
tions at issue, ante, at 14, and finding none, denies the
——————
tively “incorporate[s]” common-law trust duties into §162a(d), ante, at
22, that language simply makes clear that §162a(d) does not set forth
an exhaustive list of the Government’s trust responsibilities in manag
ing Indian trust funds; nothing in that language itself imports any
substantive obligations into the statute.
10 The majority also contends that its reading of §162a(d) is supported
by a provision in the Indian Claims Limitation Act of 1982 (ICLA), 96
Stat. 1976, which provided that if the Secretary of the Interior rejected
a claim for litigation by an Indian claimant, he was required to provide
upon request “any nonprivileged research materials or evidence gath
ered by the United States in the documentation of such claim.” §5(b),
id., at 1978. According to the majority, this provision reflected Con
gress’ understanding that “the Government retains evidentiary privi
leges allowing it to withhold information related to trust property from
Indian tribes.” Ante, at 22, n. 11. But this provision cannot bear the
weight the majority places on it. Even putting aside the undisputed
fact that the ICLA is inapplicable to the claims in this case, the major
ity’s reliance on the ICLA provision fails to recognize that documents
subject to the fiduciary exception are, under the “real client” rationale,
per se nonprivileged. See, e.g., Mett, 178 F. 3d, at 1063. Accordingly, if
anything, the ICLA’s requirement that the Government disclose “non
privileged” materials to Indian claimants supports the conclusion that
Congress intended communications related to trust fund management
to be disclosed to Indian tribes.


20

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Nation access to those communications. The upshot of
that decision, I fear, may very well be to reinvigorate the
position of the dissenting Justices in White Mountain
Apache and Mitchell II, who rejected the use of common
law principles to inform the scope of the Government’s
fiduciary obligations to Indian tribes. See White Mountain
Apache, 537 U. S., at 486–487 (THOMAS, J., dissenting);
Mitchell II, 463 U. S., at 234–235 (Powell, J., dissenting).
That approach was wrong when Mitchell II was decided
nearly 30 years ago, and it is wrong today. Under our
governing precedents, common-law trust principles play
an important role in defining the Government’s fiduciary
duties where, as here, the statutory scheme establishes a
conventional fiduciary relationship. Applying those prin
ciples in this context, I would hold that the fiduciary ex
ception is fully applicable to the communications in this
case.11
——————
11 The majority’s errors are further compounded by its failure to ac
cord proper consideration to the mandamus posture of this case. “This
Court repeatedly has observed that the writ of mandamus is an ex
traordinary remedy, to be reserved for extraordinary situations.”
Gulfstream Aerospace Corp. v. Mayacamas Corp., 485 U. S. 271, 289
(1988). “As the writ is one of the most potent weapons in the judicial
arsenal, three conditions must be satisfied before it may issue,” Cheney
v. United States Dist. Court for D. C., 542 U. S. 367, 380 (2004) (inter
nal quotation marks and citation omitted):
“First, the party seeking issuance of the writ must have no other
adequate means to attain the relief he desires—a condition designed to
ensure that the writ will not be used as a substitute for the regular
appeals process. Second, the petitioner must satisfy the burden of
showing that his right to issuance of the writ is clear and indisputable.
Third, even if the first two prerequisites have been met, the issuing
court, in the exercise of its discretion, must be satisfied that the writ is
appropriate under the circumstances.” Id., at 380–381 (internal quota
tion marks and citations omitted; alterations deleted).
The majority purports to leave the decision whether to grant man
damus relief to the Federal Circuit, but simultaneously drops a footnote
stating that it “assume[s]” that the Court of Federal Claims on remand
will “follow [its] holding” that the fiduciary exception is inapplicable


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

III
We have described the Federal Government’s fiduciary
duties toward Indian tribes as consisting of “moral obliga
tions of the highest responsibility and trust,” to be fulfilled
through conduct “judged by the most exacting fiduciary
standards.” Seminole Nation, 316 U. S., at 297; see also
Mitchell II, 463 U. S., at 225–226 (collecting cases). The
sad and well-documented truth, however, is that the Gov
ernment has failed to live up to its fiduciary obligations in
managing Indian trust fund accounts. See, e.g., Cobell,
240 F. 3d, at 1089 (“The General Accounting Office, Inte
rior Department Inspector General, and Office of Man
agement and Budget, among others, have all condemned
the mismanagement of [Indian] trust accounts over the
past twenty years”); Misplaced Trust 8 (“[T]he [Govern
ment’s] indifferent supervision and control of the Indian
trust funds has consistently resulted in a failure to exer
cise its responsibility and [to meet] any reasonable expec
tations of the tribal and individual accountholders, Con
gress, and taxpayers”); id., at 56 (“[H]ad this type of
mismanagement taken place in any other trust arrange
ments such as Social Security, there would be war”).
As Congress has recognized, “[t]he Indian trust fund is
more than balance sheets and accounting procedures.
These moneys are crucial to the daily operations of native
American tribes and a source of income to tens of thou
sands of native Americans.” Id., at 5. Given the history of
governmental mismanagement of Indian trust funds,
application of the fiduciary exception is, if anything, even
more important in this context than in the private trustee
——————
here. Ante, at 24, and n. 13. By doing so, the majority virtually assures
that the Nation will not be able to use the communications at issue in
this litigation, thereby effectively granting extraordinary relief to the
Government upon no showing whatsoever that the stringent conditions
for mandamus have been met.


22

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

context. The majority’s refusal to apply the fiduciary
exception in this case deprives the Nation—as well as the
Indian tribes in the more than 90 cases currently pending
in the federal courts involving claims of tribal trust mis
management, App. to Pet. for Cert. 126a–138a—of highly
relevant information going directly to the merits of
whether the Government properly fulfilled its fiduciary
duties. Its holding only further exacerbates the concerns
expressed by many about the lack of adequate oversight
and accountability that has marked the Government’s
handling of Indian trust fund accounts for decades.
But perhaps even more troubling than the majority’s
refusal to apply the fiduciary exception in this case is its
disregard of our established precedents that affirm the
central role that common-law trust principles play in
defining the Government’s fiduciary obligations to Indian
tribes. By rejecting the Nation’s claim on the ground that
it fails to identify a specific statutory right to the commu
nications at issue, the majority effectively embraces an
approach espoused by prior dissents that rejects the role of
common-law principles altogether in the Indian trust
context. Its decision to do so in a case involving only a
narrow evidentiary issue is wholly unnecessary and, worse
yet, risks further diluting the Government’s fiduciary
obligations in a manner that Congress clearly did not
intend and that would inflict serious harm on the already
frayed relationship between the United States and Indian
tribes. Because there is no warrant in precedent or reason
for reaching that result, I respectfully dissent.

