(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
No. 10–382.

Argued April 20, 2011—Decided June 13, 2011

Respondent Jicarilla Apache Nation’s (Tribe) reservation contains
natural resources that are developed pursuant to statutes adminis
tered by the Interior Department. Proceeds from these resources are
held by the United States in trust for the Tribe. The Tribe filed a
breach-of-trust action in the Court of Federal Claims (CFC), seeking
monetary damages for the Government’s alleged mismanagement of
the Tribe’s trust funds in violation of 25 U. S. C. §§161–162a and
other laws. During discovery, the Tribe moved to compel production
of certain documents. The Government agreed to release some of the
documents, but asserted that others were protected by, inter alia, the
attorney-client privilege. The CFC granted the motion in part, hold
ing that departmental communications relating to the management
of trust funds fall within a “fiduciary exception” to the attorney-client
privilege. Under that exception, which courts have applied to com
mon-law trusts, a trustee who obtains legal advice related to trust
administration is precluded from asserting the attorney-client privi
lege against trust beneficiaries.
Denying the Government’s petition for a writ of mandamus direct
ing the CFC to vacate its production order, the Federal Circuit
agreed with the CFC that the trust relationship between the United
States and the Indian tribes is sufficiently similar to a private trust
to justify applying the fiduciary exception. The appeals court held
that the United States cannot deny a tribe’s request to discover com
munications between the Government and its attorneys based on the
attorney-client privilege when those communications concern man
agement of an Indian trust and the Government has not claimed that
it or its attorneys considered a specific competing interest in those
communications.


2

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
Syllabus

Held: The fiduciary exception to the attorney-client privilege does not
apply to the general trust relationship between the United States
and the Indian tribes. Pp. 5–24.
(a) The Court considers the bounds of the fiduciary exception and
the nature of the Indian trust relationship. Pp. 5–14.
(1) Under English common law, when a trustee obtained legal
advice to guide his trust administration and not for his own defense
in litigation, the beneficiaries were entitled to the production of
documents related to that advice on the rationale that the advice was
sought for their benefit and obtained at their expense in that trust
funds were used to pay the attorney. In the leading American case,
Riggs Nat. Bank of Washington, D. C. v. Zimmer, 355 A. 2d 709, the
Delaware Chancery Court applied the fiduciary exception to hold that
trust beneficiaries could compel trustees to produce a legal memo
randum related to the trust’s administration because: (1) the trustees
had obtained the legal advice as “mere representative[s]” of the bene
ficiaries, who were the “real clients” of the attorney, id., at 711–712,
and (2) the fiduciary duty to furnish trust-related information to the
beneficiaries outweighed the trustees’ interest in the attorney-client
privilege, id., at 714. The Federal Courts of Appeals apply the fiduci
ary exception based on the same two criteria. Pp. 6–9.
(2) The Federal Circuit analogized the Government to a private
trustee. While the United States’ responsibilities with respect to the
management of tribal funds bear some resemblance to those of a pri
vate trustee, this analogy cannot be taken too far. The Government’s
trust obligations to the tribes are established and governed by stat
ute, not the common law, see, e.g., United States v. Navajo Nation,
537 U. S. 488, 506 (Navajo I), and in fulfilling its statutory duties,
the Government acts not as a private trustee, but pursuant to its
sovereign interest in the execution of federal law, see, e.g., Heckman
v. United States, 224 U. S. 413, 437. Once federal law imposes fidu
ciary obligations on the Government, the common law “could play a
role,” United States v. Navajo Nation, 556 U. S. ___, ___ (Navajo II);
e.g., to inform the interpretation of statutes, see United States v.
White Mountain Apache Tribe, 537 U. S. 465, 475–476. But the ap
plicable statutes and regulations control. When “the Tribe cannot
identify a specific, applicable, trust-creating statute or regulation
that the Government violated . . . neither the Government’s ‘control’
over [Indian assets] nor common-law trust principles matter.” Na
vajo II, supra, at ___. Pp. 9–14.
(b) The two criteria justifying the fiduciary exception are absent in
the trust relationship between the United States and Indian tribes.
Pp. 14–23.
(1) In cases applying the fiduciary exception, courts identify the


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
“real client” based on whether the advice was bought by the trust
corpus, whether the trustee had reason to seek advice in a personal
rather than a fiduciary capacity, and whether the advice could have
been intended for any purpose other than to benefit the trust. Riggs,
355 A. 2d, at 711–712. Applying these factors, the Court concludes
that the United States does not obtain legal advice as a “mere repre
sentative” of the Tribe; nor is the Tribe the “real client” for whom
that advice is intended. See id., at 711. Here, the Government at
torneys are paid out of congressional appropriations at no cost to the
Tribe. The Government also seeks legal advice in its sovereign capac
ity rather than as a conventional fiduciary of the Tribe. Because its
sovereign interest is distinct from the beneficiaries’ private interests,
the Government seeks legal advice in a personal, not a fiduciary, ca
pacity. Moreover, the Government has too many competing legal
concerns to allow a case-by-case inquiry into each communication’s
purpose. In addition to its duty to the Tribe, the Government may
need to comply with other statutory duties, such as environmental
and conservation obligations. It may also face conflicting duties to
different tribes or individual Indians. It may seek the advice of coun
sel for guidance in balancing these competing interests or to help de
termine whether there are conflicting interests at all. For the attor
ney-client privilege to be effective, it must be predictable. See, e.g.,
Jaffee v. Redmond, 518 U. S. 1, 18. The Government will not always
be able to predict what considerations qualify as competing interests,
especially before receiving counsel’s advice. If the Government were
required to identify the specific interests it considered in each com
munication, its ability to receive confidential legal advice would be
substantially compromised. See Upjohn Co. v. United States, 449
U. S. 383, 393. Pp. 15–20.
(2) The Federal Circuit also decided that the fiduciary exception
properly applied here because of the fiduciary’s duty to disclose all
trust-management-related information to the beneficiary. The Gov
ernment, however, does not have the same common-law disclosure
obligations as a private trustee. In this case, 25 U. S. C. §162a(d) de
lineates the Government’s “trust responsibilities.” It identifies the
Interior Secretary’s obligation to supply tribal account holders “with
periodic statements of their account performance” and to make
“available on a daily basis” their account balances, §162a(d)(5). The
Secretary has complied with these requirements in regulations man
dating that each tribe be provided with a detailed quarterly state
ment of performance. 25 CFR pt. 115.8. The common law of trusts
does not override these specific trust-creating statutes and regula
tions. A statutory clause labeling the enumerated trust responsibili
ties as nonexhaustive, see §162a(d), cannot be read to include a gen


4

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
Syllabus
eral common-law duty to disclose all information related to the ad
ministration of Indian trusts, since that would vitiate Congress’
specification of narrowly defined disclosure obligations, see, e.g.,
Mackey v. Lanier Collection Riggs Agency & Service, Inc., 486 U. S.
825, 837. By law and regulation, moreover, the documents at issue
are classed “the property of the United States” while other records
are “the property of the tribe.” 25 CFR §115.1000. This Court con
siders ownership of records to be a significant factor in deciding who
“ought to have access to the document,” Riggs, supra, at 712. Here,
that privilege belongs to the United States. Pp. 20–23.

590 F. 3d 1305, reversed and remanded.
ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
and SCALIA, KENNEDY, and THOMAS, JJ., joined. GINSBURG, J., filed an
opinion concurring in the judgment, in which BREYER, J., joined. SOTOMAYOR, J., filed a dissenting opinion. KAGAN, J., took no part in the
consideration or decision of the case.

