2

WALKER v. MARTIN
Syllabus
but gave no reason for his failure to assert the additional claims until
nearly five years after his sentence and conviction became final. The
California Supreme Court denied the petition, citing Clark and Rob
bins. Having exhausted his state-court remedies, Martin filed an
amended federal habeas petition. The District Court dismissed his
belatedly asserted claims as untimely under California law. The
Ninth Circuit vacated that order and directed the District Court to
determine the “adequacy” of the State’s time bar. Again rejecting
Martin’s petition, the District Court found California’s bar an ade
quate state ground for denying Martin’s new pleas. Concluding that
the time bar was not firmly defined or consistently applied, the Ninth
Circuit remanded for a determination of the merits of Martin’s
claims.

Held: California’s timeliness requirement qualifies as an independent
state ground adequate to bar habeas corpus relief in federal court.
Pp. 7–13.
(a) Absent showings of “cause” and “prejudice,” see Wainwright v.
Sykes, 433 U. S. 72, 84–85, federal habeas relief will be unavailable
when (1) “a state court [has] declined to address a prisoner’s federal
claims because the prisoner had failed to meet a state procedural re
quirement,” and (2) “the state judgment rests on independent and
adequate state procedural grounds,” Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S.
722, 729–730. P. 7.
(b) A “rule can be ‘firmly established’ and ‘regularly followed,’ ” and
therefore adequate, “even if the appropriate exercise of discretion
may permit consideration of a federal claim in some cases but not
others.” Beard v. Kindler, 558 U. S. ___, ___. California’s time rule,
although discretionary, meets this “firmly established” criterion. The
California Supreme Court framed the requirement in a trilogy of
cases, instructing habeas petitioners to “alleg[e] with specificity” the
absence of substantial delay, good cause for delay, or eligibility for
one of four exceptions to the time bar. Gallego, 18 Cal. 4th, at 838,
959 P. 2d, at 299. And California’s case law made it plain that Mar
tin’s nearly five-year delay was “substantial.” See, e.g., id., at 829–
831, 838, and n. 13, 959 P. 2d, at 293–294, 299, and n. 13. The Court
finds unpersuasive Martin’s argument that the terms “reasonable
time” period and “substantial delay” make California’s rule too vague
to be regarded as “firmly established.” While indeterminate language
is typical of discretionary rules, application of those rules in particu
lar circumstances can supply the requisite clarity. Congressional
statutes and this Court’s decisions have employed time limitations
that are not stated in precise, numerical terms. For example, current
federal habeas prescriptions limit the time for filing a petition to one
year. The clock runs from “the date on which the [supporting] facts

