2

WALKER v. MARTIN
Opinion of the Court

explanation or citation ordinarily ranks as a disposition on
the merits. Tr. of Oral Arg. 7; see Harrington v. Richter,
ante, at 9–10. California courts may elect to pretermit the
question whether a petition is timely and simply deny the
petition, thereby signaling that the petition lacks merit.
Petitioner below, respondent here, Charles W. Martin,
presented the claims at issue—all alleging ineffective
assistance of counsel—in a habeas petition filed in the
California Supreme Court nearly five years after his con
viction became final. He stated no reason for the long
delay. Citing Clark and Robbins, the court denied Mar
tin’s petition. In turn, the U. S. District Court for the
Eastern District of California dismissed Martin’s federal
habeas petition raising the same ineffective assistance
claims. Denial of Martin’s state-court petition as un
timely, the District Court held, rested on an adequate and
independent state ground, i.e., Martin’s failure to seek
relief in state court “without substantial delay.” See
Robbins, 18 Cal. 4th, at 787, 959 P. 2d, at 322.
The U. S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit re
versed the District Court’s decision. Contrasting the
precision of “fixed statutory deadlines” with California’s
proscription of “substantial delay,” the appeals court held
that California’s standard lacked the clarity and certainty
necessary to constitute an adequate state bar. 357 Fed.
Appx. 793, 794 (2009) (relying on Townsend v. Knowles,
562 F. 3d 1200 (CA9 2009)).
In a recent decision, Beard v. Kindler, 558 U. S. ___
(2009), this Court clarified that a state procedural bar may
count as an adequate and independent ground for denying
a federal habeas petition even if the state court had dis
cretion to reach the merits despite the default. Guided by
that decision, we hold that California is not put to the
choice of imposing a specific deadline for habeas petitions
(which would almost certainly rule out Martin’s nearly
five-year delay) or preserving the flexibility of current

