8

WALKER v. MARTIN
Opinion of the Court

Kindler, 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 7) (internal quotation
marks omitted).4 “[A] discretionary state procedural rule,”
we held in Kindler, “can serve as an adequate ground to
bar federal habeas review.” Ibid. A “rule can be ‘firmly
established’ and ‘regularly followed,’ ” Kindler observed,
“even if the appropriate exercise of discretion may permit
consideration of a federal claim in some cases but not
others.” Ibid.
California’s time rule, although discretionary, meets the
“firmly established” criterion, as Kindler comprehended
that requirement. The California Supreme Court, as
earlier noted, framed the timeliness requirement for ha
beas petitioners in a trilogy of cases. See supra, at 3.
Those decisions instruct habeas petitioners to “alleg[e]
with specificity” the absence of substantial delay, good
cause for delay, or eligibility for one of four exceptions to
the time bar. Gallego, 18 Cal. 4th, at 838, 959 P. 2d, at
299; see Robbins, 18 Cal. 4th, at 780, 959 P. 2d, at 317.5
——————
4 We

have also recognized a “limited category” of “exceptional cases in
which exorbitant application of a generally sound rule renders the state
ground inadequate to stop consideration of a federal question.” Lee v.
Kemna, 534 U. S. 362, 376 (2002). In Lee, for example, the defendant
unsuccessfully moved for a continuance when, for reasons unknown to
him, his alibi witnesses left the courthouse the day they were scheduled
to testify. This Court held inadequate to bar federal review a state
court’s persnickety application of a rule detailing formal requirements
for continuance motions. The defendant had substantially complied
with the rule’s key requirement and flawless compliance would have
been unavailing given the trial court’s reason for denying the motion.
See id., at 381–382. Martin does not suggest that the application of
California’s timeliness rule in his case falls within the exceptional
category Lee described and illustrated. See Brief for Respondent 28, 29,
54.
5 An untimely petition “will be entertained on the merits if the peti
tioner demonstrates (i) that error of constitutional magnitude led to a
trial that was so fundamentally unfair that absent the error no reason
able judge or jury would have convicted the petitioner; (ii) that the
petitioner is actually innocent of the crime or crimes of which he or she
was convicted; (iii) that the death penalty was imposed by a sentencing

