Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

35

Opinion of the Court

the Eighth Amendment, but in no sense are they remote
bystanders in California’s medical care system. They are
that system’s next potential victims.
A release order limited to prisoners within the plaintiff
classes would, if anything, unduly limit the ability of State
officials to determine which prisoners should be released.
As the State acknowledges in its brief, “release of seriously
mentally ill inmates [would be] likely to create special
dangers because of their recidivism rates.” Consolidated
Reply Brief for Appellants 34. The order of the three
judge court gives the State substantial flexibility to
determine who should be released. If the State truly be
lieves that a release order limited to sick and mentally ill
inmates would be preferable to the order entered by the
three-judge court, the State can move the three-judge
court for modification of the order on that basis. The State
has not requested this relief from this Court.
The order also is not overbroad because it encompasses
the entire prison system, rather than separately assessing
the need for a population limit at every institution. The
Coleman court found a systemwide violation when it first
afforded relief, and in Plata the State stipulated to sys
temwide relief when it conceded the existence of a viola
tion. Both the Coleman Special Master and the Plata
Receiver have filed numerous reports detailing system
wide deficiencies in medical and mental health care.
California’s medical care program is run at a systemwide
level, and resources are shared among the correctional
facilities.
Although the three-judge court’s order addresses the
entire California prison system, it affords the State flexi
bility to accommodate differences between institutions.
There is no requirement that every facility comply with
the 137.5% limit. Assuming no constitutional violation
results, some facilities may retain populations in excess of
the limit provided other facilities fall sufficiently below it

