22

BROWN v. PLATA
Opinion of the Court

Prisons have backlogs of up to 700 prisoners waiting to see
a doctor. Doc. 3231–13, at 18. A review of referrals for
urgent specialty care at one prison revealed that only 105
of 316 pending referrals had a scheduled appointment,
and only 2 had an appointment scheduled to occur within
14 days. Id., at 22–23. Urgent specialty referrals at one
prison had been pending for six months to a year. Id.,
at 27.
Crowding also creates unsafe and unsanitary living
conditions that hamper effective delivery of medical and
mental health care. A medical expert described living
quarters in converted gymnasiums or dayrooms, where
large numbers of prisoners may share just a few toilets
and showers, as “ ‘breeding grounds for disease.’ ”7 Juris.
App. 102a. Cramped conditions promote unrest and vio
lence, making it difficult for prison officials to monitor and
control the prison population. On any given day, prisoners
in the general prison population may become ill, thus
entering the plaintiff class; and overcrowding may prevent
immediate medical attention necessary to avoid suffering,
death, or spread of disease. After one prisoner was as
saulted in a crowded gymnasium, prison staff did not even
learn of the injury until the prisoner had been dead for
several hours. Tr. 382. Living in crowded, unsafe, and
unsanitary conditions can cause prisoners with latent
mental illnesses to worsen and develop overt symptoms.
Crowding may also impede efforts to improve delivery of
——————
7 Correctional officials at trial described several outbreaks of disease.
One officer testified that antibiotic-resistant staph infections spread
widely among the prison population and described prisoners “bleeding,
oozing with pus that is soaking through their clothes when they come
in to get the wound covered and treated.” Tr. 601, 604–605. Another
witness testified that inmates with influenza were sent back from the
infirmary due to a lack of beds and that the disease quickly spread to
“more than half ” the 340 prisoners in the housing unit, with the result
that the unit was placed on lockdown for a week. Id., at 720–721.

