Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

43

Opinion of the Court

According to the State, this testimony expressed the
witnesses’ policy preferences, rather than their views as to
what would cure the constitutional violation. Of course,
courts must not confuse professional standards with con
stitutional requirements. Rhodes v. Chapman, 452 U. S.
337, 348, n. 13 (1981). But expert opinion may be relevant
when determining what is obtainable and what is accept
able in corrections philosophy. See supra, at 37–38.
Nothing in the record indicates that the experts in this
case imposed their own policy views or lost sight of the
underlying violations. To the contrary, the witnesses
testified that a 130% population limit would allow the
State to remedy the constitutionally inadequate provision
of medical and mental health care. When expert opinion
is addressed to the question of how to remedy the relevant
constitutional violations, as it was here, federal judges can
give it considerable weight.
The Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) has set 130% as a
long-term goal for population levels in the federal prison
system. Brief for Appellants 43–44. The State suggests
the expert witnesses impermissibly adopted this profes
sional standard in their testimony. But courts are not
required to disregard expert opinion solely because it
adopts or accords with professional standards. Profes
sional standards may be “helpful and relevant with re
spect to some questions.” Chapman, supra, at 348, n. 13.
The witnesses testified that a limit of 130% was necessary
to remedy the constitutional violations, not that it should
be adopted because it is a BOP standard. If anything, the
fact that the BOP views 130% as a manageable population
density bolsters the three-judge court’s conclusion that a
population limit of 130% would alleviate the pressures
associated with overcrowding and allow the State to begin
to provide constitutionally adequate care.
Although the three-judge court concluded that the “evi
dence in support of a 130% limit is strong,” it found that

