Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

23

Opinion of the Court

care. Two prisoners committed suicide by hanging after
being placed in cells that had been identified as requiring
a simple fix to remove attachment points that could sup
port a noose. The repair was not made because doing so
would involve removing prisoners from the cells, and there
was no place to put them. Id., at 769–777. More gen
erally, Jeanne Woodford, the former acting secretary of
California’s prisons, testified that there “ ‘are simply too
many issues that arise from such a large number of pris
oners,’ ” and that, as a result, “ ‘management spends virtu
ally all of its time fighting fires instead of engaging in
thoughtful decision-making and planning’ ” of the sort
needed to fashion an effective remedy for these constitu
tional violations. Juris. App. 82a.
Increased violence also requires increased reliance on
lockdowns to keep order, and lockdowns further impede
the effective delivery of care. In 2006, prison officials
instituted 449 lockdowns. Id., at 116a. The average lock
down lasted 12 days, and 20 lockdowns lasted 60 days or
longer. Ibid. During lockdowns, staff must either escort
prisoners to medical facilities or bring medical staff to the
prisoners. Either procedure puts additional strain on
already overburdened medical and custodial staff. Some
programming for the mentally ill even may be canceled
altogether during lockdowns, and staff may be unable to
supervise the delivery of psychotropic medications.
The effects of overcrowding are particularly acute in
the prisons’ reception centers, intake areas that process
140,000 new or returning prisoners every year. Id., at
85a. Crowding in these areas runs as high as 300% of
design capacity. Id., at 86a. Living conditions are
“ ‘toxic,’ ” and a lack of treatment space impedes efforts to
identify inmate medical or mental health needs and pro
vide even rudimentary care. Id., at 92a. The former
warden of San Quentin reported that doctors in that
prison’s reception center “ ‘were unable to keep up with

