4

BROWN v. PLATA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

tively suffered an Eighth Amendment violation. That
theory is contrary to the bedrock rule that the sole purpose
of classwide adjudication is to aggregate claims that are
individually viable. “A class action, no less than tradi
tional joinder (of which it is a species), merely enables a
federal court to adjudicate claims of multiple parties at
once, instead of in separate suits. And like traditional
joinder, it leaves the parties’ legal rights and duties intact
and the rules of decision unchanged.” Shady Grove Or
thopedic Associates, P. A. v. Allstate Ins. Co., 559 U. S. ___,
___ (2010) (plurality opinion) (slip op., at 14).
The second possibility is that every member of the plain
tiff class has suffered an Eighth Amendment violation
merely by virtue of being a patient in a poorly-run prison
system, and the purpose of the class is merely to aggregate
all those individually viable claims. This theory has the
virtue of being consistent with procedural principles, but
at the cost of a gross substantive departure from our case
law. Under this theory, each and every prisoner who
happens to be a patient in a system that has systemic
weaknesses—such as “hir[ing] any doctor who had a li
cense, a pulse and a pair of shoes,” ante, at 10 (internal
quotation marks omitted)—has suffered cruel or unusual
punishment, even if that person cannot make an individu
alized showing of mistreatment. Such a theory of the
Eighth Amendment is preposterous. And we have said as
much in the past: “If . . . a healthy inmate who had suf
fered no deprivation of needed medical treatment were
able to claim violation of his constitutional right to medi
cal care . . . simply on the ground that the prison medical
facilities were inadequate, the essential distinction be
tween judge and executive would have disappeared: it
would have become the function of the courts to assure
adequate medical care in prisons.” Lewis v. Casey, 518
U. S. 343, 350 (1996).
Whether procedurally wrong or substantively wrong,

