18

BROWN v. PLATA
Opinion of the Court

Coleman Special Master and Plata Receiver were unable
to provide assurance that further, substantially similar
efforts would yield success absent a population reduction.
Instead, the Coleman Special Master explained that
“many of the clinical advances . . . painfully accomplished
over the past decade are slip-sliding away” as a result of
overcrowding. App. 481–482. And the Plata Receiver
indicated that, absent a reduction in overcrowding, a
successful remedial effort could “all but bankrupt” the
State of California. App. 1053.
Having engaged in remedial efforts for 5 years in Plata
and 12 in Coleman, the District Courts were not required
to wait to see whether their more recent efforts would
yield equal disappointment. When a court attempts to
remedy an entrenched constitutional violation through
reform of a complex institution, such as this statewide
prison system, it may be necessary in the ordinary course
to issue multiple orders directing and adjusting ongoing
remedial efforts. Each new order must be given a reason
able time to succeed, but reasonableness must be assessed
in light of the entire history of the court’s remedial efforts.
A contrary reading of the reasonable time requirement
would in effect require district courts to impose a morato
rium on new remedial orders before issuing a population
limit. This unnecessary period of inaction would delay an
eventual remedy and would prolong the courts’ involve
ment, serving neither the State nor the prisoners. Con
gress did not require this unreasonable result when it
used the term “reasonable.”
The Coleman and Plata courts had a solid basis to doubt
that additional efforts to build new facilities and hire new
staff would achieve a remedy. Indeed, although 5 years
have now passed since the appointment of the Plata
Receiver and approval of the revised plan of action in
Coleman, there is no indication that the constitutional
violations have been cured. A report filed by the Coleman

