6

BROWN v. PLATA
ALITO, J., dissenting

The majority approves the three-judge court’s refusal to
receive fresh evidence based largely on the need for “[o]r
derly trial management.” Ante, at 26. The majority rea
sons that the three-judge court had closed the book on the
question of constitutional violations and had turned to
the question of remedy. Ibid. As noted, however, the extent of any continuing constitutional violations was highly
relevant to the question of remedy.
The majority also countenances the three-judge court’s
reliance on dated findings. The majority notes that the
lower court considered recent reports by the Special Mas
ter and Receiver, ante, at 18–19, but the majority provides
no persuasive justification for the lower court’s refusal to
receive hard, up-to-date evidence about any continuing
violations. With the safety of the people of California in
the balance, the record on this issue should not have been
closed.
The majority repeats the lower court’s error of reciting
statistics that are clearly out of date. The Court notes
the lower court’s finding that as of 2005 “an inmate in one
of California’s prisons needlessly dies every six to seven
days.” See ante, at 9. Yet by the date of the trial before
the three-judge court, the death rate had been trending
downward for 10 quarters, App. 2257, and the number of
likely preventable deaths fell from 18 in 2006 to 3 in 2007,
a decline of 83 percent.5 Between 2001 and 2007, the
——————
decree, an accurate assessment of conditions as of that date was essen
tial in order to ensure that the relief did not sweep more broadly than
necessary.
5 2008 Death Reviews 22. The majority elides the improvement by
combining likely preventable deaths with those that were “possibly
preventable,” ante, at 7, n. 4, that is, cases in which “[i]n the judgment
of the reviewer,” 2008 Death Reviews 3, “it’s fifty-fifty that better care
would have possibly prevented the death,” App. 2277; id., at 2256. As
the majority acknowledges, even this class of cases is now dramatically
diminished, and the three-judge court must take the current conditions
into account when revising its remedy going forward. Ante, at 7, n. 4.

