32

BROWN v. PLATA
Opinion of the Court

Plata Receiver stated that he was determined to achieve
a remedy even without a population reduction, but he
warned that such an effort would “all but bankrupt” the
State. App. 1053. The Coleman Special Master noted
even more serious concerns, stating that previous reme
dial efforts had “succumbed to the inexorably rising tide of
population.” App. 489. Both reports are persuasive evi
dence that, absent a reduction in overcrowding, any rem
edy might prove unattainable and would at the very least
require vast expenditures of resources by the State. Noth
ing in the long history of the Coleman and Plata actions
demonstrates any real possibility that the necessary re
sources would be made available.
The State claims that, even if each of these measures
were unlikely to remedy the violation, they would succeed
in doing so if combined together. Aside from asserting this
proposition, the State offers no reason to believe it is so.
Attempts to remedy the violations in Plata have been
ongoing for 9 years. In Coleman, remedial efforts have
been ongoing for 16. At one time, it may have been possi
ble to hope that these violations would be cured without a
reduction in overcrowding. A long history of failed reme
dial orders, together with substantial evidence of over
crowding’s deleterious effects on the provision of care,
compels a different conclusion today.
The common thread connecting the State’s proposed
remedial efforts is that they would require the State to
expend large amounts of money absent a reduction in
overcrowding. The Court cannot ignore the political and
fiscal reality behind this case. California’s Legislature has
not been willing or able to allocate the resources necessary
to meet this crisis absent a reduction in overcrowding.
There is no reason to believe it will begin to do so now,
when the State of California is facing an unprecedented
budgetary shortfall. As noted above, the legislature re
cently failed to allocate funds for planned new construc

