Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Syllabus
results, some facilities may retain populations in excess of the 137.5%
limit provided others fall sufficiently below it so the system as a
whole remains in compliance with the order. This will afford the
State flexibility to accommodate differences between institutions.
The order may shape or control the State’s authority in the realm of
prison administration, but it leaves much to the State’s discretion.
The order’s limited scope is necessary to remedy a constitutional vio
lation. The State may move the three-judge court to modify its order,
but it has proposed no realistic alternative remedy at this time.
Pp. 33–36.
(2) The three-judge court gave “substantial weight” to any po
tential adverse impact on public safety from its order. The PLRA’s
“substantial weight” requirement does not require the court to certify
that its order has no possible adverse impact on the public. Here,
statistical evidence showed that prison populations had been lowered
without adversely affecting public safety in some California counties,
several States, and Canada. The court found that various available
methods of reducing overcrowding—good time credits and diverting
low-risk offenders to community programs—would have little or no
impact on public safety, and its order took account of such concerns
by giving the State substantial flexibility to select among the means
of reducing overcrowding. The State complains that the court ap
proved the State’s population reduction plan without considering
whether its specific measures would substantially threaten public
safety. But the court left state officials the choice of how best to com
ply and was not required to second-guess their exercise of discretion.
Developments during the pendency of this appeal, when the State
has begun to reduce the prison population, support the conclusion
that a reduction can be accomplished without an undue negative ef
fect on public safety. Pp. 37–41.
2. The three-judge court’s order, subject to the State’s right to seek
its modification in appropriate circumstances, must be affirmed.
Pp. 41–48.
(a) To comply with the PLRA, a court must set a population limit
at the highest level consistent with an efficacious remedy, and it
must order the population reduction to be achieved in the shortest
period of time reasonably consistent with public safety. Pp. 41–42.
(b) The three-judge court’s conclusion that the prison population
should be capped at 137.5% of design capacity was not clearly errone
ous. The court concluded that the evidence supported a limit be
tween the 130% limit supported by expert testimony and the Federal
Bureau of Prisons and the 145% limit recommended by the State
Corrections Independent Review Panel. The PLRA’s narrow tailoring
requirement is satisfied so long as such equitable, remedial judg

