Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

Opinion of the Court

available.” Id., at 1408.
Even on the assumption that vacant positions could be
filled, the evidence suggested there would be insufficient
space for the necessary additional staff to perform their
jobs. The Plata Receiver, in his report on overcrowding,
concluded that even the “newest and most modern pris
ons” had been “designed with clinic space which is only
one-half that necessary for the real-life capacity of the
prisons.” App. 1023 (emphasis deleted). Dr. Haney re
ported that “[e]ach one of the facilities I toured was short
of significant amounts of space needed to perform other
wise critical tasks and responsibilities.” Id., at 597–598.
In one facility, staff cared for 7,525 prisoners in space
designed for one-third as many. Juris. App. 93a. Staff
operate out of converted storage rooms, closets, bath
rooms, shower rooms, and visiting centers. These make
shift facilities impede the effective delivery of care and
place the safety of medical professionals in jeopardy,
compounding the difficulty of hiring additional staff.
This shortfall of resources relative to demand contrib
utes to significant delays in treatment. Mentally ill pris
oners are housed in administrative segregation while
awaiting transfer to scarce mental health treatment beds
for appropriate care. One correctional officer indicated
that he had kept mentally ill prisoners in segregation for
“ ‘6 months or more.’ ” App. 594. Other prisoners awaiting
care are held in tiny, phone-booth sized cages. The record
documents instances of prisoners committing suicide while
awaiting treatment.6
Delays are no less severe in the context of physical care.
——————
6 For instance, Dr. Pablo Stewart reported that one prisoner was
referred to a crisis bed but, “[a]fter learning that the restraint room
was not available and that there were no crisis beds open, staff moved
[the prisoner] back to his administrative segregation cell without any
prescribed observation.” App. 736. The prisoner “hanged himself that
night in his cell.” Ibid.; see also Juris. App. 99a.

