14

BROWN v. PLATA
Opinion of the Court

capacity of its prisons or by transferring prisoners to
county facilities or facilities in other States. Because the
order limits the prison population as a percentage of de
sign capacity, it nonetheless has the “effect of reducing or
limiting the prison population.” Ibid.
Under the PLRA, only a three-judge court may enter an
order limiting a prison population. §3626(a)(3)(B). Before
a three-judge court may be convened, a district court first
must have entered an order for less intrusive relief that
failed to remedy the constitutional violation and must
have given the defendant a reasonable time to comply
with its prior orders. §3626(a)(3)(A). The party request
ing a three-judge court must then submit “materials suffi
cient to demonstrate that [these requirements] have been
met.” §3626(a)(3)(C). If the district court concludes that
the materials are, in fact, sufficient, a three-judge court
may be convened. Ibid.; see also 28 U. S. C. §2284(b)(1)
(stating that a three-judge court may not be convened if
the district court “determines that three judges are not
required”); 17A C. Wright, A. Miller, E. Cooper, & V.
Amar, Federal Practice and Procedure §4235 (3d ed. 2007).
The three-judge court must then find by clear and con
vincing evidence that “crowding is the primary cause of
the violation of a Federal right” and that “no other relief
will remedy the violation of the Federal right.” 18 U. S. C.
§3626(a)(3)(E). As with any award of prospective relief
under the PLRA, the relief “shall extend no further than
necessary to correct the violation of the Federal right of
a particular plaintiff or plaintiffs.” §3626(a)(1)(A). The
three-judge court must therefore find that the relief is
“narrowly drawn, extends no further than necessary . . . ,
and is the least intrusive means necessary to correct the
violation of the Federal right.” Ibid. In making this de
termination, the three-judge court must give “substantial
weight to any adverse impact on public safety or the op
eration of a criminal justice system caused by the relief.”

