Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

27

Opinion of the Court

were caused by factors in addition to overcrowding and
that reducing crowding in the prisons would not entirely
cure the violations. This is consistent with the reports
of the Coleman Special Master and Plata Receiver, both
of whom concluded that even a significant reduction in the
prison population would not remedy the violations absent
continued efforts to train staff, improve facilities, and
reform procedures. App. 487, 1054.8 The three-judge
court nevertheless found that overcrowding was the pri
mary cause in the sense of being the foremost cause of the
violation.
This understanding of the primary cause requirement is
consistent with the text of the PLRA. The State in fact
concedes that it proposed this very definition of primary
cause to the three-judge court. “Primary” is defined as
“[f]irst or highest in rank, quality, or importance; princi
pal.” American Heritage Dictionary 1393 (4th ed. 2000);
see also Webster’s Third New International Dictionary
1800 (2002) (defining “primary” as “first in rank or impor
tance”); 12 Oxford English Dictionary 472 (2d ed. 1989)
(defining “primary” as “[o]f the first or highest rank or
importance; that claims the first consideration; principal,
chief ”). Overcrowding need only be the foremost, chief, or
principal cause of the violation. If Congress had intended
——————
8 The Plata Receiver concluded that those who believed a population
reduction would be a panacea were “simply wrong.” App. 1054–1055.
The Receiver nevertheless made clear that “the time this process will
take, and the cost and the scope of intrusion by the Federal Court
cannot help but increase, and increase in a very significant manner, if
the scope and characteristics of [California prison] overcrowding
continue.” Id., at 1053. The Coleman Special Master likewise found
that a large release of prisoners, without other relief, would leave the
violation “largely unmitigated” even though deficiencies in care “are
unquestionably exacerbated by overcrowding” and “defendants’ ability
to provide required mental health services would be enhanced consid
erably by a reduction in the overall census” of the prisons. App. 486–
487.

