Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

ALITO, J., dissenting

77a. Instead, it based its remedy on constitutional defi
ciencies that, in its own words, were found “years ago.”
Ibid.2
The three-judge court justified its refusal to receive up
to-date evidence on the ground that the State had not filed
a motion to terminate prospective relief under a provision
of the PLRA, §3626(b). See Juris. App. 77a. Today’s
opinion for this Court endorses that reasoning, ante, at 26.
But the State’s opportunity to file such a motion did not
eliminate the three-judge court’s obligation to ensure that
its relief was necessary to remedy ongoing violations.3
Moreover, the lower court’s reasoning did not properly
take into account the potential significance of the evidence
that the State sought to introduce. Even if that evidence
did not show that all violations had ceased—the showing
needed to obtain the termination of relief under
§3626(b)—that evidence was highly relevant with respect
to the nature and scope of permissible relief.4
——————
2 For

this reason, it is simply not the case that “evidence of current
conditions . . . informed every aspect of the judgment of the three-judge
court,” as the majority insists, ante, at 25.
3 Because the Ninth Circuit places the burden on the State to prove
the absence of an ongoing violation when it moves to terminate pro
spective relief, see Gilmore v. California, 220 F. 3d 987, 1007 (CA9
2000), even if the State had unsuccessfully moved to terminate pro
spective relief under 18 U. S. C. §3626(b), there would still have been no
determination that plaintiffs had carried their burden under the PLRA
to establish by clear and convincing evidence that a prisoner release
order is necessary to correct an ongoing rights violation.
4 It is also no answer to say, as the Court now does, ante, at 26, that
the State had the opportunity to resist the convening of the three-judge
court on the ground that there were no unremedied constitutional
violations as of that date. See §3626(a)(3)(A)(i). The District Courts
granted plaintiffs’ motions to convene a three-judge court in 2007, three
years before the remedial decree here was issued. Thus, the conditions
in the prison system as of the date when the decree was issued were not
necessarily the same as those that existed before the three-judge court
proceedings began. Moreover, as noted above, even if all of the viola
tions in the system had not been cured at the time of the remedial

