(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BROWN, GOVERNOR OF CALIFORNIA, ET AL. v. 

PLATA ET AL. 

APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURTS FOR
THE EASTERN AND NORTHERN DISTRICTS OF CALIFORNIA
No. 09–1233. Argued November 30, 2010—Decided May 23, 2011
California’s prisons are designed to house a population just under
80,000, but at the time of the decision under review the population
was almost double that. The resulting conditions are the subject of
two federal class actions. In Coleman v. Brown, filed in 1990, the
District Court found that prisoners with serious mental illness do not
receive minimal, adequate care. A Special Master appointed to over
see remedial efforts reported 12 years later that the state of mental
health care in California’s prisons was deteriorating due to increased
overcrowding. In Plata v. Brown, filed in 2001, the State conceded
that deficiencies in prison medical care violated prisoners’ Eighth
Amendment rights and stipulated to a remedial injunction. But
when the State had not complied with the injunction by 2005, the
court appointed a Receiver to oversee remedial efforts. Three years
later, the Receiver described continuing deficiencies caused by over
crowding. Believing that a remedy for unconstitutional medical and
mental health care could not be achieved without reducing over
crowding, the Coleman and Plata plaintiffs moved their respective
District Courts to convene a three-judge court empowered by the
Prison Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (PLRA) to order reductions in
the prison population. The judges in both actions granted the re
quest, and the cases were consolidated before a single three-judge
court. After hearing testimony and making extensive findings of fact,
the court ordered California to reduce its prison population to 137.5%
of design capacity within two years. Finding that the prison popula
tion would have to be reduced if capacity could not be increased
through new construction, the court ordered the State to formulate a
compliance plan and submit it for court approval.

