Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
and Plata courts had a solid basis to doubt that additional efforts to
build new facilities and hire new staff would achieve a remedy, given
the ongoing deficiencies recently reported by both the Special Master
and the Receiver. Pp. 16–19.
(c) The three-judge court did not err in finding that “crowding
[was] the primary cause of the violation,” §3626(a)(3)(E)(i). Pp. 19–
29.
(1) The trial record documents the severe impact of burgeoning
demand on the provision of care. The evidence showed that there
were high vacancy rates for medical and mental health staff, e.g.,
20% for surgeons and 54.1% for psychiatrists; that these numbers
understated the severity of the crisis because the State has not budg
eted sufficient staff to meet demand; and that even if vacant positions
could be filled, there would be insufficient space for the additional
staff. Such a shortfall contributes to significant delays in treating
mentally ill prisoners, who are housed in administrative segregation
for extended periods while awaiting transfer to scarce mental health
treatment beds. There are also backlogs of up to 700 prisoners wait
ing to see a doctor for physical care. Crowding creates unsafe and
unsanitary conditions that hamper effective delivery of medical and
mental health care. It also promotes unrest and violence and can
cause prisoners with latent mental illnesses to worsen and develop
overt symptoms. Increased violence requires increased reliance on
lockdowns to keep order, and lockdowns further impede the effective
delivery of care. Overcrowding’s effects are particularly acute in
prison reception centers, which process 140,000 new or returning
prisoners annually, and which house some prisoners for their entire
incarceration period. Numerous experts testified that crowding is the
primary cause of the constitutional violations. Pp. 19–24.
(2) Contrary to the State’s claim, the three-judge court prop
erly admitted, cited, and considered evidence of current prison condi
tions as relevant to the issues before it. Expert witnesses based their
conclusions on recent observations of prison conditions; the court ad
mitted recent reports on prison conditions by the Receiver and Spe
cial Master; and both parties presented testimony related to current
conditions. The court’s orders cutting off discovery a few months be
fore trial and excluding evidence not pertinent to the issue whether a
population limit is appropriate under the PLRA were within the
court’s sound discretion. Orderly trial management may require dis
covery deadlines and a clean distinction between litigation of the
merits and the remedy. The State points to no significant evidence
that it was unable to present and that would have changed the out
come here. Pp. 24–26.
(3) It was permissible for the three-judge court to conclude that

