4

BROWN v. PLATA
Syllabus
overcrowding was the “primary,” but not the only, cause of the viola
tions, and that reducing crowding would not entirely cure the viola
tions. This understanding of the primary cause requirement is con
sistent with the PLRA. Had Congress intended to require that
crowding be the only cause, the PLRA would have said so. Pp. 26–29.
(d) The evidence supports the three-judge court’s finding that “no
other relief [would] remedy the violation,” §3626(a)(3)(E)(ii). The
State’s claim that out-of-state transfers provide a less restrictive al
ternative to a population limit must fail because requiring transfers
is a population limit under the PLRA. Even if they could be regarded
as a less restrictive alternative, the three-judge court found no evi
dence of plans for transfers in numbers sufficient to relieve over
crowding. The court also found no realistic possibility that California
could build itself out of this crisis, particularly given the State’s ongo
ing fiscal problems. Further, it rejected additional hiring as a realis
tic alternative, since the prison system was chronically understaffed
and would have insufficient space were adequate personnel retained.
The court also did not err when it concluded that, absent a population
reduction, the Receiver’s and Special Master’s continued efforts
would not achieve a remedy. Their reports are persuasive evidence
that, with no reduction, any remedy might prove unattainable and
would at the very least require vast expenditures by the State. The
State asserts that these measures would succeed if combined, but a
long history of failed remedial orders, together with substantial evi
dence of overcrowding’s deleterious effects on the provision of care,
compels a different conclusion here. Pp. 29–33.
(e) The prospective relief ordered here was narrowly drawn, ex
tended no further than necessary to correct the violation, and was the
least intrusive means necessary to correct the violation. Pp. 33–41.
(1) The population limit does not fail narrow tailoring simply
because prisoners beyond the plaintiff class will have to be released
through parole or sentencing reform in order to meet the required re
duction. While narrow tailoring requires a “ ‘ “fit” between the [rem
edy’s] ends and the means chosen to accomplish those ends,’ ” Board
of Trustees of State Univ. of N. Y. v. Fox, 492 U. S. 469, 480, a narrow
and otherwise proper remedy for a constitutional violation is not in
valid simply because it will have collateral effects. Nor does the
PLRA require that result. The order gives the State flexibility to de
termine who should be released, and the State could move the three
judge court to modify its terms. The order also is not overbroad be
cause it encompasses the entire prison system, rather than sepa
rately assessing each institution’s need for a population limit. The
Coleman court found a systemwide violation, and the State stipulated
to systemwide relief in Plata. Assuming no constitutional violation

