Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

47

Opinion of the Court

required reduction to five years from the entry of the
judgment of this Court, the deadline proposed in the
State’s first population reduction plan. The three-judge
court may grant such a request provided that the State
satisfies necessary and appropriate preconditions designed
to ensure that measures are taken to implement the plan
without undue delay. Appropriate preconditions may
include a requirement that the State demonstrate that it
has the authority and the resources necessary to achieve
the required reduction within a 5-year period and to meet
reasonable interim directives for population reduction.
The three-judge court may also condition an extension of
time on the State’s ability to meet interim benchmarks for
improvement in provision of medical and mental health
care.
The three-judge court, in its discretion, may also con
sider whether it is appropriate to order the State to begin
without delay to develop a system to identify prisoners
who are unlikely to reoffend or who might otherwise be
candidates for early release. Even with an extension of
time to construct new facilities and implement other
reforms, it may become necessary to release prisoners to
comply with the court’s order. To do so safely, the State
should devise systems to select those prisoners least likely
to jeopardize public safety. An extension of time may
provide the State a greater opportunity to refine and elab
orate those systems.
The State has already made significant progress toward
reducing its prison population, including reforms that will
result in shifting “thousands” of prisoners to county jails.
See Supp. Brief for Appellants at 1. As the State makes
further progress, the three-judge court should evaluate
whether its order remains appropriate. If significant
progress is made toward remedying the underlying consti
tutional violations, that progress may demonstrate that
further population reductions are not necessary or are less

