Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

Roper v. Simmons, 543 U. S. 551, 615–616 (2005) (SCALIA,
J., dissenting)) does not prescribe (or at least has not until
today prescribed) rules for the “decent” running of schools,
prisons, and other government institutions. It forbids
“indecent” treatment of individuals—in the context of this
case, the denial of medical care to those who need it. And
the persons who have a constitutional claim for denial of
medical care are those who are denied medical care—not
all who face a “substantial risk” (whatever that is) of being
denied medical care.
The Coleman litigation involves “the class of seriously
mentally ill persons in California prisons,” ante, at 8, and
the Plata litigation involves “the class of state prisoners
with serious medical conditions,” ante, at 9. The plaintiffs
do not appear to claim—and it would absurd to suggest—
that every single one of those prisoners has personally
experienced “torture or a lingering death,” ante, at 13
(internal quotation marks omitted), as a consequence of
that bad medical system. Indeed, it is inconceivable that
anything more than a small proportion of prisoners in
the plaintiff classes have personally received sufficiently
atrocious treatment that their Eighth Amendment right
was violated—which, as the Court recognizes, is why the
plaintiffs do not premise their claim on “deficiencies in
care provided on any one occasion.” Ante, at 7, n. 3.
Rather, the plaintiffs’ claim is that they are all part of a
medical system so defective that some number of prisoners
will inevitably be injured by incompetent medical care,
and that this number is sufficiently high so as to render
the system, as a whole, unconstitutional.
But what procedural principle justifies certifying a class
of plaintiffs so they may assert a claim of systemic uncon
stitutionality? I can think of two possibilities, both of
which are untenable. The first is that although some or
most plaintiffs in the class do not individually have viable
Eighth Amendment claims, the class as a whole has collec

