38

BROWN v. PLATA
Opinion of the Court

those courts fashion injunctive relief to remedy serious
constitutional violations in the prisons. These questions
are difficult and sensitive, but they are factual questions
and should be treated as such. Courts can, and should,
rely on relevant and informed expert testimony when
making factual findings. It was proper for the three-judge
court to rely on the testimony of prison officials from
California and other States. Those experts testified on the
basis of empirical evidence and extensive experience in
the field of prison administration.
The three-judge court credited substantial evidence that
prison populations can be reduced in a manner that does
not increase crime to a significant degree. Some evidence
indicated that reducing overcrowding in California’s pris
ons could even improve public safety. Then-Governor
Schwarzenegger, in his emergency proclamation on over
crowding, acknowledged that “ ‘overcrowding causes harm
to people and property, leads to inmate unrest and mis
conduct, . . . and increases recidivism as shown within this
state and in others.’ ” Juris. App. 191a–192a. The former
warden of San Quentin and acting secretary of the Cali
fornia prison system testified that she “ ‘absolutely be
lieve[s] that we make people worse, and that we are not
meeting public safety by the way we treat people.’ ”10 Id.,
at 129a. And the head of Pennsylvania’s correctional
system testified that measures to reduce prison population
——————
10 The

former head of correctional systems in Washington, Maine, and
Pennsylvania, likewise referred to California’s prisons as “ ‘crimino
genic.’ ” Juris. App. 191a. The Yolo County chief probation officer
testified that “ ‘it seems like [the prisons] produce additional criminal
behavior.’ ” Id., at 190a. A former professor of sociology at George
Washington University, reported that California’s present recidivism
rate is among the highest in the Nation. App. 1246. And the three
judge court noted the report of California’s Little Hoover Commission,
which stated that “ ‘[e]ach year, California communities are burdened
with absorbing 123,000 offenders returning from prison, often more
dangerous than when they left.’ ” Juris. App. 191a.

