30

BROWN v. PLATA
Opinion of the Court

because requiring out-of-state transfers itself qualifies as
a population limit under the PLRA.9 Such an order “has
the purpose or effect of reducing or limiting the prison
population, or . . . directs the release from or nonadmission
of prisoners to a prison.” §3626(g)(4). The same is true of
transfers to county facilities. Transfers provide a means
to reduce the prison population in compliance with the
three-judge court’s order. They are not a less restrictive
alternative to that order.
Even if out-of-state transfers could be regarded as a less
restrictive alternative, the three-judge court found no
evidence of plans for transfers in numbers sufficient to
relieve overcrowding. The State complains that the Cole
man District Court slowed the rate of transfer by requir
ing inspections to assure that the receiving institutions
were in compliance with the Eighth Amendment, but the
State has made no effort to show that it has the resources
and the capacity to transfer significantly larger numbers
of prisoners absent that condition.
Construction of new facilities, in theory, could alleviate
overcrowding, but the three-judge court found no realistic
possibility that California would be able to build itself out
of this crisis. At the time of the court’s decision the State
had plans to build new medical and housing facilities, but
funding for some plans had not been secured and funding
for other plans had been delayed by the legislature for
years. Particularly in light of California’s ongoing fiscal
crisis, the three-judge court deemed “chimerical” any
“remedy that requires significant additional spending by
the state.” Juris. App. 151a. Events subsequent to the
——————
9 A program of voluntary transfers by the State would, of course, be
less restrictive than an order mandating a reduction in the prison
population. In light of the State’s longstanding failure to remedy these
serious constitutional violations, the three-judge court was under no
obligation to consider voluntary population-reduction measures by the
State as a workable alternative to injunctive relief.

