Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

lation to 137.5% of design capacity. By the three-judge
court’s own estimate, the required population reduction
could be as high as 46,000 persons. Although the State
has reduced the population by at least 9,000 persons dur
ing the pendency of this appeal, this means a further
reduction of 37,000 persons could be required. As will be
noted, the reduction need not be accomplished in an indis
criminate manner or in these substantial numbers if sat
isfactory, alternate remedies or means for compliance
are devised. The State may employ measures, including
good-time credits and diversion of low-risk offenders and
technical parole violators to community-based programs,
that will mitigate the order’s impact. The population
reduction potentially required is nevertheless of unprece
dented sweep and extent.
Yet so too is the continuing injury and harm resulting
from these serious constitutional violations. For years the
medical and mental health care provided by California’s
prisons has fallen short of minimum constitutional re
quirements and has failed to meet prisoners’ basic health
needs. Needless suffering and death have been the well
documented result. Over the whole course of years during
which this litigation has been pending, no other remedies
have been found to be sufficient. Efforts to remedy the
violation have been frustrated by severe overcrowding in
California’s prison system. Short term gains in the provi
sion of care have been eroded by the long-term effects of
severe and pervasive overcrowding.
Overcrowding has overtaken the limited resources of
prison staff; imposed demands well beyond the capacity
of medical and mental health facilities; and created unsan
itary and unsafe conditions that make progress in the
provision of care difficult or impossible to achieve. The
overcrowding is the “primary cause of the violation of a
Federal right,” 18 U. S. C. §3626(a)(3)(E)(i), specifically
the severe and unlawful mistreatment of prisoners

