2

BROWN v. PLATA
Opinion of the Court

ment is a power reserved to a three-judge district court,
not a single-judge district court. 18 U. S. C. §3626(a). In
accordance with that rule, the Coleman and Plata District
Judges independently requested that a three-judge court
be convened. The Chief Judge of the Court of Appeals for
the Ninth Circuit convened a three-judge court composed
of the Coleman and Plata District Judges and a third,
Ninth Circuit Judge. Because the two cases are interre
lated, their limited consolidation for this purpose has a
certain utility in avoiding conflicting decrees and aiding
judicial consideration and enforcement. The State in this
Court has not objected to consolidation, although the State
does argue that the three-judge court was prematurely
convened. The State also objects to the substance of the
three-judge court order, which requires the State to reduce
overcrowding in its prisons.
The appeal presents the question whether the remedial
order issued by the three-judge court is consistent with
requirements and procedures set forth in a congressional
statute, the Prison Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (PLRA).
18 U. S. C. §3626; see Appendix A, infra. The order leaves
the choice of means to reduce overcrowding to the discre
tion of state officials. But absent compliance through new
construction, out-of-state transfers, or other means—or
modification of the order upon a further showing by the
State—the State will be required to release some number
of prisoners before their full sentences have been served.
High recidivism rates must serve as a warning that mis
taken or premature release of even one prisoner can cause
injury and harm. The release of prisoners in large num
bers—assuming the State finds no other way to comply
with the order—is a matter of undoubted, grave concern.
At the time of trial, California’s correctional facilities
held some 156,000 persons. This is nearly double the
number that California’s prisons were designed to hold,
and California has been ordered to reduce its prison popu

