Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

SCALIA, J., dissenting

prison injunctions. See 18 U. S. C. §3626(b).
I suspect, however, that this passage is a warning shot
across the bow, telling the District Court that it had better
modify the injunction if the State requests what we invite
it to request. Such a warning, if successful, would achieve
the benefit of a marginal reduction in the inevitable mur
ders, robberies, and rapes to be committed by the released
inmates. But it would achieve that at the expense of in
tellectual bankruptcy, as the Court’s “warning” is entirely alien to ordinary principles of appellate review of
injunctions. When a party moves for modification of
an injunction, the district court is entitled to rule on that
motion first, subject to review for abuse of discretion if it
declines to modify the order. Horne v. Flores, 557 U. S.
___, ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 10, 20). Moreover, when a
district court enters a new decree with new benchmarks,
the selection of those benchmarks is also reviewed under
a deferential, abuse-of-discretion standard of review—a
point the Court appears to recognize. Ante, at 45. Appel
late courts are not supposed to “affirm” injunctions while
preemptively noting that the State “may” request, and the
District Court “may” grant, a request to extend the State’s
deadline to release prisoners by three years based on some
suggestions on what appropriate preconditions for such a
modification “may” include.
Of course what is really happening here is that the
Court, overcome by common sense, disapproves of the
results reached by the District Court, but cannot remedy
them (it thinks) by applying ordinary standards of appel
late review. It has therefore selected a solution unknown
in our legal system: A deliberately ambiguous set of sug
gestions on how to modify the injunction, just deferential
enough so that it can say with a straight face that it is
“affirming,” just stern enough to put the District Court on
notice that it will likely get reversed if it does not follow
them. In doing this, the Court has aggrandized itself,

