Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

45

Opinion of the Court

before the three-judge court, the State did not argue that
reductions should occur over a longer period of time. The
State later submitted a plan for court approval that would
achieve the required reduction within five years, and that
would reduce the prison population to 151% of design
capacity in two years. The State represented that this
plan would “safely reach a population level of 137.5% over
time.” App. to Juris. Statement 32a. The three-judge
court rejected this plan because it did not comply with the
deadline set by its order.
The State first had notice that it would be required to
reduce its prison population in February 2009, when the
three-judge court gave notice of its tentative ruling after
trial. The 2-year deadline, however, will not begin to run
until this Court issues its judgment. When that happens,
the State will have already had over two years to begin
complying with the order of the three-judge court. The
State has used the time productively. At oral argument,
the State indicated it had reduced its prison population
by approximately 9,000 persons since the decision of the
three-judge court. After oral argument, the State filed a
supplemental brief indicating that it had begun to imple
ment measures to shift “thousands” of additional prisoners
to county facilities. Supp. Brief for Appellants at 1.
Particularly in light of the State’s failure to contest the
issue at trial, the three-judge court did not err when
it established a 2-year deadline for relief. Plaintiffs pro
posed a 2-year deadline, and the evidence at trial was
intended to demonstrate the feasibility of a 2-year dead
line. See Tr. 2979. Notably, the State has not asked this
Court to extend the 2-year deadline at this time.
The three-judge court, however, retains the authority,
and the responsibility, to make further amendments to the
existing order or any modified decree it may enter as
warranted by the exercise of its sound discretion. “The
power of a court of equity to modify a decree of injunctive

