2

BROWN v. PLATA
Syllabus

Held:
1. The court-mandated population limit is necessary to remedy the
violation of prisoners’ constitutional rights and is authorized by the
PLRA. Pp. 12–41.
(a) If a prison deprives prisoners of basic sustenance, including
adequate medical care, the courts have a responsibility to remedy the
resulting Eighth Amendment violation. See Hutto v. Finney, 437
U. S. 678, 687, n. 9. They must consider a range of options, including
the appointment of special masters or receivers, the possibility of
consent decrees, and orders limiting a prison’s population. Under the
PLRA, only a three-judge court may limit a prison population. 18
U. S. C. §3626(a)(3). Before convening such a court, a district court
must have entered an order for less intrusive relief that failed to
remedy the constitutional violation and must have given the defen
dant a reasonable time to comply with its prior orders.
§3626(a)(3)(A). Once convened, the three-judge court must find by
clear and convincing evidence that “crowding is the primary cause of
the violation” and “no other relief will remedy [the] violation,”
§3626(a)(3)(E); and that the relief is “narrowly drawn, extends no fur
ther than necessary. . . , and is the least intrusive means necessary to
correct the violation,” §3626(a)(1)(A). The court must give “substan
tial weight to any adverse impact on public safety or the operation of
a criminal justice system caused by the relief.” Ibid. Its legal deter
minations are reviewed de novo, but its factual findings are reviewed
for clear error. Pp. 12–15.
(b) The Coleman and Plata courts acted reasonably in convening
a three-judge court. Pp. 15–19.
(1) The merits of the decision to convene are properly before
this Court, which has exercised its 28 U. S. C. §1253 jurisdiction to
determine the authority of a court below, including whether a three
judge court was properly constituted. Gonzalez v. Automatic Employ
ees Credit Union, 419 U. S. 90, 95, n. 12. Pp. 15–16.
(2) Section 3626(a)(3)(A)(i)’s previous order requirement was
satisfied in Coleman by the Special Master’s 1995 appointment and
in Plata by the 2002 approval of a consent decree and stipulated in
junction. Both orders were intended to remedy constitutional viola
tions and were given ample time to succeed—12 years in Coleman,
and 5 years in Plata.
Contrary to the State’s claim,
§3626(a)(3)(A)(ii)’s reasonable time requirement did not require the
District Courts to give more time for subsequent remedial efforts to
succeed. Such a reading would in effect require courts to impose a
moratorium on new remedial orders before issuing a population limit,
which would delay an eventual remedy, prolong the courts’ involve
ment, and serve neither the State nor the prisoners. The Coleman

