Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

No. 09–416, p. 56a (hereinafter Juris. App.). In 2006,
then-Governor Schwarzenegger declared a state of emer
gency in the prisons, as “ ‘immediate action is necessary to
prevent death and harm caused by California’s severe
prison overcrowding.’ ” Id., at 61a. The consequences of
overcrowding identified by the Governor include “ ‘in
creased, substantial risk for transmission of infectious
illness’ ” and a suicide rate “ ‘approaching an average of
one per week.’ ” Ibid.
Prisoners in California with serious mental illness do
not receive minimal, adequate care. Because of a shortage
of treatment beds, suicidal inmates may be held for pro
longed periods in telephone-booth sized cages without
toilets. See Appendix C, infra. A psychiatric expert re
ported observing an inmate who had been held in such a
cage for nearly 24 hours, standing in a pool of his own
urine, unresponsive and nearly catatonic. Prison officials
explained they had “ ‘no place to put him.’ ” App. 593.
——————
At trial, current and former California prison officials also testified to
the degree of overcrowding. Jeanne Woodford, who recently adminis
tered California’s prison system, stated that “ ‘[o]vercrowding in the
[California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR)] is
extreme, its effects are pervasive and it is preventing the Department
from providing adequate mental and medical health care to prisoners.’ ”
Juris. App. 84a. Matthew Cate, the head of the California prison
system, stated that “ ‘overpopulation makes everything we do more
difficult.’ ” Ibid. And Robin Dezember, chief deputy secretary of Cor
rectional Healthcare Services, stated that “we are terribly overcrowded
in our prison system” and “overcrowding has negative effects on every
body in the prison system.” Tr. 853, 856.
Experts from outside California offered similar assessments. Doyle
Wayne Scott, the former head of corrections in Texas, described con
ditions in California’s prisons as “appalling,” “inhumane,” and “unac
ceptable” and stated that “[i]n more than 35 years of prison work
experience, I have never seen anything like it.” App. 1337. Joseph
Lehman, the former head of correctional systems in Washington,
Maine, and Pennsylvania, concluded that “[t]here is no question that
California’s prisons are overcrowded” and that “this is an emergency
situation; it calls for drastic and immediate action.” Id., at 1312.

