Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SCALIA, J., dissenting

pernicious aspects: that they force judges to engage in a
form of factfinding-as-policymaking that is outside the
traditional judicial role. The factfinding judges tradition
ally engage in involves the determination of past or pre
sent facts based (except for a limited set of materials of
which courts may take “judicial notice”) exclusively upon
a closed trial record. That is one reason why a district
judge’s factual findings are entitled to clear-error review:
because having viewed the trial first hand he is in a better
position to evaluate the evidence than a judge reviewing a
cold record. In a very limited category of cases, judges
have also traditionally been called upon to make some
predictive judgments: which custody will best serve the
interests of the child, for example, or whether a particular
one-shot injunction will remedy the plaintiff’s grievance.
When a judge manages a structural injunction, however,
he will inevitably be required to make very broad empiri
cal predictions necessarily based in large part upon policy
views—the sort of predictions regularly made by legis
lators and executive officials, but inappropriate for the
Third Branch.
This feature of structural injunctions is superbly illus
trated by the District Court’s proceeding concerning the
decrowding order’s effect on public safety. The PLRA
requires that, before granting “[p]rospective relief in [a]
civil action with respect to prison conditions,” a court must
“give substantial weight to any adverse impact on public
safety or the operation of a criminal justice system caused
by the relief.” 18 U. S. C. §3626(a)(1)(A). Here, the Dis
trict Court discharged that requirement by making the
“factual finding” that “the state has available methods by
which it could readily reduce the prison population to
137.5% design capacity or less without an adverse impact
on public safety or the operation of the criminal justice
system.” Juris. Statement App., O. T. 2009, No. 09-416, p.
253a. It found the evidence “clear” that prison overcrowd

