8

BROWN v. PLATA
ALITO, J., dissenting

finds “by clear and convincing evidence that . . . crowding
is the primary cause of the violation of a Federal right”
and that “no other relief will remedy the violation of the
Federal right.” §3626(a)(3)(E).
These statutory restrictions largely reflect general
standards for injunctive relief aimed at remedying consti
tutional violations by state and local governments. “The
power of the federal courts to restructure the operation of
local and state governmental entities is not plenary. . . .
Once a constitutional violation is found, a federal court is
required to tailor the scope of the remedy to fit the nature
and extent of the constitutional violation.” Dayton Bd. of
Ed. v. Brinkman, 433 U. S. 406, 419–420 (1977) (internal
quotation marks omitted).
Here, the majority and the court below maintain that no
remedy short of a massive release of prisoners from the
general prison population can remedy the State’s failure to
provide constitutionally adequate health care. This argu
ment is implausible on its face and is not supported by the
requisite clear and convincing evidence.
It is instructive to consider the list of deficiencies in the
California prison health care system that are highlighted
in today’s opinion for this Court and in the opinion of the
court below. The deficiencies noted by the majority here
include the following: “ ‘[e]xam tables and counter tops,
where prisoners with . . . communicable diseases are
treated, [are] not routinely disinfected,’ ” ante, at 10; medi
cal facilities “ ‘are in an abysmal state of disrepair,’ ” ibid.;
medications “ ‘are too often not available when needed,’ ”
ante, at 10–11; “ ‘[b]asic medical equipment is often not
available or used,’ ” ante, at 10; prisons “would ‘hire any
doctor who had “a license, a pulse and a pair of shoes,” ’ ”
ibid.; and medical and mental health staff positions have
high vacancy rates, ante, at 20. The three-judge court
pointed to similar problems. See Juris. App. 93a–121a
(citing, among other things, staffing vacancies, too few

