8

BROWN v. PLATA
SCALIA, J., dissenting

ing would “perpetuate a criminogenic prison system that
itself threatens public safety,” id., at 186a, and volun
teered its opinion that “[t]he population could be reduced
even further with the reform of California’s antiquated
sentencing policies and other related changes to the laws.”
Id., at 253a. It “reject[ed] the testimony that inmates
released early from prison would commit additional new
crimes,” id., at 200a, finding that “shortening the length of
stay through earned credits would give inmates incentives
to participate in programming designed to lower recidi
vism,” id., at 204a, and that “slowing the flow of technical
parole violators to prison, thereby substantially reducing
the churning of parolees, would by itself improve both
the prison and parole systems, and public safety.” Id., at
209a. It found that “the diversion of offenders to commu
nity correctional programs has significant beneficial ef
fects on public safety,” id., at 214a, and that “additional
rehabilitative programming would result in a significant
population reduction while improving public safety,” id., at
216a.
The District Court cast these predictions (and the Court
today accepts them) as “factual findings,” made in reliance
on the procession of expert witnesses that testified at trial.
Because these “findings” have support in the record, it is
difficult to reverse them under a plain-error standard of
review. Ante, at 38. And given that the District Court
devoted nearly 10 days of trial and 70 pages of its opinion
to this issue, it is difficult to dispute that the District
Court has discharged its statutory obligation to give “sub
stantial weight to any adverse impact on public safety.”
But the idea that the three District Judges in this case
relied solely on the credibility of the testifying expert
witnesses is fanciful. Of course they were relying largely
on their own beliefs about penology and recidivism. And
of course different district judges, of different policy views,
would have “found” that rehabilitation would not work

