Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

31

Opinion of the Court

three-judge court’s decision have confirmed this conclu
sion. In October 2010, the State notified the Coleman
District Court that a substantial component of its con
struction plans had been delayed indefinitely by the legis
lature. And even if planned construction were to be
completed, the Plata Receiver found that many so-called
“expansion” plans called for cramming more prisoners into
existing prisons without expanding administrative and
support facilities. Juris. App. 151a–152a. The former
acting secretary of the California prisons explained that
these plans would “ ‘compound the burdens imposed on
prison administrators and line staff’’ ” by adding to the
already overwhelming prison population, creating new
barriers to achievement of a remedy. Id., at 152a.
The three-judge court also rejected additional hiring as
a realistic means to achieve a remedy. The State for years
had been unable to fill positions necessary for the ade
quate provision of medical and mental health care, and
the three-judge court found no reason to expect a change.
Although the State points to limited gains in staffing
between 2007 and 2008, the record shows that the prison
system remained chronically understaffed through trial in
2008. See supra, at 20. The three-judge court found that
violence and other negative conditions caused by crowding
made it difficult to hire and retain needed staff. The court
also concluded that there would be insufficient space for
additional staff to work even if adequate personnel could
somehow be retained. Additional staff cannot help to
remedy the violation if they have no space in which to see
and treat patients.
The three-judge court also did not err, much less commit
clear error, when it concluded that, absent a population
reduction, continued efforts by the Receiver and Special
Master would not achieve a remedy. Both the Receiver
and the Special Master filed reports stating that over
crowding posed a significant barrier to their efforts. The

