12

BROWN v. PLATA
ALITO, J., dissenting

out-of-state facilities in part because the number of pro
posed transfers was too small. See id., at 160a. See also
ante, at 30. But this reasoning rested on the court’s insis
tence on a reduction in the State’s general prison popula
tion rather than the two plaintiff classes.
When the State proposed to make a targeted transfer of
prisoners in one of the plaintiff classes (i.e., prisoners
needing mental health treatment), one of the District
Judges blocked the transfers for fear that the out-of-state
facilities would not provide a sufficiently high level of care.
See App. 434–440. The District Judge even refused to
allow out-of-state transfers for prisoners who volunteered
for relocation. See id., at 437. And the court did this even
though there was not even an allegation, let alone clear
evidence, that the States to which these prisoners would
have been sent were violating the Eighth Amendment.
The District Judge presumed that the receiving States
might fail to provide constitutionally adequate care, but
“ ‘in the absence of clear evidence to the contrary, courts
presume that [public officers] have properly discharged
their official duties.’ ” United States v. Armstrong, 517
U. S. 456, 464 (1996) (quoting United States v. Chemical
Foundation, Inc., 272 U. S. 1, 14–15 (1926)); Postal Service
v. Gregory, 534 U. S. 1, 10 (2001) (“[A] presumption of
regularity attaches to the actions of Government agen
cies”); see also McKune v. Lile, 536 U. S. 24, 51 (2002)
(O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment) (“[W]e may assume
that the prison is capable of controlling its inmates so that
respondent’s personal safety is not jeopardized . . . ,at least
in the absence of proof to the contrary”).8
Finally, as a last resort, a much smaller release of pris
——————
8 The Court rejects the State’s argument that out-of-state transfers offer
a less restrictive alternative to a prisoner release order because “requir
ing out-of-state transfers itself qualifies as a population limit under the
PLRA.” Ante, at 29–30. But the PLRA does not apply when the State
voluntarily conducts such transfers, as it has sought to do.

