Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

39

Opinion of the Court

may “actually improve on public safety because they ad
dress the problems that brought people to jail.” Tr. 1552–
1553.
Expert witnesses produced statistical evidence that
prison populations had been lowered without adversely
affecting public safety in a number of jurisdictions, includ
ing certain counties in California, as well as Wisconsin,
Illinois, Texas, Colorado, Montana, Michigan, Florida, and
Canada. Juris. App. 245a.11 Washington’s former secretary
of corrections testified that his State had implemented
population reduction methods, including parole reform
and expansion of good time credits, without any “deleteri
ous effect on crime.” Tr. 2008–2009. In light of this evi
dence, the three-judge court concluded that any negative
impact on public safety would be “substantially offset, and
perhaps entirely eliminated, by the public safety benefits”
——————
11 Philadelphia’s experience in the early 1990’s with a federal court
order mandating reductions in the prison population was less positive,
and that history illustrates the undoubted need for caution in this area.
One congressional witness testified that released prisoners committed
79 murders and multiple other offenses. See Hearing on S. 3 et al.
before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 104th Cong., 1st Sess.,
45 (1995) (statement of Lynne Abraham, District Attorney of Philadel
phia). Lead counsel for the plaintiff class in that case responded that
“[t]his inflammatory assertion has never been documented.” Id., at
212 (statement of David Richman). The Philadelphia decree was also
different from the order entered in this case. Among other things, it
“prohibited the City from admitting to its prisons any additional
inmates, except for persons charged with, or convicted of, murder,
forcible rape, or a crime involving the use of a gun or knife in the
commission of an aggravated assault or robbery.” Harris v. Reeves, 761
F. Supp. 382, 384–385 (ED Pa. 1991); see also Crime and Justice
Research Institute, J. Goldkamp & M. White, Restoring Accountability
in Pretrial Release: The Philadelphia Pretrial Release Supervision
Experiments 6–8 (1998). The difficulty of determining the precise
relevance of Philadelphia’s experience illustrates why appellate courts
defer to the trier of fact. The three-judge court had the opportunity to
hear testimony on population reduction measures in other jurisdictions
and to ask relevant questions of informed expert witnesses.

