46

BROWN v. PLATA
Opinion of the Court

relief is long-established, broad, and flexible.” New York
State Assn. for Retarded Children, Inc. v. Carey, 706 F. 2d
956, 967 (CA2 1983) (Friendly, J.). A court that invokes
equity’s power to remedy a constitutional violation by an
injunction mandating systemic changes to an institution
has the continuing duty and responsibility to assess the
efficacy and consequences of its order. Id., at 969–971.
Experience may teach the necessity for modification or
amendment of an earlier decree. To that end, the three
judge court must remain open to a showing or demonstra
tion by either party that the injunction should be altered
to ensure that the rights and interests of the parties are
given all due and necessary protection.
Proper respect for the State and for its governmental
processes require that the three-judge court exercise its
jurisdiction to accord the State considerable latitude to
find mechanisms and make plans to correct the violations
in a prompt and effective way consistent with public
safety. In order to “give substantial weight to any adverse
impact on public safety,” 18 U. S. C. §3626(a)(1)(A), the
three-judge court must give due deference to informed
opinions as to what public safety requires, including the
considered determinations of state officials regarding
the time in which a reduction in the prison population can
be achieved consistent with public safety. An extension of
time may allow the State to consider changing political,
economic, and other circumstances and to take advantage
of opportunities for more effective remedies that arise as
the Special Master, the Receiver, the prison system, and
the three-judge court itself evaluate the progress being
made to correct unconstitutional conditions. At the same
time, both the three-judge court and state officials must
bear in mind the need for a timely and efficacious remedy
for the ongoing violation of prisoners’ constitutional rights.
The State may wish to move for modification of the
three-judge court’s order to extend the deadline for the

