Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

SCALIA, J., dissenting

and that releasing prisoners would increase the crime
rate. I am not saying that the District Judges rendered
their factual findings in bad faith. I am saying that it is
impossible for judges to make “factual findings” without
inserting their own policy judgments, when the factual
findings are policy judgments. What occurred here is no
more judicial factfinding in the ordinary sense than would
be the factual findings that deficit spending will not lower
the unemployment rate, or that the continued occupation
of Iraq will decrease the risk of terrorism. Yet, because
they have been branded “factual findings” entitled to
deferential review, the policy preferences of three District
Judges now govern the operation of California’s penal
system.
It is important to recognize that the dressing-up of pol
icy judgments as factual findings is not an error peculiar to this case. It is an unavoidable concomitant of insti
tutional-reform litigation. When a district court issues an
injunction, it must make a factual assessment of the an
ticipated consequences of the injunction. And when the
injunction undertakes to restructure a social institution,
assessing the factual consequences of the injunction is
necessarily the sort of predictive judgment that our sys
tem of government allocates to other government officials.
But structural injunctions do not simply invite judges to
indulge policy preferences. They invite judges to indulge
incompetent policy preferences. Three years of law school
and familiarity with pertinent Supreme Court precedents
give no insight whatsoever into the management of social
institutions. Thus, in the proceeding below the District
Court determined that constitutionally adequate medical
services could be provided if the prison population was
137.5% of design capacity. This was an empirical finding
it was utterly unqualified to make. Admittedly, the court
did not generate that number entirely on its own; it heard
the numbers 130% and 145% bandied about by various

