40

BROWN v. PLATA
Opinion of the Court

of a reduction in overcrowding. Juris. App. 248a.
The court found that various available methods of re
ducing overcrowding would have little or no impact on
public safety. Expansion of good-time credits would allow
the State to give early release to only those prisoners who
pose the least risk of reoffending. Diverting low-risk
offenders to community programs such as drug treatment,
day reporting centers, and electronic monitoring would
likewise lower the prison population without releasing
violent convicts.12 The State now sends large numbers of
persons to prison for violating a technical term or condi
tion of their parole, and it could reduce the prison popula
tion by punishing technical parole violations through
community-based programs. This last measure would be
particularly beneficial as it would reduce crowding in the
reception centers, which are especially hard hit by over
crowding. See supra, at 23–24. The court’s order took
account of public safety concerns by giving the State sub
stantial flexibility to select among these and other means
of reducing overcrowding.
The State submitted a plan to reduce its prison popula
tion in accordance with the three-judge court’s order, and
it complains that the three-judge court approved that
plan without considering whether the specific measures
contained within it would substantially threaten public
safety. The three-judge court, however, left the choice of
how best to comply with its population limit to state
——————
12 Expanding such community-based measures may require an ex
penditure of resources by the State to fund new programs or expand
existing ones. The State complains that the order therefore requires it
to “divert” savings that will be achieved by reducing the prison popula
tion and that setting budgetary priorities in this manner is a “severe,
unlawful intrusion on the State authority.” Brief for Appellants 55.
This argument is not convincing. The order does not require the State
to use any particular approach to reduce its prison population or
allocate its resources.

