Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

satisfied in Plata by approval of a consent decree and
stipulated injunction in 2002. Both orders were intended
to remedy the constitutional violations. Both were given
ample time to succeed. When the three-judge court was
convened, 12 years had passed since the appointment of
the Coleman Special Master, and 5 years had passed since
the approval of the Plata consent decree. The State does
not claim that either order achieved a remedy. Although
the PLRA entitles a State to terminate remedial orders
such as these after two years unless the district court
finds that the relief “remains necessary to correct a
current and ongoing violation of the Federal right,”
§3626(b)(3), California has not attempted to obtain relief
on this basis.
The State claims instead that the second condition, the
reasonable time requirement of §3626(a)(3)(A)(ii), was not
met because other, later remedial efforts should have been
given more time to succeed. In 2006, the Coleman District
Judge approved a revised plan of action calling for con
struction of new facilities, hiring of new staff, and im
plementation of new procedures. That same year, the
Plata District Judge selected and appointed a Receiver to
oversee the State’s ongoing remedial efforts. When the
three-judge court was convened, the Receiver had filed a
preliminary plan of action calling for new construction,
hiring of additional staff, and other procedural reforms.
Although both the revised plan of action in Coleman and
the appointment of the Receiver in Plata were new devel
opments in the courts’ remedial efforts, the basic plan to
solve the crisis through construction, hiring, and proce
dural reforms remained unchanged. These efforts had
been ongoing for years; the failed consent decree in Plata
had called for implementation of new procedures and
hiring of additional staff; and the Coleman Special Master
had issued over 70 orders directed at achieving a remedy
through construction, hiring, and procedural reforms. The

