4

WILKINS v. GADDY
Per Curiam

pline, or maliciously and sadistically to cause harm.” 503
U. S., at 7; see also Whitley v. Albers, 475 U. S. 312, 319–
321 (1986). “When prison officials maliciously and sadisti
cally use force to cause harm,” the Court recognized, “con
temporary standards of decency always are violated . . .
whether or not significant injury is evident. Otherwise,
the Eighth Amendment would permit any physical pun
ishment, no matter how diabolic or inhuman, inflicting
less than some arbitrary quantity of injury.” Hudson, 503
U. S., at 9; see also id., at 13–14 (Blackmun, J., concurring
in judgment) (“The Court today appropriately puts to rest
a seriously misguided view that pain inflicted by an exces
sive use of force is actionable under the Eighth Amend
ment only when coupled with ‘significant injury,’ e.g.,
injury that requires medical attention or leaves perma
nent marks”).
This is not to say that the “absence of serious injury” is
irrelevant to the Eighth Amendment inquiry. Id., at 7.
“[T]he extent of injury suffered by an inmate is one factor
that may suggest ‘whether the use of force could plausibly
have been thought necessary’ in a particular situation.”
Ibid. (quoting Whitley, 475 U. S., at 321). The extent of
injury may also provide some indication of the amount of
force applied. As we stated in Hudson, not “every malevo
lent touch by a prison guard gives rise to a federal cause of
action.” 503 U. S., at 9. “The Eighth Amendment’s prohi
bition of ‘cruel and unusual’ punishments necessarily
excludes from constitutional recognition de minimis uses
of physical force, provided that the use of force is not of a
sort repugnant to the conscience of mankind.” Ibid. (some
internal quotation marks omitted). An inmate who com
plains of a “push or shove” that causes no discernible
injury almost certainly fails to state a valid excessive force
claim. Ibid. (quoting Johnson v. Glick, 481 F. 2d 1028,
1033 (CA2 1973)).
Injury and force, however, are only imperfectly corre

