Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Per Curiam

lated, and it is the latter that ultimately counts. An in
mate who is gratuitously beaten by guards does not lose
his ability to pursue an excessive force claim merely be
cause he has the good fortune to escape without serious
injury. Accordingly, the Court concluded in Hudson that
the supposedly “minor” nature of the injuries “provide[d]
no basis for dismissal of [Hudson’s] §1983 claim” because
“the blows directed at Hudson, which caused bruises,
swelling, loosened teeth, and a cracked dental plate, are
not de minimis for Eighth Amendment purposes.” 503
U. S., at 10.
The allegations made by Wilkins in this case are quite
similar to the facts in Hudson, and the District Court’s
analysis closely resembles the approach Hudson dis
avowed. Wilkins alleged that he was punched, kicked,
kneed, choked, and body slammed “maliciously and sadis
tically” and “[w]ithout any provocation.” Dismissing Wil
kins’ action sua sponte, the District Court did not hold that
this purported assault, which allegedly left Wilkins with a
bruised heel, back pain, and other injuries requiring medi
cal treatment, involved de minimis force. Instead, the
court concluded that Wilkins had failed to state a claim
because “he simply has not alleged that he suffered any
thing more than de minimus [sic] injury.” No. 3:08–cv–
00138 (WD NC, Apr. 16, 2008), at 2.
In giving decisive weight to the purportedly de minimis
nature of Wilkins’ injuries, the District Court relied on two
Fourth Circuit cases. See Riley, 115 F. 3d, at 1166–1168;
Taylor, 155 F. 3d, at 483–485. Those cases, in turn, were
based upon the Fourth Circuit’s earlier decision in Nor
man v. Taylor, 25 F. 3d 1259 (1994) (en banc), which
approved the practice of using injury as a proxy for force.
According to the Fourth Circuit, Hudson “does not fore
close and indeed is consistent with [the] view . . . that,
absent the most extraordinary circumstances, a plaintiff
cannot prevail on an Eighth Amendment excessive force

