(Slip Opinion) OCTOBER TERM, 2009 Syllabus NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. Syllabus No. 08–586. Argued November 2, 2009—Decided March 30, 2010 Petitioners, shareholders in mutual funds managed by respondent in vestment adviser, filed this suit alleging that respondent violated §36(b)(1) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, which imposes a “fiduciary duty [on investment advisers] with respect to the receipt of compensation for services,” 15 U. S. C. §80a–35(b). Granting respon dent summary judgment, the District Court concluded that petition ers had not raised a triable issue of fact under the applicable stan 694 F. 2d 923, 928 (CA2): “[T]he test is essentially whether the fee schedule represents a charge within the range of what would have been negotiated at arm’s-length in light of all of the surrounding cir cumstances. . . . To be guilty of a violation of §36(b), . . . the adviser must charge a fee that is so disproportionately large it bears no rea sonable relationship to the services rendered and could not have been the product of arm’s length bargaining.” Rejecting the Gartenberg standard, the Seventh Circuit panel affirmed based on different rea soning. Held: Based on §36(b)’s terms and the role that a shareholder action for breach of the investment adviser’s fiduciary duty plays in the Act’s overall structure, Gartenberg applied the correct standard. Pp. 7–17. (a) A consensus has developed regarding the standard Gartenberg set forth over 25 years ago: The standard has been adopted by other federal courts, and the Securities and Exchange Commission’s regu lations have recognized, and formalized, Gartenberg-like factors. Both petitioners and respondents generally endorse the Gartenberg ap proach but disagree in some respects about its meaning. Pp. 7–9. (b) Section 36(b)’s “fiduciary duty” phrase finds its meaning in Pep
Syllabus concept in the analogous bankruptcy context: “The essence of the test is whether or not under all the circumstances the transaction carries the earmarks of an arm’s length bargain. If it does not, equity will set it aside.” Gartenberg’s approach fully incorporates this under standing, insisting that all relevant circumstances be taken into ac count and using the range of fees that might result from arm’s-length bargaining as the benchmark for reviewing challenged fees. Pp. 9– 11. (c) Gartenberg’s approach also reflects §36(b)’s place in the statu tory scheme and, in particular, its relationship to the other protec tions the Act affords investors. Under the Act, scrutiny of investment adviser compensation by a fully informed mutual fund board, see §36(b) are mutually reinforcing but independent mechanisms for con Fox, 464 U. S. 523, 541. In recognition of the disinterested directors’ role, the Act instructs courts to give board approval of an adviser’s compensation “such consideration . . . as is deemed appropriate under all the circumstances.” §80a–35(b)(1). It may be inferred from this formulation that (1) a measure of deference to a board’s judgment may be appropriate in some instances, and (2) the appropriate meas ure of deference varies depending on the circumstances. Gartenberg heeds these precepts. See 694 F. 2d, at 930. Pp. 11–12. (d) The Court resolves the parties’ disagreements on several impor tant questions. First, since the Act requires consideration of all rele vant factors, §80a–35(b)(2), courts must give comparisons between the fees an investment adviser charges a captive mutual fund and the fees it charges its independent clients the weight they merit in light of the similarities and differences between the services the cli ents in question require. In doing so, the Court must be wary of in apt comparisons based on significant differences between those ser vices and must be mindful that the Act does not necessarily ensure fee parity between the two types of clients. However, courts should not rely too heavily on comparisons with fees charged mutual funds by other advisers, which may not result from arm’s-length negotia tions. Finally, a court’s evaluation of an investment adviser’s fiduci ary duty must take into account both procedure and substance. Where disinterested directors consider all of the relevant factors, their decision to approve a particular fee agreement is entitled to considerable weight, even if the court might weigh the factors differ ently. Cf. Lasker, 441 U. S., at 486. In contrast, where the board’s process was deficient or the adviser withheld important information, the court must take a more rigorous look at the outcome. Id., at 484. Gartenberg’s “so disproportionately large” standard, 694 F. 2d, at
Syllabus 928, reflects Congress’ choice to “rely largely upon [independent] ‘watchdogs’ to protect shareholders interests,” Lasker, supra, at 482. Pp. 12–16. (e) The Seventh Circuit erred in focusing on disclosure by invest ment advisers rather than the Gartenberg standard, which the panel rejected. That standard may lack sharp analytical clarity, but it ac curately reflects the compromise embodied in §36(b) as to the appro priate method of testing investment adviser compensation, and it has provided a workable standard for nearly three decades. Pp. 16–17. 527 F. 3d 627, vacated and remanded. ALITO, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court. THOMAS, J., filed a concurring opinion.