Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

THOMAS, J., dissenting

For this reason, I cannot agree with JUSTICE ALITO that
§4248 is a necessary and proper incident of Congress’
power “to protect the public from dangers created by the
federal criminal justice and prison systems.” Ante, at 3
(concurring in judgment). A federal criminal defendant’s
“sexually dangerous” propensities are not “created by” the
fact of his incarceration or his relationship with the fed
eral prison system. The fact that the Federal Government
has the authority to imprison a person for the purpose of
punishing him for a federal crime—sex-related or other
wise—does not provide the Government with the addi
tional power to exercise indefinite civil control over that
person.13
2
Second, the Court describes §4248 as a “modest” expan
sion on a statutory framework with a long historical pedi
gree. Ante, at 9. Yet even if the antiquity of a practice
could serve as a substitute for its constitutionality—and
the Court admits that it cannot, ibid.—the Court over
states the relevant history.
Congress’ first foray into this general area occurred in
1855, when it established St. Elizabeth’s Hospital to pro
vide treatment to “insane” persons in the military and the
——————
is complete. 18 U. S. C. §§3583, 3624(e). Contrary to the Government’s
suggestion, federal authority to exercise control over individuals
serving terms of “supervised release” does not derive from the Govern
ment’s “relationship” with the prisoner, see Brief for United States 38,
but from the original criminal sentence itself. Supervised release thus
serves to execute the enumerated power that justifies the defendant’s
statute of conviction, just like any other form of punishment imposed at
sentencing.
13 The fact that Congress has the authority to “provide for the appre
hension of escaped federal prisoners,” see ante, at 3 (ALITO, J., concur
ring in judgment), does not change this conclusion. That authority
derives from Congress’ power to vindicate the enumerated power with
which the escaped defendant’s crime of conviction interfered, not a
freestanding police power.

