2

UNITED STATES v. COMSTOCK
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

I entirely agree with the dissent that “[t]he Necessary
and Proper Clause empowers Congress to enact only those
laws that ‘carr[y] into Execution’ one or more of the federal
powers enumerated in the Constitution,” post, at 1, but
§4248 satisfies that requirement because it is a necessary
and proper means of carrying into execution the enumer
ated powers that support the federal criminal statutes
under which the affected prisoners were convicted. The
Necessary and Proper Clause provides the constitutional
authority for most federal criminal statutes. In other
words, most federal criminal statutes rest upon a congres
sional judgment that, in order to execute one or more of
the powers conferred on Congress, it is necessary and
proper to criminalize certain conduct, and in order to do
that it is obviously necessary and proper to provide for the
operation of a federal criminal justice system and a federal
prison system.
All of this has been recognized since the beginning of
our country. The First Congress enacted federal criminal
laws,1 created federal law enforcement and prosecutorial
positions,2 established a federal court system,3 provided
for the imprisonment of persons convicted of federal
crimes,4 and gave United States marshals the responsibil
——————
1 See,

e.g., ch. 9, 1 Stat. 112 (“An Act for the Punishment of certain
Crimes against the United States”).
2 Ch. 20, §35, id., at 92 (“[T]here shall be appointed in each district a
meet person learned in the law to act as attorney for the United States
in such district, . . . whose duty it shall be to prosecute in such district
all delinquents for crimes and offences, cognizable under the authority
of the United States”).
3 §1, id., at 73 (“An Act to establish the Judicial Courts of the United
States”).
4 See, e.g., §9, id., at 76–77 (providing that the federal district courts
shall have exclusive jurisdiction over “all crimes and offences that shall
be cognizable under the authority of the United States, . . . where no
other punishment than whipping, not exceeding thirty stripes, a fine
not exceeding one hundred dollars, or a term of imprisonment not

