4

UNITED STATES v. COMSTOCK
KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment

arena through such a parenthetical. See Sabri, supra, at
612 (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment) (“A statute can
have a ‘rational’ connection to an enumerated power with
out being obviously or clearly tied to that enumerated
power”). It should be remembered, moreover, that the
spending power is not designated as such in the Constitu
tion but rather is implied from the power to lay and collect
taxes and other specified exactions in order, among other
purposes, “to pay the Debts and provide for the common
Defence and general Welfare of the United States.” Art. I,
§8, cl. 1; see South Dakota v. Dole, 483 U. S. 203, 206
(1987). The limits upon the spending power have not been
much discussed, but if the relevant standard is parallel to
the Commerce Clause cases, then the limits and the ana
lytic approach in those precedents should be respected.
A separate concern stems from the Court’s explanation
of the Tenth Amendment. Ante, at 16. I had thought it a
basic principle that the powers reserved to the States
consist of the whole, undefined residuum of power remain
ing after taking account of powers granted to the National
Government. The Constitution delegates limited powers
to the National Government and then reserves the re
mainder for the States (or the people), not the other way
around, as the Court’s analysis suggests. And the powers
reserved to the States are so broad that they remain unde
fined. Residual power, sometimes referred to (perhaps
imperfectly) as the police power, belongs to the States and
the States alone.
It is correct in one sense to say that if the National
Government has the power to act under the Necessary and
Proper Clause then that power is not one reserved to the
States. But the precepts of federalism embodied in the
Constitution inform which powers are properly exercised
by the National Government in the first place. See Lopez,
514 U. S., at 580–581 (KENNEDY, J., concurring); see also
McCulloch, supra, at 421 (powers “consist[ent] with the

