20

UNITED STATES v. COMSTOCK
Opinion of the Court

additional power to provide for the safe and reasonable
management of those prisons, and the additional power to
regulate the prisoners’ behavior even after their release.
See post, at 12–13, 17, n. 11. Of course, each of those
powers, like the powers addressed in Sabri, Hall, and
McCulloch, is ultimately “derived from” an enumerated
power, Hall, supra, at 345. And, as the dissent agrees,
that enumerated power is “the enumerated power that
justifies the defendant’s statute of conviction,” post, at 17,
n. 11. Neither we nor the dissent can point to a single
specific enumerated power “that justifies a criminal de
fendant’s arrest or conviction,” post, at 12, in all cases
because Congress relies on different enumerated powers
(often, but not exclusively, its Commerce Clause power) to
enact its various federal criminal statutes, see supra, at 7–
8. But every such statute must itself be legitimately
predicated on an enumerated power. And the same enu
merated power that justifies the creation of a federal
criminal statute, and that justifies the additional implied
federal powers that the dissent considers legitimate, justi
fies civil commitment under §4248 as well. See supra, at
14–16. Thus, we must reject respondents’ argument that
the Necessary and Proper Clause permits no more than a
single step between an enumerated power and an Act of
Congress.
Nor need we fear that our holding today confers on
Congress a general “police power, which the Founders
denied the National Government and reposed in the
States.” Morrison, 529 U. S., at 618. As the Solicitor
General repeatedly confirmed at oral argument, §4248 is
narrow in scope. It has been applied to only a small frac
tion of federal prisoners. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 24–25 (105
individuals have been subject to §4248 out of over 188,000
federal inmates); see also Dept. of Justice, Bureau of
Justice Statistics, W. Sabol, H. West, & M. Cooper, Pris
oners in 2008, p. 8 (rev. Apr. 2010) (Table 8), online at

