Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

THOMAS, J., dissenting

power.
The Court observes that Congress has the undisputed
authority to “criminalize conduct” that interferes with
enumerated powers; to “imprison individuals who engage
in that conduct”; to “enact laws governing [those] prisons”;
and to serve as a “custodian of its prisoners.” Ante, at 9,
14. From this, the Court assumes that §4248 must also be
a valid exercise of congressional power because it is “ ‘rea
sonably adapted’ ” to those exercises of Congress’ inciden
tal—and thus unenumerated—authorities. See ante, at 15
(concluding that “§4248 is ‘reasonably adapted’ to Con
gress’ power to act as a responsible federal custodian”
(citation omitted)); ante, at 22 (concluding that “the stat
ute is a ‘necessary and proper’ means of exercising the
federal authority that permits Congress to create federal
criminal laws, to punish their violation, to imprison viola
tors, to provide appropriately for those imprisoned, and to
maintain the security of those who are not imprisoned but
who may be affected by the federal imprisonment of oth
ers”). But that is not the question. The Necessary and
Proper Clause does not provide Congress with authority to
enact any law simply because it furthers other laws Con
gress has enacted in the exercise of its incidental author
ity; the Clause plainly requires a showing that every
federal statute “carr[ies] into Execution” one or more of
the Federal Government’s enumerated powers.8
——————
8 McCulloch

makes this point clear. As the Court notes, ante, at 18–
19, McCulloch states, in discussing a hypothetical, that from Congress’
enumerated power to establish post offices and post roads “has been
inferred the power and duty of carrying the mail,” and, “from this
implied power, has again been inferred the right to punish those who
steal letters from the post office, or rob the mail.” 4 Wheat., at 417.
Contrary to the Court’s interpretation, this dictum does not suggest
that the relationship between Congress’ implied power to punish postal
crimes and its implied power to carry the mail is alone sufficient to
satisfy review under the Necessary and Proper Clause. Instead,
McCulloch directly links the constitutionality of the former to Congress’

