2

UNITED STATES v. COMSTOCK
THOMAS, J., dissenting

by Congress must be based on one or more of its powers
enumerated in the Constitution”). The States, in turn, are
free to exercise all powers that the Constitution does not
withhold from them. Amdt. 10 (“The powers not delegated
to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by
it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or
to the people”).1 This constitutional structure establishes
different default rules for Congress and the States: Con
gress’ powers are “few and defined,” while those that
belong to the States “remain . . . numerous and indefinite.”
The Federalist No. 45, p. 328 (B. Wright ed. 1961) (J.
Madison).
The Constitution plainly sets forth the “few and defined”
powers that Congress may exercise. Article I “vest[s]” in
Congress “[a]ll legislative Powers herein granted,” §1, and
carefully enumerates those powers in §8. The final clause
of §8, the Necessary and Proper Clause, authorizes Con
gress “[t]o make all Laws which shall be necessary and
proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers,
and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the
Government of the United States, or in any Department or
Officer thereof.” Art. I, §8, cl. 18. As the Clause’s place
ment at the end of §8 indicates, the “foregoing Powers” are
those granted to Congress in the preceding clauses of that
section. The “other Powers” to which the Clause refers are
those “vested” in Congress and the other branches by
other specific provisions of the Constitution.
Chief Justice Marshall famously summarized Congress’
authority under the Necessary and Proper Clause in
McCulloch, which has stood for nearly 200 years as this
——————
1 “With this careful last phrase, the [Tenth] Amendment avoids tak
ing any position on the division of power between the state govern
ments and the people of the States: It is up to the people of each State
to determine which ‘reserved’ powers their state government may
exercise.” U. S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton, 514 U. S. 779, 848
(1995) (THOMAS, J., dissenting).

