4

UNITED STATES v. COMSTOCK
THOMAS, J., dissenting

Federalists expressed concern that the Necessary and
Proper Clause would give Congress virtually unlimited
power. See, e.g., Essays of Brutus, in 2 The Complete
Anti-Federalist 421 (H. Storing ed. 1981). Federalist
supporters of the Constitution swiftly refuted that charge,
explaining that the Clause did not grant Congress any
freestanding authority, but instead made explicit what
was already implicit in the grant of each enumerated
power. Referring to the “powers declared in the Constitu
tion,” Alexander Hamilton noted that “it is expressly to
execute these powers that the sweeping clause . . . author
izes the national legislature to pass all necessary and
proper laws.” The Federalist No. 33, at 245. James Madi
son echoed this view, stating that “the sweeping clause . . .
only extend[s] to the enumerated powers.” 3 J. Elliot, The
Debates in the Several State Conventions on the Adoption
of the Federal Constitution 455 (2d ed. 1854) (hereinafter
Elliot). Statements by delegates to the state ratification
conventions indicate that this understanding was widely
held by the founding generation. E.g., id., at 245–246
(statement of George Nicholas) (“Suppose [the Necessary
and Proper Clause] had been inserted, at the end of every
power, that they should have power to make laws to carry
that power into execution; would that have increased their
powers? If, therefore, it could not have increased their
powers, if placed at the end of each power, it cannot in
crease them at the end of all”).2
——————
2 See also 4 Elliot 141 (2d ed. 1836) (statement of William Maclaine)
(“This clause specifies that [Congress] shall make laws to carry into
execution all the powers vested by this Constitution, consequently they
can make no laws to execute any other power”); 2 id., at 468 (statement
of James Wilson) (“[W]hen it is said that Congress shall have power to
make all laws which shall be necessary and proper, those words are
limited and defined by the following, ‘for carrying into execution the
foregoing powers.’ [The Clause] is saying no more than that the powers
we have already particularly given, shall be effectually carried into
execution”); Barnett, The Original Meaning of the Necessary and

