14

UNITED STATES v. COMSTOCK
THOMAS, J., dissenting

prisoner’s sentence expires or the date on which the stat
ute of limitations on an untried defendant’s crime has run.
The statute therefore authorizes federal custody over a
person at a time when the Government would lack juris
diction to detain him for violating a criminal law that
executes an enumerated power.
The statute this Court upheld in Greenwood v. United
States, 350 U. S. 366 (1956), provides a useful contrast.
That statute authorized the Federal Government to exer
cise civil custody over a federal defendant declared men
tally unfit to stand trial only “ ‘until the accused shall be
mentally competent to stand trial or until the pending
charges against him are disposed of according to law.’ ”
Id., at 368, n. 2 (quoting 18 U. S. C. §4246 (1952 ed.)).
Thus, that statute’s “end” reasonably could be interpreted
as preserving the Government’s power to enforce a crimi
nal law against the accused. Section 4248 (2006 ed.),
however, authorizes federal detention of a person even
after the Government loses the authority to prosecute him
for a federal crime.
Third, the definition of a “sexually dangerous person”
relevant to §4248 does not require the court to find that
the person is likely to violate a law executing an enumer
ated power in the future. Although the Federal Govern
ment has no express power to regulate sexual violence
generally, Congress has passed a number of laws proscrib
ing such conduct in special circumstances. All of these
statutes contain jurisdictional elements that require a
connection to one of Congress’ enumerated powers—such
as interstate commerce, e.g., §2252(a)(2)—or that limit the
statute’s coverage to jurisdictions in which Congress has
plenary authority, e.g., §2243(a). Section 4248, by con
trast, authorizes civil commitment upon a showing that
the person is “sexually dangerous,” and presents a risk “to
others,” §4247(a)(5). It requires no evidence that this
sexually dangerous condition will manifest itself in a way

