16

UNITED STATES v. COMSTOCK
THOMAS, J., dissenting

they may pose,11 ante, at 14. That citation is puzzling
because federal authority derives from the Constitution,
not the common law. In any event, nothing in the Re
statement suggests that a common-law custodian has the
powers that Congress seeks here. While the Restatement
provides that a custodian has a duty to take reasonable
steps to ensure that a person in his care does not cause
“bodily harm to others,” 2 Restatement (Second) of Torts
§319, p. 129 (1963–1964), that duty terminates once the
legal basis for custody expires:
“There is no duty so to control the conduct of a third
person as to prevent him from causing physical harm
to another unless
“(a) a special relation exists between the actor and
the third person which imposes a duty upon the actor
to control the third person’s conduct, or
“(b) a special relation exists between the actor and
the other which gives to the other a right to protec
tion.” Id., §315, at 122.
Once the Federal Government’s criminal jurisdiction over
a prisoner ends, so does any “special relation[ship]” be
tween the Government and the former prisoner.12
——————
11 The Court also cites Youngberg v. Romeo, 457 U. S. 307 (1982), but
that case lends even less support than the Restatement. In Youngberg,
an inmate at a state hospital argued that hospital workers violated his
constitutional rights when they applied restraints to keep him in his
bed at the hospital infirmary. Id., at 310–311. In assessing that claim,
this Court noted that the hospital had a responsibility to “protect its
residents” from the danger of violence. Id., at 320 (emphasis added).
The Court never suggested that this responsibility extended to “nearby
(and other) communities.” Ante, at 14. Moreover, the hospital was a
state institution. Nothing in Youngberg suggests that the Federal
Government can detain a person beyond the date on which its criminal
jurisdiction expires for fear that he may later pose a threat to the
surrounding community.
12 Federal law permits a sentencing court to order that a defendant be
placed on a term of “supervised release” after his term of imprisonment

