10

UNITED STATES v. COMSTOCK
THOMAS, J., dissenting

tion” an end that is “legitimate.”7 See, e.g., Jinks v. Rich
land County, 538 U. S. 456, 462–463 (2003) (citing
McCulloch, 4 Wheat., at 417, 421). But in citing these
cases, the Court puts the cart before the horse: The fit
between means and ends matters only if the end is in fact
legitimate—i.e., only if it is one of the Federal Govern
ment’s enumerated powers.
By starting its inquiry with the degree of deference
owed to Congress in selecting means to further a legiti
mate end, the Court bypasses McCulloch’s first step and
fails carefully to examine whether the end served by §4248
is actually one of those powers. See Part III–A–2, infra.
b
Second, instead of asking the simple question of what
enumerated power §4248 “carr[ies] into Execution” at
McCulloch’s first step, the Court surveys other laws Con
gress has enacted and concludes that, because §4248 is
related to those laws, the “links” between §4248 and an
enumerated power are not “too attenuated”; hence, §4248
is a valid exercise of Congress’ Necessary and Proper
Clause authority. Ante, at 18. This unnecessarily con
fuses the analysis and, if followed to its logical extreme,
would result in an unwarranted expansion of federal
——————
7 JUSTICE

KENNEDY concludes that the Necessary and Proper Clause
requires something beyond rational-basis scrutiny when assessing the
fit between an enumerated power and the means Congress selects to
execute it. Ante, at 2–4 (opinion concurring in judgment). Other
arguments regarding the degree of fit between means and end have
been lodged elsewhere. See, e.g., Gonzales v. Raich, 545 U. S. 1, 61
(2005) (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (arguing that, for a law to be within the
Necessary and Proper Clause, it must bear an “ ‘obvious, simple, and
direct relation’ ” to an exercise of Congress’ enumerated powers and
must not subvert basic principles of federalism and dual sovereignty).
But I find that debate beside the point here, because it concerns the
analysis employed at McCulloch’s second step, see McCulloch v. Mary
land, 4 Wheat. 316 (1819), while the Court’s decision today errs by
skipping the first.

