(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STATES v. COMSTOCK ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1224. Argued January 12, 2010—Decided May 17, 2010
Federal law allows a district court to order the civil commitment of a
mentally ill, sexually dangerous federal prisoner beyond the date he
would otherwise be released. 18 U. S. C. §4248. The Government in
stituted civil-commitment proceedings under §4248 against respon
dents, each of whom moved to dismiss on the ground, inter alia, that,
in enacting the statute, Congress exceeded its powers under the Nec
essary and Proper Clause, U. S. Const., Art. I, §8, cl. 18. Agreeing,
the District Court granted dismissal, and the Fourth Circuit affirmed
on the legislative-power ground.
Held: The Necessary and Proper Clause grants Congress authority suf
ficient to enact §4248. Taken together, five considerations compel
this conclusion. Pp. 5–22.
(1) The Clause grants Congress broad authority to pass laws in fur
therance of its constitutionally enumerated powers. It makes clear
that grants of specific federal legislative authority are accompanied
by broad power to enact laws that are “convenient, or useful” or “con
ducive” to the enumerated power’s “beneficial exercise,” e.g.,
McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 413, 418, and that Congress
can “legislate on that vast mass of incidental powers which must be
involved in the constitution,” id., at 421. In determining whether the
Clause authorizes a particular federal statute, there must be “means
ends rationality” between the enacted statute and the source of fed
eral power. Sabri v. United States, 541 U. S. 600, 605. The Constitu
tion “addresse[s]” the “choice of means” “primarily . . . to the judg
ment of Congress. If it can be seen that the means adopted are really
calculated to attain the end, the degree of their necessity, the extent
to which they conduce to the end, the closeness of the relationship be
tween the means adopted and the end to be attained, are matters for

