2

UNITED STATES v. COMSTOCK
Opinion of the Court

order the civil commitment of an individual who is cur
rently “in the custody of the [Federal] Bureau of Prisons,”
§4248, if that individual (1) has previously “engaged or
attempted to engage in sexually violent conduct or child
molestation,” (2) currently “suffers from a serious mental
illness, abnormality, or disorder,” and (3) “as a result of”
that mental illness, abnormality, or disorder is “sexually
dangerous to others,” in that “he would have serious diffi
culty in refraining from sexually violent conduct or child
molestation if released.” §§4247(a)(5)–(6).
In order to detain such a person, the Government (act
ing through the Department of Justice) must certify to a
federal district judge that the prisoner meets the condi
tions just described, i.e., that he has engaged in sexually
violent activity or child molestation in the past and that
he suffers from a mental illness that makes him corre
spondingly dangerous to others. §4248(a). When such a
certification is filed, the statute automatically stays the
individual’s release from prison, ibid., thereby giving the
Government an opportunity to prove its claims at a hear
ing through psychiatric (or other) evidence, §§4247(b)–(c),
4248(b). The statute provides that the prisoner “shall be
represented by counsel” and shall have “an opportunity” at
the hearing “to testify, to present evidence, to subpoena
witnesses on his behalf, and to confront and cross
examine” the Government’s witnesses. §§4247(d), 4248(c).
If the Government proves its claims by “clear and con
vincing evidence,” the court will order the prisoner’s con
tinued commitment in “the custody of the Attorney Gen
eral,” who must “make all reasonable efforts to cause” the
State where that person was tried, or the State where he
is domiciled, to “assume responsibility for his custody,
care, and treatment.” §4248(d); cf. Sullivan v. Freeman,
944 F. 2d 334, 337 (CA7 1991). If either State is willing to
assume that responsibility, the Attorney General “shall
release” the individual “to the appropriate official” of that

