12

UNITED STATES v. COMSTOCK
THOMAS, J., dissenting

Federal laws that criminalize conduct that interferes
with enumerated powers, establish prisons for those who
engage in that conduct, and set rules for the care and
treatment of prisoners awaiting trial or serving a criminal
sentence satisfy this test because each helps to “carr[y]
into Execution” the enumerated powers that justify a
criminal defendant’s arrest or conviction. For example,
Congress’ enumerated power “[t]o establish Post Offices
and post Roads,” Art. I, §8, cl. 7, would lack force or practi
cal effect if Congress lacked the authority to enact crimi
nal laws “to punish those who steal letters from the post
office, or rob the mail.” McCulloch, supra, at 417. Simi
larly, that enumerated power would be compromised if
there were no prisons to hold persons who violate those
laws, or if those prisons were so poorly managed that
prisoners could escape or demand their release on the
grounds that the conditions of their confinement violate
their constitutional rights, at least as we have defined
them. See, e.g., Estelle v. Gamble, 429 U. S. 97 (1976).
——————
enumerated power “ ‘to establish post offices and post roads.’ ” Ibid.
(explaining that “the right to . . . punish those who rob [the mail] is not
indispensably necessary to the establishment of a post office and post
road,” but is “essential to the beneficial exercise of th[at] power”). More
importantly, McCulloch’s holding, as well as the holdings of this Court’s
subsequent decisions, make plain that congressional action is valid
under the Necessary and Proper Clause only if it carries into execution
one or more enumerated powers. Id., at 422 (upholding Congress’
incorporation of a bank because it was a “means . . . to be employed
only for the purpose of carrying into execution the given powers” (em
phasis added)); see Sabri v. United States, 541 U. S. 600, 605 (2004)
(“Congress has authority under the Spending Clause to appropriate
federal moneys to promote the general welfare, and it has correspond
ing authority under the Necessary and Proper Clause to see to it that
taxpayer dollars appropriated under that power are in fact spent for the
general welfare” (emphasis added; citations omitted)); Stewart v. Kahn,
11 Wall. 493, 506–507 (1871) (“The power to pass [the Act in question]
is necessarily implied from the powers to make war and suppress
insurrections” (emphasis added) (referring to Art. I, §8, cls. 11 and 15)).

