Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

THOMAS, J., dissenting

Civil detention under §4248, on the other hand, lacks any
such connection to an enumerated power.
2
After focusing on the relationship between §4248 and
several of Congress’ implied powers, the Court finally
concludes that the civil detention of a “sexually dangerous
person” under §4248 carries into execution the enumer
ated power that justified that person’s arrest or conviction
in the first place. In other words, the Court analogizes
§4248 to federal laws that authorize prison officials to care
for federal inmates while they serve sentences or await
trial. But while those laws help to “carr[y] into Execution”
the enumerated power that justifies the imposition of
criminal sanctions on the inmate, §4248 does not bear that
essential characteristic for three reasons.
First, the statute’s definition of a “sexually dangerous
person” contains no element relating to the subject’s
crime. See §§4247(a)(5)–(6). It thus does not require a
federal court to find any connection between the reasons
supporting civil commitment and the enumerated power
with which that person’s criminal conduct interfered. As a
consequence, §4248 allows a court to civilly commit an
individual without finding that he was ever charged with
or convicted of a federal crime involving sexual violence.
§§4248(a), (d). That possibility is not merely hypothetical:
The Government concedes that nearly 20% of individuals
against whom §4248 proceedings have been brought fit
this description.9 Tr. of Oral Arg. 23–25.
Second, §4248 permits the term of federal civil commit
ment to continue beyond the date on which a convicted
——————
9 The statute does require the court to find that the subject “has en
gaged or attempted to engage in sexually violent conduct or child
molestation,” §4247(a)(5), but that factual predicate can be established
by a state conviction, or by clear and convincing evidence that the
person committed a sex crime for which he was never charged.

