Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment

issue before us.
The operative constitutional provision in this case is the
Necessary and Proper Clause. This Court has not held
that the Lee Optical test, asking if “it might be thought
that the particular legislative measure was a rational way
to correct” an evil, is the proper test in this context.
Rather, under the Necessary and Proper Clause, applica
tion of a “rational basis” test should be at least as exacting
as it has been in the Commerce Clause cases, if not more
so. Indeed, the cases the Court cites in the portion of its
opinion referring to “rational basis” are predominantly
Commerce Clause cases, and none are due process cases.
See ante, at 6 (citing Gonzales v. Raich, 545 U. S. 1 (2005);
Lopez, supra; Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining & Recla
mation Assn., Inc., 452 U. S. 264, 276 (1981)).
There is an important difference between the two ques
tions, but the Court does not make this distinction clear.
Raich, Lopez, and Hodel were all Commerce Clause cases.
Those precedents require a tangible link to commerce, not
a mere conceivable rational relation, as in Lee Optical.
“ ‘[S]imply because Congress may conclude that a particu
lar activity substantially affects interstate commerce does
not necessarily make it so.’ ” Lopez, supra, at 557, n. 2
(quoting Hodel, supra, at 311 (Rehnquist, J., concurring in
judgment)). The rational basis referred to in the Com
merce Clause context is a demonstrated link in fact, based
on empirical demonstration. While undoubtedly deferen
tial, this may well be different from the rational-basis test
as Lee Optical described it.
The Court relies on Sabri, supra, for its conclusion that
a “means-ends rationality” is all that is required for a
power to come within the Necessary and Proper Clause’s
reach. See ante, at 6. Sabri only refers to “means-ends
rationality” in a parenthetical describing the holding in
McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316 (1819); it certainly
did not import the Lee Optical rational-basis test into this

