Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

ity of securing federal prisoners.5
The only additional question presented here is whether,
in order to carry into execution the enumerated powers on
which the federal criminal laws rest, it is also necessary
and proper for Congress to protect the public from dangers
created by the federal criminal justice and prison systems.
In my view, the answer to that question is “yes.” Just as it
is necessary and proper for Congress to provide for the
apprehension of escaped federal prisoners, it is necessary
and proper for Congress to provide for the civil commit
ment of dangerous federal prisoners who would otherwise
escape civil commitment as a result of federal imprison
ment.
Some years ago, a distinguished study group created by
the Judicial Conference of the United States found that, in
a disturbing number of cases, no State was willing to
assume the financial burden of providing for the civil
commitment of federal prisoners who, if left at large after
the completion of their sentences, would present a danger
to any communities in which they chose to live or visit.
See ante, at 11; Greenwood v. United States, 350 U. S. 366,
373–374 (1956). These federal prisoners, having been held
——————
exceeding six months, is to be inflicted”); see also J. Roberts, The
Federal Bureau of Prisons: Its Mission, Its History, and Its Partnership
With Probation and Pretrial Services, 61 Fed. Probation 53 (1997)
(explaining that federal prisoners were originally housed in state and
county facilities on a contract basis).
5 See ch. 20, §27, 1 Stat. 87 (“[A] marshal shall be appointed in and
for each district for the term of four years, . . . whose duty it shall be to
attend the district and circuit courts when sitting therein, . . . [a]nd to
execute throughout the district, all lawful precepts directed to him, and
issued under the authority of the United States”); id., at 88 (“[T]he
marshal shall be held answerable for the delivery to his successor of all
prisoners which may be in his custody at the time of his removal, or
when the term for which he is appointed shall expire, and for that
purpose may retain such prisoners in his custody until his successor
shall be appointed and qualified as the law directs”).

