Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

with the States.” Post, at 7 (THOMAS, J., dissenting). To
the contrary, it requires accommodation of state interests:
The Attorney General must inform the State in which the
federal prisoner “is domiciled or was tried” that he is
detaining someone with respect to whom those States may
wish to assert their authority, and he must encourage
those States to assume custody of the individual.
§4248(d). He must also immediately “release” that person
“to the appropriate official of” either State “if such State
will assume [such] responsibility.” Ibid. And either State
has the right, at any time, to assert its authority over the
individual, which will prompt the individual’s immediate
transfer to State custody. §4248(d)(1). Respondents con
tend that the States are nonetheless “powerless to prevent
the detention of their citizens under §4248, even if deten
tion is contrary to the States’ policy choices.” Brief for
Respondents 11 (emphasis added). But that is not the
most natural reading of the statute, see §§4248(d)(1)–(e),
and the Solicitor General acknowledges that “the Federal
Government would have no appropriate role” with respect
to an individual covered by the statute once “the transfer
to State responsibility and State control has occurred.” Tr.
of Oral Arg. 9.
In Greenwood, 350 U. S. 366, the Court rejected a chal
lenge to the current statute’s predecessor—i.e., to the 1949
statute we described above, supra, at 11–12. The petition
ers in that case claimed, like the respondents here, that
the statute improperly interfered with state sovereignty.
See Brief for Petitioner in Greenwood v. United States,
O. T. 1955, No. 460, pp. 2, 18–29. But the Court rejected
that argument. See Greenwood, supra, at 375–376. And
the version of the statute at issue in Greenwood was less
protective of state interests than the current statute. That
statute authorized federal custody so long as “suitable
arrangements” were “not otherwise available” in a State or
otherwise. 63 Stat. 687 (emphasis added). Cf. Brief for

