6

UNITED STATES v. COMSTOCK
THOMAS, J., dissenting

dangerous,”4 a court may order the person committed until
he is no longer a risk “to others,” even if that does not
occur until after his federal criminal sentence has expired
or the statute of limitations on the federal charge against
him has run. §§4248(a), (d)–(e).
No enumerated power in Article I, §8, expressly dele
gates to Congress the power to enact a civil-commitment
regime for sexually dangerous persons, nor does any other
provision in the Constitution vest Congress or the other
branches of the Federal Government with such a power.
Accordingly, §4248 can be a valid exercise of congressional
authority only if it is “necessary and proper for carrying
into Execution” one or more of those federal powers actu
ally enumerated in the Constitution.
Section 4248 does not fall within any of those powers.
The Government identifies no specific enumerated power
or powers as a constitutional predicate for §4248, and none
are readily discernable. Indeed, not even the Commerce
Clause—the enumerated power this Court has interpreted
most expansively, see, e.g., NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin
Steel Corp., 301 U. S. 1, 37 (1937)—can justify federal civil
detention of sex offenders. Under the Court’s precedents,
Congress may not regulate noneconomic activity (such as
sexual violence) based solely on the effect such activity
may have, in individual cases or in the aggregate, on
interstate commerce. Morrison, 529 U. S., at 617–618;
United States v. Lopez, 514 U. S. 549, 563–567 (1995).
That limitation forecloses any claim that §4248 carries
into execution Congress’ Commerce Clause power, and the
——————
4 The Act defines a “sexually dangerous person” as one “who has en
gaged or attempted to engage in sexually violent conduct or child
molestation,” and “who is sexually dangerous to others.” §4247(a)(5).
It further defines “sexually dangerous to others” to mean a person who
“suffers from a serious mental illness” such that he would “have serious
difficulty in refraining from sexually violent conduct or child molesta
tion if released.” §4247(a)(6).

