Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
highly relevant to several §3553(a) factors that district courts are re
quired to consider at sentencing. The extensive evidence of Pepper’s
rehabilitation since his initial sentencing is clearly relevant to the se
lection of an appropriate sentence here. Most fundamentally, that
evidence provides the most up-to-date picture of his “history and
characteristics.” §3553(a)(1). At the time of his initial sentencing, he
was an unemployed drug addict who was estranged from his family
and sold drugs. By his second resentencing, he had been drug-free
for nearly five years, was attending college, was a top employee
slated for promotion, had re-established a relationship with his fa
ther, and was married and supporting a family. His postsentencing
conduct also sheds light on the likelihood that he will engage in fu
ture criminal conduct, a central factor that sentencing courts must
consider. See §§3553(a)(2)(B)–(C). Pp. 12–15.
(c) The contrary arguments advanced by amicus appointed to de
fend the judgment are unpersuasive. Pp. 15–26.
(1) While §3742(g)(2)—which prohibits a district court at re
sentencing from imposing a sentence outside the Guidelines range
except upon a ground it relied upon at the prior sentencing—
effectively precludes a court from considering postsentencing reha
bilitation, that provision is invalid after Booker. Like the provisions
invalidated in Booker—§§3553(b)(1) and 3742(e)—§3742(g)(2) re
quires district courts effectively to treat the Guidelines as mandatory
in an entire set of cases. Thus, the proper remedy is to invalidate the
provision. While applying §3742(g)(2) at resentencing would not al
ways result in a Sixth Amendment violation, this Court rejects a par
tial invalidation that would leave the Guidelines effectively manda
tory in some cases and advisory in others. The fact that §3742(g)(2)
permits a resentencing court on remand to impose a non-Guidelines
sentence where the prior sentence expressly relied on a departure
upheld by the court of appeals also does not cure the constitutional
infirmity. And the argument that any constitutional infirmity in
§3742(g)(2) can be remedied by invalidating §3742(j)(1)(B) is rejected.
Pp. 15–20.
(2) This Court finds unpersuasive amicus’ arguments focusing
on Congress’ sentencing objectives under §3553(a). Contrary to
amicus’ contention, §3742(g)(2) does not reflect a congressional pur
pose to preclude consideration of postsentencing rehabilitation evi
dence. Thus, that provision has no bearing on this Court’s analysis of
whether §3553(a) permits consideration of such evidence. Nor is the
consideration of postsentencing rehabilitation inconsistent with the
sentencing factor in §3553(a)(5)—which directs sentencing courts to
consider “any pertinent policy statement” of the Sentencing Commis
sion—particularly as the pertinent policy statement in this case is

