24

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

between the two is reflected most obviously in the fact that
the BOP has no authority to award good time credit
where, as in this case, the defendant’s good behavior
occurs after a sentence has already been served.15 The
Commission’s second proffered rationale fares no better.
To be sure, allowing district courts to consider evidence of
postsentencing rehabilitation may result in disparate
treatment between those defendants who are sentenced
properly and those who must be resentenced. But that
disparity arises not because of arbitrary or random sen
tencing practices, but because of the ordinary operation of
appellate sentencing review.
In a closely related vein, amicus argues that considera
tion of postsentencing rehabilitation is inconsistent with
§3553(a)(6), which requires sentencing courts to consider
the need to avoid unwarranted sentencing disparities.
——————
institutional disciplinary regulations.’ ” Barber v. Thomas, 560 U. S.
___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 7) (quoting 18 U. S. C. §3624(b); alteration in
original). Such credits may be revoked at any time before the date of a
prisoner’s release. See §3624(b)(2). In contrast, a court’s imposition of
a reduced sentence based on postsentencing rehabilitation changes the
very terms of imprisonment and “recognizes that the [defendant’s]
conduct since his initial sentencing warrants a less severe criminal
punishment.” Brief for United States 50. Once imposed, a sentence
may be modified only in very limited circumstances. See §3582(c).
15 Amicus points to two other procedural mechanisms that may
shorten a defendant’s sentence—early termination of a term of super
vised release, see §3583(e)(1), and the potential for sentencing reduc
tions based on postsentencing substantial assistance, see Fed. Rule
Crim. Proc. 35(b)—but neither presents an adequate substitute for a
district court’s consideration of postsentencing rehabilitation. Super
vised release follows a term of imprisonment and serves an entirely
different purpose than the sentence imposed under §3553(a). See
United States v. Johnson, 529 U. S. 53, 59 (2000) (“Supervised release
fulfills rehabilitative ends, distinct from those served by incarcera
tion”). Rule 35(b) departures address only postsentencing cooperation
with the Government, not postsentencing rehabilitation generally, and
thus a defendant with nothing to offer the Government can gain no
benefit from Rule 35(b).

