28

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

substantial assistance and sentenced him to 24 months’
imprisonment. When the Court of Appeals vacated that
sentence in Pepper II, and again in Pepper III, the case
was reassigned on remand to Chief Judge Reade. In
resentencing Pepper, Chief Judge Reade ruled that she
was not bound by the prior sentencing judge’s decision to
grant a 40 percent downward departure and instead
granted only a 20 percent downward departure, which the
Court of Appeals upheld in Pepper IV. Pepper argues that
the law of the case doctrine required Chief Judge Reade to
apply the same 40 percent departure granted by the origi
nal sentencing judge. We disagree.
Preliminarily, we note that the mandates in Pepper II
and Pepper III were “general remand[s] for resentencing,”
which “did not place any limitations on the discretion of
the newly assigned district court judge in resentencing
Pepper.” 570 F. 3d, at 963. In his merits briefs to this
Court, Pepper does not challenge the scope or validity of
the Court of Appeals’ mandate ordering de novo resentenc
ing, and thus has abandoned any argument that the man
date itself restricted the District Court from imposing a
different substantial assistance departure.18 The only
question before us is whether the law of the case doctrine
required Chief Judge Reade to adhere to the original
sentencing judge’s decision granting a 40 percent down
ward departure.
Although we have described the “law of the case [a]s an
amorphous concept,” “[a]s most commonly defined, the
doctrine posits that when a court decides upon a rule of
law, that decision should continue to govern the same
——————
18 In any event, as the Court of Appeals recognized, neither Pepper II
nor Pepper III held that a 40 percent downward departure was the only
reasonable departure that a sentencing court could grant for Pepper’s
substantial assistance; rather, the only issue those opinions actually
decided was that a “40% downward departure was not an abuse of
discretion.” 570 F. 3d, at 963–964.

