(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–6822. Argued December 6, 2010—Decided March 2, 2011
After pleading guilty to drug charges, petitioner Pepper was sentenced
under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines to 24 months’ imprison
ment, a nearly 75 percent downward departure from the low end of
the Guidelines range based in part on his substantial assistance, fol
lowed by five years of supervised release. In Pepper I, the Eighth
Circuit reversed and remanded for resentencing in light of, inter alia,
United States v. Booker, 543 U. S. 220. Pepper, who had begun serv
ing his supervised release, testified at his resentencing hearing that
he was no longer a drug addict, having completed a 500-hour drug
treatment program while in prison; that he was enrolled in commu
nity college and had achieved very good grades; and that he was
working part time. Pepper’s father testified that he and his son were
no longer estranged, and Pepper’s probation officer testified that a
24-month sentence would be reasonable in light of Pepper’s substan
tial assistance, postsentencing rehabilitation, and demonstrated low
recidivism risk. The District Court again sentenced Pepper to 24
months, granting a 40 percent downward departure based on Pep
per’s substantial assistance and a further downward variance based
on, inter alia, Pepper’s rehabilitation since his initial sentencing. In
Pepper II, the Eighth Circuit again reversed and remanded for resen
tencing, concluding that Pepper’s postsentencing rehabilitation could
not be considered as a factor supporting a downward variance, and
directing that the case be assigned to a different district judge. After
this Court vacated and remanded the Pepper II judgment in light of
Gall v. United States, 552 U. S. 38, the Eighth Circuit, in Pepper III,
reversed and remanded once more. At the second resentencing hear
ing, Pepper informed the new district judge that he was still in
school, was about to be promoted at his job, and had married and was

