Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

purpose of federal sentencing policy or any other policy
behind the federal sentencing guidelines to send this
defendant back to prison.” Id., at 149–150.
The Government again appealed Pepper’s sentence, and
the Court of Appeals again reversed and remanded for
resentencing. See United States v. Pepper, 486 F. 3d 408,
410, 413 (CA8 2007) (Pepper II). The court concluded that,
while it was “a close call, [it could not] say the district
court abused its discretion” by granting the 40 percent
downward departure for substantial assistance. Id., at
411. The court found the further 59 percent downward
variance, however, to be an abuse of discretion. Id., at
412–413. In doing so, the court held that Pepper’s “post
sentencing rehabilitation was an impermissible factor to
consider in granting a downward variance.” Id., at 413.
The court stated that evidence of postsentencing reha
bilitation “ ‘is not relevant and will not be permitted at
resentencing because the district court could not have
considered that evidence at the time of the original
sentencing,’ ” and permitting courts to consider post
sentencing rehabilitation at resentencing “would create
unwarranted sentencing disparities and inject blatant
inequities into the sentencing process.” Ibid.4 The Court
of Appeals directed that the case be assigned to a different
district judge for resentencing. Ibid.
After the Court of Appeals’ mandate issued, Pepper’s
case was reassigned on remand to Chief Judge Linda R.
Reade. In July 2007, Chief Judge Reade issued an order
on the scope of the remand from Pepper II, stating that
“[t]he court will not consider itself bound to reduce [Pep
——————
4 The Court of Appeals also held that the District Court “further erred
by considering Pepper’s lack of violent history, which history had
already been accounted for in the sentencing Guidelines calculation,
and by considering sentencing disparity among Pepper’s co-defendants
without adequate foundation and explanation.” Pepper II, 486 F. 3d, at
413.

