Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of BREYER, J.

reason (reflecting good behavior while the case is on ap
peal) would conflict with the use of other mechanisms,
such as “good-time” credits, for that purpose. But how is
that so? A defendant, after sentencing but while his case
is on appeal, may or may not be entitled to “good time.”
That may depend upon whether he remains on bail or
upon particular “good-time” rules. Regardless, the resen
tencing judge can take account of any such matter. See
also ante, at 26–28.
The Commission’s commentary also suggests it would be
inequitable to allow an offender who is being resentenced
to receive any kind of credit for his good behavior, say
while his case was on appeal. But why is that so? After
all, the Guidelines permit a judge to take account of an
offender’s good behavior after arrest but before initial
sentencing. That time period could last longer than the
time taken up on appeal. Why should pretrial behavior
count but appeal time behavior not count? Like the major
ity, I find this justification for the policy statement uncon
vincing. See ante, at 25–26.
The second question is whether, given the sentencing
court’s power to disregard the policy statement forbidding
departures based on postsentencing rehabilitation, the
facts and circumstances here could warrant a departure
(or variance) for that reason. And the answer, in my view,
is yes. This case presents unusual rehabilitative circum
stances. As the majority observes: “By the time of his
second resentencing in 2009, Pepper had been drug-free
for nearly five years, had attended college and achieved
high grades, was a top employee at his job slated for a
promotion, had reestablished a relationship with his
father, and was married and supporting his wife’s daugh
ter.” Ante, at 14. These are case-specific facts and cir
cumstances, and they are of the kind that should lead
appellate courts to show their “greatest respect” for a
sentencing decision, including a departure or variance,

