Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

23

Opinion of the Court

Brief for Amicus Curiae in Support of Judgment Below
31–32.
To be sure, we have recognized that the Commission
post-Booker continues to “fil[l] an important institutional
role” because “[i]t has the capacity courts lack to base its
determinations on empirical data and national experience,
guided by a professional staff with appropriate expertise.”
Kimbrough, 552 U. S., at 109 (internal quotation marks
omitted). Accordingly, we have instructed that district
courts must still give “respectful consideration” to the
now-advisory Guidelines (and their accompanying policy
statements). Id., at 101. As amicus acknowledges, how
ever, our post-Booker decisions make clear that a district
court may in appropriate cases impose a non-Guidelines
sentence based on a disagreement with the Commission’s
views. See id., at 109–110. That is particularly true
where, as here, the Commission’s views rest on wholly
unconvincing policy rationales not reflected in the sentenc
ing statutes Congress enacted.
The commentary to USSG §5K2.19 expresses the Com
mission’s view that departures based on postsentencing
rehabilitation would “(1) be inconsistent with the policies
established by Congress under 18 U. S. C. §3624(b) [gov
erning good time credit] and other statutory provisions for
reducing the time to be served by an imprisoned person;
and (2) inequitably benefit only those who gain the oppor
tunity to be resentenced de novo.” With regard to the first
proffered rationale, a sentencing reduction based on post
sentencing rehabilitation can hardly be said to be “incon
sistent with the policies” underlying an award of good time
credit under §3624(b) because the two serve distinctly
different penological interests.14 Indeed, the difference
——————
14 An award of good time credit by the Bureau of Prisons (BOP) does
not affect the length of a court-imposed sentence; rather, it is an admin
istrative reward “to provide an incentive for prisoners to ‘compl[y] with

