Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

ture pursuant to USSG §5K1.1 based on Pepper’s substan
tial assistance and recommended a 15 percent downward
departure.2 The District Court, however, sentenced Pep
per to a 24-month prison term, resulting in an approxi
mately 75 percent downward departure from the low end
of the Guidelines range, to be followed by five years of
supervised release. The Government appealed Pepper’s
sentence, and in June 2005, the Court of Appeals for the
Eighth Circuit reversed and remanded for resentencing in
light of our intervening decision in Booker (and for another
reason not relevant here). See United States v. Pepper,
412 F. 3d 995, 999 (2005) (Pepper I). Pepper completed his
24-month sentence three days after Pepper I was issued
and began serving his term of supervised release.
In May 2006, the District Court conducted a resentenc
ing hearing and heard from three witnesses. In his testi
mony, Pepper first recounted that while he had previously
been a drug addict, he successfully completed a 500-hour
drug treatment program while in prison and he no longer
used any drugs. App. 104–105. Pepper then explained
that since his release from prison, he had enrolled at a
local community college as a full-time student and had
earned A’s in all of his classes in the prior semester. Id.,
at 106–107. Pepper also testified that he had obtained
employment within a few weeks after being released from
custody and was continuing to work part-time while at
tending school. Id., at 106–110. Pepper confirmed that he
was in compliance with all the conditions of his supervised
release and described his changed attitude since his ar
rest. See id., at 111 (“[M]y life was basically headed to
——————
2 USSG §5K1.1 provides that a court may depart from the Guidelines
“[u]pon motion of the government stating that the defendant has
provided substantial assistance in the investigation or prosecution of
another person who has committed an offense.” Pepper provided
information to Government investigators and a grand jury concerning
two other individuals involved with illegal drugs and guns.

