2

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
supporting his new family. Noting the nearly identical remand lan
guage of Pepper II and Pepper III, the court observed that it was not
bound to reduce Pepper’s range by 40 percent for substantial assis
tance. Instead, it found him entitled to a 20 percent reduction and
refused to grant a further downward variance for, inter alia, postsen
tencing rehabilitation. It imposed a 65-month prison term and 12
months of supervised release. In Pepper IV, the Eighth Circuit once
again rejected Pepper’s postsentencing rehabilitation argument. It
also rejected his claim that the law of the case from Pepper II and
Pepper III required the District Court to reduce the applicable Guide
lines range by at least 40 percent.

Held:
1. When a defendant’s sentence has been set aside on appeal, a dis
trict court at resentencing may consider evidence of the defendant’s
postsentencing rehabilitation, and such evidence may, in appropriate
cases, support a downward variance from the now-advisory Guide
lines range. Pp. 9–27.
(a) Consistent with the principle that “the punishment should fit
the offender and not merely the crime,” Williams v. New York, 337
U. S. 241, 247, this Court has observed a consistent and uniform pol
icy “under which a sentencing judge could exercise a wide discretion
in the sources and types of evidence used to assist him in determin
ing the kind and extent of punishment to be imposed within limits
fixed by law,” id., at 246, particularly “the fullest information possi
ble concerning the defendant’s life and characteristics,” id., at 247.
That principle is codified at 18 U. S. C. §3661, which provides that
“[n]o limitation shall be placed on the information” a sentencing court
may consider “concerning the [defendant’s] background, character,
and conduct,” and at §3553(a), which specifies that sentencing courts
must consider, among other things, a defendant’s “history and char
acteristics,” §3553(a)(1). The Guidelines, which Booker made “effec
tively advisory,” 543 U. S., at 245, “should be the starting point and
the initial benchmark,” but district courts may impose sentences
within statutory limits based on appropriate consideration of all of
the §3553(a) factors, subject to appellate review for “reasonableness,”
Gall v. United States, 552 U. S. 38, 49–51. This sentencing frame
work applies both at initial sentencing and at any subsequent resen
tencing after a sentence has been set aside on appeal. Pp. 9–12.
(b) Postsentencing rehabilitation evidence may support a down
ward variance from the advisory Guidelines range. The plain lan
guage of §3661 makes clear that there is “[n]o limitation . . . on . . .
background, character, and conduct” information, and it makes no
distinction between an initial sentencing and a subsequent resen
tencing. In addition, postsentencing rehabilitation evidence may be

