Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of BREYER, J.

the Guideline policy statement’s absolute prohibition on
consideration of postsentencing rehabilitation were legally
binding, then information on that score (like information
about race, religion, sex, or national origin) would fall
outside the scope of this provision, for it would not be
relevant. Thus, reference to the statute begs the question.
Nor can I find much help in the majority’s reference to a
sentencing “ ‘tradition’ ” that considers “ ‘every convicted
person as an individual.’ ” Ante, at 9 (quoting Koon v.
United States, 518 U. S. 81, 113 (1996)). That is because
individualized sentencing is not the only relevant tradi
tion. A just legal system seeks not only to treat different
cases differently but also to treat like cases alike. Fair
ness requires sentencing uniformity as well as efforts to
recognize relevant sentencing differences. Indeed, when
Congress enacted the sentencing statutes before us, it
focused upon the unfair way in which federal sentencing
failed to treat similar offenders similarly. And Congress
wrote statutes designed primarily (though not exclusively)
to bring about greater uniformity in sentencing. See, e.g.,
Booker, supra, at 253–254. The statutes do so in large
part through the creation of a system of Guidelines writ
ten by a Sentencing Commission, which Congress in
tended the courts to follow. See Mistretta v. United States,
488 U. S. 361 (1989) (Sentencing Commission constitu
tional); Rita v. United States, 551 U. S. 338, 348–349
(2007); 18 U. S. C. §3553(a) (identifying relevant factors in
sentencing, including uniformity).
The Williams case is similarly unhelpful. That is be
cause Congress in the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984—the
law before us—disavowed the individualized approach to
sentencing that that case followed. Williams emphasized
the importance of a sentencing court’s legal power to tailor
punishment ability to fit the circumstances of each indi
vidual offender. 337 U. S., at 247 (emphasizing “modern
concepts individualizing punishment”). But Congress,

