Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

Opinion of the Court

101. In such cases, the district court at the initial sentenc
ing proceeding will necessarily have imposed a sentence
within the Guidelines range, and thus §3742(g)(2) would
require the imposition of a Guidelines sentence on re
mand. See Reply Brief for Petitioner 3–5 (describing
further categories of cases where “the Booker remedy
would be entirely unavailable if §3742(g)(2) were valid”).
To be sure, applying §3742(g)(2) at resentencing would
not always result in a Sixth Amendment violation. For
example, where the applicable Guidelines range rests
solely on facts found by a jury beyond a reasonable doubt,
application of §3742(g)(2) at resentencing would not ren
der the sentence constitutionally infirm. But, as explained
above, that possibility was equally true with respect to the
sentencing provisions we invalidated in Booker. See su
pra, at 16. As with those provisions, “we cannot assume
that Congress, if faced with the statute’s invalidity in key
applications, would have preferred to apply the statute in
as many other instances as possible.” 543 U. S., at 248.
Just as we rejected a two-track system in Booker that
would have made the Guidelines mandatory in some cases
and advisory in others, we reject a partial invalidation of
§3742(g)(2) that would leave us with the same result.
The fact that §3742(g)(2) permits a resentencing court
on remand to impose a non-Guidelines sentence in cases
where the prior sentence expressly relied upon a depar
ture upheld by the court of appeals also does not cure the
constitutional infirmity. As explained above, we observed
in Booker that the availability of departures from the
applicable Guidelines ranges in specified circumstances
“does not avoid the constitutional issue.” Id., at 234.
Because “departures are not available in every case, and
in fact are unavailable in most,” ibid., we held that reme
dying the Sixth Amendment problem required invalidation
of §3553(b)(1). That same remedial approach requires us

