4

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of BREYER, J.

concerned that individualized sentencing had gone too far,
wrote a new sentencing law designed to help correct “dis
parities” among similar defendants sentenced by different
judges. See S. Rep. No. 98–225, p. 45 (1983) (“Sentencing
disparities” are “unfair both to offenders and to the pub
lic”); id., at 38 (disparities “can be traced directly to the
unfettered discretion the law confers on those judges and
parole authorities responsible for imposing and imple
menting the sentence”).
Booker’s description of the Guidelines as “advisory”
offers somewhat greater assistance—but only if that word
is read in light of the Sixth Amendment analysis that
precedes it. This Court has held that the Sixth Amend
ment forbids Congress (through the Commission) to create
Guidelines that both (1) require judges (without juries) to
find sentencing facts and also (2) tie those facts to the
mandatory imposition of particular sentences. 543 U. S.,
at 226, 244; see also Apprendi, 530 U. S., at 490 (Sixth
Amendment requires jury findings in respect to factual
matters that require judge to increase sentence); Blakely
v. Washington, 542 U. S. 296, 303–304 (2004) (same in
respect to a State’s mandatory guidelines). In light of this
Sixth Amendment prohibition, the Court, believing that
Congress would not have intended to introduce new juries
into each sentencing proceeding, excised the few particular
provisions of the sentencing statutes that specified that
application of the Guidelines was mandatory. Booker, 543
U. S., at 259. The Court believed that the relevant stat
utes remained workable without those few provisions, that
their excision could further Congress’ basic sentencing
intentions, and that excision was more likely to do so than
invalidation of the entire statutory scheme. With an
occasional exception (such as the statutory provision we
strike down today), there is no reason to think that the
sentencing statutes as limited in Booker run afoul of
the Sixth Amendment. Ibid.

