2

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of ALITO, J.

to the Sentencing Commission the authority to make
policy decisions regarding federal sentencing, see 18
U. S. C. §§3553(a)(4), (5), and requiring judges to give
significant weight to the Commission’s policy decisions
does not run afoul of the Sixth Amendment right that the
mandatory Guidelines system was found to violate, i.e.,
the right to have a jury make certain factual findings that
are relevant to sentencing.
While I continue to believe that sentencing judges
should be required to give significant weight to all Guide
lines provisions and policy statements, see Kimbrough,
552 U. S., at 116 (opinion of ALITO, J.), the Court in
Kimbrough held that sentencing judges may not be re
quired to give weight to some unusual policy decisions, see
id., at 109–110 (majority opinion). And JUSTICE BREYER
now makes a reasonable case that the particular policy
statement involved in this case is distinguishable from
almost all of the other rules that the Commission has
adopted. See ante, p. ___ (opinion concurring in part and
concurring in judgment). His position seems to me more
consistent with Kimbrough than the Court’s. It would at
least prevent us from sliding all the way down the slippery
slope that leads back to the regime of entirely discretion
ary federal sentencing that preceded the enactment of the
Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, 98 Stat. 1987.
Anyone familiar with the history of criminal sentencing
in this country cannot fail to see the irony in the Court’s
praise for the sentencing scheme exemplified by Williams
v. New York, 337 U. S. 241 (1949), and 18 U. S. C. §3661.*
——————
* Insofar as 18 U. S. C. §3661 permitted a sentencing judge to con
sider evidence of postsentencing rehabilitation, that provision was
effectively modified by the subsequent enactment of the Sentencing
Reform Act, which instructed the Sentencing Commission to adopt
guidelines and policy statements that avoid “unwarranted sentencing
disparities,” 28 U. S. C. §991(b)(1)(B); see also §994(f), and which
provided that sentencing courts “shall consider . . . any pertinent policy

