Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

Government suggested in Booker that we render the
Guidelines advisory only in cases in which the Constitu
tion prohibits judicial factfinding, we rejected that two
track proposal, reasoning that “Congress would not have
authorized a mandatory system in some cases and a non
mandatory system in others, given the administrative
complexities that such a system would create.” Id., at 266;
see Dillon, 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 12) (“The incom
plete remedy we rejected in Booker would have required
courts to treat the Guidelines differently in similar pro
ceedings, leading potentially to unfair results and consid
erable administrative challenges”).
We did not expressly mention §3742(g)(2) in Booker,11
but the rationale we set forth in that opinion for invalidat
ing §§3553(b)(1) and 3742(e) applies equally to §3742(g)(2).
As with those provisions, §3742(g)(2) requires district
courts effectively to treat the Guidelines as mandatory in
an entire set of cases. Specifically, §3742(g)(2) precludes a
district court on remand from imposing a sentence “out
side the applicable guidelines range” except upon a
“ground of departure” that was expressly relied upon by
the court at the prior sentencing and upheld by the court
of appeals. In circumstances in which the district court
did not rely upon such a departure ground at the prior
sentencing, §3742(g)(2) would require the court on remand
to impose a sentence within the applicable Guidelines
range, thus rendering the Guidelines effectively manda
tory. Because in a large set of cases, judicial factfinding
will increase the applicable Guidelines range beyond that
supported solely by the facts established by the jury ver
dict (or guilty plea), requiring a sentencing judge on re
——————
11 See

Dillon, 560 U. S., at ___, n. 5 (Stevens, J., dissenting) (slip op.,
at 9, n. 5) (citing §3742(g)(2) as “one additional provision of the [SRA
that] should have been excised, but was not, in order to accomplish the
Court’s remedy”).

