14

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

nearly five years, had attended college and achieved high
grades, was a top employee at his job slated for a promo
tion, had re-established a relationship with his father, and
was married and supporting his wife’s daughter. There is
no question that this evidence of Pepper’s conduct since
his initial sentencing constitutes a critical part of the
“history and characteristics” of a defendant that Congress
intended sentencing courts to consider. §3553(a).
Pepper’s postsentencing conduct also sheds light on the
likelihood that he will engage in future criminal conduct, a
central factor that district courts must assess when impos
ing sentence. See §§3553(a)(2)(B)–(C); Gall, 552 U. S., at
59 (“Gall’s self-motivated rehabilitation . . . lends strong
support to the conclusion that imprisonment was not
necessary to deter Gall from engaging in future criminal
conduct or to protect the public from his future criminal
acts” (citing §§3553(a)(2)(B)–(C))). As recognized by Pep
per’s probation officer, Pepper’s steady employment, as
well as his successful completion of a 500-hour drug
treatment program and his drug-free condition, also
suggest a diminished need for “educational or vocational training . . . or other correctional treatment.”
§3553(a)(2)(D). Finally, Pepper’s exemplary postsentenc
ing conduct may be taken as the most accurate indicator of
“his present purposes and tendencies and significantly to
suggest the period of restraint and the kind of discipline
that ought to be imposed upon him.” Ashe, 302 U. S., at
55. Accordingly, evidence of Pepper’s postsentencing
rehabilitation bears directly on the District Court’s over
arching duty to “impose a sentence sufficient, but not
greater than necessary” to serve the purposes of sentenc
ing. §3553(a).
In sum, the Court of Appeals’ ruling prohibiting the
District Court from considering any evidence of Pepper’s
postsentencing rehabilitation at resentencing conflicts
with longstanding principles of federal sentencing law and

