Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of BREYER, J.

Booker made clear that the remaining statutory provi
sions, while leading us to call the Guidelines “advisory”
(rather than “mandatory”), do not give a sentencing judge
carte blanche to apply, or not to apply, the Guidelines as
that judge chooses. Rather, the “district courts, while not
bound to apply the Guidelines, must consult those Guide
lines and take them into account when sentencing.” Id., at
264. Moreover, Booker held that appellate court review of
sentencing is valid. Booker explained that the “statutory
language, the structure of the [Sentencing Reform Act],
and the sound administration of justice,” taken together,
require appellate courts to apply “reasonableness stan
dard[s]” of review. Id., at 260–261, 262 (internal quotation
marks omitted). Reasonableness standards, we added, are
“not foreign to sentencing law.” Id., at 262. And the “Act
has long required their use in important sentencing cir
cumstances—both on review of departures . . . and on
review of sentences imposed where there was no applica
ble Guideline.” Ibid. See also id., at 261 (appellate courts
will apply “a practical standard of review already familiar
to appellate courts: review for ‘unreasonable[ness]’ ”); id.,
at 264 (“[C]ourts of appeals” will “review sentencing deci
sions for unreasonableness”).
We have also indicated that, in applying reasonableness
standards, the appellate courts should take account of
sentencing policy as embodied in the statutes and Guide
lines, as well as of the comparative expertise of trial and
appellate courts. Thus, in Kimbrough, we observed that in
light of the “discrete institutional strengths” of the Sen
tencing Commission and sentencing judges, “a district
court’s decision to vary from the advisory Guidelines may
attract greatest respect when the sentencing judge finds a
particular case ‘outside the “heartland” to which the
Commission intends individual Guidelines to apply.’ ” 552
U. S., at 109 (quoting Rita, supra, at 351). We noted,
however, that “while the Guidelines are no longer binding,

