16

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

prior sentencing. As the Government concedes, however,
§3742(g)(2) is invalid after Booker.
As we have explained, Booker held that where judicial
factfinding increases a defendant’s applicable Sentencing
Guidelines range, treating the Guidelines as mandatory in
those circumstances would violate the defendant’s Sixth
Amendment right to be tried by a jury and to have every
element of an offense proved by the Government beyond a
reasonable doubt. See supra, at 11. We recognized in
Booker that, although the SRA permitted departures from
the applicable Guidelines range in limited circumstances,9
“departures are not available in every case, and in fact are
unavailable in most.” 543 U. S., at 234. Because in those
instances, “the judge is bound to impose a sentence within
the Guidelines range,” we concluded that the availability
of departures in certain circumstances “does not avoid the
constitutional issue.” Ibid.
To remedy the constitutional problem, we rendered the
Guidelines effectively advisory by invalidating two provi
sions of the SRA: 18 U. S. C. §3553(b)(1) (2000 ed., Supp.
IV), which generally required sentencing courts to impose
a sentence within the applicable Guidelines range, and
§3742(e) (2000 ed. and Supp. IV), which prescribed the
standard of appellate review, including de novo review of
Guidelines departures. 543 U. S., at 259. We invalidated
these provisions even though we recognized that manda
tory application of the Guidelines would not always result
in a Sixth Amendment violation.10 Indeed, although the
——————
9 See

18 U. S. C. §3553(b)(1) (2000 ed., Supp. IV) (permitting depar
tures where the judge “finds that there exists an aggravating or miti
gating circumstance of a kind, or to a degree, not adequately taken into
consideration by the Sentencing Commission”).
10 For example, in the pre-Booker regime, if the applicable Guidelines
range depended solely on facts found by a jury beyond a reasonable
doubt, requiring a judge to sentence within that range would not run
afoul of the Sixth Amendment.

