4

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
based on unconvincing policy rationales not reflected in the relevant
sentencing statutes. Consideration of postsentencing rehabilitation
is also not inconsistent with §3553(a)(6)—which requires courts to
consider “the need to avoid unwarranted sentenc[ing] disparities
among defendants with similar records who have been found guilty of
similar conduct”—as any disparity arises only from the normal trial
and sentencing process. The differences in procedural opportunity
that may result because some defendants are inevitably sentenced in
error and must be resentenced are not the kinds of “unwarranted”
sentencing disparities that Congress sought to eliminate under
§3553(a)(6). Pp. 21–26.
(d) On remand, the District Court should consider and give ap
propriate weight to the postsentencing rehabilitation evidence, as
well as any additional evidence concerning Pepper’s conduct since his
last sentencing. Pp. 26–27.
2. Because the Eighth Circuit in Pepper III set aside Pepper’s en
tire sentence and remanded for de novo resentencing, the District
Court was not bound by the law of the case doctrine to apply the
same 40 percent departure applied by the original sentencing judge.
To avoid undermining a district court’s original sentencing intent, an
appellate court when reversing one part of a sentence “may vacate
the entire sentence . . . so that, on remand, the trial court can recon
figure the sentencing plan . . . to satisfy [§3553(a)’s] sentencing fac
tors.” Greenlaw v. United States, 554 U. S. 237, 253. That is what
the Eighth Circuit did here. Pp. 27–30.

570 F. 3d 958, vacated in part, affirmed in part, and remanded.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, and GINSBURG, JJ., joined, and in which
BREYER and ALITO, JJ., joined as to Part III. BREYER, J., filed an opin
ion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment. ALITO, J., filed
an opinion concurring in part, concurring in the judgment in part, and
dissenting in part. THOMAS, J., filed a dissenting opinion. KAGAN, J.,
took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.

