16

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
Opinion of the Court

that “the primary protection afforded suspects subject[ed]
to custodial interrogation is the Miranda warnings them
selves.” Davis, 512 U. S., at 460. The Miranda rule and
its requirements are met if a suspect receives adequate
Miranda warnings, understands them, and has an oppor
tunity to invoke the rights before giving any answers or
admissions. Any waiver, express or implied, may be con
tradicted by an invocation at any time. If the right to
counsel or the right to remain silent is invoked at any
point during questioning, further interrogation must
cease.
Interrogation provides the suspect with additional
information that can put his or her decision to waive, or
not to invoke, into perspective. As questioning commences
and then continues, the suspect has the opportunity to
consider the choices he or she faces and to make a more
informed decision, either to insist on silence or to cooper
ate. When the suspect knows that Miranda rights can be
invoked at any time, he or she has the opportunity to
reassess his or her immediate and long-term interests.
Cooperation with the police may result in more favorable
treatment for the suspect; the apprehension of accom
plices; the prevention of continuing injury and fear; begin
ning steps towards relief or solace for the victims; and the
beginning of the suspect’s own return to the law and the
social order it seeks to protect.
In order for an accused’s statement to be admissible at
trial, police must have given the accused a Miranda warn
ing. See Miranda, 384 U. S., at 471. If that condition is
established, the court can proceed to consider whether
there has been an express or implied waiver of Miranda
rights. Id., at 476. In making its ruling on the admissibil
ity of a statement made during custodial questioning, the
trial court, of course, considers whether there is evidence
to support the conclusion that, from the whole course of
questioning, an express or implied waiver has been estab

