Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

edge that some statements or conduct are so equivocal
that police may scrupulously honor a suspect’s rights
without terminating questioning—for instance, if a sus­
pect’s actions are reasonably understood to indicate a
willingness to listen before deciding whether to respond.
But other statements or actions—in particular, when a
suspect sits silent throughout prolonged interrogation,
long past the point when he could be deciding whether to
respond—cannot reasonably be understood other than as
an invocation of the right to remain silent. Under such
circumstances, “scrupulous” respect for the suspect’s
rights will require police to terminate questioning under
Mosley.8
To be sure, such a standard does not provide police with
a bright-line rule. Cf. ante, at 9–10. But, as we have
previously recognized, Mosley itself does not offer clear
guidance to police about when and how interrogation may
continue after a suspect invokes his rights. See Solem v.
Stumes, 465 U. S. 638, 648 (1984); see also Shatzer, 559
U. S., at ___ (THOMAS, J., concurring in part and concur­
ring in judgment) (slip op., at 3). Given that police have
for nearly 35 years applied Mosley’s fact-specific standard
in questioning suspects who have invoked their right to
remain silent; that our cases did not during that time
resolve what statements or actions suffice to invoke that
right; and that neither Michigan nor the Solicitor General
have provided evidence in this case that the status quo
has proved unworkable, I see little reason to believe to­
——————
8 Indeed,

this rule appears to reflect widespread contemporary police
practice. Thompkins’ amici collect a range of training materials that
instruct police not to engage in prolonged interrogation after a suspect
has failed to respond to initial questioning. See NACDL Brief 32–34.
One widely used police manual, for example, teaches that a suspect
who “indicates,” “even by silence itself,” his unwillingness to answer
questions “has obviously exercised his constitutional privilege against
self-incrimination.” Inbau 498.

