Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

warnings, the last of which he read aloud, Thompkins
expressly declined to sign a written acknowledgment that
he had been advised of and understood his rights. There
is conflicting evidence in the record about whether
Thompkins ever verbally confirmed understanding his
rights.1 The record contains no indication that the officers
sought or obtained an express waiver.
As to the interrogation itself, Helgert candidly charac­
terized it as “very, very one-sided” and “nearly a mono­
logue.” App. 10a, 17a. Thompkins was “[p]eculiar,”
“[s]ullen,” and “[g]enerally quiet.” Id., at 149a. Helgert
and his partner “did most of the talking,” as Thompkins
was “not verbally communicative” and “[l]argely” re­
mained silent. Id., at 149a, 17a, 19a. To the extent
Thompkins gave any response, his answers consisted of “a
word or two. A ‘yeah,’ or a ‘no,’ or ‘I don’t know.’ . . . And
sometimes . . . he simply sat down . . . with [his] head in
[his] hands looking down. Sometimes . . . he would look up
and make eye-contact would be the only response.” Id., at
23a–24a. After proceeding in this fashion for approxi­
mately 2 hours and 45 minutes, Helgert asked Thompkins
three questions relating to his faith in God. The prosecu­
tion relied at trial on Thompkins’ one-word answers of
“yes.” See id., at 10a–11a.
Thompkins’ nonresponsiveness is particularly striking
in the context of the officers’ interview strategy, later
——————
1 At

the suppression hearing, Detective Helgert testified that after
reading Thompkins the warnings, “I believe I asked him if he under­
stood the Rights, and I think I got a verbal answer to that as a ‘yes.’ ”
App. 9a. In denying the motion to suppress, the trial court relied on
that factual premise. Id., at 26a. In his later testimony at trial, Hel­
gert remembered the encounter differently. Asked whether Thompkins
“indicate[d] that he understood [the warnings]” after they had been
read, Helgert stated “I don’t know that I orally asked him that ques­
tion.” Id., at 148a. Nevertheless, the Michigan Court of Appeals stated
that Thompkins verbally acknowledged understanding his rights. App.
to Pet. for Cert. 75a.

