2

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
Syllabus
eral District Court denied his subsequent habeas request, reasoning
that Thompkins did not invoke his right to remain silent and was not
coerced into making statements during the interrogation, and that it
was not unreasonable, for purposes of the Antiterrorism and Effective
Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), see 28 U. S. C. §2254(d)(1), for
the State Court of Appeals to determine that he had waived his right
to remain silent. The Sixth Circuit reversed, holding that the state
court was unreasonable in finding an implied waiver of Thompkins’
right to remain silent and in rejecting his ineffective-assistance-of
counsel claim.

Held:
1. The state court’s decision rejecting Thompkins’ Miranda claim
was correct under de novo review and therefore necessarily reason
able under AEDPA’s more deferential standard of review. Pp. 7–17.
(a) Thompkins’ silence during the interrogation did not invoke
his right to remain silent. A suspect’s Miranda right to counsel must
be invoked “unambiguously.” Davis v. United States, 512 U. S. 452,
459. If the accused makes an “ambiguous or equivocal” statement or
no statement, the police are not required to end the interrogation,
ibid., or ask questions to clarify the accused’s intent, id., at 461–462.
There is no principled reason to adopt different standards for deter
mining when an accused has invoked the Miranda right to remain si
lent and the Miranda right to counsel at issue in Davis. Both protect
the privilege against compulsory self-incrimination by requiring an
interrogation to cease when either right is invoked. The unambigu
ous invocation requirement results in an objective inquiry that
“avoid[s] difficulties of proof and . . . provide[s] guidance to officers”
on how to proceed in the face of ambiguity. Davis, supra, at 458–459.
Had Thompkins said that he wanted to remain silent or that he did
not want to talk, he would have invoked his right to end the question
ing. He did neither. Pp. 8–10.
(b) Thompkins waived his right to remain silent when he know
ingly and voluntarily made a statement to police. A waiver must be
“the product of a free and deliberate choice rather than intimidation,
coercion, or deception” and “made with a full awareness of both the
nature of the right being abandoned and the consequences of the de
cision to abandon it.” Moran v. Burbine, 475 U. S. 412, 421. Such a
waiver may be “implied” through a “defendant’s silence, coupled with
an understanding of his rights and a course of conduct indicating
waiver.” North Carolina v. Butler, 441 U. S. 369, 373. If the State
establishes that a Miranda warning was given and that it was un
derstood by the accused, an accused’s uncoerced statement estab
lishes an implied waiver. The record here shows that Thompkins
waived his right to remain silent. First, the lack of any contention

