(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BERGHUIS, WARDEN v. THOMPKINS
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1470. Argued March 1, 2010—Decided June 1, 2010
After advising respondent Thompkins of his rights, in full compliance
with Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U. S. 436, Detective Helgert and an
other Michigan officer interrogated him about a shooting in which
one victim died. At no point did Thompkins say that he wanted to
remain silent, that he did not want to talk with the police, or that he
wanted an attorney. He was largely silent during the 3-hour interro
gation, but near the end, he answered “yes” when asked if he prayed
to God to forgive him for the shooting. He moved to suppress his
statements, claiming that he had invoked his Fifth Amendment right
to remain silent, that he had not waived that right, and that his in
culpatory statements were involuntary. The trial court denied the
motion. At trial on first-degree murder and other charges, the prose
cution called Eric Purifoy, who drove the van in which Thompkins
and a third accomplice were riding at the time of the shooting, and
who had been convicted of firearm offenses but acquitted of murder
and assault. Thompkins’ defense was that Purifoy was the shooter.
Purifoy testified that he did not see who fired the shots. During clos
ing arguments, the prosecution suggested that Purifoy lied about not
seeing the shooter and pondered whether Purifoy’s jury had made the
right decision. Defense counsel did not ask the court to instruct the
jury that it could consider evidence of the outcome of Purifoy’s trial
only to assess his credibility, not to establish Thompkins’ guilt. The
jury found Thompkins guilty, and he was sentenced to life in prison
without parole. In denying his motion for a new trial, the trial court
rejected as nonprejudicial his ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claim
for failure to request a limiting instruction about the outcome of Puri
foy’s trial. On appeal, the Michigan Court of Appeals rejected both
Thompkins’ Miranda and his ineffective-assistance claims. The Fed

