20

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

day’s clear-statement rule is necessary to ensure effective
law enforcement.
Davis’ clear-statement rule is also a poor fit for the right
to silence. Advising a suspect that he has a “right to
remain silent” is unlikely to convey that he must speak
(and must do so in some particular fashion) to ensure the
right will be protected. Cf. Soffar v. Cockrell, 300 F. 3d
588, 603 (CA5 2002) (en banc) (DeMoss, J., dissenting)
(“What in the world must an individual do to exercise his
constitutional right to remain silent beyond actually, in
fact, remaining silent?”). By contrast, telling a suspect “he
has the right to the presence of an attorney, and that if he
cannot afford an attorney one will be appointed for him
prior to any questioning if he so desires,” Miranda, 384
U. S., at 479, implies the need for speech to exercise that
right. Davis’ requirement that a suspect must “clearly
reques[t] an attorney” to terminate questioning thus
aligns with a suspect’s likely understanding of the
Miranda warnings in a way today’s rule does not. The
Court suggests Thompkins could have employed the “sim­
ple, unambiguous” means of saying “he wanted to remain
silent” or “did not want to talk with the police.” Ante, at
10. But the Miranda warnings give no hint that a suspect
should use those magic words, and there is little reason to
believe police—who have ample incentives to avoid invoca­
tion—will provide such guidance.
Conversely, the Court’s concern that police will face
“difficult decisions about an accused’s unclear intent” and
suffer the consequences of “ ‘guess[ing] wrong,’ ” ante, at 9–
10 (quoting Davis, 512 U. S., at 461), is misplaced. If a
suspect makes an ambiguous statement or engages in
conduct that creates uncertainty about his intent to invoke
his right, police can simply ask for clarification. See id., at
467 (Souter, J., concurring in judgment). It is hardly an
unreasonable burden for police to ask a suspect, for in­
stance, “Do you want to talk to us?” The majority in Davis

