10

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Although the Michigan court stated that Thompkins
“sporadically” participated in the interview, App. to Pet.
for Cert. 75a, that court’s opinion and the record before us
are silent as to the subject matter or context of even a
single question to which Thompkins purportedly re­
sponded, other than the exchange about God and the
statements respecting the peppermint and the chair.
Unlike in Butler, Thompkins made no initial declaration
akin to “I will talk to you.” See also 547 F. 3d, at 586–587
(case below) (noting that the case might be different if the
record showed Thompkins had responded affirmatively to
an invitation to tell his side of the story or described any
particular question that Thompkins answered). Indeed,
Michigan and the United States concede that no waiver
occurred in this case until Thompkins responded “yes” to
the questions about God. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 7, 30. I
believe it is objectively unreasonable under our clearly
established precedents to conclude the prosecution met its
“heavy burden” of proof on a record consisting of three one­
word answers, following 2 hours and 45 minutes of silence
punctuated by a few largely nonverbal responses to uni­
dentified questions.
B
Perhaps because our prior Miranda precedents so
clearly favor Thompkins, the Court today goes beyond
AEDPA’s deferential standard of review and announces a
new general principle of law. Any new rule, it must be
emphasized, is unnecessary to the disposition of this case.
——————
F. 3d 232, 240 (CA1 1999) (citation and internal quotation marks
omitted); see also United States v. Smith, 218 F. 3d 777, 781 (CA7 2000)
(implied waiver where suspect “immediately began talking to the
agents after refusing to sign the waiver form and continued to do so for
an hour”); United States v. Scarpa, 897 F. 2d 63, 68 (CA2 1990) (implied
waiver where warned suspect engaged in a “ ‘relaxed and friendly’ ”
conversation with officers during a 2-hour drive).

