Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

rogation provide substantial evidence in support of his
claim, Thompkins did not remain absolutely silent, and
this Court has not previously addressed whether a suspect
can invoke the right to silence by remaining uncooperative
and nearly silent for 2 hours and 45 minutes.
B
The Court, however, eschews this narrow ground of
decision, instead extending Davis to hold that police may
continue questioning a suspect until he unambiguously
invokes his right to remain silent. Because Thompkins
neither said “he wanted to remain silent” nor said “he did
not want to talk with the police,” the Court concludes, he
did not clearly invoke his right to silence. Ante, at 8–10.6
I disagree with this novel application of Davis. Neither
the rationale nor holding of that case compels today’s
result. Davis involved the right to counsel, not the right to
silence. The Court in Davis reasoned that extending
Edwards’ “rigid” prophylactic rule to ambiguous requests
for a lawyer would transform Miranda into a “ ‘wholly
irrational obstacl[e] to legitimate police investigative
activity’ ” by “needlessly prevent[ing] the police from ques­
tioning a suspect in the absence of counsel even if [he] did
not wish to have a lawyer present.” Davis, supra, at 460.
But Miranda itself “distinguished between the procedural
safeguards triggered by a request to remain silent and a
request for an attorney.” Mosley, supra, at 104, n. 10;
accord, Edwards, supra, at 485. Mosley upheld the admis­
sion of statements when police immediately stopped inter­
rogating a suspect who invoked his right to silence, but
reapproached him after a 2-hour delay and obtained in­
——————
6 The Court also ignores a second available avenue to avoid reaching
the constitutional question. Because the Sixth Circuit declined to
decide Thompkins’ invocation claim, a remand would permit the lower
court to address the question in the first instance. Cf. Cutter v. Wilkin
son, 544 U. S. 709, 718, n. 7 (2005).

