Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

Some language in Miranda could be read to indicate
that waivers are difficult to establish absent an explicit
written waiver or a formal, express oral statement.
Miranda said “a valid waiver will not be presumed simply
from the silence of the accused after warnings are given or
simply from the fact that a confession was in fact eventu
ally obtained.” 384 U. S., at 475; see id., at 470 (“No effec
tive waiver . . . can be recognized unless specifically made
after the [Miranda] warnings . . . have been given”). In
addition, the Miranda Court stated that “a heavy burden
rests on the government to demonstrate that the defen
dant knowingly and intelligently waived his privilege
against self-incrimination and his right to retained or
appointed counsel.” Id., at 475.
The course of decisions since Miranda, informed by the
application of Miranda warnings in the whole course of
law enforcement, demonstrates that waivers can be estab
lished even absent formal or express statements of waiver
that would be expected in, say, a judicial hearing to de
termine if a guilty plea has been properly entered. Cf.
Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 11. The main purpose of Miranda is
to ensure that an accused is advised of and understands
the right to remain silent and the right to counsel. See
Davis, supra, at 460; Burbine, supra, at 427. Thus, “[i]f
anything, our subsequent cases have reduced the impact
of the Miranda rule on legitimate law enforcement while
reaffirming the decision’s core ruling that unwarned
statements may not be used as evidence in the prosecu
tion’s case in chief.” Dickerson v. United States, 530 U. S.
428, 443–444 (2000).
One of the first cases to decide the meaning and import
of Miranda with respect to the question of waiver was
North Carolina v. Butler. The Butler Court, after discuss
ing some of the problems created by the language in
Miranda, established certain important propositions.
Butler interpreted the Miranda language concerning the

