4

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
Opinion of the Court

153a. Thompkins answered “Yes” and looked away. Ibid.
Thompkins refused to make a written confession, and the
interrogation ended about 15 minutes later. Id., at 11a.
Thompkins was charged with first-degree murder,
assault with intent to commit murder, and certain fire
arms-related offenses. He moved to suppress the state
ments made during the interrogation. He argued that he
had invoked his Fifth Amendment right to remain silent,
requiring police to end the interrogation at once, see
Michigan v. Mosley, 423 U. S. 96, 103 (1975) (citing
Miranda, 384 U. S., at 474), that he had not waived his
right to remain silent, and that his inculpatory statements
were involuntary. The trial court denied the motion.
At trial, the prosecution’s theory was that Thompkins
shot the victims from the passenger seat of a van driven
by Eric Purifoy. Purifoy testified that he had been driving
the van and that Thompkins was in the passenger seat
while another man, one Myzell Woodward, was in the
back. The defense strategy was to pin the blame on Puri
foy. Purifoy testified he did not see who fired the weapon
because the van was stopped and he was bending over
near the floor when shots were fired. Purifoy explained
that, just after the shooting, Thompkins, holding a pistol,
told Purifoy, “What the hell you doing? Pull off.” Purifoy
then drove away from the scene. App. 170a.
So that the Thompkins jury could assess Purifoy’s credi
bility and knowledge, the prosecution elicited testimony
from Purifoy that he had been tried earlier for the shoot
ing under an aiding-and-abetting theory. Purifoy and
Detective Helgert testified that a jury acquitted him of the
murder and assault charges, convicted him of carrying a
concealed weapon in a motor vehicle, and hung on two
other firearms offenses to which he later pleaded guilty.
At Purifoy’s trial, the prosecution had argued that Purifoy
was the driver and Thompkins was the shooter. This was
consistent with the prosecution’s argument at Thomp

