Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

It is undisputed here that Thompkins never expressly
waived his right to remain silent. His refusal to sign even
an acknowledgment that he understood his Miranda
rights evinces, if anything, an intent not to waive those
rights. Cf. United States v. Plugh, 576 F. 3d 135, 142
(CA2 2009) (suspect’s refusal to sign waiver-of-rights form
“constituted an unequivocally negative answer to the
question . . . whether he was willing to waive his rights”).
That Thompkins did not make the inculpatory statements
at issue until after approximately 2 hours and 45 minutes
of interrogation serves as “strong evidence” against
waiver. Miranda and Butler expressly preclude the possi­
bility that the inculpatory statements themselves are
sufficient to establish waiver.
In these circumstances, Thompkins’ “actions and words”
preceding the inculpatory statements simply do not evi­
dence a “course of conduct indicating waiver” sufficient to
carry the prosecution’s burden. See Butler, supra, at 373.4
——————
(hereinafter Inbau) (“Once [a] waiver is given, the police may proceed
with the interrogation”); D. Zulawski & D. Wicklander, Practical
Aspects of Interview and Interrogation 55 (2d ed. 2002) (“Only upon the
waiver of th[e] [Miranda] rights by the suspect can an interrogation
occur”); see also Brief for National Association of Criminal Defense
Lawyers et al. as Amici Curiae 11–12 (hereinafter NACDL brief)
(collecting authorities).
4 Although such decisions are not controlling under AEDPA, it is
notable that lower courts have similarly required a showing of words or
conduct beyond inculpatory statements. See, e.g., United States v.
Wallace, 848 F. 2d 1464, 1475 (CA9 1988) (no implied waiver when
warned suspect “maintained her silence for . . . perhap[s] as many as
ten minutes” before answering a question); McDonald v. Lucas, 677
F. 2d 518, 521–522 (CA5 1982) (no implied waiver when defendant
refused to sign waiver and there was “no evidence of words or actions
implying a waiver, except the [inculpatory] statement”). Generally,
courts have found implied waiver when a warned suspect has made
incriminating statements “as part of a steady stream of speech or as
part of a back-and-forth conversation with the police,” or when a
warned suspect who previously invoked his right “spontaneously
recommences the dialogue with his interviewers.” Bui v. DiPaolo, 170

