8

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

whether the defendant in fact knowingly and voluntarily
waived the rights delineated in the Miranda case.” 441
U. S., at 373. Miranda, we observed, “unequivocally said
. . . mere silence is not enough.” 441 U. S., at 373. While
we stopped short in Butler of announcing a per se rule that
“the defendant’s silence, coupled with an understanding of
his rights and a course of conduct indicating waiver, may
never support a conclusion that a defendant has waived
his rights,” we reiterated that “courts must presume that a
defendant did not waive his rights; the prosecution’s bur­
den is great.” Ibid.2
Rarely do this Court’s precedents provide clearly estab­
lished law so closely on point with the facts of a particular
case. Together, Miranda and Butler establish that a court
“must presume that a defendant did not waive his
right[s]”; the prosecution bears a “heavy burden” in at­
tempting to demonstrate waiver; the fact of a “lengthy
interrogation” prior to obtaining statements is “strong
evidence” against a finding of valid waiver; “mere silence”
in response to questioning is “not enough”; and waiver
may not be presumed “simply from the fact that a confes­
sion was in fact eventually obtained.” Miranda, supra, at
475–476; Butler, supra, at 372–373.3
——————
2 The

Court cites Colorado v. Connelly, 479 U. S. 157, 168 (1986), for
the proposition that the prosecution’s “ ‘heavy burden’ ” under Miranda
“is not more than the burden to establish waiver by a preponderance of
the evidence.” Ante, at 12. Connelly did reject a clear and convincing
evidence standard of proof in favor of a preponderance burden. But
nothing in Connelly displaced the core presumption against finding a
waiver of rights, and we have subsequently relied on Miranda’s charac­
terization of the prosecution’s burden as “heavy.” See Arizona v.
Roberson, 486 U. S. 675, 680 (1988).
3 Likely reflecting the great weight of the prosecution’s burden in
proving implied waiver, many contemporary police training resources
instruct officers to obtain a waiver of rights prior to proceeding at all
with an interrogation. See, e.g., F. Inbau, J. Reid, J. Buckley, & B.
Jayne, Criminal Interrogation and Confessions 491 (4th ed. 2004)

