Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

itself approved of this approach as protecting suspects’
rights while “minimiz[ing] the chance of a confession
[later] being suppressed.” Id., at 461. Given this straight­
forward mechanism by which police can “scrupulously
hono[r]” a suspect’s right to silence, today’s clear­
statement rule can only be seen as accepting “as tolerable
the certainty that some poorly expressed requests [to
remain silent] will be disregarded,” id., at 471 (opinion of
Souter, J.), without any countervailing benefit. Police may
well prefer not to seek clarification of an ambiguous
statement out of fear that a suspect will invoke his rights.
But “our system of justice is not founded on a fear that a
suspect will exercise his rights. ‘If the exercise of constitu­
tional rights will thwart the effectiveness of a system of
law enforcement, then there is something very wrong with
that system.’ ” Burbine, 475 U. S., at 458 (STEVENS, J.,
dissenting) (quoting Escobedo v. Illinois, 378 U. S. 478,
490 (1964)).
The Court asserts in passing that treating ambiguous
statements or acts as an invocation of the right to silence
will only “ ‘marginally’ ” serve Miranda’s goals. Ante, at
10. Experience suggests the contrary. In the 16 years
since Davis was decided, ample evidence has accrued that
criminal suspects often use equivocal or colloquial lan­
guage in attempting to invoke their right to silence. A
number of lower courts that have (erroneously, in my
view) imposed a clear-statement requirement for invoca­
tion of the right to silence have rejected as ambiguous an
array of statements whose meaning might otherwise be
thought plain.9 At a minimum, these decisions suggest
——————
9 See United States v. Sherrod, 445 F. 3d 980, 982 (CA7 2006) (sus­
pect’s statement “ ‘I’m not going to talk about nothin’ ’ ” was ambiguous,
“as much a taunt—even a provocation—as it [was] an invocation of the
right to remain silent”); Burket v. Angelone, 208 F. 3d 172, 200 (CA4
2000) (upholding on AEDPA review a state court’s conclusion that “ ‘I
just don’t think that I should say anything’ ” was not a clear request to

