Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
that he did not understand his rights indicates that he knew what he
gave up when he spoke. See Burbine, supra, at 421. Second, his an
swer to the question about God is a “course of conduct indicating
waiver” of that right. Butler, supra, at 373. Had he wanted to re
main silent, he could have said nothing in response or unambigu
ously invoked his Miranda rights, ending the interrogation. That he
made a statement nearly three hours after receiving a Miranda
warning does not overcome the fact that he engaged in a course of
conduct indicating waiver. Third, there is no evidence that his
statement was coerced. See Burbine, supra, at 421. He does not
claim that police threatened or injured him or that he was fearful.
The interrogation took place in a standard-sized room in the middle
of the day, and there is no authority for the proposition that a 3-hour
interrogation is inherently coercive. Cf. Colorado v. Connelly, 479
U. S. 157, 163–164, n. 1. The fact that the question referred to reli
gious beliefs also does not render his statement involuntary. Id., at
170. Pp. 10–15.
(c) Thompkins argues that, even if his answer to Helgert could
constitute a waiver of his right to remain silent, the police were not
allowed to question him until they first obtained a waiver. However,
a rule requiring a waiver at the outset would be inconsistent with
Butler’s holding that courts can infer a waiver “from the actions and
words of the person interrogated.” 441 U. S., at 373. Any waiver, ex
press or implied, may be contradicted by an invocation at any time,
terminating further interrogation. When the suspect knows that
Miranda rights can be invoked at any time, he or she can reassess his
or her immediate and long-term interests as the interrogation pro
gresses. After giving a Miranda warning, police may interrogate a
suspect who has neither invoked nor waived Miranda rights. Thus,
the police were not required to obtain a waiver of Thompkins’
Miranda rights before interrogating him. Pp. 15–17.
2. Even if his counsel provided ineffective assistance, Thompkins
cannot show prejudice under a de novo review of this record. To es
tablish ineffective assistance, a defendant “must show both deficient
performance and prejudice.” Knowles v. Mirzayance, 556 U. S. ___,
___. To establish prejudice, a “defendant must show that there is a
reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional errors,
the result of the proceeding would have been different,” Strickland v.
Washington, 466 U. S. 668, 694, considering “the totality of the evi
dence before the judge or jury,” id., at 695. Here, the Sixth Circuit
did not account for the other evidence presented against Thompkins.
The state court rejected his claim that he was prejudiced by evidence
of Purifoy’s earlier conviction. Even if it used an incorrect legal stan
dard, this Court need not determine whether AEDPA’s deferential

