16

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

such that police were required to terminate the interroga­
tion prior to his inculpatory statements. In Michigan’s
view, Thompkins cannot prevail under AEDPA because
this Court’s precedents have not previously established
whether a suspect’s ambiguous statements or actions
require the police to stop questioning. We have held that
a suspect who has “ ‘invoked his right to have counsel
present . . . is not subject to further interrogation by the
authorities until counsel has been made available to him,
unless [he] initiates further communication, exchanges, or
conversations with the police.’ ” Maryland v. Shatzer, 559
U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 5) (quoting Edwards v.
Arizona, 451 U. S. 477, 484–485 (1981)). Notwithstanding
Miranda’s statement that “there can be no questioning” if
a suspect “indicates in any manner . . . that he wishes to
consult with an attorney,” 384 U. S., at 444–445, the Court
in Davis v. United States, 512 U. S. 452, 461 (1994) estab­
lished a clear-statement rule for invoking the right to
counsel. After a suspect has knowingly and voluntarily
waived his Miranda rights, Davis held, police may con­
tinue questioning “until and unless the suspect clearly
requests an attorney.” 512 U. S., at 461 (emphasis added).
Because this Court has never decided whether Davis’
clear-statement rule applies to an invocation of the right
to silence, Michigan contends, there was no clearly estab­
lished federal law prohibiting the state court from requir­
ing an unambiguous invocation. That the state court’s
decision was not objectively unreasonable is confirmed, in
Michigan’s view, by the number of federal Courts of Ap­
peals to have applied Davis to invocation of the right to
silence. Brief for Petitioner 44.
Under AEDPA’s deferential standard of review, it is
indeed difficult to conclude that the state court’s applica­
tion of our precedents was objectively unreasonable.
Although the duration and consistency of Thompkins’
refusal to answer questions throughout the 3-hour inter­

