18

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
Opinion of the Court

ferent.” Strickland, 466 U. S., at 694. In assessing preju
dice, courts “must consider the totality of the evidence
before the judge or jury.” Id., at 695. The Court of Ap
peals, however, neglected to take into account the other
evidence presented against Thompkins.
The Court of Appeals determined that the state court
was unreasonable, 28 U. S. C. §2254(d), when it found that
Thompkins suffered no prejudice from failure of defense
counsel to request an instruction regarding Purifoy’s
earlier acquittal of the murder and assault charges. The
state court had rejected Thompkins’s claim that he was
prejudiced by evidence of Purifoy’s earlier conviction for
firearms offenses, noting that “the record does not disclose
an attempt to argue that conviction for an improper pur
pose.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 80a. It is unclear what preju
dice standard the state court applied. The Court of Ap
peals ruled that the state court used the incorrect
standard for assessing prejudice under Strickland because
“[q]uestions of the prosecution’s purpose or intent are
completely irrelevant in analyzing whether an error re
sulted in prejudice, which by definition concerns the er
ror’s effect upon the outcome.” 547 F. 3d, at 591–592
(emphasis deleted).
Even if the state court used an incorrect legal standard,
we need not determine whether AEDPA’s deferential
standard of review, 28 U. S. C. §2254(d), applies in this
situation. Cf. Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362, 397–398
(2000). That is because, even if AEDPA deference does not
apply, Thompkins cannot show prejudice under de novo
review, the more favorable standard of review for Thomp
kins. Courts cannot grant writs of habeas corpus under
§2254 by engaging only in de novo review when it is un
clear whether AEDPA deference applies, §2254(d). In
those situations, courts must resolve whether AEDPA
deference applies, because if it does, a habeas petitioner
may not be entitled to a writ of habeas corpus under

