Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

clear-statement rule for invocation invites police to ques­
tion a suspect at length—notwithstanding his persistent
refusal to answer questions—in the hope of eventually
obtaining a single inculpatory response which will suffice
to prove waiver of rights. Such a result bears little sem­
blance to the “fully effective” prophylaxis, 384 U. S., at
444, that Miranda requires.
A
Thompkins’ claim for relief under AEDPA rests on the
clearly established federal law of Miranda and Mosley. In
Miranda, the Court concluded that “[i]f [an] individual
indicates in any manner, at any time prior to or during
questioning, that he wishes to remain silent, the interro­
gation must cease. . . . [A]ny statement taken after the
person invokes his privilege cannot be other than the
product of compulsion, subtle or otherwise.” 384 U. S., at
473–474. In Mosley, the Court said that a “critical safe­
guard” of the right to remain silent is a suspect’s “ ‘right to
cut off questioning.’ ” 423 U. S., at 103 (quoting Miranda,
supra, at 474). Thus, “the admissibility of statements
obtained after the person in custody has decided to remain
silent depends under Miranda on whether his ‘right to cut
off questioning’ was ‘scrupulously honored.’ ” 423 U. S., at
104.5
Thompkins contends that in refusing to respond to
questions he effectively invoked his right to remain silent,
——————
5 In holding that Mosley’s right had been “ ‘scrupulously honored,’ ”
the Court observed that he was properly advised of his rights and
indicated his understanding in writing; that police “immediately
ceased” interrogation when Mosley stated he did not want to discuss
the crime and allowed an “interval of more than two hours” to pass
before reapproaching Mosley “at another location about an unrelated
[crime]”; and that Mosley was readministered “full and complete
Miranda warnings at the outset of the second interrogation” and had a
“full and fair opportunity to exercise th[o]se options.” 423 U. S., at 103–
105.

