Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

statement, so far as it goes. What it omits, however, is
that the prosecution also bears an antecedent burden of
showing there was, in fact, either an express waiver or a
“course of conduct” sufficiently clear to support a finding of
implied waiver. Nothing in Burbine even hints at remov­
ing that obligation. The question in that case, rather, was
whether a suspect’s multiple express waivers of his rights
were invalid because police “misinformed an inquiring
attorney about their plans concerning the suspect or be­
cause they failed to inform the suspect of the attorney’s
efforts to reach him.” Id., at 420; see also Colorado v.
Spring, 479 U. S. 564, 573 (1987). The Court’s analysis in
Burbine was predicated on the existence of waiver-in-fact.
Today’s dilution of the prosecution’s burden of proof to
the bare fact that a suspect made inculpatory statements
after Miranda warnings were given and understood takes
an unprecedented step away from the “high standards of
proof for the waiver of constitutional rights” this Court has
long demanded. Miranda, supra, at 475; cf. Brewer v.
Williams, 430 U. S. 387, 404 (1977) (“[C]ourts indulge in
every reasonable presumption against waiver”); Zerbst,
304 U. S., at 464. When waiver is to be inferred during a
custodial interrogation, there are sound reasons to require
evidence beyond inculpatory statements themselves.
Miranda and our subsequent cases are premised on the
idea that custodial interrogation is inherently coercive.
See 384 U. S., at 455 (“Even without employing brutality,
the ‘third degree’ or [other] specific strategems . . . the
very fact of custodial interrogation exacts a heavy toll on
individual liberty and trades on the weakness of individu­
als”); Dickerson v. United States, 530 U. S. 428, 435 (2000).
Requiring proof of a course of conduct beyond the inculpa­
tory statements themselves is critical to ensuring that
those statements are voluntary admissions and not the
dubious product of an overborne will.
Today’s decision thus ignores the important interests

