12

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

the error as “readily apparent.” Tague, 444 U. S., at 470–
471. At best, the Court today creates an unworkable and
conflicting set of presumptions that will undermine
Miranda’s goal of providing “concrete constitutional guide­
lines for law enforcement agencies and courts to follow,”
384 U. S., at 442. At worst, it overrules sub silentio an
essential aspect of the protections Miranda has long pro­
vided for the constitutional guarantee against self­
incrimination.
The Court’s conclusion that Thompkins’ inculpatory
statements were sufficient to establish an implied waiver,
ante, at 14, finds no support in Butler. Butler itself distin­
guished between a sufficient “course of conduct” and in­
culpatory statements, reiterating Miranda’s admonition
that “ ‘a valid waiver will not be presumed simply from . . .
the fact that a confession was in fact eventually ob­
tained.’ ” Butler, supra, at 373 (quoting Miranda, supra,
at 475). Michigan suggests Butler’s silence “ ‘when ad­
vised of his right to the assistance of a lawyer,’ ” combined
with our remand for the state court to apply the implied­
waiver standard, shows that silence followed by state­
ments can be a “ ‘course of conduct.’ ” Brief for Petitioner
26 (quoting Butler, supra, at 371). But the evidence of
implied waiver in Butler was worlds apart from the evi­
dence in this case, because Butler unequivocally said “I
will talk to you” after having been read Miranda warn­
ings. Thompkins, of course, made no such statement.
The Court also relies heavily on Burbine in characteriz­
ing the scope of the prosecution’s burden in proving
waiver. Consistent with Burbine, the Court observes, the
prosecution must prove that waiver was “ ‘voluntary in the
sense that it was the product of a free and deliberate
choice rather than intimidation’ ” and “ ‘made with a full
awareness of both the nature of the right being abandoned
and the consequences of the decision to abandon it.’ ” Ante,
at 10 (quoting 475 U. S., at 421). I agree with the Court’s

