10

HOWES v. FIELDS
Opinion of the Court

is worlds away from those present when an inmate is
questioned in a prison, but the same cannot be said of
Shatzer, where we again distinguished between restraints
on freedom of movement and Miranda custody. Shatzer,
as noted, concerned the Edwards prophylactic rule, which
limits the ability of the police to initiate further questioning of a suspect in Miranda custody once the suspect
invokes the right to counsel. We held in Shatzer that this
rule does not apply when there is a sufficient break in
custody between the suspect’s invocation of the right to
counsel and the initiation of subsequent questioning. See
559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 13-16). And, what is significant for present purposes, we further held that a break
in custody may occur while a suspect is serving a term in
prison. If a break in custody can occur while a prisoner is
serving an uninterrupted term of imprisonment, it must
follow that imprisonment alone is not enough to create a
custodial situation within the meaning of Miranda.
There are at least three strong grounds for this conclusion. First, questioning a person who is already serving a
prison term does not generally involve the shock that very
often accompanies arrest. In the paradigmatic Miranda
situation—a person is arrested in his home or on the
street and whisked to a police station for questioning—
detention represents a sharp and ominous change, and the
shock may give rise to coercive pressures. A person who is
“cut off from his normal life and companions,” Shatzer,
supra, at ___ (slip op., at 7), and abruptly transported from
the street into a “police-dominated atmosphere,” Miranda,
384 U. S., at 456, may feel coerced into answering
questions.
By contrast, when a person who is already serving a
term of imprisonment is questioned, there is usually no
such change. “Interrogated suspects who have previously
been convicted of crime live in prison.” Shatzer, 559 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 14). For a person serving a term of

