(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

HOWES, WARDEN v. FIELDS
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–680.

Argued October 4, 2011—Decided February 21, 2012

Respondent Fields, a Michigan state prisoner, was escorted from his
prison cell by a corrections officer to a conference room where he was
questioned by two sheriff’s deputies about criminal activity he had allegedly engaged in before coming to prison. At no time was Fields
given Miranda warnings or advised that he did not have to speak
with the deputies. As relevant here: Fields was questioned for between five and seven hours; Fields was told more than once that he
was free to leave and return to his cell; the deputies were armed, but
Fields remained free of restraints; the conference room door was
sometimes open and sometimes shut; several times during the interview Fields stated that he no longer wanted to talk to the deputies,
but he did not ask to go back to his cell; after Fields confessed and
the interview concluded, he had to wait an additional 20 minutes for
an escort and returned to his cell well after the hour when he generally retired.
The trial court denied Fields’ motion to suppress his confession
under Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U. S. 436, and he was convicted. The
Michigan Court of Appeals affirmed, rejecting Fields’ contention that
his statements should have been suppressed because he was subjected to custodial interrogation without a Miranda warning. The United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan subsequently granted Fields habeas relief under 28 U. S. C. §2254(d)(1).
Affirming, the Sixth Circuit held that the interview was a custodial
interrogation within the meaning of Miranda, reasoning that Mathis
v. United States, 391 U. S. 1, “clearly established,” §2254(d)(1), that
isolation from the general prison population, combined with questioning about conduct occurring outside the prison, makes any such interrogation custodial per se.

