Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

ment was curtailed, however, is simply the first step in the
analysis, not the last. Not all restraints on freedom of
movement amount to custody for purposes of Miranda.
We have “decline[d] to accord talismanic power” to the
freedom-of-movement inquiry, Berkemer, supra, at 437,
and have instead asked the additional question whether
the relevant environment presents the same inherently
coercive pressures as the type of station house questioning
at issue in Miranda. “Our cases make clear . . . that the
freedom-of-movement test identifies only a necessary and
not a sufficient condition for Miranda custody.” Shatzer,
559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 14).
This important point is illustrated by our decision in
Berkemer v. McCarty, supra. In that case, we held that
the roadside questioning of a motorist who was pulled over
in a routine traffic stop did not constitute custodial interrogation. Id., at 423, 441–442. We acknowledged that “a
traffic stop significantly curtails the ‘freedom of action’ of
the driver and the passengers,” and that it is generally “a
crime either to ignore a policeman’s signal to stop one’s car
or, once having stopped, to drive away without permission.” Id., at 436. “[F]ew motorists,” we noted, “would feel
free either to disobey a directive to pull over or to leave the
scene of a traffic stop without being told they might do so.”
Ibid. Nevertheless, we held that a person detained as a
result of a traffic stop is not in Miranda custody because
such detention does not “sufficiently impair [the detained
person’s] free exercise of his privilege against selfincrimination to require that he be warned of his constitutional rights.” 468 U. S., at 437. As we later put it,
the “temporary and relatively nonthreatening detention involved in a traffic stop or Terry stop does not constitute
Miranda custody,” Shatzer, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 14)
(citation omitted). See Terry v. Ohio, 392 U. S. 1 (1968).
It may be thought that the situation in Berkemer—the
questioning of a motorist subjected to a brief traffic stop—

