Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

tablish the rule applied by the Court of Appeals. Miranda
adopted a “set of prophylactic measures” designed to ward
off the “ ‘inherently compelling pressures’ of custodial
interrogation,” Shatzer, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 4) (quoting Miranda, 384 U. S., at 467), but Miranda did not hold
that such pressures are always present when a prisoner
is taken aside and questioned about events outside the
prison walls. Indeed, Miranda did not even establish that
police questioning of a suspect at the station house is
always custodial. See Mathiason, supra, at 495 (declining
to find that Miranda warnings are required “simply because the questioning takes place in the station house, or
because the questioned person is one whom the police
suspect”).
In sum, our decisions do not clearly establish that a
prisoner is always in custody for purposes of Miranda
whenever a prisoner is isolated from the general prison
population and questioned about conduct outside the
prison.5
——————
5 The state-court decision applied the traditional context-specific
analysis to determine whether the circumstances of respondent’s
interrogation gave rise to “the coercive pressure that Miranda was
designed to guard against.” Shatzer, 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 13).
The court first observed: “That a defendant is in prison for an unrelated
offense when being questioned does not, without more, mean that he
was in custody for the purpose of determining whether Miranda warnings were required.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 56a (internal quotation
marks omitted and emphasis added). In this case, the court noted, the
“defendant was unquestionably in custody, but on a matter unrelated to
the interrogation.” Ibid. The Sixth Circuit concluded that the state
court thereby limited Miranda in a way rejected by Mathis v. United
States, 391 U. S. 1 (1968), and “curtail[ed] the warnings to be given
persons under interrogation by officers based on the reason why the
person is in custody.” Id., at 4–5. We think the better reading is that
the state court merely meant to draw a distinction between incarceration and Miranda custody. This reading is supported by the state
court’s subsequent consideration of whether the facts of the case were
likely to create an atmosphere of coercion. App. to Pet. for Cert. 56a.

