2

HOWES v. FIELDS
Opinion of the Court

pass through a locked door that separated two sections
of the facility. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 66a, 69a. Fields
arrived at the conference room between 7 p.m. and 9 p.m.1
and was questioned for between five and seven hours.2
At the beginning of the interview, Fields was told that
he was free to leave and return to his cell. See id., at 70a.
Later, he was again told that he could leave whenever he
wanted. See id., at 90a. The two interviewing deputies
were armed during the interview, but Fields remained free
of handcuffs and other restraints. The door to the conference room was sometimes open and sometimes shut. See
id., at 70a–75a.
About halfway through the interview, after Fields had
been confronted with the allegations of abuse, he became
agitated and began to yell. See id., at 80a, 125a. Fields
testified that one of the deputies, using an expletive, told
him to sit down and said that “if [he] didn’t want to cooperate, [he] could leave.” Id., at 89a; see also id., at 70a–
71a. Fields eventually confessed to engaging in sex acts
with the boy. According to Fields’ testimony at a suppression hearing, he said several times during the interview
that he no longer wanted to talk to the deputies, but he
did not ask to go back to his cell prior to the end of the
interview. See id., at 92a–93a.
When he was eventually ready to leave, he had to wait
——————
1 Fields testified that he left his cell around 8 p.m. and that the interview began around 8:30 p.m. App. to Pet. for Cert. 77a. Both the
Michigan Court of Appeals and the Sixth Circuit stated that the interview began between 7 p.m. and 9 p.m. See id., at 4a, 54a.
2 The Court of Appeals stated that the interview lasted for approximately seven hours, see id., at 4a, a figure that appears to be based
on the testimony of one of the interviewing deputies, see id., at 123a.
Fields put the number of hours between five and five and a half, saying
the interview began around 8:30 p.m. and continued until 1:30 a.m. or 2
a.m. See id., at 77a. The Michigan Court of Appeals stated that the
interview ended around midnight, which would put the length of the
interview at between three and five hours.

