2

HOWES v. FIELDS
Syllabus

Held:
1. This Court’s precedents do not clearly establish the categorical
rule on which the Sixth Circuit relied. The Court has repeatedly declined to adopt any such rule. See, e.g., Illinois v. Perkins, 496 U. S.
292. The Sixth Circuit misread Mathis, which simply held, as relevant here, that a prisoner who otherwise meets the requirements for
Miranda custody is not taken outside the scope of Miranda because
he was incarcerated for an unconnected offense. It did not hold that
imprisonment alone constitutes Miranda custody. Nor does the
statement in Maryland v. Shatzer, 559 U. S. ___, ___, that “[n]o one
questions that [inmate] Shatzer was in custody for Miranda purposes” support a per se rule. It means only that the issue of custody was
not contested in that case. Finally, contrary to respondent’s suggestion, Miranda itself did not hold that the inherently compelling pressures of custodial interrogation are always present when a prisoner is
taken aside and questioned about events outside the prison walls.
Pp. 4–7.
2. The Sixth Circuit’s categorical rule—that imprisonment, questioning in private, and questioning about events in the outside world
create a custodial situation for Miranda purposes—is simply wrong.
Pp. 8–13.
(a) The initial step in determining whether a person is in Miranda custody is to ascertain, given “all of the circumstances surrounding the interrogation,” how a suspect would have gauged his freedom
of movement. Stansbury v. California, 511 U. S. 318, 322, 325. However, not all restraints on freedom of movement amount to Miranda
custody. See, e.g., Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U. S. 420, 423. Shatzer,
distinguishing between restraints on freedom of movement and Miranda custody, held that a break in Miranda custody between a suspect’s invocation of the right to counsel and the initiation of subsequent questioning may occur while a suspect is serving an
uninterrupted term of imprisonment. If a break in custody can occur,
it must follow that imprisonment alone is not enough to create a custodial situation within the meaning of Miranda. At least three strong
grounds support this conclusion: Questioning a person who is already
in prison does not generally involve the shock that very often accompanies arrest; a prisoner is unlikely to be lured into speaking by a
longing for prompt release; and a prisoner knows that his questioners
probably lack authority to affect the duration of his sentence. Thus,
service of a prison term, without more, is not enough to constitute
Miranda custody. Pp. 8–12.
(b) The other two elements in the Sixth Circuit’s rule are likewise insufficient. Taking a prisoner aside for questioning may necessitate some additional limitations on the prisoner’s freedom of move-

