Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

See id., at 89a–90a (“I was told I could get up and leave
whenever I wanted”); id., at 70a–71a. Moreover, respondent was not physically restrained or threatened and was
interviewed in a well-lit, average-sized conference room,
where he was “not uncomfortable.” Id., at 90a; see id., at
71a, 88a–89a. He was offered food and water, and the
door to the conference room was sometimes left open. See
id., at 70a, 74a. “All of these objective facts are consistent
with an interrogation environment in which a reasonable
person would have felt free to terminate the interview and
leave.” Yarborough, supra, at 664–665.
Because he was in prison, respondent was not free to
leave the conference room by himself and to make his own
way through the facility to his cell. Instead, he was escorted to the conference room and, when he ultimately
decided to end the interview, he had to wait about 20
minutes for a corrections officer to arrive and escort him to
his cell. But he would have been subject to this same
restraint even if he had been taken to the conference room
for some reason other than police questioning; under no
circumstances could he have reasonably expected to be
able to roam free.6 And while respondent testified that he
——————
6 Respondent did not testify to the contrary. The following colloquy
occurred at his Miranda hearing:
“Q. You’re not generally allowed to just roam around Lenawee County
Jail on your own, are you?
“A. No, I never have.
“Q. So wouldn’t it make sense to you, since you had that experience,
that in fact you would have been escorted just like you were escorted
. . . into this conference room?
“A. That makes common sense.
“Q. So when they said that you were free to leave and you get up—
could get up and go and all you had to do was tell them you wanted to
go, in your mind, did you understand that to mean that somebody
would come get you and take you back to your cell?
“A. But that doesn’t give me freedom to just get up and walk away.
“Q. I understand it doesn’t—
“A. So, no.

