2

HOWES v. FIELDS
Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

son’s] freedom of action is curtailed in any significant
way.” Id., at 467. Given the reality that police interrogators “trad[e] on the weakness of individuals,” i.e., their
“insecurity about [themselves] or [their] surroundings,”
id., at 455, the Court found the preinterrogation warnings
set out in the opinion “indispensable,” id., at 469. Those
warnings, the Court elaborated, are “an absolute prerequisite in overcoming the inherent pressures of the interrogation atmosphere,” id., at 468; they “insure” that the suspect is timely told of his Fifth Amendment privilege, and
his freedom to exercise it, id., at 469.
Fields, serving time for disorderly conduct, was, of
course, “i[n] custody,” but not “for purposes of Miranda,”
the Court concludes. Ante, at 14. I would not train, as the
Court does, on the question whether there can be custody
within custody. Instead, I would ask, as Miranda put it,
whether Fields was subjected to “incommunicado interrogation . . . in a police-dominated atmosphere,” 384 U. S., at
445, whether he was placed, against his will, in an inherently stressful situation, see id., at 468, and whether his
“freedom of action [was] curtailed in any significant way,”
id., at 467. Those should be the key questions, and to each
I would answer “Yes.”
As the Court acknowledges, Fields did not invite or
consent to the interview. Ante, at 14. He was removed
from his cell in the evening, taken to a conference room in
the sheriff ’s quarters, and questioned by two armed deputies long into the night and early morning. Ibid. He was
not told at the outset that he had the right to decline to
speak with the deputies. Ibid. Shut in with the armed
officers, Fields felt “trapped.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 71a.
Although told he could return to his cell if he did not want
to cooperate, id., at 71a–72a, Fields believed the deputies
“would not have allowed [him] to leave the room,” id., at
72a. And with good reason. More than once, “he told the
officers . . . he did not want to speak with them anymore.”

