Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

would undermine the Act’s basic objectives. The Act seeks
to prohibit “labor conditions detrimental to the mainte­
nance of the minimum standard of living necessary for
health, efficiency, and general well-being of workers.” 29
U. S. C. §202(a). It does so in part by setting forth sub­
stantive wage, hour, and overtime standards. It relies for
enforcement of these standards, not upon “continuing
detailed federal supervision or inspection of payrolls,” but
upon “information and complaints received from employ­
ees seeking to vindicate rights claimed to have been de­
nied.” Mitchell v. Robert DeMario Jewelry, Inc., 361 U. S.
288, 292 (1960). And its antiretaliation provision makes
this enforcement scheme effective by preventing “fear of
economic retaliation” from inducing workers “quietly to
accept substandard conditions.” Ibid.
Why would Congress want to limit the enforcement
scheme’s effectiveness by inhibiting use of the Act’s com­
plaint procedure by those who would find it difficult to
reduce their complaints to writing, particularly illiterate,
less educated, or overworked workers? President Franklin
Roosevelt pointed out at the time that these were the
workers most in need of the Act’s help. See Message to
Congress, May 24, 1937, H. R. Doc. No. 255, 75th Cong.,
1st Sess., 4 (seeking a bill to help the poorest of “those who
toil in factory”).
In the years prior to the passage of the Act, illiteracy
rates were particularly high among the poor. See E.
Gordon & E. Gordon, Literacy in America 273 (2003) (one­
quarter of World War I conscripts were illiterate); Dept. of
Commerce, Bureau of Census, Sixteenth Census of the
United States, 1940, Population: The Labor Force (Sample
Statistics): Occupational Characteristics 60 (1943) (20.8%
of manufacturing laborers in 1940 had less than five years
of schooling). Those rates remained high in certain indus­
tries for many years after the Act’s passage. In 1948, for
example, the National War Labor Board wrote:

