Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

SCALIA, J., dissenting

addressee, given the facts of this case, is the employer.
Saint-Gobain’s rewording of the question presented in its
brief in opposition is even more specific: “Has an employee
alleging solely that he orally asserted objections to his
employer . . . ‘filed any complaint’ within the meaning of
[§215(a)(3)].” Brief in Opposition i (emphasis added).
Moreover, under this Court’s Rule 14.1(a), the question
presented is “deemed to comprise every subsidiary ques
tion fairly included therein.” Whether intracompany
complaints are protected is at least subsidiary to Kasten’s
formulation (and explicitly included in Saint-Gobain’s).
The question was also decided by the courts below and
was briefed before this Court. It is not clear what benefit
additional briefing would provide.
Moreover, whether §215(a)(3) covers intracompany
complaints is “predicate to an intelligent resolution of the
question presented” in this case. The Court’s own opinion
demonstrates the point. While claiming that it remains
an open question whether intracompany complaints are
covered, the opinion adopts a test for “filed any complaint”
that assumes a “yes” answer—and that makes no sense
otherwise. An employee, the Court says, is deemed to
have “filed [a] complaint” only when “ ‘a reasonable, objec
tive person would have understood the employee’ to have
‘put the employer on notice that the employee is asserting
statutory rights under the [Act].” Ante, at 12 (quoting Tr.
of Oral Arg. 23, 26). This utterly atextual standard is
obviously designed to counter the argument of SaintGobain, that if oral complaints are allowed, “employers too
often will be left in a state of uncertainty about whether
an employee . . . is in fact making a complaint . . . or just
letting off steam.” Ante, at 11. Of course, if intracompany
complaints were excluded, this concern would be nonexis
tent: Filing a complaint with a judicial or administrative
body is quite obviously an unambiguous assertion of
one’s rights. There would be no need for lower courts to

