2

KASTEN v. SAINT-GOBAIN PERFORMANCE 

PLASTICS CORP.

Opinion of the Court 


Saint-Gobain located its timeclocks between the area
where Kasten and other workers put on (and take off)
their work-related protective gear and the area where they
carry out their assigned tasks. That location prevented
workers from receiving credit for the time they spent
putting on and taking off their work clothes—contrary to
the Act’s requirements. In a related suit the District
Court agreed with Kasten, finding that Saint-Gobain’s
“practice of not compensating . . . for time spent donning
and doffing certain required protective gear and walking
to work areas” violated the Act. Kasten v. Saint-Gobain
Performance Plastics Corp., 556 F. Supp. 2d 941, 954 (WD
Wis. 2008). In this suit Kasten claims unlawful retalia­
tion. He says that Saint-Gobain discharged him because
he orally complained to Saint-Gobain officials about the
timeclocks.
In particular, Kasten says that he repeatedly called the
unlawful timeclock location to Saint-Gobain’s attention—
in accordance with Saint-Gobain’s internal grievance­
resolution procedure. See Brief for Petitioner 4 (quoting
Saint-Gobain’s Code of Ethics and Business Conduct as
imposing upon every employee “the responsibility to report
. . . suspected violations of . . . any applicable law of which
he or she becomes aware”); id., at 4–5 (quoting SaintGobain’s Employee Policy Handbook as instructing em­
ployees with “questions, complaints, and problems” to
“[c]ontact” their “supervisor[s] immediately” and if neces­
sary “take the issue to the next level of management,”
then to the “local Human Resources Manager,” then to
“Human Resources” personnel at the “Regional” or “Head­
quarters” level).
Kasten adds that he “raised a concern” with his shift
supervisor that “it was illegal for the time clocks to be
where they were” because of Saint-Gobain’s exclusion of
“the time you come in and start doing stuff”; he told a
human resources employee that “if they were to get chal­

