6

KASTEN v. SAINT-GOBAIN PERFORMANCE 

PLASTICS CORP.

SCALIA, J., dissenting 


employer. The only relevance of these provisions to
whether the FLSA covers such complaints is that none of
them achieves that result by use of the term “filed any
complaint,” and all of them use language that unmistaka
bly includes complaints to employers. See, e.g., 42 U. S. C.
§2000e–3(a) (prohibiting retaliation against employees
who “oppos[e] any [unlawful] practice”). Any suggestion
that because more recent statutes cover intracompany
complaints, a provision adopted in the 1938 Act should be
deemed to do so is unacceptable. While the jurisprudence
of this Court has sometimes sanctioned a “living Constitu
tion,” it has never approved a living United States Code.
What Congress enacted in 1938 must be applied according
to its terms, and not according to what a modern Congress
(or this Court) would deem desirable.4
3
Kasten argues that this Court should defer to the De
partment of Labor and Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission’s (EEOC) interpretations of 29 U. S. C.
§215(a)(3). He claims that those agencies have construed
§215(a)(3) to protect intracompany complaints “[f]or al
most half a century,” in litigating positions and enforce
ment actions. Reply Brief for Petitioner 22. He also
argues that although the Department of Labor lacks the
authority to issue regulations implementing §215(a)(3), it
has such authority for several similarly worded provisions
and has interpreted those statutes to include intracom
pany complaints. Id., at 20.
Even were §215(a)(3) ambiguous, deference would still
——————
4 Moreover, if the substance of the retaliation provision of any other
Act could shed light upon what Congress sought to achieve in the
FLSA, it would be the relatively contemporaneous provision of the
National Labor Relations Act, §8(4), 49 Stat. 453, codified at 29 U. S. C.
§158(a)(4), which did not cover retaliation for employee-employer
complaints. See NLRB v. Scrivener, 405 U. S. 117 (1972).

