(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

KASTEN v. SAINT-GOBAIN PERFORMANCE 

PLASTICS CORP. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–834.

Argued October 13, 2010—Decided March 22, 2011

Petitioner Kasten brought an antiretaliation suit against his former
employer, respondent (Saint-Gobain), under the Fair Labor Stan
dards Act of 1938 (Act), which provides minimum wage, maximum
hour, and overtime pay rules; and which forbids employers “to dis
charge . . . any employee because such employee has filed any com
plaint” alleging a violation of the Act, 29 U. S. C. §215(a)(3). In a re
lated suit, the District Court found that Saint-Gobain violated the
Act by placing timeclocks in a location that prevented workers from
receiving credit for the time they spent donning and doffing work
related protective gear. In this suit Kasten claims that he was dis
charged because he orally complained to company officials about the
timeclocks. The District Court granted Saint-Gobain summary
judgment, concluding that the Act’s antiretaliation provision did not
cover oral complaints. The Seventh Circuit affirmed.
Held: The scope of statutory term “filed any complaint” includes oral, as
well as written, complaints. Pp. 4–15.
(a) The interpretation of the statutory phrase “depends upon read
ing the whole statutory text, considering the [statute’s] purpose and
context . . . , and consulting any precedents or authorities that inform
the analysis.” Dolan v. Postal Service, 546 U. S. 481, 486. The text,
taken alone, cannot provide a conclusive answer here. Some diction
ary definitions of “filed” contemplate a writing while others permit
using “file” in conjunction with oral material. In addition to diction
ary definitions, state statutes and federal regulations sometimes con
template oral filings, and contemporaneous judicial usage shows that
oral filings were a known phenomenon at the time of the Act’s pas
sage. Even if “filed,” considered alone, might suggest a narrow inter

