Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

contrary indication, IBP, Inc. v. Alvarez, 546 U. S. 21, 34
(2005); Sullivan v. Stroop, 496 U. S. 478, 484 (1990). It
is one thing to expand the meaning of “complaint” in
§215(a)(3) to include complaints filed with an agency
instead of a court; it is quite something else to wrench it
from the legal context entirely, to include an employee’s
objection to an employer.
Second, the word “complaint” appears as part of the
phrase “filed any complaint” and thus draws meaning
from the verb with which it is connected. The choice of the
word “filed” rather than a broader alternative like “made,”
if it does not connote (as the Seventh Circuit believed,
and as I need not consider) something in writing, at least
suggests a degree of formality consistent with legal action
and inconsistent (at least in the less regulated work envi
ronment of 1938) with employee-to-employer complaints.
It is noteworthy that every definition of the verb “filed”
that the Court’s opinion provides, whether it supports the
inclusion of oral content or not, envisions a formal, pre
scribed process of delivery or submission. Ante, at 4–5
(comparing, for example, Webster’s 945 (to file is to “de
liver (a paper or instrument) to the proper officer”) with 1
Funk & Wagnalls New Standard Dictionary of the English
Language 920 (rev. ed. 1938) (to file is to “present in the
regular way, as to a judicial or legislative body”)).
Moreover, “[t]he law uses familiar legal expressions in
their familiar legal sense,” Henry v. United States, 251
U. S. 393, 395 (1920). It is, I suppose, possible to speak of
“filing a complaint” with an employer, but that is assur
edly not common usage. Thus, when the antiretaliation
provision of the Mine Health and Safety Act used that
phrase in a context that includes both complaints to an
agency and complaints to the employer, it did not use
“filed” alone, but supplemented that with “or made”—and
to boot specified “including a complaint notifying the
[mine] operator . . . of an alleged danger or safety or health

