2

KASTEN v. SAINT-GOBAIN PERFORMANCE 

PLASTICS CORP.

Syllabus 

pretation limited to writings, “any complaint” suggests a broad inter
pretation that would include an oral complaint. Thus, the three-word
phrase, taken by itself, cannot answer the interpretive question. The
Act’s other references to “filed” also do not resolve the linguistic ques
tion. Some of those provisions involve filed material that is virtually
always in writing; others specifically require a writing, and the re
mainder, like the provision here, leave the oral/written question un
resolved. Since “filed any complaint” lends itself linguistically to the
broader, “oral” interpretation, the use of broader language in other
statutes’ antiretaliation provisions does not indicate whether Con
gress did or did not intend to leave oral grievances unprotected here.
Because the text, taken alone, might, or might not, encompass oral
complaints, the Court must look further. Pp. 4–8.
(b) Several functional considerations indicate that Congress in
tended the antiretaliation provision to cover oral, as well as written,
complaints. Pp. 8–14.
(1) A narrow interpretation would undermine the Act’s basic ob
jective, which is to prohibit “labor conditions detrimental to the
maintenance of the minimum standard of living necessary for health,
efficiency, and general well-being of workers,” 29 U. S. C. §202(a).
The Act relies for enforcement of its substantive standards on “infor
mation and complaints received from employees,” Mitchell v. Robert
DeMario Jewelry, Inc., 361 U. S. 288, 292, and its antiretaliation pro
vision makes the enforcement scheme effective by preventing “fear of
economic retaliation” from inducing workers “quietly to accept sub
standard conditions,” ibid. Why would Congress want to limit the en
forcement scheme’s effectiveness by inhibiting use of the Act’s com
plaint procedure by those who would find it difficult to reduce their
complaints to writing, particularly the illiterate, less educated, or
overworked workers who were most in need of the Act’s help at the
time of passage? Limiting the provision’s scope to written complaints
could prevent Government agencies from using hotlines, interviews,
and other oral methods to receive complaints. And insofar as the
provision covers complaints made to employers, a limiting reading
would discourage using informal workplace grievance procedures to
secure compliance with the Act. The National Labor Relations Act’s
antiretaliation provision has been broadly interpreted as protecting
workers who simply “participate[d] in a [National Labor Relations]
Board investigation.” NLRB v. Scrivener, 405 U. S. 117, 123. The
similar enforcement needs of this related statute argue for a broad
interpretation of “complaint.” The Act’s requirement that an em
ployer receive fair notice of an employee’s complaint can be met by
oral, as well as written, complaints. Pp. 8–12.
(2) Given the delegation of enforcement powers to federal admin

