Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

do so here without pressing statutory language to its
limit). See also Tennessee Coal, Iron & R. Co. v. Muscoda
Local No. 123, 321 U. S. 590, 597 (1944) (the Act’s “reme­
dial and humanitarian . . . purpose” cautions against
“narrow, grudging” interpretations of its language).
Saint-Gobain replies that worker protection is not the
only relevant statutory objective. The Act also seeks to
establish an enforcement system that is fair to employers.
To do so, the employer must have fair notice that an em­
ployee is making a complaint that could subject the em­
ployer to a later claim of retaliation. If oral complaints
suffice, Saint-Gobain adds, employers too often will be left
in a state of uncertainty about whether an employee (par­
ticularly an employee who seems unusually angry at the
moment) is in fact making a complaint about an Act viola­
tion or just letting off steam.
We agree with Saint-Gobain that the statute requires
fair notice. Although the dictionary definitions, statutes,
regulations, and judicial opinions we considered, see su
pra, at 4–7, do not distinguish between writings and oral
statements, they do suggest that a “filing” is a serious
occasion, rather than a triviality. As such, the phrase
“filed any complaint” contemplates some degree of formal­
ity, certainly to the point where the recipient has been
given fair notice that a grievance has been lodged and
does, or should, reasonably understand the matter as part
of its business concerns.
Moreover, the statute prohibits employers from dis­
criminating against an employee “because such employee
has filed any complaint.” §215(a)(3) (emphasis added).
And it is difficult to see how an employer who does not (or
should not) know an employee has made a complaint could
discriminate because of that complaint. But we also be­
lieve that a fair notice requirement does not necessarily
mean that notice must be in writing.
At oral argument, the Government said that a complaint

