Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

the plaintiff misunderstood a crucial fact about his iden
tity. Because a plaintiff’s knowledge of the existence of a
party does not foreclose the possibility that she has made
a mistake of identity about which that party should have
been aware, such knowledge does not support that party’s
interest in repose.
Our reading is also consistent with the history of Rule
15(c)(1)(C). That provision was added in 1966 to respond
to a recurring problem in suits against the Federal Gov
ernment, particularly in the Social Security context.
Advisory Committee’s 1966 Notes 122. Individuals who
had filed timely lawsuits challenging the administrative
denial of benefits often failed to name the party identified
in the statute as the proper defendant—the current Secre
tary of what was then the Department of Health, Educa
tion, and Welfare—and named instead the United States;
the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare itself;
the nonexistent “Federal Security Administration”; or a
Secretary who had recently retired from office. Ibid. By
the time the plaintiffs discovered their mistakes, the
statute of limitations in many cases had expired, and the
district courts denied the plaintiffs leave to amend on the
ground that the amended complaints would not relate
back. Rule 15(c) was therefore “amplified to provide a
general solution” to this problem. Ibid. It is conceivable
that the Social Security litigants knew or reasonably
should have known the identity of the proper defendant
either because of documents in their administrative cases
or by dint of the statute setting forth the filing require
ments. See 42 U. S. C. §405(g) (1958 ed., Supp. III).
Nonetheless, the Advisory Committee clearly meant their
filings to qualify as mistakes under the Rule.
Respondent suggests that our decision in Nelson v.
Adams USA, Inc., 529 U. S. 460 (2000), forecloses the
reading of Rule 15(c)(1)(C)(ii) we adopt today. We dis
agree. In that case, Adams USA, Inc. (Adams), had ob

