6

KRUPSKI v. COSTA CROCIERE S. P. A.
Opinion of the Court

proper party. Id., at 18a–21a. Relying on Eleventh Cir
cuit precedent, the court explained that the word “mis
take” should not be construed to encompass a deliberate
decision not to sue a party whose identity the plaintiff
knew before the statute of limitations had run. Because
Costa Cruise informed Krupski that Costa Crociere was
the proper defendant in its answer, corporate disclosure
statement, and motion for summary judgment, and yet
Krupski delayed for months in moving to amend and then
in filing an amended complaint, the court concluded that
Krupski knew of the proper defendant and made no
mistake.
The Eleventh Circuit affirmed in an unpublished per
curiam opinion. Krupski v. Costa Cruise Lines, N. V.,
LLC, 330 Fed. Appx. 892 (2009). Rather than relying on
the information contained in Costa Cruise’s filings, all of
which were made after the statute of limitations had
expired, as evidence that Krupski did not make a mistake,
the Court of Appeals noted that the relevant information
was located within Krupski’s passenger ticket, which she
had furnished to her counsel well before the end of the
limitations period. Because the ticket clearly identified
Costa Crociere as the carrier, the court stated, Krupski
either knew or should have known of Costa Crociere’s
identity as a potential party.1 It was therefore appropri
ate to treat Krupski as having chosen to sue one potential
party over another. Alternatively, even assuming that she
first learned of Costa Crociere’s identity as the correct
party from Costa Cruise’s answer, the Court of Appeals
——————
1 The Court of Appeals stated that it was “imput[ing]” knowledge to
Krupski. 330 Fed. Appx., at 895. Petitioner uses the terms “imputed
knowledge” and “constructive knowledge” interchangeably in her brief,
while respondent addresses only actual knowledge. Because we reject
the Court of Appeals’ focus on the plaintiff’s knowledge in the first
instance, see infra, at 8–13, the distinction among these types of
knowledge is not relevant to our resolution of this case.

