10

KRUPSKI v. COSTA CROCIERE S. P. A.
Opinion of the Court

15(c)(1)(C)(ii), then, is whether party A knew or should
have known that, absent some mistake, the action would
have been brought against him.
Respondent urges that the key issue under Rule
15(c)(1)(C)(ii) is whether the plaintiff made a deliberate
choice to sue one party over another. Brief for Respondent
11–16. We agree that making a deliberate choice to sue
one party instead of another while fully understanding the
factual and legal differences between the two parties is the
antithesis of making a mistake concerning the proper
party’s identity. We disagree, however, with respondent’s
position that any time a plaintiff is aware of the existence
of two parties and chooses to sue the wrong one, the
proper defendant could reasonably believe that the plain
tiff made no mistake. The reasonableness of the mistake
is not itself at issue. As noted, a plaintiff might know that
the prospective defendant exists but nonetheless harbor a
misunderstanding about his status or role in the events
giving rise to the claim at issue, and she may mistakenly
choose to sue a different defendant based on that misim
pression. That kind of deliberate but mistaken choice does
not foreclose a finding that Rule 15(c)(1)(C)(ii) has been
satisfied.
This reading is consistent with the purpose of relation
back: to balance the interests of the defendant protected
by the statute of limitations with the preference expressed
in the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure in general, and
Rule 15 in particular, for resolving disputes on their mer
its. See, e.g., Advisory Committee’s 1966 Notes 122; 3
Moore’s Federal Practice §§15.02[1], 15.19[3][a] (3d ed.
2009). A prospective defendant who legitimately believed
that the limitations period had passed without any at
tempt to sue him has a strong interest in repose. But
repose would be a windfall for a prospective defendant
who understood, or who should have understood, that he
escaped suit during the limitations period only because

