16

KRUPSKI v. COSTA CROCIERE S. P. A.
Opinion of the Court

for a lawsuit, respondent was entitled to think that she
made a deliberate choice to sue Costa Cruise instead of
Costa Crociere. Brief for Respondent 13. As we have
explained, however, that Krupski may have known the
contents of the ticket does not foreclose the possibility that
she nonetheless misunderstood crucial facts regarding the
two companies’ identities. Especially because the face of
the complaint plainly indicated such a misunderstanding,
respondent’s contention is not persuasive. Moreover,
respondent has articulated no strategy that it could rea
sonably have thought Krupski was pursuing in suing a
defendant that was legally unable to provide relief.
Respondent also argues that Krupski’s failure to move
to amend her complaint during the Rule 4(m) period
shows that she made no mistake in that period. Id., at
13–14. But as discussed, any delay on Krupski’s part is
relevant only to the extent it may have informed Costa
Crociere’s understanding during the Rule 4(m) period of
whether she made a mistake originally. Krupski’s failure
to add Costa Crociere during the Rule 4(m) period is not
sufficient to make reasonable any belief that she had
made a deliberate and informed decision not to sue Costa
Crociere in the first instance.6 Nothing in Krupski’s con
duct during the Rule 4(m) period suggests that she failed
to name Costa Crociere because of anything other than a
mistake.
It is also worth noting that Costa Cruise and Costa
——————
6 The Court of Appeals concluded that Krupski was not diligent
merely because she did not seek leave to add Costa Crociere until 133
days after she filed her original complaint and did not actually file an
amended complaint for another a month after that. 330 Fed. Appx., at
895. It is not clear why Krupski should have been found dilatory for
not accepting at face value the unproven allegations in Costa Cruise’s
answer and corporate disclosure form. In fact, Krupski moved to
amend her complaint to add Costa Crociere within the time period
prescribed by the District Court’s scheduling order. See App. 3, 6–7;
Record, Doc. 23, p. 1.

