2

KRUPSKI v. COSTA CROCIERE S. P. A.
Syllabus
have been brought against it, but for a mistake concerning the proper
party’s identity.” Rule 15(c)(1)(C)(ii). The District Court found this
condition fatal to Krupski’s attempt to relate back. It concluded that
she had not made a mistake about the proper party’s identity be
cause, although Costa Cruise had disclosed Costa Crociere’s role in
several court filings, she nonetheless delayed for months filing an
amended complaint. The Eleventh Circuit affirmed, finding that
Krupski either knew or should have known of Costa Crociere’s iden
tity as a potential party because she furnished the ticket identifying
it to her counsel well before the limitations period ended. It was
therefore appropriate to treat her as having chosen to sue one poten
tial party over another. Additionally, the court held that relation
back was not appropriate because of Krupski’s undue delay in seek
ing to amend the complaint.

Held: Relation back under Rule 15(c)(1)(C) depends on what the party
to be added knew or should have known, not on the amending party’s
knowledge or timeliness in seeking to amend the pleading. Pp. 7–18.
(a) The Rule’s text does not support the Eleventh Circuit’s decision
to rely on the plaintiff’s knowledge in denying relation back. The
question under Rule 15(c)(1)(C)(ii) is not whether Krupski knew or
should have known Costa Crociere’s identity as the proper defendant,
but whether Costa Crociere knew or should have known during the
Rule 4(m) period that it would have been named as the defendant but
for an error. The plaintiff’s information is relevant only if it bears on
the defendant’s understanding of whether the plaintiff made a mis
take regarding the proper party’s identity. It would be error to con
flate knowledge of a party’s existence with the absence of mistake.
That a plaintiff knows of a party’s existence does not preclude her
from making a mistake with respect to that party’s identity. Making
a deliberate choice to sue one party over another while understand
ing the factual and legal differences between the two parties may be
the antithesis of making a mistake, but that does not mean that any
time a plaintiff is aware of the existence of two parties and chooses to
sue the wrong one, the proper defendant could reasonably believe
that the plaintiff made no mistake. A plaintiff might know that the
prospective defendant exists but nonetheless choose to sue a different
defendant based on a misunderstanding about the proper party’s
identity. That kind of deliberate but mistaken choice should not fore
close a finding that Rule 15(c)(1)(C)(ii) has been satisfied. This read
ing is consistent with relation back’s purpose of balancing the defen
dant’s interests protected by the statute of limitations with the
preference of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure in general, and
Rule 15 in particular, for resolving disputes on their merits. It is also
consistent with the history of Rule 15(c)(1)(C). And it is not fore

