Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
closed by Nelson v. Adams USA, Inc., 529 U. S. 460. Pp. 7–13.
(b) The Eleventh Circuit also erred in ruling that Krupski’s undue
delay in seeking to file, and in eventually filing, an amended com
plaint justified its denial of relation back under Rule 15(c)(1)(C). The
Rule plainly sets forth an exclusive list of requirements for relation
back, and the plaintiff’s diligence is not among them. Moreover, it
mandates relation back once its requirements are satisfied; it does
not leave that decision to the district court’s equitable discretion. Its
mandatory nature is particularly striking in contrast to the inquiry
under Rule 15(a), which gives a district court discretion to decide
whether to grant a motion to amend a pleading before trial. See
Foman v. Davis, 371 U. S. 178, 182. Rule 15(c)(1)(C) permits a court
to examine a plaintiff’s conduct during the Rule 4(m) period, but only
to the extent the plaintiff’s postfiling conduct informs the prospective
defendant’s understanding of whether the plaintiff initially made a
“mistake concerning the proper party’s identity.” The plaintiff’s post
filing conduct is otherwise immaterial to the relation-back question.
Pp. 13–15.
(c) Under these principles, the courts below erred in denying rela
tion back. Because the original complaint (of which Costa Crociere
had constructive notice) made clear that Krupski meant to sue the
company that “owned, operated, managed, supervised and controlled”
the ship on which she was injured and also indicated (mistakenly)
that Costa Cruise performed those roles, Costa Crociere should have
known that it avoided suit within the limitations period only because
of Krupski’s misunderstanding about which “Costa” entity was in
charge of the ship—clearly a “mistake concerning the proper party’s
identity.” That Krupski may have known the ticket’s contents does
not foreclose the possibility that she nonetheless misunderstood cru
cial facts regarding the two companies’ identities. Especially because
the face of the complaint plainly indicated such a misunderstanding,
respondent’s contention that it was entitled to think she made no
mistake is not persuasive. Moreover, respondent has articulated no
strategy that it could reasonably have thought Krupski was pursuing
in suing a defendant that was legally unable to provide relief. Noth
ing in Krupski’s conduct during the Rule 4(m) period suggests that
she failed to name Costa Crociere because of anything other than a
mistake. The interrelationship between Costa Cruise and Costa Cro
ciere and their similar names heighten the expectation that Costa
Crociere should suspect a mistake when Costa Cruise is named in a
complaint actually describing Costa Crociere’s activities. In addition,
Costa Crociere’s own actions contributed to passenger confusion over
“the proper party”: The front of the ticket advertises that “Costa
Cruises” has achieved a certification of quality without clarifying

