Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

state of mind at an earlier time” and “can inform a defen
dant’s reasonable beliefs concerning whether her omission
from the original complaint represented a mistake (as
opposed to a conscious choice)”). The plaintiff’s postfiling
conduct is otherwise immaterial to the question whether
an amended complaint relates back.5
C
Applying these principles to the facts of this case, we
think it clear that the courts below erred in denying rela
tion back under Rule 15(c)(1)(C)(ii). The District Court
held that Costa Crociere had “constructive notice” of
Krupski’s complaint within the Rule 4(m) period. App. to
Pet. for Cert. 15a–17a. Costa Crociere has not challenged
this finding. Because the complaint made clear that Krup
ski meant to sue the company that “owned, operated,
managed, supervised and controlled” the ship on which
she was injured, App. 23, and also indicated (mistakenly)
that Costa Cruise performed those roles, id., at 23–27,
Costa Crociere should have known, within the Rule 4(m)
period, that it was not named as a defendant in that com
plaint only because of Krupski’s misunderstanding about
which “Costa” entity was in charge of the ship—clearly a
“mistake concerning the proper party’s identity.”
Respondent contends that because the original com
plaint referred to the ticket’s forum requirement and
presuit claims notification procedure, Krupski was clearly
aware of the contents of the ticket, and because the ticket
identified Costa Crociere as the carrier and proper party
——————
5 Similarly,

we reject respondent’s suggestion that Rule 15(c) requires
a plaintiff to move to amend her complaint or to file and serve an
amended complaint within the Rule 4(m) period. Rule 15(c)(1)(C)(i)
simply requires that the prospective defendant has received sufficient
“notice of the action” within the Rule 4(m) period that he will not be
prejudiced in defending the case on the merits. The Advisory Commit
tee Notes to the 1966 Amendment clarify that “the notice need not be
formal.” Advisory Committee’s 1966 Notes 122.

