Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

from the case pursuant to the parties’ joint stipulation,
Krupski apparently having concluded that Costa Cruise
was correct that it bore no responsibility for her injuries.
Id., at 85–86.
Shortly thereafter, Costa Crociere—represented by the
same counsel who had represented Costa Cruise, compare
id., at 31, with id., at 100—moved to dismiss, contending
that the amended complaint did not relate back under
Rule 15(c) and was therefore untimely. The District Court
agreed. App. to Pet. for Cert. 8a–22a. Rule 15(c), the
court explained, imposes three requirements before an
amended complaint against a newly named defendant can
relate back to the original complaint. First, the claim
against the newly named defendant must have arisen “out
of the conduct, transaction, or occurrence set out—or
attempted to be set out—in the original pleading.” Fed.
Rules Civ. Proc. 15(c)(1)(B), (C). Second, “within the
period provided by Rule 4(m) for serving the summons and
complaint” (which is ordinarily 120 days from when the
complaint is filed, see Rule 4(m)), the newly named defen
dant must have “received such notice of the action that it
will not be prejudiced in defending on the merits.” Rule
15(c)(1)(C)(i). Finally, the plaintiff must show that, within
the Rule 4(m) period, the newly named defendant “knew
or should have known that the action would have been
brought against it, but for a mistake concerning the proper
party’s identity.” Rule 15(c)(1)(C)(ii).
The first two conditions posed no problem, the court
explained: The claim against Costa Crociere clearly in
volved the same occurrence as the original claim against
Costa Cruise, and Costa Crociere had constructive notice
of the action and had not shown that any unfair prejudice
would result from relation back. App. to Pet. for Cert.
14a–18a. But the court found the third condition fatal to
Krupski’s attempt to relate back, concluding that Krupski
had not made a mistake concerning the identity of the

