Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

subsidiaries, affiliates, successors, assigns, representa
tives, agents, employees, servants, concessionaires and
contractors” as well as “Costa Cruise Lines N. V.,” identi
fied as the “sales and marketing agent for the CARRIER
and the issuer of this Passage Ticket Contract.” Id., at
29a. The front of the ticket listed Costa Cruise Lines’
address in Florida and stated that an entity called “Costa
Cruises” was “the first cruise company in the world” to
obtain a certain certification of quality. Id., at 25a.
On July 2, 2007, Krupski’s counsel notified Costa Cruise
Lines of Krupski’s claims. App. 69–70. On July 9, 2007,
the claims administrator for Costa Cruise requested addi
tional information from Krupski “[i]n order to facilitate
our future attempts to achieve a pre-litigation settlement.”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 23a–24a. The parties were unable to
reach a settlement, however, and on February 1, 2008—
three weeks before the 1-year limitations period expired—
Krupski filed a negligence action against Costa Cruise,
invoking the diversity jurisdiction of the Federal District
Court for the Southern District of Florida. The complaint
alleged that Costa Cruise “owned, operated, managed,
supervised and controlled” the ship on which Krupski had
injured herself; that Costa Cruise had extended to its
passengers an invitation to enter onto the ship; and that
Costa Cruise owed Krupski a duty of care, which it
breached by failing to take steps that would have pre
vented her accident. App. 23–26. The complaint further
stated that venue was proper under the passenger ticket’s
forum selection clause and averred that, by the July 2007
notice of her claims, Krupski had complied with the
ticket’s presuit requirements. Id., at 23. Krupski served
Costa Cruise on February 4, 2008.
Over the next several months—after the limitations
period had expired—Costa Cruise brought Costa Croci
ere’s existence to Krupski’s attention three times. First,
on February 25, 2008, Costa Cruise filed its answer, as

