Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

complaint.3
Information in the plaintiff’s possession is relevant only
if it bears on the defendant’s understanding of whether
the plaintiff made a mistake regarding the proper party’s
identity. For purposes of that inquiry, it would be error to
conflate knowledge of a party’s existence with the absence
of mistake. A mistake is “[a]n error, misconception, or
misunderstanding; an erroneous belief.” Black’s Law
Dictionary 1092 (9th ed. 2009); see also Webster’s Third
New International Dictionary 1446 (2002) (defining “mis
take” as “a misunderstanding of the meaning or implica
tion of something”; “a wrong action or statement proceed
ing from faulty judgment, inadequate knowledge, or
inattention”; “an erroneous belief”; or “a state of mind not
in accordance with the facts”). That a plaintiff knows of a
party’s existence does not preclude her from making a
mistake with respect to that party’s identity. A plaintiff
may know that a prospective defendant—call him party
A—exists, while erroneously believing him to have the
status of party B. Similarly, a plaintiff may know gener
ally what party A does while misunderstanding the roles
that party A and party B played in the “conduct, transac
tion, or occurrence” giving rise to her claim. If the plaintiff
sues party B instead of party A under these circum
stances, she has made a “mistake concerning the proper
party’s identity” notwithstanding her knowledge of the
existence of both parties. The only question under Rule
——————
3 Rule 15(c)(1)(C) speaks generally of an amendment to a “pleading”
that changes “the party against whom a claim is asserted,” and it
therefore is not limited to the circumstance of a plaintiff filing an
amended complaint seeking to bring in a new defendant. Nevertheless,
because the latter is the “typical case” of Rule 15(c)(1)(C)’s applicability,
see 3 Moore’s Federal Practice §15.19[2] (3d ed. 2009), we use this
circumstance as a shorthand throughout this opinion. See also id.,
§15.19[3][a]; Advisory Committee’s 1966 Notes on Fed. Rule Civ.
Proc. 15, 28 U. S. C. App., pp. 122–123 (hereinafter Advisory Commit
tee’s 1966 Notes).

