8

SORRELL v. IMS HEALTH INC.
BREYER, J., dissenting

sales of the data to appliance manufacturers seeking to
sell gas stoves.
Such regulatory actions are subject to judicial review,
e.g., for compliance with applicable statutes. And they
would normally be subject to review under the Adminis
trative Procedure Act to make certain they are not “arbi
trary, capricious, [or] an abuse of discretion.” 5 U. S. C.
§706(2)(A) (2006 ed.). In an appropriate case, such review
might be informed by First Amendment considerations.
But regulatory actions of the kind present here have not
previously been thought to raise serious additional consti
tutional concerns under the First Amendment. But cf.
Trans Union LLC v. FTC, 536 U. S. 915 (2002) (KENNEDY,
J., dissenting from denial of certiorari) (questioning ban
on use of consumer credit reports for target marketing).
The ease with which one can point to actual or hypothet
ical examples with potentially adverse speech-related
effects at least roughly comparable to those at issue here
indicates the danger of applying a “heightened” or “inter
mediate” standard of First Amendment review where
typical regulatory actions affect commercial speech (say,
by withholding information that a commercial speaker
might use to shape the content of a message).
Thus, it is not surprising that, until today, this Court
has never found that the First Amendment prohibits the
government from restricting the use of information gath
ered pursuant to a regulatory mandate—whether the
information rests in government files or has remained in
the hands of the private firms that gathered it. But cf.
ante, at 11–14. Nor has this Court ever previously applied
any form of “heightened” scrutiny in any even roughly
similar case. See Los Angeles Police Dept. v. United Re
porting Publishing Corp., 528 U. S. 32 (1999) (no height
ened scrutiny); compare Cincinnati v. Discovery Network,
Inc., 507 U. S. 410, 426 (1993) (“[C]ommercial speech can
be subject to greater governmental regulation than non

