14

SORRELL v. IMS HEALTH INC. 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


A

The statute threatens only modest harm to commercial
speech. I agree that it withholds from pharmaceutical
companies information that would help those entities
create a more effective selling message. But I cannot
agree with the majority that the harm also involves unjus
tified discrimination in that it permits “pharmacies” to
“share prescriber-identifying information with anyone for
any reason” (but marketing). Ante, at 17. Whatever the
First Amendment relevance of such discrimination, there
is no evidence that it exists in Vermont. The record con
tains no evidence that prescriber-identifying data is
widely disseminated. See App. 248, 255. Cf. Burson v.
Freeman, 504 U. S. 191, 207 (1992) (plurality opinion)
(“States adopt laws to address the problems that confront
them. The First Amendment does not require States to
regulate for problems that do not exist”); Bates v. State
Bar of Ariz., 433 U. S. 350, 380 (1977) (“[T]he justification
for the application of overbreadth analysis applies weakly,
if at all, in the ordinary commercial context”).
The absence of any such evidence likely reflects the
presence of other legal rules that forbid widespread
release of prescriber-identifying information. Vermont’s
Pharmacy Rules, for example, define “unprofessional
conduct” to include “[d]ivulging or revealing to unauthor
ized persons patient or practitioner information or the
nature of professional pharmacy services rendered.” Rule
20.1(i) (emphasis added); see also Reply Brief for Petition
ers 21. The statute reinforces this prohibition where
pharmaceutical marketing is at issue. And the exceptions
that it creates are narrow and concern common and often
essential uses of prescription data. See Vt. Stat. Ann., Tit.
18, §4631(e)(1) (pharmacy reimbursement, patient care
management, health care research); §4631(e)(2) (drug
dispensing); §4631(e)(3) (communications between pre
scriber and pharmacy); §4631(e)(4) (information to pa

