Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

Reporting, we do have “a case in which the government is
prohibiting a speaker from conveying information that the
speaker already possesses.” Id., at 40. The difference is
significant. An individual’s right to speak is implicated
when information he or she possesses is subjected to “re
straints on the way in which the information might be
used” or disseminated. Seattle Times Co. v. Rhinehart,
467 U. S. 20, 32 (1984); see also Bartnicki v. Vopper, 532
U. S. 514, 527 (2001); Florida Star v. B. J. F., 491 U. S.
524 (1989); New York Times Co. v. United States, 403 U. S.
713 (1971) (per curiam). In Seattle Times, this Court
applied heightened judicial scrutiny before sustaining a
trial court order prohibiting a newspaper’s disclosure of
information it learned through coercive discovery. It is
true that the respondents here, unlike the newspaper in
Seattle Times, do not themselves possess information
whose disclosure has been curtailed. That information,
however, is in the hands of pharmacies and other private
entities. There is no question that the “threat of prosecu
tion . . . hangs over their heads.” United Reporting, 528
U. S., at 41. For that reason United Reporting does not
bar respondents’ facial challenge.
United Reporting is distinguishable for a second and
even more important reason. The plaintiff in United
Reporting had neither “attempt[ed] to qualify” for access to
the government’s information nor presented an as-applied
claim in this Court. Id., at 40. As a result, the Court
assumed that the plaintiff had not suffered a personal
First Amendment injury and could prevail only by invok
ing the rights of others through a facial challenge. Here,
by contrast, the respondents claim—with good reason—
that §4631(d) burdens their own speech. That argument
finds support in the separate writings in United Report
ing, which were joined by eight Justices. All of those
writings recognized that restrictions on the disclosure of
government-held information can facilitate or burden the

