2

SORRELL v. IMS HEALTH INC.
Syllabus
(a) On its face, the law enacts a content- and speaker-based re
striction on the sale, disclosure, and use of prescriber-identifying in
formation. The law first forbids sale subject to exceptions based in
large part on the content of a purchaser’s speech. It then bars phar
macies from disclosing the information when recipient speakers will
use that information for marketing. Finally, it prohibits pharmaceu
tical manufacturers from using the information for marketing. The
statute thus disfavors marketing, i.e., speech with a particular con
tent, as well as particular speakers, i.e., detailers engaged in market
ing on behalf of pharmaceutical manufacturers. Cincinnati v. Dis
covery Network, Inc., 507 U. S. 410, 426; Turner Broadcasting
System, Inc. v. FCC, 512 U. S. 622, 658. Yet the law allows pre
scriber-identifying information to be purchased, acquired, and used
for other types of speech and by other speakers. The record and for
mal legislative findings of purpose confirm that §4631(d) imposes an
aimed, content-based burden on detailers, in particular detailers who
promote brand-name drugs. In practical operation, Vermont’s law
“goes even beyond mere content discrimination, to actual viewpoint
discrimination.” R. A. V. v. St. Paul, 505 U. S. 377, 391. Heightened
judicial scrutiny is warranted. Pp. 8–11.
(b) Vermont errs in arguing that heightened scrutiny is unwar
ranted. The State contends that its law is a mere commercial regula
tion. Far from having only an incidental effect on speech, however,
§4631(d) imposes a burden based on the content of speech and the
identity of the speaker. The State next argues that, because pre
scriber-identifying information was generated in compliance with a
legal mandate, §4631(d) is akin to a restriction on access to govern
ment-held information. That argument finds some support in Los
Angeles Police Dept. v. United Reporting Publishing Corp., 528 U. S.
32, but that case is distinguishable. Vermont has imposed a restric
tion on access to information in private hands. United Reporting re
served that situation—i.e., “a case in which the government is prohib
iting a speaker from conveying information that the speaker already
possesses.” Id., at 40. In addition, the United Reporting plaintiff was
presumed to have suffered no personal First Amendment injury,
while respondents claim that §4631(d) burdens their own speech.
That circumstance warrants heightened scrutiny. Vermont also ar
gues that heightened judicial scrutiny is unwarranted because sales,
transfer, and use of prescriber-identifying information are conduct,
not speech. However, the creation and dissemination of information
are speech for First Amendment purposes. See, e.g., Bartnicki v.
Vopper, 532 U. S. 514, 527. There is no need to consider Vermont’s
request for an exception to that rule. Section 4631(d) imposes a
speaker- and content-based burden on protected expression, and that

