12

SORRELL v. IMS HEALTH INC.
Opinion of the Court

noting that “those whose business and livelihood depend
in some way upon the product involved no doubt deem
First Amendment protection to be just as important for
them as it is for other discrete, little noticed groups”).
Vermont’s law does not simply have an effect on speech,
but is directed at certain content and is aimed at particu
lar speakers. The Constitution “does not enact Mr. Her
bert Spencer’s Social Statics.” Lochner v. New York, 198
U. S. 45, 75 (1905) (Holmes, J., dissenting). It does enact
the First Amendment.
Vermont further argues that §4631(d) regulates not
speech but simply access to information. Prescriber
identifying information was generated in compliance with
a legal mandate, the State argues, and so could be consid
ered a kind of governmental information. This argument
finds some support in Los Angeles Police Dept. v. United
Reporting Publishing Corp., 528 U. S. 32 (1999), where the
Court held that a plaintiff could not raise a facial chal
lenge to a content-based restriction on access to governmentheld information. Because no private party faced a
threat of legal punishment, the Court characterized the
law at issue as “nothing more than a governmental denial
of access to information in its possession.” Id., at 40.
Under those circumstances the special reasons for permit
ting First Amendment plaintiffs to invoke the rights of
others did not apply. Id., at 38–39. Having found that the
plaintiff could not raise a facial challenge, the Court re
manded for consideration of an as-applied challenge. Id.,
at 41. United Reporting is thus a case about the availabil
ity of facial challenges. The Court did not rule on the
merits of any First Amendment claim.
United Reporting is distinguishable in at least two
respects. First, Vermont has imposed a restriction on
access to information in private hands. This confronts the
Court with a point reserved, and a situation not ad
dressed, in United Reporting. Here, unlike in United

