14

SORRELL v. IMS HEALTH INC.
Opinion of the Court

expression of potential recipients and so transgress the
First Amendment. See id., at 42 (SCALIA, J., concurring)
(suggesting that “a restriction upon access that allows
access to the press . . . but at the same time denies access
to persons who wish to use the information for certain
speech purposes, is in reality a restriction upon speech”);
id., at 43 (GINSBURG, J., concurring) (noting that “the
provision of [government] information is a kind of subsidy
to people who wish to speak” about certain subjects, “and
once a State decides to make such a benefit available to
the public, there are no doubt limits to its freedom to
decide how that benefit will be distributed”); id., at 46
(Stevens, J., dissenting) (concluding that, “because the
State’s discrimination is based on its desire to prevent the
information from being used for constitutionally protected
purposes, [i]t must assume the burden of justifying its
conduct”). Vermont’s law imposes a content- and speaker
based burden on respondents’ own speech. That consid
eration provides a separate basis for distinguishing United
Reporting and requires heightened judicial scrutiny.
The State also contends that heightened judicial scru
tiny is unwarranted in this case because sales, transfer,
and use of prescriber-identifying information are conduct,
not speech. Consistent with that submission, the United
States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit has charac
terized prescriber-identifying information as a mere “com
modity” with no greater entitlement to First Amendment protection than “beef jerky.” Ayotte, 550 F. 3d, at
52–53. In contrast the courts below concluded that a
prohibition on the sale of prescriber-identifying informa
tion is a content-based rule akin to a ban on the sale of
cookbooks, laboratory results, or train schedules. See 630
F. 3d, at 271–272 (“The First Amendment protects even
dry information, devoid of advocacy, political relevance, or
artistic expression” (internal quotation marks and altera
tion omitted)); 631 F. Supp. 2d, at 445 (“A restriction on

