(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SORRELL, ATTORNEY GENERAL OF VERMONT, 

ET AL. v. IMS HEALTH INC. ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 10–779.

Argued April 26, 2011—Decided June 23, 2011

Pharmaceutical manufacturers promote their drugs to doctors through
a process called “detailing.”
Pharmacies receive “prescriber
identifying information” when processing prescriptions and sell the
information to “data miners,” who produce reports on prescriber be
havior and lease their reports to pharmaceutical manufacturers.
“Detailers” employed by pharmaceutical manufacturers then use the
reports to refine their marketing tactics and increase sales to doctors.
Vermont’s Prescription Confidentiality Law provides that, absent the
prescriber’s consent, prescriber-identifying information may not be
sold by pharmacies and similar entities, disclosed by those entities
for marketing purposes, or used for marketing by pharmaceutical
manufacturers. Vt. Stat. Ann., Tit. 18, §4631(d). The prohibitions
are subject to exceptions that permit the prescriber-identifying in
formation to be disseminated and used for a number of purposes, e.g.,
“health care research.” §4631(e).
Respondents, Vermont data miners and an association of brand
name drug manufacturers, sought declaratory and injunctive relief
against state officials (hereinafter Vermont), contending that
§4631(d) violates their rights under the Free Speech Clause of the
First Amendment. The District Court denied relief, but the Second
Circuit reversed, holding that §4631(d) unconstitutionally burdens
the speech of pharmaceutical marketers and data miners without
adequate justification.
Held:
1. Vermont’s statute, which imposes content- and speaker-based
burdens on protected expression, is subject to heightened judicial
scrutiny. Pp. 6–15.

