Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
circumstance is sufficient to justify applying heightened scrutiny,
even assuming that prescriber-identifying information is a mere
commodity. Pp. 11–15.
2. Vermont’s justifications for §4631(d) do not withstand height
ened scrutiny. Pp. 15–24.
(a) The outcome here is the same whether a special commercial
speech inquiry or a stricter form of judicial scrutiny is applied, see,
e.g., Greater New Orleans Broadcasting Assn., Inc. v. United States,
527 U. S. 173, 184. To sustain §4631(d)’s targeted, content-based
burden on protected expression, Vermont must show at least that the
statute directly advances a substantial governmental interest and
that the measure is drawn to achieve that interest. See Board of
Trustees of State Univ. of N. Y. v. Fox, 492 U. S. 469, 480–481. Ver
mont contends that its law (1) is necessary to protect medical privacy,
including physician confidentiality, avoidance of harassment, and the
integrity of the doctor-patient relationship, and (2) is integral to the
achievement of the policy objectives of improving public health and
reducing healthcare costs. Pp. 15–17.
(b) Assuming that physicians have an interest in keeping their
prescription decisions confidential, §4631(d) is not drawn to serve
that interest. Pharmacies may share prescriber-identifying informa
tion with anyone for any reason except for marketing. Vermont
might have addressed physician confidentiality through “a more co
herent policy,” Greater New Orleans Broadcasting, supra, at 195,
such as allowing the information’s sale or disclosure in only a few
narrow and well-justified circumstances. But it did not. Given the in
formation’s widespread availability and many permissible uses, Ver
mont’s asserted interest in physician confidentiality cannot justify
the burdens that §4631(d) imposes on protected expression. It is true
that doctors can forgo the law’s advantages by consenting to the sale,
disclosure, and use of their prescriber-identifying information. But
the State has offered only a contrived choice: Either consent, which
will allow the doctor’s prescriber-identifying information to be dis
seminated and used without constraint; or, withhold consent, which
will allow the information to be used by those speakers whose mes
sage the State supports. Cf. Rowan v. Post Office Dept., 397 U. S.
728. Respondents suggest a further defect lies in §4631(d)’s pre
sumption of applicability absent an individual election to the con
trary. Reliance on a prior election, however, would not save a privacy
measure that imposed an unjustified burden on protected expression.
Vermont also asserts that its broad content-based rule is necessary to
avoid harassment, but doctors can simply decline to meet with detail
ers. Cf. Watchtower Bible & Tract Soc. of N. Y., Inc. v. Village of
Stratton, 536 U. S. 150, 168. Vermont further argues that detailers’

