Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

23

Opinion of the Court

targeted detailing based on prescriber-identifying infor
mation as “very helpful” because it allows detailers to
shape their messages to each doctor’s practice. App. 274;
see also id., at 181, 218, 271–272. Even the United States,
which appeared here in support of Vermont, took care to
dispute the State’s “unwarranted view that the dangers
of [n]ew drugs outweigh their benefits to patients.” Brief
for United States as Amicus Curiae 24, n. 4. There are di
vergent views regarding detailing and the prescription
of brand-name drugs. Under the Constitution, resolution of
that debate must result from free and uninhibited speech.
As one Vermont physician put it: “We have a saying in
medicine, information is power. And the more you know,
or anyone knows, the better decisions can be made.” App.
279. There are similar sayings in law, including that
“information is not in itself harmful, that people will
perceive their own best interests if only they are well
enough informed, and that the best means to that end is
to open the channels of communication rather than to
close them.” Virginia Bd., 425 U. S., at 770. The choice
“between the dangers of suppressing information, and the
dangers of its misuse if it is freely available” is one that
“the First Amendment makes for us.” Ibid.
Vermont may be displeased that detailers who use
prescriber-identifying information are effective in promot
ing brand-name drugs. The State can express that view
through its own speech. See Linmark, 431 U. S., at 97; cf.
§4622(a)(1) (establishing a prescription drug educational
program). But a State’s failure to persuade does not allow
it to hamstring the opposition. The State may not burden
the speech of others in order to tilt public debate in a
preferred direction. “The commercial marketplace, like
other spheres of our social and cultural life, provides a
forum where ideas and information flourish. Some of the
ideas and information are vital, some of slight worth. But
the general rule is that the speaker and the audience, not

