18

SORRELL v. IMS HEALTH INC.
BREYER, J., dissenting

vacy, 154 U. Pa. L. Rev. 477, 520–522 (2006); cf. NASA v.
Nelson, 562 U. S. ___, ___–___ (2011) (slip op., at 8–9)
(discussing privacy interests in nondisclosure).
At the same time, the record evidence is sufficient to
permit a legislature to conclude that the statute “directly
advances” each of these objectives. The statute helps to
focus sales discussions on an individual drug’s safety,
effectiveness, and cost, perhaps compared to other drugs
(including generics). These drug-related facts have every
thing to do with general information that drug manufac
turers likely possess. They have little, if anything, to do
with the name or prior prescription practices of the par
ticular doctor to whom a detailer is speaking. Shaping a
detailing message based on an individual doctor’s prior
prescription habits may help sell more of a particular
manufacturer’s particular drugs. But it does so by divert
ing attention from scientific research about a drug’s safety
and effectiveness, as well as its cost. This diversion comes
at the expense of public health and the State’s fiscal
interests.
Vermont compiled a substantial legislative record to
corroborate this line of reasoning. See Testimony of Sean
Flynn (Apr. 11, 2007), App. in No. 09–1913–cv(L) etc.
(CA2), p. A–1156 (hereinafter CA2 App.) (use of data
mining helps drug companies “to cover up information
that is not in the best of light of their drug and to high
light information that makes them look good”); Volker &
Outterson, New Legislative Trends Threaten the Way
Health Information Companies Operate, Pharmaceutical
Pricing & Reimbursement 2007, id., at A–4235 (one for
mer detailer considered prescriber-identifying data the
“ ‘greatest tool in planning our approach to manipulating
doctors’ ” (quoting Whitney, Big (Brother) Pharma: How
Drug Reps Know Which Doctors to Target, New Republic,
Aug. 29, 2006, http://www.tnr.com/article/84056/health
care-eli-lilly-pfizer-ama); Testimony of Paul Harrington

