Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

Opinion of the Court

that all privacy measures must avoid content-based rules.
Here, however, the State has conditioned privacy on ac
ceptance of a content-based rule that is not drawn to serve
the State’s asserted interest. To obtain the limited privacy
allowed by §4631(d), Vermont physicians are forced to
acquiesce in the State’s goal of burdening disfavored
speech by disfavored speakers.
Respondents suggest that a further defect of §4631(d)
lies in its presumption of applicability absent a physician’s
election to the contrary. Vermont’s law might burden less
speech if it came into operation only after an individual
choice, but a revision to that effect would not necessarily
save §4631(d). Even reliance on a prior election would not
suffice, for instance, if available categories of coverage by
design favored speakers of one political persuasion over
another. Rules that burden protected expression may not
be sustained when the options provided by the State are
too narrow to advance legitimate interests or too broad to
protect speech. As already explained, §4631(d) permits
extensive use of prescriber-identifying information and so
does not advance the State’s asserted interest in physician
confidentiality. The limited range of available privacy
options instead reflects the State’s impermissible purpose
to burden disfavored speech. Vermont’s argument accord
ingly fails, even if the availability and scope of private
election might be relevant in other contexts, as when the
statute’s design is unrelated to any purpose to advance a
preferred message.
The State also contends that §4631(d) protects doctors
from “harassing sales behaviors.” 2007 Vt. Laws No. 80,
§1(28). “Some doctors in Vermont are experiencing an
undesired increase in the aggressiveness of pharmaceuti
cal sales representatives,” the Vermont Legislature found,
“and a few have reported that they felt coerced and har
assed.” §1(20). It is doubtful that concern for “a few”
physicians who may have “felt coerced and harassed” by

