12

SORRELL v. IMS HEALTH INC.
BREYER, J., dissenting

point of view, for example, of the Congress and the ad
ministration that enacted them and ultimately the voters.
And they often aim at, and target, particular firms that
engage in practices about the merits of which the Gov
ernment and the firms may disagree. Section 2 of the
Sherman Act, 15 U. S. C. §2, for example, which limits the
truthful, nonmisleading speech of firms that, due to their
market power, can affect the competitive landscape, is
directly aimed at, and targeted at, monopolists.
In short, the case law in this area reflects the need to
ensure that the First Amendment protects the “market
place of ideas,” thereby facilitating the democratic creation
of sound government policies without improperly hamper
ing the ability of government to introduce an agenda, to
implement its policies, and to favor them to the exclusion
of contrary policies. To apply “heightened” scrutiny when
the regulation of commercial activities (which often in
volve speech) is at issue is unnecessarily to undercut the
latter constitutional goal. The majority’s view of this case
presents that risk.
Moreover, given the sheer quantity of regulatory initia
tives that touch upon commercial messages, the Court’s
vision of its reviewing task threatens to return us to a
happily bygone era when judges scrutinized legislation for
its interference with economic liberty. History shows that
the power was much abused and resulted in the constitu
tionalization of economic theories preferred by individual
jurists. See Lochner v. New York, 198 U. S. 45, 75–76
(1905) (Holmes, J., dissenting). By inviting courts to
scrutinize whether a State’s legitimate regulatory inter
ests can be achieved in less restrictive ways whenever
they touch (even indirectly) upon commercial speech,
today’s majority risks repeating the mistakes of the past
in a manner not anticipated by our precedents. See Cen
tral Hudson, 447 U. S., at 589 (Rehnquist, J., dissenting);
cf. Railroad Comm’n of Tex. v. Rowan & Nichols Oil Co.,

