Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

BREYER, J., dissenting

(May 3, 2007), id., at A–1437 (describing data mining
practices as “secret and manipulative activities by the
marketers”); Testimony of Julie Brill (May 3, 2007), id., at
A–1445 (restrictions on data mining “ensur[e] that the
FDA’s requirement of doctors receiving fair and balanced
information actually occurs”); Written Statement of Jerry
Avorn & Aaron Kesselheim, id., at A–4310 (citing studies
that “indicate that more physician-specific detailing will
lead to more prescriptions of brand-name agents, often
with no additional patient benefit but at much higher cost
to patients and to state-based insurance programs, which
will continue to drive up the cost of health care”); id., at
4311 (“Making it more difficult for manufacturers to tailor
their marketing strategies to the prescribing histories of
individual physicians would actually encourage detailers
to present physicians with a more neutral description of
the product”); see also Record in No. 1:07–cv–00188–jgm
(D Vt.), Doc. 414, pp. 53–57, 64 (hereinafter Doc. 414)
(summarizing record evidence).
These conclusions required the legislature to make
judgments about whether and how to ameliorate these
problems. And it is the job of regulatory agencies and
legislatures to make just these kinds of judgments. Ver
mont’s attempts to ensure a “fair balance” of information
is no different from the FDA’s similar requirement, see
21 CFR §§202.1(e)(1), 202.1(e)(5)(ii). No one has yet sug
gested that substantial portions of federal drug regulation
are unconstitutional. Why then should we treat Vermont’s
law differently?
The record also adequately supports the State’s privacy
objective. Regulatory rules in Vermont make clear that
the confidentiality of an individual doctor’s prescribing
practices remains the norm. See, e.g., Pharmacy Rule
8.7(c) (“Prescription and other patient health care infor
mation shall be secure from access by the public, and the
information shall be kept confidential”); Pharmacy Rule

