4

SORRELL v. IMS HEALTH INC.
Opinion of the Court

Finally, the Act’s prohibitions on sale, disclosure, and use
are subject to a list of exceptions. For example, prescriber
identifying information may be disseminated or used for
“health care research”; to enforce “compliance” with health
insurance formularies, or preferred drug lists; for “care
management educational communications provided to” pa
tients on such matters as “treatment options”; for law
enforcement operations; and for purposes “otherwise pro
vided by law.” §4631(e).
Act 80 also authorized funds for an “evidence-based pre
scription drug education program” designed to provide
doctors and others with “information and education on
the therapeutic and cost-effective utilization of prescription
drugs.” §4622(a)(1). An express aim of the program is
to advise prescribers “about commonly used brand-name
drugs for which the patent has expired” or will soon ex
pire. §4622(a)(2). Similar efforts to promote the use of
generic pharmaceuticals are sometimes referred to as
“counter-detailing.” App. 211; see also IMS Health Inc. v.
Ayotte, 550 F. 3d 42, 91 (CA1 2008) (Lipez, J., concurring
and dissenting).
The counterdetailer’s recommended
substitute may be an older, less expensive drug and not a
bioequivalent of the brand-name drug the physician might
otherwise prescribe. Like the pharmaceutical manufac
turers whose efforts they hope to resist, counterdetailers
in some States use prescriber-identifying information to
increase their effectiveness. States themselves may sup
ply the prescriber-identifying information used in these
programs. See App. 313; id., at 375 (“[W]e use the data
given to us by the State of Pennsylvania . . . to figure out
which physicians to talk to”); see also id., at 427–429
(Director of the Office of Vermont Health Access explain
ing that the office collects prescriber-identifying informa
tion but “does not at this point in time have a counter
detailing or detailing effort”). As first enacted, Act 80 also
required detailers to provide information about alternative

