22

SORRELL v. IMS HEALTH INC.
Opinion of the Court

certain speech by certain speakers—that is, by diminish
ing detailers’ ability to influence prescription decisions.
Those who seek to censor or burden free expression often
assert that disfavored speech has adverse effects. But the
“fear that people would make bad decisions if given truth
ful information” cannot justify content-based burdens on
speech. Thompson, 535 U. S., at 374; see also Virginia Bd.
of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, Inc.,
425 U. S. 748, 769–770 (1976). “The First Amendment
directs us to be especially skeptical of regulations that
seek to keep people in the dark for what the government
perceives to be their own good.” 44 Liquormart, supra, at
503 (opinion of Stevens, J.); see also Linmark Associates,
Inc. v. Willingboro, 431 U. S. 85, 97 (1977). These pre
cepts apply with full force when the audience, in this
case prescribing physicians, consists of “sophisticated and
experienced” consumers. Edenfield, 507 U. S., at 775.
As Vermont’s legislative findings acknowledge, the premise of §4631(d) is that the force of speech can justify
the government’s attempts to stifle it. Indeed the State
defends the law by insisting that “pharmaceutical market
ing has a strong influence on doctors’ prescribing prac
tices.” Brief for Petitioners 49–50. This reasoning is
incompatible with the First Amendment. In an attempt to
reverse a disfavored trend in public opinion, a State could
not ban campaigning with slogans, picketing with signs, or
marching during the daytime. Likewise the State may not
seek to remove a popular but disfavored product from the
marketplace by prohibiting truthful, nonmisleading adver
tisements that contain impressive endorsements or catchy
jingles. That the State finds expression too persuasive
does not permit it to quiet the speech or to burden its
messengers.
The defect in Vermont’s law is made clear by the fact
that many listeners find detailing instructive. Indeed the
record demonstrates that some Vermont doctors view

