2

MOHAMAD v. PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY
Syllabus
§2331(3). Pp. 2–5.
(b) Before a word will be assumed to have a meaning broader than
or different from its ordinary meaning, Congress must give some indication that it intended such a result. There are no such indications
in the TVPA. To the contrary, the statutory context confirms that
Congress in the Act created a cause of action against natural persons
alone. The Act’s liability provision uses the word “individual” five
times in the same sentence: once to refer to the perpetrator and four
times to refer to the victim. See TVPA §2(a). Since only a natural
person can be a victim of torture or extrajudicial killing, it is difficult
to conclude that Congress used “individual” four times in the same
sentence to refer to a natural person and once to refer to a natural
person and any nonsovereign organization. In addition, the TVPA
holds perpetrators liable for extrajudicial killing to “any person who
may be a claimant in an action for wrongful death.” See TVPA
§2(a)(2). “Persons” often has a broader meaning in the law than “individual,” and frequently includes non-natural persons. Construing
“individual” in the Act to encompass solely natural persons credits
Congress’ use of disparate terms. Pp. 5–6.
(c) Petitioners’ counterarguments are unpersuasive. Pp. 6–11.
(1) Petitioners dispute that the plain text of the TVPA requires
this Court’s result. First, they rely on definitions that frame “individual” in nonhuman terms, emphasizing the idea of “oneness,” but
these definitions make for an awkward fit in the context of the TVPA.
Next they claim that federal tort statutes uniformly provide for liability against organizations, a convention they maintain is common to
the legal systems of other nations. But while “Congress is understood to legislate against a background of common-law adjudicatory
principles,” Astoria Fed. Sav. & Loan Assn. v. Solimino, 501 U. S.
104, 108, Congress plainly evinced its intent in the TVPA not to subject organizations to liability. Petitioners next argue that the TVPA’s
scope of liability should be construed to conform with other federal
statutes they claim provide civil remedies to victims of torture or extrajudicial killing. But none of the statutes petitioners cite employs
the term “individual,” as the TVPA, to describe the covered defendant. Finally, although petitioners rightly note that the TVPA contemplates liability against officers who do not personally execute the
torture or extrajudicial killing, it does not follow that the Act embraces liability against nonsovereign organizations. Pp. 6–8.
(2) Petitioners also contend that legislative history supports their
broad reading of “individual,” but “reliance on legislative history is
unnecessary in light of the statute’s unambiguous language.” Milavetz, Gallop & Milavetz, P. A. v. United States, 559 U. S. ___, ___. In
any event, the history supports this Court’s interpretation. Pp. 8–10.

