Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

Petitioners 18 (citing, e.g., Webster’s 1152 (defining “individual” as “a single or particular being or thing or group
of being or things”)). Those definitions, however, do not
account even for petitioners’ preferred interpretation of “individual” in the Act, for foreign states—which petitioners concede are not liable under the Act—do not differ
from nonsovereign organizations in their degree of “oneness.” Moreover, “[w]ords that can have more than one
meaning are given content . . . by their surroundings,”
Whitman v. American Trucking Assns., Inc., 531 U. S. 457,
466 (2001), and for the reasons explained supra, petitioners’ definition makes for an awkward fit in the context of
the TVPA.
Petitioners next claim that federal tort statutes uniformly provide for liability against organizations, a convention they maintain is common to the legal systems of
other nations. We are not convinced, however, that any
such “domestic and international presumption of organizational liability” in tort actions overcomes the ordinary meaning of “individual.” Brief for Petitioners 16. It
is true that “Congress is understood to legislate against
a background of common-law adjudicatory principles.”
Astoria Fed. Sav. & Loan Assn. v. Solimino, 501 U. S. 104,
108 (1991). But Congress plainly can override those principles, see, e.g., id., at 108–109, and, as explained supra,
the TVPA’s text evinces a clear intent not to subject nonsovereign organizations to liability.4
——————
4 Petitioners’ separate contention that the TVPA must be construed
in light of international agreements prohibiting torture and extrajudicial killing fails for similar reasons. Whatever the scope of those agreements, the TVPA does not define “individual” by reference to them,
and principles they elucidate cannot overcome the statute’s text. The
same is true of petitioners’ suggestion that Congress in the TVPA
imported a “specialized usage” of the word “individual” in international
law. Brief for Petitioners 6. There is no indication in the text of the
statute or legislative history that Congress knew of any such specialized usage of the term, much less intended to import it into the Act.

