2

LEWIS v. CHICAGO
Syllabus
that the suit was untimely because the earliest EEOC charge was
filed more than 300 days after the only discriminatory act—sorting
the scores into the “well qualified,” “qualified,” and “not qualified”
categories. The later hiring decisions, the Seventh Circuit held, were
an automatic consequence of the test scores, not new discriminatory
acts.

Held: A plaintiff who does not file a timely charge challenging the adop
tion of a practice may assert a disparate-impact claim in a timely
charge challenging the employer’s later application of that practice as
long as he alleges each of the elements of a disparate-impact claim.
Pp. 4–11.
(a) Determining whether petitioners’ charges were timely requires
“identify[ing] precisely the ‘unlawful employment practice’ of which”
they complain. Delaware State College v. Ricks, 449 U. S. 250, 257.
With the exception of the first selection round, all agree that the chal
lenged practice here—the City’s selection of firefighter hires on the
basis announced in 1996—occurred within the charging period.
Thus, the question is not whether a claim predicated on that conduct
is timely, but whether the practice thus defined can be the basis for a
disparate-impact claim at all. It can. A Title VII plaintiff establishes
a prima facie claim by showing that the employer “uses a particular
employment practice that causes a disparate impact” on one of the
prohibited bases. §2000e–2(k). The term “employment practice”
clearly encompasses the conduct at issue: exclusion of passing appli
cants who scored below 89 when selecting those who would advance.
The City “use[d]” that practice each time it filled a new class of fire
fighters, and petitioners allege that doing so caused a disparate im
pact. It is irrelevant that subsection (k) does not address “accrual” of
disparate-impact claims, since the issue here is not when the claims
accrued but whether the claims stated a violation. They did.
Whether petitioners proved a violation is not before the Court.
Pp. 4–7.
(b) The City argues that the only actionable discrimination oc
curred in 1996 when it used the test results to create the hiring list,
which it concedes was unlawful. It may be true that the City’s adop
tion in 1996 of the cutoff score gave rise to a freestanding disparate
impact claim. If so, because no timely charge was filed, the City is
now “entitled to treat that past act as lawful,” United Air Lines, Inc.
v. Evans, 431 U. S. 553, 558. But it does not follow that no new viola
tion occurred—and no new claims could arise—when the City later
implemented the 1996 decision. Evans and later cases the City cites
establish only that a Title VII plaintiff must show a “present viola
tion” within the limitations period. For disparate-treatment claims—
which require discriminatory intent—the plaintiff must demonstrate

