(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

LEWIS ET AL. v. CITY OF CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–974.

Argued February 22, 2010—Decided May 24, 2010

In 1995, respondent the City of Chicago gave a written examination to
applicants seeking firefighter positions. In January 1996, the City
announced it would draw candidates randomly from a list of appli
cants who scored at least 89 out of 100 points on the examination,
whom it designated as “well qualified.” It informed those who scored
below 65 that they had failed and would not be considered further. It
informed applicants who scored between 65 and 88, whom it desig
nated as “qualified,” that it was unlikely they would be called for fur
ther processing but that the City would keep them on the eligibility
list for as long as that list was used. That May, the City selected its
first class of applicants to advance, and it repeated this process mul
tiple times over the next six years. Beginning in March 1997, several
African-American applicants who scored in the “qualified” range but
had not been hired filed discrimination charges with the Equal Em
ployment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and received right-to-sue
letters. They then filed suit, alleging (as relevant here) that the
City’s practice of selecting only applicants who scored 89 or above
had a disparate impact on African-Americans in violation of Title VII
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, see 42 U. S. C. §2000e–2(k)(1)(A)(i).
The District Court certified a class—petitioners here—of AfricanAmericans who scored in the “qualified” range but were not hired.
The court denied the City’s summary judgment motion, rejecting its
claim that petitioners had failed to file EEOC charges within 300
days “after the unlawful employment practice occurred,” §2000e–
5(e)(1), and finding instead that the City’s “ongoing reliance” on the
1995 test results constituted a continuing Title VII violation. The
litigation then proceeded, and petitioners prevailed on the merits.
The Seventh Circuit reversed the judgment in their favor, holding

