Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

ALITO, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 11–45
_________________

MICHAEL B. ELGIN, ET AL., PETITIONERS v. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY ET AL.
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE FIRST CIRCUIT

[June 11, 2012] 


JUSTICE ALITO, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG and
JUSTICE KAGAN join, dissenting.
Petitioners are former federal employees who were
discharged for failing to register for the military draft as
required under 5 U. S. C. §3328. They filed a putative
class-action suit in Federal District Court, arguing that
the registration requirement is facially unconstitutional
because it discriminates on the basis of gender and operates as a bill of attainder. Their complaint sought backpay as well as declaratory and injunctive relief reinstating
their employment and preventing the Government from
enforcing §3328 against them.
The Court affirms the dismissal of petitioners’ suit on
the ground that the Civil Service Reform Act (CSRA)
provides an exclusive administrative remedy for claims of
wrongful termination brought by covered federal employees. Because the CSRA provides an avenue for employees
to pursue their grievances through the Merit Systems
Protection Board, the majority concludes, Congress must
have intended to remove petitioners’ claims from the
ordinary ambit of the federal courts.
The problem with the majority’s reasoning is that petitioners’ constitutional claims are a far cry from the type of
claim that Congress intended to channel through the
Board. The Board’s mission is to adjudicate fact-specific


2

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
ALITO, J., dissenting

employment disputes within the existing statutory framework. By contrast, petitioners argue that one key provision of that framework is facially unconstitutional. Not
only does the Board lack authority to adjudicate facial
constitutional challenges, but such challenges are wholly
collateral to the type of claims that the Board is authorized to hear.
The majority attempts to defend its holding by noting
that, although the Board cannot consider petitioners’
claims, petitioners may appeal from the Board to the
Federal Circuit, which does have authority to address
facial constitutional claims. But that does not cure the
oddity of requiring such claims to be filed initially before
the Board, which can do nothing but pass them along
unaddressed, leaving the Federal Circuit to act as a court
of first review, but with little capacity for factfinding.
Because I doubt that Congress intended to channel
petitioners’ constitutional claims into an administrative
tribunal that is powerless to decide them, I respectfully
dissent.
I
As a general matter, federal district courts have “original jurisdiction of all civil actions arising under the Constitution, laws, or treaties of the United States.” 28
U. S. C. §1331. Under this provision, it has long been
“established practice for this Court to sustain the jurisdiction of federal courts to issue injunctions to protect rights
safeguarded by the Constitution.” Bell v. Hood, 327 U. S.
678, 684 (1946). In light of §1331, the question is not
whether Congress has specifically conferred jurisdiction,
but whether it has taken it away. See Whitman v. Department of Transportation, 547 U. S. 512, 514 (2006)
(per curiam).
Congress may remove certain claims from the general
jurisdiction of the federal courts in order to channel these


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

ALITO, J., dissenting

claims into a system of statutory review. For example, in
Shalala v. Illinois Council on Long Term Care, Inc., 529
U. S. 1 (2000), we considered a clause providing that “no
action . . . to recover on any claim” arising under the Medicare laws “shall be brought under section 1331 . . . of title
28,” id., at 5 (quoting 42 U. S. C. §405(h) (brackets omitted)). When dealing with an express preclusion clause like
this, we determine the scope of preclusion simply by interpreting the words Congress has chosen.
We have also recognized that preclusion can be implied.
When Congress creates an administrative process to handle certain types of claims, it impliedly removes those
claims from the ordinary jurisdiction of the federal courts.
Under these circumstances, the test is whether “the ‘statutory scheme’ displays a ‘fairly discernible’ intent to limit jurisdiction and the claims at issue ‘are of the type Congress
intended to be reviewed within th[e] statutory structure.’ ”
Free Enterprise Fund v. Public Company Accounting
Oversight Bd., 561 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 8)
(quoting Thunder Basin Coal Co. v. Reich, 510 U. S. 200,
207, 212 (1994); alteration in Free Enterprise). In making
this determination, we look to “the statute’s language,
structure, and purpose, its legislative history, and whether
the claims can be afforded meaningful review” through
the alternative administrative process that Congress
has established. Thunder Basin, supra, at 207 (citation
omitted).
We have emphasized two important factors for determining whether Congress intended an agency to have
exclusive original jurisdiction over a claim. The first is
whether the claim falls within the agency’s area of expertise, which would give the agency a comparative advantage over the courts in resolving the claim. “Generally,
when Congress creates procedures ‘designed to permit
agency expertise to be brought to bear on particular problems,’ those procedures ‘are to be exclusive.’ ” Free Enter-


4

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
ALITO, J., dissenting

prise Fund, supra, at ___(slip op., at 8) (quoting Whitney
Nat. Bank in Jefferson Parish v. Bank of New Orleans &
Trust Co., 379 U. S. 411, 420 (1965)).
Second, even if a claim would not benefit from agency
expertise, we nonetheless consider whether the claim is legally or factually related to the type of dispute the agency
is authorized to hear. If so, the claim may be channeled
through the administrative process to guard against
claim-splitting, which could involve redundant analysis of
overlapping issues of law and fact. But for claims that fall
outside the agency’s expertise and are “wholly collateral”
to the type of dispute the agency is authorized to hear, the
interest in requiring unified administrative review is
considerably reduced. Thunder Basin, supra, at 212 (internal quotation marks omitted); see also Free Enterprise
Fund, supra, at ___ – ___ (slip op., at 8–10).
II
The CSRA was enacted to “provide the people of the
United States with a competent, honest, and productive
Federal work force reflective of the Nation’s diversity, and
to improve the quality of public service.” §3(1), 92 Stat.
1112. To that end, the Act created an “integrated scheme
of administrative and judicial review [of personnel actions], designed to balance the legitimate interests of the
various categories of federal employees with the needs of
sound and efficient administration.” United States v.
Fausto, 484 U. S. 439, 445 (1988).
Chapter 75 of Title 5 sets forth detailed procedures for
adverse actions taken against certain covered employees
“for such cause as will promote the efficiency of the service.” 5 U. S. C. §7513(a). When an agency takes such an
action, it must provide the employee with advance written
notice of the action and the specific reasons for it, give the
employee an opportunity to respond, allow the employee to
be represented by an attorney, and provide the employee


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

ALITO, J., dissenting

with a final written decision. See §§7513(b)(1)–(4). Following these internal agency procedures, an aggrieved
employee may appeal to the Merit Systems Protection
Board. §7513(d).
The Board’s mission is “to ensure that Federal employees are protected against abuses by agency management,
that Executive branch agencies make employment decisions in accordance with the merit system principles, and
that Federal merit systems are kept free of prohibited
personnel practices.” Merit Systems Protection Board, An
Introduction to the Merit Systems Protection Board 5
(1999). The Board adjudicates employment disputes in
accordance with applicable federal laws and regulations,
including the “[m]erit system principles” and “[p]rohibited
personnel principles” identified in §§2301, 2302. After
the Board renders a decision, the United States Court of
Appeals for the Federal Circuit has exclusive jurisdiction
on appeal. See §§7703(a)(1), (b)(1); 28 U. S. C. §1295(a)(9).
The parties agree that petitioners are covered employees
who may file an appeal to the Board protesting their removal from federal employment. The parties also agree,
however, that the Board lacks authority to adjudicate
claims like those asserted by petitioners, which attack the
validity of a federal statute as a facial matter. As this
Court has noted, “[a]djudication of the constitutionality
of congressional enactments has generally been thought
beyond the jurisdiction of administrative agencies.” Thunder Basin, supra, at 214 (alteration in original; internal quotation marks omitted). The Board itself has
consistently taken the position that it lacks “authority to
determine the constitutionality of statutes.” Malone v.
Department of Justice, 14 MSPR 403, 406 (1983) (citing
Montana Ch. of Assn. of Civilian Technicians, Inc. v.
Young, 514 F. 2d 1165, 1167 (CA9 1975)). Thus, the
Board’s own self-described role in the administrative
process is simply to apply the relevant statutes as written,


6

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
ALITO, J., dissenting

without addressing any facial challenges to the validity of
those statutes.
III
There is no basis for the majority’s conclusion that
petitioners must file their constitutional challenges before the Board instead of a federal district court. Congress
has not expressly curtailed the jurisdiction of the federal
courts to consider facial constitutional claims relating to
federal employment, and no such limitation can be fairly
discerned from the CSRA. Not only are petitioners’ claims
“wholly collateral to [the CSRA’s] review provisions and
outside the agency’s expertise,” Thunder Basin, 510 U. S.,
at 212 (internal quotation marks omitted), but the Board
itself admits that it is completely powerless to consider the
merits of petitioners’ arguments. In short, neither efficiency nor agency expertise can explain why Congress
would want the Board to have exclusive jurisdiction over
claims like these. To the contrary, imposing a scheme of
exclusive administrative review in this context breeds
inefficiency and creates a procedural framework that is
needlessly vexing.
A
Petitioners argue that registration for the military
draft violates the Equal Protection and Bill of Attainder
Clauses. These facial constitutional arguments are entirely
outside the Board’s power to decide, and they do not remotely implicate the Board’s administrative expertise.
They have nothing to do with the statutory rules of federal
employment, and nothing to do with any application of the
“merit system principles” or the “prohibited personnel
practices” that the Board administers.
Petitioners’ constitutional claims also have no relation
to any of the facts that might be relevant to a proceeding
before the Board. The Board typically addresses factual


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

ALITO, J., dissenting

issues pertaining to the specific circumstances in which
employee grievances arise. For example: Why was a
particular employee removed from federal employment?
Does the employer have a sound, nonprohibited basis for
the employment action in question? See, e.g., Davis v.
Department of Veterans Affairs, 106 MSPR 654, 657–658
(2007).
By contrast, petitioners’ claims involve general factual
issues pertaining to the facial constitutionality of the
military draft. The equal protection question is whether
men and women are sufficiently different to justify disparate treatment under the Selective Service Act. Rostker v.
Goldberg, 453 U. S. 57, 78 (1981). The factual record that
petitioners wish to develop would address issues of gender
difference that might be considered relevant to military
service. See Brief for Petitioners 48 (alleging that “women’s role in the military has changed dramatically in the
past thirty years”). Likewise, under the Bill of Attainder
Clause, the key question is whether requiring draft registration as a condition of federal employment amounts to
the singling out of a particular person or group for punishment without trial. See Nixon v. Administrator of
General Services, 433 U. S. 425, 468–469. Whatever the
relevant facts may be on either claim, it is clear that they
can have no conceivable bearing on any matter the Board
is authorized to address.
B
Administrative agencies typically do not adjudicate
facial constitutional challenges to the laws that they administer. Such challenges not only lie outside the realm of
special agency expertise, but they are also wholly collateral to other types of claims that the agency is empowered
to consider. When “the administrative appeals process
does not address the kind of . . . constitutional claims” at
issue, we cannot infer that Congress intended to “limit[t]


8

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
ALITO, J., dissenting

judicial review of these claims to the procedures set forth
in [the statutory scheme].” McNary v. Haitian Refugee
Center, Inc., 498 U. S. 479, 493 (1991).
Several other cases confirm this basic principle. In Free
Enterprise Fund, for example, the plaintiffs were not
required to pursue their constitutional claims through the
Public Accounting Company Oversight Board, because
they were challenging the very existence of the Board itself. 561 U. S., at ___ – ___ (slip op., at 8–10). Likewise,
in Johnson v. Robison, 415 U. S. 361, 373–374 (1974).
Where petitioners brought claims “challenging the constitutionality of laws providing benefits,” the Court held that
these claims were not precluded by a statute creating
exclusive administrative review over how those benefits
were administered. And in Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U. S.
319, 327–332 (1976), we held that although a party challenging the denial of statutory benefits was generally
required to proceed through the statutory process of administrative review, a constitutional challenge to the administrative process itself could still be brought directly
in federal court.
The present case follows the same pattern: Petitioners
are challenging the facial validity of a law that the Board
is bound to apply to them, and so it makes little sense for
them to seek review before the Board.
The wholly collateral nature of petitioners’ claims
makes them readily distinguishable from claims that this
Court has held to be impliedly excluded from the original
jurisdiction of the federal courts. In Fausto, for example,
we held that the CSRA precluded a statutory Back Pay
Act claim involving a dispute over whether an employee
had engaged in unauthorized use of a Government vehicle.
484 U. S., at 455. The plaintiff in that case did not challenge the constitutional validity of the applicable legal
framework, but argued instead that the framework had
been improperly applied to him. He argued that he had


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

ALITO, J., dissenting

been wrongfully suspended from work, and that he was
entitled to backpay as a result. Id., at 440. For that type
of fact-specific personnel dispute, we determined, Congress had intended for the CSRA’s comprehensive administrative scheme to provide the exclusive avenue of relief.
Id., at 455.
Similarly, in Bush v. Lucas, 462 U. S. 367 (1983), we
declined to allow a claim under Bivens v. Six Unknown
Fed. Narcotics Agents, 403 U. S. 388 (1971), brought by an
employee seeking money damages for an alleged “retaliatory demotion or discharge because he ha[d] exercised his
First Amendment rights.” 462 U. S., at 381. Although
the claim was constitutional in nature, we noted that it
“ar[o]se out of an employment relationship that is governed by comprehensive procedural and substantive provisions” that had been enacted by Congress. Id., at 368.
The employee was pursuing an as-applied challenge that
depended on the case-specific facts of why he had been
fired. The gravamen of the employee’s claim was that he
had been “unfairly disciplined for making critical comments about [his agency].” Id., at 386. Under the statutory scheme that Congress had created, the employee could
have pursued a very similar statutory claim for wrongful
removal within the administrative process. Id., at 386–
388. Under these circumstances, we found that Congress
did not intend to allow a duplicative nonstatutory claim
for damages based on the same set of underlying facts.
Finally, the majority’s reliance on Thunder Basin is
entirely misplaced. See ante, at 13. In that case, we
found that a statutory scheme impliedly precluded a
pre-enforcement challenge brought by a mining company
seeking to enjoin an order issued by the Mine Safety and
Health Administration. 510 U. S., at 205. Importantly,
the plaintiff company was seeking review of purely statutory claims that were reviewable in the first instance by
the administrative commission that Congress had estab-


10

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
ALITO, J., dissenting

lished. The only constitutional issue was a matter of
timing: The company argued that it had a due process
right to immediate judicial review of its statutory claims,
because it would suffer irreparable harm if it were forced
to wait until after the agency initiated an enforcement
action. Ibid. The Court disagreed, holding that the statutory scheme was “consistent with due process” even
though it provided for only postenforcement review. Id.,
at 218. Thus, the Court rejected the company’s constitutional claim “not on preclusion grounds but on the merits.”
Id., at 219 (SCALIA, J., concurring in part and concurring
in judgment). The heart of the preclusion analysis was
that the company could not use a preenforcement challenge to obtain judicial review of statutory claims that
Congress had clearly intended to channel into administrative review.*
C
By requiring facial constitutional claims to be filed
before the Board, the majority’s holding sets up an odd
sequence of procedural hoops for petitioners to jump
——————
* The majority contends that the petitioner in Thunder Basin really
had two distinct constitutional claims. The primary constitutional
claim was a “due process challenge to a statute that permitted a regulatory agency, before a hearing, to immediately fine the petitioner for
noncompliance with the statute.” Ante, at 14, n. 6. On top of this,
according to the majority, the petitioner also had a separate constitutional claim, which asserted that precluding initial judicial review of
the first constitutional claim would violate due process. In the majority’s view, only the latter claim was rejected on the merits. But this
hairsplitting makes no difference. The entire thrust of the petitioner’s
constitutional argument was simply that proceeding through the statutory scheme would make meaningful judicial review impossible.
The Court rejected that argument, effectively disposing of any constitutional infirmity that the petitioner alleged. Unlike in the present case,
there was no freestanding constitutional claim attacking the validity
of the statutory framework on substantive rather than procedural
grounds.


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

ALITO, J., dissenting

through. As the Government concedes, the Board is powerless to adjudicate facial constitutional claims, and so
these claims cannot be addressed on the merits until they
reach the Federal Circuit on appeal. As a result, the
Federal Circuit will be forced to address the claims in the
first instance, without the benefit of any relevant factfinding at the administrative level. This is a strange result,
because “statutes that provide for only a single level of
judicial review in the courts of appeals are traditionally
viewed as warranted only in circumstances where district
court factfinding would unnecessarily duplicate an adequate administrative record.” McNary, 498 U. S., at 497
(internal quotation marks omitted).
The Government admits that the absence of first-tier
factfinding might very well result in “the initial record”
being “insufficient to permit meaningful consideration of
a constitutional claim,” but suggests that the court could
always “remand the case to the [Board] for further factual
development.” Brief for Respondents 41. The majority
accepts this solution, ante, at 15, but it is hard to see how
it will work in practice. Without any authority to decide
merits issues, the Board may find it difficult to adjudicate
disputes about the relevancy of evidence sought in discovery. Nor will the Board find it easy to figure out which
facts it must find before sending the case back to the
Federal Circuit.
Even if these problems can be overcome, that will not
resolve the needless complexity of the majority’s approach.
According to the majority, petitioners should file their
claims with the Board, which must then kick the claims
up to the Federal Circuit, which must then remand the
claims back to the Board, which must then develop the
record and send the case back to the Federal Circuit,
which can only then consider the constitutional issues.
To be sure, this might be sufficient to afford “meaningful
review” of petitioners’ claims, ante, at 16–17, but that is


12

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY
ALITO, J., dissenting

not the only consideration. The question is whether it
is “fairly discernible” that Congress intended to impose
these pinball procedural requirements instead of permitting
petitioners’ claims to be decided in a regular lawsuit in
federal district court. And why would it? As already
noted, the benefits of preventing claim-splitting are considerably reduced with respect to facial constitutional
claims that are wholly collateral to an administrative
proceeding. Because collateral constitutional claims have
no overlap with the issues of law and fact that will pertain
to the administrative proceeding, allowing the constitutional claims to be adjudicated separately before a district
court does not invite wasteful or duplicative review. It
simply allows the district court to develop the factual
record and then provide a first-tier legal analysis, thereby
enhancing both the quality and efficiency of appellate
review.
To the extent that there is some need to prevent claimsplitting, that purpose is already served by ordinary principles of claim preclusion. Plaintiffs generally must bring
all claims arising out of a common set of facts in a single
lawsuit, and federal district courts have discretion to
enforce that requirement as necessary “to avoid duplicative litigation.” Colorado River Water Conservation Dist.
v. United States, 424 U. S. 800, 817 (1976); Stone v. Department of Aviation, 453 F. 3d 1271, 1278 (CA10 2006)
(“A plaintiff ’s obligation to bring all related claims together
in the same action arises under the common-law rule of
claim preclusion prohibiting the splitting of actions”). See
also 18 C. Wright et al., Federal Practice and Procedure
§4406, p. 40 (2d ed. 2002, Supp. 2011) (discussing “principles of ‘claim splitting’ that are similar to claim preclusion,
but that do not require prior judgment”). Thus, if an
aggrieved employee goes to a district court with claims
that would duplicate the factfinding or legal analysis of a
separate Board proceeding, the district court would be free


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

ALITO, J., dissenting

to dismiss the case.
The majority suggests that its approach will allow the
Board to resolve some cases on nonconstitutional grounds,
thus avoiding needless adjudication of constitutional issues. See ante, at 18. But achieving that goal does not
require the blunt instrument of jurisdictional preclusion.
District courts have broad discretion to manage their
dockets, including the power to refrain from reviewing a
constitutional claim pending adjudication of a nonconstitutional claim that might moot the case. See Kerotest Mfg.
Co. v. C-O-Two Fire Equipment Co., 342 U. S. 180, 183
(1952) (acknowledging the equitable discretion of courts,
in furtherance of “[w]ise judicial administration” and
“conservation of judicial resources,” to stay proceedings to
prevent “two litigations where one will suffice” (internal
quotation marks omitted)). In short, the district courts
are well equipped to guard against piecemeal litigation
without any help from the majority’s holding.
Finally, the majority contends that channeling facial
constitutional claims through the Board is necessary to
provide “clear guidance about the proper forum for the
employee’s claims at the outset of the case.” Ante, at 11.
Because it can be hard to tell the difference between facial
and as-applied challenges, the majority argues, it is less
confusing simply to require that all claims must be
brought before the Board. This is a red herring. Labels
aside, the most sensible rule would be to allow initial
judicial review of constitutional claims that attack the
validity of a statute based on its inherent characteristics,
not as a result of how the statute has been applied. That
line is bright enough, and the distinction is already one
that the Board must draw based on its own determination
that it can hear some as-applied challenges but lacks
“authority to determine the constitutionality of statutes.”
Malone, 14 MSPR, at 406.


14

ELGIN v. DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY 

ALITO, J., dissenting


IV 

The presumptive power of the federal courts to hear
constitutional challenges is well established. In this case,
however, the majority relies on a very weak set of inferences to strip the courts of their original jurisdiction over
petitioners’ claims. Because I believe Congress would
have been very surprised to learn that it implied this
result when it passed the CSRA, I respectfully dissent.

