Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1322
_________________

MICHAEL J. ASTRUE, COMMISSIONER OF SOCIAL
SECURITY, PETITIONER v. CATHERINE G. RATLIFF
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
APPEALS FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
[June 14, 2010]

JUSTICE THOMAS delivered the opinion of the Court.
Section 204(d) of the Equal Access to Justice Act
(EAJA), codified in 28 U. S. C. §2412(d), provides in perti
nent part that “a court shall award to a prevailing party
. . . fees and other expenses . . . in any civil action . . .
brought by or against the United States . . . unless the
court finds that the position of the United States was
substantially justified.” We consider whether an award of
“fees and other expenses” to a “prevailing party” under
§2412(d) is payable to the litigant or to his attorney. We
hold that a §2412(d) fees award is payable to the litigant
and is therefore subject to a Government offset to satisfy a
pre-existing debt that the litigant owes the United States.
I
This case arises out of proceedings in which a Social
Security claimant, Ruby Willows Kills Ree, prevailed on a
claim for benefits against the United States. Respondent
Catherine Ratliff was Ree’s attorney in those proceedings.
The District Court granted Ree’s unopposed motion for a
§2412(d) fees award in the amount of $2,112.60. Before
the United States paid the fees award, however, it discov


2

ASTRUE v. RATLIFF
Opinion of the Court

ered that Ree owed the Government a debt that predated
the District Court’s approval of the award. Accordingly,
the United States sought an administrative offset against
the fees award to satisfy part of that debt.
The Government’s authority to use administrative
offsets is statutory. See 31 U. S. C. §§3711(a), 3716(a)
(authorizing an agency whose debt collection attempts are
unsuccessful to “collect the claim by administrative off
set”).1 Congress has subjected to offset all “funds payable
by the United States,” §3701(a)(1), to an individual who
owes certain delinquent federal debts, see §3701(b),
unless, as relevant here, payment is exempted by statute,
see §3716(e)(2). No such exemption applies to attorney’s
fees awards under 28 U. S. C. §2412(d)(1)(A) (hereinafter
subsection (d)(1)(A)), which are otherwise subject to offset,
see 31 CFR §285.5(e)(1) (2009), and which, as of January
2005, are covered by the Treasury Offset Program (TOP)
operated by the Treasury Department’s Financial Man
agement Service (FMS). See Brief for Petitioner 4 (ex
plaining TOP’s extension to cover so-called “ ‘miscellane
ous’ ” payments that include attorney’s fees payments
the Treasury Department makes on behalf of federal
agencies).2
——————
1 Section

3701 defines an administrative offset as “withholding funds
payable by the United States” to the debtor. §3701(a)(1). An agency
may effect such an offset by cooperating with another agency to with
hold such funds, or by notifying the Treasury Department of the debt so
Treasury may include it in Treasury’s centralized offset program. See
31 CFR §§285.5(d)(2), 901.3(b)(1), (c). Alternatively, the Treasury
Department may attempt an administrative offset after receiving notice
from a creditor agency that a legally enforceable nontax debt has
become more than 180 days delinquent. See 31 U. S. C. §3716(c)(6); 31
CFR §§285.5(d)(1), 901.3(b)(1).
2 Respondent Ratliff argues for the first time in her merits brief be
fore this Court that the 2005 amendments to the FMS regulations
exempt the EAJA fees award in this case from administrative offset
against Ree’s outstanding federal debt. See Brief for Respondent 8, 46


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

In this case, the Government, relying on the TOP, noti
fied Ree that the Government would apply her §2412(d)
fees award to offset a portion of her outstanding federal
debt. Ratliff intervened to challenge the offset on the
grounds that §2412(d) fees belong to a litigant’s attorney
and thus may not be used to offset or otherwise satisfy a
litigant’s federal debts. The District Court held that
because §2412(d) directs that fees be awarded to the pre
vailing party, not to her attorney, Ratliff lacked standing
to challenge the Government’s proposed offset. See No.
CIV. 06–5070–RHB, 2007 WL 6894710, *1 (D SD, May 10,
2007).
The Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit reversed.
540 F. 3d 800 (2008). It held that under Circuit precedent,
“EAJA attorneys’ fees are awarded to prevailing parties’
attorneys.” Id., at 802. The Court of Appeals recognized
that its decision did not accord with a “literal interpreta
tion of the EAJA,” ibid., and exacerbated a split among the
Courts of Appeals, compare id., at 801–802, with, e.g.,
Reeves v. Astrue, 526 F. 3d 732, 733 (CA11 2008); Manning
v. Astrue, 510 F. 3d 1246, 1249–1251 (CA10 2007); FDL
Technologies, Inc. v. United States, 967 F. 2d 1578, 1580
(CA Fed. 1992); Panola Land Buying Assn. v. Clark, 844
F. 2d 1506, 1510–1511 (CA11 1988).3 We granted certio
rari. 557 U. S. ___ (2009).
——————
(citing 31 CFR §285.5(e)(5)). We need not decide this question because
Ratliff did not raise the regulations as a bar to offset in her brief in
opposition to the Government’s petition for a writ of certiorari, see this
Court’s Rule 15.2, or in the proceedings below.
3 The split exists in the Social Security context because the Social
Security Act (SSA), 49 Stat. 620, as amended, 42 U. S. C. §301 et seq.,
provides for payment of attorney’s fees awards directly to counsel, see
§406(b)(1)(A), and until 2006 the Government in many cases treated
fees awards under EAJA the same way, see Reply Brief for Petitioner
13−14.


4

ASTRUE v. RATLIFF 

Opinion of the Court 


II 

Subsection (d)(1)(A) directs that courts “shall award to a
prevailing party . . . fees and other expenses . . . incurred
by that party.” (Emphasis added.) We have long held that
the term “prevailing party” in fee statutes is a “term of
art” that refers to the prevailing litigant. See, e.g., Buck
hannon Board & Care Home, Inc. v. West Virginia Dept. of
Health and Human Resources, 532 U. S. 598, 603 (2001).
This treatment reflects the fact that statutes that award
attorney’s fees to a prevailing party are exceptions to the
“ ‘American Rule’ ” that each litigant “bear [his] own attor
ney’s fees.” Id., at 602 (citing Key Tronic Corp. v. United
States, 511 U. S. 809, 819 (1994)). Nothing in EAJA sup
ports a different reading. Cf. Arthur Andersen LLP v.
Carlisle, 556 U. S. ___, ___, n. 4 (2009) (slip op., at 6, n. 4)
(where Congress employs “identical words and phrases
within the same statute,” they are presumed to carry “the
same meaning” (internal quotation marks omitted)).
Indeed, other subsections within §2412(d) underscore that
the term “prevailing party” in subsection (d)(1)(A) carries
its usual and settled meaning—prevailing litigant. Those
other subsections clearly distinguish the party who re
ceives the fees award (the litigant) from the attorney who
performed the work that generated the fees. See, e.g.,
§2412(d)(1)(B) (hereinafter subsection (d)(1)(B)) (the “pre
vailing party” must apply for the fees award and “sho[w]”
that he “is a prevailing party and is eligible to receive an
award” by, among other things, submitting “an itemized
statement from any attorney . . . representing or appearing
in behalf of the party” that details the attorney’s hourly
rate and time spent on the case (emphasis added)); see
also Part III, infra.
Ratliff nonetheless asserts that subsection (d)(1)(A)’s
use of the verb “award” renders §2412(d) fees payable
directly to a prevailing party’s attorney and thus protects
the fees from a Government offset against the prevailing


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

party’s federal debts. See Brief for Respondent 11−19
(arguing that subsection (d)(1)(A)’s use of the word
“ ‘award’ ” “expressly incorporates a critical distinction”
between the right to an “ ‘award’ ” of fees and the right to
“ ‘receiv[e]’ ” the fees). We disagree.
The transitive verb “ ‘award’ ” has a settled meaning in
the litigation context: It means “[t]o give or assign by
sentence or judicial determination.” Black’s Law Diction
ary 125 (5th ed. 1979) (emphasis added); see also Web
ster’s Third New International Dictionary 152 (1993) (“to
give by judicial decree” (emphasis added)). The plain
meaning of the word “award” in subsection (d)(1)(A) is
thus that the court shall “give or assign by . . . judicial
determination” to the “prevailing party” (here, Ratliff’s
client Ree) attorney’s fees in the amount sought and sub
stantiated under, inter alia, subsection (d)(1)(B).
Ratliff’s contrary argument does not withstand scrutiny.
According to Ratliff, subsection (d)(1)(B), which uses “the
noun ‘award’ ” to mean a “ ‘decision,’ ” requires us to con
strue subsection (d)(1)(A) (which uses “award” as a verb)
to mean that “[o]nly the prevailing party may receive the
award (the decision granting fees), but only the attorney
who earned the fee (the payment asked or given for profes
sional services) is entitled to receive it.” Brief for Respon
dent 16, 15 (emphasis in original; some internal quotation
marks and footnote omitted). This argument ignores the
settled definitions above, and even the definitions Ratliff
proffers, because each makes clear that the verb “award”
in subsection (d)(1)(A) means to “give by the decision of a
law court” or to “grant . . . by judicial decree,” not simply to
“give a decision” itself. Id., at 16, and n. 39 (emphasis
added; internal quotation marks omitted). We thus agree
with the Government that under the statutory language
here, the “judicial decision is the means by which the court
confers a right to payment upon the prevailing party; it is
not itself the thing that the court gives (or orders the


6

ASTRUE v. RATLIFF
Opinion of the Court

defendant to give) to the party.” Reply Brief for Petitioner
4 (emphasis in original) (citing Hewitt v. Helms, 482 U. S.
755, 761 (1987) (explaining that “[i]n all civil litigation,
the judicial decree is not the end but the means”)). This
settled and natural construction of the operative statutory
language is reflected in our cases. See, e.g., Scarborough
v. Principi, 541 U. S. 401, 405 (2004) (“EAJA authorizes
the payment of fees to a prevailing party” (emphasis
added)).
Ratliff’s final textual argument—that subsection
(d)(1)(A)’s reference to “attorney’s fees” itself establishes
that the fees are payable to the prevailing party’s attor
ney, see Brief for Respondent 19−22—proves far too much.
The fact that the statute awards to the prevailing party
fees in which her attorney may have a beneficial interest
or a contractual right does not establish that the statute
“awards” the fees directly to the attorney. For the reasons
we have explained, the statute’s plain text does the oppo
site—it “awards” the fees to the litigant, and thus subjects
them to a federal administrative offset if the litigant has
outstanding federal debts.
III
In an effort to avoid the Act’s plain meaning, Ratliff
argues that other provisions of EAJA, combined with the
SSA and the Government’s practice of paying some EAJA
fees awards directly to attorneys in Social Security cases,
render §2412(d) at least ambiguous on the question pre
sented here, and that these other provisions resolve the
ambiguity in her favor. Again we disagree. Even accept
ing §2412(d) as ambiguous on the question presented, the
provisions and practices Ratliff identifies do not alter our
conclusion that EAJA fees are payable to litigants and are
thus subject to offset where a litigant has outstanding
federal debts.
To begin with, §2412(d)(1)’s provisions differentiate


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

between attorneys and prevailing parties, and treat attor
neys on par with other service providers, in a manner that
forecloses the conclusion that attorneys have a right to
direct payment of subsection (d)(1)(A) awards. As noted
above, subsection (d)(1)(B) requires the prevailing party to
submit a fee application showing that she is otherwise
“eligible to receive an award” and, as a complement to that
requirement, compels the prevailing party to submit “an
itemized statement from any attorney . . . representing or
appearing in behalf of the party” that details the attorney’s
hourly rate and time the attorney spent on the case.
(Emphasis added.) This language would make little sense
if, as Ratliff contends, §2412(d)’s “prevailing party” lan
guage effectively refers to the prevailing litigant’s attor
ney. Subsection (d)(1)(B) similarly makes clear that the
“prevailing party” (not her attorney) is the recipient of the
fees award by requiring the prevailing party to demon
strate that her net worth falls within the range the statute
requires for fees awards. And EAJA’s cost provision fur
ther underscores the point. That provision uses language
identical to that in the attorney’s fees provision to allow
prevailing parties to recover “the reasonable expenses of
expert witnesses” and “any study, analysis, engineering
report, test, or project” necessary to prepare “the party’s
case,” §2412(d)(2)(A), yet Ratliff does not argue that it
makes costs payable directly to the vendors who provide
the relevant services.
Nor do the SSA provisions on which Ratliff relies estab
lish that subsection (d)(1)(A) fees awards are payable to
prevailing parties’ attorneys. It is true that the SSA
makes fees awards under that statute payable directly to a
prevailing claimant’s attorney.
See 42 U. S. C.
§406(b)(1)(A) (providing that where a claimant “who was
represented before the court by an attorney” obtains a
favorable judgment, “the court may determine and allow
as part of its judgment a reasonable fee for such represen


8

ASTRUE v. RATLIFF
Opinion of the Court

tation, not in excess of 25 percent of” the benefits award
and may certify the full amount of the statutory fees
award “for payment to such attorney out of, and not in
addition to, the amount of” the claimant’s benefits award
(emphasis added)). But the SSA’s express authorization of
such payments undermines Ratliff’s case insofar as it
shows that Congress knows how to make fees awards
payable directly to attorneys where it desires to do so.
Given the stark contrast between the SSA’s express au
thorization of direct payments to attorneys and the ab
sence of such language in subsection (d)(1)(A), we are
reluctant to interpret the latter provision to contain a
direct fee requirement absent clear textual evidence sup
porting such an interpretation.
Ratliff contends that Congress’ 1985 amendments to
§206(b) of EAJA supply just such evidence, at least in
Social Security cases. See §3(2), 99 Stat. 186, note follow
ing 28 U. S. C. §2412. The 1985 amendments address the
fact that Social Security claimants may be eligible to
receive fees awards under both the SSA and EAJA, and
clarify the procedure that attorneys and their clients must
follow to prevent the windfall of an unauthorized double
recovery of fees for the same work. Section 206(b) pro
vides that no violation of law occurs “if, where the claim
ant’s attorney receives fees for the same work under both
[42 U. S. C. §406(b) and 28 U. S. C. §2412(d)], the claim
ant’s attorney refunds to the claimant the amount of the
smaller fee.” According to Ratliff, the fact that §206(b)
recognizes, or at least assumes, that an attorney will
sometimes “receiv[e]” fees under 28 U. S. C. §2412(d)
suggests that we should construe subsection (d)(1)(A) to
incorporate the same direct payments to attorneys that
the SSA expressly authorizes.
This argument gives more weight to §206(b)’s reference
to attorney “recei[pt]” of fees than the reference can bear.
Section 206(b)’s ensuing reference to the attorney’s obliga


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

tion to “refun[d]” the amount of the smaller fee to the
claimant, which reference suggests that the award belongs
to the claimant in the first place, alone undercuts Ratliff’s
reading of “receives” as implying an initial statutory pay
ment to the attorney.4 And Ratliff’s reading is in any
event irreconcilable with the textual differences between
EAJA and the SSA we discuss above. Thus, even accept
ing Ratliff’s argument that subsection (d)(1)(A) is ambigu
ous, the statutory provisions she cites resolve any ambigu
ity in favor of treating subsection (d)(1)(A) awards as
payable to the prevailing litigant, and thus subject to
offset where the litigant has relevant federal debts.
The Government’s history of paying EAJA awards di
rectly to attorneys in certain cases does not compel a
different conclusion. The Government concedes that until
——————
4 Ratliff

argues that fees awarded under 42 U. S. C. §406(b) can never
be “ ‘refund[ed]’ ” in this sense because SSA fees are “never paid initially
to the client.” Brief for Respondent 14 (emphasis in original). That is
not accurate. As we have explained, Social Security claimants and
attorneys normally enter into contingent-fee agreements that are
subject to judicial “review for reasonableness.” Gisbrecht v. Barnhart,
535 U. S. 789, 809 (2002). Where the court allows a fee, §406(b) per
mits the Commissioner to collect the approved fee out of the client’s
benefit award and to certify the fee for “payment to such attorney out
of” that award. §406(b)(1)(A). In such cases, the attorney would
“refun[d]” the fee to the client in the event that the attorney also
receives a (larger) EAJA award, because the attorney “receive[d]” the
SSA fee from the client’s funds. Similarly inaccurate is Ratliff’s sugges
tion that our construction of EAJA §206(b)’s reference to “refun[d]”
would preclude attorneys from collecting any fees from a prevailing
party until both SSA and EAJA payments are awarded. Our construc
tion does not alter or preclude what we have recognized as courts’
common practice of awarding EAJA fees at the time a court remands a
case to the Social Security Administration (Administration) for benefits
proceedings. Such awards often allow attorneys to collect EAJA fees
months before any fees are awarded under 42 U. S.C §406(b), because
§406(b) fees cannot be determined until the Administration enters a
final benefits ruling. See Shalala v. Schaefer, 509 U. S. 292, 295−302
(1993).


10

ASTRUE v. RATLIFF
Opinion of the Court

2006, it “frequently paid EAJA fees in Social Security
cases directly to attorneys.” Reply Brief for Petitioner 13.
But this fact does not alter our interpretation of subsec
tion (d)(1)(A)’s “prevailing party” language or the Govern
ment’s rights and obligations under the statute. As the
Government explains, it most often paid EAJA fees di
rectly to attorneys in cases in which the prevailing party
had assigned its rights in the fees award to the attorney
(which assignment would not be necessary if the statute
rendered the fees award payable to the attorney in the
first instance). The fact that some such cases involved a
prevailing party with outstanding federal debts is unsur
prising given that it was not until 2005 that the Treasury
Department modified the TOP to require offsets against
“miscellaneous” payments such as attorney’s fees awards.
And as Ratliff admits, the Government has since contin
ued the direct payment practice only in cases where “the
plaintiff does not owe a debt to the government and as
signs the right to receive the fees to the attorney.” Brief
for Respondent 28 (boldface deleted). The Government’s
decision to continue direct payments only in such cases is
easily explained by the 2005 amendments to the TOP, and
nothing about the Government’s past payment practices
altered the statutory text that governs this case or es
topped the Government from conforming its payment
practices to the Treasury Department’s revised regula
tions. For all of these reasons, neither EAJA nor the SSA
supports Ratliff’s reading of subsection (d)(1)(A).
Our cases interpreting and applying 42 U. S. C. §1988,
which contains language virtually identical to the EAJA
provision we address here,5 buttress this conclusion. Our
——————
5 Section

1988(b) provides that in actions covered by the statute and
subject to exceptions not relevant here, “the court, in its discretion, may
allow the prevailing party, other than the United States, a reasonable
attorney’s fee.”


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

most recent cases applying §1988(b)’s “prevailing party”
language recognize the practical reality that attorneys are
the beneficiaries and, almost always, the ultimate recipi
ents of the fees that the statute awards to “prevailing
part[ies].” See, e.g., Venegas v. Mitchell, 495 U. S. 82, 86
(1990). But these cases emphasize the nonstatutory (con
tractual and other assignment-based) rights that typically
confer upon the attorney the entitlement to payment of
the fees award the statute confers on the prevailing liti
gant. As noted above, these kinds of arrangements would
be unnecessary if, as Ratliff contends, statutory fees lan
guage like that in §1988(b) and EAJA provides attorneys
with a statutory right to direct payment of awards. Hence
our conclusion that “the party, rather than the lawyer,”
id., at 87, is “entitle[d] to receive the fees” under §1988(b),
id., at 88, and that the statute “controls what the losing
defendant must pay, not what the prevailing plaintiff
must pay his lawyer,” id., at 90; see also Evans v. Jeff D.,
475 U. S. 717, 730−732, and n. 19 (1986) (explaining that
the “language of [§1988] . . . bestow[s] on the ‘prevailing
party’ (generally plaintiffs) a statutory eligibility for a
discretionary award of attorney’s fees” and does not “be
sto[w] fee awards upon attorneys” themselves (footnote
omitted)). These conclusions apply with equal force to the
functionally identical statutory language here.
*
*
*
We reverse the Court of Appeals’ judgment and remand
the case for further proceedings consistent with this
opinion.
It is so ordered.

