Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1301
_________________

THOMAS CARR, PETITIONER v. UNITED STATES
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT

[June 1, 2010]


JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR delivered the opinion of the Court.
Since 1994, federal law has required States, as a condi
tion for the receipt of certain law enforcement funds, to
maintain federally compliant systems for sex-offender
registration and community notification. In an effort to
make these state schemes more comprehensive, uniform,
and effective, Congress in 2006 enacted the Sex Offender
Registration and Notification Act (SORNA or Act) as part
of the Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act, Pub.
L. 109–248, Tit. I, 120 Stat. 590. Among its provisions,
the Act established a federal criminal offense covering,
inter alia, any person who (1) “is required to register
under [SORNA],” (2) “travels in interstate or foreign com
merce,” and (3) “knowingly fails to register or update a
registration.” 18 U. S. C. §2250(a). At issue in this case is
whether §2250 applies to sex offenders whose interstate
travel occurred prior to SORNA’s effective date and, if so,
whether the statute runs afoul of the Constitution’s prohi
bition on ex post facto laws. See Art. I, §9, cl. 3. Liability
under §2250, we hold, cannot be predicated on pre-SORNA
travel. We therefore do not address the ex post facto
question.


2

CARR v. UNITED STATES

Opinion of the Court 


I

In May 2004, petitioner Thomas Carr pleaded guilty in
Alabama state court to first-degree sexual abuse. He was
sentenced to 15 years’ imprisonment, with all but two
years suspended. Receiving credit for time previously
served, Carr was released on probation on July 3, 2004,
and he registered as a sex offender as required by Ala
bama law.
In late 2004 or early 2005, prior to SORNA’s enactment,
Carr relocated from Alabama to Indiana. He did not
comply with Indiana’s sex-offender registration require
ments. In July 2007, Carr came to the attention of law
enforcement in Fort Wayne, Indiana, following his in
volvement in a fight.
On August 22, 2007, federal prosecutors filed an indict
ment in the United States District Court for the Northern
District of Indiana charging Carr with failing to register in
violation of §2250. Carr moved to dismiss the indictment,
asserting that because he traveled to Indiana prior to
SORNA’s effective date, it would violate the Ex Post Facto
Clause to prosecute him under §2250. The District Court
denied Carr’s motion, and Carr entered a conditional
guilty plea, preserving his right to appeal. He received a
30-month prison sentence.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh
Circuit consolidated Carr’s appeal with that of a similarly
situated defendant, who, in addition to raising an ex post
facto claim, asserted that §2250, by its terms, does not
apply to persons whose interstate travel preceded
SORNA’s enactment. Beginning with the statutory argu
ment, the Court of Appeals held that §2250 “does not
require that the defendant’s travel postdate the Act.”
United States v. Dixon, 551 F. 3d 578, 582 (2008). The
court relied principally on its understanding of SORNA’s
underlying purpose:


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

“The evil at which [the Act] is aimed is that convicted
sex offenders registered in one state might move to
another state, fail to register there, and thus leave the
public unprotected. The concern is as acute in a case
in which the offender moved before the Act was
passed as in one in which he moved afterward.” Ibid.
(citation omitted).
The court drew an analogy to 18 U. S. C. §922(g), which
prohibits convicted felons from “possess[ing] in or affecting
commerc[e] any firearm or ammunition.” “The danger
posed by such a felon is unaffected by when the gun
crossed state lines . . . , and so it need not have crossed
after the statute was passed.” 551 F. 3d, at 582 (citing
Scarborough v. United States, 431 U. S. 563 (1977)).
According to the court, §2250(a), like §922(g), uses move
ment in interstate commerce as a jurisdictional element
“to establish a constitutional predicate for the statute . . .
rather than to create a temporal requirement.” 551 F. 3d,
at 583.
Reading §2250 to encompass pre-SORNA travel, the
Seventh Circuit recognized, created a conflict with the
Tenth Circuit’s decision in United States v. Husted, 545
F. 3d 1240 (2008). In holding that §2250’s coverage “is
limited to those individuals who travel in interstate com
merce after the Act’s effective date,” the Tenth Circuit
emphasized “Congress’s use of the present tense form of
the verb ‘to travel’ . . . , which according to ordinary Eng
lish grammar, does not refer to travel that has already
occurred.” Id., at 1243–1244. Rejecting this analysis, the
Seventh Circuit characterized Congress’ choice of tenses
as “ ‘not very revealing.’ ” 551 F. 3d, at 583 (quoting Scar
borough, 431 U. S., at 571).
Having dispensed with the statutory question, the
Seventh Circuit considered the claim of Carr and his co
appellant that predicating a §2250 prosecution on pre


4

CARR v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

SORNA travel violates the Ex Post Facto Clause. Reliance
on a defendant’s pre-SORNA travel, the court concluded,
poses no ex post facto problem so long as the defendant
had “reasonable time” to register after SORNA took effect
but failed to do so. 551 F. 3d, at 585. Noting that Carr
remained unregistered five months after SORNA became
applicable to him, the Seventh Circuit affirmed his convic
tion. Id., at 586–587. The court reversed the conviction of
Carr’s co-appellant, finding that he had not been given a
sufficient grace period to register.
In view of the division among the Circuits as to the
meaning of §2250’s “travel” requirement,1 we granted
certiorari, 557 U. S. __ (2009), to decide the statute’s
applicability to pre-SORNA travel and, if necessary, to
consider the statute’s compliance with the Ex Post Facto
Clause.2
——————
1 While the Seventh and Tenth Circuits have confronted the question
directly, other Circuits have also touched on it. Aligning itself with the
Seventh Circuit, the Eleventh Circuit has analogized 18 U. S. C.
§2250(a) to the felon-in-possession statute, §922(g), and applied it to a
sex offender who traveled before SORNA became applicable to him.
United States v. Dumont, 555 F. 3d 1288, 1291–1292 (2009) (per cu
riam). In contrast, the Eighth Circuit has stated in dictum that
§2250(a) “punishes convicted sex offenders who travel in interstate
commerce after the enactment of SORNA.” United States v. May, 535
F. 3d 912, 920 (2008) (emphasis added).
2 There is a separate conflict among the Courts of Appeals as to when
SORNA’s registration requirements became applicable to persons
convicted of sex offenses prior to the statute’s enactment. Several
Circuits, including the Seventh, have taken the position that the Act
did not apply to such sex offenders until the Attorney General provided
for their inclusion by issuing an interim regulation, 28 CFR §72.3, 72
Fed. Reg. 8897, on February 28, 2007. See, e.g., United States v.
Hatcher, 560 F. 3d 222, 226–229 (CA4 2009); United States v. Cain, 583
F. 3d 408, 414–419 (CA6 2009); United States v. Dixon, 551 F. 3d 578,
582 (CA7 2008) (case below); United States v. Madera, 528 F. 3d 852,
857–859 (CA11 2008) (per curiam). Other Circuits have held that
persons with pre-SORNA sex-offense convictions became subject to the
Act’s registration requirements upon the statute’s enactment in July


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

II
As relevant here, §2250 provides:
“(a) IN GENERAL.—Whoever—
“(1) is required to register under the Sex Offender
Registration and Notification Act;
“(2)(A) is a sex offender as defined for the purposes
of the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act
by reason of a conviction under Federal law (including
the Uniform Code of Military Justice), the law of the
District of Columbia, Indian tribal law, or the law of
any territory or possession of the United States; or
“(B) travels in interstate or foreign commerce, or
enters or leaves, or resides in, Indian country; and
“(3) knowingly fails to register or update a registra
tion as required by the Sex Offender Registration and
Notification Act;
“shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more
than 10 years, or both.”
For a defendant to violate this provision, Carr and the
Government agree, the statute’s three elements must “be
satisfied in sequence, culminating in a post-SORNA fail
——————
2006. See, e.g., May, 535 F. 3d, at 915–919; United States v. Hinckley,
550 F. 3d 926, 929–935 (CA10 2008). Because Carr traveled from
Alabama to Indiana before both the enactment of SORNA and the
Attorney General’s regulation, we have no occasion to consider whether
a pre-SORNA sex offender whose travel and failure to register occurred
between July 2006 and February 2007 is subject to liability under
§2250, and we express no view on that question. We similarly express
no view as to whether §72.3 was properly promulgated—a question that
has also divided the Circuits. Compare Cain, 583 F. 3d, at 419–424
(holding that the Attorney General lacked good cause for issuing the
interim regulation without adhering to the notice-and-comment and
publication requirements of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA)),
with United States v. Dean, No. 09–13115, 2010 WL 1687618, *3–*8
(CA11, Apr. 28, 2010) (finding no APA violation); United States v.
Gould, 568 F. 3d 459, 469–470 (CA4 2009) (same).


6

CARR v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

ure to register.” Brief for United States 13; see also Reply
Brief for Petitioner 4, 7, n. 6. A sequential reading, the
parties recognize, helps to assure a nexus between a de
fendant’s interstate travel and his failure to register as a
sex offender. Persons convicted of sex offenses under state
law who fail to register in their State of conviction would
otherwise be subject to federal prosecution under §2250
even if they had not left the State after being convicted—
an illogical result given the absence of any obvious federal
interest in punishing such state offenders.3
While both parties accept that the elements of §2250
should be read sequentially, they disagree on the event
that sets the sequence in motion. In the Government’s
view, the statute is triggered by a sex-offense conviction,
which must be followed by interstate travel, and then a
failure to register under SORNA. Only the last of these
events, the Government maintains, must occur after
SORNA took effect; the predicate conviction and the travel
may both have predated the statute’s enactment. Carr, in
contrast, asserts that the statutory sequence begins when
a person becomes subject to SORNA’s registration re
quirements. The person must then travel in interstate
commerce and thereafter fail to register. All of these
events, Carr avers, necessarily postdate SORNA’s enact
ment because a sex offender could not have been required
to register under SORNA until SORNA became the law.
Carr’s interpretation better accords with the statutory
text. By its terms, the first element of §2250(a) can only
be satisfied when a person “is required to register under
the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act.”
§2250(a)(1) (emphasis added). In an attempt to reconcile
its preferred construction with the words of the statute,
——————
3 For persons convicted of sex offenses under federal or Indian tribal
law, interstate travel is not a prerequisite to §2250 liability. See
§2250(a)(2)(A).


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

the Government insists that this language is merely “a
shorthand way of identifying those persons who have a
[sex-offense] conviction in the classes identified by
SORNA.” Brief for United States 19–20. To reach this
conclusion, the Government observes that another provi
sion of SORNA, 42 U. S. C. §16913(a), states that the Act’s
registration requirements apply to “sex offender[s].” A
“sex offender” is elsewhere defined as “an individual who
was convicted of a sex offense.” §16911(1). Thus, as the
Government would have it, Congress used 12 words and
two implied cross-references to establish that the first
element of §2250(a) is that a person has been convicted of
a sex offense. Such contortions can scarcely be called
“shorthand.” It is far more sensible to conclude that Con
gress meant the first precondition to §2250 liability to be
the one it listed first: a “require[ment] to register under
[SORNA].” Once a person becomes subject to SORNA’s
registration requirements, which can occur only after the
statute’s effective date, that person can be convicted under
§2250 if he thereafter travels and then fails to register.4
That §2250 sets forth the travel requirement in the
present tense (“travels”) rather than in the past or present
perfect (“traveled” or “has traveled”) reinforces the conclu
——————
4 Offering

a variation on the Government’s argument, the dissent
contends that, “[i]n accordance with current drafting conventions,
§2250(a) speaks, not as of the time when the law went into effect, but
as of the time when the first act necessary for conviction is committed.”
Post, at 7 (opinion of ALITO, J.). This occurs, the dissent maintains,
“when an individual is convicted of a qualifying sex offense, for it is
that act that triggers the requirement to register under SORNA.” Ibid.
The dissent’s account cannot be squared with the statutory text. “[T]he
first act necessary for conviction” under §2250(a) is not a predicate sex
offense conviction. It is a requirement “to register under [SORNA].”
§2250(a)(1). Thus, even if the dissent is correct that legislative drafters
do not invariably use the moment of enactment to mark the dividing
line between covered and uncovered acts, they have clearly done so
here.


8

CARR v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

sion that preenactment travel falls outside the statute’s
compass. Consistent with normal usage, we have fre
quently looked to Congress’ choice of verb tense to ascer
tain a statute’s temporal reach. See, e.g., United States v.
Wilson, 503 U. S. 329, 333 (1992) (“Congress’ use of a verb
tense is significant in construing statutes”); Gwaltney of
Smithfield, Ltd. v. Chesapeake Bay Foundation, Inc., 484
U. S. 49, 57 (1987) (“Congress could have phrased its
requirement in language that looked to the past . . . , but it
did not choose this readily available option”); Barrett v.
United States, 423 U. S. 212, 216 (1976) (observing that
Congress used the present perfect tense to “denot[e] an act
that has been completed”). The Dictionary Act also as
cribes significance to verb tense. It provides that, “[i]n
determining the meaning of any Act of Congress, unless
the context indicates otherwise[,] . . . words used in the
present tense include the future as well as the present.” 1
U. S. C. §1. By implication, then, the Dictionary Act in
structs that the present tense generally does not include
the past. Accordingly, a statute that regulates a person
who “travels” is not readily understood to encompass a
person whose only travel occurred before the statute took
effect. Indeed, neither the Government nor the dissent
identifies any instance in which this Court has construed
a present-tense verb in a criminal law to reach preenact
ment conduct.5
——————
5 The

Court of Appeals quoted a Ninth Circuit decision for the propo
sition that “ ‘the present tense is commonly used to refer to past, pre
sent, and future all at the same time.’ ” 551 F. 3d, at 583 (quoting
Coalition for Clean Air v. Southern Cal. Edison Co., 971 F. 2d 219, 225
(CA9 1992)). Neither court offered examples of such usage. Perhaps,
as the Dictionary Act itself recognizes, there may be instances in which
“context” supports this sort of omnitemporality, but it is not the typical
understanding of the present tense in either normal discourse or
statutory construction. Taken in context, the word “travels” as it
appears in §2250 is indistinguishable from the present-tense verbs that
appear in myriad other criminal statutes to proscribe conduct on a


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

In this instance, the statutory context strongly supports
a forward-looking construction of “travels.” First, the
word “travels” is followed in §2250(a)(2)(B) by a series of
other present tense verbs—“enters or leaves, or resides in,
Indian country.” (Emphasis added.) This Court has previ
ously described a statute’s “undeviating use of the present
tense” as a “striking indic[ator]” of its “prospective orien
tation.” Gwaltney, 484 U. S., at 59. The Seventh Circuit
thought otherwise, reasoning that it would “mak[e] no
sense” for “a sex offender who has resided in Indian coun
try since long before the Act was passed [to be] subject to
the Act but not someone who crossed state lines before the
Act was passed.” 551 F. 3d, at 583. As a textual matter,
however, it is the Seventh Circuit’s approach that makes
little sense: If “travels” means “traveled” (i.e., a person
“travels” if he crossed state lines before SORNA’s enact
ment), then the only way to avoid an incongruity among
neighboring verbs would be to construe the phrase “re
sides i[n] Indian country” to encompass persons who once
resided in Indian country but who left before SORNA’s
enactment and have not since returned—an implausible
reading that neither the Seventh Circuit, nor the Govern
ment, nor the dissent endorses.
Second, the other elements of a §2250 violation are
similarly set forth in the present tense.
Sections
2250(a)(1) and (a)(3) refer, respectively, to any person who
“is required to register under [SORNA]” and who “know
ingly fails to register or update a registration as required
——————
prospective basis. Examining a criminal law with a travel element
similar to the one at issue here, the Ninth Circuit itself recently agreed
that “the present tense verb ‘travels,’ most sensibly read, does not refer
to travel that occurred in the past—that is, before the enactment of the
statute.” United States v. Jackson, 480 F. 3d 1014, 1019 (CA9 2007)
(interpreting 18 U. S. C. §2423(c), which imposes criminal penalties on
“[a]ny United States citizen . . . who travels in foreign commerce, and
engages in any illicit sexual conduct with another person”).


10

CARR v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

by [SORNA].” (Emphasis added.) The Government ac
cepts that this last element—a knowing failure to register
or update a registration—must postdate SORNA’s enact
ment. Had Congress intended preenactment conduct to
satisfy the first two requirements of §2250 but not the
third, it presumably would have varied the verb tenses to
convey this meaning. Indeed, numerous federal statutes
use the past-perfect tense to describe one or more ele
ments of a criminal offense when coverage of preenact
ment events is intended.
See, e.g., 18 U. S. C. A.
§249(a)(2)(B)(iii) (Supp. 2010) (proscribing hate crimes in
which “the defendant employs a firearm, dangerous
weapon, explosive or incendiary device, or other weapon
that has traveled in interstate or foreign commerce” (em
phasis added)); 18 U. S. C. §922(g)(9) (2006 ed.) (proscrib
ing firearm possession or transport by any person “who
has been convicted” of a felony or a misdemeanor crime of
domestic violence (emphasis added)); §2252(a)(2) (2006
ed., Supp. II) (making it unlawful for any person to receive
or distribute a visual depiction of a minor engaging in
sexually explicit conduct that “has been mailed, or has
been shipped or transported in or affecting interstate or
foreign commerce” (emphasis added)). The absence of
similar phrasing here provides powerful evidence that
§2250 targets only postenactment travel.6
——————
6 The dissent identifies several “SORNA provisions that plainly use
the present tense to refer to events that . . . may have occurred before
SORNA took effect.” Post, at 10. All of these examples appear in 42
U. S. C. §16911, a definitional section that merely elucidates the
meaning of certain statutory terms and proscribes no conduct. All but
two of the provisions, moreover, rely on the term “sex offender,” which
§16911(1) defines to mean “an individual who was convicted of a sex
offense.” (Emphasis added.) The remaining provisions are §16911(7),
which simply uses “involves” rather than “involved” to define whether a
prior conviction qualifies as a “specified offense against a minor,” and
§16911(8), which makes plain that its present-tense reference to an
offender’s age refers to age “at the time of the offense.” These examples


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010) 


11

Opinion of the Court 


III 

Echoing the Seventh Circuit’s assessment that Con
gress’ use of present-tense verbs in §2250 is “not very
revealing,” Brief for United States 17, the Government
offers two principal arguments for construing the statute
to cover pre-SORNA travel: First, such a reading avoids
an “anomaly” in the statute’s coverage of federal versus
state sex offenders; and second, it “better effectuates the
statutory purpose.” Id., at 22 (capitalization omitted).
Neither argument persuades us to adopt the Government’s
strained reading of the statutory text.
A
Section 2250 imposes criminal liability on two categories
of persons who fail to adhere to SORNA’s registration
requirements: any person who is a sex offender “by reason
of a conviction under Federal law . . . , the law of the
District of Columbia, Indian tribal law, or the law
of any territory or possession of the United States,”
§2250(a)(2)(A), and any other person required to register
under SORNA who “travels in interstate or foreign com
merce, or enters or leaves, or resides in, Indian country,”
§2250(a)(2)(B). According to the Government, these cate
gories correspond to “two alternate sources of power to
achieve Congress’s aim of broadly registering sex offend
ers.” Id., at 22. Placing pre-SORNA travelers within the
statute’s coverage, the Government maintains, “ensures
that the jurisdictional reach of Section 2250(a)(2) has a
——————
thus provide scant support for the proposition that §2250 uses “travels”
to refer to pre-SORNA travel. Given the well-established presumption
against retroactivity and, in the criminal context, the constitutional bar
on ex post facto laws, it cannot be the case that a statutory prohibition
set forth in the present tense applies by default to acts completed before
the statute’s enactment. See Johnson v. United States, 529 U. S. 694,
701 (2000) (“Absent a clear statement of that intent, we do not give
retroactive effect to statutes burdening private interests”).


12

CARR v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

comparable breadth as applied to both federal and state
sex offenders.” Id., at 21.
The Government’s pronouncement that §2250 should
have an “equally broad sweep” with respect to federal and
state offenders, id., at 22, is little more than ipse dixit.
Had Congress intended to subject any unregistered state
sex offender who has ever traveled in interstate commerce
to federal prosecution under §2250, it easily could have
adopted language to that effect. That it declined to do so
indicates that Congress instead chose to handle federal
and state sex offenders differently. There is nothing
“anomal[ous]” about such a choice. To the contrary, it is
entirely reasonable for Congress to have assigned the
Federal Government a special role in ensuring compliance
with SORNA’s registration requirements by federal sex
offenders—persons who typically would have spent time
under federal criminal supervision. It is similarly reason
able for Congress to have given the States primary re
sponsibility for supervising and ensuring compliance
among state sex offenders and to have subjected such
offenders to federal criminal liability only when, after
SORNA’s enactment, they use the channels of interstate
commerce in evading a State’s reach.
In this regard, it is notable that the federal sex-offender
registration laws have, from their inception, expressly
relied on state-level enforcement. Indeed, when it initially
set national standards for state sex-offender registration
programs in 1994, Congress did not include any federal
criminal liability. Congress instead conditioned certain
federal funds on States’ adoption of “criminal penalties” on
any person “required to register under a State program . . .
who knowingly fails to so register and keep such registra
tion current.” Jacob Wetterling Crimes Against Children
and Sexually Violent Offender Registration Act, Pub. L.
103–322, Tit. XVII, §170101(c), 108 Stat. 2041, 42 U. S. C.
§14071(d). Two years later, Congress supplemented state


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

enforcement mechanisms by subjecting to federal prosecu
tion any covered sex offender who “changes address to a
State other than the State in which the person resided at
the time of the immediately preceding registration” and
“knowingly fails to” register as required. Pam Lychner
Sexual Offender Tracking and Identification Act of 1996,
Pub. L. 104–236, §2, 110 Stat. 3095, 3096, 42 U. S. C.
§§14072(g)(3), (i).7 The prospective orientation of this
provision is apparent. No statutory gap necessitated
coverage of unregistered offenders who “change[d] ad
dress” before the statute’s enactment; the prosecution of
such persons remained the province of the States.
In enacting SORNA, Congress preserved this basic
allocation of enforcement responsibilities. To strengthen
state enforcement of registration requirements, Congress
established, as a funding condition, that “[e]ach jurisdic
tion, other than a Federally recognized Indian tribe, shall
provide a criminal penalty that includes a maximum term
of imprisonment that is greater than 1 year for the failure
of a sex offender to comply with the requirements of this
subchapter.” §16913(e).8 Meanwhile, Congress in §2250
exposed to federal criminal liability, with penalties of up
to 10 years’ imprisonment, persons required to register
under SORNA over whom the Federal Government has a
direct supervisory interest or who threaten the efficacy of
the statutory scheme by traveling in interstate commerce.
——————
7 Pre-SORNA

law also exposed to federal criminal liability any person
whose State “ha[d] not established a minimally sufficient sexual
offender registration program” and who was thus required to register
with the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). See 42 U. S. C.
§§14072(c), (g)(2), (i). SORNA does not include a similar FBI registra
tion requirement, presumably because, by the time of the statute’s
enactment, “every State . . . had enacted some” type of registration
system. Smith v. Doe, 538 U. S. 84, 90 (2003).
8 The law in Indiana, Carr’s State of residence, makes the failure to
register a Class D felony, which carries a prison term of up to three
years’ imprisonment. Ind. Code §§11–8–8–17(a), 35–50–2–7(a) (2009).


14

CARR v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

Understanding the act of travel as an aspect of the harm
Congress sought to punish serves to distinguish §2250
from the felon-in-possession statute to which the Seventh
Circuit analogized. See 551 F. 3d, at 582–583. In Scar
borough, this Court held that a prior version of the stat
ute, which imposed criminal liability on any convicted
felon who “ ‘possesses . . . in commerce or affecting com
merce . . . any firearm,’ ” 431 U. S., at 564 (quoting 18
U. S. C. App. §1202(a) (1970 ed.)), did not require the
Government to prove postenactment movement of the
firearm across state lines. According to the Court, Con
gress had given “no indication of any concern with either
the movement of the gun or the possessor or with the time
of acquisition.” 431 U. S., at 572. Its aim was simply “to
keep guns out of the hands of” convicted felons, ibid., and,
by using the phrase “in commerce or affecting commerce,”
it invoked the full breadth of its Commerce Clause author
ity to achieve that end. No one in Scarborough disputed,
however, that the act of possession had to occur post
enactment; a felon who “possess[ed]” a firearm only pre
enactment was plainly outside the statute’s sweep. In this
case, the proper analogy is not, as the Seventh Circuit
suggested, between the travel of a sex offender and the
movement of a firearm; it is between the sex offender who
“travels” and the convicted felon who “possesses.” The act
of travel by a convicted sex offender may serve as a juris
dictional predicate for §2250, but it is also, like the act of
possession, the very conduct at which Congress took aim.
B
In a final effort to justify its position, the Government
invokes one of SORNA’s underlying purposes: to locate sex
offenders who had failed to abide by their registration
obligations.
SORNA, the Government observes, was
motivated at least in part by Congress’ concern about
these “missing” sex offenders—a problem the House


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

Committee on the Judiciary expressly linked to interstate
travel: “The most significant enforcement issue in the sex
offender program is that over 100,000 sex offenders, or
nearly one-fifth in the Nation[,] are ‘missing,’ meaning
they have not complied with sex offender registration
requirements. This typically occurs when the sex offender
moves from one State to another.” H. R. Rep. No. 109–
218, pt. 1, p. 26 (2005). The goal of tracking down missing
sex offenders, the Government maintains, “is surely better
served by making Section 2250 applicable to them in their
new States of residence immediately than by waiting for
them to travel in interstate commerce and fail to register
yet again.” Brief for United States 23–24. The Court of
Appeals expressed a similar view. See 551 F. 3d, at 582.9
The Government’s argument confuses a general goal of
SORNA with the specific purpose of §2250. Section 2250
is not a stand-alone response to the problem of missing sex
——————
9 Also making this point, the dissent maintains that “[i]nterpreting
§2250(a)(2)(B) to reach only postenactment travel severely impairs
§2250(a)’s effectiveness” by “plac[ing] beyond the reach of the federal
criminal laws” “the many sex offenders who had managed to avoid pre
existing registration regimes.” Post, at 14. The dissent sees “no appar
ent reason why Congress would have wanted to impose such a require
ment.” Ibid. Yet the dissent approves an even greater impairment.
Addressing a dispute we leave unresolved, see n. 2, supra, the dissent
would hold that, in enacting SORNA, “Congress remained neutral on
the question whether the Act reaches those with pre-SORNA sex
offense convictions.” Post, at 10. The dissent’s view, in other words, is
that SORNA does not apply of its own force to any sex offenders con
victed prior to the statute’s enactment—a reading wholly inconsistent
with the dissent’s description of SORNA as “a response to a dangerous
gap in the then-existing sex-offender-registration laws.” Post, at 13. If,
as the dissent accepts, Congress left open the possibility that no preen
actment offenders would face liability under §2250, then it is certainly
not unreasonable to conclude that Congress limited the statute’s
coverage to offenders who travel after its enactment. Indeed, it is
strange to think that Congress might have enacted a statute that
declined to cover pre-SORNA offenders but nevertheless covered preSORNA travel.


16

CARR v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

offenders; it is embedded in a broader statutory scheme
enacted to address the deficiencies in prior law that had
enabled sex offenders to slip through the cracks. See 42
U. S. C. §16901 (“Congress in this chapter establishes a
comprehensive national system for the registration of [sex]
offenders”). Among its many provisions, SORNA instructs
States to maintain sex-offender registries that compile an
array of information about sex offenders, §16914; to make
this information publicly available online, §16918; to share
the information with other jurisdictions and with the
Attorney General for inclusion in a comprehensive na
tional sex-offender registry, §§16919–16921; and to “pro
vide a criminal penalty that includes a maximum term of
imprisonment that is greater than 1 year for the failure of
a sex offender to comply with the requirements of this
subchapter,” §16913(e). Sex offenders, in turn, are re
quired to “register, and keep the registration current, in
each jurisdiction where the offender resides, where the
offender is an employee, and where the offender is a stu
dent,” §16913(a), and to appear in person periodically to
“allow the jurisdiction to take a current photograph, and
verify the information in each registry in which that of
fender is required to be registered,” §16916. By facilitat
ing the collection of sex-offender information and its dis
semination among jurisdictions, these provisions, not
§2250, stand at the center of Congress’ effort to account for
missing sex offenders.
Knowing that Congress aimed to reduce the number of
noncompliant sex offenders thus tells us little about the
specific policy choice Congress made in enacting §2250.
While subjecting pre-SORNA travelers to punishment
under §2250 may well be consistent with the aim of find
ing missing sex offenders, a contrary construction in no
way frustrates that broad goal.
Taking account of
SORNA’s overall structure, we have little reason to doubt
that Congress intended §2250 to do exactly what it says:


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

to subject to federal prosecution sex offenders who elude
SORNA’s registration requirements by traveling in inter
state commerce. Cf. Mertens v. Hewitt Associates, 508
U. S. 248, 261 (1993) (“[V]ague notions of a statute’s ‘basic
purpose’ are . . . inadequate to overcome the words of its
text regarding the specific issue under consideration”).
C
None of the legislative materials the Government cites
as evidence of SORNA’s purpose calls this reading into
question. To the contrary, the report of the House Judici
ary Committee suggests not only that a prohibition on
postenactment travel is consonant with Congress’ goals,
but also that it is the rule Congress in fact chose to adopt.
As the Government acknowledges, the bill under consid
eration by the Committee contained a version of §2250
that “would not have reached pre-enactment interstate
travel.” Brief for United States 24, n. 9. This earlier
version imposed federal criminal penalties on any person
who “receives a notice from an official that such person is
required to register under [SORNA] and . . . thereafter
travels in interstate or foreign commerce, or enters or
leaves Indian country.” H. R. Rep. No. 109–218, pt. 1, at
9; see also id., at 26 (“[S]ex offenders will now face Federal
prosecution . . . if they cross a State line and fail to comply
with the sex offender registration and notification re
quirements contained in the legislation”). Yet this did not
stop the Committee from describing its legislation as a
solution to the problem of missing sex offenders. See id.,
at 23–24, 26, 45–46. The Government identifies nothing
in the legislative record to suggest that, in modifying this
language during the course of the legislative process,
Congress intended to alter the statute’s temporal sweep.10
——————
10 Among other changes, Congress eliminated the language that con
ditioned liability on proof of notice, and it removed the word “thereaf
ter,” presumably as redundant in light of the sequential structure of the


18

CARR v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

At the very least, the close correspondence between the
Committee’s discussion of missing sex offenders and its
recognition of the travel element’s prospective application
would seem to confirm that reading §2250 to reach only
postenactment travel does not contravene SORNA’s un
derlying purposes, let alone result in an absurdity that
would compel us to disregard the statutory text. Cf. Ar
lington Central School Dist. Bd. of Ed. v. Murphy, 548
U. S. 291, 296 (2006) (“We have stated time and again that
courts must presume that a legislature says in a statute
what it means and means in a statute what it says there.
When the statutory language is plain, the sole function of
the courts—at least where the disposition required by the
text is not absurd—is to enforce it according to its terms”
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted)).
*
*
*
Having concluded that §2250 does not extend to preen
actment travel, we need not consider whether such a
construction would present difficulties under the Constitu
tion’s Ex Post Facto Clause. The judgment of the United
States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit is re
versed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

——————
enacted statute.

