16

CARR v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

offenders; it is embedded in a broader statutory scheme
enacted to address the deficiencies in prior law that had
enabled sex offenders to slip through the cracks. See 42
U. S. C. §16901 (“Congress in this chapter establishes a
comprehensive national system for the registration of [sex]
offenders”). Among its many provisions, SORNA instructs
States to maintain sex-offender registries that compile an
array of information about sex offenders, §16914; to make
this information publicly available online, §16918; to share
the information with other jurisdictions and with the
Attorney General for inclusion in a comprehensive na
tional sex-offender registry, §§16919–16921; and to “pro
vide a criminal penalty that includes a maximum term of
imprisonment that is greater than 1 year for the failure of
a sex offender to comply with the requirements of this
subchapter,” §16913(e). Sex offenders, in turn, are re
quired to “register, and keep the registration current, in
each jurisdiction where the offender resides, where the
offender is an employee, and where the offender is a stu
dent,” §16913(a), and to appear in person periodically to
“allow the jurisdiction to take a current photograph, and
verify the information in each registry in which that of
fender is required to be registered,” §16916. By facilitat
ing the collection of sex-offender information and its dis
semination among jurisdictions, these provisions, not
§2250, stand at the center of Congress’ effort to account for
missing sex offenders.
Knowing that Congress aimed to reduce the number of
noncompliant sex offenders thus tells us little about the
specific policy choice Congress made in enacting §2250.
While subjecting pre-SORNA travelers to punishment
under §2250 may well be consistent with the aim of find
ing missing sex offenders, a contrary construction in no
way frustrates that broad goal.
Taking account of
SORNA’s overall structure, we have little reason to doubt
that Congress intended §2250 to do exactly what it says:

