12

CARR v. UNITED STATES
ALITO, J., dissenting

to State B, then commits and is convicted of a qualifying
sex offense in State B, and subsequently, upon release
from custody in State B, fails to register as required under
the law of that State.
I agree with the Court that there is a good argument
that §2250(a) should not be read to apply to such a case,
where there is little if any connection between the of
fender’s prior interstate movement and his subsequent
failure to register. In the two hypothetical cases discussed
at the beginning of this opinion, the offender’s interstate
movement seriously frustrated the ability of the law en
forcement authorities in his new State (State B) to enforce
its registration requirements. By contrast, where an
offender’s interstate movement predates his sex offense
and conviction, his interstate movement has little if any
effect on the ability of the law enforcement authorities in
State B to enforce that State’s laws. When a sex offender
is released from custody in State B, the ability of the State
B authorities to enforce that State’s registration laws
would appear to be the same regardless of whether that
offender had lived his entire life in that State or had
moved to the State prior to committing the offense for
which he was convicted. Accordingly, it can be argued
that Congress cannot have meant to reach this situation.
As the Seventh Circuit put it, “[s]ince the statutory aim is
to prevent a convicted sex offender from circumventing
registration by leaving the state in which he is registered,
it can be argued that the travel must postdate the convic
tion.” United States v. Dixon, 551 F. 3d 578, 582 (2008).
It can also be argued that a broader construction would
mean that Congress exceeded its authority under the
Commerce Clause. See Brief for National Association of
Criminal Defense Lawyers as Amicus Curiae 16–17.
What the Court’s argument shows, however, is not that
the interstate travel required by §2250(a) must come after
SORNA’s enactment. Rather, what the Court’s argument

