Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
when, after SORNA’s enactment, they use interstate commerce
channels to evade a State’s reach. The Seventh Circuit erred in
analogizing §2250 to 18 U. S. C. §922(g), which prohibits convicted
felons from “possess[ing] in . . . commerc[e] any firearm or ammuni
tion.” According to the lower court, §2250(a), like §922(g), uses
movement in interstate commerce as a jurisdictional element to es
tablish a constitutional predicate for the statute, not to create a tem
poral requirement. However, the proper analogy here is not between
the travel of a sex offender and the movement of a firearm, but be
tween the sex offender who “travels” and the convicted felon who
“possesses.” The act of travel by a convicted sex offender may serve
as a jurisdictional predicate for §2250, but it is also, like the act of
possession, the very conduct at which Congress took aim. Pp. 11–14.
(2) Also unavailing is the Government’s invocation of one of
SORNA’s purposes, to locate sex offenders who failed to abide by
their registration obligations. The Government’s argument confuses
SORNA’s general goal with §2250’s specific purpose. Section 2250 is
not a stand-alone response to the problem of missing sex offenders; it
is embedded in a broader statutory scheme enacted to address defi
ciencies in prior law that had enabled sex offenders to slip through
the cracks. By facilitating the collection of sex-offender information
and its dissemination among jurisdictions, these other provisions, not
§2250, stand at the center of Congress’ effort to account for missing
sex offenders. While subjecting pre-SORNA travelers to punishment
under §2250 may well be consistent with the aim of finding missing
sex offenders, a contrary construction in no way frustrates that broad
goal. Taking account of SORNA’s overall structure, there is little
reason to doubt that Congress intended §2250 to do exactly what it
says: to subject to federal prosecution sex offenders who elude
SORNA’s registration requirements by traveling in interstate com
merce. Pp. 14–17.
(3) None of the legislative materials the Government cites as evi
dence of SORNA’s purpose calls this reading into question. To the
contrary, the House Judiciary Committee’s Report suggests not only
that a prohibition on postenactment travel is consonant with Con
gress’ goals, but also that it is the rule Congress in fact chose to
adopt. Pp. 17–18.
(c) Because §2250 liability cannot be predicated on pre-SORNA
travel, the Court need not address whether the statute violates the
Ex Post Facto Clause. P. 18.
551 F. 3d 578, reversed and remanded.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and STEVENS, KENNEDY, and BREYER, JJ., joined, and in which

