10

CARR v. UNITED STATES
ALITO, J., dissenting

seem necessarily to follow that the provision reaches preSORNA convictions. By using the present tense, Congress
remained neutral on the question whether the Act reaches
those with pre-SORNA sex-offense convictions and left
that question open for the Attorney General.
The conclusion that §2250(a)(2)(B) embraces preSORNA travel is reinforced by the presence of quite a few
other SORNA provisions that plainly use the present
tense to refer to events that, as a result of the Attorney
General’s regulation, may have occurred before SORNA
took effect. For example, an individual may qualify as a
“tier II sex offender” under the Act if, among other things,
his sex offense “involves . . . (i) use of a minor in sexual
performance; (ii) solicitation of a minor to practice prosti
tution; or (iii) production or distribution of child pornogra
phy.” 42 U. S. C. §16911(3)(B) (emphasis added); see also
§16911(4)(B) (offense “involves kidnapping a minor” (em
phasis added)); §16911(7) (offense “involves” certain speci
fied conduct). Similarly, a sex offender can qualify as a
“tier II sex offender” if his sex offense “occurs after the
offender becomes a tier I sex offender.” §16911(3)(C) (em
phasis added); see also §16911(4)(C) (offense “occurs after
the offender becomes a tier II sex offender” (emphasis
added)). A juvenile adjudication, moreover, may qualify as
a conviction for purposes of the Act only if, among other
things, the “offender is 14 years of age or older at the time
of the offense.” §16911(8) (emphasis added).8
——————
8 That many of these provisions rely on §16911(1)’s definition of the
term “sex offender” changes nothing. See ante, at 10, n. 6. Had the
Attorney General not exercised his discretion to make SORNA’s regis
tration requirements applicable to those with pre-SORNA sex-offense
convictions, all of these provisions would have applied to only pos
tenactment conduct—notwithstanding §16911(1)’s reference to “an
individual who was convicted of a sex offense.” (Emphasis added.) But
now that the Attorney General has so exercised his discretion, all of
these present-tense-phrased provisions necessarily must be interpreted
as reaching pre-enactment conduct. The same conclusion should follow

