10

CARR v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

by [SORNA].” (Emphasis added.) The Government ac
cepts that this last element—a knowing failure to register
or update a registration—must postdate SORNA’s enact
ment. Had Congress intended preenactment conduct to
satisfy the first two requirements of §2250 but not the
third, it presumably would have varied the verb tenses to
convey this meaning. Indeed, numerous federal statutes
use the past-perfect tense to describe one or more ele
ments of a criminal offense when coverage of preenact
ment events is intended.
See, e.g., 18 U. S. C. A.
§249(a)(2)(B)(iii) (Supp. 2010) (proscribing hate crimes in
which “the defendant employs a firearm, dangerous
weapon, explosive or incendiary device, or other weapon
that has traveled in interstate or foreign commerce” (em
phasis added)); 18 U. S. C. §922(g)(9) (2006 ed.) (proscrib
ing firearm possession or transport by any person “who
has been convicted” of a felony or a misdemeanor crime of
domestic violence (emphasis added)); §2252(a)(2) (2006
ed., Supp. II) (making it unlawful for any person to receive
or distribute a visual depiction of a minor engaging in
sexually explicit conduct that “has been mailed, or has
been shipped or transported in or affecting interstate or
foreign commerce” (emphasis added)). The absence of
similar phrasing here provides powerful evidence that
§2250 targets only postenactment travel.6
——————
6 The dissent identifies several “SORNA provisions that plainly use
the present tense to refer to events that . . . may have occurred before
SORNA took effect.” Post, at 10. All of these examples appear in 42
U. S. C. §16911, a definitional section that merely elucidates the
meaning of certain statutory terms and proscribes no conduct. All but
two of the provisions, moreover, rely on the term “sex offender,” which
§16911(1) defines to mean “an individual who was convicted of a sex
offense.” (Emphasis added.) The remaining provisions are §16911(7),
which simply uses “involves” rather than “involved” to define whether a
prior conviction qualifies as a “specified offense against a minor,” and
§16911(8), which makes plain that its present-tense reference to an
offender’s age refers to age “at the time of the offense.” These examples

