6

CARR v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

ure to register.” Brief for United States 13; see also Reply
Brief for Petitioner 4, 7, n. 6. A sequential reading, the
parties recognize, helps to assure a nexus between a de
fendant’s interstate travel and his failure to register as a
sex offender. Persons convicted of sex offenses under state
law who fail to register in their State of conviction would
otherwise be subject to federal prosecution under §2250
even if they had not left the State after being convicted—
an illogical result given the absence of any obvious federal
interest in punishing such state offenders.3
While both parties accept that the elements of §2250
should be read sequentially, they disagree on the event
that sets the sequence in motion. In the Government’s
view, the statute is triggered by a sex-offense conviction,
which must be followed by interstate travel, and then a
failure to register under SORNA. Only the last of these
events, the Government maintains, must occur after
SORNA took effect; the predicate conviction and the travel
may both have predated the statute’s enactment. Carr, in
contrast, asserts that the statutory sequence begins when
a person becomes subject to SORNA’s registration re
quirements. The person must then travel in interstate
commerce and thereafter fail to register. All of these
events, Carr avers, necessarily postdate SORNA’s enact
ment because a sex offender could not have been required
to register under SORNA until SORNA became the law.
Carr’s interpretation better accords with the statutory
text. By its terms, the first element of §2250(a) can only
be satisfied when a person “is required to register under
the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act.”
§2250(a)(1) (emphasis added). In an attempt to reconcile
its preferred construction with the words of the statute,
——————
3 For persons convicted of sex offenses under federal or Indian tribal
law, interstate travel is not a prerequisite to §2250 liability. See
§2250(a)(2)(A).

