8

CARR v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

sion that preenactment travel falls outside the statute’s
compass. Consistent with normal usage, we have fre
quently looked to Congress’ choice of verb tense to ascer
tain a statute’s temporal reach. See, e.g., United States v.
Wilson, 503 U. S. 329, 333 (1992) (“Congress’ use of a verb
tense is significant in construing statutes”); Gwaltney of
Smithfield, Ltd. v. Chesapeake Bay Foundation, Inc., 484
U. S. 49, 57 (1987) (“Congress could have phrased its
requirement in language that looked to the past . . . , but it
did not choose this readily available option”); Barrett v.
United States, 423 U. S. 212, 216 (1976) (observing that
Congress used the present perfect tense to “denot[e] an act
that has been completed”). The Dictionary Act also as
cribes significance to verb tense. It provides that, “[i]n
determining the meaning of any Act of Congress, unless
the context indicates otherwise[,] . . . words used in the
present tense include the future as well as the present.” 1
U. S. C. §1. By implication, then, the Dictionary Act in
structs that the present tense generally does not include
the past. Accordingly, a statute that regulates a person
who “travels” is not readily understood to encompass a
person whose only travel occurred before the statute took
effect. Indeed, neither the Government nor the dissent
identifies any instance in which this Court has construed
a present-tense verb in a criminal law to reach preenact
ment conduct.5
——————
5 The

Court of Appeals quoted a Ninth Circuit decision for the propo
sition that “ ‘the present tense is commonly used to refer to past, pre
sent, and future all at the same time.’ ” 551 F. 3d, at 583 (quoting
Coalition for Clean Air v. Southern Cal. Edison Co., 971 F. 2d 219, 225
(CA9 1992)). Neither court offered examples of such usage. Perhaps,
as the Dictionary Act itself recognizes, there may be instances in which
“context” supports this sort of omnitemporality, but it is not the typical
understanding of the present tense in either normal discourse or
statutory construction. Taken in context, the word “travels” as it
appears in §2250 is indistinguishable from the present-tense verbs that
appear in myriad other criminal statutes to proscribe conduct on a

