12

CARR v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

comparable breadth as applied to both federal and state
sex offenders.” Id., at 21.
The Government’s pronouncement that §2250 should
have an “equally broad sweep” with respect to federal and
state offenders, id., at 22, is little more than ipse dixit.
Had Congress intended to subject any unregistered state
sex offender who has ever traveled in interstate commerce
to federal prosecution under §2250, it easily could have
adopted language to that effect. That it declined to do so
indicates that Congress instead chose to handle federal
and state sex offenders differently. There is nothing
“anomal[ous]” about such a choice. To the contrary, it is
entirely reasonable for Congress to have assigned the
Federal Government a special role in ensuring compliance
with SORNA’s registration requirements by federal sex
offenders—persons who typically would have spent time
under federal criminal supervision. It is similarly reason
able for Congress to have given the States primary re
sponsibility for supervising and ensuring compliance
among state sex offenders and to have subjected such
offenders to federal criminal liability only when, after
SORNA’s enactment, they use the channels of interstate
commerce in evading a State’s reach.
In this regard, it is notable that the federal sex-offender
registration laws have, from their inception, expressly
relied on state-level enforcement. Indeed, when it initially
set national standards for state sex-offender registration
programs in 1994, Congress did not include any federal
criminal liability. Congress instead conditioned certain
federal funds on States’ adoption of “criminal penalties” on
any person “required to register under a State program . . .
who knowingly fails to so register and keep such registra
tion current.” Jacob Wetterling Crimes Against Children
and Sexually Violent Offender Registration Act, Pub. L.
103–322, Tit. XVII, §170101(c), 108 Stat. 2041, 42 U. S. C.
§14071(d). Two years later, Congress supplemented state

