Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

ALITO, J., dissenting

Congress cast all of these provisions in the present
tense, but now that the Attorney General has made
SORNA applicable to individuals with pre-SORNA sex
offense convictions, all of these provisions must necessar
ily be interpreted as embracing pre-enactment conduct.
II
The Court’s second reason for holding that 18 U. S. C.
§2250(a) reaches only post-SORNA travel is based on the
sequence in which the elements of §2250(a) are listed. The
Court concludes (and I agree) that the first listed element
(subsection (a)(1) (“is required to register under the Sex
Offender Registration and Notification Act”)) cannot have
been violated until the Act took effect. The Court then
reasons that the third listed element (subsection (a)(2)(B)
(“travels in interstate . . . commerce”)) must be violated
after the first. See ante, at 6. The Court explains: “Per
sons convicted of sex offenses under state law who fail to
register in their State of conviction would otherwise be
subject to federal prosecution under §2250 even if they
had not left the State after being convicted—an illogical
result given the absence of any obvious federal interest in
punishing such state offenders.” Ibid. In other words, the
Court reasons that it would be illogical to interpret the
statute as reaching a person who first moves from State A
——————
with respect to 18 U. S. C. §2250(a)(2)(B).
Additionally, I do not suggest that the “default” rule is that provi
sions written in the present tense apply to past conduct. To the con
trary, I had thought it an uncontroversial proposition of statutory
interpretation that statutes must be interpreted in context. See, e.g.,
United States Nat. Bank of Ore. v. Independent Ins. Agents of America,
Inc., 508 U. S. 439, 455 (1993); see also 1 U. S. C. § 1. And when
§2250(a) is read with an eye to the context in which SORNA was
enacted, it becomes quite clear that §2250(a)(2)(B) should be inter
preted as reaching pre-enactment travel. Giving effect to those contex
tual indicators, moreover, does not offend the presumption against
retroactivity or the Ex Post Facto Clause. See n. 10, infra.

