Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010) 


11

Opinion of the Court 


III 

Echoing the Seventh Circuit’s assessment that Con
gress’ use of present-tense verbs in §2250 is “not very
revealing,” Brief for United States 17, the Government
offers two principal arguments for construing the statute
to cover pre-SORNA travel: First, such a reading avoids
an “anomaly” in the statute’s coverage of federal versus
state sex offenders; and second, it “better effectuates the
statutory purpose.” Id., at 22 (capitalization omitted).
Neither argument persuades us to adopt the Government’s
strained reading of the statutory text.
A
Section 2250 imposes criminal liability on two categories
of persons who fail to adhere to SORNA’s registration
requirements: any person who is a sex offender “by reason
of a conviction under Federal law . . . , the law of the
District of Columbia, Indian tribal law, or the law
of any territory or possession of the United States,”
§2250(a)(2)(A), and any other person required to register
under SORNA who “travels in interstate or foreign com
merce, or enters or leaves, or resides in, Indian country,”
§2250(a)(2)(B). According to the Government, these cate
gories correspond to “two alternate sources of power to
achieve Congress’s aim of broadly registering sex offend
ers.” Id., at 22. Placing pre-SORNA travelers within the
statute’s coverage, the Government maintains, “ensures
that the jurisdictional reach of Section 2250(a)(2) has a
——————
thus provide scant support for the proposition that §2250 uses “travels”
to refer to pre-SORNA travel. Given the well-established presumption
against retroactivity and, in the criminal context, the constitutional bar
on ex post facto laws, it cannot be the case that a statutory prohibition
set forth in the present tense applies by default to acts completed before
the statute’s enactment. See Johnson v. United States, 529 U. S. 694,
701 (2000) (“Absent a clear statement of that intent, we do not give
retroactive effect to statutes burdening private interests”).

