Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

the Government insists that this language is merely “a
shorthand way of identifying those persons who have a
[sex-offense] conviction in the classes identified by
SORNA.” Brief for United States 19–20. To reach this
conclusion, the Government observes that another provi
sion of SORNA, 42 U. S. C. §16913(a), states that the Act’s
registration requirements apply to “sex offender[s].” A
“sex offender” is elsewhere defined as “an individual who
was convicted of a sex offense.” §16911(1). Thus, as the
Government would have it, Congress used 12 words and
two implied cross-references to establish that the first
element of §2250(a) is that a person has been convicted of
a sex offense. Such contortions can scarcely be called
“shorthand.” It is far more sensible to conclude that Con
gress meant the first precondition to §2250 liability to be
the one it listed first: a “require[ment] to register under
[SORNA].” Once a person becomes subject to SORNA’s
registration requirements, which can occur only after the
statute’s effective date, that person can be convicted under
§2250 if he thereafter travels and then fails to register.4
That §2250 sets forth the travel requirement in the
present tense (“travels”) rather than in the past or present
perfect (“traveled” or “has traveled”) reinforces the conclu
——————
4 Offering

a variation on the Government’s argument, the dissent
contends that, “[i]n accordance with current drafting conventions,
§2250(a) speaks, not as of the time when the law went into effect, but
as of the time when the first act necessary for conviction is committed.”
Post, at 7 (opinion of ALITO, J.). This occurs, the dissent maintains,
“when an individual is convicted of a qualifying sex offense, for it is
that act that triggers the requirement to register under SORNA.” Ibid.
The dissent’s account cannot be squared with the statutory text. “[T]he
first act necessary for conviction” under §2250(a) is not a predicate sex
offense conviction. It is a requirement “to register under [SORNA].”
§2250(a)(1). Thus, even if the dissent is correct that legislative drafters
do not invariably use the moment of enactment to mark the dividing
line between covered and uncovered acts, they have clearly done so
here.

