Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

In this instance, the statutory context strongly supports
a forward-looking construction of “travels.” First, the
word “travels” is followed in §2250(a)(2)(B) by a series of
other present tense verbs—“enters or leaves, or resides in,
Indian country.” (Emphasis added.) This Court has previ
ously described a statute’s “undeviating use of the present
tense” as a “striking indic[ator]” of its “prospective orien
tation.” Gwaltney, 484 U. S., at 59. The Seventh Circuit
thought otherwise, reasoning that it would “mak[e] no
sense” for “a sex offender who has resided in Indian coun
try since long before the Act was passed [to be] subject to
the Act but not someone who crossed state lines before the
Act was passed.” 551 F. 3d, at 583. As a textual matter,
however, it is the Seventh Circuit’s approach that makes
little sense: If “travels” means “traveled” (i.e., a person
“travels” if he crossed state lines before SORNA’s enact
ment), then the only way to avoid an incongruity among
neighboring verbs would be to construe the phrase “re
sides i[n] Indian country” to encompass persons who once
resided in Indian country but who left before SORNA’s
enactment and have not since returned—an implausible
reading that neither the Seventh Circuit, nor the Govern
ment, nor the dissent endorses.
Second, the other elements of a §2250 violation are
similarly set forth in the present tense.
Sections
2250(a)(1) and (a)(3) refer, respectively, to any person who
“is required to register under [SORNA]” and who “know
ingly fails to register or update a registration as required
——————
prospective basis. Examining a criminal law with a travel element
similar to the one at issue here, the Ninth Circuit itself recently agreed
that “the present tense verb ‘travels,’ most sensibly read, does not refer
to travel that occurred in the past—that is, before the enactment of the
statute.” United States v. Jackson, 480 F. 3d 1014, 1019 (CA9 2007)
(interpreting 18 U. S. C. §2423(c), which imposes criminal penalties on
“[a]ny United States citizen . . . who travels in foreign commerce, and
engages in any illicit sexual conduct with another person”).

