Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

to subject to federal prosecution sex offenders who elude
SORNA’s registration requirements by traveling in inter
state commerce. Cf. Mertens v. Hewitt Associates, 508
U. S. 248, 261 (1993) (“[V]ague notions of a statute’s ‘basic
purpose’ are . . . inadequate to overcome the words of its
text regarding the specific issue under consideration”).
C
None of the legislative materials the Government cites
as evidence of SORNA’s purpose calls this reading into
question. To the contrary, the report of the House Judici
ary Committee suggests not only that a prohibition on
postenactment travel is consonant with Congress’ goals,
but also that it is the rule Congress in fact chose to adopt.
As the Government acknowledges, the bill under consid
eration by the Committee contained a version of §2250
that “would not have reached pre-enactment interstate
travel.” Brief for United States 24, n. 9. This earlier
version imposed federal criminal penalties on any person
who “receives a notice from an official that such person is
required to register under [SORNA] and . . . thereafter
travels in interstate or foreign commerce, or enters or
leaves Indian country.” H. R. Rep. No. 109–218, pt. 1, at
9; see also id., at 26 (“[S]ex offenders will now face Federal
prosecution . . . if they cross a State line and fail to comply
with the sex offender registration and notification re
quirements contained in the legislation”). Yet this did not
stop the Committee from describing its legislation as a
solution to the problem of missing sex offenders. See id.,
at 23–24, 26, 45–46. The Government identifies nothing
in the legislative record to suggest that, in modifying this
language during the course of the legislative process,
Congress intended to alter the statute’s temporal sweep.10
——————
10 Among other changes, Congress eliminated the language that con
ditioned liability on proof of notice, and it removed the word “thereaf
ter,” presumably as redundant in light of the sequential structure of the

