(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CARR v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1301. Argued February 24, 2010—Decided June 1, 2010
Enacted in 2006, the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act
(SORNA) makes it a federal crime for, inter alia, any person (1) who
“is required to register under [SORNA],” and (2) who “travels in in
terstate or foreign commerce,” to (3) “knowingly fai[l] to register or
update a registration,” 18 U. S. C. §2250(a). Before SORNA’s enact
ment, petitioner Carr, a registered sex offender in Alabama, relocated
to Indiana without complying with the latter State’s registration re
quirements. Carr was indicted under §2250 post-SORNA. The Fed
eral District Court denied Carr’s motion to dismiss, which asserted
that the §2250 prosecution would violate the Constitution’s Ex Post
Facto Clause because he had traveled to Indiana before SORNA’s ef
fective date. Carr then pleaded guilty and was sentenced to prison.
Affirming the conviction, the Seventh Circuit held that §2250 does
not require that a defendant’s travel postdate SORNA and that reli
ance on a defendant’s pre-SORNA travel poses no ex post facto prob
lem so long as the defendant had a reasonable time to register postSORNA but failed to do so, as had Carr.
Held: Section 2250 does not apply to sex offenders whose interstate
travel occurred before SORNA’s effective date. Pp. 5–18.
(a) The Court rejects the Government’s view that §2250(a) requires
a sex-offense conviction, subsequent interstate travel, and then a
failure to register, and that only the last of these events must occur
after SORNA took effect. The Court instead accepts Carr’s interpre
tation that the statute does not impose liability unless a person, after
becoming subject to SORNA’s registration requirements, travels
across state lines and then fails to register. That interpretation bet
ter accords with §2250(a)’s text, the first element of which can only be
satisfied when a person “is required to register under SORNA.”

