2

CARR v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
§2250(a)(1). That §2250 sets forth the travel requirement in the pre
sent tense (“travels”) rather than in the past or present perfect
(“traveled” or “has traveled”) reinforces this conclusion. See, e.g.,
United States v. Wilson, 503 U. S. 329, 333. And because the Dic
tionary Act’s provision that statutory “words used in the present
tense include the future as well as the present,” 1 U. S. C. §1, implies
that the present tense generally does not include the past, regulating
a person who “travels” is not readily understood to encompass a per
son whose only travel occurred before the statute took effect. Indeed,
there appears to be no instance in which this Court has construed a
present-tense verb in a criminal law to reach preenactment conduct.
The statutory context also supports a forward-looking construction of
“travels.” First, the word “travels” is followed in §2250(a)(2)(B) by a
series of other present tense verbs—“enters or leaves, or resides.” A
statute’s “undeviating use of the present tense” is a “striking
indic[ator]” of its “prospective orientation.” Gwaltney of Smithfield,
Ltd. v. Chesapeake Bay Foundation, Inc., 484 U. S. 49, 59. Second,
the other elements of a §2250 violation are similarly set forth in the
present tense: Sections 2250(a)(1) and (a)(3) refer, respectively, to
any person who “is required to register under [SORNA]” and who
“knowingly fails to register or update a registration.” (Emphasis
added.) Had Congress intended preenactment conduct to satisfy
§2250’s first two requirements but not the third, it presumably would
have varied the verb tenses, as it has in numerous other federal stat
utes. Pp. 5–11.
(b) The Government’s two principal arguments for construing the
statute to cover pre-SORNA travel are unpersuasive. Pp. 11–18.
(1) The claim that such a reading avoids an “anomaly” in the
statute’s coverage of federal versus state sex offenders is rejected.
Section 2250 imposes criminal liability on two categories of persons
who fail to adhere to SORNA’s registration requirements: any person
who is a sex offender “by reason of a conviction under Federal law
. . . ,” §2250(a)(2)(A), and any other person required to register under
SORNA who “travels in interstate or foreign commerce,”
§2250(a)(2)(B). The Government’s assertion that §2250(a)(2)’s juris
dictional reach should have comparable breadth as applied to both
federal and state sex offenders is little more than ipse dixit. It is en
tirely reasonable for Congress to have assigned the Federal Govern
ment a special role in ensuring compliance with SORNA’s registra
tion requirements by federal sex offenders, who typically would have
spent time under federal criminal supervision. It is similarly reason
able for Congress to have given the States primary responsibility for
supervising and ensuring compliance among state sex offenders and
to have subjected such offenders to federal criminal liability only

