Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

Committee on the Judiciary expressly linked to interstate
travel: “The most significant enforcement issue in the sex
offender program is that over 100,000 sex offenders, or
nearly one-fifth in the Nation[,] are ‘missing,’ meaning
they have not complied with sex offender registration
requirements. This typically occurs when the sex offender
moves from one State to another.” H. R. Rep. No. 109–
218, pt. 1, p. 26 (2005). The goal of tracking down missing
sex offenders, the Government maintains, “is surely better
served by making Section 2250 applicable to them in their
new States of residence immediately than by waiting for
them to travel in interstate commerce and fail to register
yet again.” Brief for United States 23–24. The Court of
Appeals expressed a similar view. See 551 F. 3d, at 582.9
The Government’s argument confuses a general goal of
SORNA with the specific purpose of §2250. Section 2250
is not a stand-alone response to the problem of missing sex
——————
9 Also making this point, the dissent maintains that “[i]nterpreting
§2250(a)(2)(B) to reach only postenactment travel severely impairs
§2250(a)’s effectiveness” by “plac[ing] beyond the reach of the federal
criminal laws” “the many sex offenders who had managed to avoid pre
existing registration regimes.” Post, at 14. The dissent sees “no appar
ent reason why Congress would have wanted to impose such a require
ment.” Ibid. Yet the dissent approves an even greater impairment.
Addressing a dispute we leave unresolved, see n. 2, supra, the dissent
would hold that, in enacting SORNA, “Congress remained neutral on
the question whether the Act reaches those with pre-SORNA sex
offense convictions.” Post, at 10. The dissent’s view, in other words, is
that SORNA does not apply of its own force to any sex offenders con
victed prior to the statute’s enactment—a reading wholly inconsistent
with the dissent’s description of SORNA as “a response to a dangerous
gap in the then-existing sex-offender-registration laws.” Post, at 13. If,
as the dissent accepts, Congress left open the possibility that no preen
actment offenders would face liability under §2250, then it is certainly
not unreasonable to conclude that Congress limited the statute’s
coverage to offenders who travel after its enactment. Indeed, it is
strange to think that Congress might have enacted a statute that
declined to cover pre-SORNA offenders but nevertheless covered preSORNA travel.

