(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CONKRIGHT ET AL. v. FROMMERT ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 08–810.

Argued January 20, 2010—Decided April 21, 2010

Petitioners are Xerox Corporation’s pension plan (Plan) and the Plan’s
current and former administrators (Plan Administrator). Respon
dents are employees who left Xerox in the 1980’s, received lump-sum
distributions of retirement benefits earned up to that point, and were
later rehired. To account for the past distributions when calculating
respondents’ current benefits, the Plan Administrator initially inter
preted the Plan to call for an approach that has come to be known as
the “phantom account” method. Respondents challenged that method
in an action under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 (ERISA). The District Court granted summary judgment for
the Plan, but the Second Circuit vacated and remanded. It held that
the Plan Administrator’s interpretation was unreasonable and that
respondents had not received adequate notice that the phantom ac
count method would be used to calculate their benefits. On remand,
the Plan Administrator proposed a new interpretation of the Plan
that accounted for the time value of the money respondents had pre
viously received. The District Court declined to apply a deferential
standard to this interpretation, and adopted instead an approach
proposed by respondents that did not account for the time value of
money. Affirming in relevant part, the Second Circuit held that the
District Court was correct not to apply a deferential standard on re
mand, and that the District Court’s decision on the merits was not an
abuse of discretion.
Held: The District Court should have applied a deferential standard of
review to the Plan Administrator’s interpretation of the Plan on re
mand. Pp. 4–15.
(a) This Court addressed the standard for reviewing the decisions
of ERISA plan administrators in Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v.


2

CONKRIGHT v. FROMMERT
Syllabus
Bruch, 489 U. S. 101. Firestone looked to “principles of trust law” for
guidance. Id., at 111. Under trust law, the appropriate standard de
pends on the language of the instrument creating the trust. When a
trust instrument gives the trustee “power to construe disputed or
doubtful terms, . . . the trustee’s interpretation will not be disturbed
if reasonable.” Ibid. Under Firestone and the Plan’s terms, the Plan
Administrator here would normally be entitled to deference when in
terpreting the Plan. The Court of Appeals, however, crafted an ex
ception to Firestone deference, holding that a court need not apply a
deferential standard when a plan administrator’s previous construc
tion of the same plan terms was found to violate ERISA. Pp. 4–5.
(b) The Second Circuit’s “one-strike-and-you’re-out” approach has
no basis in Firestone, which set out a broad standard of deference
with no suggestion that it was susceptible to ad hoc exceptions. This
Court held in Metropolitan Life Ins. Co. v. Glenn, 554 U. S. ___, ___,
that a plan administrator operating under a systemic conflict of in
terest is nonetheless still entitled to deferential review. In light of
that ruling, it is difficult to see why a single honest mistake should
require a different result. Nor is the Second Circuit’s decision sup
ported by the considerations on which Firestone and Glenn were
based—the plan’s terms, trust law principles, and ERISA’s purposes.
The Plan grants the Plan Administrator general interpretive author
ity without suggesting that the authority is limited to first efforts to
construe the Plan. An exception to Firestone deference is also not re
quired by trust law principles, which serve as a guide under ERISA
but do not “tell the entire story.” Varity Corp. v. Howe, 516 U. S. 489,
497. Trust law does not resolve the specific question whether courts
may strip a plan administrator of Firestone deference after one good
faith mistake, but the guiding principles underlying ERISA do.
ERISA represents a “ ‘careful balancing’ between ensuring fair and
prompt enforcement of rights under a plan and the encouragement of
the creation of such plans.” Aetna Health Inc. v. Davila, 542 U. S.
200, 215. Firestone deference preserves this “careful balancing” and
protects the statute’s interests in efficiency, predictability, and uni
formity. Respondents claim that deference is less important once a
plan administrator’s interpretation has been found unreasonable, but
the interests in efficiency, predictability, and uniformity do not sud
denly disappear simply because of a single honest mistake, as illus
trated by this case. When the District Court declined to apply a def
erential standard of review on remand, the court made the case more
complicated than necessary. Respondents’ approach threatens to in
terject additional issues into ERISA litigation that “would create fur
ther complexity, adding time and expense to a process that may al
ready be too costly for many [seeking] redress.” Glenn, supra, at ___.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
This case also demonstrates the harm to predictability and uniform
ity that would result from stripping a plan administrator of Firestone
deference. The District Court’s interpretation does not account for
the time value of money, but respondents’ own actuarial expert testi
fied that fairness required recognizing that principle. Respondents
do not dispute that the District Court’s approach would place them in
a better position than employees who never left the company. If
other courts construed the Plan to account for the time value of
money, moreover, Xerox could be placed in an impossible situation in
which the Plan is subject to different interpretations and obligations
in different States. Pp. 5–13.
(c) Respondents claim that plan administrators will adopt unrea
sonable interpretations of their plans seriatim, receiving deference
each time, thereby undermining the prompt resolution of benefit dis
putes, driving up litigation costs, and discouraging employees from
challenging administrators’ decisions. These concerns are overblown
because there is no reason to think that deference would be required
in the extreme circumstances that respondents foresee. Multiple er
roneous interpretations of the same plan provision, even if issued in
good faith, could support a finding that a plan administrator is too
incompetent to exercise his discretion fairly, cutting short the rounds
of costly litigation that respondents fear. Applying a deferential
standard of review also does not mean that the plan administrator
will always prevail on the merits. It means only that the plan admin
istrator’s interpretation “will not be disturbed if reasonable.” Fire
stone, 489 U. S., at 111. The lower courts should have applied the
standard established in Firestone and Glenn. Pp. 13–14.
535 F. 3d 111, reversed and remanded.
ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which SCALIA,
KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., joined. BREYER, J., filed a dissenting
opinion, in which STEVENS and GINSBURG, JJ., joined. SOTOMAYOR, J.,
took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.

