Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–810
_________________

SALLY L. CONKRIGHT, ET AL., PETITIONERS v. PAUL
J. FROMMERT ET AL.
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE SECOND CIRCUIT

[April 21, 2010] 


CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS delivered the opinion of the
Court.
People make mistakes. Even administrators of ERISA
plans. That should come as no surprise, given that the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is “an
enormously complex and detailed statute,” Mertens v.
Hewitt Associates, 508 U. S. 248, 262 (1993), and the plans
that administrators must construe can be lengthy and
complicated. (The one at issue here runs to 81 pages, with
139 sections.) We held in Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v.
Bruch, 489 U. S. 101 (1989), that an ERISA plan adminis
trator with discretionary authority to interpret a plan is
entitled to deference in exercising that discretion. The
question here is whether a single honest mistake in plan
interpretation justifies stripping the administrator of that
deference for subsequent related interpretations of the
plan. We hold that it does not.
I
As in many ERISA matters, the facts of this case are
exceedingly complicated. Fortunately, most of the factual
details are unnecessary to the legal issues before us, so we


2

CONKRIGHT v. FROMMERT
Opinion of the Court

cover them only in broad strokes. This case concerns
Xerox Corporation’s pension plan, which is covered by
ERISA, 88 Stat. 829, as amended, 29 U. S. C. §1001 et seq.
Petitioners are the plan itself (hereinafter Plan), and the
Plan’s current and former administrators (hereinafter
Plan Administrator). See §1002(16)(A)(i); App. 32a. Re
spondents are Xerox employees who left the company in
the 1980’s, received lump-sum distributions of retirement
benefits they had earned up to that point, and were later
rehired. See 328 F. Supp. 2d 420, 424 (WDNY 2004); Brief
for Respondents 9–10. The dispute giving rise to this case
concerns how to account for respondents’ past distribu
tions when calculating their current benefits—that is, how
to avoid paying respondents the same benefits twice.
The Plan Administrator initially interpreted the Plan to
call for an approach that has come to be known as the
“phantom account” method. 328 F. Supp. 2d, at 424.
Essentially, that method calculated the hypothetical
growth that respondents’ past distributions would have
experienced if the money had remained in Xerox’s invest
ment funds, and reduced respondents’ present benefits
accordingly. See id., at 426–428; App. to Pet. for Cert.
146a. After the Plan Administrator denied respondents’
administrative challenges to that method, respondents
filed suit in federal court under ERISA, 29 U. S. C.
§1132(a)(1)(B). See 328 F. Supp. 2d, at 428–429. The
District Court granted summary judgment for the Plan,
applying a deferential standard of review to the Plan
Administrator’s interpretation. See id., at 430–431, 439.
The Second Circuit vacated and remanded, holding that
the Plan Administrator’s interpretation was unreasonable
and that respondents had not been adequately notified
that the phantom account method would be used to calcu
late their benefits. See 433 F. 3d 254, 257, 265–269
(2006).
The phantom account method having been exorcised


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

from the Plan, the District Court on remand considered
other approaches for adjusting respondents’ present bene
fits in light of their past distributions. See 472 F. Supp.
2d 452, 456–458 (WDNY 2007). The Plan Administrator
submitted an affidavit proposing an approach that, like
the phantom account method, accounted for the time value
of the money that respondents had previously received.
But unlike the phantom account method, the Plan Admin
istrator’s new approach did not calculate the present value
of a past distribution based on events that occurred after
the distribution was made. Instead, the new approach
used an interest rate that was fixed at the time of the
distribution, thereby calculating the current value of the
distribution based on information that was known at the
time of the distribution. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 147a–
153a. Petitioners argued that the District Court should
apply a deferential standard of review to this approach,
and accept it as a reasonable interpretation of the Plan.
See Defendants’ Pre-Hearing Brief Addressed to Remedies
in No. 00–CV–6311 (WDNY), pp. 7–8; Defendants’ PreHearing Reply Brief Addressing Remedies in No. 00–CV–
6311 (WDNY), p. 2.
The District Court did not apply a deferential standard
of review. Nor did it accept the Plan Administrator’s
interpretation. Instead, after finding the Plan to be am
biguous, the District Court adopted an approach proposed
by respondents that did not account for the time value of
money. Under that approach, respondents’ present bene
fits were reduced only by the nominal amount of their past
distributions—thereby treating a dollar distributed to
respondents in the 1980’s as equal in value to a dollar
distributed today. See 472 F. Supp. 2d, at 457–458. The
Second Circuit affirmed in relevant part, holding that the
District Court was correct not to apply a deferential stan
dard on remand, and that the District Court’s decision on
the merits was not an abuse of discretion. See 535 F. 3d


4

CONKRIGHT v. FROMMERT
Opinion of the Court

111, 119 (2008).
Petitioners asked us to grant certiorari on two ques
tions: (1) whether the District Court owed deference to the
Plan Administrator’s interpretation of the Plan on re
mand, and (2) whether the Court of Appeals properly
granted deference to the District Court on the merits. Pet.
for Cert. i. We granted certiorari on both, 557 U. S. ___
(2009), but find it necessary to decide only the first.
II
A
This Court addressed the standard for reviewing the
decisions of ERISA plan administrators in Firestone, 489
U. S. 101. Because ERISA’s text does not directly resolve
the matter, we looked to “principles of trust law” for guid
ance. Id., at 109, 111. We recognized that, under trust
law, the proper standard of review of a trustee’s decision
depends on the language of the instrument creating the
trust. See id., at 111–112. If the trust documents give the
trustee “power to construe disputed or doubtful terms, . . .
the trustee’s interpretation will not be disturbed if reason
able.” Id., at 111. Based on these considerations, we held
that “a denial of benefits challenged under §1132(a)(1)(B)
is to be reviewed under a de novo standard unless the
benefit plan gives the administrator or fiduciary discre
tionary authority to determine eligibility for benefits or to
construe the terms of the plan.” Id., at 115.
We expanded Firestone’s approach in Metropolitan Life
Ins. Co. v. Glenn, 554 U. S. ___ (2008). In determining the
proper standard of review when a plan administrator
operates under a conflict of interest, we again looked to
trust law, the terms of the plan at issue, and the principles
of ERISA—plus, of course, our precedent in Firestone. See
554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 4, 6–7, 9–10). We held that,
when the terms of a plan grant discretionary authority to
the plan administrator, a deferential standard of review


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

remains appropriate even in the face of a conflict. See id.,
at ___ (slip op., at 9).
It is undisputed that, under Firestone and the terms of
the Plan, the Plan Administrator here would normally be
entitled to deference when interpreting the Plan. See 328
F. Supp. 2d, at 430–431 (observing that the Plan grants
the Plan Administrator “broad discretion in making deci
sions relative to the Plan”). The Court of Appeals, how
ever, crafted an exception to Firestone deference. Specifi
cally, the Second Circuit held that a court need not apply a
deferential standard “where the administrator ha[s] previ
ously construed the same [plan] terms and we found such
a construction to have violated ERISA.” 535 F. 3d, at 119.
Under that view, the District Court here was entitled to
reject a reasonable interpretation of the Plan offered by
the Plan Administrator, solely because the Court of Ap
peals had overturned a previous interpretation by
the Administrator.
Cf. ibid. (accepting the District
Court’s chosen method as one of “several reasonable
alternatives”).
B
We reject this “one-strike-and-you’re-out” approach.
Brief for Petitioners 51. As an initial matter, it has no
basis in the Court’s holding in Firestone, which set out a
broad standard of deference without any suggestion that
the standard was susceptible to ad hoc exceptions like the
one adopted by the Court of Appeals. See 489 U. S., at
111, 115. Indeed, we refused to create such an exception
to Firestone deference in Glenn, recognizing that ERISA
law was already complicated enough without adding
“special procedural or evidentiary rules” to the mix. 554
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 10). If, as we held in Glenn, a
systemic conflict of interest does not strip a plan adminis
trator of deference, see id., at ___ (slip op., at 9), it is diffi
cult to see why a single honest mistake would require a


6

CONKRIGHT v. FROMMERT
Opinion of the Court

different result.
Nor is the Court of Appeals’ decision supported by the
considerations on which our holdings in Firestone and
Glenn were based—namely, the terms of the plan, princi
ples of trust law, and the purposes of ERISA. See supra,
at 4–5. First, the Plan here grants the Plan Administrator
general authority to “[c]onstrue the Plan.” App. to Pet. for
Cert. 141a–142a. Nothing in that provision suggests that
the grant of authority is limited to first efforts to construe
the Plan.
Second, the Court of Appeals’ exception to Firestone
deference is not required by principles of trust law. Trust
law is unclear on the narrow question before us. A leading
treatise states that a court will strip a trustee of his dis
cretion when there is reason to believe that he will not
exercise that discretion fairly—for example, upon a show
ing that the trustee has already acted in bad faith:
“If the trustee’s failure to pay a reasonable amount [to
the beneficiary of the trust] is due to a failure to exer
cise [the trustee’s] discretion honestly and fairly, the
court may well fix the amount [to be paid] itself. On
the other hand, if the trustee’s failure to provide rea
sonably for the beneficiary is due to a mistake as to
the trustee’s duties or powers, and there is no reason
to believe the trustee will not fairly exercise the dis
cretion once the court has determined the extent of
the trustee’s duties and powers, the court ordinarily
will not fix the amount but will instead direct the
trustee to make reasonable provision for the benefici
ary’s support.” 3 A. Scott, W. Fratcher, & M. Ascher,
Scott and Ascher on Trusts §18.2.1, pp. 1348–1349
(5th ed. 2007) (hereinafter Scott and Ascher) (footnote
omitted) (citing cases).
This is not surprising—if the settlor who creates a trust
grants discretion to the trustee, it seems doubtful that the


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

settlor would want the trustee divested entirely of that
discretion simply because of one good-faith mistake.1
Here the lower courts made no finding that the Plan
Administrator had acted in bad faith or would not fairly
exercise his discretion to interpret the terms of the Plan.
Thus, if the District Court had followed the trust law
principles set out in Scott and Ascher, it should not have
“act[ed] as a substitute trustee,” Eaton v. Eaton, 82 N. H.
216, 218, 132 A. 10, 11 (1926), and stripped the Plan
——————
1 The

dissent is wrong to suggest a lack of case support for this inter
pretation of trust law. Post, at 10–12 (opinion of BREYER, J.). See, e.g.,
Hanford v. Clancy, 87 N. H. 458, 461, 183 A. 271, 272–273 (1936)
(“Affirmative orders of disposition, such as the court made in this case,
may only be sustained if, under the circumstances, there is but one
reasonable disposition possible. If more than one reasonable disposi
tion could be made, then the trustee must make the choice” (emphasis
added)); In re Sullivan’s Will, 144 Neb. 36, 40–41, 12 N. W. 2d 148,
150–151 (1943) (although trustees erred in not providing any support to
plaintiff, “the court was without authority to determine the amount of
support to which plaintiff was entitled from the trust fund” because
“the court has no authority to substitute its judgment for that of the
trustees” (emphasis added)); Eaton v. Eaton, 82 N. H. 216, 218–219,
132 A. 10, 11 (1926) (“[The trustee’s] failure to administer the fund
properly did not entitle the court to act as a substitute trustee. . . .
[W]ithin the limits of reasonableness the trustee alone may exercise
discretion, since that is what the will requires” (emphasis added) (cited
in 3 A. Scott & W. Fratcher, Law of Trusts §187.1, pp. 30–31 (4th ed.
1988))); In re Marre’s Estate, 18 Cal. 2d 184, 190, 114 P. 2d 586, 590–
591 (1941) (lower court erred in setting amount of payments to benefi
ciary after ruling that trustees had mistakenly failed to make payment;
“[i]t is well settled that the courts will not attempt to exercise discretion
which has been confided to a trustee unless it is clear that the trustee
has abused his discretion in some manner. . . . The amounts to be paid
should therefore be determined in the discretion of the trustees” (cited
in 3 Scott and Ascher 1349, n. 4 (5th ed. 2007))); Finch v. Wachovia
Bank & Trust Co., 156 N. C. App. 343, 348, 577 S. E. 2d 306, 310 (2003)
(agreeing with lower court that trustee abused its discretion, but
vacating the court’s remedial order because it would “strip discretion
from the trustee and replace it with the judgment of the court”). See
also Brief for Petitioners 40–43.


8

CONKRIGHT v. FROMMERT
Opinion of the Court

Administrator of the deference he would otherwise enjoy
under Firestone and the terms of the Plan.
Other trust law sources, however, point the other way.
For example, the Restatement (Second) of Trusts states
that “the court will control the trustee in the exercise of a
power where he acts beyond the bounds of a reasonable
judgment.” Restatement (Second) of Trusts §187, Com
ment i, p. 406 (1957). Another treatise states that, after a
trustee has abused his discretion, “[s]ometimes the court
decides for the trustee how he should act, either by stating
the exact result it desires to achieve, or by fixing some
limits on the trustee’s action and giving him leeway within
those limits.” G. Bogert & G. Bogert, Law of Trusts and
Trustees §560, p. 223 (2d rev. ed. 1980).
The unclear state of trust law on the question was per
haps best captured by the Texas Supreme Court:
“There is authority for ordering a dismissal of the case
to afford the trustee an opportunity to exercise a rea
sonable discretion in arriving at the amount of pay
ments to be made in the light of our discussion of the
problem and after a proper consideration of the many
factors involved. On the other hand, there is author
ity for remanding the case to the trial court to hear
evidence and in the exercise of its supervisory juris
diction to fix the amount of such payments. There is
still other authority for remanding the case to the
trial court to hear evidence and fix the boundaries of a
reasonable discretion to be exercised by the trustee
within maximum and minimum limits.” State v.
Rubion, 158 Tex. 43, 54–55, 308 S. W. 2d 4, 11 (1957)
(citations omitted).
While we are “guided by principles of trust law” in
ERISA cases, Firestone, 489 U. S., at 111, we have recog
nized before that “trust law does not tell the entire story,”
Varity Corp. v. Howe, 516 U. S. 489, 497 (1996); see ibid.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

(“In some instances, trust law will offer only a starting
point, after which courts must go on to ask whether, or to
what extent, the language of the statute, its structure, or
its purposes require departing from common-law trust
requirements”); Brief for Respondents 50 (pressing same
view as the dissent but concluding that the dispute over
trust law “need not be resolved”). Here trust law does not
resolve the specific issue before us, but the guiding princi
ples we have identified underlying ERISA do.
Congress enacted ERISA to ensure that employees
would receive the benefits they had earned, but Congress
did not require employers to establish benefit plans in the
first place. Lockheed Corp. v. Spink, 517 U. S. 882, 887
(1996). We have therefore recognized that ERISA repre
sents a “ ‘careful balancing’ between ensuring fair and
prompt enforcement of rights under a plan and the en
couragement of the creation of such plans.” Aetna Health
Inc. v. Davila, 542 U. S. 200, 215 (2004) (quoting Pilot Life
Ins. Co. v. Dedeaux, 481 U. S. 41, 54 (1987)). Congress
sought “to create a system that is [not] so complex that
administrative costs, or litigation expenses, unduly dis
courage employers from offering [ERISA] plans in the first
place.” Varity Corp., supra, at 497. ERISA “induc[es]
employers to offer benefits by assuring a predictable set of
liabilities, under uniform standards of primary conduct
and a uniform regime of ultimate remedial orders and
awards when a violation has occurred.” Rush Prudential
HMO, Inc. v. Moran, 536 U. S. 355, 379 (2002).
Firestone deference protects these interests and, by
permitting an employer to grant primary interpretive
authority over an ERISA plan to the plan administrator,
preserves the “careful balancing” on which ERISA is
based. Deference promotes efficiency by encouraging
resolution of benefits disputes through internal adminis
trative proceedings rather than costly litigation. It also
promotes predictability, as an employer can rely on the


10

CONKRIGHT v. FROMMERT
Opinion of the Court

expertise of the plan administrator rather than worry
about unexpected and inaccurate plan interpretations that
might result from de novo judicial review. Moreover,
Firestone deference serves the interest of uniformity,
helping to avoid a patchwork of different interpretations of
a plan, like the one here, that covers employees in differ
ent jurisdictions—a result that “would introduce consider
able inefficiencies in benefit program operation, which
might lead those employers with existing plans to reduce
benefits, and those without such plans to refrain from
adopting them.” Fort Halifax Packing Co. v. Coyne, 482
U. S. 1, 11 (1987). Indeed, a group of prominent actuaries
tells us that it is impossible even to determine whether an
ERISA plan is solvent (a duty imposed on actuaries by
federal law, see 29 U. S. C. §§1023(a)(4), (d)) if the plan is
interpreted to mean different things in different places.
See Brief for Chief Actuaries as Amici Curiae 5–11.
Respondents and the United States as amicus curiae do
not question that deference to plan administrators serves
these important purposes. Rather, they argue that defer
ence is less important once a plan administrator has is
sued an interpretation of a plan found to be unreasonable.
But the interests in efficiency, predictability, and uniform
ity—and the manner in which they are promoted by defer
ence to reasonable plan construction by administrators—
do not suddenly disappear simply because a plan adminis
trator has made a single honest mistake.
This case illustrates the point. Consider first the inter
est in efficiency, an interest that Xerox has pursued by
granting the Plan Administrator authority to construe the
Plan. On remand from the Court of Appeals, if the Dis
trict Court had applied a deferential standard of review
under Firestone, the question before it would have been
whether the Plan Administrator’s interpretation of the
Plan was reasonable. After answering that question, the
case might well have been over. Instead, the District


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

Court declined to defer, and therefore had to answer the
more complicated question of how best to interpret the
Plan.
The prospect of increased litigation costs inherent in
respondents’ approach does not end there. Under respon
dents’ and the Government’s view, the question whether a
deferential standard of review was required in this case
turns on whether the Plan Administrator was interpreting
the “same terms” or deciding the “same issue” on remand.
See Brief for Respondents 43, 46–48, 53, and n. 13; Brief
for United States as Amicus Curiae 13–15, 23. Whether
that condition is satisfied will not always be clear. Indeed,
petitioners dispute that question here, arguing that the
Plan Administrator confronted an entirely new issue on
remand—how to interpret the Plan, knowing that specific
provisions requiring use of the phantom account method
could not be applied to respondents due to a lack of notice.
See Brief for Petitioners 50–51. Respondents would force
the parties to litigate this potentially complicated “same
issue” or “same terms” question before a district court
could even decide whether deference is owed to a plan
administrator’s view. As we recognized in Glenn, there is
little place in the ERISA context for these sorts of “special
procedural rules [that] would create further complexity,
adding time and expense to a process that may already be
too costly for many of those who seek redress.” 554 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 10).
The position of respondents and the Government could
interject other additional issues into ERISA litigation. For
example, even under their view, the District Court here
could have granted deference to the Plan Administrator;
the court merely was not required to do so. See Brief for
Respondents 43, 49–50, 52–53; Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae 23–24. That raises the question of how a
court is to decide between the two options; respondents’
answer is to weigh an indeterminate number of factors,


12

CONKRIGHT v. FROMMERT
Opinion of the Court

which would only further complicate ERISA proceedings.
See Tr. of Oral Arg. 34, 40–45.
This case also demonstrates the harm to the interest in
predictability that would result from stripping a plan
administrator of Firestone deference. After declining to
apply a deferential standard here, the District Court
adopted an interpretation of the Plan that does not ac
count for the time value of money. 472 F. Supp. 2d, at
458; 535 F. 3d, at 119. In the actuarial world, this is
heresy, and highly unforeseeable. Indeed, the actuaries
tell us that they have never encountered an ERISA plan
resembling this one that did not include some adjustment
for the time value of money. Brief for Chief Actuaries as
Amici Curiae 12.
Respondents’ own actuarial expert testified before the
District Court that fairness would require recognizing the
time value of money in some fashion. See App. 127a,
130a. And respondents and the Government do not dis
pute that the District Court’s approach, which does not
account for the fact that respondents were able to use
their past distributions as they saw fit for over 20 years,
would place respondents in a better position than employ
ees who never left the company. Cf. Brief for Respondents
42–43; Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 32–33.
Deference to plan administrators, who have a duty to all
beneficiaries to preserve limited plan assets, see Varity
Corp., 516 U. S., at 514, helps prevent such windfalls for
particular employees.
Finally, this case demonstrates the uniformity problems
that arise from creating ad hoc exceptions to Firestone
deference. If other courts were to adopt an interpretation
of the Plan that does account for the time value of money,
Xerox could be placed in an impossible situation. Similar
Xerox employees could be entitled to different benefits
depending on where they live, or perhaps where they bring
a legal action. Cf. 29 U. S. C. §1132(e)(2) (permitting suit


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

“where the plan is administered, where the breach took
place, or where a defendant resides or may be found”). In
fact, that may already be the case. In similar litigation
over the Plan, the Ninth Circuit also rejected the use of
the phantom account method, but held that the Plan
Administrator should utilize actuarial principles in ac
counting for rehired employees’ past distributions—which
would presumably include taking some cognizance of the
time value of money. See Miller v. Xerox Corp. Retirement
Income Guarantee Plan, 464 F. 3d 871, 875–876 (2006);
Brief for ERISA Industry Committee and American Bene
fits Council as Amici Curiae 8–9. Thus, failing to defer to
the Plan Administrator here could well cause the Plan to
be subject to different interpretations in California and
New York. “Uniformity is impossible, however, if plans
are subject to different legal obligations in different
States.” Egelhoff v. Egelhoff, 532 U. S. 141, 148 (2001).
Firestone deference serves to avoid that result and to
preserve the “careful balancing” of interests that ERISA
represents. Pilot Life Ins. Co., 481 U. S., at 54.
C
In spite of all this, respondents and the Government
argue that requiring the District Court to apply Firestone
deference in this case would actually disserve the purposes
of ERISA. They argue that continued deference would
encourage plan administrators to adopt unreasonable
interpretations of plans in the first instance, as adminis
trators would anticipate a second chance to interpret their
plans if their first interpretations were rejected. And they
argue that plan administrators would be able to proceed
seriatim through several interpretations of their plans,
each time receiving deference, thereby undermining the
prompt resolution of disputes over benefits, driving up
litigation costs, and discouraging employees from chal
lenging the decisions of plan administrators at all.


14

CONKRIGHT v. FROMMERT
Opinion of the Court

All this is overblown. There is no reason to think that
deference would be required in the extreme circumstances
that respondents foresee. Under trust law, a trustee may
be stripped of deference when he does not exercise his
discretion “honestly and fairly.” 3 Scott and Ascher 1348.
Multiple erroneous interpretations of the same plan provi
sion, even if issued in good faith, might well support a
finding that a plan administrator is too incompetent to
exercise his discretion fairly, cutting short the rounds of
costly litigation that respondents fear.
Applying a deferential standard of review does not mean
that the plan administrator will prevail on the merits. It
means only that the plan administrator’s interpretation of
the plan “will not be disturbed if reasonable.” Firestone,
489 U. S., at 111; see also ibid. (“ ‘Where discretion is
conferred upon the trustee with respect to the exercise of a
power, its exercise is not subject to control by the court
except to prevent an abuse by the trustee of his discre
tion’ ” (quoting Restatement (Second) of Trusts §187)).
Thus, far from “impos[ing] [a] rigid and inflexible re
quirement” that courts must defer to plan administrators,
post, at 8, we simply hold that the lower courts should
have applied the standard established in Firestone and
Glenn.
III
The Court of Appeals erred in holding that the District
Court could refuse to defer to the Plan Administrator’s
interpretation of the Plan on remand, simply because the
Court of Appeals had found a previous related interpreta
tion by the Administrator to be invalid. Because we re
verse on that ground, we do not reach the question
whether the Court of Appeals also erred in applying a
deferential standard of review to the decision of the Dis


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

trict Court on the merits.2
The judgment of the Court of Appeals for the Second
Circuit is reversed, and the case is remanded for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR took no part in the consideration
or decision of this case.

——————
2 The Government raises an additional argument—that the District
Court should not have deferred to the Plan Administrator’s second
interpretation of the Plan because that interpretation would have
violated ERISA’s notice requirements. See Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae 25–26. That is an argument about the merits, not the
proper standard of review, and we leave it to be decided, if necessary,
on remand.

