No. 08–1438 [April 20, 2011]  JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, with whom JUSTICE BREYER joins, dissenting. The Court holds that the term “appropriate relief” is too ambiguous to provide States with clear notice that they will be liable for monetary damages under the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of 2000 (RLUIPA), 114 Stat. 803, 42 U. S. C. §2000cc et seq. I dis agree. No one disputes that, in accepting federal funds, the States consent to suit for violations of RLUIPA’s sub stantive provisions; the only question is what relief is available to plaintiffs asserting injury from such viola tions. That monetary damages are “appropriate relief” is, in my view, self-evident. Under general remedies princi ples, the usual remedy for a violation of a legal right is damages. Consistent with these principles, our precedents make clear that the phrase “appropriate relief” includes monetary relief. By adopting a contrary reading of the term, the majority severely undermines the “broad protec tion of religious exercise” Congress intended the statute to provide. §2000cc–3(g). For these reasons, I respectfully dissent. As the Court acknowledges, the proposition that “States
may waive their sovereign immunity” is an “unremark (1999) (“[W]e have not questioned the general proposition that a State may waive its sovereign immunity and con U. S. 234, 238 (1985) (noting the “well-established” prin ciple that “if a State waives its immunity and consents to suit in federal court, the Eleventh Amendment does Comm’n, 359 U. S. 275, 276 (1959) (noting that a State may waive sovereign immunity “at its pleasure”). Neither the majority nor respondents (hereinafter Texas) dispute that, pursuant to its power under the Spending Clause, U. S. Const., Art. I, §8, cl. 1, Congress may secure a State’s consent to suit as a condition of the State’s receipt of federal funding.1 See College Savings 527 U. S. 666, 686 (1999) (“Congress may, in the exercise of its spending power, condition its grant of funds to the States upon their taking certain actions that Congress could not require them to take, and . . . acceptance of the funds entails an agreement to the actions”); Atascadero, 473 U. S., at 247 (suggesting that a federal statute can “condition participation in the programs funded under the [statute] on a State’s consent to waive its constitutional immunity”). As with all waivers of sovereign immunity, the question is whether the State has unequivocally con sented to suit in federal court. See College Savings Bank, 527 U. S., at 680; Atascadero, 473 U. S., at 238, n. 1.
Thus, in order to attach a waiver of sovereign immunity to federal funds, Congress “must do so unambiguously,” so as to “enable the States to exercise their choice know man, 451 U. S. 1, 17 (1981). In other words, the State must have notice of the condition it is accepting. See U. S. 291, 298 (2006) (“[C]lear notice . . . is required under the Spending Clause”). The reason for requiring notice is simple: “States cannot knowingly accept conditions of which they are ‘unaware’ or which they are ‘unable to ascertain.’ ” Id., at 296 (quoting Pennhurst, 451 U. S., at 17). In assessing whether a federal statute provides clear notice of the conditions attached, “we must view the [stat ute] from the perspective of a state official who is engaged in the process of deciding whether the State should accept [federal] funds and the obligations that go with those funds.” Arlington Central, 548 U. S., at 296. There is also no dispute that RLUIPA clearly conditions a State’s receipt of federal funding on its consent to suit for violations of the statute’s substantive provisions. The statute states that “program[s] or activit[ies] that receiv[e] Federal financial assistance” may not impose a “substan tial burden on the religious exercise of a person residing in or confined to an institution.” §2000cc–1. When such a burden has been imposed, the victim “may assert a viola tion of [RLUIPA] as a claim . . . in a judicial proceeding and obtain appropriate relief against a government,” §2000cc–2(a), which the statute defines, as relevant, as “a State, county, municipality, or other governmental entity created under the authority of a State,” §2000cc–5(4)(A)(i). Accordingly, it is evident that Texas had notice that, in accepting federal funds, it waived its sovereign immunity to suit by institutionalized persons upon whom it has Virginia, 474 F. 3d 118, 130 (CA4 2006) (“On its face,
RLUIPA . . . creates a private cause of action against the State, and Virginia cannot be heard to claim that it was Georgia, 391 F. 3d 1299, 1305 (CA11 2004) (“Congress unambiguously required states to waive their sovereign immunity from suits filed by prisoners to enforce RLUIPA”). The Court holds that the phrase “appropriate relief” does not provide state officials clear notice that monetary relief will be available against the States, meaning that they could not have waived their immunity with respect to that particular type of liability. This holding is contrary to general remedies principles and our precedents. RLUIPA straightforwardly provides a private right of action to “obtain appropriate relief against a government.” §2000cc–2(a). Under “our traditional approach to deciding what remedies are available for violation of a federal right,” damages are the default—and equitable relief the exception—for “it is axiomatic that a court should deter mine the adequacy of a remedy in law before resorting to Romero-Barcelo, 456 U. S. 305, 312 (1982) (“The Court has repeatedly held that the basis for injunctive relief in the federal courts has always been . . . the inadequacy of legal 403 U. S. 388, 395 (1971) (“Historically, damages have been regarded as the ordinary remedy for an invasion of Seed Farms, 561 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 24) (“An injunction is a drastic and extraordinary remedy, which should not be granted as a matter of course”). It is unsur prising, therefore, that on more than one occasion Con gress has felt it necessary to clarify in the text of a statute
that it meant the terms “relief” and “appropriate relief” to exclude damages. See 5 U. S. C. §702 (providing that, under the Administrative Procedure Act, “relief other than money damages” is available against a federal agency to remedy a “legal wrong”); see also 42 U. S. C. §6395(e)(1) (providing a cause of action for “appropriate relief,” but specifying that “[n]othing in this subsection shall author ize any person to recover damages”); 15 U. S. C. §797(b)(5) (similar). If, despite the clarity of this background principle, state officials reading RLUIPA were somehow still uncertain as to whether the phrase “appropriate relief” encompasses monetary damages, our precedents would relieve any doubt. In Franklin we made clear that, “absent clear direction to the contrary by Congress,” federal statutes providing a private right of action authorize all “appropri ate relief,” including damages, against violators of its substantive terms. 503 U. S., at 70–71, 75–76. We reiter 185, 187 (2002), affirming that “the scope of ‘appropriate relief ’ ” includes compensatory damages.2 The holdings in these cases are fully consistent with the general principle
that monetary relief is available for violations of the sub stantive conditions Congress attaches, through Spending Clause legislation, to the acceptance of federal funding. (1999) (“[P]ursuant to Congress’ authority under the Spending Clause . . . private damages actions are avail U. S. 274, 287 (1998) (noting that “[w]hen Congress at taches conditions to the award of federal funds under its spending power . . . private actions holding the recipient liable in monetary damages” are permissible). It would be an odd derogation of the normal rules of statutory con struction for state officials reading RLUIPA to assume that Congress drafted the statute in ignorance of these 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 12) (“We normally assume that, when Congress enacts statutes, it is aware of relevant judicial precedent”).3 Accordingly, it is difficult to understand the basis for the Court’s position that the phrase “appropriate relief” in §2000cc–2(a) fails to provide state officials with clear notice that waiving sovereign immunity to monetary relief
is a condition of accepting federal funds. In arguing that “a waiver of sovereign immunity to other types of relief does not waive immunity to damages,” ante, at 6 (empha sis added), the majority appears to accept that equitable relief is available to RLUIPA plaintiffs. See Madison, 474 F. 3d, at 131 (holding that a RLUIPA plaintiff’s “claims for equitable relief are not barred by the Eleventh Amend ment”); cf. 560 F. 3d 316, 331, 336 (CA5 2009) (reversing the District Court’s grant of summary judgment to Texas on one of petitioner’s RLUIPA claims for declaratory and injunctive relief ). The explanation for the majority’s implicit acceptance of suits for injunctive and declaratory relief is obvious enough: It would be a particularly curious reading of the statute to conclude that Congress’ express provision of a private right of action to seek “appropriate relief” against “a State” nonetheless left plaintiffs suing for state violations of RLUIPA with no available relief. It is not apparent, however, why the phrase “appropri ate relief” is too ambiguous to secure a waiver of state sovereign immunity with respect to damages but is clear enough as to injunctive and other forms of equitable relief. The majority appears to believe that equitable relief is a “suitable” or “proper” remedy for a state violation of RLUIPA’s substantive provisions but monetary relief is not; therefore, a state official reading the “open-ended and ambiguous” phrase “appropriate relief” will be unaware that it includes damages but fully apprised that it makes equitable relief available. See ante, at 6–7. But sovereign immunity is not simply a defense against certain classes of remedies—it is a defense against being sued at all. See, Authority, 535 U. S. 743, 766 (2002). As a result, there is no inherent reason why the phrase “appropriate relief” would provide adequate notice as to equitable remedies but not as to monetary ones. In fact, as discussed earlier, in light of general remedies principles the presumption
arguably should be the reverse. See supra, at 4–6. The majority suggests that equitable relief is the sole “appropriate relief” for statutory violations “where the defendant is a sovereign.” Ante, at 6–7. There can be little doubt, however, that the “appropriateness” of relief to be afforded a civil plaintiff is generally determined by the nature of the injury to his legal rights. See Franklin, 503 U. S., at 76 (concluding that monetary damages were “appropriate” because equitable relief offered no redress U. S. 267, 280 (1977) (“[T]he nature of the . . . remedy is to be determined by the nature and scope of the . . . viola federally protected rights have been invaded, it has been the rule from the beginning that courts will be alert to adjust their remedies so as to grant the necessary relief”). In support of its proposition the majority cites only to a case in which we expressly rejected the argument that state sovereign immunity operates differently according to what type of relief is sought. See Federal Maritime, 535 U. S., at 765 (“[S]overeign immunity applies regardless of whether a private plaintiff’s suit is for monetary damages or some other type of relief”); cf. id., at 769 (“[T]he primary function of sovereign immunity is not to protect state treasuries, but to afford the States the dignity and respect due sovereign entities” (citation omitted)). Nor is the basis for the majority’s view apparent from the other cases that it cites.4
The majority’s additional arguments in support of its holding also fail to persuade. The majority contends that the use of a “context-dependent” word like “appropriate” necessarily renders the provision ambiguous. Ante, at 7. But the fact that the precise relief afforded by a court may vary depending on the particular injury to be addressed in a given case does not render §2000cc–2(a) ambiguous; it simply means that Congress meant for that provision to be comprehensive. See Pennsylvania Dept. of Corrections a statute can be applied in situations not expressly anti cipated by Congress does not demonstrate ambiguity. It demonstrates breadth” (internal quotation marks omit (holding that the phrase “appropriate remedies” in 42 U. S. C. §2000e–16(b) includes remedies not expressly enumerated). Next, the majority repeats Texas’s dictionary-based contention that in using the word “relief” Congress meant to “connot[e] equitable relief.” Ante, at 8. This proposition suffers from three flaws. First, it is not established by the dictionary to which the majority cites. See Black’s Law Dictionary 1293 (7th ed. 1999) (“relief: . . . Also termed remedy”); id., at 1296 (“remedy: . . . The means of enforc ing a right or preventing or redressing a wrong; legal or equitable relief” (emphasis added)). Second, it is inconsis tent with our precedent. See Barnes, 536 U. S., at 185– 187 (noting that “appropriate relief” includes monetary and injunctive relief ). Third, it is undermined by the fact that, on numerous occasions, Congress has deemed it necessary to specify that “relief” includes injunctive and other equitable relief. See 16 U. S. C. §973i(e) (authoriz
ing the Attorney General to “commence a civil action for appropriate relief, including permanent or temporary injunction”); see also 2 U. S. C. §437g(a)(6)(A); 8 U. S. C. §1324a(f)(2); 12 U. S. C. §1715z–4a(b); 15 U. S. C. §6309(a). If the term “relief” already connotes equitable relief—and only equitable relief—additional explication is redundant. Finally, the majority asserts that because the parties to this case advance opposing “plausible arguments” regard ing the correct interpretation of RLUIPA’s text, we must conclude that the statute is ambiguous. Ante, at 8–9. This view of how we adjudicate cases is incorrect as a descrip 390 (2009) (reviewing the parties’ conflicting textual in terpretations of a statute but concluding that it was un ambiguous nonetheless). Moreover, I cannot agree with the majority that our capacity to interpret authoritatively the text of a federal statute is held hostage to the litigants’ strategic arguments. If this were true, there would be few cases in which we would be able to decide that a statute was unambiguous. In sum, the majority’s conclusion that States accepting federal funds have not consented to suit for monetary relief cannot be reconciled with the fact that the availabil ity of such relief is evident in light of RLUIPA’s plain terms and the principles animating our relevant prece dents. In so holding, the majority discovers ambiguity where none is to be found. There is another reason to question the soundness of today’s decision. The Court’s reading of §2000cc–2(a) severely undermines Congress’ unmistakably stated intent in passing the statute: to afford “broad protection of reli gious exercise, to the maximum extent permitted by the
terms of [the statute] and the Constitution.” §2000cc–3(g). I find it improbable that, in light of this express statutory purpose and the history of “long-running congressional efforts to accord religious exercise heightened protection 544 U. S. 709, 714 (2005), state officials would read RLUIPA’s relief provision in the same limited manner the majority does.5 As the majority acknowledges, RLUIPA was Congress’ second attempt to guarantee by statute the “broad protec tion” of religious exercise that we found to be unwarranted As we have previously recognized, in passing RLUIPA Congress was clearly concerned that state institutions regularly imposed “frivolous or arbitrary barriers im ped[ing] institutionalized persons’ religious exercise.” Cutter, 544 U. S., at 716 (internal quotation marks omit ted); see also 146 Cong. Rec. 16698, 16699 (2000) (joint statement of Sen. Hatch and Sen. Kennedy on RLUIPA) (“Whether from indifference, ignorance, bigotry, or lack of resources, some institutions restrict religious liberty in
egregious and unnecessary ways”); ibid. (“Institutional residents’ rights to practice their faith is at the mercy of those running the institution . . .”). It is difficult to believe that Congress would have devoted such care and effort to establishing significant statutory protections for religious exercise and specifically extended those protections to persons in state institutions, yet withheld from plaintiffs a crucial tool for securing the rights the statute guarantees. By depriving prisoners of a damages remedy for viola tions of their statutory rights, the majority ensures that plaintiffs suing state defendants under RLUIPA will be forced to seek enforcement of those rights with one hand tied behind their backs. Most obviously, the majority’s categorical denial of monetary relief means that a plaintiff who prevails on the merits of his claim that a State has substantially burdened his religious exercise will often be denied redress for the injury he has suffered, because in many instances “prospective relief accords . . . no remedy at all.” Franklin, 503 U. S., at 76; see H. R. Rep. No. 102– 40, pt. 2, p. 25 (1991) (Report of Committee on the Judici ary on the Civil Rights Act of 1991) (“The limitation of relief under Title VII to equitable remedies often means that victims . . . may not recover for the very real effects of the [statutory violation]”). Injunctive relief from a federal court may address a violation going forward, but this fact will be of cold comfort to the victims of serious, non recurring violations for which equitable relief may be inappropriate. In addition, the unavailability of monetary relief will effectively shield unlawful policies and practices from judicial review in many cases. Under state law, discretion to transfer prisoners “in a wide variety of circumstances is 215, 227 (1976). A number of RLUIPA suits seeking in junctive relief have been dismissed as moot because the plaintiff was transferred from the institution where the
alleged violation took place prior to adjudication on the (PR), 2010 WL 1233815, *3 (ND Cal., Mar. 26, 2010); see generally Brief for American Civil Liberties Union et al. as Amici Curiae 8–11. Absent a damages remedy, longstand ing RLUIPA challenges may well be dismissed for lack of a case or controversy conferring Article III jurisdiction on (SD Tex., Mar. 26, 2009) (dismissing as moot plaintiff’s RLUIPA claim because he had been transferred to a facil ity that provided kosher food), remanded, 364 Fed. Appx. 110 (CA5 2010); Opening Brief for Plaintiff-Appellant in 40400 (CA5), p. 11 (noting that transfer to a special facil ity took place 19 months after the plaintiff filed suit and just before discovery—which had been stayed 12 months for negotiation—was scheduled to recommence). Or, as happened in this case, officials may change the policy while litigation is pending. The fact of “voluntary cessa tion” may allow some of these claims to go forward, but many will nonetheless be dismissed as moot (as happened in this case).6
Of course, under the rule the majority announces, Con gress can revise RLUIPA to provide specifically for mone tary relief against the States, perhaps by inserting the phrase “including monetary relief” into the text of §2000cc–2(a). But we have never demanded that a waiver be presented in a particular formulation to be effective; we 415 U. S. 651, 673 (1974) (holding that waiver may be found in “express language” or by “overwhelming implica tions from the text” (internal quotation marks omitted)). In holding to the contrary, the majority erects a formalis tic barrier to the vindication of statutory rights deliber ately provided for by Congress. More problematically, because there is no apparent reason why the term “appropriate relief” is sufficiently clear as to equitable relief but not as to monetary relief, we are left with the very real possibility that, in order to secure a waiver of immunity under the majority’s new rule, Congress must now itemize in the statutory text every type of relief meant to be available against sovereign defendants. I, for one, do not relish the prospect of federal courts being presented with endless state challenges to all manner of federal statutes, on the ground that Congress failed to predict that a laundry list of terms must be in cluded to waive sovereign immunity to all forms of relief. I would avoid the problems the majority’s decision invites and hold instead that, as is the case here, when a general statutory term like “appropriate relief” is used, clear no tice has been provided and a State’s acceptance of federal funds constitutes a waiver of sovereign immunity to all relief, equitable and monetary.
As explained above, nothing in our precedent demands the result the majority reaches today. The conclusion that RLUIPA fails to provide States with sufficient notice that they are liable for monetary relief cannot be squared with the straightforward terms of the statute and the general principles evident in our prior cases. For these reasons, and because the majority’s decision significantly under mines Congress’ ability to provide needed redress for violations of individuals’ rights under federal law, I re spectfully dissent.
——————
1 Though the Court reserves the general question whether RLUIPA is
a valid exercise of Congress’ power under the Spending Clause, see
ante, at 2, n. 1, there is apparently no disagreement among the Federal
Courts of Appeals, see 560 F. 3d 316, 328, n. 34 (CA5 2009) (“Every
circuit to consider whether RLUIPA is Spending Clause legislation has
concluded that it is constitutional under at least that power”).


——————
2 The majority suggests that our use of the phrase “appropriate relief ”
in Franklin and Barnes did not “put the States on notice that the same
phrase in RLUIPA subjected them to suits for monetary relief,” because
“[t]hose cases did not involve sovereign defendants.” Ante, at 10, n. 6.
The majority misperceives the point. Franklin and Barnes simply
confirmed what otherwise would have been already apparent to any
informed reader of RLUIPA—when it comes to remedying injuries to
legal rights, monetary damages are “appropriate relief.” Moreover, as
noted in the text, see supra, at 4–5, the Administrative Procedure Act
expressly excludes “money damages” from the “relief ” available against
the United States, suggesting that Congress understands the term
normally to encompass monetary relief even when the defendant enjoys
sovereign immunity. See 5 U. S. C. §702; Bowen v. Massachusetts, 487
U. S. 879, 891–892 (1988) (noting that §702 waives the United States’
sovereign immunity to suit).


——————
3 Curiously,

the majority appears to believe that it would be appro
priate for state officials to read the statutory phrase “appropriate relief ”
without reference to general remedies principles. See ante, at 12, n. 8.
It is well-established, however, that “Congress is understood to legis
late against a background of common-law . . . principles,” Astoria Fed.
Sav. & Loan Assn. v. Solimino, 501 U. S. 104, 108 (1991), and there can
be no doubt that general legal principles necessarily inform judicial
determinations as to what remedies are available to civil plaintiffs, see,
e.g., Atlantic Sounding Co. v. Townsend, 557 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip
op., at 15) (concluding that, in light of “general principles of maritime
tort law” punitive damages were a remedy available to the plaintiff
(internal quotation marks omitted)). Why Texas’s sovereign immunity
defense renders this approach improper is a mystery the majority
opinion leaves unsolved.


——————
4 In

Lane v. Peña, 518 U. S. 187 (1996), United States v. Nordic Vil­
lage, Inc., 503 U. S. 30 (1992), and Hoffman v. Connecticut Dept. of
Income Maintenance, 492 U. S. 96 (1989), we simply reaffirmed the
principle that a sovereign’s liability for damages must be unambigu
ously expressed in the statute purporting to waive immunity; as dem
onstrated above, RLUIPA satisfies this requirement. The majority
tellingly relies on the dissent’s assertion in West v. Gibson, 527 U. S.
212 (1999), that the phrase “appropriate remedies” was too ambiguous


—————— 

to waive sovereign immunity to monetary relief. See id., at 226 (opin
ion of KENNEDY, J.). Accordingly, the cases the majority cites do not

mandate the conclusion it draws today. 



——————
5 I agree with the majority’s conclusion that, because Section 3 of
RLUIPA, addressing the rights of institutionalized persons, is not a
“provisio[n] of [a] . . . Federal statute prohibiting discrimination” within
the meaning of the Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1986, 42 U. S. C.
§2000d–7(a)(1), the latter statute’s waiver provision does not put the
States on notice that they can be sued for damages under RLUIPA. See
ante, at 12–14. It bears noting, however, that Section 2 of RLUIPA
explicitly prohibits discrimination in land use regulation.
See
§2000cc(b)(2) (“No government shall impose or implement a land use
regulation that discriminates . . . on the basis of religion or religious
denomination”). As a result, the majority’s decision in this case means
that some RLUIPA plaintiffs will be able to seek monetary damages
against a State and others will not, even though RLUIPA’s provision of
“appropriate relief ” applies equally to suits for violations of the terms
of both Section 2 and Section 3.


——————
6 See Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School Dist.
No. 1, 551 U. S. 701, 719 (2007) (“Voluntary cessation does not moot a
case or controversy unless subsequent events make it absolutely clear
that the allegedly wrongful behavior could not reasonably be expected
to recur” (internal quotation marks and alterations omitted)). The
Fifth Circuit declined to apply the “voluntary cessation” doctrine in this
case and instead granted Texas’s motion that the court dismiss as moot
petitioner’s claim for injunctive relief with respect to the prison’s cell
restriction policy. Because the prison director averred that the policy
was no longer in force, and “absent evidence that the voluntary ces
sation [wa]s a sham,” the court held that the “good faith nature” of
Texas’s change in policy rendered moot petitioner’s claim for injunctive
relief. See 560 F. 3d, at 324–326; see also Nelson v. Miller, 570 F. 3d


——————
868, 882–883 (CA7 2009) (affirming the District Court’s dismissal as
moot of a RLUIPA claim because there was no evidence that the prison
intended to revoke the plaintiff ’s religious diet); El v. Evans, 694
F. Supp. 2d 1009, 1012–1013 (SD Ill. 2010) (similar).

