(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SOSSAMON v. TEXAS ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1438. Argued November 2, 2010—Decided April 20, 2011
After this Court held that the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of
1993 was unconstitutional as applied to state and local governments
because it exceeded Congress’ power under §5 of the Fourteenth
Amendment, see City of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U. S. 507, Congress
passed the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of
2000 (RLUIPA) pursuant to its Spending Clause and Commerce
Clause authority. RLUIPA targets two areas of state and local ac
tion: land–use regulation, RLUIPA §2, 42 U. S. C. §2000cc, and re
strictions on the religious exercise of institutionalized persons,
RLUIPA §3, §2000cc–1. It also provides an express private cause of
action for “appropriate relief against a government,” §2000cc–2(a),
including, inter alia, States, their instrumentalities and officers, and
persons acting under color of state law, §2000cc–5(4)(A).
Petitioner Sossamon, a Texas prison inmate, sued respondents, the
State and prison officials, seeking injunctive and monetary relief un
der RLUIPA for prison policies that prevented inmates from attend
ing religious services while on cell restriction for disciplinary infrac
tions and that barred use of the prison chapel for religious worship.
Granting respondents summary judgment, the District Court held
that sovereign immunity barred Sossamon’s claims for monetary re
lief. The Fifth Circuit affirmed, holding that the statutory phrase
“appropriate relief against a government” did not unambiguously no
tify Texas that its acceptance of federal funds was conditioned on a
waiver of sovereign immunity to claims for monetary relief.
Held: States, in accepting federal funding, do not consent to waive their
sovereign immunity to private suits for money damages under
RLUIPA. Pp. 4–14.
(a) Sovereign immunity principles enforce an important constitu


2

SOSSAMON v. TEXAS
Syllabus
tional limitation on the power of the federal courts. See Pennhurst
State School and Hospital v. Halderman, 465 U. S. 89, 98. This
Court has consistently made clear that “federal jurisdiction over suits
against unconsenting States ‘was not contemplated by the Constitu
tion when establishing the judicial power of the United States.’ ”
Seminole Tribe of Fla. v. Florida, 517 U. S. 44, 54. A State, however,
may choose to waive its immunity. Clark v. Barnard, 108 U. S. 436,
447–448. The “ ‘test for determining whether [it has done so] is a
stringent one.’ ” College Savings Bank v. Florida Prepaid Postsec­
ondary Ed. Expense Bd., 527 U. S. 666, 675. The State’s consent to
suit must be “unequivocally expressed” in the relevant statute’s text.
Pennhurst, supra, at 99. A waiver “will be strictly construed, in
terms of its scope, in favor of the sovereign.” Lane v. Peña, 518 U. S.
187, 192. Pp. 4–6.
(b) RLUIPA’s authorization of “appropriate relief against a gov
ernment,” is not an unequivocal expression of state consent. Pp. 6–
10.
(1) “Appropriate relief” is open-ended and ambiguous about the
relief it includes. “Appropriate” is inherently context-dependent.
And the context here—where the defendant is a sovereign—suggests,
if anything, that monetary damages are not “suitable” or “proper.”
See Federal Maritime Comm’n v. South Carolina Ports Authority, 535
U. S. 743, 765. Further, where a statute is susceptible of multiple
plausible interpretations, including one preserving immunity, this
Court will not consider a State to have waived its sovereign immu
nity. Sossamon’s and Texas’ conflicting plausible arguments about
whether immunity is preserved here demonstrate that “appropriate
relief” in RLUIPA is not so free from ambiguity that the Court may
conclude that the States, by receiving federal funds, have unequivo
cally expressed intent to waive their immunity. Pp. 6–9.
(2) The Court’s use of the phrase “appropriate relief” in Franklin
v. Gwinnett County Public Schools, 503 U. S. 60, and Barnes v. Gor­
man, 536 U. S. 181, does not compel a contrary conclusion. In those
cases, where there was no express congressional intent to limit reme
dies available against municipal entities under an implied right of
action, the Court presumed that compensatory damages were avail
able. Franklin, supra, at 73. But that presumption is irrelevant to
construing the scope of an express waiver of sovereign immunity,
where the question is not whether Congress has given clear direction
that it intends to exclude a damages remedy, but whether it has
given clear direction that it intends to include a damages remedy.
Pp. 9–10.
(c) Sossamon mistakenly contends that Congress’ enactment of
RLUIPA §3 pursuant to the Spending Clause put the States on notice


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
that they would be liable for damages because Spending Clause legis
lation operates as a contract and damages are always available for a
breach of contract. While acknowledging the contract-law analogy,
this Court has been clear “not [to] imply . . . that suits under Spend
ing Clause legislation are suits in contract, or that contract-law prin
ciples apply to all issues that they raise,” Barnes, supra, at 188, n. 2,
or to rely on that analogy to expand liability beyond what would exist
under nonspending statutes, much less to extend monetary liability
against the States. Applying ordinary contract principles here would
also make little sense because contracts with a sovereign are unique:
They do not traditionally confer a right of action for damages to en
force compliance. More fundamentally, Sossamon’s implied-contract
remedy cannot be squared with the rule that a sovereign immunity
waiver must be expressly and unequivocally stated in the relevant
statute’s text. Pp. 10–12.
(d) Sossamon also errs in arguing that Texas was put on notice that
it could be sued for damages under RLUIPA by §1003 of the Rehabili
tation Act Amendments of 1986, which expressly waives state sover
eign immunity for violations of “section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act
of 1973, title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the Age Dis
crimination Act of 1975, title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, or the
provisions of any other Federal statute prohibiting discrimination by
recipients of Federal financial assistance,” 42 U. S. C. §2000d–7.
Even if such a residual clause could constitute an unequivocal textual
waiver, RLUIPA §3—which prohibits “substantial burden[s]” on reli
gious exercise—is not unequivocally a “statute prohibiting discrimi
nation” within §1003’s meaning. All the statutory provisions enu
merated in §1003 explicitly prohibit discrimination; a State might
reasonably conclude that the residual clause, strictly construed, cov
ers only provisions using the term “discrimination.” Pp. 12–14.
560 F. 3d 316, affirmed.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, GINSBURG, and ALITO, JJ., joined. SOTOMAYOR, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which BREYER, J., joined.
KAGAN, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.

