10

SMITH v. BAYER CORP.
Opinion of the Court

that they follow the same approach as the federal court
applied, we see no need to ignore that determination; in
that event, the issues in the two cases would indeed be the
same. So a federal court considering whether the relitiga
tion exception applies should examine whether state law
parallels its federal counterpart. But as suggested earlier,
see supra, at 6, the federal court must resolve any uncer
tainty on that score by leaving the question of preclusion
to the state courts.
Under this approach, the West Virginia Supreme Court
has gone some way toward resolving the matter before us
by declaring its independence from federal courts’ inter
pretation of the Federal Rules—and particularly of Rule
23. In In re W. Va. Rezulin Litigation, 214 W. Va. 52, 585
S. E. 2d 52 (2003) (In re Rezulin), the West Virginia high
court considered a plaintiff’s motion to certify a class—
coincidentally enough, in a suit about an allegedly defec
tive pharmaceutical product. The court made a point of
complaining about the parties’ and lower court’s near
exclusive reliance on federal cases about Federal Rule 23
to decide the certification question. Such cases, the court
cautioned, “ ‘may be persuasive, but [they are] not binding
or controlling.’ ” Id., at 61, 585 S. E. 2d, at 61. And lest
anyone mistake the import of this message, the court went
on: The aim of “this rule is to avoid having our legal
analysis of our Rules ‘amount to nothing more than Pav
lovian responses to federal decisional law.’ ” Ibid. (italics
omitted). Of course, the state courts might still have
adopted an approach to their Rule 23 that tracked the
analysis the federal court used in McCollins’ case. But
absent clear evidence that the state courts had done so, we
could not conclude that they would interpret their Rule in
the same way. And if that is so, we could not tell whether
the certification issues in the state and federal courts were
the same. That uncertainty would preclude an injunction.
But here the case against an injunction is even stronger,

