Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

because the West Virginia Supreme Court has disap
proved the approach to Rule 23(b)(3)’s predominance
requirement that the Federal District Court embraced.
Recall that the federal court held that the presence of
a single individualized issue—injury from the use of
Baycol—prevented class certification. See supra, at 3. The
court did not identify the common issues in the case; nor
did it balance these common issues against the need to
prove individual injury to determine which predominated.
The court instead applied a strict test barring class treat
ment when proof of each plaintiff’s injury is necessary.8
By contrast, the West Virginia Supreme Court in In
re Rezulin adopted an all-things-considered, balancing
inquiry in interpreting its Rule 23. Rejecting any “rigid
test,” the state court opined that the predominance re
quirement “contemplates a review of many factors.” 214
W. Va., at 72, 585 S. E. 2d, at 72. Indeed, the court noted,
a “ ‘single common issue’ ” in a case could outweigh “ ‘nu
merous . . . individual questions.’ ” Ibid. That meant, the
court further explained (quoting what it termed the “lead
ing treatise” on the subject), that even objections to certifi
cation “ ‘based on . . . causation, or reliance’ ”—which typi
cally involve showings of individual injury—“ ‘will not bar
predominance satisfaction.’ ” Ibid. (quoting 2 A. Conte &
H. Newberg, Newberg on Class Actions §4.26, p. 241 (4th
ed. 2002)). So point for point, the analysis set out in In re
Rezulin diverged from the District Court’s interpretation
of Federal Rule 23. A state court using the In re Rezulin
standard would decide a different question than the one
——————
8 The District Court’s approach to the predominance inquiry is consis
tent with the approach employed by the Eighth Circuit. See In re St.
Jude Medical, Inc., 522 F. 3d 836, 837–840 (2008) (holding that most
commercial misrepresentation cases are “unsuitable for class treat
ment” because individual issues of reliance necessarily predominate).
We express no opinion as to the correctness of this approach.

