8

SMITH v. BAYER CORP. 

Opinion of the Court 


A

In our most recent case on the relitigation exception,
Chick Kam Choo v. Exxon, we applied the “same issue”
requirement of preclusion law to invalidate a federal
court’s injunction. 486 U. S., at 151. The federal court
had dismissed a suit involving Singapore law on grounds
of forum non conveniens. After the plaintiff brought the
same claim in Texas state court, the federal court issued
an injunction barring the plaintiff from pursuing relief in
that alternate forum. We held that the District Court had
gone too far. “[A]n essential prerequisite for applying the
relitigation exception,” we explained, “is that the . . . is
sues which the federal injunction insulates from litigation
in state proceedings actually have been decided by the
federal court.” Id., at 148. That prerequisite, we thought,
was not satisfied because the issue to be adjudicated in
state court was not the one the federal court had resolved.
The federal court had considered the permissibility of the
claim under federal forum non conveniens principles. But
the Texas courts, we thought, “would apply a significantly
different forum non conveniens analysis,” id., at 149; they
had in prior cases rejected the strictness of the federal
doctrine. Our conclusion followed: “[W]hether the Texas
state courts are an appropriate forum for [the plaintiff’s]
Singapore law claims has not yet been litigated.” Ibid.
Because the legal standards in the two courts differed, the
issues before the courts differed, and an injunction was
unwarranted.
The question here closely resembles the one in Chick
Kam Choo. The class Smith proposed in state court mir
rored the class McCollins sought to certify in federal court:
Both included all Baycol purchasers resident in West
Virginia. Moreover, the substantive claims in the two
suits broadly overlapped: Both complaints alleged that
Bayer had sold a defective product in violation of the
State’s consumer protection law and the company’s war

