(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SMITH ET AL. v. BAYER CORP.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–1205. Argued January 18, 2011—Decided June 16, 2011
Respondent (Bayer) moved in Federal District Court for an injunction
ordering a West Virginia state court not to consider a motion for class
certification filed by petitioners (Smith), who were plaintiffs in the
state-court action. Bayer thought such an injunction warranted be
cause, in a separate case, Bayer had persuaded the same Federal
District Court to deny a similar class-certification motion that had
been filed against Bayer by a different plaintiff, George McCollins.
The District Court had denied McCollins’ certification motion under
Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 23.
The court granted Bayer’s requested injunction against the state
court proceedings, holding that its denial of certification in McCollins’
case precluded litigation of the certification issue in Smith’s case.
The Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit affirmed. It first noted
that the Anti-Injunction Act (Act) generally prohibits federal courts
from enjoining state court proceedings. But it found that the Act’s re
litigation exception authorized this injunction because ordinary rules
of issue preclusion barred Smith from seeking certification of his pro
posed class. In so doing, the court concluded that Smith was invok
ing a State Rule, W. Va. Rule Civ. Proc. 23, that was sufficiently
similar to the Federal Rule McCollins had invoked, such that the cer
tification issues presented in the two cases were the same. The court
further held that Smith, as an unnamed member of McCollins’ puta
tive class action, could be bound by the judgment in McCollins’ case.
Held: In enjoining the state court from considering Smith’s class certifi
cation request, the federal court exceeded its authority under the “re
litigation exception” to the Act. Pp. 5–18.
(a) Under that Act, a federal court “may not grant an injunction to
stay proceedings in a State court except” in rare cases, when neces

