Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

Court Judge. See §1407. Bayer, however, could not
remove Smith’s case to federal court because Smith
had sued several West Virginia defendants in addition to
Bayer, and so the suit lacked complete diversity. See
§1441(b).1 Smith’s suit thus remained in the state court
house in Brooke County.
Over the next six years, the two cases proceeded along
their separate pretrial paths at roughly the same pace. By
2008, both courts were preparing to turn to their respec
tive plaintiffs’ motions for class certification. The Federal
District Court was the first to reach a decision.
Applying Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23,2 the Dis
trict Court declined to certify McCollins’ proposed class
of West Virginia Baycol purchasers. The District Court’s
reasoning proceeded in two steps. The court first ruled
that, under West Virginia law, each plaintiff would have
to prove “actual injury” from his use of Baycol to recover.
App. to Pet. for Cert. 44a. The court then held that be
cause the necessary showing of harm would vary from
plaintiff to plaintiff, “individual issues of fact predomi
nate[d]” over issues common to all members of the pro
posed class, and so the case was not suitable for class
treatment. Id., at 45a. In the same order, the District
Court also dismissed McCollins’ claims on the merits in
light of his failure to demonstrate physical injury from his
use of Baycol. McCollins chose not to appeal.
Although McCollins’ suit was now concluded, Bayer
asked the District Court for another order based upon it,
——————
1 The

Class Action Fairness Act of 2005, 119 Stat. 4, which postdates
and therefore does not govern this lawsuit, now enables a defendant to
remove to federal court certain class actions involving nondiverse
parties. See 28 U. S. C. §§1332(d), 1453(b); see also infra, at 17.
2 Although McCollins had originally sought certification under West
Virginia Rule of Civil Procedure 23 (2011), federal procedural rules
govern a case that has been removed to federal court. See Shady Grove
Orthopedic Associates, P. A. v. Allstate Ins. Co., 559 U. S. ___ (2010).

