Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
stronger, because the State Supreme Court has expressly disap
proved the approach to Rule 23(b)(3)’s predominance requirement
embraced by the Federal District Court. Pp. 8–12.
(c) The District Court’s injunction was independently improper be
cause Smith was not a party to the federal suit and was not covered
by any exception to the rule against nonparty preclusion. Generally,
a party “is ‘[o]ne by or against whom a lawsuit is brought,’ ” United
States ex rel. Eisenstein v. City of New York, 556 U. S. ___, ___, or
who “become[s] a party by intervention, substitution, or third-party
practice,” Karcher v. May, 484 U. S. 72, 77. The definition of “party”
cannot be stretched so far as to cover a person like Smith, whom
McCollins was denied leave to represent. The only exception to the
rule against nonparty preclusion potentially relevant here is the ex
ception that binds non-named members of “properly conducted class
actions” to judgments entered in such proceedings. Taylor v. Stur
gell, 553 U. S. 880, 894. But McCollins’ suit was not a proper class
action. Indeed, the very ruling that Bayer argues should have pre
clusive effect is the District Court’s decision not to certify a class.
Absent certification of a class under Federal Rule 23, the precondi
tion for binding Smith was not met. Neither a proposed, nor a re
jected, class action may bind nonparties. See id., at 901. Bayer
claims that this Court’s approach to class actions would permit class
counsel to try repeatedly to certify the same class simply by changing
plaintiffs. But principles of stare decisis and comity among courts
generally suffice to mitigate the sometimes substantial costs of simi
lar litigation brought by different plaintiffs. The right approach does
not lie in binding nonparties to a judgment. And to the extent class
actions raise special relitigation problems, the federal Class Action
Fairness Act of 2005 provides a remedy that does not involve depart
ing from the usual preclusion rules. Pp. 12–18.
593 F. 3d 716, reversed.
KAGAN, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR,
JJ., joined, and in which THOMAS, J., joined as to Parts I and II–A.

