2

SMITH v. BAYER CORP.
Syllabus
sary to “protect or effectuate [the federal court’s] judgments.” 28
U. S. C. §2283. The Act’s “specifically defined exceptions,” Atlantic
Coast Line R. Co. v. Locomotive Engineers, 398 U. S. 281, 286, “are
narrow and are ‘not [to] be enlarged by loose statutory construction,’ ”
Chick Kam Choo v. Exxon Corp., 486 U. S. 140, 146. Indeed, “[a]ny
doubts as to the propriety of a federal injunction against state court
proceedings should be resolved in favor of permitting the state courts
to proceed.” Atlantic Coast Line R. Co., 398 U. S., at 297. The excep
tion at issue in this case, known as the “relitigation exception,” au
thorizes an injunction to prevent state litigation of a claim or issue
“that previously was presented to and decided by the federal court.”
Chick Kam Choo, 486 U. S., at 147. This exception is designed to im
plement “well-recognized concepts” of claim and issue preclusion.
Ibid. Because deciding whether and how prior litigation has preclu
sive effect is usually the bailiwick of the second court—here, the West
Virginia court—every benefit of the doubt goes toward the state
court, see Atlantic Coast Line, 398 U. S., at 287, 297; an injunction
can issue only if preclusion is clear beyond peradventure. For the
federal court’s class-action determination to preclude the state court’s
adjudication of Smith’s motion, at least two conditions must be met.
First, the issue the federal court decided must be the same as the one
presented in the state tribunal. And second, Smith must have been a
party to the federal suit or must fall within one of a few discrete ex
ceptions to the general rule against binding nonparties. Pp. 5–7.
(b) The issue the federal court decided was not the same as the one
presented in the state tribunal. This case is little more than a rerun
of Chick Kam Choo. There, a federal court dismissed a suit involving
Singapore law on forum non conveniens grounds and then enjoined
the plaintiff from pursuing the “same” claim in Texas state court.
However, because the legal standards for forum non conveniens dif
fered in the two courts, the issues before those courts differed, mak
ing an injunction unwarranted. Here, Smith’s proposed class mir
rored McCollins’, and the two suits’ substantive claims broadly
overlapped. But the federal court adjudicated McCollins’ certification
motion under Federal Rule 23, whereas the state court was poised to
consider Smith’s proposed class under W. Va. Rule 23. And the State
Supreme Court has generally stated that it will not necessarily inter
pret its Rule 23 as coterminous with the Federal Rule. Absent clear
evidence that the state courts had adopted an approach to State Rule
23 tracking the federal court’s analysis in McCollins’ case, this Court
could not conclude that they would interpret their Rule the same way
and, thus, could not tell whether the certification issues in the two
courts were the same. That uncertainty would preclude an injunc
tion. And indeed, the case against an injunction here is even

