4

SMITH v. BAYER CORP.
Opinion of the Court

this one affecting Smith’s case in West Virginia. In a
motion—receipt of which first apprised Smith of McCol
lins’ suit—Bayer explained that the proposed class in
Smith’s case was identical to the one the federal court had
just rejected. Bayer therefore requested that the federal
court enjoin the West Virginia state court from hearing
Smith’s motion to certify a class. According to Bayer, that
order was appropriate to protect the District Court’s
judgment in McCollins’ suit denying class certification.
The District Court agreed and granted the injunction.
The Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit affirmed.
In re Baycol Prods. Litigation, 593 F. 3d 716 (2010). The
court noted that the Anti-Injunction Act generally prohib
its federal courts from enjoining state court proceedings.
But the court held that the Act’s relitigation exception
authorized the injunction here because ordinary rules of
issue preclusion barred Smith from seeking certification of
his proposed class. According to the court, Smith was
invoking a similar class action rule as McCollins had used
to seek certification “of the same class” in a suit alleging
“the same legal theories,” id., at 724; the issue in the state
court therefore was “sufficiently identical” to the one the
federal court had decided to warrant preclusion, ibid. In
addition, the court held, the parties in the two proceedings
were sufficiently alike: Because Smith was an unnamed
member of the class McCollins had proposed, and because
their “interests were aligned,” Smith was appropriately
bound by the federal court’s judgment. Ibid.
We granted certiorari, 561 U. S. __ (2010), because the
order issued here implicates two circuit splits arising from
application of the Anti-Injunction Act’s relitigation excep
tion. The first involves the requirement of preclusion law
that a subsequent suit raise the “same issue” as a previous
case.3 The second concerns the scope of the rule that a
——————
3 Compare

In re Baycol Prods. Litigation, 593 F. 3d 716, 723 (CA8

