Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

ranties. So far, so good for preclusion. But not so fast:
a critical question—the question of the applicable legal
standard—remains. The District Court ruled that the
proposed class did not meet the requirements of Federal
Rule 23 (because individualized issues would predominate
over common ones). But the state court was poised to
consider whether the proposed class satisfied West Vir
ginia Rule 23. If those two legal standards differ (as
federal and state forum non conveniens law differed in
Chick Kam Choo)—then the federal court resolved an
issue not before the state court. In that event, much like
in Chick Kam Choo, “whether the [West Virginia] state
cour[t]” should certify the proposed class action “has not
yet been litigated.” 486 U. S., at 149.
The Court of Appeals and Smith offer us two competing
ways of deciding whether the West Virginia and Federal
Rules differ, but we think the right path lies somewhere in
the middle. The Eighth Circuit relied almost exclusively
on the near-identity of the two Rules’ texts. See 593 F. 3d,
at 723. That was the right place to start, but not to end.
Federal and state courts, after all, can and do apply iden
tically worded procedural provisions in widely varying
ways. If a State’s procedural provision tracks the lan
guage of a Federal Rule, but a state court interprets that
provision in a manner federal courts have not, then the
state court is using a different standard and thus deciding
a different issue. See 18 Wright & Miller §4417, at 454
(stating that preclusion is “inappropriate” when “different
legal standards . . . masquerad[e] behind similar legal
labels”). At the other extreme, Smith contends that the
source of law is all that matters: a different sovereign
must in each and every case “have the opportunity, if it
chooses, to construe its procedural rule differently.” Brief
for Petitioners 22 (quoting ALI, Principles of the Law,
Aggregate Litigation §2.11, Reporters’ Notes, cmt. b,
p. 181 (2010)). But if state courts have made crystal clear

