16

SMITH v. BAYER CORP.
Opinion of the Court

the very theory Taylor rejected.11
Bayer’s strongest argument comes not from established
principles of preclusion, but instead from policy concerns
relating to use of the class action device. Bayer warns
that under our approach class counsel can repeatedly try
to certify the same class “by the simple expedient of
changing the named plaintiff in the caption of the com
plaint.” Brief for Respondent 47–48. And in this world of
“serial relitigation of class certification,” Bayer contends,
defendants “would be forced in effect to buy litigation
peace by settling.” Id., at 2, 12; see also In re Bridge
stone/Firestone, Inc., Tires Prods. Liability Litigation,
333 F. 3d 763, 767 (CA7 2003) (objecting to an “an asym
metric system in which class counsel can win but never
lose” because of their ability to relitigate the issue of
certification).
But this form of argument flies in the face of the rule
against nonparty preclusion. That rule perforce leads to
relitigation of many issues, as plaintiff after plaintiff after
plaintiff (none precluded by the last judgment because
none a party to the last suit) tries his hand at establishing
some legal principle or obtaining some grant of relief. We
confronted a similar policy concern in Taylor, which in
volved litigation brought under the Freedom of Infor
——————
11 The great weight of scholarly authority—from the Restatement of
Judgments to the American Law Institute to Wright and Miller—
agrees that an uncertified class action cannot bind proposed class
members. See Restatement (Second) of Judgments §41(1), p. 393 (1980)
(A nonparty may be bound only when his interests are adequately
represented by “[t]he representative of a class of persons similarly
situated, designated as such with the approval of the court”); ALI,
Principles of the Law Aggregate Litigation §2.11, Reporters’ Notes, cmt.
b, p. 181 (2010) (“[N]one of [the exceptions to the rule against nonparty
preclusion] extend generally to the situation of a would-be absent class
member with respect to a denial of class certification”); 18A Wright &
Miller §4455, at 457–458 (“[A]bsent certification there is no basis for
precluding a nonparty” under the class-action exception).

