14

SMITH v. BAYER CORP.
Opinion of the Court

litigation can indeed bind Smith, it must do so under
principles of nonparty preclusion.
As Bayer notes, see Brief for Respondent 37, one such
principle allows unnamed members of a class action to be
bound, even though they are not parties to the suit. See
Cooper v. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 467 U. S.
867, 874 (1984) (“[U]nder elementary principles of prior
adjudication a judgment in a properly entertained class
action is binding on class members in any subsequent
litigation”); see also Taylor, 553 U. S., at 894 (stating that
nonparties can be bound in “properly conducted class
actions”). But here Bayer faces a conundrum. If we know
one thing about the McCollins suit, we know that it was
not a class action. Indeed, the very ruling that Bayer
argues ought to be given preclusive effect is the District
Court’s decision that a class could not properly be certi
fied. So Bayer wants to bind Smith as a member of a class
action (because it is only as such that a nonparty in
Smith’s situation can be bound) to a determination that
there could not be a class action. And if the logic of that
position is not immediately transparent, here is Bayer’s
attempt to clarify: “[U]ntil the moment when class certi
fication was denied, the McCollins case was a properly
conducted class action.” Brief for Respondent 37. That is
true, according to Bayer, because McCollins’ interests
were aligned with the members of the class he proposed
and he “act[ed] in a representative capacity when he
sought class certification.” Id., at 36.
But wishing does not make it so. McCollins sought class
certification, but he failed to obtain that result. Because
the District Court found that individual issues predomi
——————
U. S., at 394, n. 15. That result is consistent with a commonplace of
preclusion law—that nonparties sometimes may benefit from, even
though they cannot be bound by, former litigation. See Parklane Ho
siery Co. v. Shore, 439 U. S. 322, 326–333 (1979); Blonder-Tongue
Laboratories, Inc. v. University of Ill. Foundation, 402 U. S. 313 (1971).

