12

SMITH v. BAYER CORP.
Opinion of the Court

the federal court had earlier resolved.9
This case, indeed, is little more than a rerun of Chick
Kam Choo. A federal court and a state court apply differ
ent law. That means they decide distinct questions. The
federal court’s resolution of one issue does not preclude the
state court’s determination of another. It then goes with
out saying that the federal court may not issue an injunc
tion. The Anti-Injunction Act’s re-litigation exception does
not extend nearly so far.
B
The injunction issued here runs into another basic
premise of preclusion law: A court’s judgment binds only
the parties to a suit, subject to a handful of discrete and
limited exceptions. See, e.g., 18A Wright & Miller §4449,
at 330. The importance of this rule and the narrowness of
its exceptions go hand in hand. We have repeatedly “em
phasize[d] the fundamental nature of the general rule”
that only parties can be bound by prior judgments; accord
ingly, we have taken a “constrained approach to nonparty
preclusion.” Taylor v. Sturgell, 553 U. S. 880, 898 (2008).
Against this backdrop, Bayer defends the decision below
by arguing that Smith—an unnamed member of a pro
——————
9 Bayer argues that In re Rezulin does not preclude an injunction in
this case because the West Virginia court there decided that common
issues predominated over individual issues of damages, not over indi
vidual issues of liability (as exist here). See Brief for Respondent 25–
26. We think Bayer is right about this distinction, but wrong about its
consequence. Our point is not that In re Rezulin dictates the answer
to the class certification question here; the two cases are indeed too
dissimilar for that to be true. The point instead is that In re Rezulin
articulated a general approach to the predominance requirement that
differs markedly from the one the federal court used. Minor variations
in the application of what is in essence the same legal standard do not
defeat preclusion; but where, as here, the State’s courts “would apply a
significantly different . . . analysis,” Chick Kam Choo v. Exxon Corp.,
486 U. S. 140, 149 (1988), the federal and state courts decide different
issues.

