Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting

Commerce Clause authority,4 and §5000A is therefore
invalid. The Government contends, however, as expressed
in the caption to Part II of its brief, that “THE MINIMUM
COVERAGE PROVISION IS INDEPENDENTLY AUTHORIZED BY
CONGRESS’S TAXING POWER.” Petitioners’ Minimum Coverage Brief 52. The phrase “independently authorized”
suggests the existence of a creature never hitherto seen
in the United States Reports: A penalty for constitutional
purposes that is also a tax for constitutional purposes. In
all our cases the two are mutually exclusive. The provision challenged under the Constitution is either a penalty
or else a tax. Of course in many cases what was a regulatory mandate enforced by a penalty could have been
imposed as a tax upon permissible action; or what was imposed as a tax upon permissible action could have been a
regulatory mandate enforced by a penalty. But we know
of no case, and the Government cites none, in which the
imposition was, for constitutional purposes, both.5 The
two are mutually exclusive. Thus, what the Government’s
caption should have read was “ALTERNATIVELY, THE
MINIMUM COVERAGE PROVISION IS NOT A MANDATE-WITHPENALTY BUT A TAX.” It is important to bear this in mind
in evaluating the tax argument of the Government and of
those who support it: The issue is not whether Congress
——————
4 No

one seriously contends that any of Congress’ other enumerated
powers gives it the authority to enact §5000A as a regulation.
5 Of course it can be both for statutory purposes, since Congress can
define “tax” and “penalty” in its enactments any way it wishes. That is
why United States v. Sotelo, 436 U. S. 268 (1978), does not disprove our
statement. That case held that a “penalty” for willful failure to pay
one’s taxes was included among the “taxes” made non-dischargeable
under the Bankruptcy Code. 436 U. S., at 273–275. Whether the
“penalty” was a “tax” within the meaning of the Bankruptcy Code had
absolutely no bearing on whether it escaped the constitutional limitations on penalties.

