22

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


wanted product,” ante, at 18, or “suite of products,” post, at
11, n. 2 (joint opinion of SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and
ALITO, JJ.). If unwanted today, medical service secured by
insurance may be desperately needed tomorrow. Virtually
everyone, I reiterate, consumes health care at some point
in his or her life. See supra, at 3. Health insurance is a
means of paying for this care, nothing more. In requiring
individuals to obtain insurance, Congress is therefore not
mandating the purchase of a discrete, unwanted product.
Rather, Congress is merely defining the terms on which
individuals pay for an interstate good they consume:
Persons subject to the mandate must now pay for medical
care in advance (instead of at the point of service) and
through insurance (instead of out of pocket). Establishing
payment terms for goods in or affecting interstate com­
merce is quintessential economic regulation well within
Congress’ domain. See, e.g., United States v. Wrightwood
Dairy Co., 315 U. S. 110, 118 (1942). Cf. post, at 13 (joint
opinion of SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ.)
(recognizing that “the Federal Government can prescribe
[a commodity’s] quality . . . and even [its price]”).
THE CHIEF JUSTICE also calls the minimum coverage
provision an illegitimate effort to make young, healthy
individuals subsidize insurance premiums paid by the less
hale and hardy. See ante, at 17, 25–26. This complaint,
too, is spurious. Under the current health-care system,
healthy persons who lack insurance receive a benefit for
which they do not pay: They are assured that, if they need
it, emergency medical care will be available, although they
cannot afford it. See supra, at 5–6. Those who have in­
surance bear the cost of this guarantee. See ibid. By
requiring the healthy uninsured to obtain insurance or
pay a penalty structured as a tax, the minimum coverage
provision ends the free ride these individuals currently
enjoy.
In the fullness of time, moreover, today’s young and

