Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

37

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting

ernment, neither the amount of the offered federal funds
nor the amount of the federal taxes extracted from the
taxpayers of a State to pay for the program in question is
relevant in determining whether there is impermissible
coercion. Id., at 41–46.
This argument ignores reality. When a heavy federal
tax is levied to support a federal program that offers large
grants to the States, States may, as a practical matter, be
unable to refuse to participate in the federal program and
to substitute a state alternative. Even if a State believes
that the federal program is ineffective and inefficient,
withdrawal would likely force the State to impose a huge
tax increase on its residents, and this new state tax would
come on top of the federal taxes already paid by residents
to support subsidies to participating States.13
Acceptance of the Federal Government’s interpretation of the anticoercion rule would permit Congress to dictate policy in areas traditionally governed primarily at the
state or local level. Suppose, for example, that Congress
enacted legislation offering each State a grant equal to the
State’s entire annual expenditures for primary and secondary education. Suppose also that this funding came
with conditions governing such things as school curriculum, the hiring and tenure of teachers, the drawing of
school districts, the length and hours of the school day, the
——————
13 JUSTICE GINSBURG argues that “[a] State . . . has no claim on the
money its residents pay in federal taxes.” Ante, at 59, n. 26. This is
true as a formal matter. “When the United States Government taxes
United States citizens, it taxes them ‘in their individual capacities’ as
‘the people of America’—not as residents of a particular State.” Ante, at
58, n. 26 (quoting U. S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton, 514 U. S. 779,
839 (1995) (KENNEDY, J., concurring)). But unless JUSTICE GINSBURG
thinks that there is no limit to the amount of money that can be
squeezed out of taxpayers, heavy federal taxation diminishes the
practical ability of States to collect their own taxes.

