Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

21

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

decide not to do something; in others they simply fail to
do it. Allowing Congress to justify federal regulation by
pointing to the effect of inaction on commerce would bring
countless decisions an individual could potentially make
within the scope of federal regulation, and—under the
Government’s theory—empower Congress to make those
decisions for him.
Applying the Government’s logic to the familiar case of
Wickard v. Filburn shows how far that logic would carry
us from the notion of a government of limited powers. In
Wickard, the Court famously upheld a federal penalty imposed on a farmer for growing wheat for consumption
on his own farm. 317 U. S., at 114–115, 128–129. That
amount of wheat caused the farmer to exceed his quota
under a program designed to support the price of wheat by
limiting supply. The Court rejected the farmer’s argument
that growing wheat for home consumption was beyond the
reach of the commerce power. It did so on the ground that
the farmer’s decision to grow wheat for his own use allowed him to avoid purchasing wheat in the market. That
decision, when considered in the aggregate along with similar decisions of others, would have had a substantial effect on the interstate market for wheat. Id., at 127–129.
Wickard has long been regarded as “perhaps the most
far reaching example of Commerce Clause authority over
intrastate activity,” Lopez, 514 U. S., at 560, but the Government’s theory in this case would go much further.
Under Wickard it is within Congress’s power to regulate
the market for wheat by supporting its price. But price
can be supported by increasing demand as well as by
decreasing supply. The aggregated decisions of some
consumers not to purchase wheat have a substantial effect
on the price of wheat, just as decisions not to purchase
health insurance have on the price of insurance. Congress
can therefore command that those not buying wheat do so,
just as it argues here that it may command that those not

