Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

23

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

with their behaviors; most of the expense is borne by the
rest of society in the form of higher insurance premiums,
government expenditures for health care, and disability
benefits”). Congress addressed the insurance problem by
ordering everyone to buy insurance. Under the Government’s theory, Congress could address the diet problem
by ordering everyone to buy vegetables. See Dietary
Guidelines, supra, at 19 (“Improved nutrition, appropriate
eating behaviors, and increased physical activity have tremendous potential to . . . reduce health care costs”).
People, for reasons of their own, often fail to do things
that would be good for them or good for society. Those
failures—joined with the similar failures of others—can
readily have a substantial effect on interstate commerce.
Under the Government’s logic, that authorizes Congress to
use its commerce power to compel citizens to act as the
Government would have them act.
That is not the country the Framers of our Constitution
envisioned. James Madison explained that the Commerce
Clause was “an addition which few oppose and from which
no apprehensions are entertained.” The Federalist No. 45,
at 293. While Congress’s authority under the Commerce
Clause has of course expanded with the growth of the
national economy, our cases have “always recognized that
the power to regulate commerce, though broad indeed, has
limits.” Maryland v. Wirtz, 392 U. S. 183, 196 (1968). The
Government’s theory would erode those limits, permitting
Congress to reach beyond the natural extent of its authority, “everywhere extending the sphere of its activity and
drawing all power into its impetuous vortex.” The Federalist No. 48, at 309 (J. Madison). Congress already enjoys
vast power to regulate much of what we do. Accepting
the Government’s theory would give Congress the same
license to regulate what we do not do, fundamentally
changing the relation between the citizen and the Federal

