42

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.
Opinion R the Court 


regulation under the Commerce Clause so long as we abstain from the regulated activity. But from its creation,
the Constitution has made no such promise with respect to
taxes. See Letter from Benjamin Franklin to M. Le Roy
(Nov. 13, 1789) (“Our new Constitution is now established
. . . but in this world nothing can be said to be certain,
except death and taxes”).
Whether the mandate can be upheld under the Commerce Clause is a question about the scope of federal
authority. Its answer depends on whether Congress can
exercise what all acknowledge to be the novel course of
directing individuals to purchase insurance. Congress’s
use of the Taxing Clause to encourage buying something
is, by contrast, not new. Tax incentives already promote,
for example, purchasing homes and professional educations. See 26 U. S. C. §§163(h), 25A. Sustaining the
mandate as a tax depends only on whether Congress has
properly exercised its taxing power to encourage purchasing health insurance, not whether it can. Upholding the
individual mandate under the Taxing Clause thus does
not recognize any new federal power. It determines that
Congress has used an existing one.
Second, Congress’s ability to use its taxing power to
influence conduct is not without limits. A few of our cases
policed these limits aggressively, invalidating punitive
exactions obviously designed to regulate behavior otherwise regarded at the time as beyond federal authority.
See, e.g., United States v. Butler, 297 U. S. 1 (1936); Drexel
Furniture, 259 U. S. 20. More often and more recently
we have declined to closely examine the regulatory motive
or effect of revenue-raising measures. See Kahriger, 345
U. S., at 27–31 (collecting cases). We have nonetheless
maintained that “ ‘there comes a time in the extension of
the penalizing features of the so-called tax when it loses
its character as such and becomes a mere penalty with the
characteristics of regulation and punishment.’ ” Kurth

