38

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.
Opinion R the Court 


tolerable suggests that Congress did not think it was
creating four million outlaws. It suggests instead that the
shared responsibility payment merely imposes a tax citizens may lawfully choose to pay in lieu of buying health
insurance.
The plaintiffs contend that Congress’s choice of language—stating that individuals “shall” obtain insurance
or pay a “penalty”—requires reading §5000A as punishing
unlawful conduct, even if that interpretation would render the law unconstitutional. We have rejected a similar
argument before. In New York v. United States we examined a statute providing that “ ‘[e]ach State shall be responsible for providing . . . for the disposal of . . . low-level
radioactive waste.’ ” 505 U. S., at 169 (quoting 42 U. S. C.
§2021c(a)(1)(A)). A State that shipped its waste to another
State was exposed to surcharges by the receiving State,
a portion of which would be paid over to the Federal
Government.
And a State that did not adhere to the
statutory scheme faced “[p]enalties for failure to comply,”
including increases in the surcharge. §2021e(e)(2); New
York, 505 U. S., at 152–153. New York urged us to read
the statute as a federal command that the state legislature enact legislation to dispose of its waste, which would
have violated the Constitution. To avoid that outcome, we
interpreted the statute to impose only “a series of incentives” for the State to take responsibility for its waste. We
then sustained the charge paid to the Federal Government
as an exercise of the taxing power. Id., at 169–174. We
see no insurmountable obstacle to a similar approach
here.10
——————
10 The joint dissent attempts to distinguish New York v. United States
on the ground that the seemingly imperative language in that case was
in an “introductory provision” that had “no legal consequences.” Post,
at 19. We did not rely on that reasoning in New York. See 505 U. S., at
169–170. Nor could we have. While the Court quoted only the broad
statement that “[e]ach State shall be responsible” for its waste, that

