2

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

2010: the individual mandate, which requires individuals
to purchase a health insurance policy providing a minimum level of coverage; and the Medicaid expansion, which
gives funds to the States on the condition that they provide specified health care to all citizens whose income falls
below a certain threshold. We do not consider whether the
Act embodies sound policies. That judgment is entrusted
to the Nation’s elected leaders. We ask only whether
Congress has the power under the Constitution to enact
the challenged provisions.
In our federal system, the National Government possesses only limited powers; the States and the people
retain the remainder. Nearly two centuries ago, Chief
Justice Marshall observed that “the question respecting
the extent of the powers actually granted” to the Federal
Government “is perpetually arising, and will probably
continue to arise, as long as our system shall exist.”
McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 405 (1819). In this
case we must again determine whether the Constitution
grants Congress powers it now asserts, but which many
States and individuals believe it does not possess. Resolving this controversy requires us to examine both the limits
of the Government’s power, and our own limited role in
policing those boundaries.
The Federal Government “is acknowledged by all to
be one of enumerated powers.” Ibid. That is, rather
than granting general authority to perform all the conceivable functions of government, the Constitution lists, or
enumerates, the Federal Government’s powers. Congress
may, for example, “coin Money,” “establish Post Offices,”
and “raise and support Armies.” Art. I, §8, cls. 5, 7, 12.
The enumeration of powers is also a limitation of powers, because “[t]he enumeration presupposes something not
enumerated.” Gibbons v. Ogden, 9 Wheat. 1, 195 (1824).
The Constitution’s express conferral of some powers
makes clear that it does not grant others. And the Federal

