20

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


Second, it is Congress’ role, not the Court’s, to delineate
the boundaries of the market the Legislature seeks to
regulate. THE CHIEF JUSTICE defines the health-care market as including only those transactions that will occur
either in the next instant or within some (unspecified)
proximity to the next instant. But Congress could reason­
ably have viewed the market from a long-term perspective,
encompassing all transactions virtually certain to occur
over the next decade, see supra, at 19, not just those oc­
curring here and now.
Third, contrary to THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s contention, our
precedent does indeed support “[t]he proposition that
Congress may dictate the conduct of an individual today
because of prophesied future activity.” Ante, at 26. In
Wickard, the Court upheld a penalty the Federal Govern­
ment imposed on a farmer who grew more wheat than he
was permitted to grow under the Agricultural Adjustment
Act of 1938 (AAA). 317 U. S., at 114–115. He could not
be penalized, the farmer argued, as he was growing the
wheat for home consumption, not for sale on the open
market. Id., at 119. The Court rejected this argument.
Id., at 127–129. Wheat intended for home consumption,
the Court noted, “overhangs the market, and if induced by
rising prices, tends to flow into the market and check price
increases [intended by the AAA].” Id., at 128.
Similar reasoning supported the Court’s judgment in
Raich, which upheld Congress’ authority to regulate mari­
juana grown for personal use. 545 U. S., at 19. Home­
grown marijuana substantially affects the interstate market for marijuana, we observed, for “the high demand in
the interstate market will [likely] draw such marijuana
into that market.” Ibid.
Our decisions thus acknowledge Congress’ authority,
under the Commerce Clause, to direct the conduct of an
individual today (the farmer in Wickard, stopped from
growing excess wheat; the plaintiff in Raich, ordered to

