38

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


V
Through Medicaid, Congress has offered the States an
opportunity to furnish health care to the poor with the aid
of federal financing. To receive federal Medicaid funds,
States must provide health benefits to specified categories
of needy persons, including pregnant women, children,
parents, and adults with disabilities. Guaranteed eligibil­
ity varies by category: for some it is tied to the federal
poverty level (incomes up to 100% or 133%); for others it
depends on criteria such as eligibility for designated state
or federal assistance programs. The ACA enlarges the
population of needy people States must cover to include
adults under age 65 with incomes up to 133% of the federal poverty level. The spending power conferred by the
Constitution, the Court has never doubted, permits Con­
gress to define the contours of programs financed with
federal funds. See, e.g., Pennhurst State School and Hospital v. Halderman, 451 U. S. 1, 17 (1981). And to expand
coverage, Congress could have recalled the existing legis­
lation, and replaced it with a new law making Medicaid as
embracive of the poor as Congress chose.
The question posed by the 2010 Medicaid expansion,
then, is essentially this: To cover a notably larger popula­
tion, must Congress take the repeal/reenact route, or may
it achieve the same result by amending existing law? The
answer should be that Congress may expand by amend­
ment the classes of needy persons entitled to Medicaid
benefits. A ritualistic requirement that Congress repeal
and reenact spending legislation in order to enlarge the
population served by a federally funded program would
advance no constitutional principle and would scarcely
serve the interests of federalism. To the contrary, such a
requirement would rigidify Congress’ efforts to empower
States by partnering with them in the implementation of
federal programs.
Medicaid is a prototypical example of federal-state coop­

