Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

47

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

legitimacy of Congress’s exercise of the spending power
“thus rests on whether the State voluntarily and knowingly
accepts the terms of the ‘contract.’ ” Pennhurst, supra,
at 17. Respecting this limitation is critical to ensuring
that Spending Clause legislation does not undermine the
status of the States as independent sovereigns in our federal system. That system “rests on what might at first
seem a counterintuitive insight, that ‘freedom is enhanced
by the creation of two governments, not one.’ ” Bond, 564
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 8) (quoting Alden v. Maine, 527
U. S. 706, 758 (1999)). For this reason, “the Constitution
has never been understood to confer upon Congress the
ability to require the States to govern according to Congress’ instructions.” New York, supra, at 162. Otherwise
the two-government system established by the Framers
would give way to a system that vests power in one central
government, and individual liberty would suffer.
That insight has led this Court to strike down federal legislation that commandeers a State’s legislative or
administrative apparatus for federal purposes. See, e.g.,
Printz, 521 U. S., at 933 (striking down federal legislation compelling state law enforcement officers to perform
federally mandated background checks on handgun purchasers); New York, supra, at 174–175 (invalidating provisions of an Act that would compel a State to either take
title to nuclear waste or enact particular state waste
regulations). It has also led us to scrutinize Spending
Clause legislation to ensure that Congress is not using
financial inducements to exert a “power akin to undue
influence.” Steward Machine Co. v. Davis, 301 U. S. 548,
590 (1937). Congress may use its spending power to create incentives for States to act in accordance with federal
policies. But when “pressure turns into compulsion,” ibid.,
the legislation runs contrary to our system of federalism.
“[T]he Constitution simply does not give Congress the
authority to require the States to regulate.” New York,

