Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

29

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

individuals make are unlikely to fit the same or similar
description. As an example of the type of regulation he
fears, THE CHIEF JUSTICE cites a Government mandate to
purchase green vegetables. Ante, at 22–23. One could call
this concern “the broccoli horrible.” Congress, THE CHIEF
JUSTICE posits, might adopt such a mandate, reasoning
that an individual’s failure to eat a healthy diet, like the
failure to purchase health insurance, imposes costs on
others. See ibid.
Consider the chain of inferences the Court would have
to accept to conclude that a vegetable-purchase mandate
was likely to have a substantial effect on the health-care
costs borne by lithe Americans. The Court would have to
believe that individuals forced to buy vegetables would
then eat them (instead of throwing or giving them away),
would prepare the vegetables in a healthy way (steamed
or raw, not deep-fried), would cut back on unhealthy foods,
and would not allow other factors (such as lack of exercise
or little sleep) to trump the improved diet.9 Such “pil[ing
of] inference upon inference” is just what the Court re­
fused to do in Lopez and Morrison.
Other provisions of the Constitution also check congres­
sional overreaching. A mandate to purchase a particular product would be unconstitutional if, for example, the
edict impermissibly abridged the freedom of speech, inter­
fered with the free exercise of religion, or infringed on a
liberty interest protected by the Due Process Clause.
——————
9 The failure to purchase vegetables in THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s hypothet­
ical, then, is not what leads to higher health-care costs for others;
rather, it is the failure of individuals to maintain a healthy diet, and
the resulting obesity, that creates the cost-shifting problem. See ante,
at 22–23. Requiring individuals to purchase vegetables is thus
several steps removed from solving the problem. The failure to obtain
health insurance, by contrast, is the immediate cause of the cost-shifting
Congress sought to address through the ACA. See supra, at 5–7.
Requiring individuals to obtain insurance attacks the source of the
problem directly, in a single step.

