52

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


JUSTICE cites only one case: Pennhurst State School and
Hospital v. Halderman, 451 U. S. 1.
In Pennhurst, residents of a state-run, federally funded
institution for the mentally disabled complained of abu­
sive treatment and inhumane conditions in alleged viola­
tion of the Developmentally Disabled Assistance and Bill
of Rights Act. 451 U. S., at 5–6. We held that the State
was not answerable in damages for violating conditions
it did not “voluntarily and knowingly accep[t].” Id., at 17,
27. Inspecting the statutory language and legislative his­
tory, we found that the Act did not “unambiguously” im­
pose the requirement on which the plaintiffs relied: that
they receive appropriate treatment in the least restrictive
environment. Id., at 17–18. Satisfied that Congress had
not clearly conditioned the States’ receipt of federal funds
on the States’ provision of such treatment, we declined to
read such a requirement into the Act. Congress’ spending
power, we concluded, “does not include surprising partici­
pating States with postacceptance or ‘retroactive’ condi­
tions.” Id., at 24–25.
Pennhurst thus instructs that “if Congress intends to
impose a condition on the grant of federal moneys, it must
do so unambiguously.” Ante, at 53 (quoting Pennhurst,
451 U. S., at 17). That requirement is met in this case.
Section 2001 does not take effect until 2014. The ACA
makes perfectly clear what will be required of States that
accept Medicaid funding after that date: They must extend
eligibility to adults with incomes no more than 133% of
the federal poverty line. See 42 U. S. C. §1396a(a)(10)(A)
(i)(VIII) (2006 ed. and Supp. IV).
THE CHIEF JUSTICE appears to find in Pennhurst a
requirement that, when spending legislation is first
passed, or when States first enlist in the federal program,
Congress must provide clear notice of conditions it might
later impose. If I understand his point correctly, it was
incumbent on Congress, in 1965, to warn the States clearly

