22

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

buying health insurance do so. The farmer in Wickard
was at least actively engaged in the production of wheat,
and the Government could regulate that activity because
of its effect on commerce. The Government’s theory here
would effectively override that limitation, by establishing
that individuals may be regulated under the Commerce
Clause whenever enough of them are not doing something
the Government would have them do.
Indeed, the Government’s logic would justify a mandatory purchase to solve almost any problem. See Seven-Sky,
661 F. 3d, at 14–15 (noting the Government’s inability
to “identify any mandate to purchase a product or service in interstate commerce that would be unconstitutional” under its theory of the commerce power). To
consider a different example in the health care market, many
Americans do not eat a balanced diet. That group makes
up a larger percentage of the total population than those
without health insurance. See, e.g., Dept. of Agriculture
and Dept. of Health and Human Services, Dietary Guidelines for Americans 1 (2010). The failure of that group
to have a healthy diet increases health care costs, to a
greater extent than the failure of the uninsured to purchase insurance. See, e.g., Finkelstein, Trogdon, Cohen, &
Dietz, Annual Medical Spending Attributable to Obesity:
Payer- and Service-Specific Estimates, 28 Health Affairs
w822 (2009) (detailing the “undeniable link between rising rates of obesity and rising medical spending,” and estimating that “the annual medical burden of obesity has
risen to almost 10 percent of all medical spending and
could amount to $147 billion per year in 2008”). Those increased costs are borne in part by other Americans who
must pay more, just as the uninsured shift costs to the
insured. See Center for Applied Ethics, Voluntary Health
Risks: Who Should Pay?, 6 Issues in Ethics 6 (1993) (noting “overwhelming evidence that individuals with unhealthy habits pay only a fraction of the costs associated

