Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

39

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

eration in serving the Nation’s general welfare. Rather
than authorizing a federal agency to administer a uniform national health-care system for the poor, Congress offered States the opportunity to tailor Medicaid
grants to their particular needs, so long as they remain
within bounds set by federal law. In shaping Medicaid,
Congress did not endeavor to fix permanently the terms
participating states must meet; instead, Congress re­
served the “right to alter, amend, or repeal” any provision
of the Medicaid Act. 42 U. S. C. §1304. States, for their
part, agreed to amend their own Medicaid plans consistent
with changes from time to time made in the federal law.
See 42 CFR §430.12(c)(i) (2011). And from 1965 to the
present, States have regularly conformed to Congress’
alterations of the Medicaid Act.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE acknowledges that Congress may
“condition the receipt of [federal] funds on the States’
complying with restrictions on the use of those funds,”
ante, at 50, but nevertheless concludes that the 2010
expansion is unduly coercive. His conclusion rests on
three premises, each of them essential to his theory. First,
the Medicaid expansion is, in THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s view, a
new grant program, not an addition to the Medicaid pro­
gram existing before the ACA’s enactment. Congress, THE
CHIEF JUSTICE maintains, has threatened States with the
loss of funds from an old program in an effort to get them
to adopt a new one. Second, the expansion was unforesee­
able by the States when they first signed on to Medicaid.
Third, the threatened loss of funding is so large that the
States have no real choice but to participate in the Medi­
caid expansion. THE CHIEF JUSTICE therefore—for the
first time ever—finds an exercise of Congress’ spending
power unconstitutionally coercive.
Medicaid, as amended by the ACA, however, is not two
spending programs; it is a single program with a constant
aim—to enable poor persons to receive basic health care

