24

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


understanding that the power to regulate assumes there is
already something to be regulated.” Ante, at 19.
This argument is difficult to fathom. Requiring individ­
uals to obtain insurance unquestionably regulates the inter­
state health-insurance and health-care markets, both of
them in existence well before the enactment of the ACA.
See Wickard, 317 U. S., at 128 (“The stimulation of com­
merce is a use of the regulatory function quite as definitely
as prohibitions or restrictions thereon.”). Thus, the “some­
thing to be regulated” was surely there when Congress
created the minimum coverage provision.6
Nor does our case law toe the activity versus inactiv­
ity line. In Wickard, for example, we upheld the penalty
imposed on a farmer who grew too much wheat, even
though the regulation had the effect of compelling farmers
to purchase wheat in the open market. Id., at 127–129.
“[F]orcing some farmers into the market to buy what they
could provide for themselves” was, the Court held, a valid
means of regulating commerce. Id., at 128–129. In another context, this Court similarly upheld Congress’ author­
ity under the commerce power to compel an “inactive” land­
holder to submit to an unwanted sale. See Monongahela
Nav. Co. v. United States, 148 U. S. 312, 335–337 (1893)
(“[U]pon the [great] power to regulate commerce[,]” Con­
gress has the authority to mandate the sale of real property to the Government, where the sale is essential to the
improvement of a navigable waterway (emphasis added));
Cherokee Nation v. Southern Kansas R. Co., 135 U. S. 641,
——————
6 THE

CHIEF JUSTICE’s reliance on the quoted passages of the Consti­
tution, see ante, at 18–19, is also dubious on other grounds. The power
to “regulate the Value” of the national currency presumably includes
the power to increase the currency’s worth—i.e., to create value where
none previously existed. And if the power to “[r]egulat[e] . . . the land
and naval Forces” presupposes “there is already [in existence] some­
thing to be regulated,” i.e., an Army and a Navy, does Congress lack
authority to create an Air Force?

