52

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

“prerogative” to reject Congress’s desired policy, “not
merely in theory but in fact.” 483 U. S., at 211–212. The
threatened loss of over 10 percent of a State’s overall
budget, in contrast, is economic dragooning that leaves the
States with no real option but to acquiesce in the Medicaid
expansion.12
JUSTICE GINSBURG claims that Dole is distinguishable
because here “Congress has not threatened to withhold
funds earmarked for any other program.” Post, at 47. But
that begs the question: The States contend that the expansion is in reality a new program and that Congress is
forcing them to accept it by threatening the funds for the
existing Medicaid program. We cannot agree that existing
Medicaid and the expansion dictated by the Affordable
Care Act are all one program simply because “Congress
styled” them as such. Post, at 49. If the expansion is not
properly viewed as a modification of the existing Medicaid
program, Congress’s decision to so title it is irrelevant.13
——————
12 JUSTICE

GINSBURG observes that state Medicaid spending will increase by only 0.8 percent after the expansion. Post, at 43. That not
only ignores increased state administrative expenses, but also assumes
that the Federal Government will continue to fund the expansion at the
current statutorily specified levels. It is not unheard of, however, for
the Federal Government to increase requirements in such a manner as
to impose unfunded mandates on the States. More importantly, the
size of the new financial burden imposed on a State is irrelevant in
analyzing whether the State has been coerced into accepting that
burden. “Your money or your life” is a coercive proposition, whether
you have a single dollar in your pocket or $500.
13 Nor, of course, can the number of pages the amendment occupies, or the extent to which the change preserves and works within
the existing program, be dispositive. Cf. post, at 49–50 (opinion of
GINSBURG, J.). Take, for example, the following hypothetical amendment: “All of a State’s citizens are now eligible for Medicaid.” That
change would take up a single line and would not alter any “operational
aspect[ ] of the program” beyond the eligibility requirements. Post, at
49. Yet it could hardly be argued that such an amendment was a
permissible modification of Medicaid, rather than an attempt to foist an
entirely new health care system upon the States.

