28

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

the guaranteed-issue and community-rating insurance
reforms. Brief for United States 24. Under this argument, it is not necessary to consider the effect that an
individual’s inactivity may have on interstate commerce; it
is enough that Congress regulate commercial activity in a
way that requires regulation of inactivity to be effective.
The power to “make all Laws which shall be necessary
and proper for carrying into Execution” the powers enumerated in the Constitution, Art. I, §8, cl. 18, vests Congress with authority to enact provisions “incidental to the
[enumerated] power, and conducive to its beneficial exercise,” McCulloch, 4 Wheat., at 418. Although the Clause
gives Congress authority to “legislate on that vast mass
of incidental powers which must be involved in the constitution,” it does not license the exercise of any “great
substantive and independent power[s]” beyond those specifically enumerated. Id., at 411, 421. Instead, the Clause is
“ ‘merely a declaration, for the removal of all uncertainty,
that the means of carrying into execution those [powers]
otherwise granted are included in the grant.’ ” Kinsella v.
United States ex rel. Singleton, 361 U. S. 234, 247 (1960)
(quoting VI Writings of James Madison 383 (G. Hunt ed.
1906)).
As our jurisprudence under the Necessary and Proper
Clause has developed, we have been very deferential to
Congress’s determination that a regulation is “necessary.”
We have thus upheld laws that are “ ‘convenient, or useful’ or ‘conducive’ to the authority’s ‘beneficial exercise.’ ”
Comstock, 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 5) (quoting McCulloch, supra, at 413, 418). But we have also carried out our
responsibility to declare unconstitutional those laws that
undermine the structure of government established by the
Constitution. Such laws, which are not “consist[ent] with
the letter and spirit of the constitution,” McCulloch, supra,
at 421, are not “proper [means] for carrying into Execution” Congress’s enumerated powers. Rather, they are, “in

