Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012) 


45

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting


factor who offers $1 million with few strings attached to
50 randomly selected individuals. Just as this benefactor
might assume that all of these 50 individuals would snap
up his offer, so Congress assumed that every State would
gratefully accept the federal funds (and conditions) to go
with the expansion of Medicaid.
This characterization of the ACA’s offer raises obvious
questions. If that offer is “exceedingly generous,” as the
Federal Government maintains, why have more than half
the States brought this lawsuit, contending that the offer
is coercive? And why did Congress find it necessary to
threaten that any State refusing to accept this “exceedingly generous” gift would risk losing all Medicaid funds?
Congress could have made just the new funding provided
under the ACA contingent on acceptance of the terms of
the Medicaid Expansion. Congress took such an approach
in some earlier amendments to Medicaid, separating new
coverage requirements and funding from the rest of the
program so that only new funding was conditioned on new
eligibility extensions. See, e.g., Social Security Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 1465.
Congress’ decision to do otherwise here reflects its understanding that the ACA offer is not an “exceedingly
generous” gift that no State in its right mind would decline. Instead, acceptance of the offer will impose very
substantial costs on participating States. It is true that
the Federal Government will bear most of the initial costs
associated with the Medicaid Expansion, first paying
100% of the costs of covering newly eligible individuals
between 2014 and 2016. 42 U. S. C. §1396d(y). But that
is just part of the picture. Participating States will be
forced to shoulder substantial costs as well, because after
2019 the Federal Government will cover only 90% of the
costs associated with the Expansion, see ibid., with state
spending projected to increase by at least $20 billion by
2020 as a consequence. Statement of Douglas W. Elmen-

