28

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


express a similar apprehension. See post, at 8 (If the
minimum coverage provision is upheld under the com­
merce power then “the Commerce Clause becomes a font of
unlimited power, . . . the hideous monster whose devour­
ing jaws . . . spare neither sex nor age, nor high nor low,
nor sacred nor profane.” (internal quotation marks omit­
ted)). This concern is unfounded.
First, THE CHIEF JUSTICE could certainly uphold the
individual mandate without giving Congress carte blanche
to enact any and all purchase mandates. As several times
noted, the unique attributes of the health-care market
render everyone active in that market and give rise to a
significant free-riding problem that does not occur in other
markets. See supra, at 3–7, 16–18, 21.
Nor would the commerce power be unbridled, absent
THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s “activity” limitation. Congress would
remain unable to regulate noneconomic conduct that has
only an attenuated effect on interstate commerce and is
traditionally left to state law. See Lopez, 514 U. S., at
567; Morrison, 529 U. S., at 617–619. In Lopez, for
example, the Court held that the Federal Government
lacked power, under the Commerce Clause, to criminalize
the possession of a gun in a local school zone. Possessing
a gun near a school, the Court reasoned, “is in no sense
an economic activity that might, through repetition else­
where, substantially affect any sort of interstate com­
merce.” 514 U. S., at 567; ibid. (noting that the Court
would have “to pile inference upon inference” to conclude
that gun possession has a substantial effect on commerce).
Relying on similar logic, the Court concluded in Morrison
that Congress could not regulate gender-motivated vio­
lence, which the Court deemed to have too “attenuated
[an] effect upon interstate commerce.” 529 U. S., at 615.
An individual’s decision to self-insure, I have explained,
is an economic act with the requisite connection to inter­
state commerce. See supra, at 16–17. Other choices

