10

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.
Opinion R the Court 


The second provision of the Affordable Care Act directly
challenged here is the Medicaid expansion. Enacted in
1965, Medicaid offers federal funding to States to assist
pregnant women, children, needy families, the blind, the
elderly, and the disabled in obtaining medical care. See 42
U. S. C. §1396a(a)(10). In order to receive that funding,
States must comply with federal criteria governing matters such as who receives care and what services are provided at what cost. By 1982 every State had chosen to
participate in Medicaid. Federal funds received through
the Medicaid program have become a substantial part of
state budgets, now constituting over 10 percent of most
States’ total revenue.
The Affordable Care Act expands the scope of the Medicaid program and increases the number of individuals the
States must cover. For example, the Act requires state
programs to provide Medicaid coverage to adults with
incomes up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level,
whereas many States now cover adults with children only
if their income is considerably lower, and do not cover
childless adults at all. See §1396a(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII). The
Act increases federal funding to cover the States’ costs in
expanding Medicaid coverage, although States will bear a
portion of the costs on their own. §1396d(y)(1). If a State
does not comply with the Act’s new coverage requirements, it may lose not only the federal funding for those
requirements, but all of its federal Medicaid funds. See
§1396c.
Along with their challenge to the individual mandate,
the state plaintiffs in the Eleventh Circuit argued that the
Medicaid expansion exceeds Congress’s constitutional
——————
F. 3d, at 400–401. The Sixth Circuit and the D. C. Circuit considered
the question but determined that the Anti-Injunction Act did not apply.
See Thomas More, 651 F. 3d, at 539–540 (CA6); Seven-Sky, 661 F. 3d,
at 5–14 (CADC).

