Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012) 


41

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting


funding item is aid to support elementary and secondary
education, which amounts to 12.8% of total federal outlays
to the States, see id., at 7, 16, and equals only 6.6% of
all state expenditures combined. See ibid. In Arizona,
for example, although federal Medicaid expenditures are
equal to 33% of all state expenditures, federal education
funds amount to only 9.8% of all state expenditures. See
ibid. And even in States with less than average federal
Medicaid funding, that funding is at least twice the size of
federal education funding as a percentage of state expenditures. Id., at 7, 16, 47.
A State forced out of the Medicaid program would face
burdens in addition to the loss of federal Medicaid funding. For example, a nonparticipating State might be found
to be ineligible for other major federal funding sources,
such as Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF),
which is premised on the expectation that States will
participate in Medicaid. See 42 U. S. C. §602(a)(3) (2006
ed.) (requiring that certain beneficiaries of TANF funds be
“eligible for medical assistance under the State[’s Medicaid] plan”). And withdrawal or expulsion from the Medicaid program would not relieve a State’s hospitals of their
obligation under federal law to provide care for patients
who are unable to pay for medical services. The Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act, §1395dd,
requires hospitals that receive any federal funding to
provide stabilization care for indigent patients but does
not offer federal funding to assist facilities in carrying out
its mandate. Many of these patients are now covered by
Medicaid. If providers could not look to the Medicaid
program to pay for this care, they would find it exceedingly difficult to comply with federal law unless they were
given substantial state support. See, e.g., Brief for Economists as Amici Curiae in No 11–400, p. 11.
For these reasons, the offer that the ACA makes to the
States—go along with a dramatic expansion of Medicaid or

