60

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


fact, there are no such funds. There is only money States
anticipate receiving from future Congresses.
D
Congress has delegated to the Secretary of Health and
Human Services the authority to withhold, in whole or
in part, federal Medicaid funds from States that fail to
comply with the Medicaid Act as originally composed and as
subsequently amended. 42 U. S. C. §1396c.27 THE CHIEF
JUSTICE, however, holds that the Constitution precludes
the Secretary from withholding “existing” Medicaid funds
based on States’ refusal to comply with the expanded Medi­
caid program. Ante, at 55. For the foregoing reasons, I
disagree that any such withholding would violate the
Spending Clause. Accordingly, I would affirm the decision
of the Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit in this
regard.
But in view of THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s disposition, I agree
with him that the Medicaid Act’s severability clause de­
termines the appropriate remedy. That clause provides
that “[i]f any provision of [the Medicaid Act], or the appli­
cation thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter, and the application of
such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not
be affected thereby.” 42 U. S. C. §1303.
The Court does not strike down any provision of the
——————
27 As

THE CHIEF JUSTICE observes, the Secretary is authorized to
withhold all of a State’s Medicaid funding. See ante, at 51. But total
withdrawal is what the Secretary may, not must, do. She has discre­
tion to withhold only a portion of the Medicaid funds otherwise due a
noncompliant State. See §1396c; cf. 45 CFR §80.10(f) (2011) (Secretary
may enforce Title VI’s nondiscrimination requirement through “refusal
to grant or continue Federal financial assistance, in whole or in part.”
(emphasis added)). The Secretary, it is worth noting, may herself
experience political pressures, which would make her all the more
reluctant to cut off funds Congress has appropriated for a State’s needy
citizens.

