20

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting


. . . for the disposal of . . . low-level radioactive waste.” 42
U. S. C. §2021c(a)(1)(A). The Court did not hold that
“shall” could be construed to mean “may,” but rather that
this preliminary provision could not impose upon the operative provisions of the Act a mandate that they did not
contain: “We . . . decline petitioners’ invitation to construe §2021c(a)(1)(A), alone and in isolation, as a command to the States independent of the remainder of the
Act.” New York, 505 U. S., at 170. Our opinion then
proceeded to “consider each [of the three operative provisions] in turn.” Ibid. Here the mandate—the “shall”—is
contained not in an inoperative preliminary recital, but in
the dispositive operative provision itself. New York provides no support for reading it to be permissive.
Quite separately, the fact that Congress (in its own
words) “imposed . . . a penalty,” 26 U. S. C. §5000A(b)(1),
for failure to buy insurance is alone sufficient to render
that failure unlawful. It is one of the canons of interpretation that a statute that penalizes an act makes it unlawful: “[W]here the statute inflicts a penalty for doing an act,
although the act itself is not expressly prohibited, yet to do
the act is unlawful, because it cannot be supposed that the
Legislature intended that a penalty should be inflicted for
a lawful act.” Powhatan Steamboat Co. v. Appomattox R.
Co., 24 How. 247, 252 (1861). Or in the words of Chancellor Kent: “If a statute inflicts a penalty for doing an act,
the penalty implies a prohibition, and the thing is unlawful, though there be no prohibitory words in the statute.”
1 J. Kent, Commentaries on American Law 436 (1826).
We never have classified as a tax an exaction imposed
for violation of the law, and so too, we never have classified as a tax an exaction described in the legislation itself
as a penalty. To be sure, we have sometimes treated as a
tax a statutory exaction (imposed for something other
than a violation of law) which bore an agnostic label that
does not entail the significant constitutional consequences

