Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

25

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

active participation—requiring that they do so through
insurance, rather than through attempted self-insurance
with the back-stop of shifting costs to others.” Ibid.
The Government repeats the phrase “active in the market for health care” throughout its brief, see id., at 7, 18,
34, 50, but that concept has no constitutional significance.
An individual who bought a car two years ago and may
buy another in the future is not “active in the car market”
in any pertinent sense. The phrase “active in the market”
cannot obscure the fact that most of those regulated by
the individual mandate are not currently engaged in any
commercial activity involving health care, and that fact is
fatal to the Government’s effort to “regulate the uninsured
as a class.” Id., at 42. Our precedents recognize Congress’s power to regulate “class[es] of activities,” Gonzales
v. Raich, 545 U. S. 1, 17 (2005) (emphasis added), not
classes of individuals, apart from any activity in which
they are engaged, see, e.g., Perez, 402 U. S., at 153 (“Petitioner is clearly a member of the class which engages in
‘extortionate credit transactions’ . . .” (emphasis deleted)).
The individual mandate’s regulation of the uninsured as
a class is, in fact, particularly divorced from any link to
existing commercial activity. The mandate primarily
affects healthy, often young adults who are less likely to
need significant health care and have other priorities for
spending their money. It is precisely because these individuals, as an actuarial class, incur relatively low health
care costs that the mandate helps counter the effect of
forcing insurance companies to cover others who impose
greater costs than their premiums are allowed to reflect.
See 42 U. S. C. §18091(2)(I) (recognizing that the mandate
would “broaden the health insurance risk pool to include
healthy individuals, which will lower health insurance
premiums”). If the individual mandate is targeted at a
class, it is a class whose commercial inactivity rather than
activity is its defining feature.

