26

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


the actual effects of the activity in question upon inter­
state commerce.” 317 U. S., at 120. See also Morrison,
529 U. S., at 641–644 (Souter, J., dissenting) (recounting
the Court’s “nearly disastrous experiment” with formalis­
tic limits on Congress’ commerce power). Failing to learn
from this history, THE CHIEF JUSTICE plows ahead with
his formalistic distinction between those who are “active
in commerce,” ante, at 20, and those who are not.
It is not hard to show the difficulty courts (and Con­
gress) would encounter in distinguishing statutes that reg­
ulate “activity” from those that regulate “inactivity.” As
Judge Easterbrook noted, “it is possible to restate most
actions as corresponding inactions with the same effect.”
Archie v. Racine, 847 F. 2d 1211, 1213 (CA7 1988) (en
banc). Take this case as an example. An individual who
opts not to purchase insurance from a private insurer can
be seen as actively selecting another form of insurance:
self-insurance. See Thomas More Law Center, 651 F. 3d,
at 561 (Sutton, J., concurring in part) (“No one is in­
active when deciding how to pay for health care, as self­
insurance and private insurance are two forms of action
for addressing the same risk.”). The minimum coverage
provision could therefore be described as regulating activ­
ists in the self-insurance market.7 Wickard is another
example. Did the statute there at issue target activity
(the growing of too much wheat) or inactivity (the farmer’s
failure to purchase wheat in the marketplace)? If any­
thing, the Court’s analysis suggested the latter. See 317
U. S., at 127–129.
At bottom, THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s and the joint dissent­
——————
7 THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s characterization of individuals who choose not
to purchase private insurance as “doing nothing,” ante, at 20, is simi­
larly questionable. A person who self-insures opts against prepayment for
a product the person will in time consume. When aggregated, exercise
of that option has a substantial impact on the health-care market. See
supra, at 5–7, 16–17.

