24

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

Government.6
To an economist, perhaps, there is no difference between
activity and inactivity; both have measurable economic
effects on commerce. But the distinction between doing
something and doing nothing would not have been lost on
the Framers, who were “practical statesmen,” not metaphysical philosophers. Industrial Union Dept., AFL–CIO
v. American Petroleum Institute, 448 U. S. 607, 673 (1980)
(Rehnquist, J., concurring in judgment). As we have explained, “the framers of the Constitution were not mere
visionaries, toying with speculations or theories, but
practical men, dealing with the facts of political life as
they understood them, putting into form the government
they were creating, and prescribing in language clear
and intelligible the powers that government was to take.”
South Carolina v. United States, 199 U. S. 437, 449 (1905).
The Framers gave Congress the power to regulate commerce, not to compel it, and for over 200 years both our
decisions and Congress’s actions have reflected this understanding. There is no reason to depart from that understanding now.
The Government sees things differently. It argues that
because sickness and injury are unpredictable but unavoidable, “the uninsured as a class are active in the market for health care, which they regularly seek and obtain.”
Brief for United States 50. The individual mandate
“merely regulates how individuals finance and pay for that
——————
6 In an attempt to recast the individual mandate as a regulation of
commercial activity, JUSTICE GINSBURG suggests that “[a]n individual
who opts not to purchase insurance from a private insurer can be seen
as actively selecting another form of insurance: self-insurance.” Post, at
26. But “self-insurance” is, in this context, nothing more than a description of the failure to purchase insurance. Individuals are no more
“activ[e] in the self-insurance market” when they fail to purchase
insurance, ibid., than they are active in the “rest” market when doing
nothing.

