Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

use some new tools, including a requirement that most
individuals obtain private health insurance coverage. See
26 U. S. C. §5000A (2006 ed., Supp. IV) (the minimum
coverage provision). As explained below, by employing
these tools, Congress was able to achieve a practical, alto­
gether reasonable, solution.
A central aim of the ACA is to reduce the number of
uninsured U. S. residents. See 42 U. S. C. §18091(2)(C)
and (I) (2006 ed., Supp. IV). The minimum coverage
provision advances this objective by giving potential recip­
ients of health care a financial incentive to acquire insur­
ance. Per the minimum coverage provision, an individual
must either obtain insurance or pay a toll constructed as a
tax penalty. See 26 U. S. C. §5000A.
The minimum coverage provision serves a further pur­
pose vital to Congress’ plan to reduce the number of unin­
sured. Congress knew that encouraging individuals to
purchase insurance would not suffice to solve the problem,
because most of the uninsured are not uninsured by
choice.1 Of particular concern to Congress were people
who, though desperately in need of insurance, often cannot
acquire it: persons who suffer from preexisting medical
conditions.
Before the ACA’s enactment, private insurance compa­
nies took an applicant’s medical history into account when
setting insurance rates or deciding whether to insure an
individual. Because individuals with preexisting med——————
1 According to one study conducted by the National Center for Health
Statistics, the high cost of insurance is the most common reason why
individuals lack coverage, followed by loss of one’s job, an employer’s
unwillingness to offer insurance or an insurers’ unwillingness to cover
those with preexisting medical conditions, and loss of Medicaid cover­
age. See Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for
Health Statistics, Summary Health Statistics for the U. S. Population:
National Health Interview Survey—2009, Ser. 10, No. 248, p. 71, Table
25 (Dec. 2010). “[D]id not want or need coverage” received too few responses to warrant its own category. See ibid., n. 2.

