Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012) 


27

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting


The Government and those who support its position on
this point make the remarkable argument that §5000A is
not a tax for purposes of the Anti-Injunction Act, see Brief
for Petitioners in No. 11–398 (Anti-Injunction Act), but
is a tax for constitutional purposes, see Petitioners’ Minimum Coverage Brief 52–62. The rhetorical device that
tries to cloak this argument in superficial plausibility is
the same device employed in arguing that for constitutional purposes the minimum-coverage provision is a tax:
confusing the question of what Congress did with the
question of what Congress could have done. What qualifies as a tax for purposes of the Anti-Injunction Act, unlike
what qualifies as a tax for purposes of the Constitution, is
entirely within the control of Congress. Compare Bailey v.
George, 259 U. S. 16, 20 (1922) (Anti-Injunction Act barred
suit to restrain collections under the Child Labor Tax
Law), with Child Labor Tax Case, 259 U. S., at 36–41
(holding the same law unconstitutional as exceeding Congress’ taxing power). Congress could have defined “tax”
for purposes of that statute in such fashion as to exclude
some exactions that in fact are “taxes.” It might have
prescribed, for example, that a particular exercise of the
taxing power “shall not be regarded as a tax for purposes
of the Anti-Injunction Act.” But there is no such prescription here. What the Government would have us believe in
——————
latter directive would be superfluous if the former invoked the AntiInjunction Act.
Amicus also suggests that the penalty should be treated as a tax
because it is an assessable penalty, and the Code’s assessment provision authorizes the Secretary of the Treasury to assess “all taxes (including interest, additional amounts, additions to the tax, and assessable penalties) imposed by this title.” §6201(a) (2006 ed., Supp.
IV). But the fact that such items are included as “taxes” for purposes of
assessment does not establish that they are included as “taxes” for
purposes of other sections of the Code, such as the Anti-Injunction Act,
that do not contain similar “including” language.

