26

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting


to demand more than fly-by-night briefing and argument
before deciding a difficult constitutional question of first
impression.
III
The Anti-Injunction Act
There is another point related to the Individual Mandate that we must discuss—a point that logically should
have been discussed first: Whether jurisdiction over the
challenges to the minimum-coverage provision is precluded
by the Anti-Injunction Act, which provides that “no suit
for the purpose of restraining the assessment or collection
of any tax shall be maintained in any court by any person,” 26 U. S. C. §7421(a) (2006 ed.).
We have left the question to this point because it
seemed to us that the dispositive question whether the
minimum-coverage provision is a tax is more appropriately
addressed in the significant constitutional context of
whether it is an exercise of Congress’ taxing power. Having found that it is not, we have no difficulty in deciding
that these suits do not have “the purpose of restraining
the assessment or collection of any tax.”6
——————
6 The amicus appointed to defend the proposition that the AntiInjunction Act deprives us of jurisdiction stresses that the penalty for
failing to comply with the mandate “shall be assessed and collected
in the same manner as an assessable penalty under subchapter B of
chapter 68,” 26 U. S. C. §5000A(g)(1) (2006 ed., Supp. IV), and that
such penalties “shall be assessed and collected in the same manner
as taxes,” §6671(a) (2006 ed.). But that point seems to us to confirm
the inapplicability of the Anti-Injunction Act. That the penalty is to
be “assessed and collected in the same manner as taxes” refutes the
proposition that it is a tax for all statutory purposes, including with
respect to the Anti-Injunction Act. Moreover, elsewhere in the Internal
Revenue Code, Congress has provided both that a particular payment
shall be “assessed and collected” in the same manner as a tax and that
no suit shall be maintained to restrain the assessment or collection of
the payment. See, e.g., §§7421(b)(1), §6901(a); §6305(a), (b). The

