Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting

pre-existing condition. But without the contribution of
above-risk premiums from the young and healthy, the
community-rating provision will not enable insurers to
take on high-risk individuals without a massive increase
in premiums.
The Government presents the Individual Mandate as a
unique feature of a complicated regulatory scheme governing many parties with countervailing incentives that must
be carefully balanced. Congress has imposed an extensive
set of regulations on the health insurance industry, and
compliance with those regulations will likely cost the industry a great deal. If the industry does not respond by
increasing premiums, it is not likely to survive. And if
the industry does increase premiums, then there is a serious risk that its products—insurance plans—will become
economically undesirable for many and prohibitively expensive for the rest.
This is not a dilemma unique to regulation of the healthinsurance industry.
Government regulation typically
imposes costs on the regulated industry—especially regulation that prohibits economic behavior in which most
market participants are already engaging, such as “piecing out” the market by selling the product to different
classes of people at different prices (in the present context,
providing much lower insurance rates to young and
healthy buyers). And many industries so regulated face
the reality that, without an artificial increase in demand,
they cannot continue on. When Congress is regulating
these industries directly, it enjoys the broad power to
enact “ ‘all appropriate legislation’ ” to “ ‘protec[t]’ ” and
“ ‘advanc[e]’ ” commerce, NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel
Corp., 301 U. S. 1, 36–37 (1937) (quoting The Daniel Ball,
10 Wall. 557, 564 (1871)). Thus, Congress might protect
the imperiled industry by prohibiting low-cost competition,
or by according it preferential tax treatment, or even by
granting it a direct subsidy.

