14

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.
Opinion R the Court 


The Government disagrees. It argues that §5000A(g)(1)
does not direct courts to apply the Anti-Injunction Act,
because §5000A(g) is a directive only to the Secretary of
the Treasury to use the same “ ‘methodology and procedures’ ” to collect the penalty that he uses to collect taxes.
Brief for United States 32–33 (quoting Seven-Sky, 661
F. 3d, at 11).
We think the Government has the better reading. As
it observes, “Assessment” and “Collection” are chapters of
the Internal Revenue Code providing the Secretary authority to assess and collect taxes, and generally specifying
the means by which he shall do so. See §6201 (assessment authority); §6301 (collection authority). Section
5000A(g)(1)’s command that the penalty be “assessed and
collected in the same manner” as taxes is best read as
referring to those chapters and giving the Secretary the
same authority and guidance with respect to the penalty.
That interpretation is consistent with the remainder of
§5000A(g), which instructs the Secretary on the tools he
may use to collect the penalty. See §5000A(g)(2)(A) (barring criminal prosecutions); §5000A(g)(2)(B) (prohibiting
the Secretary from using notices of lien and levies). The
Anti-Injunction Act, by contrast, says nothing about the
procedures to be used in assessing and collecting taxes.
Amicus argues in the alternative that a different section
of the Internal Revenue Code requires courts to treat the
penalty as a tax under the Anti-Injunction Act. Section
6201(a) authorizes the Secretary to make “assessments of
all taxes (including interest, additional amounts, additions
to the tax, and assessable penalties).” (Emphasis added.)
Amicus contends that the penalty must be a tax, because
it is an assessable penalty and §6201(a) says that taxes
include assessable penalties.
That argument has force only if §6201(a) is read in
isolation. The Code contains many provisions treating
taxes and assessable penalties as distinct terms. See, e.g.,

