56

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

do just that. It allows her to withhold all “further [Medicaid] payments . . . to the State” if she determines that the
State is out of compliance with any Medicaid requirement,
including those contained in the expansion. 42 U. S. C.
§1396c. In light of the Court’s holding, the Secretary
cannot apply §1396c to withdraw existing Medicaid funds
for failure to comply with the requirements set out in the
expansion.
That fully remedies the constitutional violation we have
identified. The chapter of the United States Code that
contains §1396c includes a severability clause confirming
that we need go no further. That clause specifies that “[i]f
any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder
of the chapter, and the application of such provision to
other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.”
§1303. Today’s holding does not affect the continued application of §1396c to the existing Medicaid program. Nor
does it affect the Secretary’s ability to withdraw funds provided under the Affordable Care Act if a State that has
chosen to participate in the expansion fails to comply with
the requirements of that Act.
This is not to say, as the joint dissent suggests, that we
are “rewriting the Medicaid Expansion.” Post, at 48.
Instead, we determine, first, that §1396c is unconstitutional when applied to withdraw existing Medicaid funds
from States that decline to comply with the expansion.
We then follow Congress’s explicit textual instruction to
leave unaffected “the remainder of the chapter, and the
application of [the challenged] provision to other persons
or circumstances.” §1303. When we invalidate an application of a statute because that application is unconstitutional, we are not “rewriting” the statute; we are merely
enforcing the Constitution.
The question remains whether today’s holding affects
other provisions of the Affordable Care Act. In considering

