Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

19

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

for health care, because “[t]he proximity and degree of
connection between the [uninsured today] and [their]
subsequent commercial activity is too lacking.” Ante,
at 27.
This argument has multiple flaws. First, more than
60% of those without insurance visit a hospital or doctor’s
office each year. See supra, at 5. Nearly 90% will within
five years.4 An uninsured’s consumption of health care is
thus quite proximate: It is virtually certain to occur in the
next five years and more likely than not to occur this year.
Equally evident, Congress has no way of separating
those uninsured individuals who will need emergency medical care today (surely their consumption of medical care
is sufficiently imminent) from those who will not need
medical services for years to come. No one knows when an
emergency will occur, yet emergencies involving the unin­
sured arise daily. To capture individuals who unexpectedly will obtain medical care in the very near future, then,
Congress needed to include individuals who will not go to
a doctor anytime soon. Congress, our decisions instruct,
has authority to cast its net that wide. See Perez v. United
States, 402 U. S. 146, 154 (1971) (“[W]hen it is necessary
in order to prevent an evil to make the law embrace more
than the precise thing to be prevented it may do so.” (in­
ternal quotation marks omitted)).5
——————
4 See Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for
Health Statistics, Summary Health Statistics for U. S. Adults: National
Health Interview Survey 2009, Ser. 10, No. 249, p. 124, Table 37
(Dec. 2010).
5 Echoing THE CHIEF JUSTICE, the joint dissenters urge that the min­
imum coverage provision impermissibly regulates young people who
“have no intention of purchasing [medical care]” and are too far “re­
moved from the [health-care] market.” See post, at 8, 11. This criticism
ignores the reality that a healthy young person may be a day away
from needing health care. See supra, at 4. A victim of an accident or
unforeseen illness will consume extensive medical care immediately,
though scarcely expecting to do so.

