44

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

of a tax nonetheless leaves an individual with a lawful
choice to do or not do a certain act, so long as he is willing
to pay a tax levied on that choice.11
The Affordable Care Act’s requirement that certain individuals pay a financial penalty for not obtaining health
insurance may reasonably be characterized as a tax. Because the Constitution permits such a tax, it is not our role
to forbid it, or to pass upon its wisdom or fairness.
D
JUSTICE GINSBURG questions the necessity of rejecting
the Government’s commerce power argument, given that
§5000A can be upheld under the taxing power. Post, at 37.
But the statute reads more naturally as a command to buy
insurance than as a tax, and I would uphold it as a command if the Constitution allowed it. It is only because the
Commerce Clause does not authorize such a command
that it is necessary to reach the taxing power question.
And it is only because we have a duty to construe a statute to save it, if fairly possible, that §5000A can be interpreted as a tax. Without deciding the Commerce Clause
question, I would find no basis to adopt such a saving
construction.
The Federal Government does not have the power to
order people to buy health insurance. Section 5000A
would therefore be unconstitutional if read as a command.
The Federal Government does have the power to impose a
tax on those without health insurance. Section 5000A is
——————
11 Of course, individuals do not have a lawful choice not to pay a tax
due, and may sometimes face prosecution for failing to do so (although
not for declining to make the shared responsibility payment, see 26
U. S. C. §5000A(g)(2)). But that does not show that the tax restricts the
lawful choice whether to undertake or forgo the activity on which the tax
is predicated. Those subject to the individual mandate may lawfully
forgo health insurance and pay higher taxes, or buy health insurance
and pay lower taxes. The only thing they may not lawfully do is not
buy health insurance and not pay the resulting tax.

