Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

45

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

regulatory role”); Rose-Ackerman, Cooperative Federalism
and Co-optation, 92 Yale L. J. 1344, 1346 (1983) (“If
the federal government begins to take full responsibility
for social welfare spending and preempts the states, the
result is likely to be weaker . . . state governments.”).17
Although Congress “has no obligation to use its Spend­
ing Clause power to disburse funds to the States,” College
Savings Bank v. Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Ed. Expense Bd., 527 U. S. 666, 686 (1999), it has provided Medi­
caid grants notable for their generosity and flexibility.
“[S]uch funds,” we once observed, “are gifts,” id., at 686–
687, and so they have remained through decades of expan­
sion in their size and scope.
B
The Spending Clause authorizes Congress “to pay the
Debts and provide for the . . . general Welfare of the
United States.” Art. I, §8, cl. 1. To ensure that federal funds
granted to the States are spent “to ‘provide for the . . .
general Welfare’ in the manner Congress intended,” ante,
at 46, Congress must of course have authority to impose
limitations on the States’ use of the federal dollars. This
Court, time and again, has respected Congress’ prescrip­
tion of spending conditions, and has required States to
abide by them. See, e.g., Pennhurst, 451 U. S., at 17
(“[O]ur cases have long recognized that Congress may fix
the terms on which it shall disburse federal money to the
States.”). In particular, we have recognized Congress’
prerogative to condition a State’s receipt of Medicaid
——————
17 THE CHIEF JUSTICE and the joint dissenters perceive in cooperative
federalism a “threa[t]” to “political accountability.” Ante, at 48; see
post, at 34–35. By that, they mean voter confusion: Citizens upset by
unpopular government action, they posit, may ascribe to state officials
blame more appropriately laid at Congress’ door. But no such confu­
sion is apparent in this case: Medicaid’s status as a federally funded,
state-administered program is hardly hidden from view.

