2

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting


questions of first impression. The first of those is whether
failure to engage in economic activity (the purchase of
health insurance) is subject to regulation under the Commerce Clause. Failure to act does result in an effect
on commerce, and hence might be said to come under
this Court’s “affecting commerce” criterion of Commerce
Clause jurisprudence. But in none of its decisions has this
Court extended the Clause that far. The second question
is whether the congressional power to tax and spend,
U. S. Const., Art. I, §8, cl. 1, permits the conditioning of
a State’s continued receipt of all funds under a massive
state-administered federal welfare program upon its acceptance of an expansion to that program. Several of our
opinions have suggested that the power to tax and spend
cannot be used to coerce state administration of a federal
program, but we have never found a law enacted under
the spending power to be coercive. Those questions are
difficult.
The case is easy and straightforward, however, in another respect. What is absolutely clear, affirmed by the
text of the 1789 Constitution, by the Tenth Amendment
ratified in 1791, and by innumerable cases of ours in the
220 years since, is that there are structural limits upon
federal power—upon what it can prescribe with respect to
private conduct, and upon what it can impose upon the
sovereign States. Whatever may be the conceptual limits
upon the Commerce Clause and upon the power to tax
and spend, they cannot be such as will enable the Federal
Government to regulate all private conduct and to compel the States to function as administrators of federal
programs.
That clear principle carries the day here. The striking
case of Wickard v. Filburn, 317 U. S. 111 (1942), which
held that the economic activity of growing wheat, even
for one’s own consumption, affected commerce sufficiently
that it could be regulated, always has been regarded as

