Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

43

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting

require expensive care. Other ACA provisions seek to
make such policies more affordable for people of modest
means.
Finally, for low-income individuals who are
simply not able to obtain insurance, Congress expanded
Medicaid, transforming it from a program covering only
members of a limited list of vulnerable groups into a program that provides at least the requisite minimum level
of coverage for the poor. See 42 U. S. C. §§1396a(a)
(10)(A)(i)(VIII) (2006 ed., Supp. IV), 1396u–7(a), (b)(5),
18022(a). This design was intended to provide at least
a specified minimum level of coverage for all Americans,
but the achievement of that goal obviously depends on
participation by every single State. If any State—not
to mention all of the 26 States that brought this suit—
chose to decline the federal offer, there would be a gaping
hole in the ACA’s coverage.
It is true that some persons who are eligible for Medicaid coverage under the ACA may be able to secure private
insurance, either through their employers or by obtaining subsidized insurance through an exchange. See 26
U. S. C. §36B(a) (2006 ed., Supp. IV); Brief for Respondents in No. 11–400, at 12. But the new federal subsidies
are not available to those whose income is below the federal poverty level, and the ACA provides no means, other
than Medicaid, for these individuals to obtain coverage
and comply with the Mandate. The Government counters
that these people will not have to pay the penalty, see, e.g.,
Tr. of Oral Arg. 68 (Mar. 28, 2012); Brief for Respondents
in No. 11–400, at 49–50, but that argument misses the
point: Without Medicaid, these individuals will not have
coverage and the ACA’s goal of near-universal coverage
will be severely frustrated.
If Congress had thought that States might actually
refuse to go along with the expansion of Medicaid, Congress would surely have devised a backup scheme so that
the most vulnerable groups in our society, those previously

