20

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

tained”); Perez, 402 U. S., at 154 (“Where the class of
activities is regulated and that class is within the reach of
federal power, the courts have no power to excise, as trivial, individual instances of the class” (emphasis in original;
internal quotation marks omitted)); Wickard, supra, at
125 (“[E]ven if appellee’s activity be local and though it
may not be regarded as commerce, it may still, whatever
its nature, be reached by Congress if it exerts a substantial economic effect on interstate commerce”); NLRB v.
Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp., 301 U. S. 1, 37 (1937) (“Although activities may be intrastate in character when
separately considered, if they have such a close and substantial relation to interstate commerce that their control
is essential or appropriate to protect that commerce from
burdens and obstructions, Congress cannot be denied the
power to exercise that control”); see also post, at 15, 25–26,
28, 32 (GINSBURG, J., concurring in part, concurring in
judgment in part, and dissenting in part).5
The individual mandate, however, does not regulate
existing commercial activity. It instead compels individuals to become active in commerce by purchasing a product,
on the ground that their failure to do so affects interstate
commerce. Construing the Commerce Clause to permit Congress to regulate individuals precisely because they are
doing nothing would open a new and potentially vast domain to congressional authority. Every day individuals do
not do an infinite number of things. In some cases they
——————
5 JUSTICE GINSBURG cites two eminent domain cases from the 1890s to
support the proposition that our case law does not “toe the activity
versus inactivity line.” Post, at 24–25 (citing Monongahela Nav. Co. v.
United States, 148 U. S. 312, 335–337 (1893), and Cherokee Nation v.
Southern Kansas R. Co., 135 U. S. 641, 657–659 (1890)). The fact that
the Fifth Amendment requires the payment of just compensation
when the Government exercises its power of eminent domain does not
turn the taking into a commercial transaction between the landowner
and the Government, let alone a government-compelled transaction
between the landowner and a third party.

