40

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.
Opinion R the Court 


138, 144 (1948).
Even if the taxing power enables Congress to impose
a tax on not obtaining health insurance, any tax must
still comply with other requirements in the Constitution.
Plaintiffs argue that the shared responsibility payment
does not do so, citing Article I, §9, clause 4. That clause
provides: “No Capitation, or other direct, Tax shall be laid,
unless in Proportion to the Census or Enumeration herein
before directed to be taken.” This requirement means that
any “direct Tax” must be apportioned so that each State
pays in proportion to its population. According to the
plaintiffs, if the individual mandate imposes a tax, it is a
direct tax, and it is unconstitutional because Congress
made no effort to apportion it among the States.
Even when the Direct Tax Clause was written it was
unclear what else, other than a capitation (also known as
a “head tax” or a “poll tax”), might be a direct tax. See
Springer v. United States, 102 U. S. 586, 596–598 (1881).
Soon after the framing, Congress passed a tax on ownership of carriages, over James Madison’s objection that it
was an unapportioned direct tax. Id., at 597. This Court
upheld the tax, in part reasoning that apportioning such
a tax would make little sense, because it would have required taxing carriage owners at dramatically different
rates depending on how many carriages were in their
home State. See Hylton v. United States, 3 Dall. 171, 174
(1796) (opinion of Chase, J.). The Court was unanimous,
and those Justices who wrote opinions either directly
asserted or strongly suggested that only two forms of
taxation were direct: capitations and land taxes. See id.,
at 175; id., at 177 (opinion of Paterson, J.); id., at 183
(opinion of Iredell, J.).
That narrow view of what a direct tax might be persisted for a century. In 1880, for example, we explained that
“direct taxes, within the meaning of the Constitution, are
only capitation taxes, as expressed in that instrument,

