34

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting

162. Congress may not “simply commandeer the legislative processes of the States by directly compelling them to
enact and enforce a federal regulatory program.” Id.,
at 161 (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted).
Congress effectively engages in this impermissible compulsion when state participation in a federal spending
program is coerced, so that the States’ choice whether to
enact or administer a federal regulatory program is rendered illusory.
Where all Congress has done is to “encourag[e] state
regulation rather than compe[l] it, state governments
remain responsive to the local electorate’s preferences;
state officials remain accountable to the people. [But]
where the Federal Government compels States to regulate,
the accountability of both state and federal officials is
diminished.” New York, supra, at 168.
Amici who support the Government argue that forcing
state employees to implement a federal program is more
respectful of federalism than using federal workers to
implement that program. See, e.g., Brief for Service Employees International Union et al. as Amici Curiae in No.
11–398, pp. 25–26. They note that Congress, instead of
expanding Medicaid, could have established an entirely
federal program to provide coverage for the same group of
people. By choosing to structure Medicaid as a cooperative
federal-state program, they contend, Congress allows for
more state control. Ibid.
This argument reflects a view of federalism that our
cases have rejected—and with good reason. When Congress compels the States to do its bidding, it blurs the
lines of political accountability. If the Federal Government makes a controversial decision while acting on its
own, “it is the Federal Government that makes the decision in full view of the public, and it will be federal officials that suffer the consequences if the decision turns out
to be detrimental or unpopular.” New York, 505 U. S., at

