50

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting


cies, risks, and duties that Congress did not enact. That
can be a more extreme exercise of the judicial power than
striking the whole statute and allowing Congress to address the conditions that pertained when the statute was
considered at the outset.
The Court has applied a two-part guide as the framework for severability analysis. The test has been deemed
“well established.” Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Brock, 480
U. S. 678, 684 (1987). First, if the Court holds a statutory
provision unconstitutional, it then determines whether
the now truncated statute will operate in the manner Congress intended. If not, the remaining provisions must be
invalidated. See id., at 685. In Alaska Airlines, the Court
clarified that this first inquiry requires more than asking whether “the balance of the legislation is incapable of
functioning independently.” Id., at 684. Even if the remaining provisions will operate in some coherent way,
that alone does not save the statute. The question is
whether the provisions will work as Congress intended.
The “relevant inquiry in evaluating severability is whether
the statute will function in a manner consistent with
the intent of Congress.” Id., at 685 (emphasis in original).
See also Free Enterprise Fund v. Public Company Accounting Oversight Bd., 561 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at
28) (the Act “remains fully operative as a law with these
tenure restrictions excised”) (internal quotation marks
omitted); United States v. Booker, 543 U. S. 220, 227
(2005) (“[T]wo provisions . . . must be invalidated in order
to allow the statute to operate in a manner consistent
with congressional intent”); Mille Lacs, supra, at 194 (“[E]mbodying as it did one coherent policy, [the entire order]
is inseverable”).
Second, even if the remaining provisions can operate as
Congress designed them to operate, the Court must determine if Congress would have enacted them standing
alone and without the unconstitutional portion. If Con-

