Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012) 


63

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting


minor provision will be the price paid for support of a
major provision. So, if the major provision were unconstitutional, Congress would not have passed the minor one.
Without the ACA’s major provisions, many of these
minor provisions will not operate in the manner Congress
intended. For example, the tax increases are “Revenue
Offset Provisions” designed to help offset the cost to the
Federal Government of programs like the Medicaid Expansion and the exchanges’ federal subsidies. See Title
IX, Subtitle A—Revenue Offset Provisions, 124 Stat. 847.
With the Medicaid Expansion and the exchanges invalidated, the tax increases no longer operate to offset costs,
and they no longer serve the purpose in the Act’s scheme
of “shared responsibility” that Congress intended.
Some provisions, such as requiring chain restaurants to
display nutritional content, appear likely to operate as
Congress intended, but they fail the second test for severability. There is no reason to believe that Congress would
have enacted them independently. The Court has not
previously had occasion to consider severability in the context of an omnibus enactment like the ACA, which includes not only many provisions that are ancillary to its
central provisions but also many that are entirely unrelated—hitched on because it was a quick way to get them
passed despite opposition, or because their proponents
could exact their enactment as the quid pro quo for their
needed support. When we are confronted with such a socalled “Christmas tree,” a law to which many nongermane
ornaments have been attached, we think the proper rule
must be that when the tree no longer exists the ornaments
are superfluous. We have no reliable basis for knowing
which pieces of the Act would have passed on their own. It
is certain that many of them would not have, and it is not
a proper function of this Court to guess which. To sever
the statute in that manner “ ‘would be to make a new law,
not to enforce an old one. This is not part of our duty.’ ”

