Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

57

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

cial inducement offered by Congress . . . pass[ed] the point
at which pressure turns into compulsion.” Ante, at 50
(internal quotation marks omitted). The financial in­
ducement Congress employed here, he concludes, crosses
that threshold: The threatened withholding of “existing
Medicaid funds” is “a gun to the head” that forces States to
acquiesce. Ante, at 50–51 (citing 42 U. S. C. §1396c).24
THE CHIEF JUSTICE sees no need to “fix the outermost
line,” Steward Machine, 301 U. S., at 591, “where persua­
sion gives way to coercion,” ante, at 55. Neither do the
joint dissenters. See post, at 36, 38.25 Notably, the deci­
——————
24 The joint dissenters, for their part, would make this the entire in­
quiry. “[I]f States really have no choice other than to accept the pack­
age,” they assert, “the offer is coercive.” Post, at 35. THE CHIEF JUSTICE
recognizes Congress’ authority to construct a single federal program
and “condition the receipt of funds on the States’ complying with
restrictions on the use of those funds.” Ante, at 50. For the joint
dissenters, however, all that matters, it appears, is whether States can
resist the temptation of a given federal grant. Post, at 35. On this
logic, any federal spending program, sufficiently large and well-funded,
would be unconstitutional. The joint dissenters point to smaller pro­
grams States might have the will to refuse. See post, at 40–41 (elemen­
tary and secondary education). But how is a court to judge whether
“only 6.6% of all state expenditures,” post, at 41, is an amount States
could or would do without?
Speculations of this genre are characteristic of the joint dissent. See,
e.g., post, at 35 (“it may be state officials who will bear the brunt of
public disapproval” for joint federal-state endeavors); ibid., (“federal
officials . . . may remain insulated from the electoral ramifications of
their decision”); post, at 37 (“a heavy federal tax . . . levied to support a
federal program that offers large grants to the States . . . may, as a
practical matter, [leave States] unable to refuse to participate”); ibid.
(withdrawal from a federal program “would likely force the State to
impose a huge tax increase”); post, at 46 (state share of ACA expansion
costs “may increase in the future”) (all emphasis added; some internal
quotation marks omitted). The joint dissenters are long on conjecture
and short on real-world examples.
25 The joint dissenters also rely heavily on Congress’ perceived intent
to coerce the States. Post, at 42–46; see, e.g., post, at 42 (“In crafting the
ACA, Congress clearly expressed its informed view that no State could

