6

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


Ann. §§311.022(a) and (b) (West 2010); American Medical
Association, Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs,
Code of Medical Ethics, Current Opinions: Opinion 8.11—
Neglect of Patient, p. 70 (1998–1999 ed.).
As a consequence, medical-care providers deliver significant amounts of care to the uninsured for which the
providers receive no payment. In 2008, for example, hospitals, physicians, and other health-care professionals
received no compensation for $43 billion worth of the $116
billion in care they administered to those without insur­
ance. 42 U. S. C. §18091(2)(F) (2006 ed., Supp. IV).
Health-care providers do not absorb these bad debts.
Instead, they raise their prices, passing along the cost
of uncompensated care to those who do pay reliably: the
government and private insurance companies. In response,
private insurers increase their premiums, shifting the
cost of the elevated bills from providers onto those who
carry insurance. The net result: Those with health insur­
ance subsidize the medical care of those without it. As
economists would describe what happens, the uninsured
“free ride” on those who pay for health insurance.
The size of this subsidy is considerable. Congress found
that the cost-shifting just described “increases family
[insurance] premiums by on average over $1,000 a year.”
Ibid. Higher premiums, in turn, render health insurance
less affordable, forcing more people to go without insur­
ance and leading to further cost-shifting.
And it is hardly just the currently sick or injured among
the uninsured who prompt elevation of the price of health
care and health insurance. Insurance companies and
health-care providers know that some percentage of
healthy, uninsured people will suffer sickness or injury
each year and will receive medical care despite their ina­
bility to pay. In anticipation of this uncompensated care,
health-care companies raise their prices, and insurers
their premiums. In other words, because any uninsured

