8

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.
Opinion R the Court 


as tax penalties, such as the penalty for claiming too
large an income tax refund. 26 U. S. C. §5000A(g)(1). The
Act, however, bars the IRS from using several of its normal enforcement tools, such as criminal prosecutions and
levies. §5000A(g)(2). And some individuals who are subject to the mandate are nonetheless exempt from the
penalty—for example, those with income below a certain
threshold and members of Indian tribes. §5000A(e).
On the day the President signed the Act into law, Florida and 12 other States filed a complaint in the Federal
District Court for the Northern District of Florida. Those
plaintiffs—who are both respondents and petitioners here,
depending on the issue—were subsequently joined by 13
more States, several individuals, and the National Federation of Independent Business. The plaintiffs alleged,
among other things, that the individual mandate provisions of the Act exceeded Congress’s powers under Article
I of the Constitution. The District Court agreed, holding
that Congress lacked constitutional power to enact the
individual mandate. 780 F. Supp. 2d 1256 (ND Fla. 2011).
The District Court determined that the individual mandate could not be severed from the remainder of the Act,
and therefore struck down the Act in its entirety. Id., at
1305–1306.
The Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit affirmed
in part and reversed in part. The court affirmed the District Court’s holding that the individual mandate exceeds
Congress’s power. 648 F. 3d 1235 (2011). The panel
unanimously agreed that the individual mandate did not
impose a tax, and thus could not be authorized by Congress’s power to “lay and collect Taxes.” U. S. Const.,
Art. I, §8, cl. 1. A majority also held that the individual
mandate was not supported by Congress’s power to “regulate Commerce . . . among the several States.” Id., cl. 3.
According to the majority, the Commerce Clause does not
empower the Federal Government to order individuals to

