Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

35

Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.
Opinion R the Court

. . . does not alter their essential character as taxes”).7
Our cases confirm this functional approach. For example, in Drexel Furniture, we focused on three practical
characteristics of the so-called tax on employing child
laborers that convinced us the “tax” was actually a penalty. First, the tax imposed an exceedingly heavy burden—10 percent of a company’s net income—on those who
employed children, no matter how small their infraction.
Second, it imposed that exaction only on those who knowingly employed underage laborers. Such scienter requirements are typical of punitive statutes, because Congress
often wishes to punish only those who intentionally break
the law. Third, this “tax” was enforced in part by the
Department of Labor, an agency responsible for punishing violations of labor laws, not collecting revenue. 259
U. S., at 36–37; see also, e.g., Kurth Ranch, 511 U. S., at
780–782 (considering, inter alia, the amount of the exaction, and the fact that it was imposed for violation of a
separate criminal law); Constantine, supra, at 295 (same).
The same analysis here suggests that the shared responsibility payment may for constitutional purposes be
considered a tax, not a penalty: First, for most Americans
the amount due will be far less than the price of insurance, and, by statute, it can never be more.8 It may often
——————
7 Sotelo, in particular, would seem to refute the joint dissent’s contention that we have “never” treated an exaction as a tax if it was denominated a penalty. Post, at 20. We are not persuaded by the dissent’s
attempt to distinguish Sotelo as a statutory construction case from the
bankruptcy context. Post, at 17, n. 5. The dissent itself treats the
question here as one of statutory interpretation, and indeed also relies
on a statutory interpretation case from the bankruptcy context. Post,
at 23 (citing United States v. Reorganized CF&I Fabricators of Utah,
Inc., 518 U. S. 213, 224 (1996)).
8 In 2016, for example, individuals making $35,000 a year are expected to owe the IRS about $60 for any month in which they do not
have health insurance. Someone with an annual income of $100,000 a
year would likely owe about $200. The price of a qualifying insurance

