18

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

to activities that do so only when aggregated with similar
activities of others. See Wickard, 317 U. S., at 127–128.
Given its expansive scope, it is no surprise that Congress has employed the commerce power in a wide variety
of ways to address the pressing needs of the time. But
Congress has never attempted to rely on that power to
compel individuals not engaged in commerce to purchase
an unwanted product.3 Legislative novelty is not necessarily fatal; there is a first time for everything. But
sometimes “the most telling indication of [a] severe constitutional problem . . . is the lack of historical precedent”
for Congress’s action. Free Enterprise Fund v. Public Company Accounting Oversight Bd., 561 U. S. ___, ___ (2010)
(slip op., at 25) (internal quotation marks omitted). At the
very least, we should “pause to consider the implications of
the Government’s arguments” when confronted with such
new conceptions of federal power. Lopez, supra, at 564.
The Constitution grants Congress the power to “regulate
Commerce.” Art. I, §8, cl. 3 (emphasis added). The power
to regulate commerce presupposes the existence of commercial activity to be regulated. If the power to “regulate”
something included the power to create it, many of the
provisions in the Constitution would be superfluous. For
example, the Constitution gives Congress the power to
“coin Money,” in addition to the power to “regulate the
Value thereof.” Id., cl. 5. And it gives Congress the power
——————
3 The

examples of other congressional mandates cited by JUSTICE
GINSBURG, post, at 35, n. 10 (opinion concurring in part, concurring in
judgment in part, and dissenting in part), are not to the contrary. Each
of those mandates—to report for jury duty, to register for the draft, to
purchase firearms in anticipation of militia service, to exchange gold
currency for paper currency, and to file a tax return—are based on
constitutional provisions other than the Commerce Clause. See Art. I,
§8, cl. 9 (to “constitute Tribunals inferior to the supreme Court”); id.,
cl. 12 (to “raise and support Armies”); id., cl. 16 (to “provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining, the Militia”); id., cl. 5 (to “coin Money”);
id., cl. 1 (to “lay and collect Taxes”).

