Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

53

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting

ed., Supp. IV), 42 U. S. C. §18071 (2006 ed., Supp. IV)
(federal subsidies). The Federal Government’s increased
spending is offset by new taxes and cuts in other federal
expenditures, including reductions in Medicare and in
federal payments to hospitals. See, e.g., §1395ww(r) (Medicare cuts); ACA Title IX, Subtitle A, 124 Stat. 847 (“Revenue Offset Provisions”). Employers with at least 50
employees must either provide employees with adequate
health benefits or pay a financial exaction if an employee
who qualifies for federal subsidies purchases insurance
through an exchange. See 26 U. S. C. §4980H (2006 ed.,
Supp. IV).
In short, the Act attempts to achieve near-universal
health insurance coverage by spreading its costs to individuals, insurers, governments, hospitals, and employers—
while, at the same time, offsetting significant portions
of those costs with new benefits to each group. For example, the Federal Government bears the burden of paying billions for the new entitlements mandated by the
Medicaid Expansion and federal subsidies for insurance
purchases on the exchanges; but it benefits from reductions in the reimbursements it pays to hospitals. Hospitals lose those reimbursements; but they benefit from the
decrease in uncompensated care, for under the insurance
regulations it is easier for individuals with pre-existing
conditions to purchase coverage that increases payments
to hospitals. Insurance companies bear new costs imposed
by a collection of insurance regulations and taxes, including
“guaranteed issue” and “community rating” requirements
to give coverage regardless of the insured’s pre-existing
conditions; but the insurers benefit from the new, healthy
purchasers who are forced by the Individual Mandate
to buy the insurers’ product and from the new lowincome Medicaid recipients who will enroll in insurance
companies’ Medicaid-funded managed care programs. In
summary, the Individual Mandate and Medicaid Expan-

