12

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.
Opinion R the Court 


challenged only after they are paid, by suing for a refund.
See Enochs v. Williams Packing & Nav. Co., 370 U. S. 1,
7–8 (1962).
The penalty for not complying with the Affordable Care
Act’s individual mandate first becomes enforceable in
2014. The present challenge to the mandate thus seeks to
restrain the penalty’s future collection. Amicus contends
that the Internal Revenue Code treats the penalty as a
tax, and that the Anti-Injunction Act therefore bars this
suit.
The text of the pertinent statutes suggests otherwise.
The Anti-Injunction Act applies to suits “for the purpose
of restraining the assessment or collection of any tax.”
§7421(a) (emphasis added). Congress, however, chose to
describe the “[s]hared responsibility payment” imposed on
those who forgo health insurance not as a “tax,” but as a
“penalty.” §§5000A(b), (g)(2). There is no immediate
reason to think that a statute applying to “any tax” would
apply to a “penalty.”
Congress’s decision to label this exaction a “penalty”
rather than a “tax” is significant because the Affordable
Care Act describes many other exactions it creates as
“taxes.” See Thomas More, 651 F. 3d, at 551. Where
Congress uses certain language in one part of a statute
and different language in another, it is generally presumed that Congress acts intentionally. See Russello v.
United States, 464 U. S. 16, 23 (1983).
Amicus argues that even though Congress did not label
the shared responsibility payment a tax, we should treat it
as such under the Anti-Injunction Act because it functions
like a tax. It is true that Congress cannot change whether
an exaction is a tax or a penalty for constitutional purposes simply by describing it as one or the other. Congress
may not, for example, expand its power under the Taxing
Clause, or escape the Double Jeopardy Clause’s constraint
on criminal sanctions, by labeling a severe financial pun-

