Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

21

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

cease cultivating marijuana) because of a prophesied
future transaction (the eventual sale of that wheat or
marijuana in the interstate market). Congress’ actions
are even more rational in this case, where the future
activity (the consumption of medical care) is certain to
occur, the sole uncertainty being the time the activity will
take place.
Maintaining that the uninsured are not active in the
health-care market, THE CHIEF JUSTICE draws an analogy
to the car market. An individual “is not ‘active in the car
market,’ ” THE CHIEF JUSTICE observes, simply because he
or she may someday buy a car. Ante, at 25. The analogy
is inapt. The inevitable yet unpredictable need for medi­
cal care and the guarantee that emergency care will be
provided when required are conditions nonexistent in
other markets. That is so of the market for cars, and of
the market for broccoli as well. Although an individual
might buy a car or a crown of broccoli one day, there is no
certainty she will ever do so. And if she eventually wants
a car or has a craving for broccoli, she will be obliged to
pay at the counter before receiving the vehicle or nour­
ishment. She will get no free ride or food, at the expense
of another consumer forced to pay an inflated price. See
Thomas More Law Center v. Obama, 651 F. 3d 529, 565
(CA6 2011) (Sutton, J., concurring in part) (“Regulating
how citizens pay for what they already receive (health
care), never quite know when they will need, and in the
case of severe illnesses or emergencies generally will not
be able to afford, has few (if any) parallels in modern
life.”). Upholding the minimum coverage provision on the
ground that all are participants or will be participants in
the health-care market would therefore carry no implica­
tion that Congress may justify under the Commerce
Clause a mandate to buy other products and services.
Nor is it accurate to say that the minimum coverage
provision “compel[s] individuals . . . to purchase an un­

