Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

has the authority to address under the Commerce Clause.
See supra, at 14–16. See also Wickard, 317 U. S., at 128
(“It is well established by decisions of this Court that
the power to regulate commerce includes the power to regu­
late the prices at which commodities in that commerce are
dealt in and practices affecting such prices.” (emphasis
added)).
The minimum coverage provision, furthermore, bears a
“reasonable connection” to Congress’ goal of protecting the
health-care market from the disruption caused by individ­
uals who fail to obtain insurance. By requiring those who
do not carry insurance to pay a toll, the minimum cover­
age provision gives individuals a strong incentive to in­
sure. This incentive, Congress had good reason to believe,
would reduce the number of uninsured and, correspond­
ingly, mitigate the adverse impact the uninsured have on
the national health-care market.
Congress also acted reasonably in requiring uninsured
individuals, whether sick or healthy, either to obtain
insurance or to pay the specified penalty. As earlier ob­
served, because every person is at risk of needing care at
any moment, all those who lack insurance, regardless of
their current health status, adversely affect the price of
health care and health insurance. See supra, at 6–7.
Moreover, an insurance-purchase requirement limited to
those in need of immediate care simply could not work.
Insurance companies would either charge these individu­
als prohibitively expensive premiums, or, if community­
rating regulations were in place, close up shop. See supra,
at 9–11. See also Brief for State of Maryland and 10
Other States et al. as Amici Curiae in No. 11–398, p. 28
(hereinafter Maryland Brief) (“No insurance regime can
survive if people can opt out when the risk insured against
is only a risk, but opt in when the risk materializes.”).
“[W]here we find that the legislators . . . have a rational
basis for finding a chosen regulatory scheme necessary to

