Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

seven states suffered from skyrocketing insurance pre­
mium costs, reductions in individuals with coverage, and
reductions in insurance products and providers.” Brief for
American Association of People with Disabilities et al. as
Amici Curiae in No. 11–398, p. 9 (hereinafter AAPD Brief).
See also Brief for Governor of Washington Christine
Gregoire as Amicus Curiae in No. 11–398, pp. 11–14 (de­
scribing the “death spiral” in the insurance market Wash­
ington experienced when the State passed a law requiring
coverage for preexisting conditions).
Congress comprehended that guaranteed-issue and
community-rating laws alone will not work. When insur­
ance companies are required to insure the sick at afforda­
ble prices, individuals can wait until they become ill to buy
insurance. Pretty soon, those in need of immediate medi­
cal care—i.e., those who cost insurers the most—become
the insurance companies’ main customers. This “adverse
selection” problem leaves insurers with two choices: They
can either raise premiums dramatically to cover their
ever-increasing costs or they can exit the market. In the
seven States that tried guaranteed-issue and community­
rating requirements without a minimum coverage provi­
sion, that is precisely what insurance companies did. See,
e.g., AAPD Brief 10 (“[In Maine,] [m]any insurance provid­
ers doubled their premiums in just three years or less.”);
id., at 12 (“Like New York, Vermont saw substantial
increases in premiums after its . . . insurance reform
measures took effect in 1993.”); Hall, An Evaluation of
New York’s Reform Law, 25 J. Health Pol. Pol’y & L. 71,
91–92 (2000) (Guaranteed-issue and community-rating
laws resulted in a “dramatic exodus of indemnity insurers
from New York’s individual [insurance] market.”); Brief
for Barry Friedman et al. as Amici Curiae in No. 11–398,
p. 17 (“In Kentucky, all but two insurers (one State-run)
abandoned the State.”).
Massachusetts, Congress was told, cracked the adverse

