22

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting


Department of Health and Human Services interprets
Section 5000A as imposing a legal obligation,” Petitioners’
Minimum Coverage Brief 61, and that “[i]f [those subject
to the Act] pay the tax penalty, they’re in compliance with
the law,” Tr. of Oral Arg. 50 (Mar. 26, 2012). These selfserving litigating positions are entitled to no weight.
What counts is what the statute says, and that is entirely
clear. It is worth noting, moreover, that these assurances
contradict the Government’s position in related litigation.
Shortly before the Affordable Care Act was passed, the
Commonwealth of Virginia enacted Va. Code Ann. §38.2–
3430.1:1 (Lexis Supp. 2011), which states, “No resident of
[the] Commonwealth . . . shall be required to obtain or
maintain a policy of individual insurance coverage except
as required by a court or the Department of Social Services . . . .” In opposing Virginia’s assertion of standing to
challenge §5000A based on this statute, the Government
said that “if the minimum coverage provision is unconstitutional, the [Virginia] statute is unnecessary, and if the
minimum coverage provision is upheld, the state statute is
void under the Supremacy Clause.” Brief for Appellant
in No. 11–1057 etc. (CA4), p. 29. But it would be void
under the Supremacy Clause only if it was contradicted by
a federal “require[ment] to obtain or maintain a policy of
individual insurance coverage.”
Against the mountain of evidence that the minimum
coverage requirement is what the statute calls it—a requirement—and that the penalty for its violation is what
the statute calls it—a penalty—the Government brings
forward the flimsiest of indications to the contrary. It
notes that “[t]he minimum coverage provision amends the
Internal Revenue Code to provide that a non-exempted
individual . . . will owe a monetary penalty, in addition to
the income tax itself,” and that “[t]he [Internal Revenue
Service (IRS)] will assess and collect the penalty in the
same manner as assessable penalties under the Internal

