4

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

the Constitution’s text does not authorize any government
to do so. Our cases refer to this general power of governing, possessed by the States but not by the Federal Government, as the “police power.” See, e.g., United States v.
Morrison, 529 U. S. 598, 618–619 (2000).
“State sovereignty is not just an end in itself: Rather,
federalism secures to citizens the liberties that derive from
the diffusion of sovereign power.” New York v. United
States, 505 U. S. 144, 181 (1992) (internal quotation
marks omitted). Because the police power is controlled by
50 different States instead of one national sovereign, the
facets of governing that touch on citizens’ daily lives are
normally administered by smaller governments closer to
the governed. The Framers thus ensured that powers
which “in the ordinary course of affairs, concern the lives,
liberties, and properties of the people” were held by governments more local and more accountable than a distant federal bureaucracy. The Federalist No. 45, at 293
(J. Madison). The independent power of the States also
serves as a check on the power of the Federal Government:
“By denying any one government complete jurisdiction
over all the concerns of public life, federalism protects the
liberty of the individual from arbitrary power.” Bond v.
United States, 564 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 9–10).
This case concerns two powers that the Constitution
does grant the Federal Government, but which must be
read carefully to avoid creating a general federal authority
akin to the police power. The Constitution authorizes
Congress to “regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and
among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes.”
Art. I, §8, cl. 3. Our precedents read that to mean that
Congress may regulate “the channels of interstate commerce,” “persons or things in interstate commerce,” and
“those activities that substantially affect interstate commerce.” Morrison, supra, at 609 (internal quotation marks
omitted). The power over activities that substantially

