Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting

takes a few different forms, but the basic idea is that
§5000A regulates “the way in which individuals finance
their participation in the health-care market.” Petitioners’
Minimum Coverage Brief 33 (emphasis added). That is,
the provision directs the manner in which individuals
purchase health care services and related goods (directing
that they be purchased through insurance) and is therefore a straightforward exercise of the commerce power.
The primary problem with this argument is that §5000A
does not apply only to persons who purchase all, or most,
or even any, of the health care services or goods that the
mandated insurance covers. Indeed, the main objection
many have to the Mandate is that they have no intention
of purchasing most or even any of such goods or services
and thus no need to buy insurance for those purchases.
The Government responds that the health-care market
involves “essentially universal participation,” id., at 35.
The principal difficulty with this response is that it is, in
the only relevant sense, not true. It is true enough that
everyone consumes “health care,” if the term is taken to
include the purchase of a bottle of aspirin. But the health
care “market” that is the object of the Individual Mandate
not only includes but principally consists of goods and
services that the young people primarily affected by the
Mandate do not purchase. They are quite simply not
participants in that market, and cannot be made so (and
thereby subjected to regulation) by the simple device of
defining participants to include all those who will, later in
their lifetime, probably purchase the goods or services
covered by the mandated insurance.2 Such a definition of
——————
2 JUSTICE GINSBURG is therefore right to note that Congress is “not
mandating the purchase of a discrete, unwanted product.” Ante, at 22
(opinion concurring in part, concurring in judgment in part, and dis-

