60

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting


the average federal subsidy could be much higher; for
community rating greatly lowers the enormous premiums
unhealthy individuals would otherwise pay.
Federal
subsidies would make up much of the difference.
The result would be an unintended boon to insurance
companies, an unintended harm to the federal fisc, and
a corresponding breakdown of the “shared responsibility” between the industry and the federal budget that
Congress intended. Thus, the federal subsidies must be
invalidated.
In the absence of federal subsidies to purchasers, insurance companies will have little incentive to sell insurance
on the exchanges. Under the ACA’s scheme, few, if any,
individuals would want to buy individual insurance policies outside of an exchange, because federal subsidies
would be unavailable outside of an exchange. Difficulty in
attracting individuals outside of the exchange would in
turn motivate insurers to enter exchanges, despite the
exchanges’ onerous regulations. See 42 U. S. C. §18031.
That system of incentives collapses if the federal subsidies
are invalidated. Without the federal subsidies, individuals would lose the main incentive to purchase insurance
inside the exchanges, and some insurers may be unwilling
to offer insurance inside of exchanges. With fewer buyers
and even fewer sellers, the exchanges would not operate
as Congress intended and may not operate at all.
There is a second reason why, if community rating is
invalidated by the Mandate and Medicaid Expansion’s
invalidity, exchanges cannot be implemented in a manner
consistent with the Act’s design. A key purpose of an
exchange is to provide a marketplace of insurance options
where prices are standardized regardless of the buyer’s pre-existing conditions. See ibid. An individual who
shops for insurance through an exchange will evaluate
different insurance products. The products will offer
different benefits and prices. Congress designed the ex-

