Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

39

Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.
Opinion R the Court

The joint dissenters argue that we cannot uphold
§5000A as a tax because Congress did not “frame” it as
such. Post, at 17. In effect, they contend that even if
the Constitution permits Congress to do exactly what we
interpret this statute to do, the law must be struck down
because Congress used the wrong labels. An example may
help illustrate why labels should not control here. Suppose Congress enacted a statute providing that every
taxpayer who owns a house without energy efficient windows must pay $50 to the IRS. The amount due is adjusted
based on factors such as taxable income and joint filing
status, and is paid along with the taxpayer’s income tax
return. Those whose income is below the filing threshold
need not pay. The required payment is not called a “tax,”
a “penalty,” or anything else. No one would doubt that
this law imposed a tax, and was within Congress’s power
to tax. That conclusion should not change simply because
Congress used the word “penalty” to describe the payment. Interpreting such a law to be a tax would hardly
“[i]mpos[e] a tax through judicial legislation.” Post, at 25.
Rather, it would give practical effect to the Legislature’s
enactment.
Our precedent demonstrates that Congress had the
power to impose the exaction in §5000A under the taxing
power, and that §5000A need not be read to do more than
impose a tax. That is sufficient to sustain it. The “question of the constitutionality of action taken by Congress
does not depend on recitals of the power which it undertakes to exercise.” Woods v. Cloyd W. Miller Co., 333 U. S.
—————— 

language was implemented through operative provisions that also use 

the words on which the dissent relies. See 42 U. S. C. §2021e(e)(1)

(entitled “Requirements for non-sited compact regions and non-member

States” and directing that those entities “shall comply with the following requirements”); §2021e(e)(2) (describing “Penalties for failure to

comply”). The Court upheld those provisions not as lawful commands,

but as “incentives.” See 505 U. S., at 152–153, 171–173. 


