Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

43

Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.
Opinion R the Court

Ranch, 511 U. S., at 779 (quoting Drexel Furniture, supra,
at 38).
We have already explained that the shared responsibility payment’s practical characteristics pass muster as a
tax under our narrowest interpretations of the taxing
power. Supra, at 35–36. Because the tax at hand is
within even those strict limits, we need not here decide the
precise point at which an exaction becomes so punitive
that the taxing power does not authorize it. It remains
true, however, that the “ ‘power to tax is not the power to
destroy while this Court sits.’ ” Oklahoma Tax Comm’n v.
Texas Co., 336 U. S. 342, 364 (1949) (quoting Panhandle
Oil Co. v. Mississippi ex rel. Knox, 277 U. S. 218, 223
(1928) (Holmes, J., dissenting)).
Third, although the breadth of Congress’s power to tax
is greater than its power to regulate commerce, the taxing
power does not give Congress the same degree of control
over individual behavior. Once we recognize that Congress may regulate a particular decision under the Commerce Clause, the Federal Government can bring its full
weight to bear. Congress may simply command individuals to do as it directs. An individual who disobeys may
be subjected to criminal sanctions. Those sanctions can
include not only fines and imprisonment, but all the attendant consequences of being branded a criminal: deprivation of otherwise protected civil rights, such as the right
to bear arms or vote in elections; loss of employment opportunities; social stigma; and severe disabilities in other
controversies, such as custody or immigration disputes.
By contrast, Congress’s authority under the taxing
power is limited to requiring an individual to pay money
into the Federal Treasury, no more. If a tax is properly
paid, the Government has no power to compel or punish
individuals subject to it. We do not make light of the severe burden that taxation—especially taxation motivated
by a regulatory purpose—can impose. But imposition

