Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

57

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

that question, “[w]e seek to determine what Congress
would have intended in light of the Court’s constitutional
holding.” United States v. Booker, 543 U. S. 220, 246
(2005) (internal quotation marks omitted). Our “touchstone for any decision about remedy is legislative intent,
for a court cannot use its remedial powers to circumvent the intent of the legislature.” Ayotte v. Planned
Parenthood of Northern New Eng., 546 U. S. 320, 330
(2006) (internal quotation marks omitted). The question
here is whether Congress would have wanted the rest of
the Act to stand, had it known that States would have a
genuine choice whether to participate in the new Medicaid
expansion. Unless it is “evident” that the answer is no, we
must leave the rest of the Act intact. Champlin Refining
Co. v. Corporation Comm’n of Okla., 286 U. S. 210, 234
(1932).
We are confident that Congress would have wanted to
preserve the rest of the Act. It is fair to say that Congress
assumed that every State would participate in the Medicaid expansion, given that States had no real choice but to
do so. The States contend that Congress enacted the rest
of the Act with such full participation in mind; they point
out that Congress made Medicaid a means for satisfying
the mandate, 26 U. S. C. §5000A(f)(1)(A)(ii), and enacted
no other plan for providing coverage to many low-income
individuals. According to the States, this means that the
entire Act must fall.
We disagree. The Court today limits the financial pressure the Secretary may apply to induce States to accept
the terms of the Medicaid expansion. As a practical matter, that means States may now choose to reject the expansion; that is the whole point. But that does not mean
all or even any will. Some States may indeed decline to
participate, either because they are unsure they will be
able to afford their share of the new funding obligations,
or because they are unwilling to commit the administra-

