10

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


ical conditions cost insurance companies significantly more
than those without such conditions, insurers routinely refused to insure these individuals, charged them substan­
tially higher premiums, or offered only limited coverage
that did not include the preexisting illness. See Dept. of
Health and Human Services, Coverage Denied: How the
Current Health Insurance System Leaves Millions Behind
1 (2009) (Over the past three years, 12.6 million non­
elderly adults were denied insurance coverage or charged
higher premiums due to a preexisting condition.).
To ensure that individuals with medical histories have
access to affordable insurance, Congress devised a three­
part solution. First, Congress imposed a “guaranteed is­
sue” requirement, which bars insurers from denying
coverage to any person on account of that person’s medical
condition or history. See 42 U. S. C. §§300gg–1, 300gg–3,
300gg–4(a) (2006 ed., Supp. IV). Second, Congress required
insurers to use “community rating” to price their insurance
policies. See §300gg. Community rating, in effect, bars
insurance companies from charging higher premiums
to those with preexisting conditions.
But these two provisions, Congress comprehended, could
not work effectively unless individuals were given a pow­
erful incentive to obtain insurance. See Hearings before
the House Ways and Means Committee, 111th Cong., 1st
Sess., 10, 13 (2009) (statement of Uwe Reinhardt) (“[I]mposition of community-rated premiums and guaranteed
issue on a market of competing private health insurers
will inexorably drive that market into extinction, unless
these two features are coupled with . . . a mandate on
individual[s] to be insured.” (emphasis in original)).
In the 1990’s, several States—including New York, New
Jersey, Washington, Kentucky, Maine, New Hampshire,
and Vermont—enacted guaranteed-issue and community­
rating laws without requiring universal acquisition of
insurance coverage. The results were disastrous. “All

