26

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

The Government, however, claims that this does not
matter. The Government regards it as sufficient to trigger
Congress’s authority that almost all those who are uninsured will, at some unknown point in the future, engage
in a health care transaction. Asserting that “[t]here is no
temporal limitation in the Commerce Clause,” the Government argues that because “[e]veryone subject to this
regulation is in or will be in the health care market,” they
can be “regulated in advance.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 109 (Mar.
27, 2012).
The proposition that Congress may dictate the conduct
of an individual today because of prophesied future activity finds no support in our precedent. We have said that
Congress can anticipate the effects on commerce of an economic activity. See, e.g., Consolidated Edison Co. v. NLRB,
305 U. S. 197 (1938) (regulating the labor practices of
utility companies); Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United
States, 379 U. S. 241 (1964) (prohibiting discrimination by
hotel operators); Katzenbach v. McClung, 379 U. S. 294
(1964) (prohibiting discrimination by restaurant owners).
But we have never permitted Congress to anticipate that
activity itself in order to regulate individuals not currently
engaged in commerce. Each one of our cases, including
those cited by JUSTICE GINSBURG, post, at 20–21, involved
preexisting economic activity. See, e.g., Wickard, 317
U. S., at 127–129 (producing wheat); Raich, supra, at 25
(growing marijuana).
Everyone will likely participate in the markets for food,
clothing, transportation, shelter, or energy; that does not
authorize Congress to direct them to purchase particular
products in those or other markets today. The Commerce
Clause is not a general license to regulate an individual
from cradle to grave, simply because he will predictably
engage in particular transactions. Any police power to
regulate individuals as such, as opposed to their activities,
remains vested in the States.

