54

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

versal health insurance coverage.14
Indeed, the manner in which the expansion is structured indicates that while Congress may have styled the
expansion a mere alteration of existing Medicaid, it recognized it was enlisting the States in a new health care
program. Congress created a separate funding provision
to cover the costs of providing services to any person
made newly eligible by the expansion. While Congress pays
50 to 83 percent of the costs of covering individuals currently enrolled in Medicaid, §1396d(b), once the expansion is
fully implemented Congress will pay 90 percent of the
costs for newly eligible persons, §1396d(y)(1). The conditions on use of the different funds are also distinct. Congress mandated that newly eligible persons receive a level
of coverage that is less comprehensive than the traditional
Medicaid benefit package. §1396a(k)(1); see Brief for
United States 9.
As we have explained, “[t]hough Congress’ power to
legislate under the spending power is broad, it does not
include surprising participating States with postacceptance or ‘retroactive’ conditions.” Pennhurst, supra, at
25. A State could hardly anticipate that Congress’s reservation of the right to “alter” or “amend” the Medicaid
program included the power to transform it so dramatically.
JUSTICE GINSBURG claims that in fact this expansion is
——————
14 JUSTICE GINSBURG suggests that the States can have no objection to
the Medicaid expansion, because “Congress could have repealed Medicaid [and,] [t]hereafter, . . . could have enacted Medicaid II, a new
program combining the pre-2010 coverage with the expanded coverage
required by the ACA.” Post, at 51; see also post, at 38. But it would
certainly not be that easy. Practical constraints would plainly inhibit,
if not preclude, the Federal Government from repealing the existing
program and putting every feature of Medicaid on the table for political
reconsideration. Such a massive undertaking would hardly be “ritualistic.” Ibid. The same is true of JUSTICE GINSBURG’s suggestion that
Congress could establish Medicaid as an exclusively federal program.
Post, at 44.

