Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

Government “can exercise only the powers granted to it.”
McCulloch, supra, at 405.
Today, the restrictions on government power foremost in
many Americans’ minds are likely to be affirmative prohibitions, such as contained in the Bill of Rights. These
affirmative prohibitions come into play, however, only where
the Government possesses authority to act in the first
place. If no enumerated power authorizes Congress to
pass a certain law, that law may not be enacted, even if it
would not violate any of the express prohibitions in the
Bill of Rights or elsewhere in the Constitution.
Indeed, the Constitution did not initially include a Bill
of Rights at least partly because the Framers felt the enumeration of powers sufficed to restrain the Government.
As Alexander Hamilton put it, “the Constitution is itself,
in every rational sense, and to every useful purpose,
A BILL OF RIGHTS.” The Federalist No. 84, p. 515 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961). And when the Bill of Rights was ratified,
it made express what the enumeration of powers necessarily implied: “The powers not delegated to the United
States by the Constitution . . . are reserved to the States
respectively, or to the people.” U. S. Const., Amdt. 10.
The Federal Government has expanded dramatically over
the past two centuries, but it still must show that a constitutional grant of power authorizes each of its actions. See,
e.g., United States v. Comstock, 560 U. S. ___ (2010).
The same does not apply to the States, because the Constitution is not the source of their power. The Constitution may restrict state governments—as it does, for
example, by forbidding them to deny any person the equal
protection of the laws. But where such prohibitions do
not apply, state governments do not need constitutional authorization to act. The States thus can and do perform
many of the vital functions of modern government—
punishing street crime, running public schools, and zoning
property for development, to name but a few—even though

