36

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


ment plays a lead role in the health-care sector, both as a
direct payer and as a regulator.
Second, and perhaps most important, the minimum
coverage provision, along with other provisions of the
ACA, addresses the very sort of interstate problem that
made the commerce power essential in our federal system.
See supra, at 12–14. The crisis created by the large num­
ber of U. S. residents who lack health insurance is one of
national dimension that States are “separately incompe­
tent” to handle. See supra, at 7–8, 13. See also Maryland
Brief 15–26 (describing “the impediments to effective state
policymaking that flow from the interconnectedness of
each state’s healthcare economy” and emphasizing that
“state-level reforms cannot fully address the problems
associated with uncompensated care”). Far from tram­
pling on States’ sovereignty, the ACA attempts a federal
solution for the very reason that the States, acting sepa­
rately, cannot meet the need. Notably, the ACA serves the
general welfare of the people of the United States while
retaining a prominent role for the States. See id., at 31–
36 (explaining and illustrating how the ACA affords States
wide latitude in implementing key elements of the Act’s
reforms).11
——————
11 In a separate argument, the joint dissenters contend that the min­
imum coverage provision is not necessary and proper because it was not
the “only . . . way” Congress could have made the guaranteed-issue and
community-rating reforms work. Post, at 9–10. Congress could also
have avoided an insurance-market death spiral, the dissenters main­
tain, by imposing a surcharge on those who did not previously purchase
insurance when those individuals eventually enter the health­
insurance system. Post, at 10. Or Congress could “den[y] a full income
tax credit” to those who do not purchase insurance. Ibid.
Neither a surcharge on those who purchase insurance nor the de­
nial of a tax credit to those who do not would solve the problem created
by guaranteed-issue and community-rating requirements. Neither
would prompt the purchase of insurance before sickness or injury
occurred.

