32

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting


greatly increases federal power. “[O]bjectives not thought
to be within Article I’s enumerated legislative fields, may
nevertheless be attained through the use of the spending
power and the conditional grant of federal funds.” Dole,
supra, at 207 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted); see also College Savings Bank v. Florida Prepaid
Postsecondary Ed. Expense Bd., 527 U. S. 666, 686 (1999)
(by attaching conditions to federal funds, Congress may
induce the States to “tak[e] certain actions that Congress
could not require them to take”).
This formidable power, if not checked in any way, would
present a grave threat to the system of federalism created
by our Constitution. If Congress’ “Spending Clause power
to pursue objectives outside of Article I’s enumerated
legislative fields,” Davis v. Monroe County Bd. of Ed., 526
U. S. 629, 654 (1999) (KENNEDY, J., dissenting) (internal
quotation marks omitted), is “limited only by Congress’
notion of the general welfare, the reality, given the vast
financial resources of the Federal Government, is that
the Spending Clause gives ‘power to the Congress to tear
down the barriers, to invade the states’ jurisdiction, and to
become a parliament of the whole people, subject to no
restrictions save such as are self-imposed,’ ” Dole, supra, at
217 (O’Connor, J., dissenting) (quoting Butler, 297 U. S.,
at 78). “[T]he Spending Clause power, if wielded without
concern for the federal balance, has the potential to obliterate distinctions between national and local spheres of
interest and power by permitting the Federal Government
to set policy in the most sensitive areas of traditional
state concern, areas which otherwise would lie outside
its reach.” Davis, supra, at 654–655 (KENNEDY, J.,
dissenting).
Recognizing this potential for abuse, our cases have long
held that the power to attach conditions to grants to the
States has limits. See, e.g., Dole, supra, at 207–208; id.,
at 207 (spending power is “subject to several general re-

