Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

53

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

Here, the Government claims that the Medicaid expansion is properly viewed merely as a modification of the existing program because the States agreed that Congress
could change the terms of Medicaid when they signed on
in the first place. The Government observes that the
Social Security Act, which includes the original Medicaid
provisions, contains a clause expressly reserving “[t]he
right to alter, amend, or repeal any provision” of that
statute. 42 U. S. C. §1304. So it does. But “if Congress
intends to impose a condition on the grant of federal moneys, it must do so unambiguously.” Pennhurst, 451 U. S.,
at 17. A State confronted with statutory language reserving the right to “alter” or “amend” the pertinent provisions
of the Social Security Act might reasonably assume that
Congress was entitled to make adjustments to the Medicaid program as it developed. Congress has in fact done
so, sometimes conditioning only the new funding, other
times both old and new. See, e.g., Social Security Amendments of 1972, 86 Stat. 1381–1382, 1465 (extending Medicaid eligibility, but partly conditioning only the new
funding); Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990,
§4601, 104 Stat. 1388–166 (extending eligibility, and
conditioning old and new funds).
The Medicaid expansion, however, accomplishes a shift
in kind, not merely degree. The original program was designed to cover medical services for four particular categories of the needy: the disabled, the blind, the elderly,
and needy families with dependent children. See 42
U. S. C. §1396a(a)(10). Previous amendments to Medicaid
eligibility merely altered and expanded the boundaries of
these categories. Under the Affordable Care Act, Medicaid
is transformed into a program to meet the health care
needs of the entire nonelderly population with income
below 133 percent of the poverty level. It is no longer a
program to care for the neediest among us, but rather an
element of a comprehensive national plan to provide uni-

