40

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


when they need it. Given past expansions, plus express
statutory warning that Congress may change the re­
quirements participating States must meet, there can be
no tenable claim that the ACA fails for lack of notice.
Moreover, States have no entitlement to receive any Medi­
caid funds; they enjoy only the opportunity to accept funds
on Congress’ terms. Future Congresses are not bound
by their predecessors’ dispositions; they have authority to
spend federal revenue as they see fit. The Federal Gov­
ernment, therefore, is not, as THE CHIEF JUSTICE charges,
threatening States with the loss of “existing” funds from
one spending program in order to induce them to opt into
another program. Congress is simply requiring States to
do what States have long been required to do to receive
Medicaid funding: comply with the conditions Congress
prescribes for participation.
A majority of the Court, however, buys the argument
that prospective withholding of funds formerly available
exceeds Congress’ spending power. Given that holding, I
entirely agree with THE CHIEF JUSTICE as to the appropri­
ate remedy. It is to bar the withholding found impermis­
sible—not, as the joint dissenters would have it, to scrap
the expansion altogether, see post, at 46–48. The dissent­
ers’ view that the ACA must fall in its entirety is a radical
departure from the Court’s normal course. When a consti­
tutional infirmity mars a statute, the Court ordinarily
removes the infirmity. It undertakes a salvage operation;
it does not demolish the legislation. See, e.g., Brockett v.
Spokane Arcades, Inc., 472 U. S. 491, 504 (1985) (Court’s
normal course is to declare a statute invalid “to the extent
that it reaches too far, but otherwise [to leave the statute]
intact”). That course is plainly in order where, as in this
case, Congress has expressly instructed courts to leave
untouched every provision not found invalid. See 42
U. S. C. §1303. Because THE CHIEF JUSTICE finds the
withholding—not the granting—of federal funds incom­

