Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting

the ne plus ultra of expansive Commerce Clause jurisprudence. To go beyond that, and to say the failure to grow
wheat (which is not an economic activity, or any activity
at all) nonetheless affects commerce and therefore can be
federally regulated, is to make mere breathing in and out
the basis for federal prescription and to extend federal
power to virtually all human activity.
As for the constitutional power to tax and spend for
the general welfare: The Court has long since expanded
that beyond (what Madison thought it meant) taxing and
spending for those aspects of the general welfare that were
within the Federal Government’s enumerated powers,
see United States v. Butler, 297 U. S. 1, 65–66 (1936).
Thus, we now have sizable federal Departments devoted
to subjects not mentioned among Congress’ enumerated
powers, and only marginally related to commerce: the Department of Education, the Department of Health and
Human Services, the Department of Housing and Urban
Development. The principal practical obstacle that prevents Congress from using the tax-and-spend power to
assume all the general-welfare responsibilities traditionally exercised by the States is the sheer impossibility of
managing a Federal Government large enough to administer such a system. That obstacle can be overcome by
granting funds to the States, allowing them to administer
the program. That is fair and constitutional enough when
the States freely agree to have their powers employed and
their employees enlisted in the federal scheme. But it is a
blatant violation of the constitutional structure when the
States have no choice.
The Act before us here exceeds federal power both in
mandating the purchase of health insurance and in denying nonconsenting States all Medicaid funding. These
parts of the Act are central to its design and operation,
and all the Act’s other provisions would not have been
enacted without them. In our view it must follow that the

