2

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Syllabus

ample, the Act requires state programs to provide Medicaid coverage
by 2014 to adults with incomes up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level, whereas many States now cover adults with children only
if their income is considerably lower, and do not cover childless adults
at all. §1396a(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII). The Act increases federal funding to
cover the States’ costs in expanding Medicaid coverage. §1396d(y)(1).
But if a State does not comply with the Act’s new coverage requirements, it may lose not only the federal funding for those requirements, but all of its federal Medicaid funds. §1396c.
Twenty-six States, several individuals, and the National Federation of Independent Business brought suit in Federal District Court,
challenging the constitutionality of the individual mandate and the
Medicaid expansion. The Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit
upheld the Medicaid expansion as a valid exercise of Congress’s
spending power, but concluded that Congress lacked authority to enact the individual mandate. Finding the mandate severable from the
Act’s other provisions, the Eleventh Circuit left the rest of the Act intact.

Held: The judgment is affirmed in part and reversed in part.
648 F. 3d 1235, affirmed in part and reversed in part.
1. CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS delivered the opinion of the Court with
respect to Part II, concluding that the Anti-Injunction Act does not
bar this suit.
The Anti-Injunction Act provides that “no suit for the purpose of
restraining the assessment or collection of any tax shall be maintained in any court by any person,” 26 U. S. C. §7421(a), so that those
subject to a tax must first pay it and then sue for a refund. The present challenge seeks to restrain the collection of the shared responsibility payment from those who do not comply with the individual
mandate. But Congress did not intend the payment to be treated as
a “tax” for purposes of the Anti-Injunction Act. The Affordable Care
Act describes the payment as a “penalty,” not a “tax.” That label
cannot control whether the payment is a tax for purposes of the Constitution, but it does determine the application of the Anti-Injunction
Act. The Anti-Injunction Act therefore does not bar this suit. Pp. 11–
15.
2. CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS concluded in Part III–A that the individual mandate is not a valid exercise of Congress’s power under the
Commerce Clause and the Necessary and Proper Clause. Pp. 16–30.
(a) The Constitution grants Congress the power to “regulate
Commerce.” Art. I, §8, cl. 3 (emphasis added). The power to regulate
commerce presupposes the existence of commercial activity to be regulated. This Court’s precedent reflects this understanding: As expansive as this Court’s cases construing the scope of the commerce

