44

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


requirements, the Medicaid Act empowers States to “select
dramatically different levels of funding and coverage,
alter and experiment with different financing and delivery
modes, and opt to cover (or not to cover) a range of particular procedures and therapies. States have leveraged
this policy discretion to generate a myriad of dramatically
different Medicaid programs over the past several dec­
ades.” Ruger, Of Icebergs and Glaciers, 75 Law & Con­
temp. Probs. 215, 233 (2012) (footnote omitted). The ACA
does not jettison this approach. States, as first-line ad­
ministrators, will continue to guide the distribution of
substantial resources among their needy populations.
The alternative to conditional federal spending, it bears
emphasis, is not state autonomy but state marginaliza­
tion.16 In 1965, Congress elected to nationalize health
coverage for seniors through Medicare. It could similarly
have established Medicaid as an exclusively federal pro­
gram. Instead, Congress gave the States the opportunity
to partner in the program’s administration and develop­
ment. Absent from the nationalized model, of course, is
the state-level policy discretion and experimentation that
is Medicaid’s hallmark; undoubtedly the interests of fed­
eralism are better served when States retain a meaningful role in the implementation of a program of such
importance. See Caminker, State Sovereignty and Sub­
ordinacy, 95 Colum. L. Rev. 1001, 1002–1003 (1995) (cooperative federalism can preserve “a significant role for state
discretion in achieving specified federal goals, where the
alternative is complete federal preemption of any state
——————
16 In 1972, for example, Congress ended the federal cash-assistance
program for the aged, blind, and disabled. That program previously
had been operated jointly by the Federal and State Governments, as
is the case with Medicaid today. Congress replaced the cooperative
federal program with the nationalized Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program. See Schweiker v. Gray Panthers, 453 U. S. 34, 38
(1981).

