6

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting


itself. See 42 U. S. C. §18091(2)(H).
As discussed in more detail in Part V, infra, the Act
contains numerous health insurance reforms, but most
notable for present purposes are the “guaranteed issue”
and “community rating” provisions, §§300gg to 300gg–4.
The former provides that, with a few exceptions, “each
health insurance issuer that offers health insurance coverage in the individual or group market in a State must
accept every employer and individual in the State that
applies for such coverage.” §300gg–1(a). That is, an insurer may not deny coverage on the basis of, among other
things, any pre-existing medical condition that the applicant may have, and the resulting insurance must cover
that condition. See §300gg–3.
Under ordinary circumstances, of course, insurers would
respond by charging high premiums to individuals with
pre-existing conditions. The Act seeks to prevent this
through the community-rating provision. Simply put, the
community-rating provision requires insurers to calculate
an individual’s insurance premium based on only four
factors: (i) whether the individual’s plan covers just
the individual or his family also, (ii) the “rating area” in
which the individual lives, (iii) the individual’s age, and
(iv) whether the individual uses tobacco. §300gg(a)(1)(A).
Aside from the rough proxies of age and tobacco use (and
possibly rating area), the Act does not allow an insurer to
factor the individual’s health characteristics into the price
of his insurance premium. This creates a new incentive
for young and healthy individuals without pre-existing
conditions. The insurance premiums for those in this
group will not reflect their own low actuarial risks but will
subsidize insurance for others in the pool. Many of them
may decide that purchasing health insurance is not an economically sound decision—especially since the guaranteedissue provision will enable them to purchase it at the
same cost in later years and even if they have developed a

