58

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


sion on which they rely, Steward Machine, found the
statute at issue inside the line, “wherever the line may
be.” 301 U. S., at 591.
When future Spending Clause challenges arrive, as they
likely will in the wake of today’s decision, how will liti­
gants and judges assess whether “a State has a legitimate
choice whether to accept the federal conditions in ex­
change for federal funds”? Ante, at 48. Are courts to
measure the number of dollars the Federal Government
might withhold for noncompliance? The portion of the
State’s budget at stake? And which State’s—or States’—
budget is determinative: the lead plaintiff, all challenging
States (26 in this case, many with quite different fiscal
situations), or some national median? Does it matter that
Florida, unlike most States, imposes no state income tax,
and therefore might be able to replace foregone federal
funds with new state revenue?26 Or that the coercion state
——————
possibly refuse the offer that the ACA extends.”). We should not lightly
ascribe to Congress an intent to violate the Constitution (at least as my
colleagues read it). This is particularly true when the ACA could just
as well be comprehended as demonstrating Congress’ mere expectation,
in light of the uniformity of past participation and the generosity of the
federal contribution, that States would not withdraw. Cf. South Dakota
v. Dole, 483 U. S. 203, 211 (1987) (“We cannot conclude . . . that a con­
ditional grant of federal money . . . is unconstitutional simply by
reason of its success in achieving the congressional objective.”).
26 Federal taxation of a State’s citizens, according to the joint dissent­
ers, may diminish a State’s ability to raise new revenue. This, in turn,
could limit a State’s capacity to replace a federal program with an
“equivalent” state-funded analog. Post, at 40. But it cannot be true
that “the amount of the federal taxes extracted from the taxpayers of a
State to pay for the program in question is relevant in determining
whether there is impermissible coercion.” Post, at 37. When the
United States Government taxes United States citizens, it taxes them
“in their individual capacities” as “the people of America”—not as
residents of a particular State. See U. S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton,
514 U. S. 779, 839 (1995) (KENNEDY, J., concurring). That is because
the “Framers split the atom of sovereignty[,] . . . establishing two orders
of government”—“one state and one federal”—“each with its own direct

