Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

19

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

to “raise and support Armies” and to “provide and maintain a Navy,” in addition to the power to “make Rules
for the Government and Regulation of the land and naval
Forces.” Id., cls. 12–14. If the power to regulate the
armed forces or the value of money included the power to
bring the subject of the regulation into existence, the
specific grant of such powers would have been unnecessary. The language of the Constitution reflects the natural understanding that the power to regulate assumes
there is already something to be regulated. See Gibbons, 9
Wheat., at 188 (“[T]he enlightened patriots who framed
our constitution, and the people who adopted it, must be
understood to have employed words in their natural sense,
and to have intended what they have said”).4
Our precedent also reflects this understanding. As
expansive as our cases construing the scope of the commerce power have been, they all have one thing in common: They uniformly describe the power as reaching
“activity.” It is nearly impossible to avoid the word when
quoting them. See, e.g., Lopez, supra, at 560 (“Where
economic activity substantially affects interstate commerce, legislation regulating that activity will be sus——————
4 JUSTICE

GINSBURG suggests that “at the time the Constitution was
framed, to ‘regulate’ meant, among other things, to require action.”
Post, at 23 (citing Seven-Sky v. Holder, 661 F. 3d 1, 16 (CADC 2011);
brackets and some internal quotation marks omitted). But to reach
this conclusion, the case cited by JUSTICE GINSBURG relied on a dictionary in which “[t]o order; to command” was the fifth-alternative definition of “to direct,” which was itself the second-alternative definition of
“to regulate.” See Seven-Sky, supra, at 16 (citing S. Johnson, Dictionary of the English Language (4th ed. 1773) (reprinted 1978)). It is
unlikely that the Framers had such an obscure meaning in mind when
they used the word “regulate.” Far more commonly, “[t]o regulate”
meant “[t]o adjust by rule or method,” which presupposes something to
adjust. 2 Johnson, supra, at 1619; see also Gibbons, 9 Wheat., at 196
(defining the commerce power as the power “to prescribe the rule by
which commerce is to be governed”).

