48

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

505 U. S., at 178. That is true whether Congress directly
commands a State to regulate or indirectly coerces a State
to adopt a federal regulatory system as its own.
Permitting the Federal Government to force the States
to implement a federal program would threaten the political accountability key to our federal system. “[W]here the
Federal Government directs the States to regulate, it may
be state officials who will bear the brunt of public disapproval, while the federal officials who devised the regulatory program may remain insulated from the electoral
ramifications of their decision.” Id., at 169. Spending
Clause programs do not pose this danger when a State has
a legitimate choice whether to accept the federal conditions in exchange for federal funds. In such a situation,
state officials can fairly be held politically accountable for
choosing to accept or refuse the federal offer. But when
the State has no choice, the Federal Government can
achieve its objectives without accountability, just as in
New York and Printz. Indeed, this danger is heightened
when Congress acts under the Spending Clause, because
Congress can use that power to implement federal policy it
could not impose directly under its enumerated powers.
We addressed such concerns in Steward Machine. That
case involved a federal tax on employers that was abated
if the businesses paid into a state unemployment plan that
met certain federally specified conditions. An employer
sued, alleging that the tax was impermissibly “driv[ing]
the state legislatures under the whip of economic pressure
into the enactment of unemployment compensation laws
at the bidding of the central government.” 301 U. S., at
587. We acknowledged the danger that the Federal Government might employ its taxing power to exert a “power
akin to undue influence” upon the States. Id., at 590. But
we observed that Congress adopted the challenged tax and
abatement program to channel money to the States that
would otherwise have gone into the Federal Treasury for

