50

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

this threat serves no purpose other than to force unwilling
States to sign up for the dramatic expansion in health care
coverage effected by the Act.
Given the nature of the threat and the programs at
issue here, we must agree. We have upheld Congress’s
authority to condition the receipt of funds on the States’
complying with restrictions on the use of those funds,
because that is the means by which Congress ensures that
the funds are spent according to its view of the “general
Welfare.” Conditions that do not here govern the use
of the funds, however, cannot be justified on that basis. When, for example, such conditions take the form of
threats to terminate other significant independent grants,
the conditions are properly viewed as a means of pressuring the States to accept policy changes.
In South Dakota v. Dole, we considered a challenge to a
federal law that threatened to withhold five percent of a
State’s federal highway funds if the State did not raise its
drinking age to 21. The Court found that the condition
was “directly related to one of the main purposes for which
highway funds are expended—safe interstate travel.” 483
U. S., at 208. At the same time, the condition was not a
restriction on how the highway funds—set aside for specific highway improvement and maintenance efforts—were
to be used.
We accordingly asked whether “the financial inducement offered by Congress” was “so coercive as to pass the
point at which ‘pressure turns into compulsion.’ ” Id., at
211 (quoting Steward Machine, supra, at 590). By “financial inducement” the Court meant the threat of losing five
percent of highway funds; no new money was offered to
the States to raise their drinking ages. We found that the
inducement was not impermissibly coercive, because
Congress was offering only “relatively mild encouragement
to the States.” Dole, 483 U. S., at 211. We observed that
“all South Dakota would lose if she adheres to her chosen

