32

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


to enact laws in effectuation of its [commerce] powe[r]
that are not within its authority to enact in isolation.”
Raich, 545 U. S., at 39 (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment).
Hence, “[a] complex regulatory program . . . can survive a
Commerce Clause challenge without a showing that every
single facet of the program is independently and directly
related to a valid congressional goal.” Indiana, 452 U. S.,
at 329, n. 17. “It is enough that the challenged provisions
are an integral part of the regulatory program and that
the regulatory scheme when considered as a whole satis­
fies this test.” Ibid. (collecting cases). See also Raich,
545 U. S., at 24–25 (A challenged statutory provision
fits within Congress’ commerce authority if it is an “essen­
tial par[t] of a larger regulation of economic activity,”
such that, in the absence of the provision, “the regulatory
scheme could be undercut.” (quoting Lopez, 514 U. S., at
561)); Raich, 545 U. S., at 37 (SCALIA, J., concurring in
judgment) (“Congress may regulate even noneconomic
local activity if that regulation is a necessary part of
a more general regulation of interstate commerce. The
relevant question is simply whether the means chosen are
‘reasonably adapted’ to the attainment of a legitimate end
under the commerce power.” (citation omitted)).
Recall that one of Congress’ goals in enacting the Af­
fordable Care Act was to eliminate the insurance indus­
try’s practice of charging higher prices or denying coverage
to individuals with preexisting medical conditions. See
supra, at 9–10. The commerce power allows Congress to
ban this practice, a point no one disputes. See United
States v. South-Eastern Underwriters Assn., 322 U. S. 533,
545, 552–553 (1944) (Congress may regulate “the methods
by which interstate insurance companies do business.”).
Congress knew, however, that simply barring insurance
companies from relying on an applicant’s medical history
would not work in practice. Without the individual man­
date, Congress learned, guaranteed-issue and community­

