12

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting


market participants is unprecedented, and were it to be a
premise for the exercise of national power, it would have
no principled limits.
In a variation on this attempted exercise of federal
power, the Government points out that Congress in this
Act has purported to regulate “economic and financial
decision[s] to forego [sic] health insurance coverage and
[to] attempt to self-insure,” 42 U. S. C. §18091(2)(A), since
those decisions have “a substantial and deleterious effect
on interstate commerce,” Petitioners’ Minimum Coverage
Brief 34. But as the discussion above makes clear, the
decision to forgo participation in an interstate market is
not itself commercial activity (or indeed any activity at all)
within Congress’ power to regulate. It is true that, at the
end of the day, it is inevitable that each American will
affect commerce and become a part of it, even if not by
choice. But if every person comes within the Commerce
Clause power of Congress to regulate by the simple reason
that he will one day engage in commerce, the idea of a
limited Government power is at an end.
Wickard v. Filburn has been regarded as the most expansive assertion of the commerce power in our history. A
close second is Perez v. United States, 402 U. S. 146 (1971),
which upheld a statute criminalizing the eminently local
activity of loan-sharking. Both of those cases, however,
——————
senting in part). Instead, it is mandating the purchase of an unwanted
suite of products—e.g., physician office visits, emergency room visits,
hospital room and board, physical therapy, durable medical equipment,
mental health care, and substance abuse detoxification. See Selected
Medical Benefits: A Report from the Dept. of Labor to the Dept. of
Health & Human Services (April 15, 2011) (reporting that over twothirds of private industry health plans cover these goods and services),
online at http://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/sp/selmedbensreport.pdf (all Internet materials as visited June 26, 2012, and available in Clerk of Court’s
case file).

