Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.
Opinion R the Court

powers. The Court of Appeals unanimously held that the
Medicaid expansion is a valid exercise of Congress’s power
under the Spending Clause. U. S. Const., Art. I, §8, cl. 1.
And the court rejected the States’ claim that the threatened loss of all federal Medicaid funding violates the
Tenth Amendment by coercing them into complying with
the Medicaid expansion. 648 F. 3d, at 1264, 1268.
We granted certiorari to review the judgment of the
Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit with respect to
both the individual mandate and the Medicaid expansion.
565 U. S. ___ (2011). Because no party supports the Eleventh Circuit’s holding that the individual mandate can
be completely severed from the remainder of the Affordable
Care Act, we appointed an amicus curiae to defend that
aspect of the judgment below. And because there is a
reasonable argument that the Anti-Injunction Act deprives us of jurisdiction to hear challenges to the individual mandate, but no party supports that proposition, we
appointed an amicus curiae to advance it.2
II
Before turning to the merits, we need to be sure we have
the authority to do so. The Anti-Injunction Act provides
that “no suit for the purpose of restraining the assessment
or collection of any tax shall be maintained in any court
by any person, whether or not such person is the person against whom such tax was assessed.” 26 U. S. C.
§7421(a). This statute protects the Government’s ability
to collect a consistent stream of revenue, by barring litigation to enjoin or otherwise obstruct the collection of taxes.
Because of the Anti-Injunction Act, taxes can ordinarily be
——————
2 We appointed H. Bartow Farr III to brief and argue in support of the
Eleventh Circuit’s judgment with respect to severability, and Robert A.
Long to brief and argue the proposition that the Anti-Injunction Act
bars the current challenges to the individual mandate. 565 U. S. ___
(2011). Both amici have ably discharged their assigned responsibilities.

