Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting

involved commercial activity. To go beyond that, and to
say that the failure to grow wheat or the refusal to make
loans affects commerce, so that growing and lending can
be federally compelled, is to extend federal power to virtually everything. All of us consume food, and when we do
so the Federal Government can prescribe what its quality
must be and even how much we must pay. But the mere
fact that we all consume food and are thus, sooner or later,
participants in the “market” for food, does not empower
the Government to say when and what we will buy. That
is essentially what this Act seeks to do with respect to the
purchase of health care. It exceeds federal power.
C
A few respectful responses to JUSTICE GINSBURG’s dissent on the issue of the Mandate are in order. That dissent duly recites the test of Commerce Clause power that
our opinions have applied, but disregards the premise the
test contains. It is true enough that Congress needs only a
“ ‘rational basis’ for concluding that the regulated activity
substantially affects interstate commerce,” ante, at 15 (emphasis added). But it must be activity affecting commerce that is regulated, and not merely the failure to
engage in commerce. And one is not now purchasing
the health care covered by the insurance mandate simply
because one is likely to be purchasing it in the future. Our
test’s premise of regulated activity is not invented out of
whole cloth, but rests upon the Constitution’s requirement
that it be commerce which is regulated. If all inactivity
affecting commerce is commerce, commerce is everything.
Ultimately the dissent is driven to saying that there is
really no difference between action and inaction, ante, at
26, a proposition that has never recommended itself,
neither to the law nor to common sense. To say, for example, that the inaction here consists of activity in “the selfinsurance market,” ibid., seems to us wordplay. By parity

