Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
power have been, they uniformly describe the power as reaching “activity.” E.g., United States v. Lopez, 514 U. S. 549, 560. The individual mandate, however, does not regulate existing commercial activity. It instead compels individuals to become active in commerce by
purchasing a product, on the ground that their failure to do so affects
interstate commerce.
Construing the Commerce Clause to permit Congress to regulate
individuals precisely because they are doing nothing would open a
new and potentially vast domain to congressional authority. Congress already possesses expansive power to regulate what people do.
Upholding the Affordable Care Act under the Commerce Clause
would give Congress the same license to regulate what people do not
do. The Framers knew the difference between doing something and
doing nothing. They gave Congress the power to regulate commerce,
not to compel it. Ignoring that distinction would undermine the principle that the Federal Government is a government of limited and
enumerated powers. The individual mandate thus cannot be sustained under Congress’s power to “regulate Commerce.” Pp. 16–27.
(b) Nor can the individual mandate be sustained under the Necessary and Proper Clause as an integral part of the Affordable Care
Act’s other reforms. Each of this Court’s prior cases upholding laws
under that Clause involved exercises of authority derivative of, and
in service to, a granted power. E.g., United States v. Comstock, 560
U. S. ___. The individual mandate, by contrast, vests Congress with
the extraordinary ability to create the necessary predicate to the exercise of an enumerated power and draw within its regulatory scope
those who would otherwise be outside of it. Even if the individual
mandate is “necessary” to the Affordable Care Act’s other reforms,
such an expansion of federal power is not a “proper” means for making those reforms effective. Pp. 27–30.
3. CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS concluded in Part III–B that the individual mandate must be construed as imposing a tax on those who do
not have health insurance, if such a construction is reasonable.
The most straightforward reading of the individual mandate is that
it commands individuals to purchase insurance. But, for the reasons
explained, the Commerce Clause does not give Congress that power.
It is therefore necessary to turn to the Government’s alternative argument: that the mandate may be upheld as within Congress’s power
to “lay and collect Taxes.” Art. I, §8, cl. 1. In pressing its taxing
power argument, the Government asks the Court to view the mandate as imposing a tax on those who do not buy that product. Because “every reasonable construction must be resorted to, in order to
save a statute from unconstitutionality,” Hooper v. California, 155
U. S. 648, 657, the question is whether it is “fairly possible” to inter-

