44

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting


eligible for Medicaid, would not be left out in the cold. But
nowhere in the over 900-page Act is such a scheme to be
found. By contrast, because Congress thought that some
States might decline federal funding for the operation of
a “health benefit exchange,” Congress provided a backup
scheme; if a State declines to participate in the operation
of an exchange, the Federal Government will step in
and operate an exchange in that State. See 42 U. S. C.
§18041(c)(1). Likewise, knowing that States would not
necessarily provide affordable health insurance for aliens
lawfully present in the United States—because Medicaid
does not require States to provide such coverage—Congress extended the availability of the new federal insurance subsidies to all aliens. See 26 U. S. C. §36B(c)
(1)(B)(ii) (excepting from the income limit individuals
who are “not eligible for the medicaid program . . . by
reason of [their] alien status”). Congress did not make
these subsidies available for citizens with incomes below
the poverty level because Congress obviously assumed
that they would be covered by Medicaid. If Congress had
contemplated that some of these citizens would be left
without Medicaid coverage as a result of a State’s withdrawal or expulsion from the program, Congress surely
would have made them eligible for the tax subsidies provided for low-income aliens.
These features of the ACA convey an unmistakable
message: Congress never dreamed that any State would
refuse to go along with the expansion of Medicaid. Congress well understood that refusal was not a practical
option.
The Federal Government does not dispute the inference
that Congress anticipated 100% state participation, but it
argues that this assumption was based on the fact that
ACA’s offer was an “exceedingly generous” gift. Brief for
Respondents in No. 11–400, at 50. As the Federal Government sees things, Congress is like the generous bene-

