16

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

A
The Government’s first argument is that the individual
mandate is a valid exercise of Congress’s power under the
Commerce Clause and the Necessary and Proper Clause.
According to the Government, the health care market is
characterized by a significant cost-shifting problem. Everyone will eventually need health care at a time and to an
extent they cannot predict, but if they do not have insurance, they often will not be able to pay for it. Because
state and federal laws nonetheless require hospitals to
provide a certain degree of care to individuals without
regard to their ability to pay, see, e.g., 42 U. S. C. §1395dd;
Fla. Stat. Ann. §395.1041, hospitals end up receiving
compensation for only a portion of the services they provide. To recoup the losses, hospitals pass on the cost to
insurers through higher rates, and insurers, in turn, pass
on the cost to policy holders in the form of higher premiums. Congress estimated that the cost of uncompensated care raises family health insurance premiums, on
average, by over $1,000 per year. 42 U. S. C. §18091(2)(F).
In the Affordable Care Act, Congress addressed the
problem of those who cannot obtain insurance coverage
because of preexisting conditions or other health issues. It
did so through the Act’s “guaranteed-issue” and “communityrating” provisions. These provisions together prohibit insurance companies from denying coverage to those with
such conditions or charging unhealthy individuals higher
premiums than healthy individuals. See §§300gg, 300gg–1,
300gg–3, 300gg–4.
The guaranteed-issue and community-rating reforms do
not, however, address the issue of healthy individuals who
choose not to purchase insurance to cover potential health
care needs. In fact, the reforms sharply exacerbate that
problem, by providing an incentive for individuals to delay
purchasing health insurance until they become sick, relying on the promise of guaranteed and affordable coverage.

