Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Syllabus
(a) The Spending Clause grants Congress the power “to pay the
Debts and provide for the . . . general Welfare of the United States.”
Art. I, §8, cl. 1. Congress may use this power to establish cooperative
state-federal Spending Clause programs. The legitimacy of Spending
Clause legislation, however, depends on whether a State voluntarily
and knowingly accepts the terms of such programs. Pennhurst State
School and Hospital v. Halderman, 451 U. S. 1, 17. “[T]he Constitution simply does not give Congress the authority to require the States
to regulate.” New York v. United States, 505 U. S. 144, 178. When
Congress threatens to terminate other grants as a means of pressuring the States to accept a Spending Clause program, the legislation
runs counter to this Nation’s system of federalism. Cf. South Dakota
v. Dole, 483 U. S. 203, 211. Pp. 45–51.
(b) Section 1396c gives the Secretary of Health and Human Services the authority to penalize States that choose not to participate in
the Medicaid expansion by taking away their existing Medicaid funding. 42 U. S. C. §1396c. The threatened loss of over 10 percent of a
State’s overall budget is economic dragooning that leaves the States
with no real option but to acquiesce in the Medicaid expansion. The
Government claims that the expansion is properly viewed as only a
modification of the existing program, and that this modification is
permissible because Congress reserved the “right to alter, amend, or
repeal any provision” of Medicaid. §1304. But the expansion accomplishes a shift in kind, not merely degree. The original program was
designed to cover medical services for particular categories of vulnerable individuals. Under the Affordable Care Act, Medicaid is transformed into a program to meet the health care needs of the entire
nonelderly population with income below 133 percent of the poverty
level. A State could hardly anticipate that Congress’s reservation of
the right to “alter” or “amend” the Medicaid program included the
power to transform it so dramatically. The Medicaid expansion thus
violates the Constitution by threatening States with the loss of their
existing Medicaid funding if they decline to comply with the expansion. Pp. 51–55.
(c) The constitutional violation is fully remedied by precluding
the Secretary from applying §1396c to withdraw existing Medicaid
funds for failure to comply with the requirements set out in the expansion. See §1303. The other provisions of the Affordable Care Act
are not affected. Congress would have wanted the rest of the Act to
stand, had it known that States would have a genuine choice whether
to participate in the Medicaid expansion. Pp. 55–58.
6. JUSTICE GINSBURG, joined by JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, is of the view
that the Spending Clause does not preclude the Secretary from withholding Medicaid funds based on a State’s refusal to comply with the

