36

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.
Opinion R the Court 


be a reasonable financial decision to make the payment
rather than purchase insurance, unlike the “prohibitory”
financial punishment in Drexel Furniture. 259 U. S., at
37. Second, the individual mandate contains no scienter
requirement. Third, the payment is collected solely by the
IRS through the normal means of taxation—except that
the Service is not allowed to use those means most suggestive of a punitive sanction, such as criminal prosecution.
See §5000A(g)(2). The reasons the Court in Drexel Furniture held that what was called a “tax” there was a penalty
support the conclusion that what is called a “penalty” here
may be viewed as a tax.9
None of this is to say that the payment is not intended
to affect individual conduct. Although the payment will
raise considerable revenue, it is plainly designed to expand health insurance coverage. But taxes that seek to
influence conduct are nothing new. Some of our earliest
federal taxes sought to deter the purchase of imported
manufactured goods in order to foster the growth of domestic industry. See W. Brownlee, Federal Taxation in
America 22 (2d ed. 2004); cf. 2 J. Story, Commentaries on
the Constitution of the United States §962, p. 434 (1833)
(“the taxing power is often, very often, applied for other
purposes, than revenue”). Today, federal and state taxes
can compose more than half the retail price of cigarettes,
——————
policy is projected to be around $400 per month. See D. Newman, CRS
Report for Congress, Individual Mandate and Related Information Requirements Under PPACA 7, and n. 25 (2011).
9 We do not suggest that any exaction lacking a scienter requirement
and enforced by the IRS is within the taxing power. See post, at 23–24
(joint opinion of SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., dissenting).
Congress could not, for example, expand its authority to impose criminal fines by creating strict liability offenses enforced by the IRS rather
than the FBI. But the fact the exaction here is paid like a tax, to the
agency that collects taxes—rather than, for example, exacted by Department of Labor inspectors after ferreting out willful malfeasance—
suggests that this exaction may be viewed as a tax.

