Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

III
We have described the Federal Government’s fiduciary
duties toward Indian tribes as consisting of “moral obliga
tions of the highest responsibility and trust,” to be fulfilled
through conduct “judged by the most exacting fiduciary
standards.” Seminole Nation, 316 U. S., at 297; see also
Mitchell II, 463 U. S., at 225–226 (collecting cases). The
sad and well-documented truth, however, is that the Gov
ernment has failed to live up to its fiduciary obligations in
managing Indian trust fund accounts. See, e.g., Cobell,
240 F. 3d, at 1089 (“The General Accounting Office, Inte
rior Department Inspector General, and Office of Man
agement and Budget, among others, have all condemned
the mismanagement of [Indian] trust accounts over the
past twenty years”); Misplaced Trust 8 (“[T]he [Govern
ment’s] indifferent supervision and control of the Indian
trust funds has consistently resulted in a failure to exer
cise its responsibility and [to meet] any reasonable expec
tations of the tribal and individual accountholders, Con
gress, and taxpayers”); id., at 56 (“[H]ad this type of
mismanagement taken place in any other trust arrange
ments such as Social Security, there would be war”).
As Congress has recognized, “[t]he Indian trust fund is
more than balance sheets and accounting procedures.
These moneys are crucial to the daily operations of native
American tribes and a source of income to tens of thou
sands of native Americans.” Id., at 5. Given the history of
governmental mismanagement of Indian trust funds,
application of the fiduciary exception is, if anything, even
more important in this context than in the private trustee
——————
here. Ante, at 24, and n. 13. By doing so, the majority virtually assures
that the Nation will not be able to use the communications at issue in
this litigation, thereby effectively granting extraordinary relief to the
Government upon no showing whatsoever that the stringent conditions
for mandamus have been met.

