Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

of others.” Id., §82, Comment f, at 188. The majority
provides no reason why federal courts applying the fiduci
ary exception in the Indian trust context could not simi
larly adopt a workable framework that adequately takes
into account any unique governmental interests that bear
on the application of the fiduciary exception in any given
circumstance. See Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 26(b)(2)(C) (au
thorizing courts to set limits on discovery based on equita
ble concerns).
The majority’s categorical rejection of the fiduciary
exception in the Indian trust context sweeps far broader
than necessary. This case involves only the Government’s
alleged mismanagement of the Nation’s trust fund ac
counts, and the Government did not claim below that the
attorney-client communications at issue relate to any
competing governmental obligations. See App. to Pet. for
Cert. 18a–19a. To the extent the United States in other
contexts has competing interests, the Government and its
attorneys already have to identify those interests in de
termining how to balance them against their obligations to
Indian tribes, and attorney-client communications relating
to those interests may properly be withheld or redacted
consistent with application of the fiduciary exception. See
88 Fed. Cl. 1, 13 (2009) (observing that redactions “allo[w]
the privilege and exception to reign supreme within their
respective spheres”).
The majority’s categorical approach fails to appreciate
that privilege determinations are by their very nature
made on a case-by-case—indeed, document-by-document—
basis. Government attorneys, like private counsel, must
review each requested document and make an individual
ized assessment of privilege, and courts reviewing privi
lege logs and challenges must do the same. “While such a
‘case-by-case’ basis may to some slight extent undermine
desirable certainty in the boundaries of the attorney-client
privilege, it obeys the spirit of” of Rule 501, Upjohn, 449

