20

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
Opinion of the Court

We have said that for the attorney-client privilege to be
effective, it must be predictable. See Jaffee v. Redmond,
518 U. S. 1, 18 (1996); Upjohn, 449 U. S., at 393. If the
Government were required to identify the specific inter
ests it considered in each communication, its ability to
receive confidential legal advice would be substantially
compromised. The Government will not always be able to
predict what considerations qualify as a “specific compet
ing interest,” especially in advance of receiving counsel’s
advice. Forcing the Government to monitor all the consid
erations contained in each communication with counsel
would render its attorney-client privilege “little better
than no privilege at all.” Ibid.
B
The Court of Appeals also decided the fiduciary excep
tion properly applied to the Government because “the
fiduciary has a duty to disclose all information related to
trust management to the beneficiary.” 590 F. 3d, at 1312.
In general, the common-law trustee of an irrevocable trust
must produce trust-related information to the beneficiary
on a reasonable basis, though this duty is sometimes
limited and may be modified by the settlor. Restatement
(Third) of Trusts §82 (2005) (hereinafter Restatement 3d);
Bogert §§962, 965.9 The fiduciary exception applies where
——————
9 We assume for the sake of argument that an Indian trust is properly
analogized to an irrevocable trust rather than to a revocable trust. A
revocable trust imposes no duty of the trustee to disclose information to
the beneficiary. “[W]hile a trust is revocable, only the person who may
revoke it is entitled to receive information about it from the trustee.”
Bogert §962, at 25, §964; Restatement 3d, §74, Comment e, at 31
(“[T]he trustee of a revocable trust is not to provide reports or account
ings or other information concerning the terms or administration of the
trust to other beneficiaries without authorization either by the settlor
or in the terms of the trust or a statute”). In many respects, Indian
trusts resemble revocable trusts at common law because Congress has
acted as the settlor in establishing the trust and retains the right to

