14

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
Opinion of the Court

Navajo II, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 14).5 The Government
assumes Indian trust responsibilities only to the extent it
expressly accepts those responsibilities by statute.6
Over the years, we have described the federal relation
ship with the Indian tribes using various formulations.
The Indian tribes have been called “domestic dependent
nations,” Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, 5 Pet. 1, 17 (1831),
under the “tutelage” of the United States, Heckman, su
pra, at 444, and subject to “the exercise of the Govern
ment’s guardianship over . . . their affairs,” United States
v. Sandoval, 231 U. S. 28, 48 (1913). These concepts do
not necessarily correspond to a common-law trust rela
tionship. See, e.g., Restatement 2d, §7 (“A guardianship is
not a trust”). That is because Congress has chosen to
structure the Indian trust relationship in different ways.
We will apply common-law trust principles where Con
gress has indicated it is appropriate to do so. For that
reason, the Tribe must point to a right conferred by stat
ute or regulation in order to obtain otherwise privileged
information from the Government against its wishes.
III
In this case, the Tribe’s claim arises from 25 U. S. C.
§§161–162a and the American Indian Trust Fund Man
agement Reform Act of 1994, §4001 et seq. These pro
visions define “the trust responsibilities of the United
States” with respect to tribal funds. §162a(d). The Court
of Appeals concluded that the trust relationship between
the United States and the Indian tribes, outlined in these
and other statutes, is “sufficiently similar to a private
trust to justify applying the fiduciary exception.” 590
——————
5 Thus, the dissent’s reliance on the Government’s “managerial con
trol,” post, at 8 (opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.), is misplaced.
6 Cf. Restatement 2d, §25, Comment a (“[A]lthough the settlor has
called the transaction a trust[,] no trust is created unless he manifests
an intention to impose duties which are enforceable in the courts”).

