2

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
Syllabus

Held: The fiduciary exception to the attorney-client privilege does not
apply to the general trust relationship between the United States
and the Indian tribes. Pp. 5–24.
(a) The Court considers the bounds of the fiduciary exception and
the nature of the Indian trust relationship. Pp. 5–14.
(1) Under English common law, when a trustee obtained legal
advice to guide his trust administration and not for his own defense
in litigation, the beneficiaries were entitled to the production of
documents related to that advice on the rationale that the advice was
sought for their benefit and obtained at their expense in that trust
funds were used to pay the attorney. In the leading American case,
Riggs Nat. Bank of Washington, D. C. v. Zimmer, 355 A. 2d 709, the
Delaware Chancery Court applied the fiduciary exception to hold that
trust beneficiaries could compel trustees to produce a legal memo
randum related to the trust’s administration because: (1) the trustees
had obtained the legal advice as “mere representative[s]” of the bene
ficiaries, who were the “real clients” of the attorney, id., at 711–712,
and (2) the fiduciary duty to furnish trust-related information to the
beneficiaries outweighed the trustees’ interest in the attorney-client
privilege, id., at 714. The Federal Courts of Appeals apply the fiduci
ary exception based on the same two criteria. Pp. 6–9.
(2) The Federal Circuit analogized the Government to a private
trustee. While the United States’ responsibilities with respect to the
management of tribal funds bear some resemblance to those of a pri
vate trustee, this analogy cannot be taken too far. The Government’s
trust obligations to the tribes are established and governed by stat
ute, not the common law, see, e.g., United States v. Navajo Nation,
537 U. S. 488, 506 (Navajo I), and in fulfilling its statutory duties,
the Government acts not as a private trustee, but pursuant to its
sovereign interest in the execution of federal law, see, e.g., Heckman
v. United States, 224 U. S. 413, 437. Once federal law imposes fidu
ciary obligations on the Government, the common law “could play a
role,” United States v. Navajo Nation, 556 U. S. ___, ___ (Navajo II);
e.g., to inform the interpretation of statutes, see United States v.
White Mountain Apache Tribe, 537 U. S. 465, 475–476. But the ap
plicable statutes and regulations control. When “the Tribe cannot
identify a specific, applicable, trust-creating statute or regulation
that the Government violated . . . neither the Government’s ‘control’
over [Indian assets] nor common-law trust principles matter.” Na
vajo II, supra, at ___. Pp. 9–14.
(b) The two criteria justifying the fiduciary exception are absent in
the trust relationship between the United States and Indian tribes.
Pp. 14–23.
(1) In cases applying the fiduciary exception, courts identify the

