4

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

administration because such advice, provided to a trustee
to assist in his management of the trust, is ultimately for
the benefit of the trust beneficiary, rather than for the
trustee in his personal capacity. See, e.g., United States v.
Mett, 178 F. 3d 1058, 1063 (CA9 1999) (“ ‘[A]s a represen
tative for the beneficiaries of the trust which he is admin
istering, the trustee is not the real client in the sense that
he is personally being served’ ” (quoting United States v.
Evans, 796 F. 2d 264, 266 (CA9 1986) (per curiam)));
Riggs, 355 A. 2d, at 713 (same). The majority places
heavy emphasis on the source of payment for the legal
advice, see ante, at 8, 15, but it is well settled that who
pays for the legal advice, although “potentially relevant,”
“is not determinative in resolving issues of privilege.”
Restatement (Third) of Trusts §82, Comment f, p. 188
(2005) (hereinafter Third Restatement). Instead, the
lynchpin of the “real client” inquiry is the identity of the
ultimate beneficiary of the legal advice. See Wachtel, 482
F. 3d, at 232 (“[O]f central importance . . . [i]s the fiduci
ary’s lack of a legitimate personal interest in the legal
advice obtained”). If the advice was rendered for the
benefit of the beneficiary and not for the trustee in any
personal capacity, the “real client” of the advice is the
beneficiary.
As to the second rationale for the fiduciary exception—
rooted in the trustee’s fiduciary duty to disclose all infor
mation related to trust management—the majority glosses
over the fact that this duty of disclosure is designed “to
enable the beneficiary to prevent or redress a breach of
trust and otherwise to enforce his or her rights under the
trust.” Third Restatement §82, Comment a(2), at 184. As
the leading American case on the fiduciary exception
explains, “[i]n order for the beneficiaries to hold the trus
tee to the proper standards of care and honesty and pro
cure for themselves the benefits to which they are entitled,
their knowledge of the affairs and mechanics of the trust

