Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

ment of the Law (Third) Governing Lawyers §84, pp. 627–
628 (1998).
Notably, the majority does not suggest that the Nation
needs less information than a private beneficiary to exer
cise effective oversight over the Government as trustee.
Instead, the majority contends that the Nation is entitled
to less disclosure because the Government’s disclosure
obligations are more limited than a private trustee. In
particular, the majority states that the Government “as
sumes Indian trust responsibilities only to the extent it
expressly accepts those responsibilities by statute,” and
thus the Nation “must point to a right conferred by statute
or regulation in order to obtain otherwise privileged in
formation from the Government against its wishes.” Ante,
at 14. The majority cites a single statutory provision and
its implementing regulations as “defin[ing] the Govern
ment’s disclosure obligation to the [Nation].” Ante, at 22;
see ante, at 21–22 (citing 25 U. S. C. §162a(d)(5) and 25
CFR §§115.801–115.803 (2010)). Because those “narrowly
defined disclosure obligations” do not provide Indian tribes
with a specific statutory right to disclosure of attorney
client communications relating to trust administration,
ante, at 22, the majority concludes that the Government
has no duty to disclose those communications to the
Nation.
The majority’s conclusion employs a fundamentally
flawed legal premise. We have never held that all of the
Government’s trust responsibilities to Indians must be set
forth expressly in a specific statute or regulation. To the
contrary, where, as here, the statutory framework estab
lishes that the relationship between the Government and
an Indian tribe “bears the hallmarks of a conventional
fiduciary relationship,” Navajo II, 556 U. S., at __ (slip op.,
at 14) (internal quotation marks omitted), we have consis
tently looked to general trust principles to flesh out the
Government’s fiduciary obligations.

