Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
“real client” based on whether the advice was bought by the trust
corpus, whether the trustee had reason to seek advice in a personal
rather than a fiduciary capacity, and whether the advice could have
been intended for any purpose other than to benefit the trust. Riggs,
355 A. 2d, at 711–712. Applying these factors, the Court concludes
that the United States does not obtain legal advice as a “mere repre
sentative” of the Tribe; nor is the Tribe the “real client” for whom
that advice is intended. See id., at 711. Here, the Government at
torneys are paid out of congressional appropriations at no cost to the
Tribe. The Government also seeks legal advice in its sovereign capac
ity rather than as a conventional fiduciary of the Tribe. Because its
sovereign interest is distinct from the beneficiaries’ private interests,
the Government seeks legal advice in a personal, not a fiduciary, ca
pacity. Moreover, the Government has too many competing legal
concerns to allow a case-by-case inquiry into each communication’s
purpose. In addition to its duty to the Tribe, the Government may
need to comply with other statutory duties, such as environmental
and conservation obligations. It may also face conflicting duties to
different tribes or individual Indians. It may seek the advice of coun
sel for guidance in balancing these competing interests or to help de
termine whether there are conflicting interests at all. For the attor
ney-client privilege to be effective, it must be predictable. See, e.g.,
Jaffee v. Redmond, 518 U. S. 1, 18. The Government will not always
be able to predict what considerations qualify as competing interests,
especially before receiving counsel’s advice. If the Government were
required to identify the specific interests it considered in each com
munication, its ability to receive confidential legal advice would be
substantially compromised. See Upjohn Co. v. United States, 449
U. S. 383, 393. Pp. 15–20.
(2) The Federal Circuit also decided that the fiduciary exception
properly applied here because of the fiduciary’s duty to disclose all
trust-management-related information to the beneficiary. The Gov
ernment, however, does not have the same common-law disclosure
obligations as a private trustee. In this case, 25 U. S. C. §162a(d) de
lineates the Government’s “trust responsibilities.” It identifies the
Interior Secretary’s obligation to supply tribal account holders “with
periodic statements of their account performance” and to make
“available on a daily basis” their account balances, §162a(d)(5). The
Secretary has complied with these requirements in regulations man
dating that each tribe be provided with a detailed quarterly state
ment of performance. 25 CFR pt. 115.8. The common law of trusts
does not override these specific trust-creating statutes and regula
tions. A statutory clause labeling the enumerated trust responsibili
ties as nonexhaustive, see §162a(d), cannot be read to include a gen

