Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Today, numerous statutes outline the Federal Govern
ment’s obligations as trustee in managing Indian trust
funds. In particular, the Secretary of the Treasury, at the
request of the Secretary of the Interior, must invest “[a]ll
funds held in trust by the United States . . . to the credit of
Indian tribes” in certain securities “suitable to the needs
of the fund involved.” 25 U. S. C. §161a(a). The Secretary
of the Interior may deposit in the Treasury and pay manda
tory interest on Indian trust funds when “the best inter
ests of the Indians will be promoted by such deposits, in
lieu of investments.” §161. Similarly, the Secretary of the
Interior may invest tribal trust funds in certain public
debt instruments “if he deems it advisable and for the best
interest of the Indians.” §162a(a). And Congress has set
forth a nonexhaustive list of the Secretary of the Interior’s
“trust responsibilities” with respect to Indian trust funds,
which include a series of accounting, auditing, manage
ment, and disclosure obligations. §162a(d). These and
other statutory provisions4 give the United States “full
responsibility to manage Indian [trust fund accounts] for
the benefit of the Indians.” Mitchell II, 463 U. S., at 224.
“[A] fiduciary relationship necessarily arises when the
Government assumes such elaborate control over [trust
assets] belonging to Indians.” Id., at 225. Under the
——————
through the sale or lease of trust lands and include timber stumpage,
oil and gas royalties, and agriculture fees,” as well as “judgment funds
awarded to tribes.” H. R. Rep. No. 103–778, p. 9 (1994). The Nation’s
claims involve proceeds derived from the Government’s management of
the Nation’s timber, gravel, and other resources and leases of reserva
tion lands. The Government has held these funds in trust for the
Nation since the late 1880’s. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 98a–100a, 105a.
4 See, e.g., 25 U. S. C. §4011(a) (requiring Secretary of the Interior to
account “for the daily and annual balance of all funds held in trust by
the United States for the benefit of an Indian tribe”); §4041(1) (creating
the Office of Special Trustee for American Indians “to provide for more
effective management of, and accountability for the proper discharge of,
the Secretary’s trust responsibilities to Indian tribes”).

