12

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

tion.” Ibid. As a result, the majority concludes that the
fiduciary exception should not be applied at all in the
Indian trust context. Ibid.
Preliminarily, while the Government in certain circum
stances may have sovereign obligations that conflict with
its duties as a fiduciary for Indian tribes, see, e.g., Nevada
v. United States, 463 U. S. 110 (1983),7 the existence of
competing interests is not unique to the Government as
trustee. Indeed, the issue of competing interests arises
frequently in the private trust context. See, e.g., Third
Restatement §78, Comment c, at 97–103 (describing duties
of trustee with respect to “transactions that involve con
flicting fiduciary and personal interests”); id., §79,
Comment b, at 128–129 (describing trustee’s duty of impar
tiality in “balancing . . . competing interests” of multiple
beneficiaries). In such circumstances, “a trustee—and
ultimately a court—may need to provide some response
that offers a compromise between the confidentiality or
privacy concerns of some and the interest-protection needs
——————
7 In Nevada, the Government represented certain tribes in litigation
involving water rights even though it was also required by statute to
represent the water rights of a reclamation project. See 463 U. S., at
128 (noting that Congress delegated to the Secretary of the Interior
“both the responsibility for the supervision of the Indian tribes and the
commencement of reclamation projects in areas adjacent to reservation
lands”). Because of this dual litigating responsibility, we noted that “it
is simply unrealistic to suggest that the Government may not perform
its obligation to represent Indian tribes in litigation when Congress has
obliged it to represent other interests as well.” Ibid. We thus observed
in the context of that case that “the Government cannot follow the
fastidious standards of a private fiduciary, who would breach his duties
to his single beneficiary solely by representing potentially conflicting
interests without the beneficiary’s consent.” Ibid. We expressly distin
guished the context “where only a relationship between the Govern
ment and the tribe is involved.” Id., at 142. In that context, we ac
knowledged that “the law respecting obligations between a trustee and
a beneficiary in private litigation will in many, if not all, respects
adequately describe the duty of the United States.” Ibid.

