Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

ciary. See Cohen §5.03[3][b], at 408, and n. 141 (“Federal
statutes forbid use of Indian tribal funds in any man
ner not authorized by treaty or express provisions of
law” (citing 25 U. S. C. §§122, 123)). In other words, any
uniquely sovereign interest the Government may have in
other contexts of its trust relationship with Indian tribes
does not exist in the specific context of Indian trust fund
administration. It naturally follows, then, that when the
Government seeks legal advice from government attorneys
relating to the management of the Nation’s trust funds,
the “real client” of the advice for purposes of the fiduciary
exception is the Nation, not the Government.
This conclusion holds true even though government
attorneys are “paid out of congressional appropriations
at no cost to the [Nation].” Ante, at 15. As noted above,
although the source of funding for legal advice may be
relevant, the ultimate inquiry is for whose benefit the
legal advice was rendered. See supra, at 4. And, for all
the emphasis the majority places on the funding source
here, see ante, at 8, 15, the majority never suggests that
the fiduciary exception would apply if Congress amended
federal law to permit Indian tribes to pay government
attorneys out of their own trust funds.6
The majority also suggests that, even if the interests of
the United States and Indian tribes may be equivalent in
some contexts, that “equivalence” “breaks down” when
there are “multiple interests” involved in a trust relation
ship. Ante, at 18. According to the majority, “the Gov
ernment has too many competing legal concerns to allow a
case-by-case inquiry into the purpose of each communica
——————
6 The majority also states that ownership of the requested documents
is “a significant factor” in deciding whether the fiduciary exception
applies, ante, at 23, but the only case it cites as support deals with the
source of payment for the legal advice, not the ownership of the docu
ments. See ibid. (citing Riggs Nat. Bank of Washington, D. C. v.
Zimmer, 355 A. 2d 709, 712 (Del. Ch. 1976)).

