16

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

For example, in United States v. White Mountain
Apache Tribe, 537 U. S. 465 (2003), we construed a statute
that vested the Government with discretionary authority
to “use” trust property for certain purposes as imposing a
concomitant duty to preserve improvements that had
previously been made to the land. Id., at 475 (quoting 74
Stat. 8). Even though the statute did not “expressly sub
ject the Government to duties of management and conser
vation,” we construed the Government’s obligations under
the statute by reference to “elementary trust law,” which
“confirm[ed] the commonsense assumption that a fiduciary
actually administering trust property may not allow it to
fall into ruin on his watch.” 537 U. S., at 475. Similarly,
in Seminole Nation, we relied on general trust principles
to conclude that the Government had a fiduciary duty to
prevent misappropriation of tribal trust funds by corrupt
members of a tribe, even though no specific statutory or
treaty provision expressly imposed such a duty. See 316
U. S., at 296.8
——————
8 To be sure, in decisions involving the jurisdiction of the Court of
Federal Claims under the Tucker Act, we have explained that the
jurisdictional analysis “must train on specific rights-creating or duty
imposing statutory or regulatory prescriptions.” Navajo I, 537 U. S., at
506. But even assuming arguendo that those jurisdictional decisions
have relevance here, they do not stand for the proposition that the
Government’s fiduciary duties are defined exclusively by express
statutory provisions. Indeed, those decisions relied specifically on
general trust principles to determine whether the relevant statutory
scheme permitted a damages remedy, a prerequisite for jurisdiction
under the Tucker Act. See, e.g., Mitchell II, 463 U. S., at 226 (noting
that common-law trust sources establish that “a trustee is accountable
in damages for breaches of trust” and that, “[g]iven the existence of a
trust relationship, it naturally follows that the Government should be
liable in damages for the breach of its fiduciary duties”); see also
Navajo II, 556 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 14) (affirming that general
“trust principles . . . could play a role in inferring that the trust obliga
tion is enforceable by damages” (internal quotation marks and brackets
omitted)).

