Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

stored to the active litigation docket. The CFC divided the
case into phases for trial and set a discovery schedule.
The first phase, relevant here, concerns the Government’s
management of the Tribe’s trust accounts from 1972 to
1992. The Tribe alleges that during this period the Gov
ernment failed to invest its trust funds properly. Among
other things, the Tribe claims the Government failed to
maximize returns on its trust funds, invested too heavily
in short-term maturities, and failed to pool its trust
funds with other tribal trusts. During discovery, the Tribe
moved to compel the Government to produce the 226
withheld documents. In response, the Government agreed
to withdraw its claims of deliberative-process privilege
and, accordingly, to produce 71 of the documents. But the
Government continued to assert the attorney-client privi
lege and attorney work-product doctrine with respect to
the remaining 155 documents. The CFC reviewed those
documents in camera and classified them into five cate
gories: (1) requests for legal advice relating to trust ad
ministration sent by personnel at the Department of the
Interior to the Office of the Solicitor, which directs legal
affairs for the Department, (2) legal advice sent from the
Solicitor’s Office to personnel at the Interior and Treasury Departments, (3) documents generated under con
tracts between Interior and an accounting firm, (4) Inte
rior documents concerning litigation with other tribes, and
(5) miscellaneous documents not falling into the other
categories.
The CFC granted the Tribe’s motion to compel in part.
The CFC held that communications relating to the man
agement of trust funds fall within a “fiduciary exception”
to the attorney-client privilege. Under that exception,
which courts have applied in the context of common-law
trusts, a trustee who obtains legal advice related to the
execution of fiduciary obligations is precluded from assert
ing the attorney-client privilege against beneficiaries of

