18

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Contrary to the majority’s view, the Government’s dis
closure obligations are not limited solely to the “narrowly
defined disclosure obligations” set forth in §162a(d)(5) and
its implementing regulations, ante, at 22; rather, given
that the statutory regime requires the Government to act
as a conventional fiduciary in managing Indian trust
funds, the Government’s disclosure obligations include
those of a fiduciary under common-law trust principles.
See supra, at 15–17. Instead of “overrid[ing]” the specific
disclosure duty set forth in §162a(d)(5) and its implement
ing regulations, general trust principles flesh out the
Government’s disclosure obligations under the broader
statutory regime, consistent with its role as a conventional
fiduciary in this context.
This conclusion, moreover, is supported by the plain text
of the very statute cited by the majority. Section 162a(d),
which was enacted as part of the American Indian Trust
Fund Management Reform Act of 1994 (1994 Act), 108
Stat. 4239, sets forth eight “trust responsibilities of the
United States.” But that provision also specifically states
that the Secretary of the Interior’s “proper discharge of the
trust responsibilities of the United States shall include
(but are not limited to)” those specified duties. 25 U. S. C.
§162a(d) (emphasis added). By expressly including the
italicized language, Congress recognized that the Govern
ment has pre-existing trust responsibilities that arise out
of the broader statutory scheme governing the manage
ment of Indian trust funds.9 Indeed, Title I of the 1994
——————
9 The

majority invokes the canon against superfluity and argues that
the “catchall” phrase (by which it means the “shall include (but are not
limited to)” language) cannot be read to “include a general common-law
duty to disclose all information related to the administration of Indian
trusts” because doing so would “impose general obligations that would
include those specifically enumerated.” Ante, at 22. But the flaw in the
majority’s argument is that it misperceives the function of the relevant
language. Rather than serving as a “catchall” provision that affirma

