18

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
Opinion of the Court

the interests of the tribal trust fund beneficiaries,” Brief
for National Congress of American Indians et al. as Amici
Curiae 5. The United States has a sovereign interest in
the administration of Indian trusts distinct from the pri
vate interests of those who may benefit from its admini
stration. Courts apply the fiduciary exception on the
ground that “management does not manage for itself.”
Garner, 430 F. 2d, at 1101; Wachtel, 482 F. 3d, at 232
(“[O]f central importance in both Garner and Riggs was
the fiduciary’s lack of a legitimate personal interest in the
legal advice obtained”). But the Government is never in
that position. While one purpose of the Indian trust rela
tionship is to benefit the tribes, the Government has its
own independent interest in the implementation of federal
Indian policy. For that reason, when the Government
seeks legal advice related to the administration of tribal
trusts, it establishes an attorney-client relationship re
lated to its sovereign interest in the execution of federal
law. In other words, the Government seeks legal advice in
a “personal” rather than a fiduciary capacity. See Riggs,
355 A. 2d, at 711.
Moreover, the Government has too many competing
legal concerns to allow a case-by-case inquiry into the
purpose of each communication. When “multiple inter
ests” are involved in a trust relationship, the equivalence
between the interests of the beneficiary and the trustee
breaks down. Id., at 714. That principle applies with
particular force to the Government. Because of the multi
ple interests it must represent, “the Government cannot
follow the fastidious standards of a private fiduciary, who
would breach his duties to his single beneficiary solely by
representing potentially conflicting interests without the
beneficiary’s consent.” Nevada v. United States, 463 U. S.
110, 128 (1983).
As the Court of Appeals acknowledged, the Government
may be obliged “to balance competing interests” when it

