Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Act is entitled “Recognition of Trust Responsibility,” 108
Stat. 4240 (emphasis added), and courts have similarly
observed that the Act “recognized and reaffirmed . . . that
the government has longstanding and substantial trust
obligations to Indians.” Cobell, 240 F. 3d, at 1098; see also
H. R. Rep. No. 103–778, p. 9 (1994) (“The responsibility for
management of Indian Trust Funds by the [Government]
has been determined through a series of court decisions,
treaties, and statutes”). That conclusion accords with
common sense as not even the Government argues that it
had no disclosure obligations with respect to Indian trust
funds prior to the enactment of the 1994 Act.10
The majority requires the Nation to “point to a right
conferred by statute” to the attorney-client communica
tions at issue, ante, at 14, and finding none, denies the
——————
tively “incorporate[s]” common-law trust duties into §162a(d), ante, at
22, that language simply makes clear that §162a(d) does not set forth
an exhaustive list of the Government’s trust responsibilities in manag
ing Indian trust funds; nothing in that language itself imports any
substantive obligations into the statute.
10 The majority also contends that its reading of §162a(d) is supported
by a provision in the Indian Claims Limitation Act of 1982 (ICLA), 96
Stat. 1976, which provided that if the Secretary of the Interior rejected
a claim for litigation by an Indian claimant, he was required to provide
upon request “any nonprivileged research materials or evidence gath
ered by the United States in the documentation of such claim.” §5(b),
id., at 1978. According to the majority, this provision reflected Con
gress’ understanding that “the Government retains evidentiary privi
leges allowing it to withhold information related to trust property from
Indian tribes.” Ante, at 22, n. 11. But this provision cannot bear the
weight the majority places on it. Even putting aside the undisputed
fact that the ICLA is inapplicable to the claims in this case, the major
ity’s reliance on the ICLA provision fails to recognize that documents
subject to the fiduciary exception are, under the “real client” rationale,
per se nonprivileged. See, e.g., Mett, 178 F. 3d, at 1063. Accordingly, if
anything, the ICLA’s requirement that the Government disclose “non
privileged” materials to Indian claimants supports the conclusion that
Congress intended communications related to trust fund management
to be disclosed to Indian tribes.

