Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

its holding, the court recognized that sometimes the Gov
ernment may have other statutory obligations that clash
with its fiduciary duties to the Indian tribes. But because
the Government had not alleged that the legal advice in
this case related to such conflicting interests, the court
reserved judgment on how the fiduciary exception might
apply in that situation. The court rejected the Govern
ment’s argument that, because its duties to the Indian
tribes were governed by statute rather than the common
law, it had no general duty of disclosure that would over
ride the attorney-client privilege. The court also disagreed
with the Government’s contention that a case-by-case
approach made the attorney-client privilege too unpredict
able and would impair the Government’s ability to obtain
confidential legal advice.
We granted certiorari, 562 U. S. ___ (2011),2 and now
reverse and remand for further proceedings.
II
The Federal Rules of Evidence provide that evidentiary
privileges “shall be governed by the principles of the com
mon law . . . in the light of reason and experience.” Fed.
Rule Evid. 501. The attorney-client privilege “is the oldest
of the privileges for confidential communications known to
the common law.” Upjohn Co. v. United States, 449 U. S.
383, 389 (1981) (citing 8 J. Wigmore, Evidence §2290 (J.
McNaughton rev. 1961)). Its aim is “to encourage full and
frank communication between attorneys and their clients
and thereby promote broader public interests in the obser
——————
2 After

the Federal Circuit denied the Government’s mandamus peti
tion, the Government produced the documents under a protective order
that prevents disclosure to third parties until the case is resolved by
this Court. App. to Pet. for Cert. 93a–97a. The Government’s compli
ance with the production order does not affect our review. Our decision
may still provide effective relief by preventing further disclosure and by
excluding the evidence from trial. See Mohawk Industries, Inc. v.
Carpenter, 558 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 8).

