(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
No. 10–382.

Argued April 20, 2011—Decided June 13, 2011

Respondent Jicarilla Apache Nation’s (Tribe) reservation contains
natural resources that are developed pursuant to statutes adminis
tered by the Interior Department. Proceeds from these resources are
held by the United States in trust for the Tribe. The Tribe filed a
breach-of-trust action in the Court of Federal Claims (CFC), seeking
monetary damages for the Government’s alleged mismanagement of
the Tribe’s trust funds in violation of 25 U. S. C. §§161–162a and
other laws. During discovery, the Tribe moved to compel production
of certain documents. The Government agreed to release some of the
documents, but asserted that others were protected by, inter alia, the
attorney-client privilege. The CFC granted the motion in part, hold
ing that departmental communications relating to the management
of trust funds fall within a “fiduciary exception” to the attorney-client
privilege. Under that exception, which courts have applied to com
mon-law trusts, a trustee who obtains legal advice related to trust
administration is precluded from asserting the attorney-client privi
lege against trust beneficiaries.
Denying the Government’s petition for a writ of mandamus direct
ing the CFC to vacate its production order, the Federal Circuit
agreed with the CFC that the trust relationship between the United
States and the Indian tribes is sufficiently similar to a private trust
to justify applying the fiduciary exception. The appeals court held
that the United States cannot deny a tribe’s request to discover com
munications between the Government and its attorneys based on the
attorney-client privilege when those communications concern man
agement of an Indian trust and the Government has not claimed that
it or its attorneys considered a specific competing interest in those
communications.

