14

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

U. S., at 396–397, which “ ‘provide[s] the courts with the
flexibility to develop rules of privilege on a case-by-case
basis,’ ” Trammel v. United States, 445 U. S. 40, 47 (1980)
(quoting 120 Cong. Rec. 40891 (1974) (statement of Rep.
Hungate)); see S. Rep. No. 93–1277, p. 13 (1974) (“[T]he
recognition of a privilege based on a confidential relation
ship . . . should be determined on a case-by-case basis”).
Rather than fashioning a blanket rule against applica
tion of the fiduciary exception in the Indian trust context,
I would, consistent with Rule 501 and principles of judicial
restraint, decide the question solely on the facts before us.
See Upjohn, 449 U. S., at 386 (noting that “we sit to decide
concrete cases and not abstract propositions of law” and
“declin[ing] to lay down a broad rule or series of rules to
govern all conceivable future questions in this area”). On
those facts, the fiduciary exception applies to the commu
nications in this case.
B
Like the “real client” rationale, the second rationale for
the fiduciary exception, rooted in a trustee’s fiduciary duty
to disclose all matters relevant to trust administration to
the beneficiary, fully supports disclosure of the communi
cations in this case. As explained above, courts relying on
this second rationale have recognized that “[t]he policy of
preserving the full disclosure necessary in the trustee
beneficiary relationship is . . . ultimately more important
than the protection of the trustees’ confidence in the at
torney for the trust.” Riggs, 355 A. 2d, at 714. Because
the statutory scheme requires the Government to act as a
conventional fiduciary in managing the Nation’s trust
funds, the Government’s fiduciary duty to keep the Nation
informed of matters relating to trust administration in
cludes the concomitant duty to disclose attorney-client
communications relating to trust fund management. See
Third Restatement §82, Comment f, at 187–188; Restate

