20

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Nation access to those communications. The upshot of
that decision, I fear, may very well be to reinvigorate the
position of the dissenting Justices in White Mountain
Apache and Mitchell II, who rejected the use of common
law principles to inform the scope of the Government’s
fiduciary obligations to Indian tribes. See White Mountain
Apache, 537 U. S., at 486–487 (THOMAS, J., dissenting);
Mitchell II, 463 U. S., at 234–235 (Powell, J., dissenting).
That approach was wrong when Mitchell II was decided
nearly 30 years ago, and it is wrong today. Under our
governing precedents, common-law trust principles play
an important role in defining the Government’s fiduciary
duties where, as here, the statutory scheme establishes a
conventional fiduciary relationship. Applying those prin
ciples in this context, I would hold that the fiduciary ex
ception is fully applicable to the communications in this
case.11
——————
11 The majority’s errors are further compounded by its failure to ac
cord proper consideration to the mandamus posture of this case. “This
Court repeatedly has observed that the writ of mandamus is an ex
traordinary remedy, to be reserved for extraordinary situations.”
Gulfstream Aerospace Corp. v. Mayacamas Corp., 485 U. S. 271, 289
(1988). “As the writ is one of the most potent weapons in the judicial
arsenal, three conditions must be satisfied before it may issue,” Cheney
v. United States Dist. Court for D. C., 542 U. S. 367, 380 (2004) (inter
nal quotation marks and citation omitted):
“First, the party seeking issuance of the writ must have no other
adequate means to attain the relief he desires—a condition designed to
ensure that the writ will not be used as a substitute for the regular
appeals process. Second, the petitioner must satisfy the burden of
showing that his right to issuance of the writ is clear and indisputable.
Third, even if the first two prerequisites have been met, the issuing
court, in the exercise of its discretion, must be satisfied that the writ is
appropriate under the circumstances.” Id., at 380–381 (internal quota
tion marks and citations omitted; alterations deleted).
The majority purports to leave the decision whether to grant man
damus relief to the Federal Circuit, but simultaneously drops a footnote
stating that it “assume[s]” that the Court of Federal Claims on remand
will “follow [its] holding” that the fiduciary exception is inapplicable

