8

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

statutory regime described above, the Government has
extensive managerial control over Indian trust funds,
exercises considerable discretion with respect to their in
vestment, and has assumed significant responsibilities to
account to the tribal beneficiaries. As a result, “[a]ll of the
necessary elements of a common-law trust are present:
a trustee (the United States), a beneficiary (the Indian
[Tribe]), and a trust corpus (Indian . . . funds).” Ibid.
Unlike in other contexts where the statutory scheme
creates only a “bare trust” entailing only limited responsi
bilities, United States v. Navajo Nation, 537 U. S. 488, 505
(2003) (Navajo I) (internal quotation marks omitted),5 the
statutory regime governing the United States’ obligations
with regard to Indian trust funds “bears the hallmarks of
a conventional fiduciary relationship,” United States v.
Navajo Nation, 556 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (Navajo II ) (slip
op., at 14) (internal quotation marks omitted); see Lincoln
v. Vigil, 508 U. S. 182, 194 (1993) (“[T]he law is ‘well
established that the Government in its dealings with
Indian tribal property acts in a fiduciary capacity’ ” (quot
——————
5 For

example, in United States v. Mitchell, 445 U. S. 535 (1980)
(Mitchell I), this Court held that a federal statute which authorized the
President to allot a specified number of acres to individual Indians
residing on reservation lands did not “provide that the United States
has undertaken full fiduciary responsibilities as to the management of
allotted lands.” Id., at 542. Under the statute, “the Indian allottee, and
not a representative of the United States, is responsible for using the
land for agricultural or grazing purposes.” Id., at 542–543. Accord
ingly, we concluded that Congress did not intend to “impose upon the
Government all fiduciary duties ordinarily placed by equity upon a
trustee” because the statute “created only a limited trust relationship
between the United States and the allottee.” Id., at 542; see also
Navajo I, 537 U. S., at 507–508 (concluding that Secretary of the
Interior did not assume “fiduciary duties” under the relevant statutory
scheme because “[t]he Secretary is neither assigned a comprehensive
managerial role nor, . . . expressly invested with responsibility to secure
the needs and best interests of the Indian owner and his heirs” (inter
nal quotation marks omitted)).

