6

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

relationship between the United States and the Indian
people”). Congress, too, has recognized the general trust
relationship between the United States and Indian tribes.
Indeed, “[n]early every piece of modern legislation dealing
with Indian tribes contains a statement reaffirming the
trust relationship between tribes and the federal govern
ment.” F. Cohen, Handbook of Federal Indian Law
§5.04[4][a], pp. 420–421 (2005 ed.) (hereinafter Cohen).2
Against this backdrop, Congress has enacted federal
statutes that “define the contours of the United States’
fiduciary responsibilities” with regard to its management
of Indian tribal property and other trust assets. Mitchell
II, 463 U. S., at 224. The Nation’s claims as relevant in
this case concern the Government’s alleged mismanage
ment of its tribal trust fund accounts. See ante, at 3.
The system of trusteeship and federal management of
Indian funds originated with congressional enactments in
the 19th century directing the Government to hold and
manage Indian tribal funds in trust. See, e.g., Act of June
9, 1837, 5 Stat. 135; see also Misplaced Trust: The Bureau
of Indian Affairs’ Mismanagement of the Indian Trust
Fund, H. R. Rep. No. 102–449, p. 6 (1992) (hereinafter
Misplaced Trust). Through these and later congressional
enactments, the United States has come to manage almost
$3 billion in tribal funds and collects close to $380 million
per year on behalf of tribes. Cohen §5.03[3][b], at 407.3
——————
2 See,

e.g., 25 U. S. C. §458cc(a) (directing Secretary of the Interior to
enter into funding agreements with Indian tribes “in a manner consis
tent with the Federal Government’s laws and trust relationship to and
responsibility for the Indian people”); §3701 (finding that the Govern
ment “has a trust responsibility to protect, conserve, utilize, and
manage Indian agricultural lands consistent with its fiduciary obliga
tion and its unique relationship with Indian tribes”); 20 U. S. C. §7401
(“It is the policy of the United States to fulfill the Federal Government’s
unique and continuing trust relationship with and responsibility to the
Indian people for the education of Indian children”).
3 Trust fund accounts are “comprised mainly of money received

