22

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
Opinion of the Court

mation about account transactions and balances.”
§115.802.
The common law of trusts does not override the specific
trust-creating statute and regulations that apply here.
Those provisions define the Government’s disclosure ob
ligation to the Tribe. The Tribe emphasizes, Brief for
Respondent 34, that the statute identifies the list of trust
responsibilities as nonexhaustive. See §162a(d) (trust
responsibilities “are not limited to” those enumerated).
The Government replies that this clause “is best read to
refer to other statutory and regulatory requirements”
rather than to common-law duties. Brief for United States
38. Whatever Congress intended, we cannot read the
clause to include a general common-law duty to disclose
all information related to the administration of Indian
trusts. When Congress provides specific statutory obliga
tions, we will not read a “catchall” provision to impose
general obligations that would include those specifically
enumerated. Massachusetts Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Russell,
473 U. S. 134, 141–142 (1985). “As our cases have noted
in the past, we are hesitant to adopt an interpretation of a
congressional enactment which renders superfluous an
other portion of that same law.” Mackey v. Lanier Collec
tion Agency & Service, Inc., 486 U. S. 825, 837 (1988).
Reading the statute to incorporate the full duties of a
private, common-law fiduciary would vitiate Congress’
specification of narrowly defined disclosure obligations.10
——————
10 Our reading of 25 U. S. C. §162a(d) receives additional support from
another statute in which Congress expressed its understanding that
the Government retains evidentiary privileges allowing it to withhold
information related to trust property from Indian tribes. The Indian
Claims Limitation Act of 1982, 96 Stat. 1976, addressed Indian claims
that the claimants desired to have litigated by the United States. If the
Secretary of the Interior decided to reject a claim for litigation, he was
required to furnish a report to the affected Indian claimants and, upon
their request, to provide “any nonprivileged research materials or
evidence gathered by the United States in the documentation of such

