4

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
Opinion of the Court

the trust. The CFC concluded that the trust relationship
between the United States and the Indian tribes is suffi
ciently analogous to a common-law trust relationship that
the exception should apply. Accordingly, the CFC held,
the United States may not shield from the Tribe commu
nications with attorneys relating to trust matters.
The CFC ordered disclosure of almost all documents in
the first two categories because those documents “involve
matters regarding the administration of tribal trusts,
either directly or indirectly implicating the investments
that benefit Jicarilla” and contain “legal advice relating to
trust administration.” Id., at 14–15. The CFC allowed
the Government to withhold most of the documents in the
remaining categories as attorney work product,1 but the
court identified some individual documents that it deter
mined were also subject to the fiduciary exception. Id., at
18–19.
The Government sought to prevent disclosure of the
documents by petitioning the Court of Appeals for the
Federal Circuit for a writ of mandamus directing the CFC
to vacate its production order. The Court of Appeals de
nied the petition because, in its view, the CFC correctly
applied the fiduciary exception. The court held that “the
United States cannot deny an Indian tribe’s request to
discover communications between the United States and
its attorneys based on the attorney-client privilege when
those communications concern management of an Indian
trust and the United States has not claimed that the
government or its attorneys considered a specific com
peting interest in those communications.” In re United
States, 590 F. 3d 1305, 1313 (CA Fed. 2009). In qualifying
——————
1 The

CFC held that there is no fiduciary exception to the work
product doctrine. 88 Fed. Cl. 1, 12 (2009). The Court of Appeals did not
address that issue, In re United States, 590 F. 3d 1305, 1313 (CA Fed.
2009), and it is not before us.

