8

UNITED STATES v. JICARILLA APACHE NATION
Opinion of the Court

moved to compel the trustees to produce a legal memoran
dum related to the administration of the trust that the
trustees withheld on the basis of attorney-client privilege.
The Delaware Chancery Court, observing that “American
case law is practically nonexistent on the duty of a trustee
in this context,” looked to the English cases. Id., at 712.
Applying the common-law fiduciary exception, the court
held that the memorandum was discoverable. It identified
two reasons for applying the exception.
First, the court explained, the trustees had obtained the
legal advice as “mere representative[s]” of the beneficiar
ies because the trustees had a fiduciary obligation to act in
the beneficiaries’ interest when administering the trust.
Ibid. For that reason, the beneficiaries were the “real
clients” of the attorney who had advised the trustee on
trust-related matters, and therefore the attorney-client
privilege properly belonged to the beneficiaries rather
than the trustees. Id., at 711–712. The court based its
“real client” determination on several factors: (1) when the
advice was sought, no adversarial proceedings between the
trustees and beneficiaries had been pending, and therefore
there was no reason for the trustees to seek legal advice in
a personal rather than a fiduciary capacity; (2) the court
saw no indication that the memorandum was intended for
any purpose other than to benefit the trust; and (3) the
law firm had been paid out of trust assets. That the ad
vice was obtained at the beneficiaries’ expense was not
only a “significant factor” entitling the beneficiaries to see
the document but also “a strong indication of precisely
who the real clients were.” Id., at 712. The court distin
guished between “legal advice procured at the trustee’s
own expense and for his own protection,” which would
remain privileged, “and the situation where the trust itself
is assessed for obtaining opinions of counsel where inter
ests of the beneficiaries are presently at stake.” Ibid. In
the latter case, the fiduciary exception applied, and the

