Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

Opinion of BREYER, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–6822
_________________

JASON PEPPER, PETITIONER v. UNITED STATES
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT

[March 2, 2011] 


JUSTICE BREYER, concurring in part and concurring in
the judgment.
I join Part III of the Court’s opinion as to the second
question presented. As to the first question presented,
I agree with the Court’s conclusion. And I agree with
its opinion to the extent that it is consistent with this
concurrence.
Like the majority, I believe Booker requires us to hold
18 U. S. C. §3742(g)(2) unconstitutional. See ante, at 15–
21; United States v. Booker, 543 U. S. 220 (2005); see also
Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U. S. 466 (2000). And, like
the majority, I believe that the law does not require a
sentencing court to follow a Guideline policy statement
that forbids taking account of postsentencing rehabilita
tion. United States Sentencing Commission, Guidelines
Manual §5K2.19 (Nov. 2010) (USSG). I would emphasize,
however, that this conclusion does not leave a sentencing
court free to disregard the Guidelines at will. To the
contrary, the law permits the court to disregard the Guide
lines only where it is “reasonable” for a court to do so.
Booker, supra, at 261–262; Gall v. United States, 552 U. S.
38, 51–52 (2007); Kimbrough v. United States, 552 U. S.
85, 109 (2007). And an appellate court must be guided by
the basic sentencing objectives of the statutes that create
the Guidelines in determining whether, in disregarding the
Guidelines, the sentencing court has acted unreasonably.


2

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES 

Opinion of BREYER, J. 


I

The Guideline in question consists of a policy statement
that sets forth an exception to normal Guideline rules.
Normally, the Guidelines authorize a sentencing judge to
consider a departure from an ordinary Guidelines sen
tence in any case “where conduct significantly differs from
the norm” to which “a particular guideline linguistically
applies.” USSG ch. 1, pt. A1, §4(b) (discussing the Guide
lines’ general approach to departures). The policy state
ment at issue is one of a handful of Guideline rules that
nonetheless forbid departure. It says that a defendant’s
“[p]ost-sentencing rehabilitative efforts, even if excep
tional, . . . are not an appropriate basis for a downward
departure when resentencing.” USSG §5K2.19. The
policy statement thereby adds “Post-Sentencing Rehabili
tative Efforts” to such factors as race, sex, national origin,
creed, religion, and socioeconomic status, which the Guide
lines absolutely prohibit the sentencing judge from taking
into account. USSG ch. 1, pt. A1, §4(b).
II
Can a sentencing court, despite this policy statement,
take account of postsentencing rehabilitation in the par
ticular circumstances that this case presents? I cannot
find the answer to this question in the language of the
sentencing statutes, in sentencing traditions, in the preGuidelines case of Williams v. New York, 337 U. S. 241
(1949), or in this Court’s use of the word “advisory.” As
the majority points out, a sentencing statute forbids any
“ ‘limitation’ ” on the “ ‘information concerning the back
ground, character, and conduct’ ” that “ ‘a court . . . may . . .
consider.’ ” Ante, at 10 (quoting 18 U. S. C. §3661 (empha
sis deleted)). But this provision must refer to all relevant
information. See USSG §1B1.4 and comment. (generally
incorporating §3661, but noting that there are certain
factors that should not be considered for any purpose). If


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of BREYER, J.

the Guideline policy statement’s absolute prohibition on
consideration of postsentencing rehabilitation were legally
binding, then information on that score (like information
about race, religion, sex, or national origin) would fall
outside the scope of this provision, for it would not be
relevant. Thus, reference to the statute begs the question.
Nor can I find much help in the majority’s reference to a
sentencing “ ‘tradition’ ” that considers “ ‘every convicted
person as an individual.’ ” Ante, at 9 (quoting Koon v.
United States, 518 U. S. 81, 113 (1996)). That is because
individualized sentencing is not the only relevant tradi
tion. A just legal system seeks not only to treat different
cases differently but also to treat like cases alike. Fair
ness requires sentencing uniformity as well as efforts to
recognize relevant sentencing differences. Indeed, when
Congress enacted the sentencing statutes before us, it
focused upon the unfair way in which federal sentencing
failed to treat similar offenders similarly. And Congress
wrote statutes designed primarily (though not exclusively)
to bring about greater uniformity in sentencing. See, e.g.,
Booker, supra, at 253–254. The statutes do so in large
part through the creation of a system of Guidelines writ
ten by a Sentencing Commission, which Congress in
tended the courts to follow. See Mistretta v. United States,
488 U. S. 361 (1989) (Sentencing Commission constitu
tional); Rita v. United States, 551 U. S. 338, 348–349
(2007); 18 U. S. C. §3553(a) (identifying relevant factors in
sentencing, including uniformity).
The Williams case is similarly unhelpful. That is be
cause Congress in the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984—the
law before us—disavowed the individualized approach to
sentencing that that case followed. Williams emphasized
the importance of a sentencing court’s legal power to tailor
punishment ability to fit the circumstances of each indi
vidual offender. 337 U. S., at 247 (emphasizing “modern
concepts individualizing punishment”). But Congress,


4

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of BREYER, J.

concerned that individualized sentencing had gone too far,
wrote a new sentencing law designed to help correct “dis
parities” among similar defendants sentenced by different
judges. See S. Rep. No. 98–225, p. 45 (1983) (“Sentencing
disparities” are “unfair both to offenders and to the pub
lic”); id., at 38 (disparities “can be traced directly to the
unfettered discretion the law confers on those judges and
parole authorities responsible for imposing and imple
menting the sentence”).
Booker’s description of the Guidelines as “advisory”
offers somewhat greater assistance—but only if that word
is read in light of the Sixth Amendment analysis that
precedes it. This Court has held that the Sixth Amend
ment forbids Congress (through the Commission) to create
Guidelines that both (1) require judges (without juries) to
find sentencing facts and also (2) tie those facts to the
mandatory imposition of particular sentences. 543 U. S.,
at 226, 244; see also Apprendi, 530 U. S., at 490 (Sixth
Amendment requires jury findings in respect to factual
matters that require judge to increase sentence); Blakely
v. Washington, 542 U. S. 296, 303–304 (2004) (same in
respect to a State’s mandatory guidelines). In light of this
Sixth Amendment prohibition, the Court, believing that
Congress would not have intended to introduce new juries
into each sentencing proceeding, excised the few particular
provisions of the sentencing statutes that specified that
application of the Guidelines was mandatory. Booker, 543
U. S., at 259. The Court believed that the relevant stat
utes remained workable without those few provisions, that
their excision could further Congress’ basic sentencing
intentions, and that excision was more likely to do so than
invalidation of the entire statutory scheme. With an
occasional exception (such as the statutory provision we
strike down today), there is no reason to think that the
sentencing statutes as limited in Booker run afoul of
the Sixth Amendment. Ibid.


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of BREYER, J.

Booker made clear that the remaining statutory provi
sions, while leading us to call the Guidelines “advisory”
(rather than “mandatory”), do not give a sentencing judge
carte blanche to apply, or not to apply, the Guidelines as
that judge chooses. Rather, the “district courts, while not
bound to apply the Guidelines, must consult those Guide
lines and take them into account when sentencing.” Id., at
264. Moreover, Booker held that appellate court review of
sentencing is valid. Booker explained that the “statutory
language, the structure of the [Sentencing Reform Act],
and the sound administration of justice,” taken together,
require appellate courts to apply “reasonableness stan
dard[s]” of review. Id., at 260–261, 262 (internal quotation
marks omitted). Reasonableness standards, we added, are
“not foreign to sentencing law.” Id., at 262. And the “Act
has long required their use in important sentencing cir
cumstances—both on review of departures . . . and on
review of sentences imposed where there was no applica
ble Guideline.” Ibid. See also id., at 261 (appellate courts
will apply “a practical standard of review already familiar
to appellate courts: review for ‘unreasonable[ness]’ ”); id.,
at 264 (“[C]ourts of appeals” will “review sentencing deci
sions for unreasonableness”).
We have also indicated that, in applying reasonableness
standards, the appellate courts should take account of
sentencing policy as embodied in the statutes and Guide
lines, as well as of the comparative expertise of trial and
appellate courts. Thus, in Kimbrough, we observed that in
light of the “discrete institutional strengths” of the Sen
tencing Commission and sentencing judges, “a district
court’s decision to vary from the advisory Guidelines may
attract greatest respect when the sentencing judge finds a
particular case ‘outside the “heartland” to which the
Commission intends individual Guidelines to apply.’ ” 552
U. S., at 109 (quoting Rita, supra, at 351). We noted,
however, that “while the Guidelines are no longer binding,


6

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of BREYER, J.

closer review may be in order when the sentencing judge
varies from the Guidelines based solely on the judge’s view
that the Guidelines range ‘fails properly to reflect §3553(a)
considerations’ even in a mine-run case.” 552 U. S., at
109.
III
Unlike the majority, I would decide the question
Kimbrough left open. And I would follow its suggested
framework for evaluating “reasonableness.” As Kim
brough suggests, doing so takes proper account of the
comparative institutional abilities of trial courts, appellate
courts, and the Sentencing Commission. The trial court
typically better understands the individual circumstances
of particular cases before it, while the Commission has
comparatively greater ability to gather information, to
consider a broader national picture, to compare sentences
attaching to different offenses, and ultimately to write
more coherent overall standards that reflect nationally
uniform, not simply local, sentencing policies.
Applying Kimbrough’s suggested framework, I would
reason very much as does the majority. The first question
is whether a sentencing judge might sometimes take ac
count of a (resentenced) offender’s postsentencing rehabili
tation—despite a Guideline policy statement that says
never. I would find that it is reasonable for the judge to
disregard the Guidelines’ absolute prohibition, despite the
Commission’s comparatively greater policy-formation
abilities. That is because the Guideline policy statement
itself runs counter to ordinary Guideline sentencing policy,
which rarely forbids departures and then for very strong
policy reasons. Supra, at 2. See USSG ch. 1, pt. A1, §4(b).
The Commission offers no convincing justification for
creating this exception with respect to postsentencing
rehabilitation. The Commission’s commentary says that
for a judge at resentencing to lower a sentence for this


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of BREYER, J.

reason (reflecting good behavior while the case is on ap
peal) would conflict with the use of other mechanisms,
such as “good-time” credits, for that purpose. But how is
that so? A defendant, after sentencing but while his case
is on appeal, may or may not be entitled to “good time.”
That may depend upon whether he remains on bail or
upon particular “good-time” rules. Regardless, the resen
tencing judge can take account of any such matter. See
also ante, at 26–28.
The Commission’s commentary also suggests it would be
inequitable to allow an offender who is being resentenced
to receive any kind of credit for his good behavior, say
while his case was on appeal. But why is that so? After
all, the Guidelines permit a judge to take account of an
offender’s good behavior after arrest but before initial
sentencing. That time period could last longer than the
time taken up on appeal. Why should pretrial behavior
count but appeal time behavior not count? Like the major
ity, I find this justification for the policy statement uncon
vincing. See ante, at 25–26.
The second question is whether, given the sentencing
court’s power to disregard the policy statement forbidding
departures based on postsentencing rehabilitation, the
facts and circumstances here could warrant a departure
(or variance) for that reason. And the answer, in my view,
is yes. This case presents unusual rehabilitative circum
stances. As the majority observes: “By the time of his
second resentencing in 2009, Pepper had been drug-free
for nearly five years, had attended college and achieved
high grades, was a top employee at his job slated for a
promotion, had reestablished a relationship with his
father, and was married and supporting his wife’s daugh
ter.” Ante, at 14. These are case-specific facts and cir
cumstances, and they are of the kind that should lead
appellate courts to show their “greatest respect” for a
sentencing decision, including a departure or variance,


8

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of BREYER, J.

that rests upon them.
IV
In sum, the sentencing statutes, as we have interpreted
them, require courts of appeals to review sentences for
reasonableness, including sentences that depart or vary
from a specific Guideline. The appellate courts should
review those decisions more closely when they rest upon
disagreement with Guidelines policy. Kimbrough, 552
U. S., at 109. They should review those decisions with
greater deference when they rest upon case-specific cir
cumstances that place the case outside a specific Guide
line’s “heartland.” See ibid.; Rita, 551 U. S., at 351; Koon,
518 U. S., at 98–99.
By interpreting the sentencing statutes in this way, we
can remain faithful to Congress’ basic intent in writing
them—despite the need to invalidate statutory provisions
that conflict with the Sixth Amendment. The statutes
create a Sentencing Commission with authority to develop
sentencing policy embodied in the Guidelines. The Guide
lines are to further the statutes’ basic objective, namely
greater sentencing uniformity, while also taking account
of special individual circumstances, primarily by permit
ting the sentencing court to depart in nontypical cases. By
collecting trial courts’ reasons for departure (or variance),
by examining appellate court reactions, by developing
statistical and other empirical information, by considering
the views of expert penologists and others, the Commis
sion can revise the Guidelines accordingly. See USSG ch.
1, pt. A1, §3. Trial courts, appellate courts, and the Com
mission all have a role to play in what is meant to be an
iterative, cooperative institutional effort to bring about a
more uniform and a more equitable sentencing system.
See id., at 1–15. I would interpret the statutes before us
accordingly.

