(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE EIGHTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–6822. Argued December 6, 2010—Decided March 2, 2011
After pleading guilty to drug charges, petitioner Pepper was sentenced
under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines to 24 months’ imprison
ment, a nearly 75 percent downward departure from the low end of
the Guidelines range based in part on his substantial assistance, fol
lowed by five years of supervised release. In Pepper I, the Eighth
Circuit reversed and remanded for resentencing in light of, inter alia,
United States v. Booker, 543 U. S. 220. Pepper, who had begun serv
ing his supervised release, testified at his resentencing hearing that
he was no longer a drug addict, having completed a 500-hour drug
treatment program while in prison; that he was enrolled in commu
nity college and had achieved very good grades; and that he was
working part time. Pepper’s father testified that he and his son were
no longer estranged, and Pepper’s probation officer testified that a
24-month sentence would be reasonable in light of Pepper’s substan
tial assistance, postsentencing rehabilitation, and demonstrated low
recidivism risk. The District Court again sentenced Pepper to 24
months, granting a 40 percent downward departure based on Pep
per’s substantial assistance and a further downward variance based
on, inter alia, Pepper’s rehabilitation since his initial sentencing. In
Pepper II, the Eighth Circuit again reversed and remanded for resen
tencing, concluding that Pepper’s postsentencing rehabilitation could
not be considered as a factor supporting a downward variance, and
directing that the case be assigned to a different district judge. After
this Court vacated and remanded the Pepper II judgment in light of
Gall v. United States, 552 U. S. 38, the Eighth Circuit, in Pepper III,
reversed and remanded once more. At the second resentencing hear
ing, Pepper informed the new district judge that he was still in
school, was about to be promoted at his job, and had married and was


2

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
supporting his new family. Noting the nearly identical remand lan
guage of Pepper II and Pepper III, the court observed that it was not
bound to reduce Pepper’s range by 40 percent for substantial assis
tance. Instead, it found him entitled to a 20 percent reduction and
refused to grant a further downward variance for, inter alia, postsen
tencing rehabilitation. It imposed a 65-month prison term and 12
months of supervised release. In Pepper IV, the Eighth Circuit once
again rejected Pepper’s postsentencing rehabilitation argument. It
also rejected his claim that the law of the case from Pepper II and
Pepper III required the District Court to reduce the applicable Guide
lines range by at least 40 percent.

Held:
1. When a defendant’s sentence has been set aside on appeal, a dis
trict court at resentencing may consider evidence of the defendant’s
postsentencing rehabilitation, and such evidence may, in appropriate
cases, support a downward variance from the now-advisory Guide
lines range. Pp. 9–27.
(a) Consistent with the principle that “the punishment should fit
the offender and not merely the crime,” Williams v. New York, 337
U. S. 241, 247, this Court has observed a consistent and uniform pol
icy “under which a sentencing judge could exercise a wide discretion
in the sources and types of evidence used to assist him in determin
ing the kind and extent of punishment to be imposed within limits
fixed by law,” id., at 246, particularly “the fullest information possi
ble concerning the defendant’s life and characteristics,” id., at 247.
That principle is codified at 18 U. S. C. §3661, which provides that
“[n]o limitation shall be placed on the information” a sentencing court
may consider “concerning the [defendant’s] background, character,
and conduct,” and at §3553(a), which specifies that sentencing courts
must consider, among other things, a defendant’s “history and char
acteristics,” §3553(a)(1). The Guidelines, which Booker made “effec
tively advisory,” 543 U. S., at 245, “should be the starting point and
the initial benchmark,” but district courts may impose sentences
within statutory limits based on appropriate consideration of all of
the §3553(a) factors, subject to appellate review for “reasonableness,”
Gall v. United States, 552 U. S. 38, 49–51. This sentencing frame
work applies both at initial sentencing and at any subsequent resen
tencing after a sentence has been set aside on appeal. Pp. 9–12.
(b) Postsentencing rehabilitation evidence may support a down
ward variance from the advisory Guidelines range. The plain lan
guage of §3661 makes clear that there is “[n]o limitation . . . on . . .
background, character, and conduct” information, and it makes no
distinction between an initial sentencing and a subsequent resen
tencing. In addition, postsentencing rehabilitation evidence may be


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
highly relevant to several §3553(a) factors that district courts are re
quired to consider at sentencing. The extensive evidence of Pepper’s
rehabilitation since his initial sentencing is clearly relevant to the se
lection of an appropriate sentence here. Most fundamentally, that
evidence provides the most up-to-date picture of his “history and
characteristics.” §3553(a)(1). At the time of his initial sentencing, he
was an unemployed drug addict who was estranged from his family
and sold drugs. By his second resentencing, he had been drug-free
for nearly five years, was attending college, was a top employee
slated for promotion, had re-established a relationship with his fa
ther, and was married and supporting a family. His postsentencing
conduct also sheds light on the likelihood that he will engage in fu
ture criminal conduct, a central factor that sentencing courts must
consider. See §§3553(a)(2)(B)–(C). Pp. 12–15.
(c) The contrary arguments advanced by amicus appointed to de
fend the judgment are unpersuasive. Pp. 15–26.
(1) While §3742(g)(2)—which prohibits a district court at re
sentencing from imposing a sentence outside the Guidelines range
except upon a ground it relied upon at the prior sentencing—
effectively precludes a court from considering postsentencing reha
bilitation, that provision is invalid after Booker. Like the provisions
invalidated in Booker—§§3553(b)(1) and 3742(e)—§3742(g)(2) re
quires district courts effectively to treat the Guidelines as mandatory
in an entire set of cases. Thus, the proper remedy is to invalidate the
provision. While applying §3742(g)(2) at resentencing would not al
ways result in a Sixth Amendment violation, this Court rejects a par
tial invalidation that would leave the Guidelines effectively manda
tory in some cases and advisory in others. The fact that §3742(g)(2)
permits a resentencing court on remand to impose a non-Guidelines
sentence where the prior sentence expressly relied on a departure
upheld by the court of appeals also does not cure the constitutional
infirmity. And the argument that any constitutional infirmity in
§3742(g)(2) can be remedied by invalidating §3742(j)(1)(B) is rejected.
Pp. 15–20.
(2) This Court finds unpersuasive amicus’ arguments focusing
on Congress’ sentencing objectives under §3553(a). Contrary to
amicus’ contention, §3742(g)(2) does not reflect a congressional pur
pose to preclude consideration of postsentencing rehabilitation evi
dence. Thus, that provision has no bearing on this Court’s analysis of
whether §3553(a) permits consideration of such evidence. Nor is the
consideration of postsentencing rehabilitation inconsistent with the
sentencing factor in §3553(a)(5)—which directs sentencing courts to
consider “any pertinent policy statement” of the Sentencing Commis
sion—particularly as the pertinent policy statement in this case is


4

PEPPER v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
based on unconvincing policy rationales not reflected in the relevant
sentencing statutes. Consideration of postsentencing rehabilitation
is also not inconsistent with §3553(a)(6)—which requires courts to
consider “the need to avoid unwarranted sentenc[ing] disparities
among defendants with similar records who have been found guilty of
similar conduct”—as any disparity arises only from the normal trial
and sentencing process. The differences in procedural opportunity
that may result because some defendants are inevitably sentenced in
error and must be resentenced are not the kinds of “unwarranted”
sentencing disparities that Congress sought to eliminate under
§3553(a)(6). Pp. 21–26.
(d) On remand, the District Court should consider and give ap
propriate weight to the postsentencing rehabilitation evidence, as
well as any additional evidence concerning Pepper’s conduct since his
last sentencing. Pp. 26–27.
2. Because the Eighth Circuit in Pepper III set aside Pepper’s en
tire sentence and remanded for de novo resentencing, the District
Court was not bound by the law of the case doctrine to apply the
same 40 percent departure applied by the original sentencing judge.
To avoid undermining a district court’s original sentencing intent, an
appellate court when reversing one part of a sentence “may vacate
the entire sentence . . . so that, on remand, the trial court can recon
figure the sentencing plan . . . to satisfy [§3553(a)’s] sentencing fac
tors.” Greenlaw v. United States, 554 U. S. 237, 253. That is what
the Eighth Circuit did here. Pp. 27–30.

570 F. 3d 958, vacated in part, affirmed in part, and remanded.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, and GINSBURG, JJ., joined, and in which
BREYER and ALITO, JJ., joined as to Part III. BREYER, J., filed an opin
ion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment. ALITO, J., filed
an opinion concurring in part, concurring in the judgment in part, and
dissenting in part. THOMAS, J., filed a dissenting opinion. KAGAN, J.,
took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.

