(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

AT&T MOBILITY LLC v. CONCEPCION ET UX.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–893.

Argued November 9, 2010—Decided April 27, 2011

The cellular telephone contract between respondents (Concepcions) and
petitioner (AT&T) provided for arbitration of all disputes, but did not
permit classwide arbitration. After the Concepcions were charged
sales tax on the retail value of phones provided free under their ser
vice contract, they sued AT&T in a California Federal District Court.
Their suit was consolidated with a class action alleging, inter alia,
that AT&T had engaged in false advertising and fraud by charging
sales tax on “free” phones. The District Court denied AT&T’s motion
to compel arbitration under the Concepcions’ contract. Relying on
the California Supreme Court’s Discover Bank decision, it found the
arbitration provision unconscionable because it disallowed classwide
proceedings. The Ninth Circuit agreed that the provision was uncon
scionable under California law and held that the Federal Arbitration
Act (FAA), which makes arbitration agreements “valid, irrevocable,
and enforceable, save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity
for the revocation of any contract,” 9 U. S. C. §2, did not preempt its
ruling.
Held: Because it “stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and exe
cution of the full purposes and objectives of Congress,” Hines v.
Davidowitz, 312 U. S. 52, 67, California’s Discover Bank rule is pre
empted by the FAA. Pp. 4–18.
(a) Section 2 reflects a “liberal federal policy favoring arbitration,”
Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Constr. Corp., 460 U. S.
1, 24, and the “fundamental principle that arbitration is a matter of
contract,” Rent-A-Center, West, Inc. v. Jackson, 561 U. S. ____, ____.
Thus, courts must place arbitration agreements on an equal footing
with other contracts, Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v. Cardegna, 546
U. S. 440, 443, and enforce them according to their terms, Volt In


2

AT&T MOBILITY LLC v. CONCEPCION
Syllabus
formation Sciences, Inc. v. Board of Trustees of Leland Stanford Jun
ior Univ., 489 U. S. 468, 478. Section 2’s saving clause permits
agreements to be invalidated by “generally applicable contract de
fenses,” but not by defenses that apply only to arbitration or derive
their meaning from the fact that an agreement to arbitrate is at is
sue. Doctor’s Associates, Inc. v. Casarotto, 517 U. S. 681, 687. Pp. 4–
5.
(b) In Discover Bank, the California Supreme Court held that class
waivers in consumer arbitration agreements are unconscionable if
the agreement is in an adhesion contract, disputes between the par
ties are likely to involve small amounts of damages, and the party
with inferior bargaining power alleges a deliberate scheme to de
fraud. Pp. 5–6.
(c) The Concepcions claim that the Discover Bank rule is a ground
that “exist[s] at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract”
under FAA §2. When state law prohibits outright the arbitration of a
particular type of claim, the FAA displaces the conflicting rule. But
the inquiry is more complex when a generally applicable doctrine is
alleged to have been applied in a fashion that disfavors or interferes
with arbitration. Although §2’s saving clause preserves generally
applicable contract defenses, it does not suggest an intent to preserve
state-law rules that stand as an obstacle to the accomplishment of
the FAA’s objectives. Cf. Geier v. American Honda Motor Co., 529
U. S. 861, 872. The FAA’s overarching purpose is to ensure the en
forcement of arbitration agreements according to their terms so as to
facilitate informal, streamlined proceedings. Parties may agree to
limit the issues subject to arbitration, Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v.
Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc., 473 U. S. 614, 628, to arbitrate accord
ing to specific rules, Volt, supra, at 479, and to limit with whom they
will arbitrate, Stolt-Nielsen, supra, at ___. Pp. 6–12.
(d) Class arbitration, to the extent it is manufactured by Discover
Bank rather than consensual, interferes with fundamental attributes
of arbitration. The switch from bilateral to class arbitration sacri
fices arbitration’s informality and makes the process slower, more
costly, and more likely to generate procedural morass than final
judgment. And class arbitration greatly increases risks to defen
dants. The absence of multilayered review makes it more likely that
errors will go uncorrected. That risk of error may become unaccept
able when damages allegedly owed to thousands of claimants are ag
gregated and decided at once. Arbitration is poorly suited to these
higher stakes. In litigation, a defendant may appeal a certification
decision and a final judgment, but 9 U. S. C. §10 limits the grounds
on which courts can vacate arbitral awards. Pp. 12–18.

584 F. 3d 849, reversed and remanded.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., joined. THOMAS, J., filed a
concurring opinion. BREYER, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which
GINSBURG, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined.

