2

WALL v. KHOLI
Syllabus
or other collateral review” turns on the meaning of “collateral re
view,” but they disagree about what that meaning should be. Pp.
4–5.
(b) Because “collateral review” is not defined in AEDPA, the
Court begins with the ordinary understanding of that phrase. By
definition, “collateral” describes something that is “indirect,” not di
rect. 3 Oxford English Dictionary 473. This suggests that “collat
eral” review is not part of direct review. This conclusion is supported
by the definition of the related phrase “collateral attack” and by the
Court’s prior use of the term “collateral” to describe proceedings that
are separate from the direct review process. Pp. 5–7.
(c) The term “review” is best understood as a “judicial reexami
nation.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1944. Pp.
7–8.
2. A Rule 35 motion to reduce sentence under Rhode Island law is
an application for “collateral review” that triggers AEDPA’s tolling
provision. Pp. 8–15.
(a) Rhode Island’s Rule 35 is similar to the version of Federal
Rule of Criminal Procedure 35 in effect before the federal Sentencing
Reform Act of 1984. The Rule permits a court to provide relief, as
relevant here, to “reduce any sentence,” and it is generally addressed
to the sound discretion of the sentencing justice. Under the limited
review available, an appellate court may disturb the trial justice’s de
cision if the sentence imposed is without justification and is grossly
disparate when compared to sentences for similar offenses. Pp. 8–9.
(b) Keeping these principles in mind, a Rule 35 sentence reduc
tion proceeding is “collateral.” The parties agree that the motion is
not part of the direct review process, and both this Court and lower
federal courts have described a motion to reduce sentence under old
Federal Rule 35 as invoking a “collateral” remedy. Therefore, it is
not difficult to conclude that Rhode Island’s motion to reduce sen
tence is “collateral.” A Rule 35 motion also calls for “review” of the
sentence within §2244(d)(2)’s meaning. The decision to reduce a sen
tence involves judicial reexamination of the sentence to determine
whether a more lenient sentence is proper. The trial justice is guided
by several sentencing factors in making that decision. And those fac
tors are also used by the State Supreme Court in evaluating the trial
justice’s justifications for the sentence. Pp. 9–11.
(c) Rhode Island’s arguments in support of its opposing view that
“collateral review” includes only “legal” challenges to a conviction or
sentence, and thus excludes motions for a discretionary sentence re
duction, are unpersuasive. Nor does “collateral review” turn on
whether a motion is part of the same criminal case. Pp. 11–15.

582 F. 3d 147, affirmed.

