12

WALL v. KHOLI
Opinion of the Court

State Postconviction Remedies and Relief Handbook §§1:2,
1:7, pp. 2, 15 (2010) (characterizing a motion to reduce
sentence as a “collateral” or “postconviction” remedy).
In a related argument, Rhode Island notes that several
other AEDPA provisions use the term “collateral review”
to refer to proceedings that involve a challenge to the
lawfulness of a state-court judgment, see 28 U. S. C.
§§2244(b)(2)(A), (d)(1)(C), 2254(e)(2)(A)(i),6 and Rhode
Island reasons that the phrase “collateral review” in
§2244(d)(2) should be limited to proceedings of this nature.
This argument has the same flaw as the argument just
discussed. Just because the phrase “collateral review”
encompasses proceedings that challenge the lawfulness of
a prior judgment, it does not follow that other proceedings
may not also be described as involving “collateral review.”
Finally, Rhode Island contends that the purpose of the
tolling provision is to allow a state prisoner to exhaust
state remedies and that this purpose is not served when a
prisoner’s state application merely seeks sentencing leni
ency, a matter that cannot be raised in a federal habeas
petition. This argument is based on an excessively narrow
understanding of §2244(d)(2)’s role.
It is certainly true that a purpose—and perhaps the
chief purpose—of tolling under §2244(d)(2) is to permit
the exhaustion of state remedies, see Duncan, 533 U. S., at
178–179, but that is not §2244(d)(2)’s only role. The toll
ing provision “provides a powerful incentive for litigants to
exhaust all available state remedies before proceeding in
the lower federal courts.” Id., at 180 (emphasis added).
Tolling the limitation period for all “collateral review”
motions provides both litigants and States with an oppor
tunity to resolve objections at the state level, potentially
obviating the need for a litigant to resort to federal court.
——————
6 All of these provisions refer to a new rule of constitutional law made
retroactively applicable by this Court to “cases on collateral review.”

