Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

If, for example, a litigant obtains relief on state-law
grounds, there may be no need for federal habeas. The
same dynamic may be present to a degree with respect to
motions that do not challenge the lawfulness of a judg
ment. If a defendant receives relief in state court, the
need for federal habeas review may be narrowed or even
obviated, and this furthers principles of “comity, finality,
and federalism.” Williams, 529 U. S., at 436.
Rhode Island’s interpretation of §2244(d)(2) would also
greatly complicate the work of federal habeas courts.
Rhode Island would require those courts to separate mo
tions for a reduced sentence into two categories: those that
challenge a sentence on legal grounds and those that
merely ask for leniency. But this taxonomy is problem
atic. Even if a jurisdiction allows sentencing judges to
exercise a high degree of discretion in selecting a sentence
from within a prescribed range, it does not necessarily
follow that the judge’s choice is insulated from challenge
on legal grounds. “[D]iscretionary choices are not left to a
court’s ‘inclination, but to its judgment; and its judgment
is to be guided by sound legal principles.’ ” Albemarle
Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U. S. 405, 416 (1975) (quoting
United States v. Burr, 25 F. Cas. 30, 35 (No. 14,692d) (CC
Va. 1807) (Marshall, C. J.)). If the law of a jurisdiction
provides criteria to guide a trial judge’s exercise of sen
tencing discretion, a motion to reduce sentence may argue
that a sentence is inconsistent with those criteria. In that
sense, the motion argues that the sentence is contrary to
sentencing law. See, e.g., Ruffner, 5 A. 3d, at 867 (“A trial
justice considers a number of factors when determining a
fair sentence[,] including the defendant’s potential for
rehabilitation. The defendant asserts that the trial justice
did not consider defendant’s participation in rehabilitative
programs” (citations omitted)). We do not think that
§2244(d)(2) was meant to require federal habeas courts to
draw the sort of difficult distinction that Rhode Island’s

