(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MATRIXX INITIATIVES, INC., ET AL. v. SIRACUSANO
ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–1156. Argued January 10, 2011—Decided March 22, 2011
Respondents filed this securities fraud class action, alleging that peti
tioners (hereinafter Matrixx) violated §10(b) of the Securities Ex
change Act of 1934 and Securities and Exchange Commission Rule
10b–5 by failing to disclose reports of a possible link between Ma
trixx’s leading product, Zicam Cold Remedy, and loss of smell (anos
mia), rendering statements made by Matrixx misleading. Matrixx
moved to dismiss the complaint, arguing that respondents had not
pleaded the element of a material misstatement or omission and the
element of scienter. The District Court granted the motion, but the
Ninth Circuit reversed. It held that the District Court erred in re
quiring an allegation of statistical significance to establish material
ity, concluding instead that the complaint adequately alleged infor
mation linking Zicam and anosmia that would have been significant
to a reasonable investor. It also held that Matrixx’s withholding of
information about reports of adverse effects and about pending law
suits by Zicam users gave rise to a strong inference of scienter.
Held: Respondents have stated a claim under §10(b) and Rule 10b–5.
Pp. 8–22.
(a) To prevail on their claim, respondents must prove, as relevant
here, a material misrepresentation or omission by Matrixx and sci
enter. See Stoneridge Investment Partners, LLC v. Scientific-Atlanta,
Inc., 552 U. S. 148, 157. Matrixx contends that they failed to plead
these required elements because they did not allege that the reports
Matrixx received reflected statistically significant evidence that Zi
cam caused anosmia. Pp. 8–9.
(b) Respondents have adequately pleaded materiality. Pp. 9–19.
(1) Under Basic Inc. v. Levinson, 485 U. S. 224, §10(b)’s material


2

MATRIXX INITIATIVES, INC. v. SIRACUSANO
Syllabus
ity requirement is satisfied when there is “ ‘a substantial likelihood
that the disclosure of the omitted fact would have been viewed by the
reasonable investor as having significantly altered the “total mix” of
information made available.’ ” Id., at 231–232. The Court declined to
adopt a bright-line rule for determining materiality in Basic, observ
ing that “[a]ny approach that designates a single fact or occurrence as
always determinative of an inherently fact-specific finding such as
materiality, must necessarily be overinclusive or underinclusive.”
Id., at 236. Here, Matrixx’s bright-line rule—that adverse event re
ports regarding a pharmaceutical company’s products are not mate
rial absent a sufficient number of such reports to establish a statisti
cally significant risk that the product is causing the events—would
“artificially exclud[e]” information that “would otherwise be consid
ered significant to [a reasonable investor’s] trading decision.” Ibid.
Matrixx’s premise that statistical significance is the only reliable in
dication of causation is flawed. Both medical experts and the Food
and Drug Administration rely on evidence other than statistically
significant data to establish an inference of causation. It thus stands
to reason that reasonable investors would act on such evidence. Be
cause adverse reports can take many forms, assessing their material
ity is a fact-specific inquiry, requiring consideration of their source,
content, and context. The question is whether a reasonable investor
would have viewed the nondisclosed information “ ‘as having signifi
cantly altered the “total mix” of information made available.’ ” Id., at
232. Something more than the mere existence of adverse event re
ports is needed to satisfy that standard, but that something more is
not limited to statistical significance and can come from the source,
content, and context of the reports. Pp. 9–16.
(2) Applying Basic’s “total mix” standard here, respondents ade
quately pleaded materiality. The complaint’s allegations suffice to
“raise a reasonable expectation that discovery will reveal evidence”
satisfying the materiality requirement, Bell Atlantic Corp. v.
Twombly, 550 U. S. 544, 556, and to “allo[w] the court to draw the
reasonable inference that the defendant is liable,” Ashcroft v. Iqbal,
556 U. S. ___, ___. Assuming the complaint’s allegations to be true,
Matrixx received reports from medical experts and researchers that
plausibly indicated a reliable causal link between Zicam and anos
mia. Consumers likely would have viewed Zicam’s risk as substan
tially outweighing its benefit. Viewing the complaint’s allegations as
a whole, the complaint alleges facts suggesting a significant risk to
the commercial viability of Matrixx’s leading product. It is substan
tially likely that a reasonable investor would have viewed this infor
mation “ ‘as having significantly altered the “total mix” of informa
tion made available.’ ”
Basic, supra, at 232.
Assuming the


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
complaint’s allegations to be true, Matrixx told the market that reve
nues were going to rise 50 and then 80 percent when it had informa
tion indicating a significant risk to its leading revenue-generating
product. It also publicly dismissed reports linking Zicam and anos
mia and stated that zinc gluconate’s safety was well established,
when it had evidence of a biological link between Zicam’s key ingre
dient and anosmia and had conducted no studies to disprove that
link. Pp. 16–19.
(c) Respondents have also adequately pleaded scienter, “ ‘a mental
state embracing intent to deceive, manipulate, or defraud,’ ” Tellabs,
Inc. v. Makor Issues & Rights, Ltd., 551 U. S. 308, 319. This Court
assumes, without deciding, that the scienter requirement may be sat
isfied by a showing of deliberate recklessness. Under the Private Se
curities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, a complaint adequately pleads
scienter “only if a reasonable person would deem the inference of sci
enter cogent and at least as compelling as any opposing inference one
could draw from the facts alleged.” Id., at 324. Matrixx’s proposed
bright-line rule requiring an allegation of statistical significance to
establish a strong inference of scienter is once again flawed. The
complaint’s allegations, “taken collectively,” give rise to a “cogent and
compelling” inference that Matrixx elected not to disclose adverse
event reports not because it believed they were meaningless but be
cause it understood their likely effect on the market. Id., at 323, 324.
“[A] reasonable person” would deem the inference that Matrixx acted
with deliberate recklessness “at least as compelling as any [plausible]
opposing inference.” Id., at 324. Pp. 19–22.
585 F. 3d 1167, affirmed.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

