2

GRAY v. KELLY
Opinion in Chambers

trict Court extended Gray’s deadline for filing a habeas
petition to August 29.
On July 25, Gray filed with this Court a petition for a
writ of certiorari, seeking review of the decision of the
Virginia Supreme Court. He claimed that the procedures
followed by that court in adjudicating his postconviction
claims violated his federal constitutional rights to due
process and equal protection of the laws. Gray then asked
the District Court to stay its June 29 scheduling order
pending this Court’s disposition of his petition for certiorari to the Virginia Supreme Court. After the District Court
denied the request, Gray did not seek a stay from the
Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, but rather filed an
application for a stay with me as Circuit Justice.
Gray’s application accompanies his petition for certiorari to the Virginia Supreme Court, but does not seek a stay
of that court’s judgment. Nor does his application seek a
stay of his date of execution, which has not been reset.
His application instead requests only a stay of the District
Court’s order requiring him to file a federal habeas petition by August 29.*
Although Gray’s application invokes the familiar standard for securing a stay of a judgment subject to this
Court’s review, see Application for Stay 4 (citing Barefoot
v. Estelle, 463 U. S. 880, 895 (1983)), that standard is
inapplicable here because Gray does not seek a stay of
such a judgment. Gray’s request that this Court exercise
its “supervisory authority” over the District Court, Reply
——————
* Gray’s application specifically requests a stay of the District Court’s
June 29 scheduling order. Application for Stay 14. That order extended
the deadline for filing a federal habeas petition to August 29. A stay of
that order would therefore serve only to restore the original deadline
of July 29. The substance of Gray’s application makes clear, however,
that the relief he actually seeks is a stay of the District Court’s briefing
schedule in its entirety until this Court acts on his petition for a writ of
certiorari to the Virginia Supreme Court.

