2

BLOATE v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
excludable from the 70-day limit under subsection (h)(1). Such time
may be excluded only when a district court grants a continuance
based on appropriate findings under subsection (h)(7). Pp. 6–18.
(a) The delay at issue is governed by subsection (h)(1)(D) (hereinaf
ter subparagraph (D)), the enumerated category that renders auto
matically excludable “delay resulting from any pretrial motion, from
the filing of the motion through the conclusion of the hearing on, or
other prompt disposition of, such motion.” This provision communi
cates Congress’ judgment that pretrial motion-related delay is auto
matically excludable only from the time a pretrial motion is filed
through a specified hearing or disposition point, and that other pre
trial motion-related delay is excludable only if it results in a continu
ance under subsection (h)(7). This limitation is significant because
Congress knew how to define the boundaries of subsection (h)(1)’s
enumerated exclusions broadly when it so desired. Although the pe
riod of delay the Government seeks to exclude in this case results
from a proceeding governed by subparagraph (D), that period pre
cedes the first day upon which Congress specified that such delay
may be excluded automatically and thus is not automatically exclud
able. Pp. 7–10.
(b) This analysis resolves the automatic excludability inquiry be
cause “[a] specific provision” (here, subparagraph (D)) “controls one[s]
of more general application” (here, subsections (h)(1) and (h)(7)).
Gozlon-Peretz v. United States, 498 U. S. 395, 407. A contrary result
would depart from the statute in a manner that underscores the pro
priety of this Court’s approach. Subsection (h)(1)’s phrase “including
but not limited to” does not show that subsection (h)(1) permits auto
matic exclusion of delay related to an enumerated category of pro
ceedings, but outside the boundaries set forth in the subparagraph
expressly addressed to that category. That would confuse the illus
trative nature of the subsection’s list of categories with the contents
of the categories themselves. Reading the “including but not limited
to” clause to modify the contents of each subparagraph in the list as
well as the list itself would violate settled statutory construction
principles by ignoring subsection (h)(1)’s structure and grammar and
in so doing rendering even the clearest of the subparagraphs inde
terminate and virtually superfluous. See generally id., at 410. Sub
section (h)(1)’s context supports this Court’s conclusion. Subsection
(h)(7) provides that delay “resulting from a continuance granted by
any judge” may be excluded, but only if the judge finds that “the ends
of justice served by taking such action outweigh the best interest of
the public and the defendant in a speedy trial,” and records those
findings. In setting forth the statutory factors justifying a subsection
(h)(7) continuance, Congress twice recognized the importance of ade

