8

BLOATE v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

text governs the automatic excludability of delays “result
ing” from a specific category of “proceedings concerning
the defendant,” namely, proceedings involving pretrial
motions.9 Because the delay at issue here results from a
decision granting time to prepare pretrial motions, if not
from a pretrial motion itself (the defendant’s request for
additional time), it is governed by subparagraph (D). But
that does not make the delay at issue here automatically
excludable.
Subparagraph (D) does not subject all pretrial motion
related delay to automatic exclusion. Instead, it renders
automatically excludable only the delay that occurs “from
the filing of the motion through the conclusion of the
hearing on, or other prompt disposition of” the motion.
——————
9 The

dissent argues that this conclusion lacks “force” because “[i]t is
at least doubtful . . . that the delay at issue in the present case is delay
‘resulting from [a] pretrial motion.’ ” Post, at 4 (opinion of ALITO, J.).
According to the dissent, “delay ‘resulting from’ a pretrial motion is
delay that occurs as a consequence of such a motion,” which the “type of
delay involved in the present case” does not.” Post, at 4–5 (arguing that
the delay in this case instead “occurs as a consequence of the court’s
granting of a defense request for an extension of time”).
The dissent’s position, which rests upon a dictionary definition of two
isolated words, does not account for the governing statutory context.
For the reasons we explain, the text and structure of subsection (h)
support our conclusion that subparagraph (D) governs the automatic
excludability of delays “resulting from” proceedings involving pretrial
motions. As the dissent concedes, defining “resulting from” to mean “as
a consequence of” does not foreclose our interpretation. That is because
the dissent’s definition of “resulting from” leaves ample room to con
clude that the delay at issue here is “a consequence of” the category of
proceedings covered by subparagraph (D), whether one views the delay
“as a consequence of” a proceeding involving pretrial motions, or “as a
consequence of” a pretrial motion itself (the defense request for addi
tional time). At bottom, the dissent’s position is not that our interpre
tation is foreclosed by the Act; it is that the dissent’s interpretation is
preferable. We disagree because the dissent’s interpretation, among
other things, fails to account fully for the text and structure of subsec
tion (h)(1) and renders much of subsection (h)(7) a nullity.

