12

BLOATE v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

nore the structure and grammar of subsection (h)(1), and
in so doing render even the clearest of the subparagraphs
indeterminate and virtually superfluous. See GozlonPeretz, supra, at 410; Duncan v. Walker, 533 U. S. 167,
174 (2001) (“[A] statute ought, upon the whole, to be so
construed that, if it can be prevented, no clause, sentence,
or word shall be superfluous, void, or insignificant” (inter
nal quotation marks omitted)). Our reading avoids these
problems by treating the list as illustrative, but construing
each of the eight subparagraphs in (h)(1) to govern, con
clusively unless the subparagraph itself indicates other
wise, see, e.g., §3161(h)(1)(A); supra, at 9, the automatic
excludability of the delay resulting from the category of
proceedings it addresses.
The dissent responds that, even if subparagraph (D)’s
limits are conclusive rather than merely illustrative, we
should automatically exclude the delay at issue here under
subsection (h)(1)’s opening clause, see post, at 2, because it
is not “clear” that the delay is governed by the more spe
cific (and restrictive) language in subparagraph (D). Post,
at 5. We decline this invitation to use the alleged uncer
tainty in subparagraph (D)’s scope as a justification for
disregarding its limits and instead expanding, through
liberal interpretation of subsection (h)(1)’s generic opening
clause,12 what the dissent itself describes as the automatic
exclusion “exceptio[n]” to the Act’s 70-day period and the
Act’s “general rule” requiring “ends-of-justice findings for
——————
12 The dissent argues that the relevant “proceeding” in this case is the
District Court’s disposition of petitioner’s motion for additional time to
file pretrial motions. See post, at 2. If that were correct, any order
disposing of a motion—including a pretrial motion under subparagraph
(D)—would be a separate “proceeding,” and any resulting delay would
be automatically excludable. The dissent’s reading renders superflu
ous the two provisions in subsection (h)(7) that require findings for the
exclusion of time necessary for “adequate preparation for pretrial
proceedings,”
§3161(h)(7)(B)(ii),
and
“effective
preparation,”
§3161(h)(7)(B)(iv). See also infra, at 13–14.

