Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

(Emphasis added.) In so doing, the provision communi
cates Congress’ judgment that delay resulting from pre
trial motions is automatically excludable, i.e., excludable
without district court findings, only from the time a mo
tion is filed through the hearing or disposition point speci
fied in the subparagraph, and that other periods of pre
trial motion-related delay are excludable only when
accompanied by district court findings.10
This limitation is significant because Congress knew
how to define the boundaries of an enumerated exclusion
broadly when it so desired. Subsection (h)(1)(A) (hereinaf
ter subparagraph (A)), for example, provides for the auto
matic exclusion of “delay resulting from any proceeding,
including any examinations, to determine the mental
competency or physical capacity of the defendant.” (Em
phasis added.) With the word “including,” Congress indi
cated that other competency-related proceedings besides
“examinations” might fall within subparagraph (A)’s
automatic exclusion. In subparagraph (D), by contrast,
Congress declined to use an expansive or illustrative term
such as “including,” and provided instead that only pre
trial motion-related delay “from the filing” of a motion to
the hearing or disposition point specified in the provision
is automatically excludable from the Act’s 70-day limit.
Thus, although the period of delay the Government
seeks to exclude in this case results from a proceeding
——————
10 This conclusion flows not only from subparagraph (D)’s text, but
also from its structure. As noted, subparagraph (D) excludes from the
70-day period “delay resulting from any pretrial motion, from the filing
of the motion through the conclusion of the hearing on, or other prompt
disposition of, such motion.” In this case, the comma after the first
phrase indicates that the second phrase modifies the scope of exclud
able delay referred to in the first. Thus, subparagraph (D)’s automatic
exclusion for delay “resulting from” a pretrial motion is limited to delay
that occurs from the filing of the motion through the endpoints identi
fied in the provision.

