14

BLOATE v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

(requiring a district court to consider in other cases
“[w]hether the failure to grant such a continuance . . .
would deny counsel for the defendant or the attorney for
the Government the reasonable time necessary for effective
preparation, taking into account the exercise of due dili
gence” (emphasis added)). Our determination that the
delay at issue here is not automatically excludable gives
full effect to subsection (h)(7), and respects its provisions
for excluding certain types of delay only where district
court makes findings justifying the exclusion.13 Cf. post,
at 11–12 (construing subsection (h)(1) in a manner that
could encompass, and govern, delays expressly within
subsection (h)(7)’s purview).
3
Finally, our Speedy Trial Act precedents support our
reading of subsection (h)(1). We recently explained that
the Act serves not only to protect defendants, but also to
vindicate the public interest in the swift administration of
justice. We thus held that a defendant may not opt out of
the Act even if he believes it would be in his interest;
“[a]llowing prospective waivers would seriously undermine
the Act because there are many cases . . . in which the
prosecution, the defense, and the court would all be happy
to opt out of the Act, to the detriment of the public inter
——————
13 Had Congress wished courts to exclude pretrial motion preparation
time automatically, it could have said so. As noted, subsection (h)(7)
twice refers to preparation time to explain the kinds of continuances
that a court may grant in the interests of justice.
See
§§3161(h)(7)(B)(ii), (h)(7)(B)(iv). Congress easily could have referred to
preparation time similarly in subsection (h)(1). See, e.g., Speedy Trial
Act Amendments Act of 1979, H. R. 3630, 96th Cong., 1st Sess., §5(c)
(1979) (proposing to exclude under subparagraph (D) all “delay result
ing from the preparation and service of pretrial motions and responses
and from hearings thereon” (emphasis added)). Congress did not do so,
and we are bound to enforce only the language that Congress and the
President enacted.

