Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

ney and for time to allow this new attorney to become
familiar with the case. Fortunately, we can abide by the
limitations Congress imposed on the statutory rights at
issue here without interpreting the Act in a manner that
would trap trial courts.
For the reasons we explained above, neither subpara
graph (D) nor subsection (h)(1) automatically excludes
time granted to prepare pretrial motions. This conclusion
does not lay a “trap for trial judges” because it limits (in a
way the statute requires) only automatic exclusions. In
considering any request for delay, whether the exclusion of
time will be automatic or not, trial judges always have to
devote time to assessing whether the reasons for the delay
are justified, given both the statutory and constitutional
requirement of speedy trials. Placing these reasons in the
record does not add an appreciable burden on these
judges. Neither are district courts forced to choose be
tween rejecting a defendant’s request for time to prepare
pretrial motions and risking dismissal of the indictment if
preparation time delays the trial. Instead, a district court
may exclude preparation time under subsection (h)(7) if it
grants a continuance for that purpose based on recorded
findings “that the ends of justice served by taking such
action outweigh the best interest of the public and the
defendant in a speedy trial.” Subsection (h)(7) provides
“[m]uch of the Act’s flexibility,” Zedner, 547 U. S., at 498,
and gives district courts “discretion—within limits and
subject to specific procedures—to accommodate limited
delays for case-specific needs,” id., at 499. The statutory
scheme thus ensures that district courts may grant neces
sary pretrial motion preparation time without risking
dismissal.
Still, the Government suggests that, in some cases, a
district court may fail to make the findings necessary for
an exclusion under subsection (h)(7), leading to a windfall
gain for a defendant who induces delay beyond the Act’s

