4

BLOATE v. UNITED STATES
ALITO, J., dissenting

findings.” Ante, at 9. Thus, since subparagraph (D) does
not provide for the exclusion of delay resulting from the
granting of a defense request for more time to prepare
pretrial motions, the Court holds that such delay is not
excluded from the 70-day calculation. The Court’s analy
sis, however, is not supported by either the text of sub
paragraph (D) or the circumstances that gave rise to its
enactment.
D
The Court’s argument would have some force if it were
clear that the delay involved in the present case is “delay
resulting from [a] pretrial motion.” §3161(h)(1)(D). It
could then be argued that subparagraph (D) reflects a
legislative decision to provide for the automatic exclusion
of delay resulting from a pretrial motion only if that delay
occurs during the period “from the filing of the motion
through the conclusion of the hearing on, or other prompt
disposition of, such motion.” Ibid.2
It is at least doubtful, however, that the delay at issue
in the present case is delay “resulting from [a] pretrial
motion.” Ibid.3 The phrase “resulting from” means “pro
ceed[ing], spring[ing], or aris[ing] as a consequence, effect,
or conclusion.” Webster’s Third New International Dic
tionary 1937 (1971). Thus, delay “resulting from” a pre
trial motion is delay that occurs as a consequence of such a
——————
2 The

Court hints that the defense’s request for additional time might
itself be a pretrial motion within the meaning of §3161(h)(1)(D).
Neither party relies on this theory. The Court of Appeals found that
“Bloate never filed a pretrial motion.” 534 F. 3d, at 897.
3 This much is clear from the Court’s own language. The Court writes
that “although the period of delay the Government seeks to exclude in
this case results from a proceeding governed by subparagraph (D), that
period precedes the first day upon which Congress specified that such
delay may be automatically excluded.” Ante, at 9–10 (emphasis added).
Subparagraph (D) does not speak of delay that results from a “proceed
ing,” ibid.; subsection (h)(1), however, does. See §3161(h)(1).

