8

BLOATE v. UNITED STATES
ALITO, J., dissenting

motions, that concern is not present. See United States v.
Oberoi, 547 F. 3d 436, 451 (CA2 2008) (noting the impor
tance of the District Court’s expressly stopping the speedy
trial clock to create a point from which to measure prepa
ration time).5 In addition, the Committee expressed the
view that “in routine cases, preparation time should not be
excluded.” S. Rep., at 34. However, cases in which a
district court accedes to a defense request for more than
the usual amount of time for the completion of pretrial
motions are by definition not routine.
Third, there is no reason why Congress should have
supposed that the language that Congress and the Presi
dent enacted did not reach delay resulting from the grant
ing of the defendant’s request for additional time to pre
pare pretrial motions. As explained above, supra, at 2, 4–
6, such delay results from a proceeding concerning
the defendant and is not delay resulting from a pretrial
motion.
In sum, (1) delay resulting from the granting of a de
fense motion for an extension of time to file pretrial mo
tions falls within the general rule, set out in subsection
(h)(1), that automatically excludes delay “resulting from
[a] proceedin[g] concerning the defendant;” (2) the sub
paragraphs that follow, which are preceded by the phrase
“including but not limited to,” are illustrative, not exhaus
tive; and (3) neither the text of subparagraph (D) nor the
circumstances surrounding its adoption clearly reflect an
——————
5 The Court incorrectly states that the Courts of Appeals that have
read subsection (h)(1) to exclude preparation time for pretrial motions
have found it necessary to “impos[e] extratextual limitations on exclud
ability,” namely, that the trial judge must expressly grant an extension
of the time for the completion of pretrial motions. See ante, at 16. This
requirement, however, springs from the language of subsection (h)(1),
for it is the granting of the extension request that constitutes the
“proceedin[g] concerning the defendant” that triggers the exclusion
under subsection (h)(1). See supra, at 2.

