Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

ALITO, J., dissenting

a pretrial hearing.” H. R. Rep. No. 96–390, p. 10 (1979).
Similarly, the Senate Judiciary Committee expressed
frustration with what it described as the courts’ “unneces
sarily inflexible” interpretation of the Act. S. Rep. No. 96–
212, p. 18 (1979) (hereinafter S. Rep.). See also id., at 26.
Congress’ expansion of the exclusion set out in subpara
graph (D) so that it covers, not just the time taken up by
hearings on pretrial motions, but all delay resulting from
pretrial motions does not support the inference that Con
gress wanted the type of delay at issue in this case to
count against the Speedy Trial Act’s 70-day period.
Contending that Congress could have been more explicit
if it “wished courts to exclude pretrial motion preparation
time automatically,” the Court cites as an example a
legislative proposal by the Department of Justice to pro
vide for an express exclusion of preparation time for pre
trial motions. Ante, at 14, n. 13. The Court is correct that
Congress did not choose this option, but the Court’s argu
ment misses the point.
First, it bears emphasizing that the Justice Depart
ment’s proposal did not simply exclude delay caused by a
successful defense request for additional time to prepare
pretrial motions. That is the delay in dispute here. In
stead, the Justice Department’s proposal excluded all
“delay resulting from the preparation and service of pre
trial motions and responses from hearings thereon.” S.
961, 96th Cong., 1st Sess., §5 (1979) (as introduced).
Second, the reasons given in the Senate Judiciary Com
mittee report for rejecting the Justice Department pro
posal do not apply when the delay results from the grant
ing of a defense request such as the one at issue here. The
Senate Committee report noted that, when excluding time
for the preparation of pretrial motions, it will be “quite
difficult to determine a point at which preparation actu
ally begins.” S. Rep., at 34. But when a district court
grants a defendant’s motion for time to prepare pretrial

