Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

ALITO, J., dissenting

direct result of a proceeding that falls squarely within the
language of subsection (h)(1) or one of the specific illustra
tive subparagraphs that follow. See §3161(h)(7)(A) (“[a]ny
period of delay resulting from a continuance”). But such a
reading would render subsection (h)(1) and subparagraphs
(A)–(H) meaningless if it were true that all continuances
required ends-of-justice findings. The plain terms of
subsection (h)(1) refute this interpretation and show that
Congress intended for some periods of delay that postpone
the trial date to be automatically excludable.
Viewed in their proper context, subsection (h)(1) and its
subparagraphs carve out exceptions to the general rule of
§3161(h)(7)(A) requiring ends-of-justice findings for con
tinuances. See, e.g., United States v. Aviles-Alvarez, 868
F. 2d 1108, 1112 (CA9 1989) (noting that when pretrial
motion delay is automatically excluded, the District Court
“does not have to make findings or consider any factors”).
A period of delay resulting from a continuance requires
ends-of-justice findings only when it does not also fall
within the subset of automatically excludable delay de
fined by subsection (h)(1). When a period of delay result
ing from a continuance does qualify for automatic exclu
sion, a court ordinarily should give effect to the more
specific provisions of subsection (h)(1). See Gozlon-Peretz
v. United States, 498 U. S. 395, 407 (1991) (“A specific
provision controls over one of more general application”).
Cf. ante, at 10.
For the reasons discussed, see supra, at 2, the granting
of a defense request for an extension of time to complete
pretrial motions is a “proceedin[g] concerning the defen
dant” within the meaning of subsection (h)(1). It may also
qualify as a “continuance” within the meaning of
§3161(h)(7)(A) if the delay has the effect of pushing back
the trial date. But a court should resolve the conflict by
applying the more specific provision of subsection (h)(1).
This result is faithful not only to the plain language of the

