Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

District Court granted petitioner to prepare his pretrial
motions is automatically excludable under subsection
(h)(1). We disagree, and conclude that such time may be
excluded only when a district court enters appropriate
findings under subsection (h)(7).
A
The eight subparagraphs in subsection (h)(1) address
the automatic excludability of delay generated for certain
enumerated purposes. Thus, we first consider whether
the delay at issue in this case is governed by one of these
subparagraphs. It is.
The delay at issue was granted to allow petitioner suffi
cient time to file pretrial motions.8 Subsection (h)(1)(D)
(hereinafter subparagraph (D)) renders automatically
excludable “delay resulting from any pretrial motion, from
the filing of the motion through the conclusion of the
hearing on, or other prompt disposition of, such motion.”
Read, as it must be, in the context of subsection (h), this
——————
“(D) delay resulting from any pretrial motion, from the filing of the
motion through the conclusion of the hearing on, or other prompt
disposition of, such motion;
“(E) delay resulting from any proceeding relating to the transfer of a
case or the removal of any defendant from another district under the
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure;
“(F) delay resulting from transportation of any defendant from another
district, or to and from places of examination or hospitalization, except
that any time consumed in excess of ten days from the date an order of
removal or an order directing such transportation, and the defendant’s
arrival at the destination shall be presumed to be unreasonable;
“(G) delay resulting from consideration by the court of a proposed plea
agreement to be entered into by the defendant and the attorney for the
Government; and
“(H) delay reasonably attributable to any period, not to exceed thirty
days, during which any proceeding concerning the defendant is actually
under advisement by the court.”
8 See Defendant’s Request for Additional Time To File Pre-trial Mo
tions in No. 4:06CR518–SNL (TCM) (ED Mo.), Doc. 19; Order in No.
4:06CR518–SNL (ED Mo.), Doc. 44 (granting same).

