Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

ernment in asserting that the Act is amenable to another
interpretation that would avoid the “strange result” that
“petitioner may be entitled to dismissal of the charges
against him because his attorney persuaded a Magistrate
Judge to give the defense additional time to prepare pre
trial motions and thus delayed the commencement of his
trial.” Post, at 1. This argument takes aim at an exagger
ated target. Because we conclude that the type of delay at
issue here is excludable under subsection (h)(7), courts can
in future cases easily avoid the result the dissent decries,
a result that is not certain even in this case. See infra, at
17–18. And even if dismissal is ultimately required on
remand, a desire to avoid this result does not justify read
ing subsection (h)(1) (and specifically its reference to
“other proceedings concerning the defendant”) to permit
automatic exclusion of delay resulting from virtually any
decision to continue a deadline.
The dissent first argues that the delay in this case is
automatically excludable under subsection (h)(1) because
the provision’s use of the phrase “including but not limited
to” shows that subsection (h)(1) permits automatic exclu
sion of delays beyond those covered by its enumerated
subparagraphs. See post, at 3; see also United States v.
Oberoi, 547 F. 3d 436, 450 (CA2 2008). This argument
confuses the illustrative nature of subsection (h)(1)’s list of
categories of excludable delay (each of which is repre
sented by a subparagraph) with the contents of the catego
ries themselves. That the list of categories is illustrative
rather than exhaustive in no way undermines our conclu
sion that a delay that falls within the category of delay
addressed by subparagraph (D) is governed by the limits
in that subparagraph. The “including but not limited to”
clause would affect our conclusion only if one read it to
modify the contents of subparagraph (D) as well as the list
itself. As noted, such a reading would violate settled
principles of statutory construction because it would ig

