Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

ALITO, J., dissenting

motion. The type of delay involved in the present case,
however, does not occur as a consequence of a pretrial
motion; rather, it occurs as a consequence of the court’s
granting of a defense request for an extension of time.
The particular facts of this case sharply illustrate this
point because petitioner never filed pretrial motions.4
It is telling that the Court elides the statutory phrase
“resulting from” and substitutes a broader phrase of its
own invention. The Court writes that “pretrial motion
related delay” that is not captured by subparagraph (D)’s
text is “excludable only when accompanied by district
court findings.” Ante, at 9. See also ante, at 8 (“Subpara
graph (D) does not subject all pretrial motion-related delay
to automatic exclusion”); ante, at 9 (“[O]nly pretrial mo
tion-related delay ‘from the filing’ of a motion to the hear
ing or disposition point specified in the provision is auto
matically excludable”); ante, at 15, n. 14 (“pretrial motion
related delay”); ibid. (“pretrial motion-related proceed
ings”). But “pretrial motion-related delay” is not necessar
ily delay “resulting from” a pretrial motion.
Even if it is possible to read the statutory phrase “re
sulting from” to mean “related [to],” see ante, at 9, there
are at least two good reasons for rejecting that reading.
First, because subparagraphs (A)–(H) are meant to be
illustrative, those provisions should not be interpreted as
limiting unless the limitation is very clear. Second, the
Court’s interpretation of subparagraph (D) leads to an
anomalous result that Congress is unlikely to have in
tended. Because subparagraph (D) automatically excludes
“delay resulting from any pretrial motion, from the filing
of the motion through the conclusion of the hearing on, or
other prompt disposition of, such motion,” it is clear that
——————
4 But even if petitioner had filed pretrial motions, the delay resulting
from the granting of the extension still would not be delay “resulting
from” the motion.

