2

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Syllabus
misunderstood the issue, assuming resolution of Zivotofsky’s claim
would require the Judiciary to define U. S. policy regarding the status of Jerusalem. In fact, this case asks the courts to determine only
whether Zivotofsky can vindicate his statutory right under §214(d) to
choose to have Israel recorded as his place of birth on his passport.
Making such determinations is a familiar judicial exercise. Moreover, because the parties do not dispute the interpretation of §214(d),
the only real question for the courts is whether the statute is constitutional. There is no “textually demonstrable constitutional commitment” of that question to another branch: At least since Marbury
v. Madison, 1 Cranch 137, this Court has recognized that it is “emphatically the province and duty” of the Judiciary to determine the
constitutionality of a statute. Nor is there “a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for resolving” the question: Both
parties offer detailed legal arguments concerning whether the textual, structural, and historical evidence supports a determination that
§214(d) is constitutional. Pp. 5–12.
(b) Because the lower courts erroneously concluded that the case
presents a political question, they did not reach the merits of Zivotofsky’s claim. This Court is “a court of final review and not first
view,” Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Mineta, 534 U. S. 103, 110, and
ordinarily “do[es] not decide in the first instance issues not decided
below,” National Collegiate Athletic Assn. v. Smith, 525 U. S. 459,
470. The merits of this case are therefore left to the lower courts to
consider in the first instance. P. 12.

571 F. 3d 1227, vacated and remanded.
ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which SCALIA,
KENNEDY, THOMAS, GINSBURG, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. SOTOMAYOR, J.,
filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment, in
which BREYER, J., joined as to Part I. ALITO, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment. BREYER, J., filed a dissenting opinion.

