Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

“would be significantly harmed,” id., at 49. Such an action, she says, “ ‘would signal, symbolically or concretely,
that’ ” the United States “ ‘recognizes that Jerusalem is a
city that is located within the sovereign territory of Israel,’” and doing so, “‘would critically compromise the ability
of the United States to work with Israelis, Palestinians
and others in the region to further the peace process.’ ”
Brief for Respondent 2; App. 52–53. She adds that the
very enactment of this statutory provision in 2002 produced headlines in the Middle East stating the “the U. S.
now recognizes Jerusalem as Israel’s capital.” Id., at 231;
Brief for Respondent 10; see also App. 53–55, 227–231.
A judge’s ability to evaluate opposing claims of this kind
is minimal. At the same time, a judicial effort to do so
risks inadvertently jeopardizing sound foreign policy
decisionmaking by the other branches of Government.
How, for example, is this Court to determine whether, or
the extent to which, the continuation of the adjudication
that it now orders will itself have a foreign policy effect?
Third, the countervailing interests in obtaining judicial
resolution of the constitutional determination are not
particularly strong ones. Zivotofsky does not assert the
kind of interest, e.g., an interest in property or bodily
integrity, which courts have traditionally sought to protect. See, e.g., Ingraham v. Wright, 430 U. S. 651, 673–
674 (1977) (enduring commitment to legal protection of
bodily integrity). Nor, importantly, does he assert an
interest in vindicating a basic right of the kind that the
Constitution grants to individuals and that courts traditionally have protected from invasion by the other branches
of Government. And I emphasize this fact because the
need for judicial action in such cases can trump the foreign
policy concerns that I have mentioned. As Professor Jaffe
pointed out many years ago, “Our courts would not refuse
to entertain habeas corpus to test the constitutionality of
the imprisonment of an alleged Chinese agent even if it

