Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

States policy toward Jerusalem should be. Instead, Zivotofsky requests that the courts enforce a specific statutory
right. To resolve his claim, the Judiciary must decide if
Zivotofsky’s interpretation of the statute is correct, and
whether the statute is constitutional. This is a familiar
judicial exercise.
Moreover, because the parties do not dispute the interpretation of §214(d), the only real question for the courts is
whether the statute is constitutional. At least since Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch 137 (1803), we have recognized
that when an Act of Congress is alleged to conflict with the
Constitution, “[i]t is emphatically the province and duty of
the judicial department to say what the law is.” Id., at
177. That duty will sometimes involve the “[r]esolution of
litigation challenging the constitutional authority of one of
the three branches,” but courts cannot avoid their responsibility merely “because the issues have political implications.” INS v. Chadha, 462 U. S. 919, 943 (1983).
In this case, determining the constitutionality of §214(d)
involves deciding whether the statute impermissibly
intrudes upon Presidential powers under the Constitution.
If so, the law must be invalidated and Zivotofsky’s case
should be dismissed for failure to state a claim. If, on the
other hand, the statute does not trench on the President’s
powers, then the Secretary must be ordered to issue Zivotofsky a passport that complies with §214(d). Either way,
the political question doctrine is not implicated. “No
policy underlying the political question doctrine suggests
that Congress or the Executive . . . can decide the constitutionality of a statute; that is a decision for the courts.” Id.,
at 941–942.
The Secretary contends that “there is ‘a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment’ ” to the President
of the sole power to recognize foreign sovereigns and, as
a corollary, to determine whether an American born in
Jerusalem may choose to have Israel listed as his place of

