Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

such cases, the Constitution itself requires that another
branch resolve the question presented.
The second and third Baker factors reflect circumstances in which a dispute calls for decisionmaking beyond
courts’ competence. “ ‘The judicial Power’ created by Article III, §1, of the Constitution is not whatever judges
choose to do,” but rather the power “to act in the manner
traditional for English and American courts.” Vieth v.
Jubelirer, 541 U. S. 267, 278 (2004) (plurality opinion).
That traditional role involves the application of some
manageable and cognizable standard within the competence of the Judiciary to ascertain and employ to the facts
of a concrete case. When a court is given no standard by
which to adjudicate a dispute, or cannot resolve a dispute
in the absence of a yet-unmade policy determination
charged to a political branch, resolution of the suit is beyond the judicial role envisioned by Article III. See, e.g.,
Gilligan v. Morgan, 413 U. S. 1, 10 (1973) (“[I]t is difficult
to conceive of an area of governmental activity in which
the courts have less competence” than “[t]he complex,
subtle, and professional decisions as to the composition,
training, equipping, and control of a military force”); Vieth,
541 U. S., at 278 (“One of the most obvious limitations
imposed by [Article III] is that judicial action must be
governed by standard . . . ”). This is not to say, of course,
that courts are incapable of interpreting or applying
somewhat ambiguous standards using familiar tools of
statutory or constitutional interpretation. But where an
issue leaves courts truly rudderless, there can be “no
doubt of [the] validity” of a court’s decision to abstain from
judgment. Ibid.
The final three Baker factors address circumstances in
which prudence may counsel against a court’s resolution of
an issue presented. Courts should be particularly cautious
before forgoing adjudication of a dispute on the basis that
judicial intervention risks “embarrassment from multifar-

