6

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
BREYER, J., dissenting

which enforcement will interfere with the President’s
ability to make significant recognition-related foreign
policy decisions.
Certainly the parties argue as if that were so. Zivotofsky, for example, argues that replacing “Jerusalem” on
his passport with “Israel” will have no serious foreign
policy significance. See Brief for Petitioner 43, 46–52;
Reply Brief for Petitioner 25–26. And in support he points
to (1) a State Department official’s statement that birthplace designation serves primarily as “an element of identification,” while omitting mention of recognition; (2) the
fact that the State Department has recorded births in
unrecognized territories in the region, such as the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank, apparently without adverse
effect; and (3) the fact that sometimes Jerusalem does
(because of what the Government calls “clerical errors”)
carry with it the name of “Israel” on certain official documents, again apparently without seriously adverse effect.
See Brief for Petitioner 7–10, 15, 43, 50; App. 50, 58–60,
75–76. Moreover, Zivotofsky says, it is unfair to allow the
100,000 or so Americans born in cities that the United
States recognizes as under Israeli sovereignty, such as Tel
Aviv or Haifa, the right to a record that mentions Israel,
while denying that privilege to the 50,000 or so Americans
born in Jerusalem. See Brief for Petitioner 18–20, 48–49;
App. 48.
At the same time, the Secretary argues that listing
Israel on the passports (and consular birth reports) of
Americans born in Jerusalem will have significantly adverse foreign policy effects. See Brief for Respondent 8,
37–41. She says that doing so would represent “ ‘an official decision by the United States to begin to treat Jerusalem as a city located within Israel,’ ” id., at 38–39, that it
“would be interpreted as an official act of recognizing
Jerusalem as being under Israeli sovereignty,” App. 56,
and that our “national security interests” consequently

