8

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

asked to decide. Here, petitioner’s suit claims that a
federal statute provides him with a right to have “Israel”
listed as his place of birth on his passport and other related documents. App. 15–18. To decide that question, a
court must determine whether the statute is constitutional, and therefore mandates the Secretary of State to
issue petitioner’s desired passport, or unconstitutional, in
which case his suit is at an end. Resolution of that issue is
not one “textually committed” to another branch; to the
contrary, it is committed to this one. In no fashion does the
question require a court to review the wisdom of the President’s policy toward Jerusalem or any other decision
committed to the discretion of a coordinate department.
For that reason, I agree that the decision below should be
reversed.
That is not to say, however, that no statute could give
rise to a political question. It is not impossible to imagine
a case involving the application or even the constitutionality of an enactment that would present a nonjusticiable
issue. Indeed, this Court refused to determine whether an
Ohio state constitutional provision offended the Republican Guarantee Clause, Art. IV, §4, holding that “the
question of whether that guarantee of the Constitution
has been disregarded presents no justiciable controversy.”
Ohio ex rel. Davis v. Hildebrant, 241 U. S. 565, 569 (1916).
A similar result would follow if Congress passed a statute,
for instance, purporting to award financial relief to those
improperly “tried” of impeachment offenses. To adjudicate
claims under such a statute would require a court to resolve the very same issue we found nonjusticiable in
Nixon. Such examples are atypical, but they suffice to show
that the foreclosure altogether of political question analysis in statutory cases is unwarranted.
Second, the Court suggests that this case does not implicate the political question doctrine’s concern with issues
exhibiting “ ‘a lack of judicially discoverable and managea-

