Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

Constitution commits exclusively to the Executive. Zivotofsky argues that the Secretary is overreading the authority
granted to the President in the “receive Ambassadors”
clause. He observes that in the Federalist Papers, Alexander
Hamilton described the power conferred by this clause as
“more a matter of dignity than of authority,” and called it “a
circumstance, which will be without consequence in the
administration of the government.” The Federalist No. 69,
p. 468 (J. Cooke ed. 1961); see Brief for Petitioner 37. Zivotofsky also points to other clauses in the Constitution, such
as Congress’s power to declare war, that suggest some congressional role in recognition. Reply Brief for Petitioner 23
(citing U. S. Const., Art. I, §8, cl. 11). He cites, for example,
an 1836 message from President Jackson to Congress, acknowledging that it is unclear who holds the authority to
recognize because it is a power “no where expressly delegated” in the Constitution, and one that is “necessarily
involved in some of the great powers given to Congress.”
Message from the President of the United States Upon the
Subject of the Political, Military, and Civil Condition of
Texas, H. R. Doc. No. 35, 24th Cong., 2d Sess., 2; see Reply
Brief for Petitioner 11–12.
Zivotofsky argues that language from this Court’s precedents suggesting the recognition power belongs exclusively
to the President is inapplicable to his claim, because that
language appeared in cases where the Court was asked to
alter recognition policy developed by the Executive in the
absence of congressional opposition. See Brief for Petitioner
44–46; Reply Brief for Petitioner 18–19. Finally, Zivotofsky
contends that even if the “receive Ambassadors” clause
confers some exclusive recognition power on the President,
simply allowing a choice as to the “place of birth” entry on a
passport does not significantly intrude on that power.
Recitation of these arguments—which sound in familiar
principles of constitutional interpretation—is enough to
establish that this case does not “turn on standards that defy

