2

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

which an issue might present a political question: (1) “a
textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the
issue to a coordinate political department”; (2) “a lack of
judicially discoverable and manageable standards for
resolving it”; (3) “the impossibility of deciding without an
initial policy determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion”; (4) “the impossibility of a court’s undertaking independent resolution without expressing lack of the
respect due coordinate branches of government”; (5) “an
unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political
decision already made”; or (6) “the potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious pronouncements by various
departments on one question.” Id., at 217. Baker established that “[u]nless one of these formulations is inextricable from the case at bar, there should be no dismissal for
nonjusticiability.” Ibid. But Baker left unanswered when
the presence of one or more factors warrants dismissal,
as well as the interrelationship of the six factors and the
relative importance of each in determining whether a case
is suitable for adjudication.
In my view, the Baker factors reflect three distinct
justifications for withholding judgment on the merits of a
dispute. When a case would require a court to decide an
issue whose resolution is textually committed to a coordinate political department, as envisioned by Baker’s first
factor, abstention is warranted because the court lacks
authority to resolve that issue. See, e.g., Nixon v. United
States, 506 U. S. 224, 229 (1993) (holding nonjusticiable
the Senate’s impeachment procedures in light of Article I’s
commitment to the Senate of the “ ‘sole Power to try all
Impeachments’ ”); see also Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch
137, 165–166 (1803) (“By the constitution of the United
States, the president is invested with certain important
political powers, in the exercise of which he is to use
his own discretion, and is accountable only to his country
in his political character, and to his own conscience”). In

