4

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Opinion of the Court

The Court of Appeals for the D. C. Circuit reversed,
concluding that Zivotofsky did have standing. It then
observed that while Zivotofsky had originally asked that
“Jerusalem, Israel” be recorded on his passport, “[b]oth
sides agree that the question now is whether §214(d)
entitles [him] to have just ‘Israel’ listed as his place of
birth.” 444 F. 3d 614, 619 (2006). The D. C. Circuit determined that additional factual development might be
helpful in deciding whether this question was justiciable,
as the parties disagreed about the foreign policy implications of listing “Israel” alone as a birthplace on the passport. Id., at 619–620. It therefore remanded the case to
the District Court.
The District Court again found that the case was not
justiciable. It explained that “[r]esolving [Zivotofsky’s]
claim on the merits would necessarily require the Court to
decide the political status of Jerusalem.” 511 F. Supp. 2d
97, 103 (2007). Concluding that the claim therefore presented a political question, the District Court dismissed
the case for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
The D. C. Circuit affirmed. It reasoned that the Constitution gives the Executive the exclusive power to recognize
foreign sovereigns, and that the exercise of this power
cannot be reviewed by the courts. Therefore, “deciding
whether the Secretary of State must mark a passport . . .
as Zivotofsky requests would necessarily draw [the court]
into an area of decisionmaking the Constitution leaves to
the Executive alone.” 571 F. 3d 1227, 1232–1233 (2009).
The D. C. Circuit held that the political question doctrine
prohibits such an intrusion by the courts, and rejected any
suggestion that Congress’s decision to take “a position on
the status of Jerusalem” could change the analysis. Id., at
1233.
Judge Edwards concurred in the judgment, but wrote
separately to express his view that the political question
doctrine has no application to this case. He explained that

