Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

587 (describing practices of judicial abstention sounding in
justiciability, comity, forum non conveniens, and separation of powers).
To be sure, it will be the rare case in which Baker’s final
factors alone render a case nonjusticiable.2 But our long
historical tradition recognizes that such exceptional cases
arise, and due regard for the separation of powers and the
judicial role envisioned by Article III confirms that abstention may be an appropriate response.
II
The court below held that this case presented a political
question because it thought petitioner’s suit asked the
court to decide an issue “textually committed” to a coordinate branch—namely, “to review a policy of the State
Department implementing the President’s decision” to
keep the United States out of the debate over the status of
Jersualem. 571 F. 3d 1227, 1231–1232 (CADC 2009).
Largely for the reasons set out by the Court, I agree that
the Court of Appeals misapprehended the nature of its
task. In two respects, however, my understanding of the
political question doctrine might require a court to engage
in further analysis beyond that relied upon by the Court.
First, the Court appropriately recognizes that petitioner’s claim to a statutory right is “relevant” to the justiciability inquiry required in this case. Ante, at 6. In order to
evaluate whether a case presents a political question, a
court must first identify with precision the issue it is being
——————
2 Often when such factors are implicated in a case presenting a political question, other factors identified in Baker will likewise be apparent.
See, e.g., Nixon v. United States, 506 U. S. 224, 236 (1993) (“[i]n addition to the textual commitment argument,” finding persuasive that
“opening the door of judicial review” of impeachment procedures would
“ ‘expose the political life of the country to months, or perhaps years, of
chaos’ ”); Baker, 369 U. S., at 222 (explaining that the Court in Luther
v. Borden, 7 How. 1 (1849), found present features associated with each
of the three rationales underlying Baker’s factors).

