6

ZIVOTOFSKY v. CLINTON
Opinion of the Court

The lower courts ruled that this case involves a political
question because deciding Zivotofsky’s claim would force
the Judicial Branch to interfere with the President’s exercise of constitutional power committed to him alone. The
District Court understood Zivotofsky to ask the courts to
“decide the political status of Jerusalem.” 511 F. Supp. 2d,
at 103. This misunderstands the issue presented. Zivotofsky does not ask the courts to determine whether Jerusalem is the capital of Israel. He instead seeks to determine whether he may vindicate his statutory right, under
§214(d), to choose to have Israel recorded on his passport
as his place of birth.
For its part, the D. C. Circuit treated the two questions
as one and the same. That court concluded that “[o]nly
the Executive—not Congress and not the courts—has the
power to define U. S. policy regarding Israel’s sovereignty
over Jerusalem,” and also to “decide how best to implement that policy.” 571 F. 3d, at 1232. Because the Department’s passport rule was adopted to implement the
President’s “exclusive and unreviewable constitutional
power to keep the United States out of the debate over the
status of Jerusalem,” the validity of that rule was itself a
“nonjusticiable political question” that “the Constitution
leaves to the Executive alone.” Id., at 1231–1233. Indeed,
the D. C. Circuit’s opinion does not even mention §214(d)
until the fifth of its six paragraphs of analysis, and then
only to dismiss it as irrelevant: “That Congress took a
position on the status of Jerusalem and gave Zivotofsky a
statutory cause of action . . . is of no moment to whether
the judiciary has [the] authority to resolve this dispute
. . . .” Id., at 1233.
The existence of a statutory right, however, is certainly
relevant to the Judiciary’s power to decide Zivotofsky’s
claim. The federal courts are not being asked to supplant
a foreign policy decision of the political branches with the
courts’ own unmoored determination of what United

