(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ZIVOTOFSKY, BY HIS PARENTS AND GUARDIANS,



ZIVOTOFSKY ET UX. v. CLINTON, SECRETARY 



OF STATE

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT
No. 10–699.

Argued November 7, 2011—Decided March 26, 2012

Petitioner Menachem Binyamin Zivotofsky was born in Jerusalem. His
mother requested that Zivotofsky’s place of birth be listed as “Israel”
on a consular report of birth abroad and on his passport, pursuant to
§214(d) of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Year 2003.
That provision states: “For purposes of the registration of birth, certification of nationality, or issuance of a passport of a United States citizen born in the city of Jerusalem, the Secretary shall, upon the request of the citizen or the citizen’s legal guardian, record the place of
birth as Israel.” U. S. officials refused the request, citing a State Department policy that prohibits recording “Israel” as the place of birth
for those born in Jerusalem. Zivotofsky’s parents filed a suit on his
behalf against the Secretary of State. The District Court dismissed
the case, holding that it presented a nonjusticiable political question
regarding Jerusalem’s political status. The D. C. Circuit affirmed,
reasoning that the Constitution gives the Executive the exclusive
power to recognize foreign sovereigns, and that the exercise of that
power cannot be reviewed by the courts.
Held: The political question doctrine does not bar judicial review of Zivotofsky’s claim. Pp. 5−12.
(a) This Court has said that a controversy “involves a political
question . . . where there is ‘a textually demonstrable constitutional
commitment of the issue to a coordinate political department; or a
lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for resolving it.’ ” Nixon v. United States, 506 U. S. 224, 228. The lower courts
ruled that this case presents such a political question because they

