Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

the attorney’s fees at issue, a court may decide that the
defendant should not have to pay them. But if the defen
dant would have incurred those fees anyway, to defend
against non-frivolous claims, then a court has no basis
for transferring the expense to the plaintiff. Suppose, for
example, that a defendant’s attorney conducts a deposition
on matters relevant to both a frivolous and a non-frivolous
claim—and more, that the lawyer would have taken and
committed the same time to this deposition even if the
case had involved only the non-frivolous allegation. In
that circumstance, the work does not implicate Congress’s
reason for allowing defendants to collect fees. The defen
dant would have incurred the expense in any event; he has
suffered no incremental harm from the frivolous claim. In
short, the defendant has never shouldered the burden that
Congress, in enacting §1988, wanted to relieve. The basic
American Rule thus continues to operate.3
A standard allowing more expansive fee-shifting would
furnish windfalls to some defendants, making them better
off because they were subject to a suit including frivolous
claims. For under any more permissive test, the simple
presence of a frivolous claim would allow the court to shift
——————
3 The test set out here differs from the one we adopted in Hensley v.
Eckerhart, 461 U. S. 424, 435 (1983), to govern fee awards to plaintiffs
in cases involving both successful and unsuccessful claims. See supra,
at 6–7. That difference reflects the disparate legislative purposes we
have recognized in the two settings. See Christiansburg Garment Co. v.
EEOC, 434 U. S. 412, 419–420 (1978); supra, at 5–6. Congress author
ized fees to plaintiffs to compensate them for the costs of redressing
civil rights violations; accordingly, a plaintiff may receive fees for all
work relating to the accomplishment of that result, even if “the plaintiff
failed to prevail on every contention raised.” Hensley, 461 U. S., at 435.
By contrast, Congress authorized fees to defendants to remove the
burden associated with fending off frivolous claims; accordingly, a
defendant may recover for fees that those claims caused him to incur.
In each context, the standard for allocating fees in “mixed” cases
matches the relevant congressional purpose.

