6

FOX v. VICE
Opinion of the Court

erations” at stake. Id., at 419. In enacting §1988, we
stated, Congress sought “to protect defendants from bur
densome litigation having no legal or factual basis.” Id.,
at 420. Accordingly, §1988 authorizes a district court to
award attorney’s fees to a defendant “upon a finding that
the plaintiff’s action was frivolous, unreasonable, or with
out foundation.” Id., at 421; see also Kentucky v. Graham,
473 U. S. 159, 165, n. 9 (1985).
These standards would be easy to apply if life were like
the movies, but that is usually not the case. In Hollywood,
litigation most often concludes with a dramatic verdict
that leaves one party fully triumphant and the other
utterly prostrate. The court in such a case would know
exactly how to award fees (even if that anti-climactic scene
is generally left on the cutting-room floor). But in the real
world, litigation is more complex, involving multiple
claims for relief that implicate a mix of legal theories and
have different merits. Some claims succeed; others fail.
Some charges are frivolous; others (even if not ultimately
successful) have a reasonable basis. In short, litigation is
messy, and courts must deal with this untidiness in
awarding fees.
Given this reality, we have made clear that plaintiffs
may receive fees under §1988 even if they are not victori
ous on every claim. A civil rights plaintiff who obtains
meaningful relief has corrected a violation of federal law
and, in so doing, has vindicated Congress’s statutory pur
poses. That “result is what matters,” we explained in
Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461 U. S. 424, 435 (1983): A court
should compensate the plaintiff for the time his attorney
reasonably spent in achieving the favorable outcome, even
if “the plaintiff failed to prevail on every contention.” Ibid.
The fee award, of course, should not reimburse the plain
tiff for work performed on claims that bore no relation to
the grant of relief: Such work “cannot be deemed to have
been expended in pursuit of the ultimate result achieved.”

