Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

with the congressional policy of sparing defendants from
the costs of frivolous litigation.
Nor did the Court of Appeals uphold the award of fees
on the ground that we would require. The majority articu
lated a standard that, taken alone, might be read as con
sistent with our opinion; according to the court, a defen
dant should receive fees for “work which can be distinctly
traced to a plaintiff’s frivolous claims.” 594 F. 3d, at 429.
But the court seemed to think that its test permitted
awarding Vice fees for any work useful to defending
against a frivolous claim, even if lawyers would have done
that work regardless. Indeed, this very point divided the
majority and the dissent. Judge Southwick objected to the
fee award on the ground that “almost all [of] the defen
dant[s’] discovery and factual analysis would have been
necessary even if no federal claims had been brought.” Id.,
at 431. But the majority never responded to that argu
ment or otherwise engaged this crucial question. The
majority instead merely reiterated the District Court’s
reasoning that the parties had principally “focus[ed]” on
the §1983 allegations. That finding, as we have explained,
is irrelevant if Vice’s attorneys would have performed the
same work to defend against the state-law claims.
On this record, we must return the case to the lower
courts. See, e.g., Perdue, 559 U. S., at ___–___ (slip op., at
12–15); Pennsylvania v. Delaware Valley Citizens’ Council
for Clean Air, 478 U. S. 546, 566–568 (1986); Hensley, 461
U. S., at 438–440. In a suit of this kind, involving both
frivolous and non-frivolous claims, a defendant may re
cover the reasonable attorney’s fees he expended solely
because of the frivolous allegations. And that is all. Con
sistent with the policy underlying §1988, the defendant
may not receive compensation for any fees that he would
have paid in the absence of the frivolous claims. We there
fore vacate the judgment of the Court of Appeals and
remand the case for further proceedings consistent with
this opinion.
It is so ordered.

