Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

whether the costs would have been incurred in the ab
sence of the frivolous allegation. The answers to those
inquiries will usually track each other, but when they
diverge, it is the second that matters.
We emphasize, as we have before, that the determina
tion of fees “should not result in a second major litigation.”
Hensley, 461 U. S., at 437. The fee applicant (whether a
plaintiff or a defendant) must, of course, submit appropri
ate documentation to meet “the burden of establishing
entitlement to an award.” Ibid. But trial courts need not,
and indeed should not, become green-eyeshade account
ants. The essential goal in shifting fees (to either party) is
to do rough justice, not to achieve auditing perfection. So
trial courts may take into account their overall sense of a
suit, and may use estimates in calculating and allocating
an attorney’s time. And appellate courts must give sub
stantial deference to these determinations, in light of “the
district court’s superior understanding of the litigation.”
Ibid.; see Webb v. Dyer County Bd. of Ed., 471 U. S. 234,
244 (1985). We can hardly think of a sphere of judicial
decisionmaking in which appellate micromanagement has
less to recommend it.
But the trial court must apply the correct standard, and
the appeals court must make sure that has occurred. See
Perdue v. Kenny A., 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at
14) (“Determining a ‘reasonable attorney’s fee’ is a matter
that is committed to the sound discretion of a trial judge,
. . . but the judge’s discretion is not unlimited”); Cf. Koon
v. United States, 518 U. S. 81, 100 (1996) (“A district court
by definition abuses its discretion when it makes an error
of law”). That means the trial court must determine
whether the fees requested would not have accrued but for
the frivolous claim. And the appeals court must determine
whether the trial court asked and answered that question,
rather than some other. A trial court has wide discretion
when, but only when, it calls the game by the right rules.

