(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FOX v. VICE, AS EXECUTRIX OF THE ESTATE OF VICE, 

ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–114.

Argued March 22, 2011—Decided June 6, 2011

Claiming that he was subjected to dirty tricks during his successful
campaign to become the police chief of Vinton, La., petitioner Fox
filed a state-court suit against Vice, the incumbent chief, and the
town (Vice, for short). Fox’s suit asserted both state-law claims, in
cluding defamation, and federal civil rights claims under 42 U. S. C.
§1983, including interference with Fox’s right to seek public office.
Vice removed the case to federal court based on the §1983 claims. Af
ter discovery, he sought summary judgment on the federal claims,
which Fox conceded were not valid. The District Court accordingly
dismissed them with prejudice and remanded the remaining claims
to state court, noting that Vice’s attorneys’ work could be useful in
the state-court proceedings. Vice then asked the federal court for at
torney’s fees under §1988, submitting attorney billing records esti
mating the time spent on the entire suit, without differentiating be
tween time spent on the now-dismissed federal claims and on the
remaining state claims. The court granted the motion on the ground
that Fox’s federal claims were frivolous, awarding Vice fees for all
work his attorneys had performed in the suit. Although the state-law
allegations had not been found frivolous, the court did not require
Vice to separate out the work the attorneys had done on the two sets
of claims. It also declined to reduce the fee award to reflect the sur
viving state-law claims, noting that both sides had focused on the
frivolous §1983 claims. The Fifth Circuit affirmed, rejecting Fox’s
argument that every claim in a suit must be frivolous for the defen
dant to recover any fees, and agreeing with the District Court that
the litigation had focused on the frivolous federal claims.

