2

FOX v. VICE
Syllabus

Held:
1. When a plaintiff’s suit involves both frivolous and non-frivolous
claims, a court may grant reasonable fees to the defendant, but only
for costs that the defendant would not have incurred but for the frivo
lous claims. Pp. 5–11.
(a) Section 1988 allows the award of “a reasonable attorney’s fee”
to “the prevailing party” in certain civil rights cases, including §1983
suits. While most of this Court’s §1988 decisions have concerned fees
to prevailing plaintiffs, §1988 also authorizes a fee award to a pre
vailing defendant “upon a finding that the plaintiff’s action was frivo
lous, unreasonable, or without foundation.” Christiansburg Garment
Co. v. EEOC, 434 U. S. 412, 421. Just as plaintiffs may receive fees
under §1988 even if they are not victorious on every claim, Hensley v.
Eckerhart, 461 U. S. 424, 435, so too may a defendant be reimbursed
for costs under §1988 even if the plaintiff’s suit is not wholly frivo
lous, ibid., n. 10. The defendant is not entitled to fees arising from
these non-frivolous charges, see Christiansburg, 434 U. S., at 420–
421, but the presence of reasonable allegations does not immunize
the plaintiff against paying for the fees that his frivolous claims im
posed. Pp. 5–7.
(b) The question then becomes how to allocate fees in a lawsuit
having both frivolous and non-frivolous claims. Congress’s purpose
in enacting §1988—to relieve defendants of the burdens associated
with fending off frivolous litigation—points to the proper standard:
Section 1988 allows a defendant to recover reasonable attorney’s fees
incurred because of, but only because of, a frivolous claim; i.e., §1988
permits the defendant to receive only the portion of his fees that he
would not have paid but for the frivolous claim. A standard allowing
more expansive fee-shifting would furnish windfalls to some defen
dants, who would be relieved of normal litigation costs merely be
cause the plaintiff’s suit also included frivolous claims. This “but-for”
standard may, in some instances, allow compensation to a defendant
for attorney work relating to both frivolous and non-frivolous claims,
for instance, if the frivolous claim requires a lawyer to do more work
because of the defendant’s greater financial exposure on that claim.
The dispositive question is not whether attorney costs at all relate to
a non-frivolous claim, but whether the costs would have been in
curred in the absence of the frivolous allegation. The answers to
those inquiries will usually track each other, but when they diverge,
it is the second one that matters. The determination of fees “should
not result in a second major litigation.” Hensley, 461 U. S., at 437.
The essential goal in shifting fees is to do rough justice, not to
achieve auditing perfection. The trial court has wide discretion, but
must apply the correct but-for standard. And the appeals court must

