4

FOX v. VICE
Opinion of the Court

case, even though state-law claims remained unadjudi
cated. Repeating the trial court’s view that the whole
litigation had focused on the frivolous federal claims, the
Fifth Circuit upheld the fee award. See 594 F. 3d, at 428.
Judge Southwick dissented. He agreed that Vice was
entitled to some reimbursement for fees. Id., at 430. But
he thought the District Court had erred in declining to
“allocate the fees separately between the successful claims
and the unsuccessful” ones just because all of them were
“interrelated.” Ibid. “[W]hen some claims are dismissed
as frivolous and others are not,” he stated, the defendants
should receive fees only for “the legal work allocable solely
or dominantly to the dismissed” claims. Id., at 431. Be
cause in this case “almost all of the defendant[s’] discovery
and factual analysis would have been necessary even if no
federal claims had been brought,” he concluded, the fee
award should have been much smaller. Ibid.
The Fifth Circuit’s decision deepened a Circuit split
about whether and to what extent a court may award fees
to a defendant under §1988 when a plaintiff asserts both
frivolous and non-frivolous claims.2 One Court of Appeals
has forbidden any compensation unless all of the plaintiff’s
claims are frivolous. See Balmer v. HCA, Inc., 423 F. 3d
606, 617 (CA6 2005). Others have rejected this approach,
but struggled with how to allocate fees in a suit that in
volves a mix of frivolous and non-frivolous claims. Com
pare, e.g., 594 F. 3d 423 (CA5 2010) (opinion below), with
Colombrito v. Kelly, 764 F. 2d 122, 132 (CA2 1985) (declin
ing to award fees when the frivolous claim “added no
additional testimony or expense to the trial”). We granted
——————
2 The parties do not dispute for purposes of argument here that this
case involves both kinds of claims. The District Court deemed the
federal claims frivolous, and Fox has not asked us to disturb that
ruling. See Brief for Petitioner 26, and n. 2. The court remanded the
state-law claims to state court, and Vice has assumed in this Court that
they are not frivolous. See Brief for Respondents 8, n. 5.

