10

FOX v. VICE
Opinion of the Court

to the plaintiff some of the costs of defending against
regular, non-frivolous charges. So two defendants (call
them Vice and Rice) could face identical non-frivolous
allegations, but because Vice also confronted a frivolous
claim, he might end by paying less than Rice to his attor
neys. The chance assertion—for Vice, the downright lucky
assertion—of the frivolous claim could relieve him not only
of the incremental costs of that claim but also of costs that
he, like Rice, would have had to pay in its absence. Sec
tion 1988 provides no warrant for that peculiar result;
that statute was “never intended to produce windfalls” for
parties. See Farrar v. Hobby, 506 U. S. 103, 115 (1992)
(internal quotation marks omitted).
At the same time, the “but-for” standard we require may
in some cases allow compensation to a defendant for at
torney work relating to both frivolous and non-frivolous
claims. Suppose, for example, that a plaintiff asserts one
frivolous and one non-frivolous claim, but that only the
frivolous allegation can legally result in a damages award.
If an attorney performs work useful to defending against
both, but did so only because of the defendant’s monetary
exposure on the frivolous charge, a court may decide to
shift fees. Or similarly, imagine that the frivolous claim
enables removal of the case to federal court, which in
turn drives up litigation expenses. Here too, our standard
would permit awarding fees for work relevant to both
claims in order to reflect the increased costs (if any) of the
federal forum. And frivolous claims may increase the cost
of defending a suit in ways that are not reflected in the
number of hours billed. If a defendant could prove, for
example, that a frivolous claim involved a specialized area
that reasonably caused him to hire more expensive coun
sel for the entire case, then the court may reimburse the
defendant for the increased marginal cost. As all these
examples show, the dispositive question is not whether
attorney costs at all relate to a non-frivolous claim, but

