8

FOX v. VICE
Opinion of the Court

what work may the defendant receive fees for? Vice con
cedes, as he must, that a defendant may not obtain com
pensation for work unrelated to a frivolous claim. Brief
for Respondents 42, n. 13. Similarly, we think Fox would
have to concede (once he has lost the argument that the
presence of any non-frivolous claim precludes a fee award)
that the defendant may receive reasonable fees for work
related exclusively to a frivolous claim. The question in
dispute concerns work that helps defend against non
frivolous and frivolous claims alike—for example, a depo
sition eliciting facts relevant to both allegations.
Vice proposes authorizing the trial court to award fees
for work that is “fairly attributable” to the frivolous por
tion of the lawsuit. See, e.g., Tr. of Oral Arg. 41, 45. But
that standard is in truth no standard at all. The very
question under consideration is: What fees may be fairly
attributed to frivolous claims under §1988? To answer
“Those that are fairly attributable to frivolous claims” is
just to restate this question. And that non-response re
sponse would leave to each and every trial court not only
the implementation, but also the invention, of the applica
ble legal standard. We do not think trial courts would
appreciate that lack of guidance. And yet more important,
we do not think such an empty and amorphous test would
ensure that all fee awards to defendants comport with
Congress’s purpose in enacting §1988.
That congressional policy points to a different and more
meaningful standard: Section 1988 allows a defendant to
recover reasonable attorney’s fees incurred because of, but
only because of, a frivolous claim. Or what is the same
thing stated as a but-for test: Section 1988 permits the
defendant to receive only the portion of his fees that he
would not have paid but for the frivolous claim. Recall
that the relevant purpose of §1988 is to relieve defendants
of the burdens associated with fending off frivolous litiga
tion. See supra, at 5–6. So if a frivolous claim occasioned

