12

FOX v. VICE 

Opinion of the Court 


III 

The task remains of applying these principles to the fee
award Vice received. The District Court’s analysis sug
gests that Vice’s attorneys would have done much the
same work even if Fox had not brought his frivolous
claims. As noted earlier, see supra, at 3, the court ac
knowledged that Fox’s federal and state-law claims were
“interrelated,” App. to Pet. for Cert. 28a (internal quota
tion marks omitted). The charges “arose out of the same
transaction”—Vice’s conduct in the campaign—and their
“defense entailed proof or denial of essentially the same
facts.” Ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted). It there
fore seems likely that Vice’s attorneys would at least have
conducted similar fact-gathering activities—taken many of
the same depositions, produced and reviewed many of the
same documents, and so forth. Indeed, the District Court
highlighted the usefulness of the attorneys’ work to de
fending against the state-law claims: In its order remand
ing those claims, the court noted that the “trial prepara
tion, legal research, and discovery” done in the federal
court could “be used by the parties in the state court pro
ceedings.” Id., at 40a.
The District Court’s decision to award full attorney’s
fees to Vice failed to take proper account of this overlap
between the frivolous and non-frivolous claims. Rather
than apply the but-for standard we have set out, the court
indicated that the paramount factor was the parties’ “fo
cus” in the litigation. Id., at 33a. The court did not ad
dress whether the “interrelated[ness]” of the claims meant
that Vice would have incurred part or most of his fees even
if Fox had asserted only the non-frivolous state-law
claims. To the contrary, the court suggested that the close
relationship between the federal and state-law claims
supported Vice’s request to recover all of his attorney’s
fees. See id., at 28a; supra, at 3. That reasoning stands
the appropriate analysis on its head. It cannot be squared

