14

ONTARIO v. QUON
Opinion of the Court

Raab, supra, at 671; cf. Vernonia School Dist. 47J v. Ac
ton, 515 U. S. 646, 654–657 (1995). Even if he could as­
sume some level of privacy would inhere in his messages,
it would not have been reasonable for Quon to conclude
that his messages were in all circumstances immune from
scrutiny. Quon was told that his messages were subject to
auditing. As a law enforcement officer, he would or should
have known that his actions were likely to come under
legal scrutiny, and that this might entail an analysis of his
on-the-job communications. Under the circumstances, a
reasonable employee would be aware that sound manage­
ment principles might require the audit of messages to
determine whether the pager was being appropriately
used. Given that the City issued the pagers to Quon and
other SWAT Team members in order to help them more
quickly respond to crises—and given that Quon had re­
ceived no assurances of privacy—Quon could have antici­
pated that it might be necessary for the City to audit
pager messages to assess the SWAT Team’s performance
in particular emergency situations.
From OPD’s perspective, the fact that Quon likely had
only a limited privacy expectation, with boundaries that
we need not here explore, lessened the risk that the review
would intrude on highly private details of Quon’s life.
OPD’s audit of messages on Quon’s employer-provided
pager was not nearly as intrusive as a search of his per­
sonal e-mail account or pager, or a wiretap on his home
phone line, would have been. That the search did reveal
intimate details of Quon’s life does not make it unreason­
able, for under the circumstances a reasonable employer
would not expect that such a review would intrude on such
matters. The search was permissible in its scope.
The Court of Appeals erred in finding the search unrea­
sonable. It pointed to a “host of simple ways to verify the
efficacy of the 25,000 character limit . . . without intruding
on [respondents’] Fourth Amendment rights.” 529 F. 3d,

