Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

Rapid changes in the dynamics of communication and
information transmission are evident not just in the tech­
nology itself but in what society accepts as proper behav­
ior. As one amici brief notes, many employers expect or at
least tolerate personal use of such equipment by employ­
ees because it often increases worker efficiency. See Brief
for Electronic Frontier Foundation et al. 16–20. Another
amicus points out that the law is beginning to respond to
these developments, as some States have recently passed
statutes requiring employers to notify employees when
monitoring their electronic communications. See Brief for
New York Intellectual Property Law Association 22 (citing
Del. Code Ann., Tit. 19, §705 (2005); Conn. Gen. Stat. Ann.
§31–48d (West 2003)). At present, it is uncertain how
workplace norms, and the law’s treatment of them, will
evolve.
Even if the Court were certain that the O’Connor plural­
ity’s approach were the right one, the Court would have
difficulty predicting how employees’ privacy expectations
will be shaped by those changes or the degree to which
society will be prepared to recognize those expectations as
reasonable. See 480 U. S., at 715. Cell phone and text
message communications are so pervasive that some
persons may consider them to be essential means or nec­
essary instruments for self-expression, even self­
identification. That might strengthen the case for an
expectation of privacy. On the other hand, the ubiquity of
those devices has made them generally affordable, so one
could counter that employees who need cell phones or
similar devices for personal matters can purchase and pay
for their own. And employer policies concerning commu­
nications will of course shape the reasonable expectations
of their employees, especially to the extent that such
policies are clearly communicated.
A broad holding concerning employees’ privacy expecta­
tions vis-à-vis employer-provided technological equipment

