Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
to investigate violations of workplace rules—searches of the sort that
are regarded as reasonable and normal in the private-employer con
text—do not violate the . . . Amendment,” id., at 732. Pp. 7–9.
(b) Even assuming that Quon had a reasonable expectation of pri
vacy in his text messages, the search was reasonable under both
O’Connor approaches, the plurality’s and JUSTICE SCALIA’s. Pp. 9–17.
(1) The Court does not resolve the parties’ disagreement over
Quon’s privacy expectation. Prudence counsels caution before the
facts in this case are used to establish far-reaching premises that de
fine the existence, and extent, of privacy expectations of employees
using employer-provided communication devices. Rapid changes in
the dynamics of communication and information transmission are
evident not just in the technology itself but in what society accepts as
proper behavior. At present, it is uncertain how workplace norms,
and the law’s treatment of them, will evolve. Because it is therefore
preferable to dispose of this case on narrower grounds, the Court as
sumes, arguendo, that: (1) Quon had a reasonable privacy expecta
tion; (2) petitioners’ review of the transcript constituted a Fourth
Amendment search; and (3) the principles applicable to a government
employer’s search of an employee’s physical office apply as well in the
electronic sphere. Pp. 9–12.
(2) Petitioners’ warrantless review of Quon’s pager transcript was
reasonable under the O’Connor plurality’s approach because it was
motivated by a legitimate work-related purpose, and because it was
not excessive in scope. See 480 U. S., at 726. There were “reasonable
grounds for [finding it] necessary for a noninvestigatory work-related
purpose,” ibid., in that Chief Scharf had ordered the audit to deter
mine whether the City’s contractual character limit was sufficient to
meet the City’s needs. It was also “reasonably related to the objec
tives of the search,” ibid., because both the City and OPD had a le
gitimate interest in ensuring that employees were not being forced to
pay out of their own pockets for work-related expenses, or, on the
other hand, that the City was not paying for extensive personal
communications. Reviewing the transcripts was an efficient and ex
pedient way to determine whether either of these factors caused
Quon’s overages. And the review was also not “excessively intrusive.”
Ibid. Although Quon had exceeded his monthly allotment a number
of times, OPD requested transcripts for only August and September
2002 in order to obtain a large enough sample to decide the character
limits’ efficaciousness, and all the messages that Quon sent while off
duty were redacted. And from OPD’s perspective, the fact that Quon
likely had only a limited privacy expectation lessened the risk that
the review would intrude on highly private details of Quon’s life.
Similarly, because the City had a legitimate reason for the search

