(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CITY OF ONTARIO, CALIFORNIA, ET AL. v. QUON 

ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1332. Argued April 19, 2010—Decided June 17, 2010
Petitioner Ontario (hereinafter City) acquired alphanumeric pagers
able to send and receive text messages. Its contract with its service
provider, Arch Wireless, provided for a monthly limit on the number
of characters each pager could send or receive, and specified that us
age exceeding that number would result in an additional fee. The
City issued the pagers to respondent Quon and other officers in its
police department (OPD), also a petitioner here. When Quon and
others exceeded their monthly character limits for several months
running, petitioner Scharf, OPD’s chief, sought to determine whether
the existing limit was too low, i.e., whether the officers had to pay
fees for sending work-related messages or, conversely, whether the
overages were for personal messages. After Arch Wireless provided
transcripts of Quon’s and another employee’s August and September
2002 text messages, it was discovered that many of Quon’s messages
were not work related, and some were sexually explicit. Scharf re
ferred the matter to OPD’s internal affairs division. The investigat
ing officer used Quon’s work schedule to redact from his transcript
any messages he sent while off duty, but the transcript showed that
few of his on-duty messages related to police business. Quon was dis
ciplined for violating OPD rules.
He and the other respondents—each of whom had exchanged text
messages with Quon during August and September—filed this suit,
alleging, inter alia, that petitioners violated their Fourth Amendment
rights and the federal Stored Communications Act (SCA) by obtain
ing and reviewing the transcript of Quon’s pager messages, and that
Arch Wireless violated the SCA by giving the City the transcript.
The District Court denied respondents summary judgment on the

