Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

was ready to receive the message, at which point Arch
Wireless transmitted the message from the transmitting
station nearest to the recipient. After delivery, Arch
Wireless retained a copy on its computer servers. The
message did not pass through computers owned by the
City.
Although the Computer Policy did not cover text mes­
sages by its explicit terms, the City made clear to employ­
ees, including Quon, that the City would treat text mes­
sages the same way as it treated e-mails. At an April 18,
2002, staff meeting at which Quon was present, Lieuten­
ant Steven Duke, the OPD officer responsible for the City’s
contract with Arch Wireless, told officers that messages
sent on the pagers “are considered e-mail messages. This
means that [text] messages would fall under the City’s
policy as public information and [would be] eligible for
auditing.” App. 30. Duke’s comments were put in writing
in a memorandum sent on April 29, 2002, by Chief Scharf
to Quon and other City personnel.
Within the first or second billing cycle after the pagers
were distributed, Quon exceeded his monthly text message
character allotment. Duke told Quon about the overage,
and reminded him that messages sent on the pagers were
“considered e-mail and could be audited.” Id., at 40. Duke
said, however, that “it was not his intent to audit [an]
employee’s text messages to see if the overage [was] due to
work related transmissions.” Ibid. Duke suggested that
Quon could reimburse the City for the overage fee rather
than have Duke audit the messages. Quon wrote a check
to the City for the overage. Duke offered the same ar­
rangement to other employees who incurred overage fees.
Over the next few months, Quon exceeded his character
limit three or four times. Each time he reimbursed the
City. Quon and another officer again incurred overage
fees for their pager usage in August 2002. At a meeting in
October, Duke told Scharf that he had become “ ‘tired of

