10

ONTARIO v. QUON
Opinion of the Court

would remain private.
At this point, were we to assume that inquiry into “op­
erational realities” were called for, compare O’Connor, 480
U. S., at 717 (plurality opinion), with id., at 730–731
(opinion of SCALIA, J.); see also id., at 737–738 (Blackmun,
J., dissenting), it would be necessary to ask whether
Duke’s statements could be taken as announcing a change
in OPD policy, and if so, whether he had, in fact or ap­
pearance, the authority to make such a change and to
guarantee the privacy of text messaging. It would also be
necessary to consider whether a review of messages sent
on police pagers, particularly those sent while officers are
on duty, might be justified for other reasons, including
performance evaluations, litigation concerning the lawful­
ness of police actions, and perhaps compliance with state
open records laws. See Brief for Petitioners 35–40 (citing
Cal. Public Records Act, Cal. Govt. Code Ann. §6250 et seq.
(West 2008)). These matters would all bear on the legiti­
macy of an employee’s privacy expectation.
The Court must proceed with care when considering the
whole concept of privacy expectations in communications
made on electronic equipment owned by a government
employer. The judiciary risks error by elaborating too
fully on the Fourth Amendment implications of emerging
technology before its role in society has become clear. See,
e.g., Olmstead v. United States, 277 U. S. 438 (1928),
overruled by Katz v. United States, 389 U. S. 347, 353
(1967). In Katz, the Court relied on its own knowledge
and experience to conclude that there is a reasonable
expectation of privacy in a telephone booth. See id., at
360–361 (Harlan, J., concurring). It is not so clear that
courts at present are on so sure a ground. Prudence coun­
sels caution before the facts in the instant case are used to
establish far-reaching premises that define the existence,
and extent, of privacy expectations enjoyed by employees
when using employer-provided communication devices.

