Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

at 909. The panel suggested that Scharf “could have
warned Quon that for the month of September he was
forbidden from using his pager for personal communica­
tions, and that the contents of all his messages would be
reviewed to ensure the pager was used only for work­
related purposes during that time frame. Alternatively, if
[OPD] wanted to review past usage, it could have asked
Quon to count the characters himself, or asked him to
redact personal messages and grant permission to [OPD]
to review the redacted transcript.” Ibid.
This approach was inconsistent with controlling prece­
dents. This Court has “repeatedly refused to declare that
only the ‘least intrusive’ search practicable can be reason­
able under the Fourth Amendment.” Vernonia, supra, at
663; see also, e.g., Board of Ed. of Independent School Dist.
No. 92 of Pottawatomie Cty. v. Earls, 536 U. S. 822, 837
(2002); Illinois v. Lafayette, 462 U. S. 640, 647 (1983).
That rationale “could raise insuperable barriers to the
exercise of virtually all search-and-seizure powers,”
United States v. Martinez-Fuerte, 428 U. S. 543, 557, n. 12
(1976), because “judges engaged in post hoc evaluations of
government conduct can almost always imagine some
alternative means by which the objectives of the govern­
ment might have been accomplished,” Skinner, 489 U. S.,
at 629, n. 9 (internal quotation marks and brackets omit­
ted). The analytic errors of the Court of Appeals in this
case illustrate the necessity of this principle. Even assum­
ing there were ways that OPD could have performed the
search that would have been less intrusive, it does not
follow that the search as conducted was unreasonable.
Respondents argue that the search was per se unrea­
sonable in light of the Court of Appeals’ conclusion that
Arch Wireless violated the SCA by giving the City the
transcripts of Quon’s text messages. The merits of the
SCA claim are not before us. But even if the Court of
Appeals was correct to conclude that the SCA forbade

