2

ONTARIO v. QUON
Syllabus
constitutional claims, relying on the plurality opinion in O’Connor v.
Ortega, 480 U. S. 709, to determine that Quon had a reasonable ex
pectation of privacy in the content of his messages. Whether the au
dit was nonetheless reasonable, the court concluded, turned on
whether Scharf used it for the improper purpose of determining if
Quon was using his pager to waste time, or for the legitimate purpose
of determining the efficacy of existing character limits to ensure that
officers were not paying hidden work-related costs. After the jury
concluded that Scharf’s intent was legitimate, the court granted peti
tioners summary judgment on the ground they did not violate the
Fourth Amendment. The Ninth Circuit reversed. Although it agreed
that Quon had a reasonable expectation of privacy in his text mes
sages, the appeals court concluded that the search was not reason
able even though it was conducted on a legitimate, work-related ra
tionale. The opinion pointed to a host of means less intrusive than
the audit that Scharf could have used. The court further concluded
that Arch Wireless had violated the SCA by giving the City the tran
script.

Held: Because the search of Quon’s text messages was reasonable, peti
tioners did not violate respondents’ Fourth Amendment rights, and
the Ninth Circuit erred by concluding otherwise. Pp. 7–17.
(a) The Amendment guarantees a person’s privacy, dignity, and se
curity against arbitrary and invasive governmental acts, without re
gard to whether the government actor is investigating crime or per
forming another function. Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives’
Assn., 489 U. S. 602, 613–614. It applies as well when the govern
ment acts in its capacity as an employer. Treasury Employees v. Von
Raab, 489 U. S. 656, 665. The Members of the O’Connor Court dis
agreed on the proper analytical framework for Fourth Amendment
claims against government employers. A four-Justice plurality con
cluded that the correct analysis has two steps. First, because “some
[government] offices may be so open . . . that no expectation of pri
vacy is reasonable,” a court must consider “[t]he operational realities
of the workplace” to determine if an employee’s constitutional rights
are implicated. 480 U. S., at 718. Second, where an employee has a
legitimate privacy expectation, an employer’s intrusion on that ex
pectation “for noninvestigatory, work-related purposes, as well as for
investigations of work-related misconduct, should be judged by the
standard of reasonableness under all the circumstances.” Id., at 725–
726. JUSTICE SCALIA, concurring in the judgment, would have dis
pensed with the “operational realities” inquiry and concluded “that
the offices of government employees . . . are [generally] covered by
Fourth Amendment protections,” id., at 731, but he would also have
held “that government searches to retrieve work-related materials or

