2

ONTARIO v. QUON
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

That should end the matter.
The Court concedes as much, ante, at 9, 12–17, yet it
inexplicably interrupts its analysis with a recitation of the
parties’ arguments concerning, and an excursus on the
complexity and consequences of answering, that admit
tedly irrelevant threshold question, ante, at 9–12. That
discussion is unnecessary. (To whom do we owe an addi
tional explanation for declining to decide an issue, once we
have explained that it makes no difference?) It also seems
to me exaggerated. Applying the Fourth Amendment to
new technologies may sometimes be difficult, but when it
is necessary to decide a case we have no choice. The
Court’s implication, ante, at 10, that where electronic
privacy is concerned we should decide less than we other
wise would (that is, less than the principle of law neces
sary to resolve the case and guide private action)—or that
we should hedge our bets by concocting case-specific stan
dards or issuing opaque opinions—is in my view indefen
sible. The-times-they-are-a-changin’ is a feeble excuse for
disregard of duty.
Worse still, the digression is self-defeating. Despite the
Court’s insistence that it is agnostic about the proper test,
lower courts will likely read the Court’s self-described
“instructive” expatiation on how the O’Connor plurality’s
approach would apply here (if it applied), ante, at 9–11, as
a heavy-handed hint about how they should proceed.
Litigants will do likewise, using the threshold question
whether the Fourth Amendment is even implicated as a
——————
question whether the approach advocated by Justice Blackmun in his
dissent in O’Connor is the proper standard. There is room for reason
able debate as to which of the two approaches advocated by Justices
whose votes supported the judgment in O’Connor—the plurality’s and
mine—is controlling under Marks v. United States, 430 U. S. 188, 193
(1977). But unless O’Connor is overruled, it is assuredly false that a
test that would have produced the opposite result in that case is still in
the running.

