Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1457
_________________

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P., PETITIONER v. 

NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT

[June 17, 2010] 


JUSTICE KENNEDY, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG,
JUSTICE BREYER, and JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR join, dissent
ing.
As of the day this case was argued before the Court, the
National Labor Relations Board (Board), constituted as a
five-member board, had operated with but two members
for more than 26 months. That state of affairs, to say the
least, was not ideal. This may be an underlying reason for
the Court’s conclusion. Despite the fact that the statute’s
plain terms permit a two-member quorum of a properly
designated three-member group to issue orders, the Court
holds that the two-member quorum lost all authority to
act once the third member left the Board. Under the
Court’s holding, the Board was unauthorized to resolve
the more than 500 cases it addressed during those 26
months in the course of carrying out its responsibility “to
remove obstructions to the free flow of commerce” through
“the promotion of industrial peace.” NLRB v. Fansteel
Metallurgical Corp., 306 U. S. 240, 257 (1939). This result
is removed even farther from the ideal and from congres
sional intent, as revealed in the statutory design. So it is
hard to make the case that the Court’s interpretation of
the statute either furthers its most evident purposes or
leads to the more sensible outcome.
Indeed, in my view, the objectives of the statute, which


2

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

must be to ensure orderly operations when the Board is
not at full strength as well as efficient operations when it
is, are better respected by a statutory interpretation that
dictates a result opposite to the one reached by the Court.
And in all events, the outcome of the case is but a check on
the accuracy of the textual analysis; and here the text of
the statute, which must control, does not support the
holding of the Court. These reasons, and those to be
further discussed, inform this respectful dissent.
I
The Board, by statute, consists of five members. 29
U. S. C. §153(a). Section 153(b) provides a mechanism in
which the Board can delegate all of its powers to a three
member group. As relevant here, the statute consists of
three parts. First, a delegation clause:
“The Board is authorized to delegate to any group of
three or more members any or all of the powers which
it may itself exercise.”
Then, a vacancy clause:
“A vacancy in the Board shall not impair the right of
the remaining members to exercise all of the powers of
the Board . . . .”
And finally, immediately following the vacancy clause, are
the Board and group quorum provisions:
“[A]nd three members of the Board shall, at all times,
constitute a quorum of the Board, except that two
members shall constitute a quorum of any group des
ignated pursuant to the first sentence hereof.”
As the Court acknowledges, ante, at 4, the three
member group of Members Liebman, Schaumber, and
Kirsanow were a “group designated pursuant to the first
sentence” of §153(b). As such, a two-member quorum of
that group had statutory authorization to issue orders;


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

and that is precisely what Members Liebman and
Schaumber did. Because the group was properly desig
nated under §153(b) and a two-member quorum of the
group was authorized to act under the statute’s plain
terms, its actions were lawful. See Connecticut Nat. Bank
v. Germain, 503 U. S. 249, 253–254 (1992) (“[I]n interpret
ing a statute a court should always turn first to one, car
dinal canon before all others. . . . [C]ourts must presume
that a legislature says in a statute what it means and
means in a statute what it says”).
Nothing in the statute suggests that a delegation to a
three-member group expires when one member’s seat
becomes vacant, as the Court holds today. In other con
texts, it is settled law that a vacancy in a delegee group
does not void the initial delegation. See Nguyen v. United
States, 539 U. S. 69, 82 (2003) (concerning vacancies in
three-member panels of the courts of appeals). Any doubt
on that point should be resolved by this specific statutory
instruction: “A vacancy in the Board shall not impair the
right of the remaining members to exercise all of the
powers of the Board.” Members Liebman and Schaumber
were exercising the powers of the Board as its remaining
members; yet the Court today holds that the vacancy
impaired their right to exercise those powers in hundreds
of cases. That conclusion is contrary to the statutory
mandate.
By its holding, the Court rejects a straightforward read
ing that it acknowledges is “textually permissible.” Ante,
at 6. It does so because, in its view, it is “structurally
implausible.” Ante, at 6−7. But the only textually permis
sible reading of §153(b) authorizes a two-member quorum
of a delegee group to issue orders, as was done here; and
in any event there is no structural implausibility in read
ing the statute according to its plain terms.


4

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

II
The Court reads the statute to require a delegee group
to maintain three members. Unable to find this require
ment in the statute’s text, the Court gives three reasons
for its interpretation. Those reasons do not withstand
scrutiny.
A
The first reason the Court gives for its interpretation is
that reading the statute to require a delegee group to
maintain three members “is the only way to harmonize
and give meaningful effect to all of the provisions in”
§153(b). Ante, at 5. This is not so. But it should be fur
ther noted that the argument advanced by the Court is not
that the Government’s interpretation of the statute ren
ders any provision superfluous or without a role to play in
the statutory scheme. Instead, the Court surmises that
certain provisions would not have “meaningful,” “mate
rial,” or “practical” effect, ante, at 5, 6, 14. But that is just
to say that the Court has determined, in its own judgment,
that some provisions should have a greater role than
provided by the text of the statute.
The Government’s reading of the statute does not render
any clause meaningless. The full Board must have three
or more members in order to conduct any business, includ
ing delegating its authority to a three-member group, as
required under the Board quorum provision. This provi
sion applies “at all times” to the Board acting as a whole.
Two members of the Board could not conduct any business
unless they were previously designated by the full Board
as members of a delegee group with such authority. Any
delegation of the Board’s authority must be to at least
three members, as required by the delegation clause. Any
group to which the Board has properly delegated its au
thority must have two members present to act, as required
by the group quorum provision. This reading gives the


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

delegation clause and each of the quorum provisions inde
pendent meaning.
Where two members act as a quorum of a group, the
statute (unlike the Court) is indifferent to the reason for
the third member’s absence, be it illness, recusal, or va
cancy. The Court would hold that two members of a group
can act as a quorum so long as the third’s absence is not
due to a vacancy; yet the vacancy clause makes it clear
that the authority of Board “members” to act shall not be
impaired by vacancies. The clause includes all members,
including those acting as part of three-member groups.
The Court in effect would rewrite the group quorum
provision to say, “two members shall constitute a quorum
of any group [unless the third member’s absence is due to
a vacancy].” Even if the statute said nothing about vacan
cies, this would be a misreading of the quorum provision.
A “quorum” is the “minimum number of members . . . who
must be present for a deliberative assembly to legally
transact business.” See Black’s Law Dictionary 1370 (9th
ed. 2009) (hereinafter Black’s). As the Court has made
clear in the past, quorum requirements are generally
indifferent to the reasons underlying any particular mem
ber’s absence. See Nguyen, 539 U. S., at 82.
For instance, the Court has previously discussed a
statute governing the delegation of power to three-member
panels of the federal courts of appeals. Ibid. That statute
provides: “A majority of the number of judges authorized
to constitute a court or panel thereof . . . shall constitute a
quorum.” 28 U. S. C. §46(d). While the statute makes no
mention of vacancies, the Court had little trouble conclud
ing that the statute “permits a quorum to proceed to
judgment when one member of the panel dies or is dis
qualified.” Nguyen, supra, at 82. The Court today offers
to distinguish Nguyen as being “informed by the long
standing practice of allowing two judges from the initial
panel to proceed to judgment in the case of a vacancy.”


6

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

Ante, at 12. But there was little if any reliance on any
such practice in Nguyen. In noting that its conclusion was
a matter of “settled law,” the Court relied on the text of
the statute and a single case that itself looked directly to
the statutory text of §46(d). Nguyen, supra, at 82 (citing
United States v. Allied Stevedoring Corp., 241 F. 2d 925,
927 (CA2 1957) (L. Hand, J.)).
If the group quorum provision leaves any room for doubt
that it applies in cases of vacancy, its application is made
clearer by the vacancy clause itself. That clause states in
unequivocal terms that “[a] vacancy in the Board shall not
impair the right of the remaining members to exercise all
of the powers of the Board.” §153(b). The Court makes
much of the fact that the statute refers to a vacancy in the
“Board” rather than in a “group.” But the former category
subsumes the latter. That is, the phrase “[a] vacancy in
the Board” covers the entire universe of instances in which
there may be a vacancy in a group, because all group
members are Board members.
The Court counters that the vacancy clause “speaks to
the effect of a vacancy in the Board on the authority to
exercise the powers of the Board,” ante, at 11, as opposed
to a vacancy in a group. But the Court’s abridged re
statement of the vacancy clause suffers from a critical
imprecision. The Court’s point would be well taken if the
vacancy clause stated that “a vacancy in the Board shall
not affect the power of the Board to operate.” But the
clause instead states that “[a] vacancy in the Board shall
not impair the right of the remaining members to exercise
all of the powers of the Board.” Delegee groups consist of
members exercising the powers of the Board. This clause
thus instructs that a vacancy in the Board shall not im
pair the right of members to exercise the Board’s powers,
an authority that members of delegee groups possess. But
under the Court’s reading, vacancies in the Board will
often impair the right of the remaining members to exer


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

cise the powers of the Board, notwithstanding the explicit
statutory command to the contrary.
In an effort to avoid the mandates of the group quorum
provision, as buttressed by the vacancy clause, the Court
relies on the delegation clause. The Court reads the
clause as requiring a delegee group to maintain three
members in order for its authority to remain intact. In my
respectful submission, this reading of the statute, in which
any vacancy in a delegee group somehow invalidates the
delegation itself, has no textual basis. Contrary to the
Court’s and petitioner’s assertions, the delegation clause is
not rendered unimportant under the Government’s inter
pretation. The delegation clause establishes what is re
quired for delegation in the first instance, while the va
cancy clause and the group quorum provision allow the
delegee group to proceed in the event that a member’s
term expires or a member resigns.
Congress could have required a delegee group to main
tain three members, but it did not do so; instead, it in
cluded a vacancy clause that is an explicit rejection of such
a requirement. That is no doubt why the Court’s reading
has not been adopted by the five Courts of Appeals to have
rejected its result. See Teamsters Local Union No. 523 v.
NLRB, 590 F. 3d 849 (CA10 2009); Narricot Indus., L. P.
v. NLRB, 587 F. 3d 654 (CA4 2009); Snell Island SNF
LLC v. NLRB, 568 F. 3d 410 (CA2 2009); 564 F. 3d 840
(CA7 2009); Northeastern Land Servs., Ltd. v. NLRB, 560
F. 3d 36 (CA1 2009). While one court of appeals reached
the same result as the Court, it too did not adopt the
Court’s reasoning that a delegee group must maintain
three members. Laurel Baye Healthcare of Lake Lanier,
Inc. v. NLRB, 564 F. 3d 469, 472−473 (CADC 2009)
(“[T]his delegee group may act with two members so
long as the Board quorum requirement is, ‘at all times,’
satisfied”).
The Court’s reasons for nonetheless reading this re


8

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

quirement into the statutory text bring me to its second
point.
B
The Court’s textual arguments in the end reduce to a
single objection: The Government’s reading of §153(b)
allows two Board members to act as the full Board,
thereby eviscerating the requirement that the Board only
operate with a three-member quorum (or as three-member
panels). This animates the Court’s second reason for
departing from the statutory text, as the Court suggests
that had Congress “intended to authorize two members
alone to act for the Board on an ongoing basis, it could
have said so in straightforward language.” Ante, at 7. But
Congress undoubtedly permitted two members to act for
the Board: Even under the Court’s interpretation, two
members are authorized to exercise the full powers of the
Board so long as they are part of a delegee group that has
fallen to two members due to any reason other than va
cancy. Ante, at 13 (“[T]he group quorum provision still
operates to allow any panel to issue a decision by only two
members if one member is disqualified”).
The Court’s complaint, then, cannot be that Congress
did not intend two members to exercise the powers of the
Board; it must be that Congress did not intend to allow
two members to do so for protracted periods of time. The
Court is likely correct that Congress did not expect a two
member quorum to operate as the Board for extended
periods, but unintended consequences are typically the
result of unforeseen circumstances. And it should be even
more evident that Congress did not intend the Board to
cease operating entirely for an extended period of time, as
the Court’s interpretation of §153(b) now ordains. Mem
bers Liebman and Schaumber issued more than 500 opin
ions when they operated as a two-member quorum of a
properly designated group:


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

“Those decisions resolved a wide variety of disputes
over union representation and allegations of unfair
labor practices, including cases involving employers’
discharges of employees for exercising their statutory
rights; disputes over secret ballot elections in which
employees voted to select a union representative; pro
tests over employers’ withdrawal of recognition from
union representatives designated by employees; re
fusals by employers or unions to honor their obliga
tion to bargain in good faith; and challenges to the re
quirement that employees pay union dues as a
condition of employment.” Brief for Respondent 6−7
(footnotes omitted).
The Court’s objection, that Congress could have been
more explicit if it wanted two members to operate as the
Board, is misplaced. There is nothing inconsistent about
Congress preferring Board decisions to be made by three
members and advancing that preference through statutory
requirements, while at the same time providing exceptions
for suboptimal circumstances, such as those presented
here. Quorum provisions do not express the legislature’s
judgment about the optimal number of members that
should be present to transact business; they set a floor
that, while less than ideal, provides a minimum number of
participants necessary to protect “against totally unrepre
sentative action.” Robert’s Rules of Order §3, p. 16 (rev.
ed. 1970).
One likely reason Congress did not permit the Board to
delegate its authority to two-member groups in the first
instance is that Congress wanted to avoid two-member
groups in the mine run of cases. Congress’ statutory
scheme achieved that goal, as the Court’s review of the
Board’s historical practices aptly demonstrates. Ante, at
7−8. Congress nonetheless provided for two-member
quorums to operate in extraordinary circumstances, where


10

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

the Board has exercised its discretion to delegate its au
thority to a particular three-member group, and one mem
ber of such a group is unavailable for whatever reason.
The Board’s delegation to a three-member group that
ultimately dwindled to two was a thoughtful and consid
erate exercise of its reasonable discretion when it was
confronted with two imperfect alternatives.
During the past two years, events have turned what
Congress had undoubtedly thought would be an extraordi
nary circumstance into an ordinary one, through no fault
of the Board. That is no reason to dispense with the statu
tory regime that is prescribed when these circumstances
arise, even when they unexpectedly persist.
C
The Court’s final reason for its interpretation is the
Board’s longstanding practice of reconstituting panels
whenever they drop below three members due to a va
cancy. But see Photo-Sonics, Inc. v. NLRB, 678 F. 2d 121,
122−123 (CA9 1982) (upholding decision from a two
member delegee group after third member retired). The
commonsense conclusion from this practice, however, is
that the Board respects the superiority of three-member
groups to two-member quorums of those groups. That the
Board reconstitutes its panels to include three members
does not demonstrate that a two-member group lacks the
authority to act when recomposition is not an option.
The Court is mistaken, then, when it suggests that, if
two-member quorums were permissible, the Board would
have a practice of allowing two-member quorums to per
sist without reconstituting panels. Persuasive authority
shows the contrary to be true. In 2003, the Office of Legal
Counsel advised that two members can operate as a quo
rum of a properly designated group, even if the other seats
on the Board are vacant. The Board agreed to be bound by
that opinion. See Dept. of Justice, Office of Legal Counsel,


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

Quorum Requirements, App. to Brief for Respondent
1a−3a. Six months later, Board Member Acosta resigned.
See NLRB Bulletin, Ronald Meisburg Receives Recess
Appointment From President Bush to be NLRB Member
(Dec. 29, 2003). Despite OLC’s opinion and the Board’s
position that two-member quorums could exercise the full
powers of the Board, the Board prudently reconstituted
each three-member panel on which Member Acosta served
before his departure because there were enough members
of the Board to do so. Its own prudent actions should not
be used as a reason to strip the Board of a statutory
power.
And a further instructive history comes from the prac
tices of the original Board, before the 1947 Taft-Hartley
Act. The Wagner Act of 1935, 49 Stat. 451, provided for a
three-member Board and contained a vacancy provision
similar to the one found in §153(b): “A vacancy in the
Board shall not impair the right of the remaining mem
bers to exercise all the powers of the Board, and two mem
bers of the Board shall, at all times, constitute a quorum.”
§3(b), 49 Stat. 451. Under this statutory grant of author
ity, from 1935 to 1947 a two-member quorum of the Board
operated during three separate periods when the third
seat was vacant, issuing nearly 500 two-member decisions
during such times. Those two-member Boards issued 3
published decisions in 1936 (reported at 2 N. L. R. B.
198−240); 237 published decisions in 1940 (reported at 27
N. L. R. B. 1−1395 and 28 N. L. R. B. 1−115); and 225
published decisions in 1941 (reported at 35 N. L. R. B.
24−1360 and 36 N. L. R. B. 1−45); see also Brief for Re
spondent 3, n. 1.
Congress intended to preserve this practice when it
enacted the Taft-Hartley Act in 1947. The purpose of the
Taft-Hartley amendment was to increase the Board’s
efficiency by permitting multiple three-member groups to
exercise the full powers of the Board. See S. Rep. No. 105,


12

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

80th Cong., 1st Sess., 8 (1947) (“The expansion of the
Board . . . would permit it to operate in panels of three,
thereby increasing by 100 percent its ability to dispose of
cases expeditiously”). In furtherance of that objective, the
new statutory language in §153(b) complements the con
gressional intent to preserve the ability of two members of
the Board to exercise the Board’s full powers, in limited
circumstances, by permitting the Board to delegate “any or
all” of its powers “to any group of three or more members,”
two members of which would constitute a quorum.
D
The petitioner, but not the Court, advances an alterna
tive interpretation of §153(b) adopted by the United States
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. See
Brief for Petitioner 16−27; Laurel Baye, 564 F. 3d 469. In
the petitioner’s view, §153(b) requires the Board to have a
quorum of three members “at all times,” and when the
Board’s quorum fell to two members any powers that it
had delegated automatically ceased.
This is a misreading of the statute that the Court
rightly declines to adopt. Ante, at 9−10, n. 4. As ex
plained above, that the Board must meet a three-member
quorum requirement at all times when it wishes to oper
ate as the full Board does not mean it must maintain three
members in order for delegee groups to act. It just means
that the quorum requirement for the full Board, operating
independently of any delegee group, is fixed at three, as
opposed to the various dynamic quorum requirements
found elsewhere in the United States Code. See, e.g., 28
U. S. C. §46(d) (setting the quorum requirements for
courts of appeals at “[a] majority of the number of judges
authorized to constitute a court or panel thereof”); see also
Black’s 1370 (defining “proportional quorum” as: “A quo
rum calculated with reference to some defined or assumed
set, usu. either the number of seats (including vacancies)


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

or the number of sitting members (excluding vacancies)”).
Petitioner’s reading ignores the operation of the word
“except” in the statute: “[T]hree members of the Board
shall, at all times, constitute a quorum of the Board, ex
cept that two members shall constitute a quorum of any
group.” §153(b).
While the Court does not adopt petitioner’s flawed
reading, it should be noted that its failure to decisively
reject it calls into question various delegations of authority
the Board has made beyond three-member groups. For
instance, §153(d) permits the Board to delegate various
powers to its general counsel, but under petitioner’s view
the general counsel would have lost all authority the
moment the Board fell to two members. See also §153(b)
(permitting Board to delegate certain powers to its re
gional directors). The Court’s assurances that its opinion
“does not cast doubt on the prior delegations of authority
to non-group members,” ante, at 10, n. 4, are cold comfort
when it fails to reject petitioner’s view outright.
*
*
*
It is not optimal for a two-member quorum to exercise
the full powers of the Board for an extended period of
time. But the desire to avoid that situation cannot justify
the Court’s significant revisions to §153(b): (1) It writes
language into the delegation clause, requiring delegee
groups to maintain a membership of three, despite the
conspicuous absence of this requirement and the statutory
rejection of it in the group quorum provision; (2) it excises
the word “not” from the vacancy clause, so that a Board
vacancy does “impair the right of the remaining members
to exercise all of the powers of the Board” in hundreds of
cases; (3) it renders the group quorum provision unintelli
gible, so that its application depends entirely on the rea
son for the third member’s absence, and applies in all
instances except when the absence is due to a vacancy


14

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

(despite the vacancy clause’s contrary mandate, earlier in
the very same sentence).
The Court’s revisions leave the Board defunct for ex
tended periods of time, a result that Congress surely did
not intend. The Court’s assurance that its interpretation
is designed to give practical effect to the statute should
bring it to the opposite result from the one it reaches. For
these reasons, I would affirm the judgment of the Court of
Appeals.

