Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1457
_________________

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P., PETITIONER v. 

NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT

[June 17, 2010] 


JUSTICE STEVENS delivered the opinion of the Court.
The Taft-Hartley Act, enacted in 1947, increased the
size of the National Labor Relations Board (Board) from
three members to five. See 29 U. S. C. §153(a). Concur
rent with that change, the Taft-Hartley Act amended §3(b)
of the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) to increase
the quorum requirement for the Board from two members
to three, and to allow the Board to delegate its authority to
groups of at least three members. See §153(b). The ques
tion in this case is whether, following a delegation of the
Board’s powers to a three-member group, two members
may continue to exercise that delegated authority once the
group’s (and the Board’s) membership falls to two. We
hold that two remaining Board members cannot exercise
such authority.
I
As 2007 came to a close, the Board found itself with four
members and one vacancy. It anticipated two more vacan
cies at the end of the year, when the recess appointments
of Members Kirsanow and Walsh were set to expire, which
would leave the Board with only two members—too few to


2

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
Opinion of the Court

meet the Board’s quorum requirement, §153(b). The four
sitting members decided to take action in an effort to
preserve the Board’s authority to function. On December
20, 2007, the Board made two delegations of its authority,
effective as of midnight December 28, 2007. First, the
Board delegated to the general counsel continuing author
ity to initiate and conduct litigation that would normally
require case-by-case approval of the Board. See Minute of
Board Action (Dec. 20, 2007), App. to Brief for Petitioner
4a–5a (hereinafter Board Minutes). Second, the Board
delegated “to Members Liebman, Schaumber and Kir
sanow, as a three-member group, all of the Board’s pow
ers, in anticipation of the adjournment of the 1st Session
of the 110th Congress.” Id., at 5a. The Board expressed
the opinion that its action would permit the remaining two
members to exercise the powers of the Board “after [the]
departure of Members Kirsanow and Walsh, because the
remaining Members will constitute a quorum of the three
member group.” Ibid.
The Board’s minutes explain that it relied on “the statu
tory language” of §3(b), as well as an opinion issued by the
Office of Legal Counsel (OLC), for the proposition that the
Board may use this delegation procedure to “issue deci
sions during periods when three or more of the five seats
on the Board are vacant.” Id., at 6a. The OLC had con
cluded in 2003 that “if the Board delegated all of its pow
ers to a group of three members, that group could continue
to issue decisions and orders as long as a quorum of two
members remained.” Dept. of Justice, OLC, Quorum
Requirements, App. to Brief for Respondent 3a. In seek
ing the OLC’s advice, the Board agreed to accept the
OLC’s answer regarding its ability to operate with only
two members, id., at 1a, n. 1, and the Board in its minutes
therefore “acknowledged that it is bound” by the OLC
opinion. Board Minutes 6a. The Board noted, however,
that it was not bound to make this delegation; rather, it


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

had “decided to exercise its discretion” to do so. Ibid.
On December 28, 2007, the Board’s delegation to the
three-member group of Members Liebman, Schaumber,
and Kirsanow became effective. On December 31, 2007,
Member Kirsanow’s recess appointment expired. Thus,
starting on January 1, 2008, Members Liebman and
Schaumber became the only members of the Board. They
proceeded to issue decisions for the Board as a two
member quorum of a three-member group. The delegation
automatically terminated on March 27, 2010, when the
President made two recess appointments to the Board,
because the terms of the delegation specified that it would
be revoked when the Board’s membership returned to at
least three members, id., at 7a.
During the 27-month period in which the Board had
only two members, it decided almost 600 cases. See Letter
from Elena Kagan, Solicitor General, to William K. Suter,
Clerk of Court (Apr. 26, 2010). One of those cases involved
petitioner New Process Steel. In September 2008, the two
member Board issued decisions sustaining two unfair
labor practice complaints against petitioner. See New
Process Steel, LP, 353 N. L. R. B. No. 25 (2008); New Proc
ess Steel, LP, 353 N. L. R. B. No. 13 (2008). Petitioner
sought review of both orders in the Court of Appeals for
the Seventh Circuit, and challenged the authority of the
two-member Board to issue the orders.
The court ruled in favor of the Government. After a
review of the text and legislative history of §3(b) and the
sequence of events surrounding the delegation of authority
in December 2007, the court concluded that the then
sitting two members constituted a valid quorum of a
three-member group to which the Board had legitimately
delegated all its powers. 564 F. 3d 840, 845–847 (CA7
2009). On the same day that the Seventh Circuit issued
its decision in this case, the Court of Appeals for the Dis
trict of Columbia announced a decision coming to the


4

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
Opinion of the Court

opposite conclusion. Laurel Baye Healthcare of Lake
Lanier, Inc. v. NLRB, 564 F. 3d 469 (2009). We granted
certiorari to resolve the conflict.1 558 U. S. ___ (2009).
II
The Board’s quorum requirements and delegation pro
cedure are set forth in §3(b) of the NLRA, 49 Stat. 451, as
amended by 61 Stat. 139, which provides:
“The Board is authorized to delegate to any group of
three or more members any or all of the powers which
it may itself exercise. . . . A vacancy in the Board
shall not impair the right of the remaining members
to exercise all of the powers of the Board, and three
members of the Board shall, at all times, constitute a
quorum of the Board, except that two members shall
constitute a quorum of any group designated pursuant
to the first sentence hereof.” 29 U. S. C. §153(b).
It is undisputed that the first sentence of this provision
authorized the Board to delegate its powers to the three
member group effective on December 28, 2007, and the
last sentence authorized two members of that group to act
as a quorum of the group during the next three days if, for
example, the third member had to recuse himself from a
particular matter. The question we face is whether those
two members could continue to act for the Board as a
quorum of the delegee group after December 31, 2007,
when the Board’s membership fell to two and the desig
nated three-member group of “Members Liebman,
Schaumber, and Kirsanow” ceased to exist due to the
——————
1 Several other Courts of Appeals reached the same conclusion as the
Seventh Circuit, although not always following the same reasoning.
See Northeastern Land Servs., Ltd. v. NLRB, 560 F. 3d 36, 41 (CA1
2009); Snell Island SNF LLC v. NLRB, 568 F. 3d 410, 424 (CA2 2009);
Narricot Industries, L. P. v. NLRB, 587 F. 3d 654, 660 (CA4 2009);
Teamsters Local Union No. 523 v. NLRB, 590 F. 3d 849, 852 (CA10
2009).


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

expiration of Member Kirsanow’s term. Construing §3(b)
as a whole and in light of the Board’s longstanding prac
tice, we are persuaded that they could not.
The first sentence of §3(b), which we will call the delega
tion clause, provides that the Board may delegate its
powers only to a “group of three or more members.” 61
Stat. 139. There are two different ways to interpret that
language. One interpretation, put forward by the Gov
ernment, would read the clause to require only that a
delegee group contain three members at the precise time
the Board delegates its powers, and to have no continuing
relevance after the moment of the initial delegation.
Under that reading, two members alone may exercise the
full power of the Board so long as they were part of a
delegee group that, at the time of its creation, included
three members. The other interpretation, by contrast,
would read the clause as requiring that the delegee group
maintain a membership of three in order for the delega
tion to remain valid. Three main reasons support the
latter reading.
First, and most fundamentally, reading the delegation
clause to require that the Board’s delegated power be
vested continuously in a group of three members is the
only way to harmonize and give meaningful effect to all of
the provisions in §3(b). See Duncan v. Walker, 533 U. S.
167, 174 (2001) (declining to adopt a “construction of the
statute, [that] would render [a term] insignificant”); Mar
ket Co. v. Hoffman, 101 U. S. 112, 115–116 (1879) (“[A]
statute ought, upon the whole, to be so construed that, if it
can be prevented, no clause, sentence, or word shall be . . .
insignificant” (internal quotation marks omitted)). Those
provisions are: (1) the delegation clause; (2) the vacancy
clause, which provides that “[a] vacancy in the Board shall
not impair the right of the remaining members to exercise
all of the powers of the Board”; (3) the Board quorum
requirement, which mandates that “three members of the


6

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
Opinion of the Court

Board shall, at all times, constitute a quorum of the
Board”; and (4) the group quorum provision, which pro
vides that “two members shall constitute a quorum” of any
delegee group. See §153(b).
Interpreting the statute to require the Board’s powers to
be vested at all times in a group of at least three members
is consonant with the Board quorum requirement, which
requires three participating members “at all times” for the
Board to act. The interpretation likewise gives material
effect to the three-member requirement in the delegation
clause. The vacancy clause still operates to provide that
vacancies do not impair the ability of the Board to take
action, so long as the quorum is satisfied. And the inter
pretation does not render inoperative the group quorum
provision, which still operates to authorize a three
member delegee group to issue a decision with only two
members participating, so long as the delegee group was
properly constituted. Reading §3(b) in this manner, the
statute’s various pieces hang together—a critical clue that
this reading is a sound one.
The contrary reading, on the other hand, allows two
members to act as the Board ad infinitum, which dramati
cally undercuts the significance of the Board quorum
requirement by allowing its permanent circumvention.
That reading also makes the three-member requirement
in the delegation clause of vanishing significance, because
it allows a de facto delegation to a two-member group, as
happened in this case. Under the Government’s approach,
it would satisfy the statute for the Board to include a third
member in the group for only one minute before her term
expires; the approach gives no meaningful effect to the
command implicit in both the delegation clause and in the
Board quorum requirement that the Board’s full power be
vested in no fewer than three members. Hence, while the
Government’s reading of the delegation clause is textually
permissible in a narrow sense, it is structurally implausi


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

ble, as it would render two of §3(b)’s provisions function
ally void.
Second, and relatedly, if Congress had intended to
authorize two members alone to act for the Board on an
ongoing basis, it could have said so in straightforward
language. Congress instead imposed the requirement that
the Board delegate authority to no fewer than three mem
bers, and that it have three participating members to
constitute a quorum. Those provisions are at best an
unlikely way of conveying congressional approval of a two
member Board. Indeed, had Congress wanted to provide
for two members alone to act as the Board, it could have
maintained the NLRA’s original two-member Board quo
rum provision, see 29 U. S. C. §153(b) (1946 ed.), or pro
vided for a delegation of the Board’s authority to groups of
two. The Rube Goldberg-style delegation mechanism
employed by the Board in 2007—delegating to a group of
three, allowing a term to expire, and then continuing with
a two-member quorum of a phantom delegee group—is
surely a bizarre way for the Board to achieve the authority
to decide cases with only two members. To conclude that
Congress intended to authorize such a procedure to con
travene the three-member Board quorum, we would need
some evidence of that intent.
The Government has not adduced any convincing evi
dence on this front, and to the contrary, our interpretation
is consistent with the longstanding practice of the Board.
This is the third factor driving our decision. Although the
Board has throughout its history allowed two members of
a three-member group to issue decisions when one mem
ber of a group was disqualified from a case, see Brief for
Respondent 20; Board Minutes 6a, the Board has not
(until recently) allowed two members to act as a quorum of
a defunct three-member group.2 Instead, the Board con
——————
2 When

one member of a group is disqualified, only two members


8

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
Opinion of the Court

cedes that its practice was to reconstitute a delegee group
when one group member’s term expired. Brief for Respon
dent 39, n. 27.3 That our interpretation of the delegation
provision is consistent with the Board’s longstanding
practice is persuasive evidence that it is the correct one,
notwithstanding the Board’s more recent view. See Bowen
v. Georgetown Univ. Hospital, 488 U. S. 204, 214 (1988).
In sum, a straightforward understanding of the text,
which requires that no fewer than three members be
vested with the Board’s full authority, coupled with the
Board’s longstanding practice, points us toward an inter
pretation of the delegation clause that requires a delegee
group to maintain a membership of three.
III
Against these points, the Government makes several
arguments that we find unconvincing. It first argues that
§3(b) authorizes the Board’s action by its plain terms,
notwithstanding the somewhat fictional nature of the
delegation to a three-member group with the expectation
that within days it would become a two-member group. In
——————
actually participate in the decision. That circumstance thus also
presents the problem of the possible inferiority of two-member deci
sionmaking. That the Board found it necessary to reconstitute groups
only when there was a vacancy, and not when there was a disqualifica
tion, suggests that its practice was driven by more than its belief in
the “superiority of three-member groups,” post, at 10 (KENNEDY, J.,
dissenting).
3 It also has not been the Board’s practice to issue decisions when the
Board’s membership has fallen to two. For about a 2-month period in
1993–1994, and a 1-month period in 2001–2002, the Board had only
two members and did not issue decisions. Brief for Respondent 5, n. 4.
In 2005, the Board did delegate its authority to a three-member group,
of which two members issued a few orders as a quorum during a 3-day
period in which the Board’s (and the group’s) membership fell below
three. Ibid. But the two-member Board at issue in this case, extending
over two years, is unprecedented in the history of the post-Taft-Hartley
Board.


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

particular, the Government contends the group quorum
requirement and the vacancy clause together make clear
that when the Board has delegated its power to a three
member group, “any two members of that group constitute
a quorum that may continue to exercise the delegated
powers, regardless whether the third group member . . .
continues to sit on the Board” and regardless “whether a
quorum remains in the full Board.” Brief for Respondent
17; see also id., at 20–23.
Although the group quorum provision clearly authorizes
two members to act as a quorum of a “group designated
pursuant to the first sentence”—i.e., a group of at least
three members—it does not, by its plain terms, authorize
two members to constitute a valid delegee group. A quo
rum is the number of members of a larger body that must
participate for the valid transaction of business. See
Black’s Law Dictionary 1370 (9th ed. 2009) (defining
“quorum” as the “minimum number of members . . . who
must be present for a deliberative assembly to legally
transact business”); 13 Oxford English Dictionary 51 (2d
ed. 1989) (“A fixed number of members of any body . . .
whose presence is necessary for the proper or valid trans
action of business”); Webster’s New International Diction
ary 2046 (2d ed. 1954) (“Such a number of the officers or
members of any body as is, when duly assembled, legally
competent to transact business”). But the fact that there
are sufficient members participating to constitute a quo
rum does not necessarily establish that the larger body is
properly constituted or can validly exercise authority.4 In
——————
4 Nor does failure to meet a quorum requirement necessarily establish
that an entity’s power is suspended so that it can be exercised by no
delegee. The requisite membership of an organization, and the number
of members who must participate for it to take an action, are two
separate (albeit related) characteristics. Thus, although we reach the
same result, we do not adopt the District of Columbia Circuit’s equation
of a quorum requirement with a membership requirement that must be


10

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
Opinion of the Court

other words, that only two members must participate to
transact business in the name of the group, does not estab
lish that the group itself can exercise the Board’s author
ity when the group’s membership falls below three.
The Government nonetheless contends that quorum
rules “ordinarily” define the number of members that is
both necessary and sufficient for an entity to take an
action. Brief for Respondent 20. Therefore, because of the
quorum provision, if “at least two members of a delegee
group actually participate in a decision . . . that should be
the end of the matter,” regardless of vacancies in the
group or on the Board. Ibid. But even if quorum provi
sions ordinarily provide the rule for dealing with vacan
cies—i.e., even if they ordinarily make irrelevant any
vacancies in the remainder of the larger body—the quo
rum provisions in §3(b) do no such thing. Rather, there is
a separate clause addressing vacancies. The vacancy
clause, recall, provides that “[a] vacancy in the Board shall
not impair the right of the remaining members to exercise
all of the powers of the Board.” §153(b) (2006 ed.). We
thus understand the quorum provisions merely to define
the number of members who must participate in a deci
——————
satisfied or else the power of any entity to which the Board has dele
gated authority is suspended. See Laurel Baye Healthcare of Lake
Lanier, Inc. v. NLRB, 564 F. 3d 469, 475 (2009) (“[T]he Board quorum
provision establishes that the power of the Board to act exists [only]
when the Board consists of three members. The delegee group’s dele
gated power to act . . . ceases when the Board’s membership dips below
the Board quorum of three members” (citation omitted)). The Board
may not, of course, itself take any action absent sufficient membership
to muster a quorum (three), and in that sense a quorum requirement
establishes a minimum membership level. Our conclusion that the
delegee group ceases to exist once there are no longer three Board
members to constitute the group does not cast doubt on the prior
delegations of authority to nongroup members, such as the regional
directors or the general counsel. The latter implicates a separate
question that our decision does not address.


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

sion, and look to the vacancy clause to determine whether
vacancies in excess of that number have any effect on an
entity’s authority to act.
The Government argues that the vacancy clause estab
lishes that a vacancy in the group has no effect. But the
clause speaks to the effect of a vacancy in the Board on the
authority to exercise the powers of the Board; it does not
provide a delegee group authority to act when there is a
vacancy in the group. It is true that any vacancy in the
group is necessarily also a vacancy in the Board (although
the converse is not true), and that a group exercises the
(delegated) “powers of the Board.” But §3(b) explicitly
distinguishes between a group and the Board throughout,
and in light of that distinction we do not think “Board”
should be read to include “group” when doing so would
negate for all practical purposes the command that
a delegation must be made to a group of at least three
members.
Some courts have nonetheless interpreted the quorum
and vacancy provisions of §3(b) by analogizing to an appel
late panel, which may decide a case even though only two
of the three initially assigned judges remain on the panel.
See Photo-Sonics, Inc. v. NLRB, 678 F. 2d 121, 122–123
(CA9 1982). The governing statute provides that a case
may be decided “by separate panels, each consisting of
three judges,” 28 U. S. C. §46(b), but that a “majority of
the number of judges authorized to constitute a court or
panel thereof . . . shall constitute a quorum,” §46(d). We
have interpreted that statute to “requir[e] the inclusion of
at least three judges in the first instance,” but to allow a
two-judge “quorum to proceed to judgment when one
member of the panel dies or is disqualified.” Nguyen v.
United States, 539 U. S. 69, 82 (2003). But §46, which
addresses the assignment of particular cases to panels, is
a world apart from this statute, which authorizes the
standing delegation of all the Board’s powers to a small


12

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
Opinion of the Court

group.5 Given the difference between a panel constituted
to decide particular cases and the creation of a standing
panel plenipotentiary, which will decide many cases aris
ing long after the third member departs, there is no basis
for reading the statutes similarly. Moreover, our reading
of the court of appeals quorum provision was informed by
the longstanding practice of allowing two judges from the
initial panel to proceed to judgment in the case of a va
cancy, see ibid., and as we have already explained, the
Board’s practice has been precisely the opposite.
Finally, we are not persuaded by the Government’s
argument that we should read the statute to authorize the
Board to act with only two members in order to advance
the congressional objective of Board efficiency. Brief for
Respondent 26. In the Government’s view, Congress’
establishment of the two-member quorum for a delegee
group reflected its comfort with pre-Taft-Hartley practice,
when the then-three-member Board regularly issued
decisions with only two members. Id., at 24. But it is
unsurprising that two members regularly issued Board
decisions prior to Taft-Hartley, because the statute then
provided for a Board quorum of two. See 29 U. S. C.
§153(b) (1946 ed.). Congress changed that requirement to
a three-member quorum for the Board. As we noted
above, if Congress had wanted to allow the Board to con
tinue to operate with only two members, it could have kept
the Board quorum requirement at two.6
——————
5 In any event, if the analogy to the appellate courts were correct,
then one might have to examine each Board decision individually.
Petitioner’s case was not initially assigned to a three-member panel
and thereafter decided by two members after one member had retired.
Instead, by the time petitioner’s case came before the Board, Member
Kirsanow had long departed. In practical terms, petitioner’s case was
both assigned to and decided by a two-member delegee group.
6 We have no doubt that Congress intended “to preserve the ability of
two members of the Board to exercise the Board’s full powers, in limited
circumstances,” post, at 12, as when a two-member quorum of a prop


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

Furthermore, if Congress had intended to allow for a
two-member Board, it is hard to imagine why it would
have limited the Board’s power to delegate its authority by
requiring a delegee group of at least three members. Nor
do we have any reason to surmise that Congress’ overrid
ing objective in amending §3(b) was to keep the Board
operating at all costs; the inclusion of the three-member
quorum and delegation provisions indicate otherwise. Cf.
Robert’s Rules of Order §3, p. 20 (10th ed. 2001) (“The
requirement of a quorum is a protection against totally
unrepresentative action in the name of the body by an
unduly small number of persons”).
IV
In sum, we find that the Board quorum requirement and
the three-member delegation clause should not be read as
easily surmounted technical obstacles of little to no im
port. Our reading of the statute gives effect to those pro
visions without rendering any other provision of the stat
ute superfluous: The delegation clause still operates to
allow the Board to act in panels of three, and the group
quorum provision still operates to allow any panel to issue
a decision by only two members if one member is disquali
fied. Our construction is also consistent with the Board’s
longstanding practice with respect to delegee groups. We
thus hold that the delegation clause requires that a
delegee group maintain a membership of three in order to
exercise the delegated authority of the Board.
We are not insensitive to the Board’s understandable
desire to keep its doors open despite vacancies.7 Nor are
——————
erly constituted delegee group issues a decision for the Board in a
particular case. But we doubt “Congress intended to preserve” the preTaft-Hartley practice of two members acting for the Board when the
third seat was vacant, post, at 11, because it declined to preserve the
pre-Taft-Hartley two-member Board quorum.
7 Former Board members have identified turnover and vacancies as a


14

NEW PROCESS STEEL, L. P. v. NLRB
Opinion of the Court

we unaware of the costs that delay imposes on the liti
gants. If Congress wishes to allow the Board to decide
cases with only two members, it can easily do so. But
until it does, Congress’ decision to require that the Board’s
full power be delegated to no fewer than three members,
and to provide for a Board quorum of three, must be given
practical effect rather than swept aside in the face of
admittedly difficult circumstances. Section 3(b), as it
currently exists, does not authorize the Board to create a
tail that would not only wag the dog, but would continue
to wag after the dog died.
The judgment is reversed, and the case is remanded for
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

——————
significant impediment to the operations of the Board. See Truesdale,
Battling Case Backlogs at the NLRB, 16 Lab. Law. 1, 5 (2000) (“[I]t is
clear that turnover and vacancies have a major impact on Board
productivity”); Higgins, Labor Czars—Commissars—Keeping Women in
the Kitchen—the Purpose and Effects of the Administrative Changes
Made by Taft-Hartley, 47 Cath. U. L. Rev. 941, 953 (1998) (“TaftHartley’s Achilles heel is the appointment process. . . . In the past
twenty years . . . Board member turnover and delays in appointments
and in the confirmation process have kept the Board from reaching its
true potential”).

