Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–948
_________________

COMPUCREDIT CORPORATION, ET AL., PETITIONERS
v. WANDA GREENWOOD ET AL.
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[January 10, 2012]


JUSTICE GINSBURG, dissenting.
Congress enacted the Credit Repair Organizations Act
(CROA) to protect consumers “who have experienced
credit problems”—“particularly those of limited economic
means”—against the unfair and deceptive practices of
credit repair organizations. 15 U. S. C. §1679(a). Central
to the legislation, Congress sought to arm consumers with
information needed to make intelligent decisions about
purchasing a repair organization’s services. To that end,
Congress directed that, “before [execution of] any contract
. . . between [a] consumer and [a] credit repair organiza­
tion,” the organization must make certain disclosures.
One of the required disclosures reads:
“You have a right to sue a credit repair organization
that violates the [CROA]. This law prohibits decep­
tive practices by [such] organizations.” §1679c(a).
The Act’s civil-liability provision describes suits consumers
may bring in court: individual and class actions for dam­
ages (actual and punitive) and attorneys’ fees. A further
provision renders void any purported waiver of any protec­
tion or right the Act grants to consumers.
The Court today holds that credit repair organizations
can escape suit by providing in their take-it-or-leave-it
contracts that arbitration will serve as the parties’ sole


2

COMPUCREDIT CORP. v. GREENWOOD
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

dispute-resolution mechanism. The “right to sue,” the
Court explains, merely connotes the vindication of legal
rights, whether in court or before an arbitrator. That
reading may be comprehensible to one trained to “think
like a lawyer.” But Congress enacted the CROA with
vulnerable consumers in mind—consumers likely to read
the words “right to sue” to mean the right to litigate in
court, not the obligation to submit disputes to binding
arbitration.
In accord with the Ninth Circuit, I would hold that
Congress, in an Act meant to curb deceptive practices, did
not authorize credit repair organizations to make a false
or misleading disclosure—telling consumers of a right they
do not, in fact, possess. If the Act affords consumers a
nonwaivable right to sue in court, as I believe it does, a
credit repair organization cannot retract that right by
making arbitration the consumer’s sole recourse.
I
CompuCredit marketed a credit card to consumers with
weak credit ratings. It did so through massive direct-mail
and Internet solicitations, urging recipients to acquire a
card under the brand name Aspire Visa, and thereby
“rebuild poor credit” and “improve [their] credit rating.”
App. 40, Complaint ¶11 (internal quotation marks omit­
ted). Plaintiffs, individuals who applied for and received
CompuCredit’s card, sought redress for multiple violations
of the CROA.
Their complaint alleged that CompuCredit’s promotion­
al materials told potential customers that no deposit
would be required, and that cardholders would receive,
upfront, a credit line of $300. In fact, plaintiffs asserted,
they were charged an initial finance fee of $29, a monthly
fee of $6.50, and an annual fee of $150, assessed immedi­
ately against the $300 limit. In the aggregate, plaintiffs
calculated, fees charged the first year amounted to $257.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

CompuCredit’s fee exactions did appear in the promotional
materials: in small print, buried amidst other information,
and removed from the clearer representation that no deposit would be required. Id., at 40–41, Complaint ¶¶12–
13. Far from improving their credit rating, plaintiffs
complained, CompuCredit knew that its card, saddled
with these fees, “would not provide any meaningful assis­
tance whatsoever with regard to rebuilding credit and
improving a credit rating.” Id., at 48, Complaint ¶41(b).
Furthermore, plaintiffs stated, CompuCredit did not
provide them with the written disclosures of their rights
required by the CROA. Id., at 42, Complaint ¶23.
Seeking damages for the alleged violations, along with
attorneys’ fees, plaintiffs requested class certification. In
the District Court and Court of Appeals, they successfully
resisted CompuCredit’s motion to compel arbitration
pursuant to a form contract that barred class proceedings.1
This Court, however, interprets the CROA to permit CompuCredit’s demand that plaintiffs proceed, if at all, before
an arbitrator.2 I read the governing statute differently.
II
Three sections of the CROA, considered together, indi­
cate Congress’ intention to preclude mandatory, creditor­
imposed, arbitration of CROA claims. See 15 U. S. C.
§§1679c(a), 1679g, and 1679f. Before entering into any
——————
1 The

contract signed by cardholders did not itself require arbitration.
Rather, it incorporated by reference an “enclosed insert” providing that
all disputes would be resolved by arbitration at the discretion of Com­
puCredit or the cardholder. App. 61–63.
2 CompuCredit’s form contract specified that arbitration was to occur
under the auspices of the National Arbitration Forum (NAF). In 2009,
after the Attorney General of Minnesota filed an action alleging that
NAF had engaged in numerous violations of consumer-protection laws,
NAF entered into a consent decree barring it from handling consumer
arbitrations. See Press Release by Lori Swanson, Attorney General of
Minnesota (July 19, 2009).


4

COMPUCREDIT CORP. v. GREENWOOD
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

consumer contract, credit repair organizations must give
potential customers a written statement of rights they
possess under that Act and related consumer-protection
laws. §1679c(a). Congress dictated every word of the
required notification. Credit repair organizations must
tell consumers, in plain terms, how they may enforce their
rights: “You have a right to sue a credit repair organiza­
tion that violates the Credit Repair Organization Act.”
Ibid.
The “right to sue” refers to the claim for relief Congress
afforded consumers in §1679g. “Any person” who violates
another’s rights under the CROA “shall be liable” for
actual damages and attorneys’ fees, and may be liable for
punitive damages as well. §1679g(a)(1)–(3). The Act sets
out the factors “the court shall consider” in determining
the amount of punitive damages “the court may allow”
aggrieved consumers to recover, either individually or as a
class. §1679g(a)(2) and (b). The liability created here, in
§1679g, is precisely what the consumer, in light of §1679c,
may sue to enforce.
The Act renders void and unenforceable “[a]ny waiver by
any consumer of any protection provided by or any right of
the consumer under this subchapter.” §1679f (emphasis
added).3 The rights listed in §1679c(a) rendered nonwaivable by §1679f are the “right to sue” and the “right to
cancel [a] contract . . . for any reason within 3 business
days from the date [the consumer] signed it.”4
——————
3 Section 1679f(a), omitted from the Court’s statutory appendix, ante,
at 11–14, provides in full:
“Any waiver by any consumer of any protection provided by or any
right of the consumer under this subchapter—
“(1) shall be treated as void; and
“(2) may not be enforced by any Federal or State court or any other
person.”
4 Two provisions, although described by §1679c(a) as consumer
“right[s],” are not rendered nonwaivable by §1679f because they are not
“right[s] . . . under this subchapter.” Rather, the “right to dispute


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

The question on which this case turns is what Congress
meant when it created a nonwaivable “right to sue.”
Recall that Congress’ target audience in the CROA is not
composed of lawyers and judges accustomed to nuanced
reading of statutory texts, but laypersons who receive a
disclosure statement in the mail. Recall, as well, Con­
gress’ findings that these individuals are often “of limited
economic means and . . . inexperienced in credit matters.”
§1679(a)(2). Attributing little importance to this context,
the Court construes the right to sue as “the legal right,
enforceable in court, to recover damages . . . without re­
gard to whether the suit in court has to be preceded by an
arbitration proceeding.” Ante, at 8. I read Congress’
words without that sophisticated gloss: The right to sue,
I would hold, means the right to litigate in court.
The Court is quite right in recognizing that consumers
“have the legal right, enforceable in court, to recover dam­
ages from credit repair organizations that violate the
CROA.” Ibid. But the Court is quite wrong, as I see it, to
characterize as merely “imprecise,” ibid., Congress’ failure
to include the caveat that access to court may be condi­
tioned upon an anterior arbitration. The “right to sue”
may well be “a colloquial method of communicating to
consumers.” See ibid. But it surely is not colloquially
understood by recipients of the required disclosures as the
right, not to adjudicate in court, but only to seek, or defend
against, court enforcement of an award rendered by the
arbitrator chosen by the credit repair organization. Few,
if any, credit repair customers would equate the “right to
——————
inaccurate information in your credit report” and the “right to obtain a
copy of your credit report” referred to in §1679c(a) are rights conferred
elsewhere in the U. S. Code. See §1681i(a), §1681j. Section 1679f also
makes nonwaivable the “protection[s] provided . . . under this subchap­
ter” (emphasis added); these protections include the prohibition of cer­
tain business practices, see §1679b, and the provision, in writing, of
certain contractual terms and conditions, see §1679d.


6

COMPUCREDIT CORP. v. GREENWOOD
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

sue,” §1679c(a), with the extremely limited judicial review
given to an arbitrator’s award, see, e.g., Hall Street Associates, L. L. C. v. Mattel, Inc., 552 U. S. 576, 586–589
(2008).
The Court discounts the references to “action,” “class
action,” and “court” in §1679g, the provision that “cre­
ate[s]” the consumers’ claim for relief. See ante, at 5.
Despite similar statutory language, the Court observes, we
have enforced arbitration agreements to settle disputes
arising under other Acts of Congress. The CROA, however, is distinguished by its disclosure requirements,
prime among them, the obligation imposed on the credit
repair organization to inform potential customers they
“have a right to sue” an organization that violates the Act.
§1679c(a). Yet the Court refuses to read this language in
concert with §1679g, notwithstanding our frequent ac­
knowledgment that “a statute is to be read as a whole,
since the meaning of statutory language . . . depends on
context.” King v. St. Vincent’s Hospital, 502 U. S. 215, 221
(1991) (citation omitted). As just explained, I believe
Congress meant what an ordinary reader of the disclosure
requirement would likely comprehend: A credit repair
organization that engages in deceptive practices may be
sued in court.
Reducing the required disclosure to insignificance, see
ante, at 4–5, the Court’s construction of the CROA scarcely
advances the Act’s goals. Congress aimed to ensure pro­
spective customers “are provided with the information
necessary to make an informed decision,” and also to
“protect the public from unfair or deceptive advertising
and business practices.” 15 U. S. C. §1679(b). The Court’s
interpretation, however, enables the very deception Con­
gress sought to suppress. Today’s decision permits credit
repair organizations to deny consumers, through fine print
in a contract, an important right whose disclosure is de­
creed in the U. S. Code.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

This unfortunate result is not compelled by our prece­
dents. The Court cites three decisions for the proposition,
by now uncontroversial, that the mere existence of a statutory right of action does not preclude agreements to
arbitrate disputes. See ante, at 5–6 (citing Gilmer v.
Interstate/Johnson Lane Corp., 500 U. S. 20, 28 (1991);
Shearson/American Express Inc. v. McMahon, 482 U. S.
220, 240 (1987); and Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler
Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc., 473 U. S. 614, 637 (1985)). As
the Court acknowledges, ante, at 6, none of the statutes at
issue in those cases contained a nonwaiver clause analo­
gous to §1679f. Yet the presence of such a clause would
not have affected the outcome, the Court maintains; a
nonwaiver provision would not have precluded arbitration
because the statutes conferred no underlying right to
proceed in court.
Precisely the point: The CROA differs from the statutes
we have construed in the past in just that respect. The
Act does not merely create a claim for relief. It designates
that claim as an action entailing a “right to sue”; man­
dates that consumers be informed, prior to entering any
contract, of that right; and precludes the waiver of any
“right” conferred by the Act. Neither Gilmer, McMahon,
nor Mitsubishi construed a statute of a similar order.5
III
The Court’s final point is that, elsewhere, Congress has
spoken with particular clarity in guaranteeing a judicial
——————
5 “[I]f one believes [the CROA] . . . establishes a nonwaivable right to
initial judicial enforcement,” the Court states, “one must also believe
that it establishes a nonwaivable right to initial judicial enforcement in
any competent judicial tribunal.” Ante, at 7. In Sportin’ Life’s words,
“it ain’t necessarily so.” While there is good reason to believe Congress
cared about the institutional location of consumers’ suits under the
CROA, there is no reason to think Congress sought to disturb the
personal jurisdiction and venue rules that determine in which court a
civil action may be brought.


8

COMPUCREDIT CORP. v. GREENWOOD
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

forum and proscribing arbitration, but here, it did not do
so. The two statutes the Court cites as exemplary post­
date the CROA’s enactment by 14 and 6 years, respective­
ly. (A third merely delegates regulatory authority over
certain arbitration agreements.) See ante, at 9. Notably,
these recent statutes were framed following a string of
this Court’s decisions compelling arbitration pursuant to
contractual stipulations.6 Our decisions have increasingly
alerted Congress to the utility of drafting antiwaiver
prescriptions with meticulous care. But the Congress that
drafted the CROA was not similarly stimulated, and we
cannot fairly assess that enactment in the light of subse­
quent legislative responses to developments unknown to
the CROA’s drafters. Cf. United States v. Price, 361 U. S.
304, 313 (1960) (“[T]he views of a subsequent Congress
form a hazardous basis for inferring the intent of an
earlier one.”).
Beyond question, the Federal Arbitration Act, “standing
alone,” favors the enforcement of arbitration agreements.
McMahon, 482 U. S., at 226. To depart from that rule,
however, Congress need not employ “magic words.” See
Tr. of Oral Arg. 6. In determining whether the Arbitration
Act’s general rule has been displaced by another statutory
prescription, it remains our responsibility to examine
carefully “the text of the [statute], its legislative history,”
and Congress’ “underlying purposes.” Gilmer, 500 U. S.,
at 26 (citing McMahon, 482 U. S., at 227). See also 14
Penn Plaza LLC v. Pyett, 556 U. S. 247, 258 (2009) (arbi­
tration agreements will be enforced “unless Congress itself
has evinced an intention to preclude a waiver of judicial
remedies for the statutory rights at issue” (quoting
Gilmer, 500 U. S., at 26, in turn quoting Mitsubishi, 473
U. S., at 628)). No “unmistakably clear” statement is
——————
6 See Brief for American Association for Justice as Amicus Curiae 12,
and n. 5 (listing arbitration decisions since the CROA’s enactment).


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

necessary to proscribe the arbitration clause CompuCredit
seeks to enforce.
*
*
*
The CROA mandates that potential customers shall be
told of their “right to sue a credit repair organization” for
damages arising from deceptive practices. 15 U. S. C.
§1679c(a). But CompuCredit’s adhesion contract provided
that consumers would “not have the right to go to court.”
App. 61 (capitalization omitted). Congress’ direction must
prevail over CompuCredit’s opposing declaration. Accord­
ingly, I would affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals
for the Ninth Circuit.

