Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Per Curiam

See Harrington v. Richter, 562 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip
op., at 8). The “clearly established Federal law” relevant
here is our decision in Darden v. Wainwright, 477 U. S.
168 (1986), which explained that a prosecutor’s improper
comments will be held to violate the Constitution only if
they “ ‘so infected the trial with unfairness as to make the
resulting conviction a denial of due process.’ ” Id., at 181
(quoting Donnelly v. DeChristoforo, 416 U. S. 637, 643
(1974)).
According to the Sixth Circuit, the prosecutor violated
Darden by suggesting that Matthews had colluded with
his lawyer, David Busse, and with Dr. Chutkow to manufacture an extreme emotional disturbance defense. But
although the Sixth Circuit quoted a lengthy section of the
prosecutor’s closing argument which could be understood
as raising a charge of collusion,2 the court did not address
——————
2 The

full text of the section the Sixth Circuit found objectionable is as
follows:
“He’s arraigned, he meets with his attorney and either he tells his attorney, I did it or I didn’t do it. One or the other. But, the attorney
knows what the evidence is. By the way, the defendant knows what the
evidence is, because while he’s giving this statement, it’s sitting right in
front of him at the Homicide Office. Here’s the gun. Here’s the shoes,
David. ‘Nah, nah, I never saw it before. I never borrowed a gun. I
never borrowed any money. I wasn’t there. I was at home in bed
asleep.’ He’s denying it there.
“And what does his attorney think? His attorney sees all this evidence, and he’s going through his mind, what kind of legal excuse can
I have? What is this man’s defense? Self protection? No, there’s no
proof of a gun found at that house on 310 North 24th Street. No proof
of that. Protection of another? The defendant’s mother is at home on
Lytle Street. He isn’t protecting her over there on North 24th Street.
Intoxication? Yeah, well, he was drinking that night. Maybe that will
mean something.
“But that isn’t enough, Ladies and Gentlemen. Mr. Busse has to
contact a psychiatrist to see his client, and he comes in and sees his
client one month after the day of his arrest, one month to the day, and
by that time, Mr. David Eugene Matthews sees his defense in the form
of Doctor Chutkow, and do you think this guy is aware of what’s going

