Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Per Curiam

burden of proving extreme emotional disturbance “entirely
on the defendant,” 651 F. 3d, at 500.
The Sixth Circuit’s interpretation is supported by certain aspects of the Kentucky Supreme Court’s opinion in
Matthews’ case. For example, the state court indicated
that Matthews had “present[ed] extensive evidence” of his
extreme emotional disturbance, yet the court rejected his
sufficiency-of-the-evidence claim by finding the evidence
he had presented “far from overwhelming,” rather than by
stating that it failed to raise a reasonable doubt. Matthews, 709 S. W. 2d, at 420–421. The state court also
observed that it had recently clarified in Wellman v. Commonwealth, 694 S. W. 2d 696 (1985), that “absence of
extreme emotional disturbance is not an element of the
crime of murder which the Commonwealth must affirmatively prove.” Matthews, supra, at 421. In the Sixth Circuit’s view, the Kentucky Supreme Court’s reliance on this
Wellman formulation of extreme emotional disturbance in
resolving Matthews’ appeal violated the Due Process
Clause, as construed by this Court in Bouie v. City of
Columbia, 378 U. S. 347, 354 (1964), because it involved
the retroactive application of an “ ‘unexpected and indefensible’ ” judicial revision of the Kentucky murder statute.
The Kentucky Supreme Court’s initial assessment of
the evidence and reliance upon Wellman would be relevant
if they formed the sole basis for denial of Matthews’
sufficiency-of-the-evidence claim. It is not clear, however,
that they did. The Kentucky Supreme Court explained that
“[t]he trial court’s instructions in regard to extreme emotional disturbance were adequate, and the proof supported
the jury’s findings of intentional murder.” 709 S. W. 2d,
at 421. Those jury instructions required the jury to find
beyond a reasonable doubt that Matthews had not acted
“under the influence of extreme emotional disturbance for
which there was a reasonable justification or excuse under
the circumstances as he believed them to be.” 6 Record

