Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Per Curiam

conclusions should be drawn from evidence admitted at
trial,” Cavazos v. Smith, 565 U. S. 1, ___ (2011) (per curiam)
(slip op., at 1). The evidence is sufficient to support a
conviction whenever, “after viewing the evidence in the
light most favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier
of fact could have found the essential elements of the
crime beyond a reasonable doubt.” Jackson v. Virginia,
443 U. S. 307, 319 (1979). And a state-court decision
rejecting a sufficiency challenge may not be overturned on
federal habeas unless the “decision was ‘objectively unreasonable.’ ” Cavazos, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 1).
In light of this twice-deferential standard, it is abundantly clear that the Kentucky Supreme Court’s rejection
of Matthews’ sufficiency claim is controlling in this federal
habeas proceeding. The Sixth Circuit noted that Dr.
Chutkow expressed an opinion that Matthews was under
the influence of extreme emotional disturbance at the time
of the murders, and did not retreat from that opinion on
cross-examination. But there was ample evidence pointing in the other direction as well. As the Kentucky
Supreme Court observed, Matthews’ claim of extreme emotional disturbance was belied by “the circumstances of the
crime,” 709 S. W. 2d, at 421—including the facts that he
borrowed money to purchase the murder weapon the day
of the murders, that he waited several hours after buying
the gun before starting for his wife’s home, and that he
delayed several hours between shooting his mother-in-law
and killing his wife. The claim was also belied by his
behavior after the murders, including his “[taking] steps to
hide the gun and clean his clothes,” and later “giv[ing]
a false statement to the police.” Ibid. The Sixth Circuit
discounted this evidence because Dr. Chutkow testified
that Matthews’ deliberateness and consciousness of
wrongdoing were not inconsistent with the diagnosis of
extreme emotional disturbance. 651 F. 3d., at 504, n. 4.
But expert testimony does not trigger a conclusive pre-

