Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

jurisdiction alters the normal operation of our adversarial
system. Under that system, courts are generally limited
to addressing the claims and arguments advanced by the
parties. See Sanchez-Llamas v. Oregon, 548 U. S. 331,
356–357 (2006). Courts do not usually raise claims or
arguments on their own. But federal courts have an inde
pendent obligation to ensure that they do not exceed the
scope of their jurisdiction, and therefore they must raise
and decide jurisdictional questions that the parties either
overlook or elect not to press. See Arbaugh, supra, at 514.
Jurisdictional rules may also result in the waste of
judicial resources and may unfairly prejudice litigants.
For purposes of efficiency and fairness, our legal system is
replete with rules requiring that certain matters be raised
at particular times. See Sanchez-Llamas, supra, at 356–
357. Objections to subject-matter jurisdiction, however,
may be raised at any time. Thus, a party, after losing at
trial, may move to dismiss the case because the trial court
lacked subject-matter jurisdiction. Arbaugh, 546 U. S., at
508. Indeed, a party may raise such an objection even if
the party had previously acknowledged the trial court’s
jurisdiction. Ibid. And if the trial court lacked jurisdic
tion, many months of work on the part of the attorneys
and the court may be wasted.
Because the consequences that attach to the jurisdic
tional label may be so drastic, we have tried in recent
cases to bring some discipline to the use of this term. We
have urged that a rule should not be referred to as juris
dictional unless it governs a court’s adjudicatory capacity,
that is, its subject-matter or personal jurisdiction. Reed
Elsevier, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 6); Kontrick, supra, at
455. Other rules, even if important and mandatory, we
have said, should not be given the jurisdictional brand.
See Union Pacific, 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 12).
Among the types of rules that should not be described as
jurisdictional are what we have called “claim-processing

