Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

scale in the veteran’s favor in the course of administrative
and judicial review of VA decisions,” id., at ___ (Souter, J.,
dissenting) (slip op., at 2). See, e. g., Veterans Claims
Assistance Act of 2000, 114 Stat. 2096; Act of Nov. 21,
1997, 111 Stat. 2271; VJRA, §103, 102 Stat. 4106–4107.
The contrast between ordinary civil litigation—which
provided the context of our decision in Bowles—and the
system that Congress created for the adjudication of vet
erans’ benefits claims could hardly be more dramatic. In
ordinary civil litigation, plaintiffs must generally com
mence their suits within the time specified in a statute of
limitations, see 28 U. S. C. §1658, and the litigation is
adversarial. Plaintiffs must gather the evidence that
supports their claims and generally bear the burden of
production and persuasion. Both parties may appeal an
adverse trial-court decision, see §1291, and a final judg
ment may be reopened only in narrow circumstances. See
Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 60.
By contrast, a veteran seeking benefits need not file an
initial claim within any fixed period after the alleged onset
of disability or separation from service. When a claim is
filed, proceedings before the VA are informal and nonad
versarial. The VA is charged with the responsibility of
assisting veterans in developing evidence that supports
their claims, and in evaluating that evidence, the VA must
give the veteran the benefit of any doubt. If a veteran is
unsuccessful before a regional office, the veteran may
obtain de novo review before the Board, and if the veteran
loses before the Board, the veteran can obtain further
review in the Veterans Court. A Board decision in the
veteran’s favor, on the other hand, is final. And even if a
veteran is denied benefits after exhausting all avenues of
administrative and judicial review, a veteran may reopen
a claim simply by presenting “new and material evidence.”
Rigid jurisdictional treatment of the 120-day period for
filing a notice of appeal in the Veterans Court would clash

