Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
gress regarded the 120-day limit as a claim-processing rule. Most
telling, however, are the singular characteristics of the review
scheme that Congress created for adjudicating veterans’ benefits
claims. Congress’ longstanding solicitude for veterans, United States
v. Oregon, 366 U. S. 643, 647, is plainly reflected in the VJRA and in
subsequent laws that place a thumb on the scale in the veteran’s fa
vor in the course of administrative and judicial review of VA deci
sions. The contrast between ordinary civil litigation—which provided
the context in Bowles—and the system Congress created for veterans
is dramatic. In ordinary civil litigation suits must generally be com
menced within a specified limitations period; the litigation is adver
sarial; plaintiffs must gather the evidence supporting their claims
and generally bear the burden of production and persuasion; both
parties may appeal an adverse decision; and a final judgment may be
reopened only in narrow circumstances. By contrast, a veteran need
not file an initial benefits claim within any fixed period; the VA pro
ceedings are informal and nonadversarial; and the VA assists veter
ans in developing their supporting evidence and must give them the
benefit of any doubt in evaluating that evidence. A veteran who loses
before the Board may obtain review in the Veterans Court, but a
Board decision in the veteran’s favor is final. And a veteran may re
open a claim simply by presenting new and material evidence. Rigid
jurisdictional treatment of the 120-day period would clash sharply
with this scheme. Particularly in light of “the canon that provisions
for benefits to members of the Armed Services are to be construed in
the beneficiaries’ favor,” King v. St. Vincent’s Hospital, 502 U. S. 215,
220–221, n. 9, this Court sees no clear indication that the 120-day
limit was intended to carry the harsh consequences that accompany
the jurisdiction tag. Contrary to the Government’s argument, the
lack of review opportunities for veterans before 1988 is of little help
in interpreting §7266(a). Section 7266(a) was enacted as part of the
VJRA, and that legislation was decidedly favorable to veterans.
Pp. 8–12.
589 F. 3d 1201, reversed and remanded.
ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which all other Mem
bers joined, except KAGAN, J., who took no part in the consideration or
decision of the case.

