2

HENDERSON v. SHINSEKI
Syllabus
does not have jurisdictional consequences. Pp. 4–13.
(a) Branding a procedural rule as going to a court’s subject-matter
jurisdiction alters the normal operation of the adversarial system.
Federal courts have an independent obligation to ensure that they do
not exceed the scope of their subject-matter jurisdiction and thus
must raise and decide jurisdictional questions that the parties either
overlook or elect not to press. Jurisdictional rules may also cause a
waste of judicial resources and may unfairly prejudice litigants, since
objections may be raised at any time, even after trial. Because of
these drastic consequences, this Court has urged that a rule should
not be referred to as jurisdictional unless it governs a court’s adjudi
catory capacity, i.e., its subject-matter or personal jurisdiction. E.g.,
Reed Elsevier, Inc. v. Muchnick, 559 U. S. ___, ___. Among the rules
that should not be described as jurisdictional are “claim-processing
rules,” which seek to promote the orderly progress of litigation by re
quiring parties to take certain procedural steps at specified times.
Although filing deadlines are quintessential claim-processing rules,
Congress is free to attach jurisdictional consequences to such rules.
Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp., 546 U. S. 500, applied a “readily adminis
trable bright line” rule to determine whether Congress has done so:
There must be a “clear” indication that Congress wanted the rule to
be “jurisdictional.” Id., at 515–516. “[C]ontext, including this Court’s
interpretation of similar provisions in many years past, is relevant,”
Reed Elsevier, supra, at ___, to whether Congress has spoken clearly
on this point. Pp. 4–6.
(b) Congress did not clearly prescribe that the 120-day deadline
here be jurisdictional. Pp. 7–12.
(1) None of the precedents cited by the parties controls here. All
of the cases they cite—e.g., Bowles, supra; Stone v. INS, 514 U. S.
386; and Bowen v. City of New York, 476 U. S. 467—involved review
by Article III courts. This case, by contrast, involves review by an
Article I tribunal as part of a unique administrative scheme. Instead
of applying a categorical rule regarding review of administrative de
cisions, this Court attempts to ascertain Congress’ intent regarding
the particular type of review at issue. Pp. 7–8.
(2) Several factors indicate that 120-day deadline was not meant
to be jurisdictional. The terms of §7266(a), which sets the deadline,
provide no clear indication that the provision was meant to carry ju
risdictional consequences. It neither speaks in “jurisdictional terms”
nor refers “in any way to the jurisdiction of the [Veterans Court],”
Zipes v. Trans World Airlines, Inc., 455 U. S. 385, 394. Nor does
§7266’s placement within the VJRA provide such an indication. Its
placement in a subchapter entitled “Procedure,” and not in the sub
chapter entitled “Organization and Jurisdiction,” suggests that Con

