Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

§120, 56 Stat. 385 (defining “child” to include “legitimate
child,” “child legally adopted,” and, under certain conditions, “stepchild” and “illegitimate child” (internal quotation marks omitted)).
Nor does §416(e) indicate that Congress intended “biological” parentage to be prerequisite to “child” status
under that provision. As the SSA points out, “[i]n 1939,
there was no such thing as a scientifically proven biological relationship between a child and a father, which is . . .
part of the reason that the word ‘biological’ appears nowhere in the Act.” Reply Brief 6. Notably, a biological
parent is not necessarily a child’s parent under law.
Ordinarily, “a parent-child relationship does not exist
between an adoptee and the adoptee’s genetic parents.”
Uniform Probate Code §2–119(a), 8 U. L. A. 55 (Supp.
2011) (amended 2008). Moreover, laws directly addressing
use of today’s assisted reproduction technology do not
make biological parentage a universally determinative
criterion. See, e.g., Cal. Fam. Code Ann. §7613(b) (West
Supp. 2012) (“The donor of semen . . . for use in artificial
insemination or in vitro fertilization of a woman other
than the donor’s wife is treated in law as if he were not the
natural father of a child thereby conceived, unless otherwise agreed to in a writing signed by the donor and the
woman prior to the conception of the child.”); Mass. Gen.
Laws, ch. 46, §4B (West 2010) (“Any child born to a married woman as a result of artificial insemination with the
consent of her husband, shall be considered the legitimate
child of the mother and such husband.”).
We note, in addition, that marriage does not ever and
always make the parentage of a child certain, nor does the
absence of marriage necessarily mean that a child’s parentage is uncertain. An unmarried couple can agree that
a child is theirs, while the parentage of a child born during
a marriage may be uncertain. See Reply Brief 11 (“Respondent errs in treating ‘marital’ and ‘undisputed’ as

