Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
sioner shall apply state intestacy law. Respondent notes the absence
of any cross-reference in §416(e) to §416(h), but she overlooks that
§416(h) provides the crucial link: It requires reference to state intestacy law to determine child status not just for §416(h) purposes, but
“for purposes of this subchapter,” which includes both §§402(d) and
416(e). Having explicitly complemented §416(e) by the definitional
provisions contained in §416(h), Congress had no need to place a redundant cross-reference in §416(e).
The Act commonly refers to state law on matters of family status,
including an applicant’s status as a wife, widow, husband, or widower. See, e.g., §§416(b), (h)(1)(A). The Act also sets duration-ofrelationship limitations, see Weinberger v. Salfi, 422 U. S. 749, 777–
782, and time limits qualify the statutes of several States that accord
inheritance rights to posthumously conceived children. In contrast,
no time constraint attends the Third Circuit’s ruling in this case, under which the biological child of married parents is eligible for survivors benefits, no matter the length of time between the father’s death
and the child’s conception and birth.
Because a child who may take from a father’s estate is more likely
to “be dependent during the parent’s life and at his death,” Mathews
v. Lucas, 427 U. S. 495, 514, reliance on state intestacy law to determine who is a “child” serves the Act’s driving objective, which is to
“provide . . . dependent members of [a wage earner’s] family with protection against the hardship occasioned by [the] loss of [the insured’s]
earnings,” Califano v. Jobst, 434 U. S. 47, 52. Although the Act and
regulations set different eligibility requirements for adopted children,
stepchildren, grandchildren, and stepgrandchildren, it hardly follows,
as respondent argues, that applicants in those categories are treated
more advantageously than are children who must meet a §416(h) criterion. Respondent charges that the SSA’s construction of the Act
raises serious constitutional concerns under the equal protection
component of the Due Process Clause. But under rational-basis review, the appropriate standard here, the regime passed by Congress
easily passes inspection. Pp. 10–15.
(c) Because the SSA’s interpretation of the relevant provisions, is
at least reasonable, the agency’s reading is entitled to this Court’s
deference under Chevron, 467 U. S. 837. Chevron deference is appropriate “when it appears that Congress delegated authority to the
agency generally to make rules carrying the force of law, and that the
agency interpretation claiming deference was promulgated in the exercise of that authority.” United States v. Mead Corp., 533 U. S. 218,
226–227. Here, the SSA’s longstanding interpretation, set forth in
regulations published after notice-and-comment rulemaking, is neither “arbitrary or capricious in substance, [n]or manifestly contrary

