6

ASTRUE v. CAPATO
Opinion of the Court

ranks as a “child” if the insured and the other parent went
through a marriage ceremony that would have been valid
but for certain legal impediments. §416(h)(2)(B). Further,
an applicant is deemed a “child” if, before death, the insured acknowledged in writing that the applicant is his or
her son or daughter, or if the insured had been decreed by
a court to be the father or mother of the applicant, or had
been ordered to pay child support. §416(h)(3)(C)(i). In
addition, an applicant may gain “child” status upon
proof that the insured individual was the applicant’s parent and “was living with or contributing to the support
of the applicant” when the insured individual died.
§416(h)(3)(C)(ii).5
The SSA has interpreted these provisions in regulations
adopted through notice-and-comment rulemaking. The
regulations state that an applicant may be entitled to
benefits “as a natural child, legally adopted child, stepchild, grandchild, stepgrandchild, or equitably adopted
child.” 20 CFR §404.354. Defining “[w]ho is the insured’s
natural child,” §404.355, the regulations closely track
42 U. S. C. §§416(h)(2) and (h)(3). They state that an
applicant may qualify for insurance benefits as a “natural
child” by meeting any of four conditions: (1) the applicant
“could inherit the insured’s personal property as his or her
natural child under State inheritance laws”; (2) the applicant is “the insured’s natural child and [his or her parents]
went through a ceremony which would have resulted in
a valid marriage between them except for a legal impediment”; (3) before death, the insured acknowledged in
writing his or her parentage of the applicant, was decreed
by a court to be the applicant’s parent, or was ordered by a
court to contribute to the applicant’s support; or (4) other
evidence shows that the insured is the applicant’s “natural
——————
5 Respondent does not invoke any of the alternative criteria as a basis
for the twins’ “child” status.

