(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ASTRUE, COMMISSIONER OF SOCIAL SECURITY v. 

CAPATO, ON BEHALF OF B. N. C. ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 11–159.

Argued March 19, 2012—Decided May 21, 2012

Eighteen months after her husband, Robert Capato, died of cancer, respondent Karen Capato gave birth to twins conceived through in
vitro fertilization using her husband’s frozen sperm. Karen applied
for Social Security survivors benefits for the twins. The Social Security Administration (SSA) denied her application, and the District
Court affirmed. In accord with the SSA’s construction of the Social
Security Act (Act), the court determined that the twins would qualify
for benefits only if, as 42 U. S. C. §416(h)(2)(A) specifies, they could
inherit from the deceased wage earner under state intestacy law.
The court then found that Robert was domiciled in Florida at his
death, and that under Florida law, posthumously conceived children
do not qualify for inheritance through intestate succession. The
Third Circuit reversed. It concluded that, under §416(e), which defines child to mean, inter alia, “the child or legally adopted child of an
[insured] individual,” the undisputed biological children of an insured
and his widow qualify for survivors benefits without regard to state
intestacy law.
Held: The SSA’s reading is better attuned to the statute’s text and its
design to benefit primarily those supported by the deceased wage
earner in his or her lifetime. Moreover, even if the SSA’s longstanding interpretation is not the only reasonable one, it is at least a permissible construction entitled to deference under Chevron U. S. A.
Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U. S. 837. Pp. 4–
16.
(a) Congress amended the Act in 1939 to provide that, as relevant
here, “[e]very child (as defined in section 416(e) of this title)” of a de-

