(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

STAUB v. PROCTOR HOSPITAL
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–400.

Argued November 2, 2010—Decided March 1, 2011

While employed as an angiography technician by respondent Proctor
Hospital, petitioner Staub was a member of the United States Army
Reserve. Both his immediate supervisor (Mulally) and Mulally’s su
pervisor (Korenchuk) were hostile to his military obligations. Mu
lally gave Staub disciplinary warning which included a directive re
quiring Staub to report to her or Korenchuk when his cases were
completed. After receiving a report from Korenchuk that Staub had
violated the Corrective Action, Proctor’s vice president of human re
sources (Buck) reviewed Staub’s personnel file and decided to fire
him. Staub filed a grievance, claiming that Mulally had fabricated
the allegation underlying the warning out of hostility toward his
military obligations, but Buck adhered to her decision. Staub sued
Proctor under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemploy
ment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA), which forbids an employer to
deny “employment, reemployment, retention in employment, promo
tion, or any benefit of employment” based on a person’s “membership”
in or “obligation to perform service in a uniformed service,” 38
U. S. C. §4311(a), and provides that liability is established “if the
person’s membership . . . is a motivating factor in the employer’s ac
tion,” §4311(c). He contended not that Buck was motivated by hostil
ity to his military obligations, but that Mulally and Korenchuk were,
and that their actions influenced Buck’s decision. A jury found Proc
tor liable and awarded Staub damages, but the Seventh Circuit re
versed, holding that Proctor was entitled to judgment as a matter of
law because the decisionmaker had relied on more than Mulally’s and
Korenchuk’s advice in making her decision.
Held:
1. If a supervisor performs an act motivated by antimilitary ani


2

STAUB v. PROCTOR HOSPITAL
Syllabus
mus that is intended by the supervisor to cause an adverse employ
ment action, and if that act is a proximate cause of the ultimate em
ployment action, then the employer is liable under USERRA. In con
struing the phrase “motivating factor in the employer’s action,” this
Court starts from the premise that when Congress creates a federal
tort it adopts the background of general tort law. See, e.g., Burling
ton N. & S. F. R. Co. v. United States, 556 U. S. ___, ___. Intentional
torts such as the one here “generally require that the actor intend
‘the consequences’ of an act,’ not simply ‘the act itself.’ ” Kawaauhau
v. Geiger, 523 U. S. 57, 61–62. However, Proctor errs in contending
that an employer is not liable unless the de facto decisionmaker is
motivated by discriminatory animus. So long as the earlier agent in
tended, for discriminatory reasons, that the adverse action occur, he
has the scienter required for USERRA liability. Moreover, it is axio
matic under tort law that the decisionmaker’s exercise of judgment
does not prevent the earlier agent’s action from being the proximate
cause of the harm. See Hemi Group, LLC v. City of New York, 559
U. S. 1, ___. Nor can the ultimate decisionmaker’s judgment be
deemed a superseding cause of the harm. See Exxon Co., U. S. A. v.
Sofec, Inc., 517 U. S. 830, 837. Proctor’s approach would have an im
probable consequence: If an employer isolates a personnel official
from its supervisors, vests the decision to take adverse employment
actions in that official, and asks that official to review the employee’s
personnel file before taking the adverse action, then the employer
will be effectively shielded from discriminatory acts and recommen
dations of supervisors that were designed and intended to produce
the adverse action. Proctor also errs in arguing that a decision
maker’s independent investigation, and rejection, of an employee’s
discriminatory animus allegations should negate the effect of the
prior discrimination. Pp. 4–10.
2. Applying this analysis here, the Seventh Circuit erred in holding
that Proctor was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Both Mu
lally and Korenchuk acted within the scope of their employment
when they took the actions that allegedly caused Buck to fire Staub.
There was also evidence that their actions were motivated by hostil
ity toward Staub’s military obligations, and that those actions were
causal factors underlying Buck’s decision. Finally, there was evi
dence that both Mulally and Korenchuk had the specific intent to
cause Staub’s termination. The Seventh Circuit is to consider in the
first instance whether the variance between the jury instruction
given at trial and the rule adopted here was harmless error or should
mandate a new trial. Pp. 11–12.

560 F. 3d 647, reversed and remanded.


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.
ALITO, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which THOMAS, J., joined. KAGAN, J., took no part in the consideration or decision
of the case.

