26

SOUTHERN UNION CO. v. UNITED STATES
BREYER, J., dissenting

fairness of the criminal trial process. A defendant will not
find it easy to show the jury at trial that (1) he committed
no environmental crime, but (2) in any event, he commit­
ted the crime only on 20 days, not 30. Moreover, the
majority’s holding will sometimes permit prosecutors to
introduce newly relevant evidence that would otherwise
have been kept from the jury on the ground that it was
cumulative or unduly prejudicial. If victims’ losses are
relevant, the prosecutor may be able to produce witness
after witness testifying only about the amount of life
savings lost to the fraud. The defendant in this case, for
example, thought the introduction of evidence about the
discovery of mercury and remediation and evacuation of a
nearby apartment complex was unduly prejudicial. Brief
for United States 51 (citing App. 15 (defendant’s motion in
limine to exclude such evidence)). But even if that were
so, that evidence might now be admitted as showing the
amount of harm caused or the number of days upon which
the defendant’s unlawful activity took place.
Administrative problems here may prove more serious
than where, as in Apprendi, prison terms were at stake.
In part, that is because corporate criminal cases often
focus upon complex frauds, criminal price fixing, extended
environmental pollution, food-and-drug safety violations,
and the like. Both Congress and the Sentencing Commis­
sion have recognized as much. The federal criminal fine
statute to which I earlier referred specifically creates an
exception where assessing total loss or gain “would unduly
complicate or prolong the sentencing process.” 18 U. S. C.
§3571(d). Similarly, Sentencing Guidelines applicable to
corporations exclude fine provisions for environmental
crimes (along with most crimes involving export viola­
tions, food-and-drug safety, agricultural-and-consumer
products, and RICO violations) because of the “potential
difficulty . . . of defining and computing loss.” Nagel &
Swenson, supra, at 256; see USSG §8C2.1, and comment.,

