16

SOUTHERN UNION CO. v. UNITED STATES
BREYER, J., dissenting

considered a federal embargo statute making it a crime to
“put” certain “goods” on board a ship with intent to “ex­
port” them outside of the United States. See Act of Jan. 9,
1809, ch. 5, §1, 2 Stat. 506. The statute also provided
that an offender’s “goods” and ship “shall be forfeited,” and
the offender, “shall, upon conviction,” be “fined a sum, by
the court before which the conviction is had, equal to four
times the value of such specie, goods, wares and merchan­
dise.” Ibid. The statute thereby required determination of
a sentencing fact, namely “the value of such . . . goods.”
Was the finding of this sentencing fact for the judge or for
the jury?
In Tyler, the defendant had been indicted for attempting
to export 19 barrels of pearl-ashes, valued at $600. Ante,
at 13–14. The jury convicted the defendant, but when
doing so, it said that it found the defendant guilty of hav­
ing tried to export “ ‘pot-ashes . . . worth two hundred and
eighty dollars.’ ” 7 Cranch, at 285 (emphasis deleted). The
defendant appealed, claiming a difference between the
jury’s basis for conviction and the crime as charged in the
indictment. The difference between the words “pearl­
ashes” and “pot-ashes” is unlikely to have mattered, for
pearl-ash is simply a refined grade of pot-ash (potassium
carbonate). See T. Barker, R. Dickinson, & D. Hardie,
Origins of the Synthetic Alkali Industry in Britain, 23
Economica 158, 163 (1956). Thus, the defendant did not
focus upon that difference. Rather, he claimed that the
jury’s verdict “was not sufficiently certain as to the value
of the property charged in the indictment.” Tyler, 7
Cranch, at 285 (emphasis added). Because $280 differs
from $600, the jury had not found him guilty of the crime
charged.
The Supreme Court, however, found that the jury’s
finding as to valuation was not relevant. It upheld the
conviction because it was “of the opinion that, under this
law, no valuation by the jury was necessary to enable the

