12

SOUTHERN UNION CO. v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

fine’s maximum amount is an application of the “two
longstanding tenets of common-law criminal jurisprudence” on which Apprendi is based: First, “the ‘truth of
every accusation’ against a defendant ‘should afterwards
be confirmed by the unanimous suffrage of twelve of his
equals and neighbours.’ ” Blakely, 542 U. S., at 301 (quoting 4 Blackstone 343). And second, “ ‘an accusation which
lacks any particular fact which the law makes essential to
the punishment is . . . no accusation within the requirements of the common law, and it is no accusation in reason.’ ” 542 U. S., at 301–302 (quoting 1 J. Bishop, Criminal Procedure §87, p. 55 (2d ed. 1872)). Indeed, Bishop’s
leading treatise on criminal procedure specifically identified cases involving fines as evidence of the proposition
that “the indictment must, in order to inform the court
what punishment to inflict, contain an averment of every
particular thing which enters into the punishment.” Id.,
§540, at 330 (discussing Clark and Garner). This principle, Bishop explained, “pervades the entire system of the
adjudged law of criminal procedure. It is not made apparent to our understandings by a single case only, but by
all the cases.” Criminal Procedure §81, at 51. See also Apprendi, 530 U. S., at 510–511 (THOMAS, J., concurring)
(explaining that Bishop grounded this principle in “wellestablished common-law practice . . . and in the provisions
of Federal and State Constitutions guaranteeing notice of
an accusation in all criminal cases, indictment by a grand
jury for serious crimes, and trial by jury”).
As counterevidence that juries historically did not determine facts relevant to criminal fines, the Government
points to two decisions from this Court. One is United
States v. Murphy, 16 Pet. 203 (1842), which considered
whether an interested witness was competent to testify in
a larceny prosecution brought under a provision of the
Crimes Act of 1790. Murphy’s only relevance to this case
is that the Crimes Act authorized a fine of up to four times

