12

SOUTHERN UNION CO. v. UNITED STATES
BREYER, J., dissenting

criminal pleading that says, unlike in cases “where to
constitute the offence the value must [only] be of a certain
amount,” in cases “where the offence, or its defined meas­
ure of punishment, depends upon the quantity of that
excess . . . a variance from the amount averred . . . will be
fatal.” 1 T. Starkie, A Treatise on Criminal Pleading 187–
188 (emphasis deleted). It then adds that “in the case of
usury, where the judgment depends upon the quantum
taken, the usurious contract must be averred according to
the fact; and a variance from it, in evidence, would be
fatal, because the penalty is apportioned to the value.”
Id., at 188. And an 18th-century treatise says that it
is questionable whether it is necessary “to set forth the
Value of the Goods in an Indictment of Trespass for any
other Purpose than to aggravate the Fine.” 2 W. Hawkins,
A Treatise of the Pleas of the Crown, ch. 25, §75, pp. 234–
235 (3d ed. 1739) (emphasis added). One might read these
statements as supporting the majority, for they might indicate that, where a statute sets forth facts that deter­
mine a pecuniary penalty, then a jury, not judge, would
determine those facts.
But whether that is the correct reading is unclear. For
one thing, prosecutions for economic crimes were usually
brought by injured parties and the “fine” in such cases
went in whole or in part to compensate that party for
damages. See Beattie 35–36, 192. For example, immedi­
ately following the sentence I have just quoted, Hawkins
wrote that it is questionable whether it is necessary “to set
forth the Value of the Goods . . . in an Indictment of Lar­
ceny for any other Purpose than to sh[o]w that the Crime
amounts to grand Larceny, and to ascertain the Goods,
thereby the better to [e]ntitle the Prosecutor to a Restitution.” Hawkins, supra, at 234–235 (emphasis added;
footnote omitted). Likewise, Blackstone dated English
usury law back to a 1545 statute that provided as the
penalty that the offending lender shall both “make f[i]ne

