18

SOUTHERN UNION CO. v. UNITED STATES
BREYER, J., dissenting

early American States,” see Ice, 555 U. S., at 169 (footnote
omitted), judges, not juries, normally determined fine­
related sentencing facts. Instead, it asks whether a jury,
rather than the judge, found those facts in that subclass of
cases where a statute “peg[ged] the amount of a fine to the
determination of specified facts.” Ante, at 10. It concludes
that “the predominant practice was for such facts to be
alleged in the indictment and proved to the jury.” Ibid.
Putting the question this way invites a circular re­
sponse. As is true of the English usury cases, nothing
prohibits a legislature from requiring a jury to find a
sentencing fact in a particular subset of cases. And obvi­
ously when a State does so, the jury will indeed have to
find those facts. Thus, if, say, 10 States decide to make
juries find facts that will set the fine for, say, simple lar­
ceny, then jury practice in those States (during, say, the
19th century) will include the jury’s finding of those sen­
tencing facts. But that circumstance tells us only that in
those 10 States for those specific statutes the legislatures
so required. It tells us little, if anything, about practices
in most States, and it tells us nothing at all about tradi­
tional practice in England or 18th-century America. Nor
does a discovery that, say, 10 state legislatures once re­
quired juries, rather than judges, generally to set fines tell
us about the scope of the Sixth Amendment’s constitutional right to trial by jury. The matter is important because the majority rests its conclusion almost exclusively
upon reports of mid-19th-century jury trials in a handful of
States, namely Alabama, Illinois, Indiana, Massachusetts,
and New Hampshire, and a treatise that bases its state­
ments upon those cases. Ante, at 10–12.
Scholars tell us that in fact there were about 10
States—including Alabama, Illinois, and Indiana—that
(after ratification of the Sixth Amendment) enacted stat­
utes that required juries, not judges, to determine a de­
fendant’s punishment, including not only the length of a

