Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
of his equals and neighbours.’ ” Blakely, 542 U. S., at 301. And second, “ ‘an accusation which lacks any particular fact which the law
makes essential to the punishment is . . . no accusation within the
requirements of the common law, and is no accusation in reason.’ ”
Ibid. Contrary to the Government’s contentions, neither United
States v. Murphy, 16 Pet. 203, nor United States v. Tyler, 7 Cranch
285, overcomes the ample historical evidence that juries routinely
found facts that set maximum criminal fines. Pp. 8−14.
(c) The Government’s remaining arguments, echoed by the dissent,
are unpersuasive. The Government claims that facts relevant to a fine’s
amount typically quantify the harm caused by the defendant’s offense, and do not define a separate set of acts for punishment. The
Government contends that only the latter determination implicates
Apprendi’s concerns. But this argument rests on the rejected assumption that, in determining the maximum punishment for an offense, there is a constitutionally significant difference between a fact
that is an “element” of the offense and one that is a “sentencing factor.” Further, the facts the District Court found in imposing a fine on
Southern Union are not fairly characterized as merely quantifying
the harm the company caused.
The Government also argues that applying Apprendi to criminal
fines will prevent States and the Federal Government from enacting statutes that calibrate the amount of a fine to a defendant’s culpability. But legislatures are free to enact such statutes, so long
as the statutes are administered in conformance with the Sixth
Amendment.
Finally, the Government contends that requiring juries to determine facts related to fines will cause confusion, prejudice defendants,
or be impractical. These policy arguments rehearse those made by
the dissents in our prior Apprendi cases. They must be rejected because the rule the Government espouses is unconstitutional. In addition, because Apprendi is now more than a decade old, the reliance
interests underlying the Government’s arguments are by this point
attenuated. Pp. 14−16.
630 F. 3d 17, reversed and remanded.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, THOMAS, GINSBURG, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. BREYER,
J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which KENNEDY and ALITO, JJ., joined.

