Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

able doubt.” 530 U. S., at 490. The number of days (be­
yond one) on which the defendant violated this criminal
statute is such a fact. Nonetheless, like the majority, I
believe that Apprendi’s rule does not automatically control
the outcome in this case.
That is because this case concerns a fine, not, as in
Apprendi, a term of imprisonment. And we made clear in
Oregon v. Ice, 555 U. S. 160, that Apprendi does not en­
compass every kind of fact-related sentencing decision
that increases the statutory maximum. In Ice, we consid­
ered Apprendi’s application to a sentencing decision about
whether two prison sentences for conviction of two sepa­
rate crimes (e.g., illegal drug possession and illegal gun
possession) would run concurrently or consecutively. 555
U. S., at 163. An Oregon statute required a concurrent
sentence unless the sentencing judge found certain facts.
Id., at 165. Those facts could make a large difference in a
term of imprisonment. Their presence could mean that a
5-year sentence for illegal drug possession and a 5-year
sentence for illegal gun possession would amount to 10
years of imprisonment rather than 5 (indeed, in Ice itself,
the judge’s factfinding increased the sentence by 20 years,
see id., at 166, and n. 5). Thus, the presence of those
“fact[s]” could “increas[e] the penalty” beyond what would
otherwise be “the prescribed statutory maximum.” Id., at
167 (internal quotation marks omitted). Nonetheless, we
held that the Sixth Amendment permitted a judge—it did
not require a jury—to make that factual determination.
Id., at 164.
We consequently concluded that Apprendi does not
encompass every kind of fact-related sentencing decision
that increases the statutory maximum. In doing so, we
wrote that the “animating principle” of Apprendi’s rule
“is the preservation of the jury’s historic role as a bulwark between the State and the accused at the trial for
an alleged offense.” 555 U. S., at 168. And we refused

