Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

478; Ring, 536 U. S., at 605. Second, we doubt the coherence of this distinction. This case proves the point. Under
42 U. S. C. §6928(d), the fact that will ultimately determine the maximum fine Southern Union faces is the number of days the company violated the statute. Such a
finding is not fairly characterized as merely “quantifying
the harm” Southern Union caused. Rather, it is a determination that for each given day, the Government has
proved that Southern Union committed all of the acts
constituting the offense.
The Government next contends that applying Apprendi
to fines will prevent States and the Federal Government
from enacting statutes that, like §6928(d), calibrate fines
to a defendant’s culpability, thus providing just punishment and reducing unwarranted sentencing disparity.
But the Government presents a false choice. As was true
in our prior Apprendi cases, and remains so here, legislatures are free to enact statutes that constrain judges’
discretion in sentencing—Apprendi requires only that
such provisions be administered in conformance with the
Sixth Amendment.
Last, the Government argues that requiring juries to
determine facts related to fines will cause confusion (because expert testimony might be needed to guide the
inquiry); or prejudice the defendant (who might have to
deny violating a statute while simultaneously arguing
that any violation was minimal); or be impractical (at
least when the relevant facts are unknown or unknowable
until the trial is completed).8 These arguments rehearse
——————
8 In this vein, the dissent speculates that today’s decision may
“nudg[e] our [criminal justice] system” further in favor of plea bargains
at the expense of jury trials. Post, at 28. But groups representing the
interests of defendants—whom the dissent’s rule purportedly favors—
tell us the opposite is true. See Brief for Chamber of Commerce of the
United States of America et al. as Amici Curiae 5 (“[E]xempting criminal fines from Apprendi makes innocent defendants more likely to

