2

SOUTHERN UNION CO. v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
(a) Apprendi’s rule is “rooted in longstanding common-law practice,” Cunningham v. California, 549 U. S. 270, 281, and preserves
the “historic jury function” of “determining whether the prosecution
has proved each element of an offense beyond a reasonable doubt,”
Oregon v. Ice, 555 U. S. 160, 163. This Court has repeatedly affirmed
Apprendi’s rule by applying it to a variety of sentencing schemes that
allow judges to find facts that increase a defendant’s maximum authorized sentence. See Cunningham, 549 U. S., at 274−275; United
States v. Booker, 543 U. S. 220, 226–227; Blakely v. Washington, 542
U. S. 296, 299–300; Ring v. Arizona, 536 U. S. 584, 588–589; Apprendi, 530 U. S., at 468–469. While the punishments at stake in these
cases were imprisonment or a death sentence, there is no principled
basis under Apprendi to treat criminal fines differently. Apprendi’s
“core concern”—to reserve to the jury “the determination of facts that
warrant punishment for a specific statutory offense,” Ice, 555 U. S.,
at 170—applies whether the sentence is a criminal fine or imprisonment or death. Criminal fines, like these other forms of punishment,
are penalties inflicted by the sovereign for the commission of offenses.
Fines were by far the most common form of noncapital punishment in
colonial America and they continue to be frequently imposed today.
And, the amount of a fine, like the maximum term of imprisonment
or eligibility for the death penalty, is often determined by reference to
particular facts. The Government argues that fines are less onerous
than incarceration and the death sentence and therefore should be
exempt from Apprendi. But where a fine is substantial enough to
trigger the Sixth Amendment’s jury-trial guarantee, Apprendi applies
in full. Pp. 3−8.
(b) The “historical role of the jury at common law,” which informs
the “scope of the constitutional jury right,” Ice, 555 U. S., at 170, supports applying Apprendi to criminal fines. To be sure, judges in the
colonies and during the founding era had much discretion in determining whether to impose a fine and in what amount. But the exercise of such discretion is fully consistent with Apprendi, which permits courts to impose “judgment within the range prescribed by
statute.” 530 U. S., at 481 (emphasis in original). The more salient
question is what role the jury played in prosecutions for offenses that
pegged the amount of a fine to the determination of specified facts. A
review of both state and federal decisions discloses that the predominant practice was for such facts to be alleged in the indictment and
proved to the jury. The rule that juries must determine facts that set
a fine’s maximum amount is an application of the “two longstanding
tenets of common-law criminal jurisprudence” on which Apprendi is
based: first, “the ‘truth of every accusation’ against a defendant
‘should afterwards be confirmed by the unanimous suffrage of twelve

