Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

27

BREYER, J., dissenting

§8C2.10. Where the defendant is a human being, the
Government can avoid problems of proof simply by aban­
doning any effort to obtain a fine; instead, perhaps to the
individual defendant’s dismay, the prosecution can seek
a longer prison term. Where the criminal defendant is a
corporation, however, no such possibility exists.
If, as seems likely, it becomes too difficult to prove fine­
related sentencing facts to a jury, legislatures will have
to change their statutes. Some may choose to return to
highly discretionary sentencing, with its related risks of
nonuniformity. Others may link conviction with fines
specified in amount, rather like the 10th-century preNorman system of three cows for perjury or more modern
mandatory minimum penalties. As Blackstone pointed
out, those systems produce sentences that are not propor­
tionate; they tend to treat alike offenders who committed
the same crime in very different ways. See 4 Blackstone
371–372.
The majority believes that 10 years of experience with
Apprendi “attenuate[s]” any legal claim of reliance on
different rule of constitutional law here. Ante, at 16.
Perhaps so. Perhaps that experience shows that Apprendi’s jury trial requirement is workable. But there is an­
other less optimistic possibility.
Perhaps that experience, like the canary in a mine­
shaft, tells us only that our criminal justice system is no
longer the jury-trial-based adversarial system that it once
was. We have noted that “[n]inety-seven percent of fed­
eral convictions and ninety-four percent of state convictions
are the result of guilty pleas.” Missouri v. Frye, 566 U. S.
___, ___ (2012) (slip op., at 7). We have added that today
“ ‘plea bargaining” is “not some adjunct to the criminal
justice system; it is the criminal justice system.’ ” Ibid.
(quoting Scott & Stuntz, Plea Bargaining as Contract, 101
Yale L. J. 1909, 1912 (1992)). And in such a system, com­
plex jury trial requirements may affect the strength of a

