12

BRUESEWITZ v. WYETH LLC
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

1987 had a number of options before it, including adopting
an entirely different compensation scheme, as the Reagan
administration was proposing;11 establishing different
limitations on tort liability, including eliminating design
defect liability, as pharmaceutical industry leaders were
advocating;12 or not funding the compensation program at
all, which would have effectively nullified the relevant
portions of the Act. Because the tort reforms in the 1986
Act, including §22(b)(1), had no operative legal effect
unless and until Congress provided funding for the com
pensation program, the views of the Congress that enacted
that funding legislation are a proper and, indeed, authori
tative guide to the meaning of §22(b)(1). Those views, as
reflected in the 1987 Report, provide unequivocal confir
——————
ing mechanism is akin to appropriations legislation and that giving
weight to the legislative history of such legislation “would set a danger
ous precedent.” Ante, at 18. The difference, of course, is that appro
priations legislation ordinarily funds congressional enactments that
already have operative legal effect; in contrast, operation of the tort
reforms in the 1986 Act, including §22(b)(1), was expressly conditioned
on the enactment of a separate tax to fund the compensation program.
See §323(a), 100 Stat. 3784. Accordingly, this Court’s general reluc
tance to view appropriations legislation as modifying substantive
legislation, see, e.g., TVA v. Hill, 437 U. S. 153, 190 (1978), has no
bearing here.
11 See 1987 Report 700 (describing the administration’s alternative
proposal).
12 See, e.g., Hearings on Funding of the Childhood Vaccine Program
before the Subcommittee on Select Revenue Measures of the House
Committee on Ways and Means, 100th Cong., 1st Sess., 85 (1987)
(“[T]he liability provisions of the 1986 Act should be amended to assure
that manufacturers will not be found liable in the tort system if they
have fully complied with applicable government regulations. In par
ticular, manufacturers should not face liability under a ‘design defect’
theory in cases where plaintiffs challenge the decisions of public health
authorities and federal regulators that the licensed vaccines are the
best available way to protect children from deadly diseases” (statement
of Robert B. Johnson, President, Lederle Laboratories Division, Ameri
can Cyanamid Co.)).

