20

BRUESEWITZ v. WYETH LLC
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

that simply stated that vaccine manufacturers would be
liable for “defective design” would be silent as to the avail
ability of a comment k-type defense for “unavoidably
unsafe” vaccines, and thus would not have fully achieved
Congress’ aim of extending greater liability protection
to vaccine manufacturers by providing comment k-type
protection in all civil actions as a matter of federal law.
B
The majority’s structural arguments fare no better than
its textual ones. The principal thrust of the majority’s
position is that, since nothing in the Vaccine Act or the
FDA’s regulations governing vaccines expressly mentions
design defects, Congress must have intended to remove
issues concerning the design of FDA-licensed vaccines
from the tort system. Ante, at 13. The flaw in that rea
soning, of course, is that the FDA’s silence on design de
fects existed long before the Vaccine Act was enacted.
Indeed, the majority itself concedes that the “FDA has
never even spelled out in regulations the criteria it uses to
decide whether a vaccine is safe and effective for its in
tended use.”18 Ibid. And yet it is undisputed that prior to
the Act, vaccine manufacturers had long been subject to
liability under state tort law for defective vaccine design.
That the Vaccine Act did not itself set forth a comprehen
sive regulatory scheme with respect to design defects is
thus best understood to mean not that Congress suddenly
decided to change course sub silentio and pre-empt a
——————
negligence”); Toner, 112 Idaho, at 340, 732 P. 2d, at 309–310 (“The
authorities universally agree that where a product is deemed unavoid
ably unsafe, the plaintiff is deprived of the advantage of a strict liabil
ity cause of action, but may proceed under a negligence cause of ac
tion”).
18 See 42 U. S. C. §262(a)(2)(C)(i)(I) (“The Secretary shall approve a
biologics license application . . . on the basis of a demonstration that . . .
the biological product that is the subject of the application is safe, pure,
and potent”).

