2

BRUESEWITZ v. WYETH LLC
Syllabus
provides that “[n]o vaccine manufacturer shall be liable in a civil ac
tion for damages arising from a vaccine-related injury or death asso
ciated with the administration of a vaccine after October 1, 1988, if
the injury or death resulted from side-effects that were unavoidable
even though the vaccine was properly prepared and was accompanied
by proper directions and warnings.” The Third Circuit affirmed.

Held: The NCVIA preempts all design-defect claims against vaccine
manufacturers brought by plaintiffs seeking compensation for injury
or death caused by a vaccine’s side effects. Pp. 7–19.
(a) Section 300aa–22(b)(1)’s text suggests that a vaccine’s design is
not open to question in a tort action. If a manufacturer could be held
liable for failure to use a different design, the “even though” clause
would do no work. A vaccine side effect could always have been
avoidable by use of a different vaccine not containing the harmful
element. The language of the provision thus suggests the design is
not subject to question in a tort action. What the statute establishes
as a complete defense must be unavoidability (given safe manufac
ture and warning) with respect to the particular design. This conclu
sion is supported by the fact that, although products-liability law es
tablishes three grounds for liability—defective manufacture,
inadequate directions or warnings, and defective design—the Act
mentions only manufacture and warnings. It thus seems that the
Act’s failure to mention design-defect liability is “by deliberate choice,
not inadvertence.” Barnhart v. Peabody Coal Co., 537 U. S. 149, 168.
Pp. 7–8.
(b) Contrary to petitioners’ argument, there is no reason to believe
that §300aa–22(b)(1)’s term “unavoidable” is a term of art incorporat
ing Restatement (Second) of Torts §402A, Comment k, which exempts
from strict liability rules “unavoidably unsafe products.” “Unavoid
able” is hardly a rarely used word, and cases interpreting comment k
attach special significance only to the term “unavoidably unsafe
products,” not the word “unavoidable” standing alone. Moreover,
reading the phrase “side effects that were unavoidable” to exempt in
juries caused by flawed design would require treating “even though”
as a coordinating conjunction linking independent ideas when it is a
concessive, subordinating conjunction conveying that one clause
weakens or qualifies the other. The canon against superfluity does
not undermine this Court’s interpretation because petitioners’ com
peting interpretation has superfluity problems of its own. Pp. 8–12.
(c) The structure of the NCVIA and of vaccine regulation in general
reinforces what §300aa–22(b)(1)’s text suggests. Design defects do
not merit a single mention in the Act or in Food and Drug Admini
stration regulations that pervasively regulate the drug manufactur
ing process. This lack of guidance for design defects, combined with

