Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

BREYER, J., concurring

ages, and, in turn, increasing numbers of unimmunized
children, and, perhaps, a resurgence of preventable dis
eases.” H. R. Rep., at 5. At the same time, Congress
sought to provide generous compensation to those whom
vaccines injured—as determined by an expert compensa
tion program. Id., at 5, 24.
Given these broad general purposes, to read the pre
emption clause as preserving design-defect suits seems
anomalous. The Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) decides when a vaccine is safe enough to
be licensed and which licensed vaccines, with which
associated injuries, should be placed on the Vaccine Injury Table. 42 U. S. C. §300aa–14; ante, at 3–4; A
Comprehensive Review of Federal Vaccine Safety Pro
grams and Public Health Activities 13–15, 32–34
(Dec. 2008), http://www.hhs.gov/nvpo/nvac/documents/
vaccine-safety-review.pdf. A special master in the Act’s
compensation program determines whether someone has
suffered an injury listed on the Injury Table and, if not,
whether the vaccine nonetheless caused the injury. Ante,
at 3–4; §300aa–13. To allow a jury in effect to second
guess those determinations is to substitute less expert for
more expert judgment, thereby threatening manufacturers
with liability (indeed, strict liability) in instances where
any conflict between experts and nonexperts is likely to be
particularly severe—instances where Congress intended
the contrary. That is because potential tort plaintiffs are
unlikely to bring suit unless the specialized compensation
program has determined that they are not entitled to
compensation (say, because it concludes that the vaccine
did not cause the injury). Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae 28 (“99.8% of successful Compensation
Program claimants have accepted their awards, foregoing
any tort remedies against vaccine manufacturers”). It is
difficult to reconcile these potential conflicts and the re
sulting tort liabilities with a statute that seeks to diminish

