Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

27

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

policy preference, the decision to bar all design defect
claims against vaccine manufacturers is one that Congress
must make, not this Court.25 By construing §22(b)(1) to
——————
25 Respondent notes that there are some 5,000 petitions alleging a
causal link between certain vaccines and autism spectrum disorders
that are currently pending in an omnibus proceeding in the Court of
Federal Claims (Vaccine Court). Brief for Respondent 56–57. Accord
ing to respondent, a ruling that §22(b)(1) does not pre-empt design
defect claims could unleash a “crushing wave” of tort litigation that
would bankrupt vaccine manufacturers and deplete vaccine supply.
Id., at 28. This concern underlies many of the policy arguments in
respondent’s brief and appears to underlie the majority and concurring
opinions in this case. In the absence of any empirical data, however,
the prospect of an onslaught of autism-related tort litigation by claim
ants denied relief by the Vaccine Court seems wholly speculative. As
an initial matter, the special masters in the autism cases have thus far
uniformly rejected the alleged causal link between vaccines and autism.
See Brief for American Academy of Pediatrics et al. as Amici Curiae
20–21, n. 4 (collecting cases). To be sure, those rulings do not necessar
ily mean that no such causal link exists, cf. Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae 29 (noting that injuries have been added to the Vaccine
Injury Table for existing vaccines), or that claimants will not ultimately
be able to prove such a link in a state tort action, particularly with the
added tool of civil discovery. But these rulings do highlight the sub
stantial hurdles to recovery a claimant faces. See Schafer v. American
Cyanamid Co., 20 F. 3d 1, 5 (CA1 1994) (“[A] petitioner to whom the
Vaccine Court gives nothing may see no point in trying to overcome tort
law’s yet more serious obstacles to recovery”). Trial courts, moreover,
have considerable experience in efficiently handling and disposing of
meritless products liability claims, and decades of tort litigation (in
cluding for design defect) in the prescription-drug context have not led
to shortages in prescription drugs. Despite the doomsday predictions of
respondent and the various amici cited by the concurrence, ante, at 6–7,
the possibility of a torrent of meritless lawsuits bankrupting manufac
turers and causing vaccine shortages seems remote at best. More
fundamentally, whatever the merits of these policy arguments, the
issue in this case is what Congress has decided, and as to that question,
the text, structure, and legislative history compel the conclusion that
Congress intended to leave the courthouse doors open for children who
have suffered severe injuries from defectively designed vaccines. The
majority’s policy-driven decision to the contrary usurps Congress’ role
and deprives such vaccine-injured children of a key remedy that Con
gress intended them to have.

