8

BRUESEWITZ v. WYETH LLC
Opinion of the Court

A further textual indication leads to the same conclu
sion. Products-liability law establishes a classic and well
known triumvirate of grounds for liability: defective
manufacture, inadequate directions or warnings, and
defective design.36 If all three were intended to be pre
served, it would be strange to mention specifically only
two, and leave the third to implication. It would have
been much easier (and much more natural) to provide that
manufacturers would be liable for “defective manufacture,
defective directions or warning, and defective design.” It
seems that the statute fails to mention design-defect
liability “by deliberate choice, not inadvertence.” Barn
hart v. Peabody Coal Co., 537 U. S. 149, 168 (2003). Ex
pressio unius, exclusio alterius.
B
The dissent’s principal textual argument is mistaken.
We agree with its premise that “ ‘side effects that were
unavoidable’ must refer to side effects caused by a vac
cine’s design.”37 We do not comprehend, however, the
second step of its reasoning, which is that the use of
the conditional term “if” in the introductory phrase “if the
injury or death resulted from side effects that were un
avoidable” “plainly implies that some side effects stem
ming from a vaccine’s design are ‘unavoidable,’ while
——————
We doubt that Congress would introduce such an amorphous test by
implication when it otherwise micromanages vaccine manufacturers.
See infra, at 13–14. We have no idea how much more expensive an
alternative design can be before it “compromis[es]” a vaccine’s cost or
how much efficacy an alternative design can sacrifice to improve safety.
Neither does the dissent. And neither will the judges who must rule on
motions to dismiss, motions for summary judgment, and motions for
judgment as a matter of law. Which means that the test would proba
bly have no real-world effect.
36 W. Keeton, D. Dobbs, R. Keeton, & D. Owen, Prosser and Keeton on
Law of Torts 695 (5th ed. 1984); Restatement (Third) of Torts §2 (1999).
37 Post, at 3.

