24

BRUESEWITZ v. WYETH LLC
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

case for federal pre-emption is particularly weak where
Congress has indicated its awareness of the operation of
state law in a field of federal interest, and has nonetheless
decided to stand by both concepts and to tolerate whatever
tension there is between them.” (internal quotation marks
and alteration omitted)).
III
In enacting the Vaccine Act, Congress established a
carefully wrought federal scheme that balances the com
peting interests of vaccine-injured persons and vaccine
manufacturers. As the legislative history indicates, the
Act addressed “two overriding concerns”: “(a) the inade
quacy—from both the perspective of vaccine-injured per
sons as well as vaccine manufacturers—of the current
approach to compensating those who have been damaged
by a vaccine; and (b) the instability and unpredictability of
the childhood vaccine market.” 1986 Report 7. When
viewed in the context of the Vaccine Act as a whole,
§22(b)(1) is just one part of a broader statutory scheme
that balances the need for compensating vaccine-injured
children with added liability protections for vaccine manu
facturers to ensure a stable childhood vaccine market.
The principal innovation of the Act was the creation of
the no-fault compensation program—a scheme funded
entirely through an excise tax on vaccines.22 Through that
——————
that Congress intended sub silentio to displace a longstanding species
of state tort liability where, as here, Congress specifically included an
express saving clause preserving state law, there is a long history of
state-law regulation of vaccine design, and pre-emption of state law
would leave an important regulatory function—i.e., ensuring optimal
vaccine design—entirely unaddressed by the congressional substitute.
22 The majority’s suggestion that “vaccine manufacturers fund from
their sales” the compensation program is misleading. Ante, at 15.
Although the manufacturers nominally pay the tax, the amount of the
tax is specifically included in the vaccine price charged to purchasers.
See CDC Vaccine Price List (Feb. 15, 2011), http://www.cdc.gov/

