(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BRUESEWITZ ET AL. v. WYETH LLC, FKA WYETH, INC.,
ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 09–152.

Argued October 12, 2010—Decided February 22, 2011

The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 (NCVIA or Act) cre
ated a no-fault compensation program to stabilize a vaccine market
adversely affected by an increase in vaccine-related tort litigation
and to facilitate compensation to claimants who found pursuing le
gitimate vaccine-inflicted injuries too costly and difficult. The Act
provides that a party alleging a vaccine-related injury may file a peti
tion for compensation in the Court of Federal Claims, naming the
Health and Human Services Secretary as the respondent; that the
court must resolve the case by a specified deadline; and that the
claimant can then decide whether to accept the court’s judgment or
reject it and seek tort relief from the vaccine manufacturer. Awards
are paid out of a fund created by an excise tax on each vaccine dose.
As a quid pro quo, manufacturers enjoy significant tort-liability pro
tections. Most importantly, the Act eliminates manufacturer liability
for a vaccine’s unavoidable, adverse side effects.
Hannah Bruesewitz’s parents filed a vaccine-injury petition in the
Court of Federal Claims, claiming that Hannah became disabled af
ter receiving a diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis (DTP) vaccine
manufactured by Lederle Laboratories (now owned by respondent
Wyeth). After that court denied their claim, they elected to reject the
unfavorable judgment and filed suit in Pennsylvania state court, al
leging, inter alia, that the defective design of Lederle’s DTP vaccine
caused Hannah’s disabilities, and that Lederle was subject to strict
liability and liability for negligent design under Pennsylvania com
mon law. Wyeth removed the suit to the Federal District Court. It
granted Wyeth summary judgment, holding that the relevant Penn
sylvania law was preempted by 42 U. S. C. §300aa–22(b)(1), which

