Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

25

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

program, Congress relieved vaccine manufacturers of the
burden of compensating victims of vaccine-related injuries
in the vast majority of cases23—an extremely significant
economic benefit that “functionally creat[es] a valuable
insurance policy for vaccine-related injuries.” Reply Brief
for Petitioners 10. The structure and legislative history,
moreover, point clearly to Congress’ intention to divert
would-be tort claimants into the compensation program,
rather than eliminate a longstanding category of tradi
tional tort claims. See 1986 Report 13 (“The Committee
anticipates that the speed of the compensation program,
the low transaction costs of the system, the no-fault na
ture of the required findings, and the relative certainty
and generosity of the system’s awards will divert a signifi
cant number of potential plaintiffs from litigation”). In
deed, although complete pre-emption of tort claims would
have eliminated the principal source of the “unpredictabil
ity” in the vaccine market, Congress specifically chose not
to pre-empt state tort claims categorically. See 42 U. S. C.
§300aa–22(a) (providing as a “[g]eneral rule” that “State
law shall apply to a civil action brought for damages for a
vaccine-related injury or death”). That decision reflects
Congress’ recognition that court actions are essential
——————
vaccines/programs/vfc/cdc-vac-price-list.htm. Accordingly, the only way
the vaccine manufacturers can be said to actually “fund” the compensa
tion program is if the cost of the excise tax has an impact on the num
ber of vaccines sold by the vaccine manufacturer. The majority points
to no evidence that the excise tax—which ordinarily amounts to 75
cents per dose, 26 U. S. C. §4131(b)—has any impact whatsoever on the
demand for vaccines.
23 See Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 28 (“Department of
Justice records indicate that 99.8% of successful Compensation Pro
gram claimants have accepted their awards, foregoing any tort reme
dies against vaccine manufacturers”); S. Plotkin, W. Orenstein, & P.
Offit, Vaccines 1673 (5th ed. 2008) (noting that “[v]irtually all . . .
petitioners, even those who were not awarded compensation” under the
compensation program, choose to accept the program’s determination).

