6

BRUESEWITZ v. WYETH LLC
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

cines covered in the bill and that such products not be
the subject of liability in the tort system.” Id., at 25–
26.
The Report expressly adopts comment k of §402A of the
Restatement of Torts (Second) (1963–1964) (hereinafter
Restatement), which provides that “unavoidably unsafe”
products—i.e., those that “in the present state of human
knowledge, are quite incapable of being made safe for
their intended and ordinary use”—are not defective.4 As
“[a]n outstanding example” of an “[u]navoidably unsafe”
product, comment k cites “the vaccine for the Pasteur
treatment of rabies, which not uncommonly leads to very
serious and damaging consequences when it is injected”;
——————
4 Comment k provides as follows:
“Unavoidably unsafe products. There are some products which, in
the present state of human knowledge, are quite incapable of being
made safe for their intended and ordinary use. These are especially
common in the field of drugs. An outstanding example is the vaccine
for the Pasteur treatment of rabies, which not uncommonly leads to
very serious and damaging consequences when it is injected. Since the
disease itself invariably leads to a dreadful death, both the marketing
and the use of the vaccine are fully justified, notwithstanding the
unavoidable high degree of risk which they involve. Such a product,
properly prepared, and accompanied by proper directions and warning,
is not defective, nor is it unreasonably dangerous. The same is true of
many other drugs, vaccines, and the like, many of which for this very
reason cannot legally be sold except to physicians, or under the pre
scription of a physician. It is also true in particular of many new or
experimental drugs as to which, because of lack of time and opportunity
for sufficient medical experience, there can be no assurance of safety, or
perhaps even of purity of ingredients, but such experience as there is
justifies the marketing and use of the drug notwithstanding a medically
recognizable risk. The seller of such products, again with the qualifica
tion that they are properly prepared and marketed, and proper warning
is given, where the situation calls for it, is not to be held to strict
liability for unfortunate consequences attending their use, merely
because he has undertaken to supply the public with an apparently
useful and desirable product, attended with a known but apparently
reasonable risk.” Restatement 353–354.

