Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

renders 13 words of the statute entirely superfluous. See
ante, at 12 (“The intervening passage (‘the injury or death
resulted from side effects that were unavoidable even
though’) is unnecessary. True enough”). Nevertheless, the
majority contends that “the rule against giving a portion of
text an interpretation which renders it superfluous . . .
applies only if verbosity and prolixity can be eliminated by
giving the offending passage, or the remainder of the text,
a competing interpretation.” Ibid. According to the major
ity, petitioners’ reading of §22(b)(1) renders the “even
though” clause superfluous because, to reach petitioners’
desired outcome, “[i]t would suffice to say ‘if the injury or
death resulted from side effects that were unavoidable’—
full stop.” Ibid. As explained above, however, the “even
though” clause establishes two additional prerequisites—
proper manufacturing and proper labeling—to qualify for
§22(b)(1)’s exemption from liability. Contrary to the ma
jority’s contention, then, the “even though” clause serves
an important function by limiting the scope of the pre
emption afforded by the preceding “if ” clause.14
The majority’s only other textual argument is based on
——————
14 In this manner, the “even though” clause functions in a “concessive
subordinat[ing]” fashion, ante, at 11, in accord with normal grammati
cal usage. According to the majority, however, the “even though” clause
“clarifies the word that precedes it” by “delineat[ing]” the conditions
that make a side effect “unavoidable” under the statute. Ante, at 7.
The majority’s interpretation hardly treats the clause as “concessive,”
and indeed strains the meaning of “even though.” In the majority’s
view, proper manufacturing and labeling are the sole prerequisites that
render a vaccine’s side effects unavoidable. Thus, an injurious side
effect is unavoidable because the vaccine was properly prepared and
labeled, not “even though” it was. The two conjunctions are not equiva
lent: The sentence “I am happy even though it is raining” can hardly be
read to mean that “I am happy because it is raining.” In any event, the
more fundamental point is that petitioners’ interpretation actually
gives meaning to the words “even though,” whereas the majority
concedes that its interpretation effectively reads those words entirely
out of the statute. See supra this page.

