12

BRUESEWITZ v. WYETH LLC
Opinion of the Court

Petitioners and the dissent contend that the interpreta
tion we propose would render part of §300aa–22(b)(1)
superfluous: Congress could have more tersely and more
clearly preempted design-defect claims by barring liability
“if . . . the vaccine was properly prepared and was accom
panied by proper directions and warnings.” The interven
ing passage (“the injury or death resulted from side effects
that were unavoidable even though”) is unnecessary. True
enough. But the rule against giving a portion of text an
interpretation which renders it superfluous does not pre
scribe that a passage which could have been more terse
does not mean what it says. The rule applies only if ver
bosity and prolixity can be eliminated by giving the offend
ing passage, or the remainder of the text, a competing
interpretation. That is not the case here.48 To be sure,
petitioners’ and the dissent’s interpretation gives inde
pendent meaning to the intervening passage (the supposed
meaning of comment k); but it does so only at the expense
of rendering the remainder of the provision superfluous.
Since a vaccine is not “quite incapable of being made safer
for [its] intended use” if manufacturing defects could have
been eliminated or better warnings provided, the entire
“even though” clause is a useless appendage.49 It would
suffice to say “if the injury or death resulted from side
effects that were unavoidable”—full stop.
——————
performed by “and.” No, we think “even though” has a distinctive
concessive, subordinating role to play.
48 Because the dissent has a superfluity problem of its own, its reli
ance on Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC, 544 U. S. 431 (2005), is mis
placed. See id., at 449 (adopting an interpretation that was “the only
one that makes sense of each phrase” in the relevant statute).
49 That is true regardless of whether §300aa–22(b)(1) incorporates
comment k. See Restatement §402A, Comment k, pp. 353, 354 (noting
that “unavoidably unsafe products” are exempt from strict liability
“with the qualification that they are properly prepared and marketed,
and proper warning is given”).

