Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

23

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

23) (noting that the FDA has “traditionally regarded state
law as a complementary form of drug regulation” as
“[s]tate tort suits uncover unknown drug hazards and
provide incentives for drug manufacturers to disclose
safety risks promptly”).20 The importance of the States’
traditional regulatory role is only underscored by the
unique features of the vaccine market, in which there are
“only one or two manufacturers for a majority of the vac
cines listed on the routine childhood immunization sched
ule.” Brief for Respondent 55. The normal competitive
forces that spur innovation and improvements to existing
product lines in other markets thus operate with less force
in the vaccine market, particularly for vaccines that have
already been released and marketed to the public. Absent
a clear statutory mandate to the contrary, there is no
reason to think that Congress intended in the vaccine
context to eliminate the traditional incentive and deter
rence functions served by state tort liability in favor of a
federal regulatory scheme providing only carrots and no
sticks.21 See Levine, 555 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 18) (“The
——————
20 Indeed,

we observed in Levine that the FDA is perpetually under
staffed and underfunded, see 555 U. S., at ___, n. 11 (slip op., at 22,
n. 11), and the agency has been criticized in the past for its slow re
sponse in failing to withdraw or warn about potentially dangerous
products, see, e.g., L. Leveton, H. Sox, & M. Soto, Institute of Medicine,
HIV and the Blood Supply: An Analysis of Crisis Decisionmaking
(1995) (criticizing FDA response to transmission of AIDS through blood
supply). These practical shortcomings reinforce the conclusion that
“state law offers an additional, and important, layer of consumer
protection that complements FDA regulation.” Levine, 555 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 23).
21 The majority mischaracterizes my position as expressing a general
“skeptic[ism] of preemption unless the congressional substitute oper
ate[s] like the tort system.” Ante, at 16. Congress could, of course,
adopt a regulatory regime that operates differently from state tort
systems, and such a difference is not necessarily a reason to question
Congress’ pre-emptive intent. In the specific context of the Vaccine Act,
however, the relevant point is that this Court should not lightly assume

