14

BRUESEWITZ v. WYETH LLC
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

render §22(b)(1) a nullity. Ibid. A tort claimant, accord
ing to the majority, will always be able to point to a differ
ently designed vaccine not containing the “harmful ele
ment,” and if that were sufficient to show that a vaccine’s
side effects were not “unavoidable,” the statute would pre
empt nothing.
The starting premise of the majority’s interpretation,
however, is fatally flawed. Although in the most literal
sense, as the majority notes, a side effect can always be
avoided “by use of a differently designed vaccine not con
taining the harmful element,” ibid., this interpretation of
“unavoidable” would effectively read the term out of the
statute, and Congress could not have intended that result.
Indeed, §22(b)(1) specifically uses the conditional phrase
“if the injury or death resulted from side effects that were
unavoidable,” which plainly indicates that Congress con
templated that there would be some instances in which a
vaccine’s side effects are “unavoidable” and other in
stances in which they are not. See supra, at 3. The major
ity’s premise that a vaccine’s side effects can always be
“avoid[ed] by use of a differently designed vaccine not
containing the harmful element,” ante, at 7, entirely ig
nores the fact that removing the “harmful element” will
often result in a less effective (or entirely ineffective)
vaccine. A vaccine, by its nature, ordinarily employs a
killed or weakened form of a bacteria or virus to stimulate
antibody production;13 removing that bacteria or virus
might remove the “harmful element,” but it would also
necessarily render the vaccine inert. As explained above,
the legislative history of the Vaccine Act and the cases
interpreting comment k make clear that a side effect is
——————
13 See

American Academy of Pediatrics, Questions and Answers about
Vaccine Ingredients (Oct. 2008), http://www.aap.org/immunization/
families/faq/Vaccineingredients.pdf (all Internet materials as visited
Feb. 18, 2011, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file).

