Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

not end there. The phrase “even though” in the clause
“even though the vaccine was properly prepared and
[labeled]” is meant to signal the unexpected: unavoidable
side effects persist despite best manufacturing and label
ing practices.43 But petitioners’ reading eliminates any
opposition between the “even though” clause—called a
concessive subordinate clause by grammarians—and the
word “unavoidable.”44 Their reading makes preemption
turn equally on unavoidability, proper preparation, and
proper labeling. Thus, the dissent twice refers to the
requirements of proper preparation and proper labeling as
“two additional prerequisites” for preemption independent
of unavoidability.45 The primary textual justification for
the dissent’s position depends on that independence.46
But linking independent ideas is the job of a coordinating
junction like “and,” not a subordinating junction like “even
though.”47
——————
43 The dissent’s assertion that we treat “even though” as a synonym
for “because” misses the subtle distinction between “because” and
“despite.” See post, at 17, n. 14. “Even though” is a close cousin of the
latter. See Webster’s New International Dictionary 709, 2631 (2d ed.
1957). The statement “the car accident was unavoidable despite his
quick reflexes” indicates that quick reflexes could not avoid the acci
dent, and leaves open two unstated possibilities: (1) that other, un
stated means of avoiding the accident besides quick reflexes existed,
but came up short as well; or (2) that quick reflexes were the only
possible way to avoid the accident. Our interpretation of §300aa–
22(b)(1) explains why we think Congress meant the latter in this
context. (Incidentally, the statement “the car accident was unavoidable
because of his quick reflexes” makes no sense.)
44 See W. Follett, Modern American Usage: A Guide 61 (1966).
45 Post, at 9, 17.
46 Post, at 3–5.
47 The dissent responds that these “additional prerequisites” act “in a
concessive, subordinating fashion,” post, at 17, n. 14 (internal quotation
marks and brackets omitted). But that is no more true of the dissent’s
conjunctive interpretation of the present text than it is of all provisions
that set forth additional requirements—meaning that we could elimi
nate “even though” from our English lexicon, its function being entirely

