18

BRUESEWITZ v. WYETH LLC
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

the expressio unius, exclusio alterius canon. According to
the majority, because blackletter products liability law
generally recognizes three different types of product de
fects, “[i]f all three were intended to be preserved, it would
be strange [for Congress] to mention specifically only
two”—namely, manufacturing and labeling defects in the
“even though” clause—“and leave the third to implication.”
Ante, at 8. The majority’s argument, however, ignores
that the default rule under the Vaccine Act is that state
law is preserved. As explained above, §22(a) expressly
provides that the “[g]eneral rule” is that “State law shall
apply to a civil action brought for damages for a vaccine
related injury or death.” 42 U. S. C. §300aa–22(a). Be
cause §22(a) already preserves state-law design defect
claims (to the extent the exemption in §22(b)(1) does not
apply), there was no need for Congress separately and
expressly to preserve design defect claims in §22(b)(1).
Indeed, Congress’ principal aim in enacting §22(b)(1) was
not to preserve manufacturing and labeling claims (those,
too, were already preserved by §22(a)), but rather, to
federalize comment k-type protection for “unavoidably
unsafe” vaccines. The “even though” clause simply func
tions to limit the applicability of that defense. The lack of
express language in §22(b)(1) specifically preserving de
sign defect claims thus cannot fairly be understood as
impliedly (and categorically) pre-empting such traditional
state tort claims, which had already been preserved by
§22(a).15
——————
15 This

Court, moreover, has long operated on “the assumption that
the historic police powers of the States are not to be superseded by the
Federal Act unless that was the clear and manifest purpose of Con
gress.” Altria Group, Inc. v. Good, 555 U. S. ___, ___ (2008) (slip op., at
5) (internal quotation marks and alteration omitted). Given the long
history of state regulation of vaccines, see Brief for Petitioners 3–6, the
presumption provides an additional reason not to read §22(b)(1) as pre
empting all design defect claims, especially given Congress’ inclusion of

