22

BRUESEWITZ v. WYETH LLC
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

that vaccines are optimally designed in light of existing
science and technology has traditionally been left to the
States through the imposition of damages for design de
fects. Cf. Bates, 544 U. S., at 451 (“ ‘[T]he specter of dam
age actions may provide manufacturers with added dy
namic incentives to continue to keep abreast of all possible
injuries stemming from use of their product[s] so as to
forestall such actions through product improvement’ ”);
Wyeth v. Levine, 555 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 22–
——————
vaccine designs only if and when manufacturers come forward with a
proposal”); Jones v. Lederle Labs., 695 F. Supp. 700, 711 (EDNY 1988)
(“[T]he agency takes the drugs and manufacturers as it finds them.
While its goal is to oversee inoculation with the best possible vaccine, it
is limited to reviewing only those drugs submitted by various manufac
turers, regardless of their flaws”). Although the FDA has authority
under existing regulations to revoke a manufacturer’s biologics licenses,
that authority can be exercised only where (as relevant here) “[t]he
licensed product is not safe and effective for all of its intended uses.” 21
CFR §601.5(b)(1)(vi) (2010); see §600.3(p) (defining “safety” as “relative
freedom from harmful effect to persons affected, directly or indirectly,
by a product when prudently administered, taking into consideration
the character of the product in relation to the condition of the recipient
at the time”). The regulation does not authorize the FDA to revoke a
biologics license for a manufacturer’s failure to adopt an optimal
vaccine design in light of existing science and technology. See Conk, Is
There a Design Defect in the Restatement (Third) of Torts: Products
Liability? 109 Yale L. J. 1087, 1128–1129 (1999–2000) (“The FDA does
not claim to review products for optimal design . . . . FDA review thus
asks less of drug . . . manufacturers than the common law of products
liability asks of other kinds of manufacturers”). At oral argument,
counsel for amicus United States stated that the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) routinely performs comparative analyses
of vaccines that are already on the market. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 44–45;
id., at 52–53 (describing CDC’s comparison of Sabin and Salk polio
vaccines). Neither the United States nor any of the parties, however,
has represented that CDC examines whether a safer alternative
vaccine could have been designed given practical and scientific limits,
the central inquiry in a state tort law action for design defect. CDC
does not issue biologics licenses, moreover, and thus has no authority to
require a manufacturer to adopt a different vaccine design.

