22

BILSKI v. KAPPOS
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

law,” Chakrabarty, 447 U. S., at 316. It appears, however,
that regardless of how one construes the term “useful
arts,” business methods are not included.
Noah Webster’s first American dictionary26 defined the
term “art” as the “disposition or modification of things by
human skill, to answer the purpose intended,” and differ
entiated between “useful or mechanic” arts, on the one
hand, and “liberal or polite” arts, on the other. 1 An
American Dictionary of the English Language (1828)
(facsimile edition) (emphasis added). Although other
dictionaries defined the word “art” more broadly,27 Web
ster’s definition likely conveyed a message similar to the
meaning of the word “manufactures” in the earlier English
statute. And we know that the term “useful arts” was
used in the founding era to refer to manufacturing and
similar applied trades.28 See Coulter, The Field of the
——————
26 Some scholars suggest that Webster’s “close proximity to the Con
stitutional Convention coupled with his familiarity with the delegates
makes it likely that he played some indirect role in the development” of
the Constitution’s Intellectual Property Clause—a Clause that estab
lished not only the power to create patents but also copyrights, a
subject in which Webster had great interest. Donner, Copyright Clause
of the U. S. Constitution: Why Did the Framers Include It With
Unanimous Approval? 36 Am. J. Legal. Hist. 361, 372 (1992). But
there is no direct evidence of this fact. See Walterscheid, Background
and Origin 40–41.
27 See, e.g., 1 S. Johnson, Dictionary of the English Language (1773)
(reprint 1978) (listing as definitions of an “art”:“[t]he power of doing
something not taught by nature and instinct,” “[a] science; as, the
liberal arts,” “[a] trade,” “[a]rtfulness; skill; dexterity,” “[c]unning,” and
“[s]peculation”). One might question the breadth of these definitions.
This same dictionary offered as an example of “doing something not
taught by nature and instinct,” the art of “dance”; and as an example of
a “trade,” the art of “making sugar.” Ibid.
28 For examples of this usage, see Book of Trades or Library of Useful
Arts (1807) (describing in a three-volume work 68 trades, each of which
is the means of creating a product, such as feather worker or cork
cutter); 1 J. Bigelow, The Useful Arts Considered in Connexion with the
Applications of Science (1840) (surveying a history of what we would

