Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

First, the Court suggests that the terms in the Patent
Act must be read as lay speakers use those terms, and not
as they have traditionally been understood in the context
of patent law. See, e.g., ante, at 6 (terms in §101 must be
viewed in light of their “ ‘ordinary, contemporary, common
meaning’ ”); ante, at 10 (patentable “method” is any “or
derly procedure or process,” “regular way or manner of
doing anything,” or “set form of procedure adopted in
investigation or instruction” (internal quotation marks
omitted)). As I will explain at more length in Part III,
infra, if this portion of the Court’s opinion were taken
literally, the results would be absurd: Anything that con
stitutes a series of steps would be patentable so long as it
is novel, nonobvious, and described with specificity. But
the opinion cannot be taken literally on this point. The
Court makes this clear when it accepts that the “atextual”
machine-or-transformation test, ante, at 12, is “useful and
important,” ante, at 8, even though it “violates” the stated
“statutory interpretation principles,” ante, at 6; and when
the Court excludes processes that tend to pre-empt com
monly used ideas, see ante, at 14–15.
Second, in the process of addressing the sole issue
presented to us, the opinion uses some language that
seems inconsistent with our centuries-old reliance on the
machine-or-transformation criteria as clues to patentabil
ity. Most notably, the opinion for a plurality suggests
that these criteria may operate differently when address
ing technologies of a recent vintage. See ante, at 8–9
(machine-or-transformation test is useful “for evaluating
processes similar to those in the Industrial Age,” but is
less useful “for determining the patentability of inventions
in the Information Age”). In moments of caution, however,
the opinion for the Court explains—correctly—that the
Court is merely restoring the law to its historical state of
rest. See ante, at 8 (“This Court’s precedents establish
that the machine-or-transformation test is a useful and

