Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

test for what constitutes a “process” (as opposed to just an
important and useful clue) violates these statutory inter
pretation principles. Section 100(b) provides that “[t]he
term ‘process’ means process, art or method, and includes
a new use of a known process, machine, manufacture,
composition of matter, or material.” The Court is unaware
of any “ ‘ordinary, contemporary, common meaning,’ ”
Diehr, supra, at 182, of the definitional terms “process, art
or method” that would require these terms to be tied to a
machine or to transform an article. Respondent urges the
Court to look to the other patentable categories in §101—
machines, manufactures, and compositions of matter—to
confine the meaning of “process” to a machine or trans
formation, under the doctrine of noscitur a sociis. Under
this canon, “an ambiguous term may be given more precise
content by the neighboring words with which it is associ
ated.” United States v. Stevens, 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010)
(slip op., at 12) (internal quotation marks omitted). This
canon is inapplicable here, for §100(b) already explicitly
defines the term “process.” See Burgess v. United States,
553 U. S. 124, 130 (2008) (“When a statute includes an
explicit definition, we must follow that definition” (inter
nal quotation marks omitted)).
The Court of Appeals incorrectly concluded that this
Court has endorsed the machine-or-transformation test as
the exclusive test. It is true that Cochrane v. Deener, 94
U. S. 780, 788 (1877), explained that a “process” is “an act,
or a series of acts, performed upon the subject-matter to be
transformed and reduced to a different state or thing.”
More recent cases, however, have rejected the broad impli
cations of this dictum; and, in all events, later authority
shows that it was not intended to be an exhaustive or
exclusive test. Gottschalk v. Benson, 409 U. S. 63, 70
(1972), noted that “[t]ransformation and reduction of an
article ‘to a different state or thing’ is the clue to the pat

