Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

43

STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

hard to see how the public would be benefited by disclo
sure” of certain business tools, since the nondisclosure of
these tools “encourages businesses to initiate new and
individualized plans of operation,” which “in turn, leads to
a greater variety of business methods.” Bicron, 416 U. S.,
at 483.
In any event, even if patents on business methods were
useful for encouraging innovation and disclosure, it would
still be questionable whether they would, on balance,
facilitate or impede the progress of American business.
For even when patents encourage innovation and disclo
sure, “too much patent protection can impede rather than
‘promote the Progress of . . . useful Arts.’ ” Laboratory
Corp. of America Holdings v. Metabolite Laboratories, Inc.,
548 U. S. 124, 126–127 (2006) (BREYER, J., dissenting
from dismissal of certiorari). Patents “can discourage
research by impeding the free exchange of information,”
for example, by forcing people to “avoid the use of poten
tially patented ideas, by leading them to conduct costly
and time-consuming searches of existing or pending pat
ents, by requiring complex licensing arrangements, and by
raising the costs of using the patented” methods. Id., at
127. Although “[e]very patent is the grant of a privilege of
exacting tolls from the public,” Great Atlantic, 340 U. S.,
at 154 (Douglas, J., concurring), the tolls of patents on
business methods may be especially high.
The primary concern is that patents on business meth
ods may prohibit a wide swath of legitimate competition
and innovation. As one scholar explains, “it is useful to
conceptualize knowledge as a pyramid: the big ideas are
on top; specific applications are at the bottom.” Dreyfuss
275. The higher up a patent is on the pyramid, the
greater the social cost and the greater the hindrance to
further innovation.53 Thus, this Court stated in Benson
——————
53 See

Dreyfuss 276; Merges & Nelson, On the Complex Economics of

