32

BILSKI v. KAPPOS
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

that piece of legislative history to mean that any series of
steps is a patentable process. Indeed, if that were so, then
our many opinions analyzing what is a patentable process
were simply wastes of pages in the U. S. Reports. And to
accept that errant piece of legislative history as widening
the scope of the patent law would contradict other evi
dence in the congressional record, as well as our presump
tion that the 1952 Act merely codified the meaning of
“process” and did not expand it, see Diehr, 450 U. S., at
184.
Taken in context, it is apparent that the quoted lan
guage has a far less expansive meaning. The full sentence
in the Committee Reports reads: “A person may have
‘invented’ a machine or a manufacture, which may include
anything under the sun that is made by man, but it is not
necessarily patentable under section 101 unless the condi
tions of [this] title are fulfilled.” S. Rep. 1979, at 5; H. R.
Rep. 1923, at 6. Viewed as a whole, it seems clear that
this language does not purport to explain that “anything
under the sun” is patentable. Indeed, the language may
be understood to state the exact opposite: that “[a] person
may have ‘invented’ . . . anything under the sun,” but that
thing “is not necessarily patentable under section 101.”
Thus, even in the Chakrabarty opinion, which relied on
this quote, we cautioned that the 1952 Reports did not
“suggest that §101 has no limits or that it embraces every
discovery.” 447 U. S., at 309.
Moreover, even if the language in the Committee Re
ports was meant to flesh out the meaning of any portion of
§101, it did not purport to define the term “process.” The
language refers only to “manufacture[s]” and “machine[s],”
tangible objects “made by man.” It does not reference the
“process” category of subject matter (nor could a process be
comfortably described as something “made by man”). The
language may also be understood merely as defining the
term “invents” in §101. As Judge Dyk explained in his

