(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BILSKI ET AL. v. KAPPOS, UNDER SECRETARY OF 

COMMERCE FOR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND 

DIRECTOR, PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
No. 08–964.

Argued November 9, 2009—Decided June 28, 2010

Petitioners’ patent application seeks protection for a claimed invention
that explains how commodities buyers and sellers in the energy mar
ket can protect, or hedge, against the risk of price changes. The key
claims are claim 1, which describes a series of steps instructing how
to hedge risk, and claim 4, which places the claim 1 concept into a
simple mathematical formula. The remaining claims explain how
claims 1 and 4 can be applied to allow energy suppliers and consum
ers to minimize the risks resulting from fluctuations in market de
mand. The patent examiner rejected the application on the grounds
that the invention is not implemented on a specific apparatus, merely
manipulates an abstract idea, and solves a purely mathematical
problem. The Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences agreed and
affirmed. The Federal Circuit, in turn, affirmed. The en banc court
rejected its prior test for determining whether a claimed invention
was a patentable “process” under Patent Act, 35 U. S. C. §101—i.e.,
whether the invention produced a “useful, concrete, and tangible re
sult,” see, e.g., State Street Bank & Trust Co v. Signature Financial
Group, Inc., 149 F. 3d 1368, 1373—holding instead that a claimed
process is patent eligible if: (1) it is tied to a particular machine or
apparatus, or (2) it transforms a particular article into a different
state or thing. Concluding that this “machine-or-transformation test”
is the sole test for determining patent eligibility of a “process” under
§101, the court applied the test and held that the application was not
patent eligible.
Held: The judgment is affirmed.

