Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

that petitioners’ application is phrased broadly. See ante,
at 14–15. But claim specification is covered by §112, not
§101; and if a series of steps constituted an unpatentable
idea merely because it was described without sufficient
specificity, the Court could be calling into question some of
our own prior decisions.2 At points, the opinion suggests
that novelty is the clue. See ante, at 14. But the fact that
hedging is “ ‘long prevalent in our system of commerce,’ ”
ibid., cannot justify the Court’s conclusion, as “the proper
construction of §101 . . . does not involve the familiar
issu[e] of novelty” that arises under §102. Flook, 437
U. S., at 588. At other points, the opinion for a plurality
suggests that the analysis turns on the category of patent
involved. See, e.g., ante, at 12 (courts should use the
abstract-idea rule as a “too[l]” to set “a high enough bar”
“when considering patent applications of this sort”). But
we have never in the past suggested that the inquiry
varies by subject matter.
The Court, in sum, never provides a satisfying account
of what constitutes an unpatentable abstract idea. In
deed, the Court does not even explain if it is using the
machine-or-transformation criteria. The Court essentially
asserts its conclusion that petitioners’ application claims
an abstract idea. This mode of analysis (or lack thereof)
may have led to the correct outcome in this case, but it
also means that the Court’s musings on this issue stand
for very little.
——————
2 For

example, a rule that broadly-phrased claims cannot constitute
patentable processes could call into question our approval of Alexander
Graham Bell’s famous fifth claim on “ ‘[t]he method of, and apparatus
for, transmitting vocal or other sounds telegraphically, as herein
described, by causing electrical undulations, similar in form to the
vibrations of the air accompanying the said vocal or other sounds,
substantially as set forth,’ ” The Telephone Cases, 126 U. S. 1, 531
(1888).

