4

BILSKI v. KAPPOS
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

method to hedge their risks by agreeing upon a fixed
series of payments at regular intervals throughout the
year instead of charging or paying prices that fluctuate in
response to changing weather conditions. The patent
application describes a series of steps, including the
evaluation of historical costs and weather variables and
the use of economic and statistical formulas, to analyze
these data and to estimate the likelihood of certain out
comes. See id., at 12–19.
The patent examiner rejected petitioners’ application on
the ground that it “is not directed to the technological
arts,” insofar as it “is not implemented on a specific appa
ratus and merely manipulates [an] abstract idea and
solves a purely mathematical problem without any limita
tion to a practical application.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 148a.
The Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences (Board)
affirmed the examiner’s decision, but it rejected the posi
tion that a patentable process must relate to “technologi
cal arts” or be performed on a machine. Id., at 180a–181a.
Instead, the Board denied petitioners’ patent on two alter
native, although similar, grounds: first, that the patent
involves only mental steps that do not transform physical
subject matter, id., at 181a–184a; and, second, that it is
directed to an “abstract idea,” id., at 184a–187a.
Petitioners appealed to the United States Court of Ap
peals for the Federal Circuit. After briefing and argument
before a three-judge panel, the court sua sponte decided to
hear the case en banc and ordered the parties to address:
(1) whether petitioners’ “claim 1 . . . claims patent-eligible
subject matter under 35 U. S. C. §101”; (2) “[w]hat stan
dard should govern in determining whether a process is
patent-eligible subject matter”; (3) “[w]hether the claimed
subject matter is not patent-eligible because it constitutes
an abstract idea or mental process”; (4) “[w]hether a
method or process must result in a physical transforma
tion of an article or be tied to a machine to be patent

