12

BILSKI v. KAPPOS
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

argued that because “a word” in a statute “is given more
precise content by the neighboring words with which it”
associates, United States v. Williams, 553 U. S. 285, 294
(2008), we may draw inferences from the fact that “[t]he
other three statutory categories of patent-eligible subject
matter identified in Section 101—‘machine, manufacture,
or composition of matter’—all ‘are things made by man,
and involve technology.’ ” Brief for Respondent 26. Spe
cifically, the Government submits, we may infer “that the
term ‘process’ is limited to technological and industrial
methods.” Ibid. The Court rejects this submission cate
gorically, on the ground that “§100(b) already explicitly
defines the term ‘process.’ ” Ante, at 6. But §100(b) de
fines the term “process” by using the term “process,” as
well as several other general terms. This is not a case,
then, in which we must either “follow” a definition, ante, at
7, or rely on neighboring words to understand the scope of
an ambiguous term. The definition itself contains the very
ambiguous term that we must define.
In my view, the answer lies in between the Govern
ment’s and the Court’s positions: The terms adjacent to
“process” in §101 provide a clue as to its meaning, al
though not a very strong clue. Section 101’s list of catego
ries of patentable subject matter is phrased in the disjunc
tive, suggesting that the term “process” has content
distinct from the other items in the list. It would therefore
be illogical to “rob” the word “process” of all independent
meaning. Reiter v. Sonotone Corp., 442 U. S. 330, 338
(1979). Moreover, to the extent we can draw inferences
about what is a “process” from common attributes in §101,
it is a dangerous endeavor to do so on the basis of a per
ceived overarching theme. Given the many moving parts
at work in the Patent Act, there is a risk of merely con
firming our preconceived notions of what should be pat
entable or of seeing common attributes that track “the
familiar issues of novelty and obviousness” that arise

