Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of ENNEDY, J.
Opinion of Kthe Court

contemplated by Congress . . . would frustrate the pur
poses of the patent law.” Chakrabarty, 447 U. S., at 315.
The machine-or-transformation test may well provide a
sufficient basis for evaluating processes similar to those in
the Industrial Age—for example, inventions grounded in a
physical or other tangible form. But there are reasons to
doubt whether the test should be the sole criterion for
determining the patentability of inventions in the Infor
mation Age. As numerous amicus briefs argue, the ma
chine-or-transformation test would create uncertainty as
to the patentability of software, advanced diagnostic medi
cine techniques, and inventions based on linear program
ming, data compression, and the manipulation of digital
signals. See, e.g., Brief for Business Software Alliance 24–
25; Brief for Biotechnology Industry Organization et al.
14–27; Brief for Boston Patent Law Association 8–15;
Brief for Houston Intellectual Property Law Association
17–22; Brief for Dolby Labs., Inc., et al. 9–10.
In the course of applying the machine-or-transformation
test to emerging technologies, courts may pose questions
of such intricacy and refinement that they risk obscuring
the larger object of securing patents for valuable inven
tions without transgressing the public domain. The dis
sent by Judge Rader refers to some of these difficulties.
545 F. 3d, at 1015. As a result, in deciding whether previ
ously unforeseen inventions qualify as patentable “proc
ess[es],” it may not make sense to require courts to confine
themselves to asking the questions posed by the machine
or-transformation test. Section 101’s terms suggest that
new technologies may call for new inquiries. See Benson,
supra, at 71 (to “freeze process patents to old technologies,
leaving no room for the revelations of the new, onrushing
technology[,] . . . is not our purpose”).
It is important to emphasize that the Court today is not
commenting on the patentability of any particular inven

