Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

under other sections of the statute but are not relevant to
§101, Flook, 437 U. S., at 588. The placement of “process”
next to other items thus cannot prove that the term is
limited to any particular categories; it does, however, give
reason to be skeptical that the scope of a patentable “proc
ess” extends to cover any series of steps at all.
The Court makes a more serious interpretive error. As
briefly discussed in Part II, supra, the Court at points
appears to reject the well-settled proposition that the term
“process” in §101 is not a “ ‘process’ in the ordinary sense
of the word,” Flook, 437 U. S., at 588. Instead, the Court
posits that the word “process” must be understood in light
of its “ordinary, contemporary, common meaning,” ante, at
6 (internal quotation marks omitted). Although this is a
fine approach to statutory interpretation in general, it is a
deeply flawed approach to a statute that relies on complex
terms of art developed against a particular historical
background.4 Indeed, the approach would render §101
almost comical. A process for training a dog, a series of
dance steps, a method of shooting a basketball, maybe
even words, stories, or songs if framed as the steps of
typing letters or uttering sounds—all would be patent
eligible. I am confident that the term “process” in §101 is
not nearly so capacious.5
——————
4 For example, if this Court were to interpret the Sherman Act accord
ing to the Act’s plain text, it could prohibit “the entire body of private
contract,” National Soc. of Professional Engineers v. United States, 435
U. S. 679, 688 (1978).
5 The Court attempts to avoid such absurd results by stating that
these “[c]oncerns” “can be met by making sure that the claim meets the
requirements of §101.” Ante, at 6. Because the only limitation on the
plain meaning of “process” that the Court acknowledges explicitly is the
bar on abstract ideas, laws of nature, and the like, it is presumably this
limitation that is left to stand between all conceivable human activity
and patent monopolies. But many processes that would make for
absurd patents are not abstract ideas. Nor can the requirements of
novelty, nonobviousness, and particular description pick up the slack.

