14

BILSKI v. KAPPOS
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

So is the Court, perhaps. What is particularly incredi
ble about the Court’s stated method of interpreting §101
(other than that the method itself may be patent-eligible
under the Court’s theory of §101) is that the Court devi
ates from its own professed commitment to “ordinary,
contemporary, common meaning.” As noted earlier, the
Court accepts a role for the “atextual” machine-or
transformation “clue.” Ante, at 12, 7. The Court also
accepts that we have “foreclose[d] a purely literal reading
of §101,” Flook, 437 U. S., at 589, by holding that claims
that are close to “laws of nature, natural phenomena, and
abstract ideas,” Diamond v. Diehr, 450 U. S. 175, 185
(1981), do not count as “processes” under §101, even if
they can be colloquially described as such.6 The Court
attempts to justify this latter exception to §101 as “a
matter of statutory stare decisis.” Ante, at 5. But it is
strange to think that the very same term must be inter
preted literally on some occasions, and in light of its his
torical usage on others.
In fact, the Court’s understanding of §101 is even more
remarkable because its willingness to exclude general
principles from the provision’s reach is in tension with its
apparent willingness to include steps for conducting busi
ness. The history of patent law contains strong norms
against patenting these two categories of subject matter.
Both norms were presumably incorporated by Congress
into the Patent Act in 1952.
——————
Cf. ante, at 12–13 (plurality opinion). A great deal of human activity
was at some time novel and nonobvious.
6 Curiously, the Court concedes that “these exceptions are not re
quired by the statutory text,” but urges that “they are consistent with
the notion that a patentable process must be ‘new and useful.’ ” Ante,
at 5 (emphasis added). I do not see how these exceptions find a textual
home in the term “new and useful.” The exceptions may be consistent
with those words, but they are sometimes inconsistent with the “ordi
nary, contemporary, common meaning,” ante, at 6, 10 (internal quota
tion marks omitted), of the words “process” and “method.”

