Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

141, 151 (1989).3
The text of the Patent Act does not on its face give much
guidance about what constitutes a patentable process.
The statute defines the term “process” as a “process, art or
method [that] includes a new use of a known process,
machine, manufacture, composition of matter, or mate
rial.” §100(b). But, this definition is not especially help
ful, given that it also uses the term “process” and is there
fore somewhat circular.
As lay speakers use the word “process,” it constitutes
any series of steps. But it has always been clear that, as
used in §101, the term does not refer to a “ ‘process’ in the
ordinary sense of the word,” Flook, 437 U. S., at 588; see
also Corning v. Burden, 15 How. 252, 268 (1854) (“[T]he
term process is often used in a more vague sense, in which
it cannot be the subject of a patent”). Rather, as discussed
in some detail in Part IV, infra, the term “process” (along
with the definitions given to that term) has long accumu
lated a distinctive meaning in patent law. When the term
was used in the 1952 Patent Act, it was neither intended
nor understood to encompass any series of steps or any
way to do any thing.
With that understanding in mind, the Government has
——————
3 The

Court quotes our decision in Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U. S.
303 (1980), for the proposition that, “ ‘[i]n choosing such expansive
terms . . . modified by the comprehensive “any,” Congress plainly
contemplated that the patent laws would be given wide scope.’ ” Ante,
at 4. But the Court fails to mention which terms we were discussing in
Chakrabarty: the terms “manufacture” and “composition of matter.”
See 447 U. S., at 308 (“In choosing such expansive terms as ‘manufac
ture’ and ‘composition of matter,’ modified by the comprehensive ‘any,’
Congress plainly contemplated that the patent laws would be given
wide scope”). As discussed herein, Congress’ choice of the term “proc
ess” reflected a background understanding of what sorts of series of
steps could be patented, and likely reflected an intentional design to
codify that settled, judicial understanding. This may not have been the
case with the terms at issue in Chakrabarty.

