44

BILSKI v. KAPPOS
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

that “[p]henomena of nature . . . , mental processes, and
abstract intellectual concepts are not patentable, as they
are the basic tools of scientific and technological work,”
409 U. S., at 67; see also, Joseph E. Seagram & Sons, Inc.,
180 F. 2d, at 28 (“To give appellant a monopoly, through
the issuance of a patent, upon so great an area . . . would
in our view impose without warrant of law a serious re
straint upon the advance of science and industry”). Busi
ness methods are similarly often closer to “big ideas,” as
they are the basic tools of commercial work. They are
also, in many cases, the basic tools of further business
innovation: Innovation in business methods is often a
sequential and complementary process in which imitation
may be a “spur to innovation” and patents may “become an
impediment.” Bessen & Maskin, Sequential Innovation,
Patents, and Imitation, 40 RAND J. Econ. 611, 613
(2009).54 “Think how the airline industry might now be
structured if the first company to offer frequent flyer miles
had enjoyed the sole right to award them.” Dreyfuss 264.
“[I]mitation and refinement through imitation are both
necessary to invention itself and the very lifeblood of a
competitive economy.” Bonito Boats, 489 U. S., at 146.
If business methods could be patented, then many busi
ness decisions, no matter how small, could be potential
patent violations. Businesses would either live in constant
fear of litigation or would need to undertake the costs of
searching through patents that describe methods of doing
business, attempting to decide whether their innovation is
one that remains in the public domain. See Long, Infor
mation Costs in Patent and Copyright, 90 Va. L. Rev. 465,
——————
Patent Scope, 90 Colum. L. Rev. 839, 873–878 (1990).
54 See also Raskind, The State Street Bank Decision, The Bad Busi
ness of Unlimited Patent Protection for Methods of Doing Business, 10
Fordham Intell. Prop. Media & Ent. L. J. 61, 102 (1999) (“Interactive
emulation more than innovation is the driving force of business method
changes”).

