14

BILSKI v. KAPPOS
Opinion of the Court

Benson. The applicant there attempted to patent a proce
dure for monitoring the conditions during the catalytic
conversion process in the petrochemical and oil-refining
industries. The application’s only innovation was reliance
on a mathematical algorithm. 437 U. S., at 585–586.
Flook held the invention was not a patentable “process.”
The Court conceded the invention at issue, unlike the
algorithm in Benson, had been limited so that it could still
be freely used outside the petrochemical and oil-refining
industries. 437 U. S., at 589–590. Nevertheless, Flook
rejected “[t]he notion that post-solution activity, no matter
how conventional or obvious in itself, can transform an
unpatentable principle into a patentable process.” Id., at
590. The Court concluded that the process at issue there
was “unpatentable under §101, not because it contain[ed]
a mathematical algorithm as one component, but because
once that algorithm [wa]s assumed to be within the prior
art, the application, considered as a whole, contain[ed] no
patentable invention.” Id., at 594. As the Court later
explained, Flook stands for the proposition that the prohi
bition against patenting abstract ideas “cannot be circum
vented by attempting to limit the use of the formula to a
particular technological environment” or adding “insignifi
cant postsolution activity.” Diehr, 450 U. S., at 191–192.
Finally, in Diehr, the Court established a limitation on
the principles articulated in Benson and Flook. The appli
cation in Diehr claimed a previously unknown method for
“molding raw, uncured synthetic rubber into cured preci
sion products,” using a mathematical formula to complete
some of its several steps by way of a computer. 450 U. S.,
at 177. Diehr explained that while an abstract idea, law of
nature, or mathematical formula could not be patented,
“an application of a law of nature or mathematical for
mula to a known structure or process may well be deserv
ing of patent protection.” Id., at 187. Diehr emphasized

