Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
Finally, the Federal Circuit incorrectly concluded that this Court has
endorsed the machine-or-transformation test as the exclusive test.
Recent authorities show that the test was never intended to be ex
haustive or exclusive. See, e.g., Parker v. Flook, 437 U. S. 584, 588,
n. 9. Pp. 5–8.
(c) Section 101 similarly precludes a reading of the term “process”
that would categorically exclude business methods.
The term
“method” within §100(b)’s “process” definition, at least as a textual
matter and before other consulting other Patent Act limitations and
this Court’s precedents, may include at least some methods of doing
business. The Court is unaware of any argument that the “ordinary,
contemporary, common meaning,” Diehr, supra, at 182, of “method”
excludes business methods. Nor is it clear what a business method
exception would sweep in and whether it would exclude technologies
for conducting a business more efficiently. The categorical exclusion
argument is further undermined by the fact that federal law explic
itly contemplates the existence of at least some business method pat
ents: Under §273(b)(1), if a patent-holder claims infringement based
on “a method in [a] patent,” the alleged infringer can assert a defense
of prior use. By allowing this defense, the statute itself acknowledges
that there may be business method patents. Section 273 thus clari
fies the understanding that a business method is simply one kind of
“method” that is, at least in some circumstances, eligible for patent
ing under §101. A contrary conclusion would violate the canon
against interpreting any statutory provision in a manner that would
render another provision superfluous. See Corley v. United States,
556 U. S. ___, ___. Finally, while §273 appears to leave open the pos
sibility of some business method patents, it does not suggest broad
patentability of such claimed inventions. Pp. 10–11.
(d) Even though petitioners’ application is not categorically outside
of §101 under the two atextual approaches the Court rejects today,
that does not mean it is a “process” under §101. Petitioners seek to
patent both the concept of hedging risk and the application of that
concept to energy markets. Under Benson, Flook, and Diehr, how
ever, these are not patentable processes but attempts to patent ab
stract ideas. Claims 1 and 4 explain the basic concept of hedging and
reduce that concept to a mathematical formula. This is an unpat
entable abstract idea, just like the algorithms at issue in Benson and
Flook. Petitioners’ remaining claims, broad examples of how hedging
can be used in commodities and energy markets, attempt to patent
the use of the abstract hedging idea, then instruct the use of well
known random analysis techniques to help establish some of the in
puts into the equation. They add even less to the underlying abstract
principle than the invention held patent ineligible in Flook. Pp. 12–

