8

BILSKI v. KAPPOS
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

important clue, an investigative tool, for determining
whether some claimed inventions are processes under
§101 ”). Notwithstanding this internal tension, I under
stand the Court’s opinion to hold only that the machine-or
transformation test remains an important test for pat
entability. Few, if any, processes cannot effectively be
evaluated using these criteria.
Third, in its discussion of an issue not contained in the
questions presented—whether the particular series of
steps in petitioners’ application is an abstract idea—the
Court uses language that could suggest a shift in our
approach to that issue. Although I happen to agree that
petitioners seek to patent an abstract idea, the Court does
not show how this conclusion follows “clear[ly],” ante, at
15, from our case law. The patent now before us is not for
“[a] principle, in the abstract,” or a “fundamental truth.”
Parker v. Flook, 437 U. S. 584, 589 (1978) (internal quota
tion marks omitted). Nor does it claim the sort of phe
nomenon of nature or abstract idea that was embodied by
the mathematical formula at issue in Gottschalk v. Ben
son, 409 U. S. 63, 67 (1972), and in Flook.
The Court construes petitioners’ claims on processes for
pricing as claims on “the basic concept of hedging, or
protecting against risk,” ante, at 14, and thus discounts
the application’s discussion of what sorts of data to use,
and how to analyze those data, as mere “token postsolu
tion components,” ante, at 15. In other words, the Court
artificially limits petitioners’ claims to hedging, and then
concludes that hedging is an abstract idea rather than a
term that describes a category of processes including
petitioners’ claims. Why the Court does this is never
made clear. One might think that the Court’s analysis
means that any process that utilizes an abstract idea is
itself an unpatentable, abstract idea. But we have never
suggested any such rule, which would undermine a host of
patentable processes. It is true, as the Court observes,

