2

BILSKI v. KAPPOS
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

patentable. In the late 1990’s, the Federal Circuit and
others called this proposition into question. Congress
quickly responded to a Federal Circuit decision with a
stopgap measure designed to limit a potentially significant
new problem for the business community. It passed the
First Inventors Defense Act of 1999 (1999 Act), 113 Stat.
1501A–555 (codified at 35 U. S. C. §273), which provides a
limited defense to claims of patent infringement, see
§273(b), for “method[s] of doing or conducting business,”
§273(a)(3). Following several more years of confusion, the
Federal Circuit changed course, overruling recent deci
sions and holding that a series of steps may constitute a
patentable process only if it is tied to a machine or trans
forms an article into a different state or thing. This “ma
chine-or-transformation test” excluded general methods of
doing business as well as, potentially, a variety of other
subjects that could be called processes.
The Court correctly holds that the machine-or
transformation test is not the sole test for what constitutes
a patentable process; rather, it is a critical clue.1 But the
Court is quite wrong, in my view, to suggest that any
series of steps that is not itself an abstract idea or law of
nature may constitute a “process” within the meaning of
§101. The language in the Court’s opinion to this effect
can only cause mischief. The wiser course would have
been to hold that petitioners’ method is not a “process”
because it describes only a general method of engaging in
business transactions—and business methods are not
patentable.
More precisely, although a process is not
patent-ineligible simply because it is useful for conducting
business, a claim that merely describes a method of doing
——————
1 Even if the machine-or-transformation test may not define the scope
of a patentable process, it would be a grave mistake to assume that
anything with a “ ‘useful, concrete and tangible result,’ ” State Street
Bank & Trust v. Signature Financial Group, Inc., 149 F. 3d 1368, 1373
(CA Fed. 1998), may be patented.

