40

BILSKI v. KAPPOS
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

swath of technological developments).
Without any legislative guidance to the contrary, there
is a real concern that patents on business methods would
press on the limits of the “standard expressed in the Con
stitution,” Graham, 383 U. S., at 6, more likely stifling
progress than “promot[ing]” it. U. S. Const., Art. I, §8,
cl. 8. I recognize that not all methods of doing business
are the same, and that therefore the constitutional “bal
ance,” Bonito Boats, 489 U. S., at 146, may vary within
this category. Nevertheless, I think that this balance
generally supports the historic understanding of the term
“process” as excluding business methods. And a categori
cal analysis fits with the purpose, as Thomas Jefferson
explained, of ensuring that “ ‘every one might know when
his actions were safe and lawful,’ ” Graham, 383 U. S., at
10; see also Festo Corp. v. Shoketsu Kinzoku Kogyo Kabu
shiki Co., 535 U. S. 722, 730–731 (2002) (“The monopoly is
a property right; and like any property right, its bounda
ries should be clear. This clarity is essential to promote
progress”); Diehr, 450 U. S., at 219 (STEVENS, J., dissent
ing) (it is necessary to have “rules that enable a conscien
tious patent lawyer to determine with a fair degree of
accuracy” what is patentable).
On one side of the balance is whether a patent monopoly
is necessary to “motivate the innovation,” Pfaff v. Wells
Electronics, Inc., 525 U. S. 55, 63 (1998). Although there
is certainly disagreement about the need for patents,
scholars generally agree that when innovation is expen
sive, risky, and easily copied, inventors are less likely to
undertake the guaranteed costs of innovation in order to
obtain the mere possibility of an invention that others can
copy.45 Both common sense and recent economic scholar
ship suggest that these dynamics of cost, risk, and reward
——————
45 See generally W. Landes & R. Posner, The Economic Structure of
Intellectual Property Law 13–15 (2003).

