12

BILSKI v. KAPPOS
Opinion of ENNEDY, J.
Opinion of Kthe Court

until modern times revives many of the previously dis
cussed difficulties. See supra, at 8–9. At the same time,
some business method patents raise special problems in
terms of vagueness and suspect validity. See eBay Inc. v.
MercExchange, L. L. C., 547 U. S. 388, 397 (2006)
(KENNEDY, J., concurring). The Information Age empow
ers people with new capacities to perform statistical
analyses and mathematical calculations with a speed and
sophistication that enable the design of protocols for more
efficient performance of a vast number of business tasks.
If a high enough bar is not set when considering patent
applications of this sort, patent examiners and courts
could be flooded with claims that would put a chill on
creative endeavor and dynamic change.
In searching for a limiting principle, this Court’s prece
dents on the unpatentability of abstract ideas provide
useful tools. See infra, at 12–15. Indeed, if the Court of
Appeals were to succeed in defining a narrower category
or class of patent applications that claim to instruct how
business should be conducted, and then rule that the
category is unpatentable because, for instance, it repre
sents an attempt to patent abstract ideas, this conclusion
might well be in accord with controlling precedent. See
ibid. But beyond this or some other limitation consistent
with the statutory text, the Patent Act leaves open the
possibility that there are at least some processes that can
be fairly described as business methods that are within
patentable subject matter under §101.
Finally, even if a particular business method fits into
the statutory definition of a “process,” that does not mean
that the application claiming that method should be
granted.
In order to receive patent protection, any
claimed invention must be novel, §102, nonobvious, §103,
and fully and particularly described, §112. These limita
tions serve a critical role in adjusting the tension, ever

