Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

the need to consider the invention as a whole, rather than
“dissect[ing] the claims into old and new elements and
then . . . ignor[ing] the presence of the old elements in the
analysis.” Id., at 188. Finally, the Court concluded that
because the claim was not “an attempt to patent a
mathematical formula, but rather [was] an industrial
process for the molding of rubber products,” it fell within
§101’s patentable subject matter. Id., at 192–193.
In light of these precedents, it is clear that petitioners’
application is not a patentable “process.” Claims 1 and 4
in petitioners’ application explain the basic concept of
hedging, or protecting against risk: “Hedging is a funda
mental economic practice long prevalent in our system of
commerce and taught in any introductory finance class.”
545 F. 3d, at 1013 (Rader, J., dissenting); see, e.g., D.
Chorafas, Introduction to Derivative Financial Instru
ments 75–94 (2008); C. Stickney, R. Weil, K. Schipper, &
J. Francis, Financial Accounting: An Introduction to Con
cepts, Methods, and Uses 581–582 (13th ed. 2010); S.
Ross, R. Westerfield, & B. Jordan, Fundamentals of Cor
porate Finance 743–744 (8th ed. 2008). The concept of
hedging, described in claim 1 and reduced to a mathemati
cal formula in claim 4, is an unpatentable abstract idea,
just like the algorithms at issue in Benson and Flook.
Allowing petitioners to patent risk hedging would pre
empt use of this approach in all fields, and would effec
tively grant a monopoly over an abstract idea.
Petitioners’ remaining claims are broad examples of how
hedging can be used in commodities and energy markets.
Flook established that limiting an abstract idea to one
field of use or adding token postsolution components did
not make the concept patentable. That is exactly what the
remaining claims in petitioners’ application do. These
claims attempt to patent the use of the abstract idea of
hedging risk in the energy market and then instruct the

