2

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Opinion of BREYER, J. 


a state-court property decision enacts an unconstitutional
taking. Ante, at 21. The plurality further concludes that a
state-court decision violates the Takings Clause not when
the decision is “unpredictab[le]” on the basis of prior law,
but rather when the decision takes private property rights
that are “established.” Ante, at 23–24. And finally, it
concludes that all those affected by a state-court property
law decision can raise a takings claim in federal court, but
for the losing party in the initial state-court proceeding,
who can only raise her claim (possibly for the first time) in
a petition for a writ of certiorari here. Ante, at 23.
I do not claim that all of these conclusions are unsound.
I do not know. But I do know that, if we were to express
our views on these questions, we would invite a host of
federal takings claims without the mature consideration of
potential procedural or substantive legal principles that
might limit federal interference in matters that are pri
marily the subject of state law. Property owners litigate
many thousands of cases involving state property law in
state courts each year. Each state-court property decision
may further affect numerous nonparty property owners as
well. Losing parties in many state-court cases may well
believe that erroneous judicial decisions have deprived
them of property rights they previously held and may
consequently bring federal takings claims. And a glance
at Part IV makes clear that such cases can involve state
property law issues of considerable complexity. Hence, the
approach the plurality would take today threatens to open
the federal court doors to constitutional review of many,
perhaps large numbers of, state-law cases in an area of
law familiar to state, but not federal, judges. And the
failure of that approach to set forth procedural limitations
or canons of deference would create the distinct possibility
that federal judges would play a major role in the shaping
of a matter of significant state interest—state property
law.

