Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

the Court
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

propriation. The asserted reasons for the due-process
limitation are that the legislative and executive branches
“are accountable in their political capacity” for takings,
post, at 2, and “[c]ourts . . . are not designed to make policy
decisions” about takings, post, at 4. These reasons may
have a lot to do with sound separation-of-powers principles
that ought to govern a democratic society, but they have
nothing whatever to do with the protection of individual
rights that is the object of the Due Process Clause.
Of course even taking those reasons at face value, it is
strange to proclaim a democracy deficit and lack of special
competence for the judicial taking of an individual prop
erty right, when this Court has had no trouble deciding
matters of much greater moment, contrary to congres
sional desire or the legislated desires of most of the States,
with no special competence except the authority we pos
sess to enforce the Constitution. In any case, our opinion
does not trust judges with the relatively small power
JUSTICE KENNEDY now objects to. It is we who propose
setting aside judicial decisions that take private property;
it is he who insists that judges cannot be so limited. Un
der his regime, the citizen whose property has been judi
cially redefined to belong to the State would presumably
be given the Orwellian explanation: “The court did not
take your property. Because it is neither politically ac
countable nor competent to make such a decision, it can
not take property.”
JUSTICE KENNEDY’s injection of separation-of-powers
principles into the Due Process Clause would also have the
ironic effect of preventing the assignment of the expropria
tion function to the branch of government whose proce
dures are, by far, the most protective of individual rights.
So perhaps even this first respect in which JUSTICE KENNEDY would have the Due Process Clause do the work of
the Takings Clause pertains to Substantive, rather than
Procedural, Due Process. His other arguments undoubt

