Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

the Court
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

Our precedents provide no support for the proposition
that takings effected by the judicial branch are entitled to
special treatment, and in fact suggest the contrary.
PruneYard Shopping Center v. Robins, 447 U. S. 74
(1980), involved a decision of the California Supreme
Court overruling one of its prior decisions which had held
that the California Constitution’s guarantees of freedom of
speech and of the press, and of the right to petition the
government, did not require the owner of private property
to accord those rights on his premises. The appellants,
owners of a shopping center, contended that their private
property rights could not “be denied by invocation of a
state constitutional provision or by judicial reconstruction
of a State’s laws of private property,” id., at 79 (emphasis
added). We held that there had been no taking, citing
cases involving legislative and executive takings, and
applying standard Takings Clause analysis. See id., at
82–84. We treated the California Supreme Court’s appli
cation of the constitutional provisions as a regulation of
the use of private property, and evaluated whether that
regulation violated the property owners’ “right to exclude
others,” id., at 80 (internal quotation marks omitted). Our
opinion addressed only the claimed taking by the constitu
tional provision. Its failure to speak separately to the
claimed taking by “judicial reconstruction of a State’s laws
of private property” certainly does not suggest that a
taking by judicial action cannot occur, and arguably sug
gests that the same analysis applicable to taking by con
stitutional provision would apply.
Webb’s Fabulous Pharmacies, supra, is even closer in
point. There the purchaser of an insolvent corporation
had interpleaded the corporation’s creditors, placing the
purchase price in an interest-bearing account in the regis
try of the Circuit Court of Seminole County, to be distrib
uted in satisfaction of claims approved by a receiver. The
Florida Supreme Court construed an applicable statute to

