22

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

the Court
Opinion of SCALIA, J. 


cial decision that purports merely to clarify property
rights has instead taken them. But federal courts must
often decide what state property rights exist in nontakings
contexts, see, e.g., Board of Regents of State Colleges v.
Roth, 408 U. S. 564, 577–578 (1972) (Due Process Clause).
And indeed they must decide it to resolve claims that
legislative or executive action has effected a taking. For
example, a regulation that deprives a property owner of all
economically beneficial use of his property is not a taking
if the restriction “inhere[s] in the title itself, in the restric
tions that background principles of the State’s law of
property and nuisance already place upon land owner
ship.” Lucas, 505 U. S., at 1029. A constitutional provi
sion that forbids the uncompensated taking of property is
quite simply insusceptible of enforcement by federal courts
unless they have the power to decide what property rights
exist under state law.
Respondents also warn us against depriving common
law judging of needed flexibility. That argument has little
appeal when directed against the enforcement of a consti
tutional guarantee adopted in an era when, as we said
supra, at 17, courts had no power to “change” the common
law. But in any case, courts have no peculiar need of
flexibility. It is no more essential that judges be free to
overrule prior cases that establish property entitlements
than that state legislators be free to revise pre-existing
statutes that confer property entitlements, or agency
heads pre-existing regulations that do so. And insofar as
courts merely clarify and elaborate property entitlements
that were previously unclear, they cannot be said to have
taken an established property right.
Finally, the city and county argue that applying the
Takings Clause to judicial decisions would force lower
federal courts to review final state-court judgments, in
violation of the so-called Rooker-Feldman doctrine. See
Rooker v. Fidelity Trust Co., 263 U. S. 413, 415–416

