6

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Opinion of the Court 


intent to award the permits, App. 27–41, and the Board
approved the erosion-control line, id., at 49–50.
The petitioner here, Stop the Beach Renourishment,
Inc., is a nonprofit corporation formed by people who own
beachfront property bordering the project area (we shall
refer to them as the Members). It brought an administra
tive challenge to the proposed project, see id., at 10–26,
which was unsuccessful; the Department approved the
permits. Petitioner then challenged that action in state
court under the Florida Administrative Procedure Act,
Fla. Stat. §120.68 (2007). The District Court of Appeal for
the First District concluded that, contrary to the Act’s
preservation of “all common-law riparian rights,” the order
had eliminated two of the Members’ littoral rights: (1) the
right to receive accretions to their property; and (2) the
right to have the contact of their property with the water
remain intact. Save Our Beaches, Inc. v. Florida Dept. of
Environmental Protection, 27 So. 3d 48, 57 (2006). This, it
believed, would be an unconstitutional taking, which
would “unreasonably infringe on riparian rights,” and
therefore require the showing under Fla. Admin. Code
Rule 18–21.004(3)(b) that the local governments owned or
had a property interest in the upland property. It set
aside the Department’s final order approving the permits
and remanded for that showing to be made. 27 So. 3d, at
60. It also certified to the Florida Supreme Court the
following question (as rephrased by the latter court):
“On its face, does the Beach and Shore Preservation
Act unconstitutionally deprive upland owners of litto
ral rights without just compensation?”3 998 So. 2d, at
1105 (footnotes omitted).
——————
3 The

Florida Supreme Court seemingly took the question to refer to
constitutionality under the Florida Constitution, which contains a
clause similar to the Takings Clause of the Federal Constitution.
Compare Fla. Const., Art. X, §6, cl. (a), with U. S. Const., Amdt. 5.

