10

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

the Court
Opinion of SCALIA, J. 


mean that the interest on the account belonged to the
county, because the account was “considered ‘public
money,’ ” Beckwith v. Webb’s Fabulous Pharmacies, 374
So. 2d 951, 952–953 (1979) (per curiam). We held this to
be a taking. We noted that “[t]he usual and general rule is
that any interest on an interpleaded and deposited fund
follows the principal and is to be allocated to those who
are ultimately to be the owners of that principal,” 449
U. S., at 162. “Neither the Florida Legislature by statute,
nor the Florida courts by judicial decree,” we said, “may
accomplish the result the county seeks simply by rechar
acterizing the principal as ‘public money.’ ” Id., at 164.
In sum, the Takings Clause bars the State from taking
private property without paying for it, no matter which
branch is the instrument of the taking. To be sure, the
manner of state action may matter: Condemnation by
eminent domain, for example, is always a taking, while a
legislative, executive, or judicial restriction of property use
may or may not be, depending on its nature and extent.
But the particular state actor is irrelevant. If a legislature
or a court declares that what was once an established
right of private property no longer exists, it has taken that
property, no less than if the State had physically appro
priated it or destroyed its value by regulation. “[A] State,
by ipse dixit, may not transform private property into
public property without compensation.” Ibid.
B
JUSTICE BREYER’s concurrence says that we need nei
ther (1) to decide whether the judiciary can ever effect a
taking, nor (2) to establish the standard for determining
whether it has done so. See post, at 1–2 (opinion concur
ring in part and concurring in judgment). The second part
of this is surely incompatible with JUSTICE BREYER’s
conclusion that the “Florida Supreme Court’s decision in
this case did not amount to a ‘judicial taking.’ ” Post, at 3.

