Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
dinate to the State’s right to fill. Pp. 25–27.
(c) The decision below is consistent with these principles. Cf. Lucas
v. South Carolina Coastal Council, 505 U. S. 1003, 1028–1029. It did
not abolish the Members’ right to future accretions, but merely held
that the right was not implicated by the beach-restoration project be
cause of the doctrine of avulsion. Relying on dicta in the Florida Su
preme Court’s Sand Key decision, petitioner contends that the State
took the Members’ littoral right to have the boundary always be the
mean high-water line. But petitioner’s interpretation of that dictum
contradicts the clear law governing avulsion. One cannot say the
Florida Supreme Court contravened established property law by re
jecting it. Pp. 27–29.
JUSTICE SCALIA, joined by THE CHIEF JUSTICE, JUSTICE THOMAS, and
JUSTICE ALITO, concluded in Parts II and III that if a court declares
that what was once an established right of private property no longer
exists, it has taken that property in violation of the Takings Clause.
Pp. 7–24.
(a) Though the classic taking is a transfer of property by eminent
domain, the Clause applies to other state actions that achieve the
same thing, including those that recharacterize as public property
what was previously private property, see Webb’s Fabulous Pharma
cies, Inc. v. Beckwith, 449 U. S. 155, 163–165. The Clause is not ad
dressed to the action of a specific branch or branches. It is concerned
simply with the act, not with the governmental actor. This Court’s
precedents provide no support for the proposition that takings ef
fected by the judicial branch are entitled to special treatment, and in
fact suggest the contrary. See PruneYard Shopping Center v. Robins,
447 U. S. 74, Webb’s Fabulous Pharmacies, supra. Pp. 7–20.
(b) For a judicial taking, respondents would add to the normal tak
ings inquiry the requirement that the court’s decision have no “fair
and substantial basis.” This test is not obviously appropriate, but it
is no different in this context from the requirement that the property
owner prove an established property right. Respondents’ additional
arguments—that federal courts lack the knowledge of state law re
quired to decide whether a state judicial decision purporting to clarify
property rights has instead taken them; that common-law judging
should not be deprived of needed flexibility; and that applying the
Takings Clause to judicial decisions would force lower federal courts
to review final state-court judgments, in violation of the RookerFeldman doctrine, see Rooker v. Fidelity Trust Co., 263 U. S. 413,
415–416, District of Columbia Court of Appeals v. Feldman, 460 U. S.
462, 476—are unpersuasive. And petitioner’s proposed “unpredict
ability test”—that a judicial taking consists of a decision that “consti
tutes a sudden change in state law, unpredictable in terms of rele

