Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

Clause forbids it to do by legislative fiat.” Ante, at 8. The
objection that a due process claim might involve close
questions concerning whether a judicial decree extends
beyond what owners might have expected is not a sound
argument; for the same close questions would arise with
respect to whether a judicial decision is a taking. See
Apfel, supra, at 541 (opinion of KENNEDY, J.) (“Cases
attempting to decide when a regulation becomes a taking
are among the most litigated and perplexing in current
law”); Penn Central Transp. Co. v. New York City, 438
U. S. 104, 123 (1978) (“The question of what constitutes a
‘taking’ for purposes of the Fifth Amendment has proved
to be a problem of considerable difficulty”).
To announce that courts too can effect a taking when
they decide cases involving property rights, would raise
certain difficult questions. Since this case does not require
those questions to be addressed, in my respectful view, the
Court should not reach beyond the necessities of the case
to announce a sweeping rule that court decisions can be
takings, as that phrase is used in the Takings Clause. The
evident reason for recognizing a judicial takings doctrine
would be to constrain the power of the judicial branch. Of
course, the judiciary must respect private ownership. But
were this Court to say that judicial decisions become
takings when they overreach, this might give more power
to courts, not less.
Consider the instance of litigation between two property
owners to determine which one bears the liability and
costs when a tree that stands on one property extends its
roots in a way that damages adjacent property. See, e.g.,
Fancher v. Fagella, 274 Va. 549, 650 S. E. 2d 519 (2007).
If a court deems that, in light of increasing urbanization,
the former rule for allocation of these costs should be
changed, thus shifting the rights of the owners, it may
well increase the value of one property and decrease the
value of the other. This might be the type of incremental

