24

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Opinion of the Court 


but it does not eliminate established property rights. And
the predictability test covers too little, because a judicial
elimination of established private-property rights that is
foreshadowed by dicta or even by holdings years in ad
vance is nonetheless a taking. If, for example, a state
court held in one case, to which the complaining property
owner was not a party, that it had the power to limit the
acreage of privately owned real estate to 100 acres, and
then, in a second case, applied that principle to declare the
complainant’s 101st acre to be public property, the State
would have taken an acre from the complainant even
though the decision was predictable.
IV
We come at last to petitioner’s takings attack on the
decision below. At the outset, respondents raise two pre
liminary points which need not detain us long. The city
and the county argue that petitioner cannot state a cause
of action for a taking because, though the Members own
private property, petitioner itself does not; and that the
claim is unripe because petitioner has not sought just
compensation. Neither objection appeared in the briefs in
opposition to the petition for writ of certiorari, and since
neither is jurisdictional,10 we deem both waived. See this
Court’s Rule 15.2; cf. Oklahoma City v. Tuttle, 471 U. S.
808, 815–816 (1985).
Petitioner argues that the Florida Supreme Court took
two of the property rights of the Members by declaring
that those rights did not exist: the right to accretions, and
the right to have littoral property touch the water (which
——————
10 Petitioner meets the two requirements necessary for an association
to assert the Article III standing of its Members. See Food and Com
mercial Workers v. Brown Group, Inc., 517 U. S. 544, 555–557 (1996).
And the claim here is ripe insofar as Article III standing is concerned,
since (accepting petitioner’s version of Florida law as true) petitioner
has been deprived of property.

