8

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Opinion of KENNEDY, J. 


law but there is no “fair or substantial basis” for this
statement. Broad River, 281 U. S., at 540. (Most of these
cases may arise in the latter posture, like inverse condem
nation claims where the State says it is not taking prop
erty and pays no compensation.) Call this Case A. The
only issue in Case A was determining the substance of
state property law. It is doubtful that parties would raise
a judicial takings claim on appeal, or in a petition for a
writ of certiorari, in Case A, as the issue would not have
been litigated below. Rather, the party may file a sepa
rate lawsuit—Case B—arguing that a taking occurred in
light of the change in property law made by Case A. After
all, until the state court in Case A changes the law, the
party will not know if his or her property rights will have
been eliminated. So res judicata probably would not bar
the party from litigating the takings issue in Case B.
Second, it is unclear what remedy a reviewing court
could enter after finding a judicial taking. It appears
under our precedents that a party who suffers a taking is
only entitled to damages, not equitable relief: The Court
has said that “[e]quitable relief is not available to enjoin
an alleged taking of private property for a public use . . .
when a suit for compensation can be brought against the
sovereign subsequent to the taking,” Ruckelshaus v. Mon
santo Co., 467 U. S. 986, 1016 (1984), and the Court sub
sequently held that the Takings Clause requires the avail
ability of a suit for compensation against the States, First
English, supra, at 321–322. It makes perfect sense that
the remedy for a Takings Clause violation is only dam
ages, as the Clause “does not proscribe the taking of prop
erty; it proscribes taking without just compensation.”
Williamson County Regional Planning Comm’n v. Hamil
ton Bank of Johnson City, 473 U. S. 172, 194 (1985).
It is thus questionable whether reviewing courts could
invalidate judicial decisions deemed to be judicial takings;
they may only be able to order just compensation. In the

