Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

Opinion of the Court

petitioner distinguishes from the mere right of access to
the water).11 Under petitioner’s theory, because no prior
Florida decision had said that the State’s filling of sub
merged tidal lands could have the effect of depriving a
littoral owner of contact with the water and denying him
future accretions, the Florida Supreme Court’s judgment
in the present case abolished those two easements to
which littoral property owners had been entitled. This
puts the burden on the wrong party. There is no taking
unless petitioner can show that, before the Florida Su
preme Court’s decision, littoral-property owners had rights
to future accretions and contact with the water superior to
the State’s right to fill in its submerged land. Though
some may think the question close, in our view the show
ing cannot be made.
Two core principles of Florida property law intersect in
this case. First, the State as owner of the submerged land
adjacent to littoral property has the right to fill that land,
so long as it does not interfere with the rights of the public
and the rights of littoral landowners. See Hayes v. Bow
man, 91 So. 2d 795, 799–800 (Fla. 1957) (right to fill con
veyed by State to private party); State ex rel. Buford v.
Tampa, 88 Fla. 196, 210–211, 102 So. 336, 341 (1924)
——————
11 Petitioner

raises two other claims that we do not directly address.
First, petitioner tries to revive its challenge to the beach restoration
project, contending that it (rather than the Florida Supreme Court’s
opinion) constitutes a taking. Petitioner’s arguments on this score are
simply versions of two arguments it makes against the Florida Su
preme Court’s opinion: that the Department has replaced the Members’
littoral property rights with versions that are inferior because statu
tory; and that the Members previously had the right to have their
property contact the water. We reject both, infra, at 28–29, and n. 12.
Second, petitioner attempts to raise a challenge to the Act as a depriva
tion of property without due process. Petitioner did not raise this
challenge before the Florida Supreme Court, and only obliquely raised
it in the petition for certiorari. We therefore do not reach it. See
Adams, 520 U. S., at 86–87.

