4

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Opinion of KENNEDY, J. 


property rights is “otherwise constitutional” so long as the
State compensates the aggrieved property owners. Ibid.
There is no clear authority for this proposition.
When courts act without direction from the executive or
legislature, they may not have the power to eliminate
established property rights by judicial decision. “Given
that the constitutionality” of a judicial decision altering
property rights “appears to turn on the legitimacy” of
whether the court’s judgment eliminates or changes estab
lished property rights “rather than on the availability of
compensation, . . . the more appropriate constitutional
analysis arises under general due process principles
rather than under the Takings Clause.” Ibid. Courts,
unlike the executive or legislature, are not designed to
make policy decisions about “the need for, and likely effec
tiveness of, regulatory actions.” Lingle, supra, at 545.
State courts generally operate under a common-law tradi
tion that allows for incremental modifications to property
law, but “this tradition cannot justify a carte blanch judi
cial authority to change property definitions wholly free of
constitutional limitations.” Walston, The Constitution and
Property: Due Process, Regulatory Takings, and Judicial
Takings, 2001 Utah L. Rev. 379, 435.
The Court would be on strong footing in ruling that a
judicial decision that eliminates or substantially changes
established property rights, which are a legitimate expec
tation of the owner, is “arbitrary or irrational” under the
Due Process Clause. Lingle, 544 U. S., at 542; see id., at
548–549 (KENNEDY, J., concurring); see also Perry v.
Sindermann, 408 U. S. 593, 601 (1972) (“ ‘[P]roperty’ ”
interests protected by the Due Process Clauses are those
“that are secured by ‘existing rules or understandings’ ”
(quoting Board of Regents of State Colleges v. Roth, 408
U. S. 564, 577 (1972))). Thus, without a judicial takings
doctrine, the Due Process Clause would likely prevent a
State from doing “by judicial decree what the Takings

