28

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Opinion of the Court 


state-created avulsions ought to be treated differently
from other avulsions insofar as the property right to accre
tion is concerned. But nothing in prior Florida law makes
such a distinction, and Martin suggests, if it does not
indeed hold, the contrary. Even if there might be different
interpretations of Martin and other Florida property-law
cases that would prevent this arguably odd result, we are
not free to adopt them. The Takings Clause only protects
property rights as they are established under state law,
not as they might have been established or ought to have
been established. We cannot say that the Florida Su
preme Court’s decision eliminated a right of accretion
established under Florida law.
Petitioner also contends that the State took the Mem
bers’ littoral right to have their property continually main
tain contact with the water. To be clear, petitioner does
not allege that the State relocated the property line, as
would have happened if the erosion-control line were
landward of the old mean high-water line (instead of
identical to it). Petitioner argues instead that the Mem
bers have a separate right for the boundary of their prop
erty to be always the mean high-water line. Petitioner
points to dicta in Sand Key that refers to “the right to have
the property’s contact with the water remain intact,” 512
So. 2d, at 936. Even there, the right was included in the
definition of the right to access, ibid., which is consistent
with the Florida Supreme Court’s later description that
“there is no independent right of contact with the water”
but it “exists to preserve the upland owner’s core littoral
right of access to the water,” 998 So. 2d, at 1119. Peti
tioner’s expansive interpretation of the dictum in Sand
Key would cause it to contradict the clear Florida law
governing avulsion. One cannot say that the Florida
Supreme Court contravened established property law by

