Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

the Court
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

whether a state-court decision rests upon adequate and
independent state grounds, placing it beyond our jurisdic
tion to review. See E. Gressman, K. Geller, S. Shapiro, T.
Bishop, & E. Hartnett, Supreme Court Practice, ch. 3.26,
p. 222 (9th ed. 2007). To assure that there is no “evasion”
of our authority to review federal questions, we insist that
the nonfederal ground of decision have “fair support.”
Broad River Power Co. v. South Carolina ex rel. Daniel,
281 U. S. 537, 540 (1930); see also Ward v. Board of
Comm’rs of Love Cty., 253 U. S. 17, 22–23 (1920). A test
designed to determine whether there has been an evasion
is not obviously appropriate for determining whether there
has been a taking of property. But if it is to be extended
there it must mean (in the present context) that there is a
“fair and substantial basis” for believing that petitioner’s
Members did not have a property right to future accretions
which the Act would take away. This is no different, we
think, from our requirement that petitioners’ Members
must prove the elimination of an established property
right.9
Next, respondents argue that federal courts lack the
knowledge of state law required to decide whether a judi
——————
9 JUSTICE BREYER complains that we do not set forth “procedural limi
tations or canons of deference” to restrict federal-court review of state
court property decisions. See post, at 2. (1) To the extent this is true it
is unsurprising, but (2) fundamentally, it is false: (1) It is true that we
make our own determination, without deference to state judges,
whether the challenged decision deprives the claimant of an established
property right. That is unsurprising because it is what this Court does
when determining state-court compliance with all constitutional
imperatives. We do not defer to the judgment of state judges in deter
mining whether, for example, a state-court decision has deprived a
defendant of due process or subjected him to double jeopardy. (2) The
test we have adopted, however (deprivation of an established property
right), contains within itself a considerable degree of deference to state
courts. A property right is not established if there is doubt about its
existence; and when there is doubt we do not make our own assessment
but accept the determination of the state court.

