Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

the Court
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

(1923); District of Columbia Court of Appeals v. Feldman,
460 U. S. 462, 476 (1983). That does not necessarily fol
low. The finality principles that we regularly apply to
takings claims, see Williamson County Regional Planning
Comm’n v. Hamilton Bank of Johnson City, 473 U. S. 172,
186–194 (1985), would require the claimant to appeal a
claimed taking by a lower court to the state supreme
court, whence certiorari would come to this Court. If
certiorari were denied, the claimant would no more be able
to launch a lower-court federal suit against the taking
effected by the state supreme-court opinion than he would
be able to launch such a suit against a legislative or execu
tive taking approved by the state supreme-court opinion;
the matter would be res judicata. And where the claimant
was not a party to the original suit, he would be able to
challenge in federal court the taking effected by the state
supreme-court opinion to the same extent that he would
be able to challenge in federal court a legislative or execu
tive taking previously approved by a state supreme-court
opinion.
For its part, petitioner proposes an unpredictability test.
Quoting Justice Stewart’s concurrence in Hughes v. Wash
ington, 389 U. S. 290, 296 (1967), petitioner argues that a
judicial taking consists of a decision that “ ‘constitutes a
sudden change in state law, unpredictable in terms of
relevant precedents.’ ” See Brief for Petitioner 17, 34–50.
The focus of petitioner’s test is misdirected. What counts
is not whether there is precedent for the allegedly confis
catory decision, but whether the property right allegedly
taken was established. A “predictability of change” test
would cover both too much and too little. Too much, be
cause a judicial property decision need not be predictable,
so long as it does not declare that what had been private
property under established law no longer is. A decision
that clarifies property entitlements (or the lack thereof)
that were previously unclear might be difficult to predict,

