14

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

the Court
Opinion of SCALIA, J. 


C
Like
JUSTICE
BREYER’s
concurrence,
JUSTICE
KENNEDY’s concludes that the Florida Supreme Court’s
action here does not meet the standard for a judicial tak
ing, while purporting not to determine what is the stan
dard for a judicial taking, or indeed whether such a thing
as a judicial taking even exists. That approach is invalid
for the reasons we have discussed.
JUSTICE KENNEDY says that we need not take what he
considers the bold and risky step of holding that the Tak
ings Clause applies to judicial action, because the Due
Process Clause “would likely prevent a State from doing
by judicial decree what the Takings Clause forbids it to do
by legislative fiat,” post, at 4–5 (opinion concurring in part
and concurring in judgment) (internal quotation marks
omitted). He invokes the Due Process Clause “in both its
substantive and procedural aspects,” post, at 3, not speci
fying which of his arguments relates to which.
The first respect in which JUSTICE KENNEDY thinks the
Due Process Clause can do the job seems to sound in
Procedural Due Process. Because, he says, “[c]ourts,
unlike the executive or legislature, are not designed to
make policy decisions” about expropriation, “[t]he Court
would be on strong footing in ruling that a judicial deci
sion that eliminates or substantially changes established
property rights” violates the Due Process Clause. Post, at
4. Let us be clear what is being proposed here. This Court
has held that the separation-of-powers principles that the
Constitution imposes upon the Federal Government do not
apply against the States. See Dreyer v. Illinois, 187 U. S.
71, 83–84 (1902). But in order to avoid the bold and risky
step of saying that the Takings Clause applies to all gov
ernment takings, JUSTICE KENNEDY would have us use
Procedural Due Process to impose judicially crafted sepa
ration-of-powers limitations upon the States: courts can
not be used to perform the governmental function of ex

