18

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

the Court
Opinion of SCALIA, J. 


contradictory statement that “courts cannot abandon
settled principles,” post, at 6. If no “settled principl[e]” has
been abandoned, it is hard to see how property law could
have been “change[d],” rather than merely clarified.
JUSTICE KENNEDY has added “two additional practical
considerations that the Court would need to address be
fore recognizing judicial takings,” post, at 7. One of them
is simple and simply answered: the assertion that “it is
unclear what remedy a reviewing court could enter after
finding a judicial taking,” post, at 8. JUSTICE KENNEDY
worries that we may only be able to mandate compensa
tion. That remedy is even rare for a legislative or execu
tive taking, and we see no reason why it would be the
exclusive remedy for a judicial taking. If we were to hold
that the Florida Supreme Court had effected an uncom
pensated taking in the present case, we would simply
reverse the Florida Supreme Court’s judgment that the
Beach and Shore Preservation Act can be applied to the
property in question. JUSTICE KENNEDY’s other point,
post, at 7–8—that we will have to decide when the claim of
a judicial taking must be asserted—hardly presents an
awe-inspiring prospect. These, and all the other “difficul
ties,” post, at 1, “difficult questions,” post, at 5, and “prac
tical considerations” post, at 7, that JUSTICE KENNEDY
worries may perhaps stand in the way of recognizing a
judicial taking, are either nonexistent or insignificant.
Finally, we cannot avoid comment upon JUSTICE
KENNEDY’s donning of the mantle of judicial restraint—
his assertion that it is we, and not he, who would empower
the courts and encourage their expropriation of private
property. He warns that if judges know that their action
is covered by the Takings Clause, they will issue “sweep
ing new rule[s] to adjust the rights of property owners,”
comfortable in the knowledge that their innovations will
be preserved upon payment by the State. Post, at 6. That
is quite impossible. As we have said, if we were to hold

