Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

the Court
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

effect, than merely applying the Takings Clause to judicial
action. And the third and last problem with using Sub
stantive Due Process is that either (1) it will not do all
that the Takings Clause does, or (2) if it does all that the
Takings Clause does, it will encounter the same supposed
difficulties that JUSTICE KENNEDY finds troublesome.
We do not grasp the relevance of JUSTICE KENNEDY’s
speculation, post, at 6, that the Framers did not envision
the Takings Clause would apply to judicial action. They
doubtless did not, since the Constitution was adopted in
an era when courts had no power to “change” the common
law. See 1 Blackstone 69–70 (1765); Rogers v. Tennessee,
532 U. S. 451, 472–478 (2001) (SCALIA, J., dissenting).
Where the text they adopted is clear, however (“nor shall
private property be taken for public use”), what counts is
not what they envisioned but what they wrote. Of course
even after courts, in the 19th century, did assume the
power to change the common law, it is not true that the
new “common-law tradition . . . allows for incremental
modifications to property law,” post, at 4, so that “owners
may reasonably expect or anticipate courts to make cer
tain changes in property law,” post, at 6. In the only sense
in which this could be relevant to what we are discussing,
that is an astounding statement. We are talking here
about judicial elimination of established private property
rights.
If that is indeed a “common-law tradition,”
JUSTICE KENNEDY ought to be able to provide a more solid
example for it than the only one he cites, post, at 5, a
state-court change (from “noxious” to “harmful”) of the test
for determining whether a neighbor’s vegetation is a tor
tious nuisance. Fancher v. Fagella, 274 Va. 549, 555–556,
650 S. E. 2d 519, 522 (2007). But perhaps he does not
really mean that it is a common-law tradition to eliminate
property rights, since he immediately follows his state
ment that “owners may reasonably expect or anticipate
courts to make certain changes in property law” with the

