20

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

the Court
Opinion of SCALIA, J. 


tive Due Process; but because Substantive Due Process is
such a wonderfully malleable concept, see, e.g., Lawrence
v. Texas, 539 U. S. 558, 562 (2003) (referring to “liberty of
the person both in its spatial and in its more transcendent
dimensions”), even a firm commitment to apply it would be
a firm commitment to nothing in particular. JUSTICE
KENNEDY’s desire to substitute Substantive Due Process
for the Takings Clause suggests, and the rest of what he
writes confirms, that what holds him back from giving the
Takings Clause its natural meaning is not the intrusive
ness of applying it to judicial action, but the definiteness of
doing so; not a concern to preserve the powers of the
States’ political branches, but a concern to preserve this
Court’s discretion to say that property may be taken, or
may not be taken, as in the Court’s view the circumstances
suggest. We must not say that we are bound by the Con
stitution never to sanction judicial elimination of clearly
established property rights. Where the power of this
Court is concerned, one must never say never. See, e.g.,
Vieth v. Jubelirer, 541 U. S. 267, 302–305 (2004) (plurality
opinion); Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain, 542 U. S. 692, 750–751
(2004) (SCALIA, J., concurring in part and concurring in
judgment). The great attraction of Substantive Due Proc
ess as a substitute for more specific constitutional guaran
tees is that it never means never—because it never means
anything precise.
III
Respondents put forward a number of arguments which
contradict, to a greater or lesser degree, the principle
discussed above, that the existence of a taking does not
depend upon the branch of government that effects it.
First, in a case claiming a judicial taking they would add
to our normal takings inquiry a requirement that the
court’s decision have no “fair and substantial basis.” This
is taken from our jurisprudence dealing with the question

