16

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

the Court
Opinion of SCALIA, J. 


edly pertain to that, as evidenced by his assertion that “[i]t
is . . . natural to read the Due Process Clause as limiting
the power of courts to eliminate or change established
property rights,” post, at 3, his endorsement of the propo
sition that the Due Process Clause imposes “limits on
government’s ability to diminish property values by regu
lation,” ibid., and his contention that “the Due Process
Clause would likely prevent a State from doing by judicial
decree what the Takings Clause forbids it to do by legisla
tive fiat,” post, at 4 (internal quotation marks omitted).
The first problem with using Substantive Due Process to
do the work of the Takings Clause is that we have held it
cannot be done. “Where a particular Amendment ‘pro
vides an explicit textual source of constitutional protec
tion’ against a particular sort of government behavior,
‘that Amendment, not the more generalized notion of
“substantive due process,” must be the guide for analyzing
these claims.’ ” Albright v. Oliver, 510 U. S. 266, 273
(1994) (four-Justice plurality opinion) (quoting Graham v.
Connor, 490 U. S. 386, 395 (1989)); see also 510 U. S., at
281 (KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment) (“I agree with
the plurality that an allegation of arrest without probable
cause must be analyzed under the Fourth Amendment
without reference to more general considerations of due
process”). The second problem is that we have held for
many years (logically or not) that the “liberties” protected
by Substantive Due Process do not include economic liber
ties. See, e.g., Lincoln Fed. Labor Union v. Northwestern
Iron & Metal Co., 335 U. S. 525, 536 (1949). JUSTICE
KENNEDY’s language (“If a judicial decision . . . eliminates
an established property right, the judgment could be set
aside as a deprivation of property without due process of
law,” post, at 3) propels us back to what is referred to
(usually deprecatingly) as “the Lochner era.” See Lochner
v. New York, 198 U. S 45, 56–58 (1905). That is a step of
much greater novelty, and much more unpredictable

