2

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Opinion of KENNEDY, J. 


The right of the property owner is subject, however, to
the rule that the government does have power to take
property for a public use, provided that it pays just com
pensation.
See First English Evangelical Lutheran
Church of Glendale v. County of Los Angeles, 482 U. S.
304, 314–315 (1987). This is a vast governmental power.
And typically, legislative bodies grant substantial discre
tion to executive officers to decide what property can be
taken for authorized projects and uses. As a result, if an
authorized executive agency or official decides that Black
acre is the right place for a fire station or Greenacre is the
best spot for a freeway interchange, then the weight and
authority of the State are used to take the property, even
against the wishes of the owner, who must be satisfied
with just compensation.
In the exercise of their duty to protect the fisc, both the
legislative and executive branches monitor, or should
monitor, the exercise of this substantial power. Those
branches are accountable in their political capacity for the
proper discharge of this obligation.
To enable officials to better exercise this great power in
a responsible way, some States allow their officials to take
a second look after property has been condemned and a
jury returns a verdict setting the amount of just compen
sation. See, e.g., Cal. Civ. Proc. Code Ann. §1268.510
(2007).
If the condemning authority, usually acting
through the executive, deems the compensation too high to
pay for the project, it can decide not to take the property
at all. The landowner is reimbursed for certain costs and
expenses of litigation and the property remains in his or
her hands. See, e.g., §1268.610(a).
This is just one aspect of the exercise of the power to
select what property to condemn and the responsibility to
ensure that the taking makes financial sense from the
State’s point of view. And, as a matter of custom and
practice, these are matters for the political branches—the

