(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR-

IDA DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTEC-

TION ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF FLORIDA
No. 08–1151. Argued December 2, 2009—Decided June 17, 2010
Florida owns in trust for the public the land permanently submerged
beneath navigable waters and the foreshore. The mean high-water
line is the ordinary boundary between private beachfront, or littoral
property, and state-owned land. Littoral owners have, inter alia,
rights to have access to the water, to use the water for certain pur
poses, to have an unobstructed view of the water, and to receive ac
cretions and relictions (collectively, accretions) to the littoral prop
erty. An accretion occurs gradually and imperceptibly, while a
sudden change is an avulsion. The littoral owner automatically takes
title to dry land added to his property by accretion. With avulsion,
however, the seaward boundary of littoral property remains what it
was: the mean high-water line before the event. Thus, when an avul
sion has added new land, the littoral owner has no right to subse
quent accretions, because the property abutting the water belongs to
the owner of the seabed (ordinarily the State).
Florida’s Beach and Shore Preservation Act establishes procedures
for depositing sand on eroded beaches (restoration) and maintaining
the deposited sand (nourishment). When such a project is under
taken, the State entity that holds title to the seabed sets a fixed “ero
sion control line” to replace the fluctuating mean high-water line as
the boundary between littoral and state property. Once the new line
is recorded, the common law ceases to apply. Thereafter, when accre
tion moves the mean high-water line seaward, the littoral property
remains bounded by the permanent erosion-control line.
Respondents the city of Destin and Walton County sought permits
to restore 6.9 miles of beach eroded by several hurricanes, adding
about 75 feet of dry sand seaward of the mean high-water line (to be

