Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

posture discussed above where Case A changes the law
and Case B addresses whether that change is a taking, it
is not clear how the Court, in Case B, could invalidate the
holding of Case A. If a single case were to properly ad
dress both a state court’s change in the law and whether
the change was a taking, the Court might be able to give
the state court a choice on how to proceed if there were a
judicial taking. The Court might be able to remand and
let the state court determine whether it wants to insist on
changing its property law and paying just compensation or
to rescind its holding that changed the law. Cf. First
English, 482 U. S., at 321 (“Once a court determines that a
taking has occurred, the government retains the whole
range of options already available—amendment of the
regulation, withdrawal of the invalidated regulation, or
exercise of eminent domain”). But that decision would
rest with the state court, not this Court; so the state court
could still force the State to pay just compensation. And
even if the state court decided to rescind its decision that
changed the law, a temporary taking would have occurred
in the interim. See ibid.
These difficult issues are some of the reasons why the
Court should not reach beyond the necessities of the case
to recognize a judicial takings doctrine. It is not wise,
from an institutional standpoint, to reach out and decide
questions that have not been discussed at much length by
courts and commentators. This Court’s dicta in William
son County, supra, at 194–197, regarding when regulatory
takings claims become ripe, explains why federal courts
have not been able to provide much analysis on the issue
of judicial takings. See San Remo Hotel, L. P. v. City and
County of San Francisco, 545 U. S. 323, 351 (2005)
(Rehnquist, C. J., concurring in judgment) (“Williamson
County’s state-litigation rule has created some real
anomalies, justifying our revisiting the issue”). Until
Williamson County is reconsidered, litigants will have to

