6

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Opinion of KENNEDY, J. 


modification under state common law that does not violate
due process, as owners may reasonably expect or antici
pate courts to make certain changes in property law. The
usual due process constraint is that courts cannot abandon
settled principles. See, e.g., Rogers v. Tennessee, 532 U. S.
451, 457 (2001) (citing Bouie v. City of Columbia, 378 U. S.
347, 354 (1964)); Apfel, 524 U. S., at 548–549 (opinion of
KENNEDY, J.); see also Perry, supra, at 601; Roth, supra,
at 577.
But if the state court were deemed to be exercising the
power to take property, that constraint would be removed.
Because the State would be bound to pay owners for tak
ings caused by a judicial decision, it is conceivable that
some judges might decide that enacting a sweeping new
rule to adjust the rights of property owners in the context
of changing social needs is a good idea. Knowing that the
resulting ruling would be a taking, the courts could go
ahead with their project, free from constraints that would
otherwise confine their power. The resulting judgment as
between the property owners likely could not be set aside
by some later enactment. See Plaut v. Spendthrift Farm,
Inc., 514 U. S. 211, 217 (1995) (leaving open whether
legislation reopening final judgments violates Due Process
Clause). And if the litigation were a class action to decide,
for instance, whether there are public rights of access that
diminish the rights of private ownership, a State might
find itself obligated to pay a substantial judgment for the
judicial ruling. Even if the legislature were to subse
quently rescind the judicial decision by statute, the State
would still have to pay just compensation for the tempo
rary taking that occurred from the time of the judicial
decision to the time of the statutory fix. See First English,
482 U. S., at 321.
The idea, then, that a judicial takings doctrine would
constrain judges might just well have the opposite effect.
It would give judges new power and new assurance that

