2

STOP THE BEACH RENOURISHMENT, INC. v. FLOR- 

IDA DEPT. OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

Syllabus 

denominated the erosion-control line). Petitioner, a nonprofit corpo
ration formed by owners of beachfront property bordering the project
(hereinafter Members) brought an unsuccessful administrative chal
lenge. Respondent the Florida Department of Environmental Protec
tion approved the permits, and this suit followed. The State Court of
Appeal concluded that the Department’s order had eliminated the
Members’ littoral rights (1) to receive accretions to their property and
(2) to have their property’s contact with the water remain intact.
Concluding that this would be an unconstitutional taking and would
require an additional administrative requirement to be met, it set
aside the order, remanded the proceeding, and certified to the Florida
Supreme Court the question whether the Act unconstitutionally de
prived the Members of littoral rights without just compensation. The
State Supreme Court answered “no” and quashed the remand, con
cluding that the Members did not own the property supposedly
taken. Petitioner sought rehearing on the ground that the Florida
Supreme Court’s decision effected a taking of the Members’ littoral
rights contrary to the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments; rehearing
was denied.

Held: The judgment is affirmed.
998 So. 2d 1102, affirmed.
JUSTICE SCALIA delivered the opinion of the Court with respect to
Parts I, IV, and V, concluding that the Florida Supreme Court did not
take property without just compensation in violation of the Fifth and
Fourteenth Amendments. Pp. 24–29.
(a) Respondents’ arguments that petitioner does not own the prop
erty and that the case is not ripe were not raised in the briefs in op
position and thus are deemed waived. Pp. 24–25.
(b) There can be no taking unless petitioner can show that, before
the Florida Supreme Court’s decision, littoral property owners had
rights to future accretions and to contact with the water superior to
the State’s right to fill in its submerged land. That showing cannot
be made. Two core Florida property-law principles intersect here.
First, the State as owner of the submerged land adjacent to littoral
property has the right to fill that land, so long as it does not interfere
with the rights of the public and of littoral landowners. Second, if an
avulsion exposes land seaward of littoral property that had previ
ously been submerged, that land belongs to the State even if it inter
rupts the littoral owner’s contact with the water. Prior Florida law
suggests that there is no exception to this rule when the State causes
the avulsion. Thus, Florida law as it stood before the decision below
allowed the State to fill in its own seabed, and the resulting sudden
exposure of previously submerged land was treated like an avulsion
for ownership purposes. The right to accretions was therefore subor

