Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

the Court
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

that the Florida Supreme Court had effected an uncom
pensated taking in this case, we would not validate the
taking by ordering Florida to pay compensation. We
would simply reverse the Florida Supreme Court’s judg
ment that the Beach and Shore Preservation Act can be
applied to the Members’ property. The power to effect a
compensated taking would then reside, where it has al
ways resided, not in the Florida Supreme Court but in the
Florida Legislature—which could either provide compen
sation or acquiesce in the invalidity of the offending fea
tures of the Act. Cf. Davis v. Michigan Dept. of Treasury,
489 U. S. 803, 817–818 (1989). The only realistic incentive
that subjection to the Takings Clause might provide to any
court would be the incentive to get reversed, which in our
experience few judges value.
JUSTICE KENNEDY, however, while dismissive of the
Takings Clause, places no other constraints on judicial
action. He puts forward some extremely vague applica
tions of Substantive Due Process, and does not even say
that they (whatever they are) will for sure apply. (“It is
thus natural to read the Due Process Clause as limiting
the power of courts to eliminate or change established
property rights,” post, at 3; “courts . . . may not have the
power to eliminate established property rights by judicial
decision,” post, at 4; “the Due Process Clause would likely
prevent a State from doing by judicial decree what the
Takings Clause forbids it to do by legislative fiat,” post, at
4–5 (internal quotation marks omitted); we must defer
applying the Takings Clause until “[i]f and when future
cases show that the usual principles, including constitu
tional principles that constrain the judiciary like due
process, are somehow inadequate to protect property
owners,” post, at 10.)
Moreover, and more importantly, JUSTICE KENNEDY
places no constraints whatever upon this Court. Not only
does his concurrence only think about applying Substan

