Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

not limited to, issuing oral warnings and placing warnings
in advertisements, posters, and media releases”). Neither
step would encroach on the pre-empted field of locomo­
tives’ “physical elements.” Napier, 272 U. S., at 612. The
majority is therefore wrong to say that “the ‘gravamen’ of
petitioners’ failure-to-warn claims ‘is still that [Corson]
suffered harmful consequences as a result of his exposure
to asbestos contained in locomotive parts and appurte­
nances.’ ” Ante, at 8–9 (quoting Kurns v. A. W. Chesteron,
Inc., 620 F. 3d 392, 398, n. 8 (CA3 2010)). Rather, the
“gravamen” of these claims is that petitioners’ decedent
George Corson could have avoided the harmful conse­
quences of exposure to asbestos while repairing precisely
the same locomotive parts had respondents cautioned him,
for example, to wear a mask.
Finally, preserving petitioners’ failure-to-warn claims
coheres with the LIA’s regulatory regime. Neither the
Interstate Commerce Commission, to which Congress first
delegated authority under the LIA, nor the Federal Rail­
road Administration (FRA), to whom that authority now
belongs, has ever regulated locomotive repair and mainte­
nance. To the contrary, the FRA takes the position that it
lacks power under the LIA to regulate within locomotive
maintenance and repair facilities. Brief for United States
as Amicus Curiae in John Crane, Inc. v. Atwell, O. T.
2010, No. 10–272, p. 10 (“[T]he field covered by the LIA
does not include requirements concerning the repair of
locomotives that are not in use”); Brief for United States
as Amicus Curiae 13 (“The preempted field . . . does not
include tort claims based on injuries arising when locomo­
tives are not in use”). The FRA has determined that the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, not itself,
bears primary responsibility for workplace safety, includ­
ing with respect to hazardous materials. 43 Fed. Reg.
10583–10590 (1978); cf., e.g., English, 496 U. S., at 83, and
n. 6. And the FRA has not promulgated regulations that

