2

KURNS v. RAILROAD FRICTION PRODUCTS CORP.
KAGAN, J., concurring

they fell “within the scope of the authority delegated to the
Commission”); see also ante, at 5 (the “ ‘broad scope of the
authority’ ” given to the agency “led to [Napier’s] conclusion”); post, at 7–8 (“[T]he pre-empted field is congruent
with the regulated field”). And under that test, none of
the state-law claims at issue here can survive.
All of us agree that the petitioners’ defective-design
claims are preempted. Napier recognized the federal
agency’s delegated authority over “the design, the construction and the material of every part of the locomotive.”
272 U. S., at 611. In doing so, Napier did not distinguish
between “hazards arising from repair and maintenance” of
the parts and hazards stemming from their “use on the
line.” Ante, at 7. The agency thus has authority to regulate the design of locomotive equipment—like the asbetoscontaining brakeshoes here—to prevent either danger.
And that fact resolves the preemption question. Because
the agency could have banned use of the brakeshoes as
designed, the petitioners’ defective-design claims—which
would effectively accomplish the identical result—fall
within the preempted field.
So too the petitioners’ failure-to-warn claims, and for
the same reason. Napier did not specifically address
warnings, because the case in no way involved them. But
if an agency has the power to prohibit the use of locomotive equipment, it also has the power to condition the use
of that equipment on proper warnings. (And that is so,
contrary to JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s view, see post, at 8, n. 3,
whether the warning is engraved into the part itself or
posted on the workshop wall.) Here, for example, the
agency need not have chosen between banning asbestoscontaining brakeshoes and leaving them entirely unregulated. It could instead have required a warning about how
to handle those brakeshoes safely. If, say, a mask would
have protected a worker from risk, then the agency could
have demanded a notice to that effect. See, e.g., Law v.

