Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

Comment l). That may be true at a high level of generality, but “[d]esign and failure-to-warn claims . . . rest on
different factual allegations and distinct legal concepts.”
Restatement §2, at 35, Comment n. For example, a manu­
facturer or seller cannot escape liability for an unreasona­
bly unsafe design merely by issuing a warning. See id., at
33, Comment l (“Warnings are not . . . a substitute for the
provision of a reasonably safe design”). In a fundamental
sense, therefore, a failure-to-warn claim proceeds by tak­
ing a product’s physical design as a given. A failure-to­
warn claim alleges a “defect” by asserting that a product,
as designed, is safe for use only when accompanied by a
warning—not that a product must be designed differently.
The majority further conflates defective-design and
failure-to-warn claims by noting that each is “directed at”
locomotive equipment. Ante, at 9. That is insufficient.
Not every state law that “could be said to affect tangen­
tially” matters within the regulated field is pre-empted.
English v. General Elec. Co., 496 U. S. 72, 85 (1990).
Rather, “for a state law to fall within the pre-empted zone,
it must have some direct and substantial effect” on the
primary conduct of entities subject to federal regulation.
Ibid. As explained above, the LIA regulates the physical
equipment of locomotives. But petitioners’ failure-to-warn
claims, if successful, would have no necessary effect on the
physical equipment of locomotives at all, as respondents
themselves acknowledge. See Brief for Respondents 55
(petitioners’ failure-to-warn claims “may not themselves
literally mandate physical alteration of the locomotive’s
design or construction”).
In the majority’s view, a “duty to warn and the accom­
panying threat of liability will inevitably influence” a
manufacturer’s design choices. Ante, at 9, n. 4. But an
“influence” is not the same as an “effect,” and not every
state law with some imaginable impact on matters within
a federally regulated field is, for that reason alone, pre­

