4

KURNS v. RAILROAD FRICTION PRODUCTS CORP.
Opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.

(“In products liability suits based upon strict liability, . . .
the product itself need not be defective. Where a manufac­
turer or seller has reason to anticipate that danger may
result from a particular use of his product, and he fails to
give adequate warning of such a danger, the product sold
without such warning is in a defective condition within
the strict liability doctrine”); Greiner v. Volkswagenwerk
Aktiengeselleschaft, 540 F. 2d 85, 92–93 (CA3 1976) (find­
ing that “failure to adequately warn of inherent or latent
limitations in a product, which do not necessarily amount
to a design defect” is “an independent basis of liability”
under Pennsylvania law).2
Similarly, this Court has explained that a failure-to­
warn claim is “narrower” than a claim that alleges a defect
in the underlying product. Wyeth v. Levine, 555 U. S. 555,
565 (2009). Thus in Wyeth, this Court affirmed a state
damages award based on a drug manufacturer’s failure to
provide sufficient warnings to clinicians against intrave­
nous administration of the drug, but noted that it was
unnecessary to decide “whether a state rule proscribing
intravenous administration would be pre-empted.” Ibid.
Cf. Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC, 544 U. S. 431, 444
(2005) (“Rules that require manufacturers to design rea­
sonably safe products . . . plainly do not qualify as re­
quirements for ‘labeling or packaging.’ None of these
common-law rules requires that manufacturers label or
package their products in any particular way”).
The majority treats defective-design and failure-to-warn
claims as congruent, reasoning that each asserts a product
defect. See ante, at 8–9 (citing Restatement §2(c) and
——————
2 Petitioners brought suit in Pennsylvania, but alleged that their
decedent, George Corson, was exposed to asbestos at railroad mainte­
nance and repair shops in Montana and South Dakota. Id., at 42, ¶¶6–
7. Because the District Court granted summary judgment on the issue
of pre-emption, it performed no choice-of-law analysis to identify the
applicable substantive state law. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 22a–39a.

