2

KURNS v. RAILROAD FRICTION PRODUCTS CORP.
Syllabus
an express pre-emption provision, state law must yield to a congressional Act to the extent of any conflict with a federal statute, see
Crosby v. National Foreign Trade Council, 530 U. S. 363, 372, or
when the federal statute’s scope indicates that Congress intended
federal law to occupy a field exclusively, see Freightliner Corp. v. Myrick, 514 U. S. 280, 287. This case involves only the latter, so-called
“field pre-emption.” Pp. 3–4.
(c) In Napier, this Court held two state laws prescribing the use of
locomotive equipment pre-empted by the LIA, concluding that the
broad power conferred by the LIA on the Interstate Commerce Commission (the agency then vested with authority to carry out the LIA’s
requirements) was a “general one” that “extends to the design, the
construction and the material of every part of the locomotive and
tender and of all appurtenances.” 272 U. S., at 611. The Court rejected the States’ contention that the scope of the pre-empted field
was to “be determined by the object sought through legislation, rather than the physical elements affected by it,” id., at 612, and found
it dispositive that “[t]he federal and state statutes are directed to the
same subject―the equipment of locomotives.” Ibid. Pp. 4−5.
(d) The Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (FRSA) did not alter
the LIA’s pre-emptive scope. By its terms, the FRSA—which instructs that “[t]he Secretary of Transportation . . . shall prescribe
regulations and issue orders for every area of railroad safety supplementing laws and regulations in effect on October 16, 1970,” 49
U. S. C. §20103(a)—does not alter pre-existing federal railroad safety
statutes. Rather, it leaves those statutes intact and authorizes the
Secretary to fill interstitial areas of railroad safety with supplemental regulation. Because the LIA was already in effect when the
FRSA was enacted, the FRSA left the LIA, and its pre-emptive scope
as defined by Napier, intact. P. 6.
(e) Petitioners do not argue that Napier should be overruled. Instead, petitioners contend that their claims fall outside the LIA’s
pre-empted field, as it was defined in Napier. Petitioners’ arguments
are unpersuasive. First, the argument that the pre-empted field
does not extend to state-law claims arising from the repair or
maintenance of locomotives is inconsistent with Napier’s holding
that Congress, in enacting the LIA, “manifest[ed] the intention to occupy the entire field of regulating locomotive equipment.” 272 U. S.,
at 611. Second, the argument that petitioners’ failure-to-warn
claims are not pre-empted because they do not base liability on the
design or manufacture of a product ignores that a failure-to-warn
claim alleges that the product itself is defective unless accompanied
by sufficient warnings or instructions. Because petitioners’ failureto-warn claims are therefore directed at the equipment of locomo-

