2

STERN v. MARSHALL
Syllabus
Bankruptcy Court lacked jurisdiction to enter a final judgment on
that counterclaim because it was not a “core proceeding” as defined
by 28 U. S. C. §157(b)(2)(C). As set forth in §157(a), Congress has di
vided bankruptcy proceedings into three categories: those that
“aris[e] under title 11”; those that “aris[e] in” a Title 11 case; and
those that are “related to a case under title 11.” District courts may
refer all such proceedings to the bankruptcy judges of their district,
and bankruptcy courts may enter final judgments in “all core pro
ceedings arising under title 11, or arising in a case under title 11.”
§§157(a), (b)(1). In non-core proceedings, by contrast, a bankruptcy
judge may only “submit proposed findings of fact and conclusions of
law to the district court.” §157(c)(1). Section 157(b)(2) lists 16 cate
gories of core proceedings, including “counterclaims by the estate
against persons filing claims against the estate.” §157(b)(2)(C).
The Bankruptcy Court concluded that Vickie’s counterclaim was a
core proceeding. The District Court reversed, reading this Court’s
precedent in Northern Pipeline Constr. Co. v. Marathon Pipe Line
Co., 458 U. S. 50, to “suggest[ ] that it would be unconstitutional to
hold that any and all counterclaims are core.” The court held that
Vickie’s counterclaim was not core because it was only somewhat re
lated to Pierce’s claim, and it accordingly treated the Bankruptcy
Court’s judgment as proposed, not final. Although the Texas state
court had by that time conducted a jury trial on the merits of the par
ties’ dispute and entered a judgment in Pierce’s favor, the District
Court went on to decide the matter itself, in Vickie’s favor. The
Court of Appeals ultimately reversed. It held that the Bankruptcy
Court lacked authority to enter final judgment on Vickie’s counter
claim because the claim was not “so closely related to [Pierce’s] proof
of claim that the resolution of the counterclaim is necessary to re
solve the allowance or disallowance of the claim itself.” Because that
holding made the Texas probate court’s judgment the earliest final
judgment on matters relevant to the case, the Court of Appeals held
that the District Court should have given the state judgment preclu
sive effect.

Held: Although the Bankruptcy Court had the statutory authority to
enter judgment on Vickie’s counterclaim, it lacked the constitutional
authority to do so. Pp. 6–38.
1. Section 157(b) authorized the Bankruptcy Court to enter final
judgment on Vickie’s counterclaim. Pp. 8–16.
(a) The Bankruptcy Court had the statutory authority to enter
final judgment on Vickie’s counterclaim as a core proceeding under
§157(b)(2)(C). Pierce argues that §157(b) authorizes bankruptcy
courts to enter final judgments only in those proceedings that are
both core and either arise in a Title 11 case or arise under Title 11 it

