30

STERN v. MARSHALL
Opinion of the Court

We do not agree. As an initial matter, it is hard to see
why Pierce’s decision to file a claim should make any
difference with respect to the characterization of Vickie’s
counterclaim. “ ‘[P]roperty interests are created and de­
fined by state law,’ and ‘[u]nless some federal interest
requires a different result, there is no reason why such
interests should be analyzed differently simply because an
interested party is involved in a bankruptcy proceeding.”
Travelers Casualty & Surety Co. of America v. Pacific Gas
& Elec. Co., 549 U. S. 443, 451 (2007) (quoting Butner v.
United States, 440 U. S. 48, 55 (1979)). Pierce’s claim for
defamation in no way affects the nature of Vickie’s coun­
terclaim for tortious interference as one at common law
that simply attempts to augment the bankruptcy estate—
the very type of claim that we held in Northern Pipeline
and Granfinanciera must be decided by an Article III court.
Contrary to Vickie’s contention, moreover, our decisions
in Katchen and Langenkamp do not suggest a different
result. Katchen permitted a bankruptcy referee acting
under the Bankruptcy Acts of 1898 and 1938 (akin to a
bankruptcy court today) to exercise what was known as
“summary jurisdiction” over a voidable preference claim
brought by the bankruptcy trustee against a creditor who
had filed a proof of claim in the bankruptcy proceeding.
See 382 U. S., at 325, 327–328. A voidable preference
claim asserts that a debtor made a payment to a particu­
lar creditor in anticipation of bankruptcy, to in effect
increase that creditor’s proportionate share of the estate.
The preferred creditor’s claim in bankruptcy can be disal­
lowed as a result of the preference, and the amounts paid
to that creditor can be recovered by the trustee. See id., at
330; see also 11 U. S. C. §§502(d), 547(b).
Although the creditor in Katchen objected that the
preference issue should be resolved through a “plenary
suit” in an Article III court, this Court concluded that
summary adjudication in bankruptcy was appropriate,

