2

STERN v. MARSHALL
SCALIA, J., concurring

never any reason to believe that the process of adjudi
cating Pierce’s proof of claim would necessarily resolve
Vickie’s counterclaim,” ante, at 32; that the trustee was
not “asserting a right of recovery created by federal bank
ruptcy law,” ante, at 33; and that the Bankruptcy Judge
“ha[d] the power to enter ‘appropriate orders and judg
ments’—including final judgments—subject to review only
if a party chooses to appeal,” ante, at 35.
Apart from their sheer numerosity, the more fundamen
tal flaw in the many tests suggested by our jurisprudence
is that they have nothing to do with the text or tradition of
Article III. For example, Article III gives no indication
that state-law claims have preferential entitlement to an
Article III judge; nor does it make pertinent the extent to
which the area of the law is “particularized.” The multi
factors relied upon today seem to have entered our juris
prudence almost randomly.
Leaving aside certain adjudications by federal adminis
trative agencies, which are governed (for better or worse)
by our landmark decision in Crowell v. Benson, 285 U. S.
22 (1932), in my view an Article III judge is required in all
federal adjudications, unless there is a firmly established
historical practice to the contrary. For that reason—and
not because of some intuitive balancing of benefits and
harms—I agree that Article III judges are not required in
the context of territorial courts, courts-martial, or true
“public rights” cases. See Northern Pipeline Constr. Co. v.
Marathon Pipe Line Co., 458 U. S. 50, 71 (1982) (plurality
opinion). Perhaps historical practice permits non-Article
III judges to process claims against the bankruptcy estate,
see, e.g., Plank, Why Bankruptcy Judges Need Not and
Should Not Be Article III Judges, 72 Am. Bankr. L. J. 567,
607–609 (1998); the subject has not been briefed, and so I
state no position on the matter. But Vickie points to no
historical practice that authorizes a non-Article III judge
to adjudicate a counterclaim of the sort at issue here.

