8

STERN v. MARSHALL
Opinion of the Court

bankruptcy court in core proceedings to the district court,
which reviews them under traditional appellate stan­
dards. See §158(a); Fed. Rule Bkrtcy. Proc. 8013.
When a bankruptcy judge determines that a referred “pro­
ceeding . . . is not a core proceeding but . . . is otherwise related to a case under title 11,” the judge may only
“submit proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law
to the district court.” §157(c)(1). It is the district court
that enters final judgment in such cases after reviewing de
novo any matter to which a party objects. Ibid.
B
Vickie’s counterclaim against Pierce for tortious inter­
ference is a “core proceeding” under the plain text of
§157(b)(2)(C). That provision specifies that core proceed­
ings include “counterclaims by the estate against persons
filing claims against the estate.” In past cases, we have
suggested that a proceeding’s “core” status alone author­
izes a bankruptcy judge, as a statutory matter, to enter
——————
“(E) orders to turn over property of the estate;
“(F) proceedings to determine, avoid, or recover preferences;
“(G) motions to terminate, annul, or modify the automatic stay;
“(H) proceedings to determine, avoid, or recover fraudulent convey­
ances;
“(I) determinations as to the dischargeability of particular debts;
“(J) objections to discharges;
“(K) determinations of the validity, extent, or priority of liens;
“(L) confirmations of plans;
“(M) orders approving the use or lease of property, including the use
of cash collateral;
“(N) orders approving the sale of property other than property result­
ing from claims brought by the estate against persons who have not
filed claims against the estate;
“(O) other proceedings affecting the liquidation of the assets of the
estate or the adjustment of the debtor-creditor or the equity security
holder relationship, except personal injury tort or wrongful death
claims; and
“(P) recognition of foreign proceedings and other matters under
chapter 15 of title 11.”

