4

STERN v. MARSHALL
Syllabus
Id., at 69–72; see id., at 90–91 (Rehnquist, J., concurring in judg
ment). After the decision in Northern Pipeline, Congress revised the
statutes governing bankruptcy jurisdiction and bankruptcy judges.
With respect to the “core” proceedings listed in §157(b)(2), however,
the bankruptcy courts under the Bankruptcy Amendments and Fed
eral Judgeship Act of 1984 exercise the same powers they wielded
under the 1978 Act. The authority exercised by the newly consti
tuted courts over a counterclaim such as Vickie’s exceeds the bounds
of Article III. Pp. 16–22.
(b) Vickie’s counterclaim does not fall within the public rights ex
ception, however defined. The Court has long recognized that, in
general, Congress may not “withdraw from judicial cognizance any
matter which, from its nature, is the subject of a suit at the common
law, or in equity, or admiralty.” Murray’s Lessee v. Hoboken Land &
Improvement Co., 18 How. 272, 284. The Court has also recognized
that “[a]t the same time there are matters, involving public rights,
. . . which are susceptible of judicial determination, but which con
gress may or may not bring within the cognizance of the courts of the
United States, as it may deem proper.” Ibid. Several previous deci
sions have contrasted cases within the reach of the public rights ex
ception—those arising “between the Government and persons subject
to its authority in connection with the performance of the constitu
tional functions of the executive or legislative departments”—and
those that are instead matters “of private right, that is, of the liabil
ity of one individual to another under the law as defined.” Crowell v.
Benson, 285 U. S. 22, 50, 51.
Shortly after Northern Pipeline, the Court rejected the limitation of
the public rights exception to actions involving the Government as a
party. The Court has continued, however, to limit the exception to
cases in which the claim at issue derives from a federal regulatory
scheme, or in which resolution of the claim by an expert Government
agency is deemed essential to a limited regulatory objective within
the agency’s authority. In other words, it is still the case that what
makes a right “public” rather than private is that the right is inte
grally related to particular Federal Government action. See United
States v. Jicarilla Apache Nation, 564 U. S. ___, ___–___ (slip op., at
10–11); Thomas v. Union Carbide Agricultural Products Co., 473
U. S. 568, 584; Commodity Futures Trading Commission v. Schor,
478 U. S. 833, 844, 856.
In Granfinanciera, S. A. v. Nordberg, 492 U. S. 33, the most recent
case considering the public rights exception, the Court rejected a
bankruptcy trustee’s argument that a fraudulent conveyance action
filed on behalf of a bankruptcy estate against a noncreditor in a
bankruptcy proceeding fell within the exception. Vickie’s counter

