24

STERN v. MARSHALL
Opinion of the Court

tional Safety and Health Review Comm’n, 430 U. S. 442,
458 (1977) (Exception extends to cases “where the Gov­
ernment is involved in its sovereign capacity under . . . [a]
statute creating enforceable public rights,” while “[w]holly
private tort, contract, and property cases, as well as a vast
range of other cases . . . are not at all implicated”); Ex
parte Bakelite Corp., 279 U. S. 438, 451–452 (1929). See
also Northern Pipeline, supra, at 68 (plurality opinion)
(citing Ex parte Bakelite Corp. for the proposition that the
doctrine extended “only to matters that historically could
have been determined exclusively by” the Executive and
Legislative Branches).
Shortly after Northern Pipeline, the Court rejected the
——————
private dispute before it could be determined by a non-Article III
tribunal in the first instance, subject to judicial review, the Court did so
only after observing that the administrative adjudicator had only
limited authority to make specialized, narrowly confined factual deter­
minations regarding a particularized area of law and to issue orders
that could be enforced only by action of the District Court. 285 U. S., at
38, 44–45, 54; see Northern Pipeline Constr. Co. v. Marathon Pipe Line
Co., 458 U. S. 50, 78 (1982) (plurality opinion). In other words, the
agency in Crowell functioned as a true “adjunct” of the District Court.
That is not the case here. See infra, at 34–36.
Although the dissent suggests that we understate the import of
Crowell in this regard, the dissent itself recognizes—repeatedly—that
Crowell by its terms addresses the determination of facts outside
Article III. See post, at 4 (Crowell “upheld Congress’ delegation of
primary factfinding authority to the agency”); post, at 12 (quoting
Crowell, 285 U. S., at 51, for the proposition that “ ‘there is no require­
ment that, in order to maintain the essential attributes of the judicial
power, all determinations of fact in constitutional courts shall be made
by judges’ ”). Crowell may well have additional significance in the
context of expert administrative agencies that oversee particular
substantive federal regimes, but we have no occasion to and do not
address those issues today. See infra, at 29. The United States appar­
ently agrees that any broader significance of Crowell is not pertinent in
this case, citing to Crowell in its brief only once, in the last footnote,
again for the limited proposition discussed above. Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 32, n. 5.

