Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

BREYER, J., dissenting

ing jurisdiction of the parties to controversies brought
before them,” “decid[ing] all matters in dispute,” and
“decree[ing] complete relief.” Katchen v. Landy, 382 U. S.
323, 335 (1966) (internal quotation marks omitted).
The restructuring process requires a creditor to file a
proof of claim in the bankruptcy court. 11 U. S. C. §501;
Fed. Rule Bkrtcy. Proc. 3002(a). In doing so, the creditor
“triggers the process of ‘allowance and disallowance of
claims,’ thereby subjecting himself to the bankruptcy
court’s equitable power.” Langenkamp, supra, at 44 (quot­
ing Granfinanciera, supra, at 58). By filing a proof of
claim, the creditor agrees to the bankruptcy court’s resolu­
tion of that claim, and if the creditor wins, the creditor will
receive a share of the distribution of the bankruptcy es­
tate. When the bankruptcy estate has a related claim
against that creditor, that counterclaim may offset the
creditor’s claim, or even yield additional damages that
augment the estate and may be distributed to the other
creditors.
The consequent importance to the total bankruptcy
scheme of permitting the trustee in bankruptcy to assert
counterclaims against claimants, and resolving those
counterclaims in a bankruptcy court, is reflected in the
fact that Congress included “counterclaims by the estate
against persons filing claims against the estate” on its list
of “[c]ore proceedings.” 28 U. S. C. §157(b)(2)(C). And it
explains the difference, reflected in this Court’s opinions,
between a claimant’s and a nonclaimant’s constitutional
right to a jury trial. Compare Granfinanciera, supra, at
58–59 (“Because petitioners . . . have not filed claims
against the estate” they retain “their Seventh Amendment
right to a trial by jury”), with Langenkamp, supra, at 45
(“Respondents filed claims against the bankruptcy estate”
and “[c]onsequently, they were not entitled to a jury
trial”).
Consequently a bankruptcy court’s determination of

