Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

25

Opinion of the Court

limitation of the public rights exception to actions involv­
ing the Government as a party. The Court has continued,
however, to limit the exception to cases in which the claim
at issue derives from a federal regulatory scheme, or in
which resolution of the claim by an expert government
agency is deemed essential to a limited regulatory objec­
tive within the agency’s authority. In other words, it is
still the case that what makes a right “public” rather than
private is that the right is integrally related to particular
federal government action. See United States v. Jicarilla
Apache Nation, 564 U. S. ___, ___–___ (2011) (slip op., at
10–11) (“The distinction between ‘public rights’ against
the Government and ‘private rights’ between private
parties is well established,” citing Murray’s Lessee and
Crowell).
Our decision in Thomas v. Union Carbide Agricultural
Products Co., for example, involved a data-sharing ar­
rangement between companies under a federal statute pro­
viding that disputes about compensation between the
companies would be decided by binding arbitration. 473
U. S. 568, 571–575 (1985). This Court held that the
scheme did not violate Article III, explaining that “[a]ny
right to compensation . . . results from [the statute] and
does not depend on or replace a right to such compensa­
tion under state law.” Id., at 584.
Commodity Futures Trading Commission v. Schor con­
cerned a statutory scheme that created a procedure for
customers injured by a broker’s violation of the federal
commodities law to seek reparations from the broker
before the Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(CFTC). 478 U. S. 833, 836 (1986). A customer filed such
a claim to recover a debit balance in his account, while the
broker filed a lawsuit in Federal District Court to recover
the same amount as lawfully due from the customer. The
broker later submitted its claim to the CFTC, but after
that agency ruled against the customer, the customer

