32

STERN v. MARSHALL
Opinion of the Court

proof of claim, the trustee’s preference action does not
“become[ ] part of the claims-allowance process” subject to
resolution by the bankruptcy court. Ibid.; see id., at 45.
In ruling on Vickie’s counterclaim, the Bankruptcy
Court was required to and did make several factual and
legal determinations that were not “disposed of in passing on objections” to Pierce’s proof of claim for defamation, which the court had denied almost a year earlier.
Katchen, supra, at 332, n. 9. There was some overlap
between Vickie’s counterclaim and Pierce’s defamation
claim that led the courts below to conclude that the coun­
terclaim was compulsory, 600 F. 3d, at 1057, or at least in
an “attenuated” sense related to Pierce’s claim, 264 B. R.,
at 631. But there was never any reason to believe that the
process of adjudicating Pierce’s proof of claim would neces­
sarily resolve Vickie’s counterclaim. See id., at 631, 632
(explaining that “the primary facts at issue on Pierce’s
claim were the relationship between Vickie and her attor­
neys and her knowledge or approval of their statements,”
and “the counterclaim raises issues of law entirely dif­
ferent from those raise[d] on the defamation claim”). The
United States acknowledges the point. See Brief for
United States as Amicus Curiae, p. (I) (question presented
concerns authority of a bankruptcy court to enter final
judgment on a compulsory counterclaim “when adjudica­
tion of the counterclaim requires resolution of issues that
are not implicated by the claim against the estate”); id.,
at 26.
The only overlap between the two claims in this case
was the question whether Pierce had in fact tortiously
taken control of his father’s estate in the manner alleged
by Vickie in her counterclaim and described in the alleg­
edly defamatory statements. From the outset, it was clear
that, even assuming the Bankruptcy Court would (as it
did) rule in Vickie’s favor on that question, the court could
not enter judgment for Vickie unless the court additionally

