14

STERN v. MARSHALL
Opinion of the Court

Section 157(b)(5) does not have the hallmarks of a juris­
dictional decree. To begin, the statutory text does not
refer to either district court or bankruptcy court “jurisdic­
tion,” instead addressing only where personal injury tort
claims “shall be tried.”
The statutory context also belies Pierce’s jurisdictional
claim. Section 157 allocates the authority to enter final
judgment between the bankruptcy court and the district
court. See §§157(b)(1), (c)(1). That allocation does not
implicate questions of subject matter jurisdiction. See
§157(c)(2) (parties may consent to entry of final judgment
by bankruptcy judge in non-core case).
By the same
token, §157(b)(5) simply specifies where a particular cate­
gory of cases should be tried. Pierce does not explain why
that statutory limitation may not be similarly waived.
We agree with Vickie that Pierce not only could but did
consent to the Bankruptcy Court’s resolution of his defa­
mation claim. Before the Bankruptcy Court, Vickie ob­
jected to Pierce’s proof of claim for defamation, arguing
that Pierce’s claim was unenforceable and that Pierce
should not receive any amount for it. See 29 Court of
Appeals Supplemental Excerpts of Record 6031, 6035
(hereinafter Supplemental Record). Vickie also noted
that the Bankruptcy Court could defer ruling on her objec­
tion, given the litigation posture of Pierce’s claim before
the Bankruptcy Court. See id., at 6031. Vickie’s filing
prompted Pierce to advise the Bankruptcy Court that “[a]ll
parties are in agreement that the amount of the contin­
gent Proof of Claim filed by [Pierce] shall be determined
by the adversary proceedings” that had been commenced
in the Bankruptcy Court. 31 Supplemental Record 6801.
Pierce asserted that Vickie’s objection should be overruled
or, alternatively, that any ruling on the objection “should
be continued until the resolution of the pending adversary
proceeding litigation.” Ibid. Pierce identifies no point in
the record where he argued to the Bankruptcy Court that

