28

STERN v. MARSHALL
Opinion of the Court

Granfinanciera, supra, at 59, n. 14 (noting that “[p]arallel
reasoning [to Schor] is unavailable in the context of bank­
ruptcy proceedings, because creditors lack an alternative
forum to the bankruptcy court in which to pursue their
claims”).8
Furthermore, the asserted authority to decide Vickie’s
claim is not limited to a “particularized area of the law,”
as in Crowell, Thomas, and Schor. Northern Pipeline, 458
U. S., at 85 (plurality opinion). We deal here not with an
agency but with a court, with substantive jurisdiction
reaching any area of the corpus juris. See ibid.; id., at 91
(Rehnquist, J., concurring in judgment). This is not a
situation in which Congress devised an “expert and inex­
pensive method for dealing with a class of questions of fact
which are particularly suited to examination and determi­
nation by an administrative agency specially assigned to
that task.” Crowell, 285 U. S., at 46; see Schor, supra, at
855–856. The “experts” in the federal system at resolving
common law counterclaims such as Vickie’s are the Article
III courts, and it is with those courts that her claim must
stay.
The dissent reads our cases differently, and in particu­
lar contends that more recent cases view Northern Pipe
line as “ ‘establish[ing] only that Congress may not vest in
a non-Article III court the power to adjudicate, render
final judgment, and issue binding orders in a traditional
contract action arising under state law, without consent of
——————
8 Contrary to the claims of the dissent, see post, at 12–13, Pierce did
not have another forum in which to pursue his claim to recover from
Vickie’s pre-bankruptcy assets, rather than take his chances with
whatever funds might remain after the Title 11 proceedings. Creditors
who possess claims that do not satisfy the requirements for nondis­
chargeability under 11 U. S. C. §523 have no choice but to file their
claims in bankruptcy proceedings if they want to pursue the claims at
all. That is why, as we recognized in Granfinanciera, the notion of
“consent” does not apply in bankruptcy proceedings as it might in other
contexts.

