12

STERN v. MARSHALL
BREYER, J., dissenting

152, 153 (1999) (“unsupported by substantial evidence”
more deferential than “clearly erroneous” (internal quota­
tion marks omitted)). And, as Crowell noted, “there is no
requirement that, in order to maintain the essential at­
tributes of the judicial power, all determinations of fact in
constitutional courts shall be made by judges.” 285 U. S.,
at 51.
Moreover, in one important respect Article III judges
maintain greater control over the bankruptcy court pro­
ceedings at issue here than they did over the relevant
proceedings in any of the previous cases in which this
Court has upheld a delegation of adjudicatory power. The
District Court here may “withdraw, in whole or in part,
any case or proceeding referred [to the Bankruptcy Court]
. . . on its own motion or on timely motion of any party, for
cause shown.” 28 U. S. C. §157(d); cf. Northern Pipeline,
458 U. S., at 80, n. 31 (plurality opinion) (contrasting
pre-1978 law where “power to withdraw the case from
the [bankruptcy] referee” gave district courts “control”
over case with the unconstitutional 1978 statute, which
provided no such district court authority).
Fourth, the fact that the parties have consented to Bank­
ruptcy Court jurisdiction argues in favor of constitutional­
ity, and strongly so. Pierce Marshall, the counterclaim
defendant, is not a stranger to the litigation, forced to
appear in Bankruptcy Court against his will. Cf. id., at 91
(Rehnquist, J., concurring in judgment) (suit was litigated
in Bankruptcy Court “over [the defendant’s] objection”).
Rather, he appeared voluntarily in Bankruptcy Court as
one of Vickie Marshall’s creditors, seeking a favorable
resolution of his claim against Vickie Marshall to the
detriment of her other creditors. He need not have filed a
claim, perhaps not even at the cost of bringing it in the
future, for he says his claim is “nondischargeable,” in
which case he could have litigated it in a state or federal
court after distribution. See 11 U. S. C. §523(a)(6). Thus,

