Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

37

Opinion of the Court

that, “to be effective, a single tribunal must have broad
authority to restructure [debtor-creditor] relations.” Post,
at 14, 15 (emphasis deleted). But the framework Congress
adopted in the 1984 Act already contemplates that certain
state law matters in bankruptcy cases will be resolved by
judges other than those of the bankruptcy courts. Section
1334(c)(2), for example, requires that bankruptcy courts
abstain from hearing specified non-core, state law claims
that “can be timely adjudicated[ ] in a State forum of ap­
propriate jurisdiction.” Section 1334(c)(1) similarly pro­
vides that bankruptcy courts may abstain from hearing
any proceeding, including core matters, “in the interest of
comity with State courts or respect for State law.”
As described above, the current bankruptcy system also
requires the district court to review de novo and enter
final judgment on any matters that are “related to” the
bankruptcy proceedings, §157(c)(1), and permits the dis­
trict court to withdraw from the bankruptcy court any
referred case, proceeding, or part thereof, §157(d). Pierce
has not argued that the bankruptcy courts “are barred
from ‘hearing’ all counterclaims” or proposing findings of
fact and conclusions of law on those matters, but rather
that it must be the district court that “finally decide[s]”
them. Brief for Respondent 61. We do not think the re­
moval of counterclaims such as Vickie’s from core bank­
ruptcy jurisdiction meaningfully changes the division of
labor in the current statute; we agree with the United
States that the question presented here is a “narrow” one.
Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 23.
If our decision today does not change all that much, then
why the fuss? Is there really a threat to the separation of
powers where Congress has conferred the judicial power
outside Article III only over certain counterclaims in
bankruptcy? The short but emphatic answer is yes. A
statute may no more lawfully chip away at the authority
of the Judicial Branch than it may eliminate it entirely.

