Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

31

Opinion of the Court

because it was not possible for the referee to rule on the
creditor’s proof of claim without first resolving the void­
able preference issue. 382 U. S., at 329–330, 332–333, and
n. 9, 334. There was no question that the bankruptcy
referee could decide whether there had been a voidable
preference in determining whether and to what extent
to allow the creditor’s claim. Once the referee did that,
“nothing remains for adjudication in a plenary suit”; such
a suit “would be a meaningless gesture.” Id., at 334. The
plenary proceeding the creditor sought could be brought
into the bankruptcy court because “the same issue [arose]
as part of the process of allowance and disallowance of
claims.” Id., at 336.
It was in that sense that the Court stated that “he who
invokes the aid of the bankruptcy court by offering a proof
of claim and demanding its allowance must abide the
consequences of that procedure.” Id., at 333, n. 9. In
Katchen one of those consequences was resolution of the
preference issue as part of the process of allowing or disal­
lowing claims, and accordingly there was no basis for the
creditor to insist that the issue be resolved in an Article
III court. See id., at 334. Indeed, the Katchen Court
expressly noted that it “intimate[d] no opinion concerning
whether” the bankruptcy referee would have had “sum­
mary jurisdiction to adjudicate a demand by the [bank­
ruptcy] trustee for affirmative relief, all of the substantial
factual and legal bases for which ha[d] not been disposed
of in passing on objections to the [creditor’s proof of]
claim.” Id., at 333, n. 9.
Our per curiam opinion in Langenkamp is to the same
effect. We explained there that a preferential transfer
claim can be heard in bankruptcy when the allegedly
favored creditor has filed a claim, because then “the ensu­
ing preference action by the trustee become[s] integral to
the restructuring of the debtor-creditor relationship.” 498
U. S., at 44. If, in contrast, the creditor has not filed a

