Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
self. But that reading necessarily assumes that there is a category of
core proceedings that do not arise in a bankruptcy case or under
bankruptcy law, and the structure of §157 makes clear that no such
category exists. Pp. 8–11.
(b) In the alternative, Pierce argues that the Bankruptcy Court
lacked jurisdiction to resolve Vickie’s counterclaim because his defa
mation claim is a “personal injury tort” that the Bankruptcy Court
lacked jurisdiction to hear under §157(b)(5). The Court agrees with
Vickie that §157(b)(5) is not jurisdictional, and Pierce consented to
the Bankruptcy Court’s resolution of the defamation claim. The
Court is not inclined to interpret statutes as creating a jurisdictional
bar when they are not framed as such. See generally Henderson v.
Shinseki, 562 U. S. ___; Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp., 546 U. S. 500. Sec
tion 157(b)(5) does not have the hallmarks of a jurisdictional decree,
and the statutory context belies Pierce’s claim that it is jurisdictional.
Pierce consented to the Bankruptcy Court’s resolution of the defama
tion claim by repeatedly advising that court that he was happy to
litigate his claim there. Pp. 12–16.
2. Although §157 allowed the Bankruptcy Court to enter final judg
ment on Vickie’s counterclaim, Article III of the Constitution did not.
Pp. 16–38.
(a) Article III is “an inseparable element of the constitutional
system of checks and balances” that “both defines the power and pro
tects the independence of the Judicial Branch.” Northern Pipeline,
458 U. S., at 58 (plurality opinion). Article III protects liberty not
only through its role in implementing the separation of powers, but
also by specifying the defining characteristics of Article III judges to
protect the integrity of judicial decisionmaking.
This is not the first time the Court has faced an Article III chal
lenge to a bankruptcy court’s resolution of a debtor’s suit. In North
ern Pipeline, the Court considered whether bankruptcy judges serv
ing under the Bankruptcy Act of 1978—who also lacked the tenure
and salary guarantees of Article III—could “constitutionally be
vested with jurisdiction to decide [a] state-law contract claim” against
an entity that was not otherwise part of the bankruptcy proceedings.
Id., at 53, 87, n. 40 (plurality opinion). The plurality in Northern
Pipeline recognized that there was a category of cases involving “pub
lic rights” that Congress could constitutionally assign to “legislative”
courts for resolution. A full majority of the Court, while not agreeing
on the scope of that exception, concluded that the doctrine did not en
compass adjudication of the state law claim at issue in that case, and
rejected the debtor’s argument that the Bankruptcy Court’s exercise
of jurisdiction was constitutional because the bankruptcy judge was
acting merely as an adjunct of the district court or court of appeals.

