12

STERN v. MARSHALL 

Opinion of the Court 


C

Pierce argues, as another alternative to reaching the
constitutional question, that the Bankruptcy Court lacked
jurisdiction to enter final judgment on his defamation
claim. Section 157(b)(5) provides that “[t]he district court
shall order that personal injury tort and wrongful death
claims shall be tried in the district court in which the
bankruptcy case is pending, or in the district court in the
district in which the claim arose.” Pierce asserts that
his defamation claim is a “personal injury tort,” that the
Bankruptcy Court therefore had no jurisdiction over that
claim, and that the court therefore necessarily lacked
jurisdiction over Vickie’s counterclaim as well. Brief for
Respondent 65–66.
Vickie objects to Pierce’s statutory analysis across the
board. To begin, Vickie contends that §157(b)(5) does not
address subject matter jurisdiction at all, but simply
specifies the venue in which “personal injury tort and
wrongful death claims” should be tried. See Reply Brief
for Petitioner 16–17, 19; see also Tr. of Oral Arg. 23 (Dep­
uty Solicitor General) (Section “157(b)(5) is in [the United
States’] view not jurisdictional”). Given the limited scope
of that provision, Vickie argues, a party may waive or for­
feit any objections under §157(b)(5), in the same way that
a party may waive or forfeit an objection to the bank­
ruptcy court finally resolving a non-core claim. Reply
Brief for Petitioner 17–20; see §157(c)(2) (authorizing the
district court, “with the consent of all the parties to the
proceeding,” to refer a “related to” matter to the bank­
ruptcy court for final judgment). Vickie asserts that in
this case Pierce consented to the Bankruptcy Court’s
adjudication of his defamation claim, and forfeited any
argument to the contrary, by failing to seek withdrawal of
the claim until he had litigated it before the Bankruptcy
Court for 27 months. Id., at 20–23. On the merits, Vickie
contends that the statutory phrase “personal injury tort

