8

STERN v. MARSHALL
BREYER, J., dissenting

counterclaim is consistent with Article III.
In doing so, the Court expressly “declined to adopt
formalistic and unbending rules.” Schor, 478 U. S., at 851.
Rather, it “weighed a number of factors, none of which has
been deemed determinative, with an eye to the practical
effect that the congressional action will have on the consti­
tutionally assigned role of the federal judiciary.” Ibid.
Those relevant factors include (1) “the origins and im­
portance of the right to be adjudicated”; (2) “the extent to
which the non-Article III forum exercises the range of ju­
risdiction and powers normally vested only in Article III
courts”; (3) the extent to which the delegation nonetheless
reserves judicial power for exercise by Article III courts;
(4) the presence or “absence of consent to an initial adjudi­
cation before a non-Article III tribunal”; and (5) “the con­
cerns that drove Congress to depart from” adjudication in
an Article III court. Id., at 849, 851.
The Court added that where “private rights,” rather
than “public rights” are involved, the “danger of encroach­
ing on the judicial powers” is greater. Id., at 853–854
(internal quotation marks omitted). Thus, while nonArticle III adjudication of “private rights” is not necessar­
ily unconstitutional, the Court’s constitutional “examina­
tion” of such a scheme must be more “searching.” Ibid.
Applying this analysis, the Court upheld the agency’s
authority to adjudicate the counterclaim. The Court con­
ceded that the adjudication might be of a kind tradi­
tionally decided by a court and that the rights at issue
were “private,” not “public.” Id., at 853. But, the Court
said, the CFTC deals only with a “ ‘particularized area of
law’ ”; the decision to invoke the CFTC forum is “left en­
tirely to the parties”; Article III courts can review the
agency’s findings of fact under “the same ‘weight of the
evidence’ standard sustained in Crowell” and review its
“legal determinations . . . de novo”; and the agency’s “coun­
terclaim jurisdiction” was necessary to make “workable” a

