Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Syllabus
claim is similar. It is not a matter that can be pursued only by grace
of the other branches, as in Murray’s Lessee, 18 How., at 284; it does
not flow from a federal statutory scheme, as in Thomas, 473 U. S., at
584–585; and it is not “completely dependent upon” adjudication of a
claim created by federal law, as in Schor, 478 U. S., at 856. This case
involves the most prototypical exercise of judicial power: the entry of
a final, binding judgment by a court with broad substantive jurisdic
tion, on a common law cause of action, when the action neither de
rives from nor depends upon any agency regulatory regime. If such
an exercise of judicial power may nonetheless be taken from the Arti
cle III Judiciary simply by deeming it part of some amorphous “public
right,” then Article III would be transformed from the guardian of in
dividual liberty and separation of powers the Court has long recog
nized into mere wishful thinking. Pp. 22–29.
(c) The fact that Pierce filed a proof of claim in the bankruptcy
proceedings did not give the Bankruptcy Court the authority to adju
dicate Vickie’s counterclaim. Initially, Pierce’s defamation claim does
not affect the nature of Vickie’s tortious interference counterclaim as
one at common law that simply attempts to augment the bankruptcy
estate—the type of claim that, under Northern Pipeline and Granfi
nanciera, must be decided by an Article III court. The cases on which
Vickie relies, Katchen v. Landy, 382 U. S. 323, and Langenkamp v.
Culp, 498 U. S. 42 (per curiam), are inapposite. Katchen permitted a
bankruptcy referee to exercise jurisdiction over a trustee’s voidable
preference claim against a creditor only where there was no question
that the referee was required to decide whether there had been a
voidable preference in determining whether and to what extent to al
low the creditor’s claim. The Katchen Court “intimate[d] no opinion
concerning whether” the bankruptcy referee would have had “sum
mary jurisdiction to adjudicate a demand by the [bankruptcy] trustee
for affirmative relief, all of the substantial factual and legal bases for
which ha[d] not been disposed of in passing on objections to the
[creditor’s proof of ] claim.” 382 U. S., at 333, n. 9. The per curiam
opinion in Langenkamp is to the same effect. In this case, by con
trast, the Bankruptcy Court—in order to resolve Vickie’s counter
claim—was required to and did make several factual and legal de
terminations that were not “disposed of in passing on objections” to
Pierce’s proof of claim. In both Katchen and Langenkamp, moreover,
the trustee bringing the preference action was asserting a right of re
covery created by federal bankruptcy law. Vickie’s claim is instead a
state tort action that exists without regard to any bankruptcy pro
ceeding. Pp. 29–34.
(d) The bankruptcy courts under the 1984 Act are not “adjuncts”
of the district courts. The new bankruptcy courts, like the courts

