(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

STERN, EXECUTOR OF THE ESTATE OF MARSHALL
v. MARSHALL, EXECUTRIX OF THE ESTATE OF
MARSHALL
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–179.

Argued January 18, 2011—Decided June 23, 2011

Article III, §1, of the Constitution mandates that “[t]he judicial Power
of the United States, shall be vested in one supreme Court, and in
such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain
and establish,” and provides that the judges of those constitutional
courts “shall hold their Offices during good Behaviour” and “receive
for their Services[ ] a Compensation[ ] [that] shall not be diminished”
during their tenure. The questions presented in this case are
whether a bankruptcy court judge who did not enjoy such tenure and
salary protections had the authority under 28 U. S. C. §157 and Arti
cle III to enter final judgment on a counterclaim filed by Vickie Lynn
Marshall (whose estate is the petitioner) against Pierce Marshall
(whose estate is the respondent) in Vickie’s bankruptcy proceedings.
Vickie married J. Howard Marshall II, Pierce’s father, approxi
mately a year before his death. Shortly before J. Howard died, Vickie
filed a suit against Pierce in Texas state court, asserting that J.
Howard meant to provide for Vickie through a trust, and Pierce tor
tiously interfered with that gift. After J. Howard died, Vickie filed
for bankruptcy in federal court. Pierce filed a proof of claim in that
proceeding, asserting that he should be able to recover damages from
Vickie’s bankruptcy estate because Vickie had defamed him by induc
ing her lawyers to tell the press that he had engaged in fraud in con
trolling his father’s assets. Vickie responded by filing a counterclaim
for tortious interference with the gift she expected from J. Howard.
The Bankruptcy Court granted Vickie summary judgment on the
defamation claim and eventually awarded her hundreds of millions of
dollars in damages on her counterclaim. Pierce objected that the

