10

STERN v. MARSHALL
Opinion of the Court

bankruptcy courts are to do with respect to the category of
matters that Pierce posits—core proceedings that do not
arise under Title 11 or in a Title 11 case. To the contrary,
§157(b)(3) only instructs a bankruptcy judge to “deter­
mine, on the judge’s own motion or on timely motion of a
party, whether a proceeding is a core proceeding under
this subsection or is a proceeding that is otherwise related
to a case under title 11.” Two options. The statute does
not suggest that any other distinctions need be made.
Under our reading of the statute, core proceedings are
those that arise in a bankruptcy case or under Title 11.
The detailed list of core proceedings in §157(b)(2) provides courts with ready examples of such matters. Pierce’s
reading of §157, in contrast, supposes that some core pro­
ceedings will arise in a Title 11 case or under Title 11
and some will not. Under that reading, the statute pro­
vides no guidance on how to tell which are which.
We think it significant that Congress failed to provide
any framework for identifying or adjudicating the asserted
category of core but not “arising” proceedings, given the
otherwise detailed provisions governing bankruptcy court
authority. It is hard to believe that Congress would go to
the trouble of cataloging 16 different types of proceedings
that should receive “core” treatment, but then fail to spec­
ify how to determine whether those matters arise under
Title 11 or in a bankruptcy case if—as Pierce asserts—the
latter inquiry is determinative of the bankruptcy court’s
authority.
Pierce argues that we should treat core matters that
arise neither under Title 11 nor in a Title 11 case as pro­
ceedings “related to” a Title 11 case. Brief for Respondent
60 (internal quotation marks omitted). We think that a
contradiction in terms. It does not make sense to describe
a “core” bankruptcy proceeding as merely “related to” the
bankruptcy case; oxymoron is not a typical feature of
congressional drafting. See Northern Pipeline, 458 U. S.,

