2

STERN v. MARSHALL
Opinion of the Court

through state and federal courts in Louisiana, Texas, and
California, and two of those courts—a Texas state probate
court and the Bankruptcy Court for the Central District
of California—have reached contrary decisions on its mer­
its. The Court of Appeals below held that the Texas state
decision controlled, after concluding that the Bankruptcy
Court lacked the authority to enter final judgment on a
counterclaim that Vickie brought against Pierce in her
bankruptcy proceeding.1 To determine whether the Court
of Appeals was correct in that regard, we must resolve two
issues: (1) whether the Bankruptcy Court had the statu­
tory authority under 28 U. S. C. §157(b) to issue a final
judgment on Vickie’s counterclaim; and (2) if so, whether
conferring that authority on the Bankruptcy Court is
constitutional.
Although the history of this litigation is complicated, its
resolution ultimately turns on very basic principles. Arti­
cle III, §1, of the Constitution commands that “[t]he judi­
cial Power of the United States, shall be vested in one
supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Con­
gress may from time to time ordain and establish.” That
Article further provides that the judges of those courts
shall hold their offices during good behavior, without
diminution of salary. Ibid. Those requirements of Article
III were not honored here. The Bankruptcy Court in this
case exercised the judicial power of the United States by
entering final judgment on a common law tort claim, even
though the judges of such courts enjoy neither tenure
during good behavior nor salary protection. We conclude
that, although the Bankruptcy Court had the statutory
authority to enter judgment on Vickie’s counterclaim, it
lacked the constitutional authority to do so.
——————
1 Because both Vickie and Pierce passed away during this litigation,
the parties in this case are Vickie’s estate and Pierce’s estate. We
continue to refer to them as “Vickie” and “Pierce.”

