Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

23

Opinion of the Court

the subject of a suit at the common law, or in equity, or
admiralty.” Ibid. The Court also recognized that “[a]t the
same time there are matters, involving public rights,
which may be presented in such form that the judicial
power is capable of acting on them, and which are suscep­
tible of judicial determination, but which congress may or
may not bring within the cognizance of the courts of the
United States, as it may deem proper.” Ibid.
As an example of such matters, the Court referred to
“[e]quitable claims to land by the inhabitants of ceded
territories” and cited cases in which land issues were
conclusively resolved by Executive Branch officials. Ibid.
(citing Foley v. Harrison, 15 How. 433 (1854); Burgess v.
Gray, 16 How. 48 (1854)). In those cases “it depends upon
the will of congress whether a remedy in the courts shall
be allowed at all,” so Congress could limit the extent to
which a judicial forum was available. Murray’s Lessee, 18
How., at 284. The challenge in Murray’s Lessee to the
Treasury Department’s sale of the collector’s land likewise
fell within the “public rights” category of cases, because it
could only be brought if the Federal Government chose to
allow it by waiving sovereign immunity. Id., at 283–284.
The point of Murray’s Lessee was simply that Congress
may set the terms of adjudicating a suit when the suit
could not otherwise proceed at all.
Subsequent decisions from this Court contrasted cases
within the reach of the public rights exception—those
arising “between the Government and persons subject to
its authority in connection with the performance of the
constitutional functions of the executive or legislative
departments”—and those that were instead matters “of
private right, that is, of the liability of one individual to
another under the law as defined.” Crowell v. Benson, 285
U. S. 22, 50, 51 (1932).6 See Atlas Roofing Co. v. Occupa
——————
6 Although

the Court in Crowell went on to decide that the facts of the

