Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

Opinion of the Court

B
This is not the first time we have faced an Article III
challenge to a bankruptcy court’s resolution of a debtor’s
suit. In Northern Pipeline, we considered whether bank­
ruptcy judges serving under the Bankruptcy Act of 1978—
appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate,
but lacking the tenure and salary guarantees of Article
III—could “constitutionally be vested with jurisdiction to
decide [a] state-law contract claim” against an entity that
was not otherwise part of the bankruptcy proceedings.
458 U. S., at 53, 87, n. 40 (plurality opinion); see id., at
89–92 (Rehnquist, J., concurring in judgment). The Court
concluded that assignment of such state law claims for
resolution by those judges “violates Art. III of the Con­
stitution.” Id., at 52, 87 (plurality opinion); id., at 91
(Rehnquist, J., concurring in judgment).
The plurality in Northern Pipeline recognized that
there was a category of cases involving “public rights”
that Congress could constitutionally assign to “legislative”
courts for resolution. That opinion concluded that this
“public rights” exception extended “only to matters arising
between” individuals and the Government “in connection
with the performance of the constitutional functions of the
executive or legislative departments . . . that historically
could have been determined exclusively by those”
branches. Id., at 67–68 (internal quotation marks omit­
ted). A full majority of the Court, while not agreeing on
the scope of the exception, concluded that the doctrine did
not encompass adjudication of the state law claim at issue
in that case. Id., at 69–72; see id., at 90–91 (Rehnquist, J.,
concurring in judgment) (“None of the [previous cases
addressing Article III power] has gone so far as to sanction
the type of adjudication to which Marathon will be sub­
jected . . . . To whatever extent different powers granted
under [the 1978] Act might be sustained under the ‘public
rights’ doctrine of Murray’s Lessee . . . and succeeding

