Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

35

Opinion of the Court

rejected a similar argument in Northern Pipeline, see 458
U. S., at 84–86 (plurality opinion); id., at 91 (Rehnquist,
J., concurring in judgment), and our reasoning there holds
true today.
To begin, as explained above, it is still the bankruptcy
court itself that exercises the essential attributes of judi­
cial power over a matter such as Vickie’s counterclaim.
See supra, at 20. The new bankruptcy courts, like the old,
do not “ma[k]e only specialized, narrowly confined factual
determinations regarding a particularized area of law”
or engage in “statutorily channeled factfinding functions.”
Northern Pipeline, 458 U. S., at 85 (plurality opinion).
Instead, bankruptcy courts under the 1984 Act resolve
“[a]ll matters of fact and law in whatever domains of the
law to which” the parties’ counterclaims might lead. Id.,
at 91 (Rehnquist, J., concurring in judgment).
In addition, whereas the adjunct agency in Crowell v.
Benson “possessed only a limited power to issue compensa­
tion orders . . . [that] could be enforced only by order of the
district court,” Northern Pipeline, supra, at 85, a bank­
ruptcy court resolving a counterclaim under 28 U. S. C.
§157(b)(2)(C) has the power to enter “appropriate orders
and judgments”—including final judgments—subject to
review only if a party chooses to appeal, see §§157(b)(1),
158(a)–(b). It is thus no less the case here than it was in
Northern Pipeline that “[t]he authority—and the respon­
sibility—to make an informed, final determination . . .
remains with” the bankruptcy judge, not the district court.
458 U. S., at 81 (plurality opinion) (internal quotation
marks omitted). Given that authority, a bankruptcy court
can no more be deemed a mere “adjunct” of the district
court than a district court can be deemed such an “ad­
junct” of the court of appeals. We certainly cannot accept
the dissent’s notion that judges who have the power to
enter final, binding orders are the “functional[ ]” equiva­
lent of “law clerks[ ] and the Judiciary’s administrative

