Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

“related to a case under title 11.” §157(a). District courts
may refer any or all such proceedings to the bankruptcy
judges of their district, ibid., which is how the Bankruptcy
Court in this case came to preside over Vickie’s bank­
ruptcy proceedings. District courts also may withdraw a
case or proceeding referred to the bankruptcy court “for
cause shown.” §157(d). Since Congress enacted the Bank­
ruptcy Amendments and Federal Judgeship Act of
1984 (the 1984 Act), bankruptcy judges for each district
have been appointed to 14-year terms by the courts of
appeals for the circuits in which their district is
located. §152(a)(1).
The manner in which a bankruptcy judge may act on
a referred matter depends on the type of proceeding in­
volved. Bankruptcy judges may hear and enter final
judgments in “all core proceedings arising under title 11,
or arising in a case under title 11.” §157(b)(1). “Core
proceedings include, but are not limited to” 16 different
types of matters, including “counterclaims by [a debtor’s]
estate against persons filing claims against the estate.”
§157(b)(2)(C).3 Parties may appeal final judgments of a
——————
3 In

full, §§157(b)(1)–(2) provides:
“(1) Bankruptcy judges may hear and determine all cases under title
11 and all core proceedings arising under title 11, or arising in a case
under title 11, referred under subsection (a) of this section, and may
enter appropriate orders and judgments, subject to review under
section 158 of this title.
“(2) Core proceedings include, but are not limited to—
“(A) matters concerning the administration of the estate;
“(B) allowance or disallowance of claims against the estate or exemp­
tions from property of the estate, and estimation of claims or interests
for the purposes of confirming a plan under chapter 11, 12, or 13 of title
11 but not the liquidation or estimation of contingent or unliquidated
personal injury tort or wrongful death claims against the estate for
purposes of distribution in a case under title 11;
“(C) counterclaims by the estate against persons filing claims against
the estate;
“(D) orders in respect to obtaining credit;

