Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

BREYER, J., dissenting

is made up of judges who enjoy considerable protection
from improper political influence. Unlike the 1978 Act
which provided for the appointment of bankruptcy judges
by the President with the advice and consent of the
Senate, 28 U. S. C. §152 (1976 ed., Supp. IV), current
law provides that the federal courts of appeals appoint fed­
eral bankruptcy judges, §152(a)(1) (2006 ed.). Bankruptcy
judges are removable by the circuit judicial counsel (made
up of federal court of appeals and district court judges)
and only for cause. §152(e). Their salaries are pegged to
those of federal district court judges, §153(a), and the cost
of their courthouses and other work-related expenses are
paid by the Judiciary, §156. Thus, although Congress
technically exercised its Article I power when it created
bankruptcy courts, functionally, bankruptcy judges can be
compared to magistrate judges, law clerks, and the Judi­
ciary’s administrative officials, whose lack of Article III
tenure and compensation protections do not endanger the
independence of the Judicial Branch.
Third, the control exercised by Article III judges over
bankruptcy proceedings argues in favor of constitutional­
ity. Article III judges control and supervise the bank­
ruptcy court’s determinations—at least to the same degree
that Article III judges supervised the agency’s determina­
tions in Crowell, if not more so. Any party may appeal
those determinations to the federal district court, where
the federal judge will review all determinations of fact for
clear error and will review all determinations of law de
novo. Fed. Rule Bkrtcy. Proc. 8013; 10 Collier on Bank­
ruptcy ¶8013.04 (16th ed. 2011). But for the here­
irrelevant matter of what Crowell considered to be special
“constitutional” facts, the standard of review for factual
findings here (“clearly erroneous”) is more stringent than
the standard at issue in Crowell (whether the agency’s
factfinding was “supported by evidence in the record”).
285 U. S., at 48; see Dickinson v. Zurko, 527 U. S. 150,

