Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

27

Opinion of the Court

mon law that more nearly resemble state law contract
claims brought by a bankrupt corporation to augment the
bankruptcy estate than they do creditors’ hierarchically
ordered claims to a pro rata share of the bankruptcy res.”
Id., at 56. As a consequence, we concluded that fraudulent
conveyance actions were “more accurately characterized as
a private rather than a public right as we have used those
terms in our Article III decisions.” Id., at 55.7
Vickie’s counterclaim—like the fraudulent conveyance
claim at issue in Granfinanciera—does not fall within any
of the varied formulations of the public rights exception in
this Court’s cases. It is not a matter that can be pursued
only by grace of the other branches, as in Murray’s Lessee,
18 How., at 284, or one that “historically could have been
determined exclusively by” those branches, Northern
Pipeline, supra, at 68 (citing Ex parte Bakelite Corp., 279
U. S., at 458). The claim is instead one under state com­
mon law between two private parties. It does not “de­
pend[ ] on the will of congress,” Murray’s Lessee, supra, at
284; Congress has nothing to do with it.
In addition, Vickie’s claimed right to relief does not flow
from a federal statutory scheme, as in Thomas, 473 U. S.,
at 584–585, or Atlas Roofing, 430 U. S., at 458. It is not
“completely dependent upon” adjudication of a claim cre­
ated by federal law, as in Schor, 478 U. S., at 856. And in
contrast to the objecting party in Schor, id., at 855–856,
Pierce did not truly consent to resolution of Vickie’s claim
in the bankruptcy court proceedings. He had nowhere else
to go if he wished to recover from Vickie’s estate. See
——————
7 We noted that we did not mean to “suggest that the restructuring of
debtor-creditor relations is in fact a public right.” 492 U. S., at 56,
n. 11. Our conclusion was that, “even if one accepts this thesis,” Con­
gress could not constitutionally assign resolution of the fraudulent
conveyance action to a non-Article III court. Ibid. Because neither
party asks us to reconsider the public rights framework for bankruptcy,
we follow the same approach here.

