26

STERN v. MARSHALL
Opinion of the Court

argued that agency jurisdiction over the broker’s counter­
claim violated Article III. Id., at 837–838. This Court
disagreed, but only after observing that (1) the claim and
the counterclaim concerned a “single dispute”—the same
account balance; (2) the CFTC’s assertion of authority
involved only “a narrow class of common law claims” in
a “ ‘particularized area of law’ ”; (3) the area of law in
question was governed by “a specific and limited federal
regulatory scheme” as to which the agency had “obvious
expertise”; (4) the parties had freely elected to resolve
their differences before the CFTC; and (5) CFTC orders
were “enforceable only by order of the district court.” Id.,
at 844, 852–855 (quoting Northern Pipeline, 458 U. S., at
85); see 478 U. S., at 843–844; 849–857. Most signifi­
cantly, given that the customer’s reparations claim before
the agency and the broker’s counterclaim were competing
claims to the same amount, the Court repeatedly empha­
sized that it was “necessary” to allow the agency to exer­
cise jurisdiction over the broker’s claim, or else “the
reparations procedure would have been confounded.”
Id., at 856.
The most recent case in which we considered application
of the public rights exception—and the only case in which
we have considered that doctrine in the bankruptcy con­
text since Northern Pipeline—is Granfinanciera, S. A. v.
Nordberg, 492 U. S. 33 (1989). In Granfinanciera we
rejected a bankruptcy trustee’s argument that a fraudu­
lent conveyance action filed on behalf of a bankruptcy
estate against a noncreditor in a bankruptcy proceeding
fell within the “public rights” exception. We explained
that, “[i]f a statutory right is not closely intertwined with
a federal regulatory program Congress has power to enact,
and if that right neither belongs to nor exists against the
Federal Government, then it must be adjudicated by an
Article III court.” Id., at 54–55. We reasoned that fraudu­
lent conveyance suits were “quintessentially suits at com­

