10

STERN v. MARSHALL 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


B

Applying Schor’s approach here, I conclude that the
delegation of adjudicatory authority before us is consti­
tutional. A grant of authority to a bankruptcy court
to adjudicate compulsory counterclaims does not violate
any constitutional separation-of-powers principle related to
Article III.
First, I concede that the nature of the claim to be adju
dicated argues against my conclusion. Vickie Marshall’s
counterclaim—a kind of tort suit—resembles “a suit at the
common law.” Murray’s Lessee, 18 How., at 284. Although
not determinative of the question, see Schor, 478 U. S., at
853, a delegation of authority to a non-Article III judge to
adjudicate a claim of that kind poses a heightened risk of
encroachment on the Federal Judiciary, id., at 854.
At the same time the significance of this factor is miti­
gated here by the fact that bankruptcy courts often decide
claims that similarly resemble various common-law ac­
tions. Suppose, for example, that ownership of 40 acres of
land in the bankruptcy debtor’s possession is disputed by a
creditor. If that creditor brings a claim in the bankruptcy
court, resolution of that dispute requires the bankruptcy
court to apply the same state property law that would
govern in a state court proceeding. This kind of dispute
arises with regularity in bankruptcy proceedings.
Of course, in this instance the state-law question is
embedded in a debtor’s counterclaim, not a creditor’s
claim. But the counterclaim is “compulsory.” It “arises
out of the transaction or occurrence that is the subject
matter of the opposing party’s claim.” Fed. Rule Civ. Proc.
13(a); Fed. Rule Bkrtcy. Proc. 7013. Thus, resolution of
the counterclaim will often turn on facts identical to, or at
least related to, those at issue in a creditor’s claim that is
undisputedly proper for the bankruptcy court to decide.
Second, the nature of the non-Article III tribunal argues
in favor of constitutionality. That is because the tribunal

