6

STERN v. MARSHALL
Syllabus
considered in Northern Pipeline, do not “ma[k]e only specialized, nar
rowly confined factual determinations regarding a particularized
area of law” or engage in “statutorily channeled factfinding func
tions.” 458 U. S., at 85 (plurality opinion). Whereas the adjunct
agency in Crowell v. Benson “possessed only a limited power to issue
compensation orders . . . [that] could be enforced only by order of the
district court,” ibid., a bankruptcy court resolving a counterclaim un
der §157(b)(2)(C) has the power to enter “appropriate orders and
judgments”—including final judgments—subject to review only if a
party chooses to appeal, see §§157(b)(1), 158(a)–(b). Such a court is
an adjunct of no one. Pp. 34–36.
(e) Finally, Vickie and her amici predict that restrictions on a
bankruptcy court’s ability to hear and finally resolve compulsory
counterclaims will create significant delays and impose additional
costs on the bankruptcy process. It goes without saying that “the fact
that a given law or procedure is efficient, convenient, and useful in
facilitating functions of government, standing alone, will not save it if
it is contrary to the Constitution.” INS v. Chadha, 462 U. S. 919,
944. In addition, the Court is not convinced that the practical conse
quences of such limitations are as significant as Vickie suggests. The
framework Congress adopted in the 1984 Act already contemplates
that certain state law matters in bankruptcy cases will be resolved by
state courts and district courts, see §§157(c), 1334(c), and the Court
does not think the removal of counterclaims such as Vickie’s from
core bankruptcy jurisdiction meaningfully changes the division of la
bor in the statute. Pp. 36–38.

600 F. 3d 1037, affirmed.
ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which SCALIA,
KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., joined. SCALIA, J., filed a concurring
opinion. BREYER, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined.

