(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

WILLIAMSON ET AL. v. MAZDA MOTOR OF AMERICA,
INC., ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE COURT OF APPEAL OF CALIFORNIA,

FOURTH APPELLATE DISTRICT, DIVISION THREE

No. 08–1314. Argued November 3, 2010—Decided February 23, 2011
The 1989 version of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208
(FMVSS 208) requires, as relevant here, auto manufacturers to in
stall seatbelts on the rear seats of passenger vehicles. They must in
stall lap-and-shoulder belts on seats next to a vehicle’s doors or
frames, but may install either those belts or simple lap belts on rear
inner seats, e.g., those next to a minivan’s aisle.
The Williamson family and Thanh Williamson’s estate brought this
California tort suit, claiming that Thanh died in an accident because
the rear aisle seat of the Mazda minivan in which she was riding had
a lap belt instead of lap-and-shoulder belts. The state trial court
dismissed their claim on the pleadings. The State Court of Appeal af
firmed, relying on Geier v. American Honda Motor Co., 529 U. S. 861,
in which this Court found that an earlier (1984) version of FMVSS
208—which required installation of passive restraint devices—pre
empted a state tort suit against an auto manufacturer on a failure to
install airbags.
Held: FMVSS 208 does not pre-empt state tort suits claiming that
manufacturers should have installed lap-and-shoulder belts, instead
of lap belts, on rear inner seats. Pp. 3–12.
(a) Because this case involves (1) the same statute as Geier, (2) a
later version of the same regulation, and (3) a somewhat similar
claim that a state tort action conflicts with the federal regulation, the
answers to two of the subsidiary questions posed in Geier apply di
rectly here. Thus, the statute’s express pre-emption clause cannot
pre-empt the common-law tort action here; but neither can its saving
clause foreclose or limit the operation of ordinary conflict pre-emption
principles. The Court consequently turns to Geier’s third subsidiary


2

WILLIAMSON v. MAZDA MOTOR OF AMERICA, INC.
Syllabus
question, whether, in fact, the state tort action conflicts with the fed
eral regulation. Pp. 3–5.
(b) Under ordinary conflict pre-emption principles a state law that
“stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment” of a federal law is pre
empted. Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U. S. 52, 67. In Geier, the state
law stood as an obstacle to the accomplishment of a significant fed
eral regulatory objective, namely, giving manufacturers a choice
among different kinds of passive restraint systems. This conclusion
was supported by the regulation’s history, the agency’s contempora
neous explanation, and the Government’s current understanding of
the regulation. The history showed that the Department of Trans
portation (DOT) had long thought it important to leave manufactur
ers with a choice of systems. DOT’s contemporaneous explanation of
the regulation made clear that manufacturer choice was an impor
tant means for achieving DOT’s basic objectives. It phased in passive
restraint requirements to give manufacturers time to improve airbag
technology and develop better systems; it worried that requiring air
bags would cause a public backlash; and it was concerned about air
bag safety and cost. Finally, the Government’s current understand
ing was that a tort suit insisting upon airbag use would “ ‘ “stan[d] as
an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of these objec
tives.” ’ ” 529 U. S., at 883. Pp. 5–8.
(c) Like the regulation in Geier, the instant regulation leaves the
manufacturer with a choice, and the tort suit here would restrict that
choice. But in contrast to Geier, the choice here is not a significant
regulatory objective. The regulation’s history resembles the history
of airbags to some degree. DOT rejected a regulation requiring lap
and-shoulder belts in rear seats in 1984. But by 1989, changed cir
cumstances led DOT to require manufacturers to install lap-and
shoulder belts for rear outer seats but to retain a manufacturer
choice for rear inner seats. Its reasons for doing so differed consid
erably from its 1984 reasons for permitting a choice of passive re
straint. It was not concerned about consumer acceptance; it thought
that lap-and-shoulder belts would increase safety and did not pose
additional safety risks; and it was not seeking to use the regulation to
spur development of alternative safety devices. Instead, DOT
thought that the requirement would not be cost effective. That fact
alone cannot show that DOT sought to forbid common-law tort suits.
For one thing, DOT did not believe that costs would remain frozen.
For another, many federal safety regulations embody a cost
effectiveness judgment. To infer pre-emptive intent from the mere
existence of such a cost-effectiveness judgment would eliminate the
possibility that the agency seeks only to set forth a minimum stan
dard. Finally, the Solicitor General represents that DOT’s regulation


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
does not pre-empt this tort suit. As in Geier, “the agency’s own views
should make a difference,” 529 U. S., at 883, and DOT has not ex
pressed inconsistent views on this subject. Pp. 8–12.
167 Cal. App. 4th 905, 84 Cal. Rptr. 3d 545, reversed.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, GINSBURG, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined. SOTOMAYOR, J., filed a concurring opinion. THOMAS, J., filed an
opinion concurring in the judgment. KAGAN, J., took no part in the con
sideration or decision of the case.

