No. 09–1272 [May 16, 2011]  JUSTICE GINSBURG, dissenting. The Court today arms the police with a way routinely to dishonor the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement in drug cases. In lieu of presenting their evidence to a neu tral magistrate, police officers may now knock, listen, then break the door down, nevermind that they had ample time to obtain a warrant. I dissent from the Court’s reduction of the Fourth Amendment’s force. The Fourth Amendment guarantees to the people “[t]he right . . . to be secure in their . . . houses . . . against un reasonable searches and seizures.” Warrants to search, the Amendment further instructs, shall issue only upon a showing of “probable cause” to believe criminal activity is afoot. These complementary provisions are designed to ensure that police will seek the authorization of a neutral magistrate before undertaking a search or seizure. Excep tions to the warrant requirement, this Court has ex plained, must be “few in number and carefully delineated,” United States Dist. Court for Eastern Dist. of Mich., 407 27, 31 (2001). This case involves a principal exception to the warrant requirement, the exception applicable in “exigent circum stances.” See ante, at 6–7. “[C]arefully delineated,” the exception should govern only in genuine emergency situa
tions. Circumstances qualify as “exigent” when there is an imminent risk of death or serious injury, or danger that evidence will be immediately destroyed, or that a suspect (2006). The question presented: May police, who could pause to gain the approval of a neutral magistrate, dis pense with the need to get a warrant by themselves creat ing exigent circumstances? I would answer no, as did the Kentucky Supreme Court. The urgency must exist, I would rule, when the police come on the scene, not subse quent to their arrival, prompted by their own conduct. Two pillars of our Fourth Amendment jurisprudence should have controlled the Court’s ruling: First, “whenever practical, [the police must] obtain advance judicial ap proval of searches and seizures through the warrant pro unwarranted “searches and seizures inside a home” bear 586 (1980). The warrant requirement, Justice Jackson observed, ranks among the “fundamental distinctions between our form of government, where officers are under the law, and the police-state where they are the law.” Court has accordingly declared warrantless searches, in 551, 559 (2004). “[T]he police bear a heavy burden,” the Court has cautioned, “when attempting to demonstrate an urgent need that might justify warrantless searches.” That heavy burden has not been carried here. There was little risk that drug-related evidence would have been destroyed had the police delayed the search pending a magistrate’s authorization. As the Court recognizes,
“[p]ersons in possession of valuable drugs are unlikely to destroy them unless they fear discovery by the police.” Ante, at 8. Nothing in the record shows that, prior to the knock at the apartment door, the occupants were appre hensive about police proximity. In no quarter does the Fourth Amendment apply with greater force than in our homes, our most private space which, for centuries, has been regarded as “ ‘entitled to (1998) (KENNEDY, J., concurring). Home intrusions, the Court has said, are indeed “the chief evil against which . . . the Fourth Amendment is directed.” Payton, 445 U. S., at United States, 365 U. S. 505, 511 (1961) (“At [the Fourth Amendment’s] very core stands the right of a man to retreat to his own home and there be free from unreason able governmental intrusion.”). “ ‘[S]earches and seizures inside a home without a warrant are [therefore] presump tively unreasonable.’ ” Brigham City, 547 U. S., at 403 (quoting Groh, 540 U. S., at 559). How “secure” do our homes remain if police, armed with no warrant, can pound on doors at will and, on hearing sounds indicative of things moving, forcibly enter and search for evidence of unlawful activity? As above noted, to justify the police activity in this case, Kentucky invoked the once-guarded exception for emer gencies “in which the delay necessary to obtain a warrant . . . threaten[s] ‘the destruction of evidence.’ ” Schmerber United States, 376 U. S. 364, 367 (1964)). To fit within this exception, “police action literally must be [taken] ‘now Kentucky, 413 U. S. 496, 505 (1973).
The existence of a genuine emergency depends not only on the state of necessity at the time of the warrantless search; it depends, first and foremost, on “actions taken by the police preceding the warrantless search.” United (“[O]fficers must seek a warrant based on probable cause when they believe in advance they will find contraband or evidence of a crime.”). “[W]asting a clear opportunity to obtain a warrant,” therefore, “disentitles the officer from relying on subsequent exigent circumstances.” S. Saltz burg & D. Capra, American Criminal Procedure 376 (8th ed. 2007). Under an appropriately reined-in “emergency” or “exi gent circumstances” exception, the result in this case should not be in doubt. The target of the investigation’s entry into the building, and the smell of marijuana seep ing under the apartment door into the hallway, the Ken tucky Supreme Court rightly determined, gave the police “probable cause . . . sufficient . . . to obtain a warrant to search the . . . apartment.” 302 S. W. 3d 649, 653 (2010). As that court observed, nothing made it impracticable for the police to post officers on the premises while proceeding to obtain a warrant authorizing their entry. Id., at 654. Before this Court, Kentucky does not urge otherwise. See Brief for Petitioner 35, n. 13 (asserting “[i]t should be of no importance whether police could have obtained a warrant”). In Johnson, the Court confronted this scenario: standing outside a hotel room, the police smelled burning opium and heard “some shuffling or noise” coming from the room. 333 U. S., at 12 (internal quotation marks omitted). Could the police enter the room without a warrant? The Court answered no. Explaining why, the Court said: “The right of officers to thrust themselves into a home
is . . . a grave concern, not only to the individual but to a society which chooses to dwell in reasonable security and freedom from surveillance. When the right of privacy must reasonably yield to the right of search is, as a rule, to be decided by a judicial officer, not a policeman . . . . “If the officers in this case were excused from the constitutional duty of presenting their evidence to a magistrate, it is difficult to think of [any] case in which [a warrant] should be required.” Id., at 14–15. I agree, and would not allow an expedient knock to over ride the warrant requirement.* Instead, I would accord that core requirement of the Fourth Amendment full respect. When possible, “a warrant must generally be secured,” the Court acknowledges. Ante, at 5. There is every reason to conclude that securing a warrant was entirely feasible in this case, and no reason to contract the Fourth Amendment’s dominion.
——————
* The Court in Johnson was informed that “when [the officer]
knocked on [Johnson’s] door the ‘first thing that naturally struck [her]’
was to conceal the opium and the equipment for smoking it.” See Brief
for United States in Johnson v. United States, O. T. 1947, No. 329,
p. 17, n. 6. Had the Government in Johnson urged that the “shuffling
or noise” indicated evidence was at risk, would the result have
changed? Justice Jackson’s recognition of the primacy of the warrant
requirement suggests not. But see ante, at 15, n. 5 (distinguishing
Johnson on the ground that the Government did not contend “that
the officers entered the room in order to prevent the destruction of
evidence”).

