6

LOS ANGELES COUNTY v. HUMPHRIES
Opinion of the Court

ties, but because it would have imposed liability upon
municipalities based purely upon the acts of others. That
is to say, the rejected amendment would have imposed
liability upon local governments “without regard to
whether a local government was in any way at fault for
the breach of the peace for which it was to be held for
damages.” 436 U. S., at 681, n. 40 (emphasis added). In
Monell’s view Congress may have thought that it lacked
the power to impose that kind of indirect liability upon
municipalities, id., at 679, but “nothing said in debate on
the Sherman amendment would have prevented holding a
municipality liable . . . for its own violations of the Four
teenth Amendment,” id., at 683 (emphasis added). The
Court, overruling Monroe, held that municipalities were
“persons” under §1983. 436 U. S., at 690.
The Court also concluded that a municipality could not
be held liable under §1983 solely because it employed a
tortfeasor. The Court’s conclusion rested on “the language
of §1983, read against the background of the same legisla
tive history.” Id., at 691. Section 1983’s causation lan
guage imposes liability on a “ ‘person who . . . shall subject,
or cause to be subjected, any person’ ” to a deprivation of
federal rights. Ibid. (quoting 17 Stat. 13; emphasis de
leted). That language, the Court observed, could not “be
easily read to impose liability vicariously . . . solely on the
basis of the existence of an employer-employee relation
ship with a tortfeasor.” 436 U. S., at 692. The statute’s
legislative history, in particular the constitutional objec
tions that had been raised to the Sherman amendment,
supported this conclusion. Id., at 692–94, and n. 57.
For these reasons, the Court concluded that a munici
pality could be held liable under §1983 only for its own
violations of federal law. Id., at 694. The Court described
what made a violation a municipality’s own violation:
“Local governing bodies, therefore, can be sued di

