(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

LOS ANGELES COUNTY, CALIFORNIA v. 

HUMPHRIES ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–350.

Argued October 5, 2010—Decided November 30, 2010

The Humphries (hereinafter respondents) were accused of child abuse
in California, but were later exonerated. However, under California
law, their names were added to a Child Abuse Central Index (Index),
where they would remain available to various state agencies for at
least 10 years. The statute has no procedures for allowing individu
als to challenge their inclusion in the Index, and neither California
nor Los Angeles County has created such procedures. Respondents
filed suit under §1983, seeking damages, an injunction, and a decla
ration that public officials and petitioner Los Angeles County had de
prived them of their constitutional rights by failing to create a
mechanism through which they could contest inclusion in the Index.
The District Court granted the defendants summary judgment, but
the Ninth Circuit disagreed, holding that the Fourteenth Amendment
required the State to provide those on the list with notice and a hear
ing, and thus respondents were entitled to declaratory relief. The
court also held that respondents were prevailing parties entitled to
attorney’s fees, including $60,000 from the county. The county ob
jected, claiming that as a municipal entity, it was liable only if its
“policy or custom” caused the deprivation of a plaintiff’s federal right,
Monell v. New York City Dept. of Social Servs., 436 U. S. 658, 694;
but a state policy caused any deprivation here. The Ninth Circuit, in
ter alia, found that respondents did prevail against the county on
their claim for declaratory relief because Monell did not apply to pro
spective relief claims.
Held: Monell’s “policy or custom” requirement applies in §1983 cases
irrespective of whether the relief sought is monetary or prospective.
Pp. 4–10.

