2

LOS ANGELES COUNTY v. HUMPHRIES
Syllabus
(a) In Monroe v. Pape, 365 U. S. 167, this Court based its holding
that municipal entities were not “person[s]” under §1983 on the pro
vision’s legislative history, particularly Congress’ rejection of the so
called Sherman amendment, which would have made municipalities
liable for damages done by private persons “ ‘riotously and tumultu
ously assembled,’ ” id., at 188–190, and n. 38. Reexamining this leg
islative history in Monell, the Court overruled Monroe. It concluded
that Congress had rejected the Sherman amendment, not because it
would have imposed liability on municipalities, but because it would
have imposed such liability solely based on the acts of others. The
Court, on the basis of the statutory text and the legislative history,
went on to explain what acts are the municipality’s own for purposes
of liability. The Court held that “a municipality cannot be held li
able” solely for the acts of others, e.g., “solely because it employs a
tortfeasor,” 436 U. S., at 691, but it may be held liable “when execu
tion of a government’s policy or custom . . . inflicts the injury,” id., at
694. Pp. 4–7.
(b) Section 1983, read in light of Monell’s understanding of the leg
islative history, explains why claims for prospective relief, like claims
for money damages, fall within the scope of the “policy or custom” re
quirement. Nothing in §1983 suggests that the causation require
ment should change with the form of relief sought. In fact, the text
suggests the opposite when it provides that a person who meets
§1983’s elements “shall be liable . . . in an action at law, suit in eq
uity, or other proper proceeding for redress.” Thus, as Monell explic
itly stated, “local governing bodies . . . can be sued directly under
§1983 for monetary, declaratory, or injunctive relief where, as here,
the action that is alleged to be unconstitutional implements or exe
cutes” a policy or custom. 436 U. S., at 690. To find the “policy or
custom” requirement inapplicable in prospective relief cases would
also undermine Monell’s logic. For whether an action or omission is a
municipality’s “own” has to do with the nature of the action or omis
sion, not with the nature of the relief that is later sought in court.
Pp. 7–8.
(c) Respondents’ arguments to the contrary are unconvincing.
Pp. 8–9.

Reversed and remanded.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which all other
Members joined, except KAGAN, J., who took no part in the considera
tion or decision of the case.

