8

LOS ANGELES COUNTY v. HUMPHRIES
Opinion of the Court

elements “shall be liable . . . in an action at law, suit in
equity, or other proper proceeding for redress.” Thus, as
Monell explicitly stated, “[l]ocal governing bodies . . . can
be sued directly under §1983 for monetary, declaratory, or
injunctive relief where, as here, the action that is alleged
to be unconstitutional implements or executes” a policy or
custom. 436 U. S., at 690 (emphasis added). Monell went
on to quote this Court’s statement in a 1973 case, Kenosha
v. Bruno, 412 U. S. 507, 513, to the effect that the Con
gress that enacted §1983 did not intend the “ ‘generic word
“person” . . . to have a bifurcated application to municipal
corporations depending on the nature of the relief sought
against them.’ ” 436 U. S., at 701, n. 66 (emphasis added).
Monell added that “[n]othing we say today affects” this
pre-Monell “conclusion.” Ibid.
Monell’s logic also argues against any such relief-based
bifurcation. The Monell Court thought that Congress
intended potential §1983 liability where a municipality’s
own violations were at issue but not where only the viola
tions of others were at issue. The “policy or custom” re
quirement rests upon that distinction and embodies it in
law. To find the requirement inapplicable where prospec
tive relief is at issue would undermine Monell’s logic. For
whether an action or omission is a municipality’s “own”
has to do with the nature of the action or omission, not
with the nature of the relief that is later sought in court.
C
The Humphries’ (hereinafter respondents) arguments to
the contrary are unconvincing. Respondents correctly note
that by the time Monell reached the Supreme Court only
the plaintiffs’ damages claim remained live. See id., at
661. From this fact they conclude that the Court’s holding
applies directly only to claims for monetary damages. A
holding, however, can extend through its logic beyond the
specific facts of the particular case. It does so here.

