Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

SCALIA, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–63
_________________

CORY R. MAPLES, PETITIONER v. KIM T. THOMAS,

COMMISSIONER, ALABAMA DEPARTMENT OF 

CORRECTIONS 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT

[January 18, 2012]


JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom JUSTICE THOMAS joins,
dissenting.
The Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals held that Cory
Maples’ appeal from the denial of his state postconviction
petition was barred because he had not filed a notice of
appeal within the allotted time. The Court now concludes
that Maples has established cause for his procedural
default by reason of abandonment by his attorneys. Because I cannot agree with that conclusion, and because
Maples’ alternative argument fares no better, I would
affirm the judgment.
I

A

Our doctrine of procedural default reflects, and furthers,
the principle that errors in state criminal trials should
be remedied in state court. As we have long recognized,
federal habeas review for state prisoners imposes significant costs on the States, undermining not only their practical interest in the finality of their criminal judgments,
see Engle v. Isaac, 456 U. S. 107, 126–127 (1982), but also
the primacy of their courts in adjudicating the constitutional rights of defendants prosecuted under state law, id.,
at 128. We have further recognized that “[t]hese costs are


2

MAPLES v. THOMAS
SCALIA, J., dissenting

particularly high . . . when a state prisoner, through a
procedural default, prevents adjudication of his constitutional claims in state court.” Coleman v. Thompson, 501
U. S. 722, 748 (1991). In that situation, the prisoner has
“deprived the state courts of an opportunity to address
those claims in the first instance,” id., at 732, thereby
leaving the state courts without “a chance to mend their
own fences and avoid federal intrusion,” Engle, 456 U. S.,
at 129. For that reason, and because permitting federalcourt review of defaulted claims would “undercu[t] the
State’s ability to enforce its procedural rules,” ibid., we
have held that when a state court has relied on an adequate and independent state procedural ground in denying
a prisoner’s claims, the prisoner ordinarily may not obtain
federal habeas relief. Coleman, 501 U. S., at 729–730.
To be sure, the prohibition on federal-court review of
defaulted claims is not absolute. A habeas petitioner’s default in state court will not bar federal habeas review if
“the petitioner demonstrates cause and actual prejudice,”
id., at 748—“cause” constituting “something external to
the petitioner, something that cannot fairly be attributed
to him,” that impeded compliance with the State’s procedural rule, id., at 753. As a general matter, an attorney’s
mistakes (or omissions) do not meet the standard “because
the attorney is the petitioner’s agent when acting, or
failing to act, in furtherance of the litigation, and the
petitioner must ‘bear the risk of attorney error.’ ” Ibid.
(quoting Murray v. Carrier, 477 U. S. 478, 488 (1986)).
See also Link v. Wabash R. Co., 370 U. S. 626, 633–634,
and n. 10 (1962).
When an attorney’s error occurs at a stage of the proceedings at which the defendant has a constitutional right
to effective assistance of counsel, that error may constitute
cause to excuse a resulting procedural default. A State’s
failure in its duty to provide an effective attorney, as
measured by the standard set forth in Strickland v. Wash-


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

ington, 466 U. S. 668 (1984), makes the attorney’s error
chargeable to the State, and hence external to the defense.
See Murray, supra, at 488. But when the client has no
right to counsel—as is the case in the postconviction setting, see Pennsylvania v. Finley, 481 U. S. 551, 555
(1987)—the client bears the risk of all attorney errors
made in the course of the representation, regardless of the
egregiousness of the mistake. Coleman, supra, at 754
(“[I]t is not the gravity of the attorney’s error that matters,
but that it constitutes a violation of petitioner’s right to
counsel, so that the error must be seen as an external
factor”).
B
In light of the principles just set out, the Court is correct
to conclude, ante, at 14, that a habeas petitioner’s procedural default may be excused when it is attributable to
abandonment by his attorney. In such a case, Coleman’s
rationale for attributing the attorney’s acts and omissions
to the client breaks down; for once the attorney has ceased
acting as the client’s agent, “well-settled principles of
agency law,” 501 U. S., at 754, no longer support charging
the client with his lawyer’s mistakes. The attorney’s
mistakes may therefore be understood as an “external
factor,” ibid., and in appropriate circumstances may justify excusing the prisoner’s procedural default.
I likewise agree with the Court’s conclusion, ante, at 15,
that Maples’ two out-of-state attorneys of record, Jaasi
Munanka and Clara Ingen-Housz, had abandoned Maples
by the time the Alabama trial court entered its order
denying his petition for postconviction relief. As the Court
observes, ante, at 15–16, without informing Maples or
seeking leave from the Alabama trial court to withdraw
from Maples’ case, both Munanka and Ingen-Housz left
Sullivan & Cromwell’s employ and accepted new positions
that precluded them from continuing to represent Maples.


4

MAPLES v. THOMAS
SCALIA, J., dissenting

This conduct amounted to renunciation of their roles as
Maples’ agents, see 1 Restatement (Second) of Agency
§119, Comment b (1957) (hereinafter Restatement 2d),
and thus terminated their authority to act on Maples’
behalf, id., §118. As a result, Munanka’s and IngenHousz’s failure to take action in response to the trial
court’s order should not be imputed to Maples.
It is an unjustified leap, however, to conclude that Maples was left unrepresented during the relevant window
between the Alabama trial court’s dismissal of his postconviction petition and expiration of the 42-day period for
filing a notice of appeal established by Alabama Rule of
Appellate Procedure 4(a)(1) (2009). Start with Maples’
own allegations: In his amended federal habeas petition,
Maples alleged that, at the time he sought postconviction relief in Alabama trial court, he “was represented by
Sullivan & Cromwell of New York, New York.” App. 256.
Although the petition went on to identify Munanka and
Ingen-Housz as “the two Sullivan lawyers handling the
matter,” id., at 257, its statement that Maples was “represented” by the firm itself strongly suggests that Maples
viewed himself as having retained the services of the firm
as a whole, a perfectly natural understanding. “When a
client retains a lawyer who practices with a firm, the
presumption is that both the lawyer and the firm have
been retained.” 1 Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers §31, Comment f, p. 222 (1998). Admittedly,
in connection with the attempt before the Alabama trial
court to extend the time for appeal, Sullivan & Cromwell
partner Marc De Leeuw submitted an affidavit stating
that the firm’s lawyers “handle pro bono cases on an individual basis” and that the lawyers who had appeared in
Maples’ case had followed that practice, “attempt[ing] not
to use the firm name on correspondence or court papers.”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 257a. But Maples’ habeas petition is
the pleading that initiated the current litigation; and


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

surely the allegations that it contained should be given
priority over representations made to prior courts.*
In any case, even if Maples had no attorney-client relationship with the Sullivan & Cromwell firm, Munanka
and Ingen-Housz were surely not the only Sullivan &
Cromwell lawyers who represented Maples on an individual basis. De Leeuw’s affidavit acknowledged that he had
“been involved in [Maples’] case since the summer of
2001,” ibid., roughly a year before Munanka and IngenHousz left Sullivan & Cromwell, and it further stated that
after “Ms. Ingen-Housz and Mr. Munanka” learned of the
court’s initial order denying the State’s motion to dismiss
Maples’ postconviction petition in December 2001, “the
lawyers working on this case for Mr. Maples prepared
for the evidentiary hearing” Maples had requested, id., at
258a. Moreover, when Sullivan & Cromwell attorney
Felice Duffy filed a motion to appear pro hac vice before
the Alabama trial court in connection with the attempt to
extend the deadline, she stated that she had “worked on
[Maples’] case since October 14, 2002,” App. 231, months
before the procedural default took place.
According to the Court, see ante, at 17, De Leeuw’s
affidavit does not make clear how he was “involved” in
——————

* The Court says that the allegations in Maples’ own habeas petition
are not “persuasive evidence,” ante, at 17–18, n. 8, because Maples’
lawyers at Sullivan & Cromwell labored under a conflict of interest
when they prepared the document. This is a curious point, since the
effect of Maples’ statement was to implicate Sullivan & Cromwell as a
firm in missing the filing deadline. The conflict would have induced the
Sullivan & Cromwell lawyers to exonerate the firm. To be sure, as the
case later developed (at this stage abandonment had not yet been
conceived as the litigating strategy), it would have been in Maples’
interest to say he had no lawyers. But the issue the petition’s statement raises is not whether Maples was cleverly represented; it is
whether the statement was true. And if Sullivan & Cromwell’s involvement in preparing the petition has any bearing upon that, it only
reinforces the truth.


6

MAPLES v. THOMAS
SCALIA, J., dissenting

Maples’ case or whether lawyers other than Munanka and
Ingen-Housz were among those who prepared for the
anticipated evidentiary hearing; and Duffy’s motion does
not make clear what her “wor[k]” entailed. But there is
little doubt that Munanka and Ingen-Housz were not the
only attorneys who engaged in the preparations; and that
De Leeuw was “involved” and Duffy “worked” as lawyers
for Maples (what other role could they have taken on?).
De Leeuw’s distinction between “Ms. Ingen-Housz and Mr.
Munanka” and “the lawyers working on his case for Mr.
Maples” would have been senseless if the latter category
did not extend beyond the two named attorneys.
In sum, there is every indication that when the trial
court entered its order dismissing Maples’ postconviction
petition in May 2003, Maples continued to be represented
by a team of attorneys in Sullivan & Cromwell’s New York
office. The Court nonetheless insists that the actions of
these attorneys are irrelevant because they had not been
admitted to practice law in Alabama, had not entered
appearances in the Alabama trial court, and had not
sought to substitute for Munanka and Ingen-Housz. See
ante, at 18–19. The Court does not, however, explain why
these facts establish that the attorneys were not Maples’
agents for the purpose of attending to those aspects of the
case that did not require court appearance—which would
certainly include keeping track of orders issued and filing
deadlines. The Court’s quotation from the Restatement of
Agency, ante, at 18, that the “failure to acquire a qualification by the agent without which it is illegal to do an authorized act . . . terminates the agent’s authority to act,” 1
Restatement 2d, §111, at 290, omits the crucial condition
contained at the end of the section: “if thereafter he [the
agent] should infer that the principal, if he knew the facts,
would not consent to the further exercise of the authority.”
There was no basis whatever for these attorneys to infer
that Maples no longer wanted them to represent him,


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

SCALIA, J., dissenting

simply because they had not yet qualified before the Alabama court. Though it would have been “illegal” for these
attorneys to file a notice of appeal without being authorized to practice in Alabama, nothing prevented them from
first seeking to secure admission to practice, as Munanka
and Ingen-Housz initially had done, and then filing a
notice of appeal.
It would create a huge gap in our Coleman jurisprudence to disregard all attorney errors committed before
admission to the relevant court; and an even greater gap
to disregard (as the Court suggests) all errors committed
before the attorney enters an appearance. Moreover, even
if these attorneys cannot be regarded as Maples’ agents for
purposes of conducting the Alabama litigation, they were
at least his agents for purposes of advising him of the
impending deadline. His unawareness was the fault of
counsel who were his agents, and must be charged to him.
What happened here is simply “[a]ttorney ignorance or
inadvertence” of the sort that does not furnish cause to
excuse a procedural default. Coleman, 501 U. S., at 753.
But even leaving aside the question of Maples’ “unadmitted” attorneys at Sullivan & Cromwell, Maples had a
fully admitted attorney, who had entered an appearance,
in the person of local counsel, John Butler. There is no
support for the Court’s conclusion that Butler “did not
even begin to represent Maples.” Ante, at 19. True, the
affidavit Butler filed with the Alabama trial court in the
proceeding seeking extension of the deadline stated that
he had “no substantive involvement” with the case, and
that he had “agreed to serve as local counsel only.” App. to
Pet. for Cert. 255a. But a disclaimer of “substantive involvement” in a case, whether or not it violates a lawyer’s
ethical obligations, see ante, at 19, is not equivalent to a
denial of any agency role at all. A local attorney’s “nonsubstantive” involvement would surely include, at a minimum, keeping track of local court orders and advising


8

MAPLES v. THOMAS
SCALIA, J., dissenting

“substantive” counsel of impending deadlines. Nor did
Butler’s explanation for his failure to act when he received
a copy of the trial court’s order sound in abandonment.
Butler did not say, for instance, that he ignored the order
because he did not consider Maples to be his client. Instead, based on “past practice” and the content of the
order, Butler “assumed” that Maples’ lawyers at Sullivan
& Cromwell would receive a copy. App. to Pet. for Cert.
256a.
The Court gets this badly wrong when it states that
“Butler’s failure even to place a phone call to the New
York firm” demonstrates Butler’s “disclaimer of any genuinely representative role.” Ante, at 19. By equating the
very attorney error that contributed to Maples’ procedural
default with the absence of an agency relationship, the
Court ensures that today’s opinion will serve as a template
for future habeas petitioners seeking to evade Coleman’s
holding that ineffectiveness of postconviction counsel will
not furnish cause to excuse a procedural default. See 501
U. S., at 752–754. The trick will be to allege, not that
counsel was ineffective, but rather that counsel’s ineffectiveness demonstrates that he was not a genuinely representative agent. No precedent should be so easily circumvented by word games, but the damage is particularly
acute when the affected precedent is so firmly “grounded
in concerns of comity and federalism.” Id., at 730.
The Court’s last-gasp attempt to justify its conclusion
that Butler was not Maples’ agent is to point out that a
prosecutor sent a letter to Maples directly, informing him
of the defaulted appeal. See ante, at 20. The Court reasons that the prosecutor must have thought that Maples
had been abandoned by his lawyers, since to communicate
with a represented party would have been a violation of
ethical standards. Ibid. But even if this supposition is
correct, it is hard to understand what it proves. What
matters, after all, is not whether the prosecutor thought


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

SCALIA, J., dissenting

Maples had been abandoned, but whether Maples really
was abandoned. And as it turns out, Butler’s conduct
after learning about the default further belies any such
contention. Almost immediately, Butler began to cooperate with Maples’ lawyers at Sullivan & Cromwell, filing
papers as “Counsel for Mr. Maples” or “Local Counsel for
Petitioner Cory Maples” in multiple courts in an attempt
to rectify the mistake. See App. 229, 230, 236, 238. Had
Butler reassumed his representational duties after having
abandoned them? Hardly. There is no proper basis for a
conclusion of abandonment interruptus.
II
Maples argues in the alternative that his default should
be excused because his right to due process was violated
when the trial-court clerk failed to take action after Munanka’s and Ingen-Housz’s copies of the court’s dismissal
order were returned undeliverable. According to Maples,
our decision in Jones v. Flowers, 547 U. S. 220 (2006),
establishes that the clerk had a duty to do more.
We held in Jones that, when a mailed notice of a tax
sale is returned unclaimed, a State must take additional
reasonable steps to attempt to provide notice to the property owner before selling his property. See id., at 234. It
is questionable whether that holding has any relevance to
the circumstances here, which involved not the institution
of proceedings against an unwitting litigant, but rather
the issuance of an order in a pending case that was instituted by Maples himself. Indeed, I think it doubtful
whether due process entitles a litigant to any notice of a
court’s order in a pending case. The Federal Rules certainly reject the notion that notice is an absolute requirement. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 77(d)(2) provides
that “[l]ack of notice of the entry [of an order or judgment]
does not affect the time for appeal or relieve—or authorize
the court to relieve—a party for failing to appeal within


10

MAPLES v. THOMAS
SCALIA, J., dissenting

the time allowed, except as allowed by Federal Rule of
Appellate Procedure (4)(a).” And although Federal Rule
of Appellate Rule 4(a)(6) in turn provides that the time for
filing an appeal can be reopened when a litigant did not
receive notice, it establishes 180 days after the judgment
or order is entered as the outer limit by which a motion to
reopen must be filed. See Fed. Rule App. Proc. 4(a)(6)(B).
There is no need to grapple with this question, however,
because Butler received a copy of the trial court’s order.
“Under our system of representative litigation, ‘each party
. . . is considered to have notice of all facts, notice of which
can be charged upon [his] attorney.’ ” Irwin v. Department
of Veterans Affairs, 498 U. S. 89, 92 (1990) (quoting Link
v. Wabash R. Co., 370 U. S. 626, 634 (1962)). The notice to
Butler was therefore constitutionally sufficient.
*
*
*
One suspects that today’s decision is motivated in large
part by an understandable sense of frustration with the
State’s refusal to waive Maples’ procedural default in
the interest of fairness. Indeed, that frustration may well
explain the Court’s lengthy indictment of Alabama’s general procedures for providing representation to capital
defendants, ante, at 2–4, a portion of the Court’s opinion
that is so disconnected from the rest of its analysis as to be
otherwise inexplicable.
But if the interest of fairness justifies our excusing
Maples’ procedural default here, it does so whenever a
defendant’s procedural default is caused by his attorney.
That is simply not the law—and cannot be, if the states
are to have an orderly system of criminal litigation conducted by counsel. Our precedents allow a State to stand
on its rights and enforce a habeas petitioner’s procedural
default even when counsel is to blame. Because a faithful
application of those precedents leads to the conclusion that
Maples has not demonstrated cause to excuse his proce-


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

SCALIA, J., dissenting

dural default; and because the reasoning by which the
Court justifies the opposite conclusion invites future evisceration of the principle that defendants are responsible
for the mistakes of their attorneys; I respectfully dissent.

