(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MAPLES v. THOMAS, COMMISSIONER, ALABAMA 

DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–63. Argued October 4, 2011—January 18, 2012
Petitioner Cory R. Maples was found guilty of murder and sentenced to
death in Alabama state court. In 2001, Maples sought postconviction
relief in state court under Alabama Rule 32. Maples alleged, among
other things, that his underpaid and inexperienced trial attorneys
failed to afford him the effective assistance guaranteed by the Sixth
Amendment. His petition was written by two pro bono attorneys,
Jaasai Munanka and Clara Ingen-Housz, both associated with the
New York offices of the Sullivan & Cromwell law firm. As required
by Alabama law, the two attorneys engaged an Alabama lawyer,
John Butler, to move their admission pro hac vice. Butler made
clear, however, that he would undertake no substantive involvement
in the case.
In 2002, while Maples’ state postconviction petition was pending,
Munanka and Ingen-Housz left Sullivan & Cromwell. Their new employment disabled them from representing Maples. They did not inform Maples of their departure and consequent inability to serve as
his counsel. In disregard of Alabama law, neither sought the trial
court’s leave to withdraw. No other Sullivan & Cromwell attorney
entered an appearance, moved to substitute counsel, or otherwise notified the court of a change in Maples’ representation. Thus, Munanka, Ingen-Housz, and Butler remained Maples’ listed, and only, attorneys of record.
The trial court denied Maples’ petition in May 2003. Notices of the
order were posted to Munanka and Ingen-Housz at Sullivan &
Cromwell’s address. When those postings were returned, unopened,
the trial court clerk attempted no further mailing. Butler also received a copy of the order, but did not act on it. With no attorney of


2

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Syllabus
record in fact acting on Maples’ behalf, the 42-day period Maples had
to file a notice of appeal ran out.
About a month later, an Alabama Assistant Attorney General sent
a letter directly to Maples. The letter informed Maples of the missed
deadline and notified him that he had four weeks remaining to file a
federal habeas petition. Maples immediately contacted his mother,
who called Sullivan & Cromwell. Three Sullivan & Cromwell attorneys, through Butler, moved the trial court to reissue its order,
thereby restarting the 42-day appeal period. The court denied the
motion. The Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals then denied a writ
of mandamus that would have granted Maples leave to file an out-oftime appeal, and the State Supreme Court affirmed.
Thereafter, Maples sought federal habeas relief. Both the District
Court and the Eleventh Circuit denied his request, pointing to the
procedural default in state court, i.e., Maples’ failure timely to appeal
the state trial court’s order denying his Rule 32 petition for postconviction relief.
Held: Maples has shown the requisite “cause” to excuse his procedural default. Pp. 11–22.
(a) As a rule, a federal court may not entertain a state prisoner’s
habeas claims “when (1) ‘a state court [has] declined to address
[those] claims because the prisoner had failed to meet a state procedural requirement,’ and (2) ‘the state judgment rests on independent
and adequate state procedural grounds.’ ” Walker v. Martin, 562
U. S. ___, ___. The bar to federal review may be lifted, however, if
“the prisoner can demonstrate cause for the [procedural] default [in
state court] and actual prejudice as a result of the alleged violation of
federal law.” Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, 750.
Cause for a procedural default exists where “something external to
the petitioner, something that cannot fairly be attributed to him[,]
. . . ‘impeded [his] efforts to comply with the State’s procedural rule.’ ”
Id., at 753. A prisoner’s postconviction attorney’s negligence does not
qualify as “cause,” ibid., because the attorney is the prisoner’s agent,
and under “well-settled” agency law, the principal bears the risk of
his agent’s negligent conduct, id., at 753–754. Thus, a petitioner is
bound by his attorney’s failure to meet a filing deadline and cannot
rely on that failure to establish cause. Ibid.
A markedly different situation arises, however, when an attorney
abandons his client without notice, and thereby occasions the default.
In such cases, the principal-agent relationship is severed and the attorney’s acts or omissions “cannot fairly be attributed to [the client].”
Id., at 753. Nor can the client be faulted for failing to act on his own
behalf when he lacks reason to believe his attorneys of record, in fact,
are not representing him.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
Holland v. Florida, 560 U. S. ___, is instructive. There, the Court
found that the one-year deadline for filing a federal habeas petition
can be tolled for equitable reasons, and that an attorney’s unprofessional conduct may sometimes be an “extraordinary circumstance”
justifying equitable tolling. Id., at ___, ___–___. The Court recognized that an attorney’s negligence does not provide a basis for tolling
a statutory time limit. Id., at ___. Holland’s claim that he was abandoned by his attorney, however, if true, “would suffice to establish extraordinary circumstances beyond his control,” id., at ___ (opinion of
ALITO, J.). Pp. 11–15.
(b) From the time of his initial Rule 32 petition until well after
time ran out for appealing the trial court’s denial of that petition,
Maples’ sole attorneys of record were Munanka, Ingen-Housz, and
Butler. Unknown to Maples, none of those lawyers was in fact serving as his attorney during the 42-day appeal period. Pp. 15–21.
(1) The State contends that Sullivan & Cromwell represented
Maples throughout his state postconviction proceedings, and that, as
a result, Maples cannot establish abandonment by counsel during the
42-day period. But it is undisputed that Munanka and Ingen-Housz
severed their agency relationship with Maples long before the default
occurred. Furthermore, because the attorneys did not seek the trial
court’s permission to withdraw, they allowed court records to convey
that they remained the attorneys of record. As such, the attorneys,
not Maples, would be the addressees of court orders Alabama law requires the clerk to furnish.
The State asserts that, after Munanka’s and Ingen-Housz’s departure, other Sullivan & Cromwell attorneys came forward to serve as
Maples’ counsel. At the time of the default, however, those attorneys
had not been admitted to practice in Alabama, had not entered their
appearances on Maples’ behalf, and had done nothing to inform the
Alabama court that they wished to substitute for Munanka and IngenHousz. Thus, they lacked the legal authority to act on Maples’
behalf before his time to appeal expired. Pp. 15–19.
(2) Maples’ only other attorney of record, local counsel Butler, did
not even begin to represent Maples. Butler told Munanka and IngenHousz that he would serve as local counsel only for the purpose of enabling them to appear pro hac vice and would play no substantive
role in the case. Other factors confirm that Butler was not Maples’
“agent in any meaningful sense of that word.” Holland, 560 U. S., at
___ (opinion of ALITO, J.). Upon receiving a copy of the trial court’s
order, Butler did not contact Sullivan & Cromwell to ensure that firm
lawyers were taking appropriate action. Nor did the State treat Butler as Maples’ actual representative. Notably, the Alabama Assistant
Attorney General wrote directly and only to Maples, notwithstanding


4

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Syllabus
an ethical obligation to refrain from communicating directly with an
opposing party known to be represented by counsel. Pp. 19–20.
(3) Not only was Maples left without any functioning attorney of
record; the very listing of Munanka, Ingen-Housz, and Butler as his
representatives meant that he had no right personally to receive notice. He in fact received none within the 42 days allowed for commencing an appeal. Given no reason to suspect that he lacked counsel able and willing to represent him, Maples surely was blocked from
complying with the State’s procedural rule. Pp. 20–21.
(c) “The cause and prejudice requirement shows due regard for
States’ finality and comity interests while ensuring that ‘fundamental fairness [remains] the central concern of the writ of habeas corpus.’ ” Dretke v. Haley, 541 U. S. 386, 393. In the unusual circumstances of this case, agency law principles and fundamental fairness
point to the same conclusion: there was indeed cause to excuse Maples’ procedural default. Through no fault of his own, he lacked the
assistance of any authorized attorney during the 42-day appeal period. And he had no reason to suspect that, in reality, he had been reduced to pro se status. Pp. 21–22.
(d) The question of prejudice, which neither the District Court nor
the Eleventh Circuit reached, remains open for decision on remand.
P. 22.

586 F. 3d 879, reversed and remanded.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, BREYER, ALITO, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined.
ALITO, J., filed a concurring opinion. SCALIA, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which THOMAS, J., joined.

