Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–63
_________________

CORY R. MAPLES, PETITIONER v. KIM T. THOMAS,

COMMISSIONER, ALABAMA DEPARTMENT OF 

CORRECTIONS 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT

[January 18, 2012]


JUSTICE GINSBURG delivered the opinion of the Court.
Cory R. Maples is an Alabama capital prisoner sentenced to death in 1997 for the murder of two individuals.
At trial, he was represented by two appointed lawyers,
minimally paid and with scant experience in capital cases.
Maples sought postconviction relief in state court, alleging
ineffective assistance of counsel and several other trial
infirmities. His petition, filed in August 2001, was written
by two New York attorneys serving pro bono, both associated with the same New York-based large law firm. An
Alabama attorney, designated as local counsel, moved
the admission of the out-of-state counsel pro hac vice. As
understood by New York counsel, local counsel would
facilitate their appearance, but would undertake no substantive involvement in the case.
In the summer of 2002, while Maples’ postconviction
petition remained pending in the Alabama trial court, his
New York attorneys left the law firm; their new employment disabled them from continuing to represent Maples.
They did not inform Maples of their departure and conse-


2

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

quent inability to serve as his counsel. Nor did they seek
the Alabama trial court’s leave to withdraw. Neither they
nor anyone else moved for the substitution of counsel able
to handle Maples’ case.
In May 2003, the Alabama trial court denied Maples’
petition. Notices of the court’s order were posted to the
New York attorneys at the address of the law firm with
which they had been associated. Those postings were returned, unopened, to the trial court clerk, who attempted no further mailing. With no attorney of record in fact
acting on Maples’ behalf, the time to appeal ran out.
Thereafter, Maples petitioned for a writ of habeas
corpus in federal court. The District Court and, in turn,
the Eleventh Circuit, rejected his petition, pointing to the
procedural default in state court, i.e., Maples’ failure
timely to appeal the Alabama trial court’s order denying
him postconviction relief. Maples, it is uncontested, was
blameless for the default.
The sole question this Court has taken up for review is
whether, on the extraordinary facts of Maples’ case, there
is “cause” to excuse the default. Maples maintains that
there is, for the lawyers he believed to be vigilantly representing him had abandoned the case without leave of
court, without informing Maples they could no longer
represent him, and without securing any recorded substitution of counsel. We agree. Abandoned by counsel, Maples was left unrepresented at a critical time for his state
postconviction petition, and he lacked a clue of any need to
protect himself pro se. In these circumstances, no just
system would lay the default at Maples’ death-cell door.
Satisfied that the requisite cause has been shown, we
reverse the Eleventh Circuit’s judgment.
I
A
Alabama sets low eligibility requirements for lawyers


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

appointed to represent indigent capital defendants at trial.
American Bar Association, Evaluating Fairness and Accuracy in State Death Penalty Systems: The Alabama Death
Penalty Assessment Report 117–120 (June 2006) (hereinafter ABA Report); Brief for Alabama Appellate Court
Justices et al. as Amici Curiae 7–8 (hereinafter Justices
Brief). Appointed counsel need only be a member of the
Alabama bar and have “five years’ prior experience in the
active practice of criminal law.” Ala. Code §13A–5–54
(2006). Experience with capital cases is not required.
Justices Brief 7–8. Nor does the State provide, or require
appointed counsel to gain, any capital-case-specific professional education or training. ABA Report 129–131; Justices Brief 14–16.
Appointed counsel in death penalty cases are also undercompensated. ABA Report 124–129; Justices Brief 12–
14. Until 1999, the State paid appointed capital defense
attorneys just “$40.00 per hour for time expended in court
and $20.00 per hour for time reasonably expended out of
court in the preparation of [the defendant’s] case.” Ala.
Code §15–12–21(d) (1995). Although death penalty litigation is plainly time intensive,1 the State capped at $1,000
fees recoverable by capital defense attorneys for out-ofcourt work. Ibid.2 Even today, court-appointed attorneys
receive only $70 per hour. 2011 Ala. Acts no. 2011–678,
pp. 1072–1073, §6.
——————
1 One

study of federal capital trials from 1990 to 1997 found that defense attorneys spent an average of 1,480 out-of-court hours preparing a defendant’s case. Subcommittee on Federal Death Penalty Cases,
Committee on Defender Services, Judicial Conference of the United
States, Federal Death Penalty Cases: Recommendations Concerning the
Cost and Quality of Defense Representation 14 (May 1998).
2 In 1999, the State removed the cap on fees for out-of-court work in
capital cases. Ala. Code §15–12–21(d) (2010 Cum. Supp.). Perhaps not
coincidentally, 70% of the inmates on Alabama’s death row in 2006,
including Maples, had been convicted when the $1,000 cap was in
effect. ABA Report 126.


4

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

Nearly alone among the States, Alabama does not guarantee representation to indigent capital defendants in
postconviction proceedings. ABA Report 111–112, 158–
160; Justices Brief 33. The State has elected, instead, “to
rely on the efforts of typically well-funded [out-of-state]
volunteers.” Brief in Opposition in Barbour v. Allen, O. T.
2006, No. 06–10605, p. 23. Thus, as of 2006, 86% of the
attorneys representing Alabama’s death row inmates in
state collateral review proceedings “either worked for the
Equal Justice Initiative (headed by NYU Law professor
Bryan Stevenson), out-of-state public interest groups like
the Innocence Project, or an out-of-state mega-firm.” Brief
in Opposition 16, n. 4. On occasion, some prisoners sentenced to death receive no postconviction representation at
all. See ABA Report 112 (“[A]s of April 2006, approximately fifteen of Alabama’s death row inmates in the final rounds of state appeals had no lawyer to represent
them.”).
B
This system was in place when, in 1997, Alabama
charged Maples with two counts of capital murder; the
victims, Stacy Alan Terry and Barry Dewayne Robinson
II, were Maples’ friends who, on the night of the murders,
had been out on the town with him. Maples pleaded not
guilty, and his case proceeded to trial, where he was represented by two court-appointed Alabama attorneys. Only
one of them had earlier served in a capital case. See Tr.
3081. Neither counsel had previously tried the penalty
phase of a capital case. Compensation for each lawyer was
capped at $1,000 for time spent out-of-court preparing
Maples’ case, and at $40 per hour for in-court services.
See Ala. Code §15–12–21 (1995).
Finding Maples guilty on both counts, the jury recommended that he be sentenced to death. The vote was 10 to
2, the minimum number Alabama requires for a death


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

recommendation. See Ala. Code §13A–5–46(f) (1994)
(“The decision of the jury to recommend a sentence of
death must be based on a vote of at least 10 jurors.”).
Accepting the jury’s recommendation, the trial court sentenced Maples to death. On direct appeal, the Alabama
Court of Criminal Appeals and the Alabama Supreme
Court affirmed the convictions and sentence. Ex parte
Maples, 758 So. 2d 81 (Ala. 1999); Maples v. State, 758
So. 2d 1 (Ala. Crim. App. 1999). We denied certiorari.
Maples v. Alabama, 531 U. S. 830 (2000).
Two out-of-state volunteers represented Maples in
postconviction proceedings: Jaasi Munanka and Clara
Ingen-Housz, both associates at the New York offices of
the Sullivan & Cromwell law firm. At the time, Alabama
required out-of-state attorneys to associate local counsel
when seeking admission to practice pro hac vice before an
Alabama court, regardless of the nature of the proceeding.
Rule Governing Admission to the Ala. State Bar VII (2000)
(hereinafter Rule VII).3 The Alabama Rule further prescribed that the local attorney’s name “appear on all notices, orders, pleadings, and other documents filed in the
cause,” and that local counsel “accept joint and several
responsibility with the foreign attorney to the client, to
opposing parties and counsel, and to the court or administrative agency in all matters [relating to the case].”
Rule VII(C).
Munanka and Ingen-Housz associated Huntsville, Alabama attorney John Butler as local counsel. Notwithstanding his obligations under Alabama law, Butler
informed Munanka and Ingen-Housz, “at the outset,” that
he would serve as local counsel only for the purpose of
——————
3 In 2006, Alabama revised Rule VII. See Rule Governing Admission
to the Ala. State Bar VII (2009). Under the new rule, the State allows
out-of-state counsel to represent pro bono indigent criminal defendants
in postconviction proceedings without involvement of local counsel.
Ibid.


6

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

allowing the two New York attorneys to appear pro hac
vice on behalf of Maples. App. to Pet. for Cert. 255a.
Given his lack of “resources, available time [and] experience,” Butler told the Sullivan & Cromwell lawyers, he
could not “deal with substantive issues in the case.” Ibid.
The Sullivan & Cromwell attorneys accepted Butler’s
conditions. Id., at 257a. This arrangement between outof-state and local attorneys, it appears, was hardly atypical. See Justices Brief 36 (“The fact is that local counsel
for out-of-state attorneys in post-conviction litigation most
often do nothing other than provide the mechanism for
foreign attorneys to be admitted.”).
With the aid of his pro bono counsel, Maples filed a
petition for postconviction relief under Alabama Rule of
Criminal Procedure 32.4 Among other claims, Maples
asserted that his court-appointed attorneys provided constitutionally ineffective assistance during both guilt and
penalty phases of his capital trial. App. 29–126. He
alleged, in this regard, that his inexperienced and underfunded attorneys failed to develop and raise an obvious
intoxication defense, did not object to several egregious
instances of prosecutorial misconduct, and woefully underprepared for the penalty phase of his trial. The State
responded by moving for summary dismissal of Maples’
petition. On December 27, 2001, the trial court denied the
State’s motion.
Some seven months later, in the summer of 2002, both
Munanka and Ingen-Housz left Sullivan & Cromwell.
App. to Pet. for Cert. 258a. Munanka gained a clerkship
with a federal judge; Ingen-Housz accepted a position with
the European Commission in Belgium. Ibid. Neither
attorney told Maples of their departure from Sullivan &
Cromwell or of their resulting inability to continue to
——————
4 Originally filed in August 2001, the petition was resubmitted, with
only minor alterations, in December 2001. See App. 22–24, 28–142.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

represent him. In disregard of Alabama law, see Ala. Rule
Crim. Proc. 6.2, Comment, neither attorney sought the
trial court’s leave to withdraw, App. to Pet. for Cert. 223a.
Compounding Munanka’s and Ingen-Housz’s inaction, no
other Sullivan & Cromwell lawyer entered an appearance
on Maples’ behalf, moved to substitute counsel, or otherwise notified the court of any change in Maples’ representation. Ibid.
Another nine months passed. During this time period,
no Sullivan & Cromwell attorneys assigned to Maples’
case sought admission to the Alabama bar, entered appearances on Maples’ behalf, or otherwise advised the
Alabama court that Munanka and Ingen-Housz were no
longer Maples’ attorneys. Thus, Munanka and IngenHousz (along with Butler) remained Maples’ listed, and
only, “attorneys of record.” Id., at 223a.
There things stood when, in May 2003, the trial court,
without holding a hearing, entered an order denying
Maples’ Rule 32 petition. App. 146–225.5 The clerk of the
Alabama trial court mailed copies of the order to Maples’
three attorneys of record. He sent Munanka’s and IngenHousz’s copies to Sullivan & Cromwell’s New York address, which the pair had provided upon entering their
appearances.
When those copies arrived at Sullivan & Cromwell,
Munanka and Ingen-Housz had long since departed. The
notices, however, were not forwarded to another Sullivan
& Cromwell attorney. Instead, a mailroom employee sent
the unopened envelopes back to the court. “Returned to
Sender—Attempted, Unknown” was stamped on the envelope addressed to Munanka. App. to Reply to Brief in
——————
5 One

of Maples’ attorneys observed, without contradiction, that the
trial court’s order was a “word for word copy of the proposed Order that
the State had submitted [with] its [December 2001] Motion to Dismiss.”
Id., at 300.


8

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

Opposition 8a. A similar stamp appeared on the envelope
addressed to Ingen-Housz, along with the handwritten
notation “Return to Sender—Left Firm.” Id., at 7a.
Upon receiving back the unopened envelopes he had
mailed to Munanka and Ingen-Housz, the Alabama court
clerk took no further action. In particular, the clerk did
not contact Munanka or Ingen-Housz at the personal
telephone numbers or home addresses they had provided
in their pro hac vice applications. See Ingen-Housz Verified Application for Admission to Practice Under Rule VII,
p. 1; and Munanka Verified Application for Admission to
Practice Under Rule VII, p. 1, in Maples v. State, No. CC–
95–842.60 (C. C. Morgan Cty., Ala.). Nor did the clerk
alert Sullivan & Cromwell or Butler. Butler received his
copy of the order, but did not act on it. App. to Pet. for
Cert. 256a. He assumed that Munanka and Ingen-Housz,
who had been “CC’d” on the order, would take care of filing
an appeal. Ibid.
Meanwhile, the clock ticked on Maples’ appeal. Under
Alabama’s Rules of Appellate Procedure, Maples had 42
days to file a notice of appeal from the trial court’s May 22,
2003 order denying Maples’ petition for postconviction
relief. Rule 4(a)(1) (2000). No appeal notice was filed, and
the time allowed for filing expired on July 7, 2003.
A little over a month later, on August 13, 2003, Alabama Assistant Attorney General Jon Hayden, the attorney representing the State in Maples’ collateral review
proceedings, sent a letter directly to Maples. App. to Pet.
for Cert. 253a–254a. Hayden’s letter informed Maples of
the missed deadline for initiating an appeal within the
State’s system, and notified him that four weeks remained
during which he could file a federal habeas petition. Ibid.
Hayden mailed the letter to Maples only, using his prison
address. Ibid. No copy was sent to Maples’ attorneys of
record, or to anyone else acting on Maples’ behalf. Ibid.
Upon receiving the State’s letter, Maples immediately


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

contacted his mother. Id., at 258a. She telephoned Sullivan & Cromwell to inquire about her son’s case. Ibid.
Prompted by her call, Sullivan & Cromwell attorneys
Marc De Leeuw, Felice Duffy, and Kathy Brewer submitted a motion, through Butler, asking the trial court to
reissue its order denying Maples’ Rule 32 petition, thereby
restarting the 42-day appeal period. Id., at 222a.
The trial court denied the motion, id., at 222a–225a, noting that Munanka and Ingen-Housz had not withdrawn
from the case and, consequently, were “still attorneys of record for the petitioner,” id., at 223a. Furthermore, the court added, attorneys De Leeuw, Duffy, and
Brewer had not “yet been admitted to practice in Alabama” or “entered appearances as attorneys of record.”
Ibid. “How,” the court asked, “can a Circuit Clerk in
Decatur, Alabama know what is going on in a law firm in
New York, New York?” Id., at 223a–224a. Declining to
blame the clerk for the missed notice of appeal deadline,
the court said it was “unwilling to enter into subterfuge in
order to gloss over mistakes made by counsel for the petitioner.” Ibid.
Maples next petitioned the Alabama Court of Criminal
Appeals for a writ of mandamus, granting him leave to file
an out-of-time appeal. Rejecting Maples’ plea, the Court of
Criminal Appeals determined that, although the clerk had
“assumed a duty to notify the parties of the resolution of
Maples’s Rule 32 petition,” the clerk had satisfied that
obligation by sending notices to the attorneys of record at
the addresses those attorneys provided. Id., at 234a–235a.
Butler’s receipt of the order, the court observed, sufficed to
notify all attorneys “in light of their apparent co-counsel
status.” Id., at 235a–236a (quoting Thomas v. Kellett, 489
So. 2d 554, 555 (Ala. 1986)). The Alabama Supreme Court
summarily affirmed the Court of Criminal Appeals’ judgment, App. to Pet. for Cert. 237a, and this Court denied
certiorari, Maples v. Alabama, 543 U. S. 1148 (2005).


10

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

Having exhausted his state postconviction remedies,
Maples sought federal habeas corpus relief. Addressing
the ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claims Maples
stated in his federal petition, the State urged that Maples
had forever forfeited those claims. Maples did, indeed,
present the claims in his state postconviction (Rule 32)
petition, the State observed, but he did not timely appeal
from the trial court’s denial of his petition. That procedural default, the State maintained, precluded federalcourt consideration of the claims.6 Maples replied that the
default should be excused, because he missed the appeal
deadline “through no fault of his own.” App. 262 (internal
quotation marks omitted).
The District Court determined that Maples had defaulted his ineffective-assistance claims, and that he had not
shown “cause” sufficient to overcome the default. App. to
Pet. for Cert. 49a–55a. The court understood Maples to
argue that errors committed by his postconviction counsel,
not any lapse on the part of the court clerk in Alabama,
provided the requisite “cause” to excuse his failure to meet
Alabama’s 42-days-to-appeal Rule. Id., at 55a. Such an
argument was inadmissible, the court ruled, because this
Court, in Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722 (1991), had
held that the ineffectiveness of postconviction appellate
counsel could not qualify as cause. App. to Pet. for Cert.
55a (citing Coleman, 501 U. S., at 751).
A divided panel of the Eleventh Circuit affirmed. Maples v. Allen, 586 F. 3d 879 (2009) (per curiam). In accord
with the District Court, the Court of Appeals’ majority
held that Maples defaulted his ineffective-assistance
——————
6 In opposing Maples’ request for an out-of-time appeal, the State
argued to the Alabama Supreme Court that such an appeal was unwarranted. In that context, the State noted that Maples “may still present
his postconviction claims to [the federal habeas] court.” 35 Record, Doc.
No. 55, p. 22, n. 4. The State’s current position is in some tension with
that observation.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

claims in state court by failing to file a timely notice of
appeal, id., at 890, and that Coleman rendered Maples’
assertion of “cause” unacceptable, 586 F. 3d, at 891.
Judge Barkett dissented. Id., at 895–898. She concluded that the Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals had acted
“arbitrarily” in refusing to grant Maples’ request for an
out-of-time appeal. Id., at 896. In a case involving “indistinguishable facts,” Judge Barkett noted, the Alabama
appellate court had allowed the petitioner to file a late
appeal. Ibid. (citing Marshall v. State, 884 So. 2d 898, 899
(Ala. Crim. App. 2002)). Inconsistent application of the
42-days-to-appeal rule, Judge Barkett said, “render[ed]
the rule an inadequate ground on which to bar federal
review of Maples’s claims.” 586 F. 3d, at 897. The interests of justice, she added, required review of Maples’
claims in view of the exceptional circumstances and high
stakes involved, and the absence of any fault on Maples’
part. Ibid.
We granted certiorari to decide whether the uncommon
facts presented here establish cause adequate to excuse
Maples’ procedural default. 562 U. S. ___ (2011).
II

A

As a rule, a state prisoner’s habeas claims may not be
entertained by a federal court “when (1) ‘a state court
[has] declined to address [those] claims because the prisoner had failed to meet a state procedural requirement,’
and (2) ‘the state judgment rests on independent and
adequate state procedural grounds.’ ” Walker v. Martin,
562 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 7) (quoting Coleman,
501 U. S., at 729–730). The bar to federal review may be
lifted, however, if “the prisoner can demonstrate cause for
the [procedural] default [in state court] and actual prejudice as a result of the alleged violation of federal law.” Id.,
at 750; see Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U. S. 72, 84–85


12

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

(1977).
Given the single issue on which we granted review, we
will assume, for purposes of this decision, that the Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals’ refusal to consider
Maples’ ineffective-assistance claims rested on an independent and adequate state procedural ground: namely,
Maples’ failure to satisfy Alabama’s Rule requiring a
notice of appeal to be filed within 42 days from the trial
court’s final order. Accordingly, we confine our consideration to the question whether Maples has shown cause to
excuse the missed notice of appeal deadline.
Cause for a procedural default exists where “something
external to the petitioner, something that cannot fairly be
attributed to him[,] . . . ‘impeded [his] efforts to comply
with the State’s procedural rule.’ ” Coleman, 501 U. S., at
753 (quoting Murray v. Carrier, 477 U. S. 478, 488 (1986);
emphasis in original). Negligence on the part of a prisoner’s postconviction attorney does not qualify as “cause.”
Coleman, 501 U. S., at 753. That is so, we reasoned in
Coleman, because the attorney is the prisoner’s agent, and
under “well-settled principles of agency law,” the principal
bears the risk of negligent conduct on the part of his
agent. Id., at 753–754. See also Irwin v. Department of
Veterans Affairs, 498 U. S. 89, 92 (1990) (“Under our
system of representative litigation, ‘each party is deemed
bound by the acts of his lawyer-agent.’ ” (quoting Link v.
Wabash R. Co., 370 U. S. 626, 634 (1962))). Thus, when a
petitioner’s postconviction attorney misses a filing deadline, the petitioner is bound by the oversight and cannot
rely on it to establish cause. Coleman, 501 U. S., at 753–
754. We do not disturb that general rule.
A markedly different situation is presented, however, when
an attorney abandons his client without notice, and thereby occasions the default. Having severed the principalagent relationship, an attorney no longer acts, or fails
to act, as the client’s representative. See 1 Restatement


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

(Third) of Law Governing Lawyers §31, Comment f (1998)
(“Withdrawal, whether proper or improper, terminates
the lawyer’s authority to act for the client.”). His acts or
omissions therefore “cannot fairly be attributed to [the
client].” Coleman, 501 U. S., at 753. See, e.g., Jamison v.
Lockhart, 975 F. 2d 1377, 1380 (CA8 1992) (attorney
conduct may provide cause to excuse a state procedural
default where, as a result of a conflict of interest, the
attorney “ceased to be [petitioner’s] agent”); Porter v.
State, 339 Ark. 15, 16–19, 2 S. W. 3d 73, 74–76 (1999)
(finding “good cause” for petitioner’s failure to file a timely
habeas petition where the petitioner’s attorney terminated
his representation without notifying petitioner and without taking “any formal steps to withdraw as the attorney
of record”).
Our recent decision in Holland v. Florida, 560 U. S. ___
(2010), is instructive. That case involved a missed oneyear deadline, prescribed by 28 U. S. C. §2244(d), for filing
a federal habeas petition. Holland presented two issues:
first, whether the §2244(d) time limitation can be tolled
for equitable reasons, and, second, whether an attorney’s
unprofessional conduct can ever count as an “extraordinary circumstance” justifying equitable tolling. 560 U. S.,
at ___, ___–___ (slip op., at 1, 16–17) (internal quotation
marks omitted). We answered yes to both questions.
On the second issue, the Court recognized that an attorney’s negligence, for example, miscalculating a filing
deadline, does not provide a basis for tolling a statutory
time limit. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 19); id., at ___–___
(ALITO, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment)
(slip op., at 5–6); see Lawrence v. Florida, 549 U. S. 327,
336 (2007). The Holland petitioner, however, urged that
attorney negligence was not the gravamen of his complaint. Rather, he asserted that his lawyer had detached
himself from any trust relationship with his client: “[My
lawyer] has abandoned me,” the petitioner complained to


14

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

the court. 560 U. S., at ___–___ (slip op., at 3–4) (brackets
and internal quotation marks omitted); see Nara v. Frank,
264 F. 3d 310, 320 (CA3 2001) (ordering a hearing on
whether a client’s effective abandonment by his lawyer
merited tolling of the one-year deadline for filing a federal
habeas petition).
In a concurring opinion in Holland, JUSTICE ALITO
homed in on the essential difference between a claim of
attorney error, however egregious, and a claim that an
attorney had essentially abandoned his client. 560 U. S.,
at ___–___ (slip op., at 5–7). Holland’s plea fit the latter
category: He alleged abandonment “evidenced by counsel’s
near-total failure to communicate with petitioner or to
respond to petitioner’s many inquiries and requests over a
period of several years.” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 6); see id.,
at ___–___, ___ (majority opinion) (slip op., at 3–4, 20). If
true, JUSTICE ALITO explained, “petitioner’s allegations
would suffice to establish extraordinary circumstances
beyond his control[:] Common sense dictates that a litigant cannot be held constructively responsible for the
conduct of an attorney who is not operating as his agent
in any meaningful sense of that word.” Id., at ___ (slip op.,
at 6).7
We agree that, under agency principles, a client cannot
be charged with the acts or omissions of an attorney who
has abandoned him. Nor can a client be faulted for failing
to act on his own behalf when he lacks reason to believe
his attorneys of record, in fact, are not representing him.
We therefore inquire whether Maples has shown that his
attorneys of record abandoned him, thereby supplying the
——————
7 Holland v. Florida, 560 U. S. ___ (2010), involved tolling of a federal
time bar, while Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722 (1991), concerned
cause for excusing a procedural default in state court. See Holland, 560
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 18). We see no reason, however, why the
distinction between attorney negligence and attorney abandonment
should not hold in both contexts.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

“extraordinary circumstances beyond his control,” ibid.,
necessary to lift the state procedural bar to his federal
petition.
B
From the time he filed his initial Rule 32 petition until
well after time ran out for appealing the trial court’s
denial of that petition, Maples had only three attorneys of
record: Munanka, Ingen-Housz, and Butler. Unknown to
Maples, not one of these lawyers was in fact serving as his
attorney during the 42 days permitted for an appeal from
the trial court’s order.
1
The State contends that Sullivan & Cromwell represented Maples throughout his state postconviction proceedings. Accordingly, the State urges, Maples cannot
establish abandonment by counsel continuing through the
six weeks allowed for noticing an appeal from the trial
court’s denial of his Rule 32 petition. We disagree. It is
undisputed that Munanka and Ingen-Housz severed their
agency relationship with Maples long before the default
occurred. See Brief for Respondent 47 (conceding that the
two attorneys erred in failing to file motions to withdraw
from the case). Both Munanka and Ingen-Housz left
Sullivan & Cromwell’s employ in the summer of 2002, at
least nine months before the Alabama trial court entered
its order denying Rule 32 relief. App. to Pet. for Cert.
258a. Their new employment—Munanka as a law clerk
for a federal judge, Ingen-Housz as an employee of the
European Commission in Belgium—disabled them from
continuing to represent Maples. See Code of Conduct for
Judicial Employees, Canon 4(D)(3) (1999) (prohibiting
judicial employees from participating in “litigation against
federal, state or local government”); Staff Regulations of
Officials of the European Commission, Tit. I, Art. 12b


16

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

(2004) (employees cannot perform outside work without first obtaining authorization from the Commission),
available at http://ec.europa.eu/civil_service/docs/toc100_
en.pdf (as visited Jan. 13, 2012, and in Clerk of Court’s
case file). Hornbook agency law establishes that the attorneys’ departure from Sullivan & Cromwell and their
commencement of employment that prevented them from
representing Maples ended their agency relationship with
him. See 1 Restatement (Second) of Agency §112 (1957)
(hereinafter Restatement (Second)) (“[T]he authority of an
agent terminates if, without knowledge of the principal, he
acquires adverse interests or if he is otherwise guilty of
a serious breach of loyalty to the principal.”); 2 id., §394,
Comment a (“[T]he agent commits a breach of duty [of
loyalty] to his principal by acting for another in an undertaking which has a substantial tendency to cause him to
disregard his duty to serve his principal with only his
principal’s purposes in mind.”).
Furthermore, the two attorneys did not observe Alabama’s Rule requiring them to seek the trial court’s permission to withdraw. See Ala. Rule Crim. Proc. 6.2,
Comment. Cf. 1 Restatement (Second) §111, Comment b
(“[I]t is ordinarily inferred that a principal does not intend
an agent to do an illegal act.”). By failing to seek permission to withdraw, Munanka and Ingen-Housz allowed the
court’s records to convey that they represented Maples.
As listed attorneys of record, they, not Maples, would be
the addressees of court orders Alabama law requires the
clerk to furnish. See Ala. Rule Crim. Proc. 34.5 (“Upon
the entry of any order in a criminal proceeding made in
response to a motion, . . . the clerk shall, without undue
delay, furnish all parties a copy thereof by mail or by other
appropriate means.”) and 34.4 (“[W]here the defendant is
represented by counsel, service shall be made upon the
attorney of record.”).
Although acknowledging that Munanka and Ingen-


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of the Court

Housz severed their agency relationship with Maples upon
their departure from Sullivan & Cromwell, the State
argues that, nonetheless, Maples was not abandoned.
Other attorneys at the firm, the State asserts, continued
to serve as Maples’ counsel. Regarding this assertion, we
note, first, that the record is cloudy on the role other Sullivan & Cromwell attorneys played. In an affidavit submitted to the Alabama trial court in support of Maples’
request that the court reissue its Rule 32 order, see supra,
at 9, partner Marc De Leeuw stated that he had been “involved in [Maples’] case since the summer of 2001.” App.
to Pet. for Cert. 257a. After the trial court initially denied
the State’s motion to dismiss in December 2001, De Leeuw
informed the court, Sullivan & Cromwell “lawyers working
on this case for Mr. Maples prepared for [an anticipated]
evidentiary hearing.” Id., at 258a. Another Sullivan &
Cromwell attorney, Felice Duffy, stated, in an affidavit
submitted to the Alabama trial court in September 2003,
that she “ha[d] worked on [Maples’] case since October 14,
2002.” App. 231. But neither De Leeuw nor Duffy described what their “involve[ment]” or “wor[k] on [Maples’]
case” entailed. And neither attorney named the lawyers,
other than Munanka and Ingen-Housz (both of them still
with Sullivan & Cromwell in December 2001), engaged in
preparation for the expected hearing. Nor did De Leeuw
identify the specific work, if any, other lawyers performed
on Maples’ case between Munanka’s and Ingen-Housz’s
departures and the firm’s receipt of the telephone call
from Maples’ mother.8
——————
8 The unclear state of the record is perhaps not surprising, given Sullivan & Cromwell’s representation of Maples after the default. As
amici for Maples explain, a significant conflict of interest arose for the
firm once the crucial deadline passed. Brief for Legal Ethics Professors
et al. as Amici Curiae 23–27. Following the default, the firm’s interest
in avoiding damage to its own reputation was at odds with Maples’
strongest argument—i.e., that his attorneys had abandoned him,


18

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

The slim record on activity at Sullivan & Cromwell,
however, does not warrant a remand to determine more
precisely the work done by firm lawyers other than Munanka and Ingen-Housz. For the facts essential to our
decision are not in doubt. At the time of the default, the
Sullivan & Cromwell attorneys who later came forward—
De Leeuw, Felice Duffy, and Kathy Brewer—had not been
admitted to practice law in Alabama, had not entered
their appearances on Maples’ behalf, and had done nothing to inform the Alabama court that they wished to substitute for Munanka and Ingen-Housz. Thus, none of
these attorneys had the legal authority to act on Maples’
behalf before his time to appeal expired. Cf. 1 Restatement (Second) §111 (The “failure to acquire a qualification
by the agent without which it is illegal to do an authorized
act . . . terminates the agent’s authority to act.”).9 What
they did or did not do in their New York offices is therefore
——————
therefore he had cause to be relieved from the default. Yet Sullivan &
Cromwell did not cede Maples’ representation to a new attorney, who
could have made Maples’ abandonment argument plain to the Court of
Appeals. Instead, the firm represented Maples through briefing and
oral argument in the Eleventh Circuit, where they attempted to cast
responsibility for the mishap on the clerk of the Alabama trial court.
Given Sullivan & Cromwell’s conflict of interest, Maples’ federal habeas
petition, prepared and submitted by the firm, is not persuasive evidence that Maples, prior to the default, ever “viewed himself” as represented by “the firm,” see post, at 4, rather than by his attorneys of
record, Munanka and Ingen-Housz.
9 The dissent argues that the Sullivan & Cromwell attorneys had no
basis “to infer that Maples no longer wanted them to represent him,
simply because they had not yet qualified before the Alabama court.”
Post, at 6–7. While that may be true, it is irrelevant. What the attorneys could have inferred is that Maples would not have wanted them to
file a notice of appeal on his behalf prior to their admission to practice
in Alabama, for doing so would be “illegal,” post, at 7 (internal quotation marks omitted). See also 1 Restatement (Second) §111, Comment
b, quoted supra, at 16. For the critical purpose of filing a notice of
appeal, then, the other Sullivan & Cromwell attorneys had no authority
to act for Maples.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

19

Opinion of the Court

beside the point. At the time critical to preserving Maples’
access to an appeal, they, like Munanka and Ingen-Housz,
were not Maples’ authorized agents.
2
Maples’ only other attorney of record, local counsel
Butler, also left him abandoned. Indeed, Butler did not
even begin to represent Maples. Butler informed Munanka and Ingen-Housz that he would serve as local counsel
only for the purpose of enabling the two out-of-state attorneys to appear pro hac vice. Supra, at 5–6. Lacking the
necessary “resources, available time [and] experience,”
Butler told the two Sullivan & Cromwell lawyers, he
would not “deal with substantive issues in the case.” Ibid.
That the minimal participation he undertook was inconsistent with Alabama law, see Rule VII, supra, at 5, underscores the absurdity of holding Maples barred because
Butler signed on as local counsel.
In recognizing that Butler had no role in the case other
than to allow Munanka and Ingen-Housz to appear pro
hac vice, we need not rely solely on Butler’s and De
Leeuw’s statements to that effect. App. to Pet. for Cert.
255a–258a. Other factors confirm that Butler did not
“operat[e] as [Maples’] agent in any meaningful sense of
that word.” Holland, 560 U. S., at ___ (ALITO, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (slip op., at 6).
The first is Butler’s own conduct. Upon receiving a copy of
the trial court’s Rule 32 order, Butler did not contact
Sullivan & Cromwell to ensure that firm lawyers were
taking appropriate action. Although Butler had reason to
believe that Munanka and Ingen-Housz had received a
copy of the court’s order, see App. 225 (indicating that
Munanka and Ingen-Housz were CC’d on the order), Butler’s failure even to place a phone call to the New York
firm substantiates his disclaimer of any genuinely representative role in the case.


20

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

Notably, the State did not treat Butler as Maples’ actual
representative. Assistant Attorney General Hayden addressed the letter informing Maples of the default directly
to Maples in prison. See supra, at 8. Hayden sent no copy
to, nor did he otherwise notify, any of the attorneys listed
as counsel of record for Maples. Lawyers in Alabama have
an ethical obligation to refrain from communicating directly with an opposing party known to be represented by
counsel. See Ala. Rule of Professional Conduct 4.2 (2003);
Ala. Rule Crim. Proc. 34.4 (requiring that the service of all
documents “be made upon the attorney of record”). In
writing directly and only to Maples, notwithstanding this
ethical obligation, Assistant Attorney General Hayden
must have believed that Maples was no longer represented
by counsel, out-of-state or local.10
In sum, the record admits of only one reading: At no
time before the missed deadline was Butler serving as
Maples’ agent “in any meaningful sense of that word.”
Holland, 560 U. S., at ___ (opinion of ALITO, J.) (slip op.,
at 6).
3
Not only was Maples left without any functioning attorney of record, the very listing of Munanka, Ingen-Housz,
and Butler as his representatives meant that he had no
right personally to receive notice. See supra, at 16. He in
——————
10 It

bears note, as well, that the State served its response to Maples’
Rule 32 petition only on Munanka at Sullivan & Cromwell’s New York
address, not on Butler. App. 26. While the State may not be obligated
to serve more than one attorney of record, its selection of New York
rather than local counsel is some indication that, from the start, the
State was cognizant of the limited role Butler would serve. Conforming
the State’s Rule to common practice, in 2006, the Alabama Supreme
Court amended the provision on appearances by out-of-state counsel to
eliminate the requirement that such attorneys associate local counsel
when representing indigent criminal defendants pro bono in postconviction proceedings. See supra, at 5, n. 3.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

21

Opinion of the Court

fact received none or any other warning that he had better
fend for himself. Had counsel of record or the State’s
attorney informed Maples of his plight before the time to
appeal ran out, he could have filed a notice of appeal
himself11 or enlisted the aid of new volunteer attorneys.12
Given no reason to suspect that he lacked counsel able and
willing to represent him, Maples surely was blocked from
complying with the State’s procedural rule.
C
“The cause and prejudice requirement,” we have said,
“shows due regard for States’ finality and comity interests
while ensuring that ‘fundamental fairness [remains] the
central concern of the writ of habeas corpus.’ ” Dretke v.
Haley, 541 U. S. 386, 393 (2004) (quoting Strickland v.
Washington, 466 U. S. 668, 697 (1984)). In the unusual
circumstances of this case, principles of agency law and
fundamental fairness point to the same conclusion: There
was indeed cause to excuse Maples’ procedural default.
Through no fault of his own, Maples lacked the assistance
of any authorized attorney during the 42 days Alabama
allows for noticing an appeal from a trial court’s denial of
postconviction relief. As just observed, he had no reason
to suspect that, in reality, he had been reduced to pro se
status. Maples was disarmed by extraordinary circumstances quite beyond his control. He has shown ample
cause, we hold, to excuse the procedural default into which
——————
11 The notice is a simple document. It need specify only: the party
taking the appeal, the order or judgment appealed from, and the name
of the court to which appeal is taken. Ala. Rule App. Proc. 3(c) (2000).
12 Alabama grants out-of-time appeals to prisoners proceeding pro se
who were not timely served with copies of court orders. See Maples v.
Allen, 586 F. 3d 879, 888, and n. 6 (CA11 2009) (per curiam) (citing
Ex parte Miles, 841 So. 2d 242, 243 (Ala. 2002), and Ex parte Robinson,
865 So. 2d 1250, 1251–1252 (Ala. Crim. App. 2003) (per curiam)).
Though Maples was not a pro se petitioner on the record, he was, in
fact, without authorized counsel.


22

MAPLES v. THOMAS
Opinion of the Court

he was trapped when counsel of record abandoned him
without a word of warning.
III
Having found no cause to excuse the failure to file a
timely notice of appeal in state court, the District Court
and the Eleventh Circuit did not reach the question of
prejudice. See supra, at 10–11. That issue, therefore,
remains open for decision on remand.
*
*
*
For the reasons stated, the judgment of the Court of
Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit is reversed, and the case
is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this
opinion.
It is so ordered.

