16 UNION PACIFIC R. CO. v. LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS AND 

TRAINMEN GEN. COMM. OF ADJUSTMENT 

Opinion of the Court 


10, 22.9
B
The RLA provides that, when on-property proceedings
do not yield settlement, both parties or either party may
refer the case to the Board “with a full statement of the
facts and all supporting data bearing upon the disputes.”
§153 First (i). Circular One correspondingly instructs
employees seeking Board adjudication “[to] set forth all
relevant, argumentative facts” and “affirmatively show the
same to have been presented to the carrier and made a
part of the particular question in dispute.” 29 CFR
§301.5(d); see §301.5(e) (similar instruction addressed to
carriers). Conferencing, the Carrier urged, is a “relevant,
argumentative fac[t],” so proof thereof must accompany
party submissions.
As earlier explained, see supra, at 14, instructions on
party submissions—essentially pleading instructions—are
claim-processing, not jurisdictional, rules. Moreover, the
Board itself has recognized that conferencing may not be a
“question in dispute.” It has counseled parties submitting
joint exhibits “to omit documents that are unimportant
and/or irrelevant to the disposition of the [case]; for exam­
ple . . . letters requesting a conference (assuming that is
not an issue in the dispute).” NRAB Instructions Sheet,
Joint Exh. Program, p. 5 (July 1, 2003), online at
http://www.nmb.gov/arbitration/nrab-instruc.pdf (as vis­
ited Dec. 3, 2009, and available in Clerk of Court’s case
——————
9 While holding that the panel did not lack jurisdiction over the em­
ployees’ claims, we recognize the Board’s authority to adopt claim­
processing rules backed by effective sanctions. See supra, at 3; cf. Fed.
Rule Civ. Proc. 37(b)(2) (specifying sanctions, including dismissal, for
failure to comply with discovery orders); Rule 41(b) (authorizing invol­
untary dismissal for failure to prosecute or to comply with rules of
procedure or court orders). We also recognize that NRAB panels, in
managing individual arbitrations, may prescribe and enforce reason­
able procedural requirements.

