8

UNION PACIFIC R. CO. v. LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS AND
TRAINMEN GEN. COMM. OF ADJUSTMENT
Opinion of the Court

encing had in fact occurred.” See id., ¶¶21–23. The Union
did so, offering phone logs, handwritten notes, and corre­
spondence between the parties as evidence of conferencing
in each of the five cases. E.g., Panel Decision 67a–68a.
From its first notice of the objection, however, the Union
maintained that the proof-of-conferencing issue was un­
timely raised, indeed forfeited, as the Carrier itself had
not objected prior to the date set for argument of the cases.
E.g., id., at 67a; Pet. to Review ¶¶22, 29, 30, 54.
On March 15, 2005, nearly one year after the question of
conferencing first arose, the panel, in five identical deci­
sions, dismissed the petitions for want of “authority to
assume jurisdiction over the claim[s].” Panel Decision
72a. Citing Circular One, see supra, at 3–4, and “the
weight of arbitral precedent,” the panel stated that “the
evidentiary record” must be deemed “closed once a Notice
of Intent has been filed with the NRAB . . . .” Panel Deci­
sion 71a.5 In explaining why the record could not be sup­
plemented to meet the no-proof-of-conferencing objection,
the panel emphasized that it was “an appellate tribunal,
as opposed to one which is empowered to consider and rule
on de novo evidence and arguments.” Id., at 69a.
The two labor representatives dissented. The Carrier’s
submissions, they reasoned, took no exception based on
failure to conference or to prove conferencing; therefore,
they concluded, under a “well settled principle governing
the Board’s deliberations,” the Carrier had forfeited the
issue. Id., at 105a–106a. The dissenters urged that the
Union had furnished evidence showing “the cases had all
been conferenced, even though the relevant Collective
Bargaining Agreement [did] not require [conferencing].”
Id., at 105a. Dismissal of the claims, the dissenters
——————
5 The panel observed, however, that the records and notes offered by
the Union, “on their face, may be regarded as supportive of its position
that the conference[s] occurred.” Panel Decision 69a.

