Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009) 


7

Opinion of the Court 


B

The instant matter arose when petitioner Union Pacific
Railroad Co. (hereinafter Carrier) charged five of its em­
ployees with disciplinary violations. Their union, the
Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Trainmen
(hereinafter Union), initiated grievance proceedings pur­
suant to the CBA. The Union asserts that, following
exhaustion of grievance proceedings, the parties confer­
enced all the disputes; counsel for the Carrier conceded at
argument that at least two of the disputes were confer­
enced, Tr. of Oral Arg. 7. Dissatisfied with the outcome of
the on-property proceedings, the Union sought arbitration
before the First Division of the NRAB. The Union and the
Carrier, from early 2002 through 2003, filed simultaneous
submissions in the five cases. In each submission, the
Union included the notice of discipline (or discharge), the
hearing transcript, and all exhibits and evidence relating
to the underlying adverse actions used in the grievance
proceeding. Neither party mentioned conferencing as a
disputed matter. Yet, in each case, both parties necessar­
ily knew whether the Union and the Carrier had con­
ferred, and the Board’s governing rule instructs carriers
and employees to “set forth all relevant, argumentative
facts,” 29 CFR §301.5(d), (e).
On March 18, 2004, just prior to the hearing on the
employees’ claims, one of the industry representatives on
the arbitration panel raised an objection. Petition to
Review and Vacate Awards and Orders of First Div.
NRAB in No. 05–civ–2401 (ND Ill.), ¶20 (hereinafter Pet.
to Review). On his own initiative, unprompted by the
Carrier, and in executive session, the industry representa­
tive asserted that the on-property record included no proof
of conferencing. See ibid. The Carrier thereafter em­
braced the panel member’s objection. The neutral referee
informed the Union of the issue and adjourned the hear­
ing, allowing the Union “to submit evidence that confer­

