4

UNION PACIFIC R. CO. v. LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS AND
TRAINMEN GEN. COMM. OF ADJUSTMENT
Opinion of the Court

ceedings,” §153 First (v); the product of that rulemaking,
codified at 29 CFR pt. 301 (2009), is known as Circular
One.
In keeping with Congress’ aim to promote peaceful
settlement of minor disputes, the RLA requires employees
and carriers, before resorting to arbitration, to exhaust the
grievance procedures specified in the collective-bargaining
agreement (hereinafter CBA). See 45 U. S. C. §153 First
(i). This stage of the dispute-resolution process is known
as “on-property” proceedings. As a final prearbitration
step, the Act directs parties to attempt settlement “in
conference” between designated representatives of the
carrier and the grievant-employee. §152 Second, Sixth.3
The RLA contains instructions concerning the place and
time of conferences, but specifies that the statute does not
——————
3 Central

to the instant controversy, §152 Second, Sixth read, in full:
“Second. Consideration of disputes by representatives.
All disputes between a carrier or carriers and its or their employees
shall be considered, and, if possible, decided, with all expedition, in
conference between representatives designated and authorized so to
confer, respectively, by the carrier or carriers and by the employees
thereof interested in the dispute.”
“Sixth. Conference of representatives; time; place; private agree­
ments.
In case of a dispute between a carrier or carriers and its or their
employees, arising out of grievances or out of the interpretation or
application of agreements concerning rates of pay, rules, or working
conditions, it shall be the duty of the designated representative or
representatives of such carrier or carriers and of such employees,
within ten days after the receipt of notice of a desire on the part of
either party to confer in respect to such dispute, to specify a time and
place at which such conference shall be held: Provided, (1) That the
place so specified shall be situated upon the line of the carrier involved
or as otherwise mutually agreed upon; and (2) that the time so specified
shall allow the designated conferees reasonable opportunity to reach
such place of conference, but shall not exceed twenty days from the
receipt of such notice: And provided further, That nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to supersede the provisions of any agree­
ment (as to conferences) then in effect between the parties.”

