Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

11

Opinion of the Court

respondent may, “without filing a cross-appeal or cross­
petition, . . . rely upon any matter appearing in the record
in support of the judgment.” Blum v. Bacon, 457 U. S.
132, 137, n. 5 (1982). The Seventh Circuit, as just ob­
served, see supra, at 9–10, understood that the Union had
pressed “statutory and constitutional” arguments, but also
comprehended that both arguments homed in on “a single
question: is written documentation of the conference in the
on-property record a necessary prerequisite to arbitration
before the NRAB?” 522 F. 3d, at 750. Answering this
“single question” in the negative, the Court of Appeals
effectively resolved the Union’s core complaint. But, for
reasons far from apparent, the court declared that “once
we answer the key question . . . , adjudication of the due
process claim is unavoidable.” Ibid.
The Seventh Circuit, we agree, asked the right question,
but inappropriately placed its answer under a constitu­
tional, rather than a statutory, headline. As the Court of
Appeals determined, and as we discuss infra, at 12–17,
nothing in the Act elevates to jurisdictional status the
obligation to conference minor disputes or to prove confer­
encing. That being so, the “unavoidable” conclusion,
following from the Seventh Circuit’s “answer [to] the key
question,” 522 F. 3d, at 750, is that the panel, in §153
First (q)’s words, failed “to conform, or confine itself, to
matters within the scope of [its] jurisdiction.” The Carrier,
although it sought a different outcome, was quite right to
“urg[e] [the Court of Appeals] to consider the statutory
claim before the constitutional one.” 522 F. 3d, at 750.
In short, a negative answer to the “single question”
identified by the Court of Appeals leaves no doubt about
the Union’s entitlement, in accord with §153 First (q), to
vacation of the Board’s orders. Given this statutory
ground for relief, there is no due process issue alive in this
case, and no warrant to answer a question that may be
consequential in another case: Absent grounds specified in

