12 UNION PACIFIC R. CO. v. LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS AND 

TRAINMEN GEN. COMM. OF ADJUSTMENT 

Opinion of the Court 


§153 First (q) for vacating a Board order, may a reviewing
court set aside an NRAB adjudication for incompatibility
with due process? An answer to that question must await
a case in which the issue is genuinely in controversy.7 In
this case, however, our grant of certiorari enables us to
address a matter of some importance: We can reduce
confusion, clouding court as well as Board decisions, over
matters properly typed “jurisdictional.”
III 

A

Recognizing that the word “jurisdiction” has been used
by courts, including this Court, to convey “many, too
many, meanings,” Steel Co. v. Citizens for Better Environ
ment, 523 U. S. 83, 90 (1998) (internal quotation marks
omitted), we have cautioned, in recent decisions, against
profligate use of the term. Not all mandatory “prescrip­
tions, however emphatic, are . . . properly typed jurisdic­
tional,” we explained in Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp., 546 U. S.
500, 510 (2006) (internal quotation marks omitted). Sub­
ject-matter jurisdiction properly comprehended, we em­
phasized, refers to a tribunal’s “power to hear a case,” a
matter that “can never be forfeited or waived.” Id., at 514
(quoting United States v. Cotton, 535 U. S. 625, 630
(2002)). In contrast, a “claim-processing rule, . . . even if
unalterable on a party’s application,” does not reduce the
adjudicatory domain of a tribunal and is ordinarily “for­
feited if the party asserting the rule waits too long to raise
the point.” Kontrick v. Ryan, 540 U. S. 443, 456 (2004).
——————
7 A case of that order would be uncommon. As the Carrier acknowl­
edges, “many of the cases reviewing ostensibly extra-statutory due
process objections could have been accommodated within the statutory
framework.” Brief for Petitioner 36. See also id., at 37 (“The statutory
review provisions are plainly generous enough to permit litigants to
raise all of the simple, common, easily adjudicated, and likely to be
meritorious claims that sail under the flag of due process of law . . . .”).

