2

UNION PACIFIC R. CO. v. LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS AND
TRAINMEN GEN. COMM. OF ADJUSTMENT
Syllabus

fine itself, to matters within the scope of the division’s jurisdiction, or
. . . fraud or corruption by a member of the division making the or
der.” §153 First (q). Courts of Appeals have divided on whether, in
addition to the statutory grounds for judicial review stated in §153
First (q), courts may review NRAB proceedings for due process viola
tions.
After petitioner Union Pacific Railroad Co. (hereinafter Carrier)
charged five of its employees with disciplinary violations, their union
(hereinafter Union) initiated grievance proceedings pursuant to the
CBA. The Union asserts that the parties conferenced all five dis
putes and the Carrier concedes that they conferenced at least two.
Dissatisfied with the outcome of the on-property proceedings, the Un
ion sought arbitration before the NRAB’s First Division. Both parties
filed submissions in the five cases, but neither mentioned conferenc
ing as a disputed matter. Yet, in each case, both parties necessarily
knew whether the Union and the Carrier had conferred; and the
Board’s governing rule, published in Circular One, which prescribes
Board procedures, instructs carriers and employees to “set forth all
relevant, argumentative facts,” 29 CFR §301.5(d), (e). Just prior to
the hearing, one of the arbitration panel’s industry representatives
objected, sua sponte, that the on-property record included no proof of
conferencing. The Carrier thereafter embraced that objection. The
referee allowed the Union to submit evidence of conferencing. The
Union did so, but it maintained that the proof-of-conferencing issue
was untimely raised, indeed forfeited, as the Carrier had not objected
before the date set for argument. The panel, in five identical deci
sions, dismissed the petitions for want of jurisdiction. The record
could not be supplemented to meet the no-proof-of-conferencing objec
tion, the panel reasoned, for as an appellate tribunal, the panel was
not empowered to consider de novo evidence and arguments. The Un
ion sought review in the Federal District Court, which affirmed the
Board’s decision. On appeal, the Seventh Circuit observed that the
“single question” at issue was whether written documentation of the
conference in the on-property record was a necessary prerequisite to
NRAB arbitration, and determined that there was no such prerequi
site in the statute or rules. But instead of resting its decision on the
Union’s primary, statute-based argument—that the panel erred in
ruling that it lacked jurisdiction over the cases—it reversed on the
ground that the NRAB’s proceedings were incompatible with due
process.
Held:
1. The Seventh Circuit erred in resolving the Union’s appeal under
a constitutional, rather than a statutory, headline. This Court
granted certiorari to address whether NRAB orders may be set aside

