Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

3

Syllabus
for failure to comply with due process notwithstanding §153 First
(q)’s limited grounds for review. But so long as a respondent does not
“seek to modify the judgment below,” true here, the respondent may
“rely upon any matter appearing in the record in support of the
judgment.” Blum v. Bacon, 457 U. S. 132, 137, n. 5. The Seventh
Circuit understood that the Union had pressed “statutory and consti
tutional” arguments, but observed that both arguments homed in on
a “single question”: is written documentation of the conference in the
on-property record a necessary prerequisite to NRAB arbitration?
Answering this “single question” in the negative, the Seventh Circuit
effectively resolved the Union’s core complaint. Because nothing in
the Act elevates to jurisdictional status the obligation to conference
minor disputes or to prove conferencing, a negative answer to the
“single question” leaves no doubt about the Union’s entitlement, in
accord with §153 First (q), to vacation of the Board’s orders. Given
this statutory ground for relief, there is no due process issue alive in
this case, and no warrant to answer a question that may be conse
quential in another case. Nevertheless, the grant of certiorari here
enables this Court to reduce confusion, clouding court as well as
Board decisions, over matters properly typed “jurisdictional.” Pp. 10–
12.
2. Congress authorized the Board to prescribe rules for presenting
and processing claims, §153 First (v), but Congress alone controls the
Board’s jurisdiction. By refusing to adjudicate the instant cases on
the false premise that it lacked “jurisdiction” to hear them, the NRAB
panel failed “to conform, or confine itself, to matters [Congress
placed] within the scope of [NRAB] jurisdiction,” §153 First (q).
Pp. 12–17.
(a) Not all mandatory “prescriptions, however emphatic, ‘are . . .
properly typed “jurisdictional.” ’ ” Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp., 546 U. S.
500, 510. Subject-matter jurisdiction properly comprehended refers
to a tribunal’s “ ‘power to hear a case,’ ” and “ ‘can never be forfeited or
waived.’ ” Id., at 514. In contrast, a “claim-processing rule” does not
reduce a tribunal’s adjudicatory domain and is ordinarily “forfeited if
the party asserting the rule waits too long to raise the point.” Kon
trick v. Ryan, 540 U. S. 443, 456. For example, this Court has held
nonjurisdictional and forfeitable the provision in Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 requiring complainants to file a timely discrimina
tion charge with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC) before proceeding to court, Zipes v. Trans World Airlines,
Inc., 455 U. S. 385, 393. In contrast, the Court has reaffirmed the ju
risdictional character of 28 U. S. C. §2107(a)’s time limitation for fil
ing a notice of appeal. Bowles v. Russell, 551 U. S. 205, 209–211.
Here, the requirement that parties to minor disputes, as a last

