Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

9

Opinion of the Court

charged, demonstrated “the kind of gamesmanship that
breeds contempt for the minor dispute process.” Id., at
107a.
The Union filed a petition for review in the United
States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois,
asking the court to set aside the Board’s orders on the
ground that the panel had “unlawfully held [it lacked]
authority to assume jurisdiction over [the] cases [absent]
evidence of a ‘conference’ between the parties in the . . .
‘on-property’ record.” Pet. to Review ¶1. Nothing in the
Act or the NRAB’s procedural rules, the Union main­
tained, mandated dismissal for failure to allege and prove
conferencing in the Union’s original submission. Id., ¶¶3,
4. By imposing, without warrant, “a technical pleading or
evidentiary requirement” and elevating it to jurisdictional
status, the Union charged, the panel had “egregiously
violate[d] the Act,” id., ¶3, or “fail[ed] to conform its juris­
diction to that required by . . . law,” id., ¶4. Alternatively,
the Union asserted that the panel violated procedural due
process by entertaining the Carrier’s untimely objection,
even though “the Carrier had failed to raise any objection
as to lack of conferencing” in its submissions. Id., ¶5.
The District Court affirmed the Board’s orders. Ad­
dressing the Union’s argument that the no-proof-of­
conferencing issue was untimely raised, the court accepted
the panel’s description of the issue as “jurisdictional,” and
noted the familiar proposition that jurisdictional chal­
lenges may be raised at any stage of the proceedings. 432
F. Supp. 2d 768, 777, and n. 7 (2006).
On appeal, the Seventh Circuit recognized that the
Union had presented its case “through both a statutory
and constitutional framework.” 522 F. 3d 746, 750 (2008).
The court observed, however, that “the essence of the
conflict boils down to a single question: is written docu­
mentation of the conference in the on-property record a
necessary prerequisite to arbitration before the NRAB?”

