10 UNION PACIFIC R. CO. v. LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS AND 

TRAINMEN GEN. COMM. OF ADJUSTMENT 

Opinion of the Court 


Ibid. It then determined that there was no such prerequi­
site: “[N]o statute, regulation, or CBA,” the court con­
cluded, “required the evidence [of conferencing] to be
presented in the on-property record.” Id., at 757–758. But
instead of resting its decision on the Union’s primary,
statute-based argument—that the panel erred in ruling
that it lacked jurisdiction over the cases—the Court of
Appeals reversed on the ground that the NRAB’s proceed­
ings were incompatible with due process. See id., at 750.
II
We granted the Carrier’s petition for certiorari, 555
U. S. ___ (2009), which asked us to determine whether a
reviewing court may set aside NRAB orders for failure to
comply with due process notwithstanding the limited
grounds for review specified in §153 First (q).6 As earlier
recounted, Courts of Appeals have divided on this issue.
See supra, at 6, and n. 4. Appearing as respondent in this
Court, however, the Union urged affirmance of the Sev­
enth Circuit’s judgment on an alternative ground. Reas­
serting the lead argument it had advanced in its petition
for court review, see supra, at 9, the Union maintained
that the Board did not “conform, or confine itself, to mat­
ters within the scope of [its] jurisdiction,” §153 First (q).
Brief for Respondent 52–53. In response, the Carrier
stated that the Union’s alternative ground “presents a
pure question of law that th[e] Court can and should
resolve without need for remand.” Reply Brief 24, n. 9.
We agree.
So long as a respondent does not “seek to modify the
judgment below,” true here, “[i]t is well accepted” that the
——————
6 Quoted supra, at 6, those grounds are “failure of the division to
comply with [RLA] requirements,” “failure of the order to conform, or
confine itself, to matters within the scope of the division’s jurisdiction,”
and “fraud or corruption by a member of the division making the
order.”

