14 UNION PACIFIC R. CO. v. LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS AND 

TRAINMEN GEN. COMM. OF ADJUSTMENT 

Opinion of the Court 


be handled in the usual manner up to and including the
[designated] chief operating officer.” §153 First (i). And
when the CBA’s grievance procedure has not been fol­
lowed, resort to the Board would ordinarily be objection­
able as premature.
The additional requirement of a conference, we note, is
independent of the CBA process. Rather, the conference
requirement is stated in the “[g]eneral duties” section of
the RLA, §152, a section that is not moored to the
“[e]stablishment[,] . . . powers[,] and duties” of the NRAB
set out next in §153 First. Rooted in §152 and often in­
formal in practice, see supra, at 4–5, conferencing is surely
no more “jurisdictional” than is the presuit resort to the
EEOC held forfeitable in Zipes, 455 U. S., at 393.8 And if
the requirement to conference is not “jurisdictional,” then
failure initially to submit proof of conferencing cannot be
of that genre. See Part III–B, infra.
In defense of the Board’s characterization of conferenc­
ing and proof thereof as jurisdictional, the Carrier points
to the NRAB’s Circular One procedural regulations, see
supra, at 3–4, which provide: “No petition shall be consid­
ered by any division of the Board unless the subject mat­
ter has been handled in accordance with the provisions of
the [RLA].” 29 CFR §301.2(b). But that provision, as
other prescriptions in Circular One, is a claims-processing
rule. Congress gave the Board no authority to adopt rules
of jurisdictional dimension. See 45 U. S. C. §153 First (v)
(authorizing the NRAB to “adopt such rules as it deems
necessary to control proceedings before the respective
——————
8 The RLA states, in §152 First, a general duty “to settle all disputes,”
and, in §152 Second, a more specific duty to “conference.” These provi­
sions apply to all disputes in the railroad industry, major as well as
minor. They also apply to disputes in the airline industry, over which
the NRAB has no jurisdiction. §181. Neither provision “speak[s] in
jurisdictional terms or refer[s] in any way to the jurisdiction of the”
NRAB. Zipes, 455 U. S., at 394.

