6

UNION PACIFIC R. CO. v. LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS AND
TRAINMEN GEN. COMM. OF ADJUSTMENT
Opinion of the Court

to state grounds on which both employees and railroads
could seek judicial review of NRAB orders. The governing
provision, still in force, allows parties aggrieved by an
NRAB panel order to petition for court review. 45 U. S. C.
§153 First (q) (2006 ed.). The provision instructs that
“[o]n such review, the findings and order of the divi­
sion shall be conclusive on the parties, except that the
order . . . may be set aside, in whole or in part, or re­
manded . . . , for failure of the division to comply with
the requirements of [the RLA], for failure of the order
to conform, or confine itself, to matters within the
scope of the division’s jurisdiction, or for fraud or
corruption by a member of the division making the
order.”
Courts of Appeals have divided on whether this provision
precludes judicial review of NRAB proceedings for due
process violations. Compare, e.g., Shaffi v. PLC British
Airways, 22 F. 3d 59, 64 (CA2 1994) (review available),
and Edelman v. Western Airlines, Inc., 892 F. 2d 839, 847
(CA9 1989) (same), with Kinross v. Utah R. Co., 362 F. 3d
658, 662 (CA10 2004) (review precluded).4
——————
4 The disagreement stems from this Court’s per curiam opinion in
Union Pacific R. Co. v. Sheehan, 439 U. S. 89 (1978). That case in­
volved an NRAB decision turning on a time limitation contained in the
governing CBA. Based on that limitation, the Board dismissed an
employee’s claim. The Tenth Circuit remanded the case to the NRAB
on the ground that the Board had failed to consider the employee’s
equitable tolling argument and thereby violated due process. We
summarily reversed, observing that the Board had in fact considered
the plea for equitable tolling and explicitly rejected it. Id., at 92. We
added that if the Court of Appeals “intended to reverse the [NRAB’s]
rejection of [the employee’s] equitable tolling argument,” then the court
had exceeded the bounds §153 First (q) placed on its review authority.
Id., at 93. In determining whether the CBA’s time limitation was
tolled, we said, the Board “certainly was acting within its jurisdiction
and in conformity with . . . the Act.” Ibid.

