4

UNION PACIFIC R. CO. v. LOCOMOTIVE ENGINEERS AND
TRAINMEN GEN. COMM. OF ADJUSTMENT
Syllabus

chance prearbitration, attempt settlement “in conference,” is imposed
on carriers and grievants alike, but satisfaction of that obligation
does not condition the Board’s adjudicatory authority, which extends
to “all disputes between carriers and their employees ‘growing out of
grievances or out of the interpretation or application of agreements
concerning rates of pay, rules, or working conditions . . . ,’ ” Slocum v.
Delaware, L. & W. R. Co., 339 U. S. 239, 240 (quoting §153 First (i)).
When a CBA’s grievance procedure has not been followed, resort to
the Board would ordinarily be objectionable as premature, but the
conference requirement is independent of the CBA process. Rooted in
§152, the RLA’s “[g]eneral duties” section, and not moored to the
NRAB’s “[e]stablishment[,] . . . powers[,] and duties” set out in §153
First, conferencing is often informal in practice, and is no more “ju
risdictional” than is the presuit resort to the EEOC held nonjurisdic
tional and forfeitable in Zipes. And if the conference requirement is
not “jurisdictional,” then failure initially to submit proof of conferenc
ing cannot be of that genre. And although the Carrier alleges that
NRAB decisions support characterizing conferencing as jurisdic
tional, if the NRAB lacks authority to define its panels’ jurisdiction,
surely the panels themselves lack that authority. Furthermore,
NRAB panels have variously addressed the matter. Pp. 12–15.
(b) Neither the RLA nor Circular One could plausibly be read to
require, as a prerequisite to the NRAB’s exercise of jurisdiction, sub
mission of proof of conferencing. Instructions on party submissions
are claim-processing, not jurisdictional, rules. The Board itself has
recognized that conferencing may not be a “question in dispute,” and
when that is so, proof thereof need not accompany party submissions.
It makes sense to exclude at the arbitration stage newly presented
“data” supporting the employee’s grievance, 29 CFR §301(d)—
evidence the carrier had no opportunity to consider prearbitration.
But conferencing is not a fact bearing on the merits of a grievance.
Moreover, the RLA respects the parties’ right to order for themselves
the conference procedures they will follow. See 45 U. S. C. §152
Sixth. Pp. 16–17.
522 F. 3d 746, affirmed.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

