(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CSX TRANSPORTATION, INC. v. MCBRIDE
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–235.

Argued March 28, 2011—Decided June 23, 2011

Respondent McBride, a locomotive engineer with petitioner CSX
Transportation, Inc., an interstate railroad, sustained a debilitating
hand injury while switching railroad cars. He filed suit under the
Federal Employers’ Liability Act (FELA), which holds railroads liable
for employees’ injuries “resulting in whole or in part from [carrier]
negligence.” 45 U. S. C. §51. McBride alleged that CSX negligently
(1) required him to use unsafe switching equipment and (2) failed to
train him to operate that equipment. A verdict for McBride would be
in order, the District Court instructed, if the jury found that CSX’s
negligence “caused or contributed to” his injury. The court declined
CSX’s request for additional charges requiring McBride to “show that
. . . [CSX’s] negligence was a proximate cause of the injury” and de
fining “proximate cause” as “any cause which, in natural or probable
sequence, produced the injury complained of.” Instead, relying on
Rogers v. Missouri Pacific R. Co., 352 U. S. 500, the court gave the
Seventh Circuit’s pattern FELA instruction: “Defendant ‘caused or
contributed to’ Plaintiff’s injury if Defendant’s negligence played a
part—no matter how small—in bringing about the injury.” The jury
returned a verdict for McBride.
On appeal, CSX renewed its objection to the failure to instruct on
proximate cause, now defining the phrase to require a “direct relation
between the injury asserted and the injurious conduct alleged.” The
appeals court, however, approved the District Court’s instruction and
affirmed its judgment for McBride. Because Rogers had relaxed the
proximate cause requirement in FELA cases, the court said, an in
struction that simply paraphrased Rogers’ language could not be de
clared erroneous.
Held: The judgment is affirmed.


2

CSX TRANSP., INC. v. MCBRIDE
Syllabus

598 F. 3d 388, affirmed.
JUSTICE GINSBURG delivered the opinion of the Court with
respect to all but Part III–A, concluding, in accord with FELA’s text
and purpose, Rogers, and the uniform view of the federal appellate
courts, that FELA does not incorporate stock “proximate cause” stan
dards developed in nonstatutory common-law tort actions. The
charge proper in FELA cases simply tracks the language Congress
employed, informing juries that a defendant railroad “caused or con
tributed to” a railroad worker’s injury “if [the railroad’s] negligence
played a part—no matter how small—in bringing about the injury.”
That, indeed, is the test Congress prescribed for proximate causation
in FELA cases. Pp. 4–14, 16–19.
(a) CSX’s interpretation of Rogers is not persuasive. Pp. 4–12.
(1) Given FELA’s “broad” causation language, Urie v. Thompson,
337 U. S. 163, 181, and Congress’ “humanitarian” and “remedial
goal[s]” in enacting the statute, FELA’s causation standard is “re
laxed” compared to that applicable in common-law tort litigation,
Consolidated Rail Corporation v. Gottshall, 512 U. S. 532, 542–543.
Rogers described that relaxed standard as “whether the proofs justify
with reason the conclusion that employer negligence played any part,
even the slightest, in producing the injury or death for which dam
ages are sought.” 352 U. S., at 506. Because the District Court’s in
struction tracked Rogers’ language, the instruction was plainly
proper so long as Rogers actually prescribes the causation definition
applicable under FELA. See Patterson v. McLean Credit Union, 491
U. S. 164, 172. CSX, however, contends that Rogers was a narrowly
focused decision that did not displace common-law formulations of
“proximate cause.” Drawing largely on Justice Souter’s concurrence
in Norfolk Southern R. Co. v. Sorrell, 549 U. S. 158, 173, CSX urges
that Rogers’ “any part . . . in producing the injury” test displaced only
common-law restrictions on recovery for injuries involving contribu
tory negligence or other multiple causes, but did not address the req
uisite directness of a cause. Pp. 4–6.
(2) In Rogers, the employee was burning vegetation that lined his
employer’s railroad tracks. A passing train fanned the flames, which
spread to the top of the culvert where he was standing. Attempting
to escape, he slipped and fell on the sloping gravel covering the cul
vert, sustaining serious injuries. 352 U. S., at 501–503. The state
court jury returned a verdict for him, but the Missouri Supreme
Court reversed. Even if the railroad had been negligent in failing to
maintain a flat surface, the court reasoned, the employee was at fault
because of his lack of attention to the spreading fire. As the fire “was
something extraordinary, unrelated to, and disconnected from the in
cline of the gravel,” the court found that “plaintiff’s injury was not the


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
natural and probable consequence of any negligence of defendant.”
Ibid. This Court reversed. FELA, this Court affirmed, did not incor
porate any traditional common-law formulation of “proximate causa
tion[,] which [requires] the jury [to] find that the defendant’s negli
gence was the sole, efficient, producing cause of injury.” Id., at 506.
Whether the railroad’s negligent act was the “immediate reason” for
the fall, the Court added, was “irrelevant.” Id., at 503. The Court
then announced its “any part . . . in producing the injury” test, id., at
506.
Rogers is most sensibly read as a comprehensive statement of
FELA’s causation standard. The State Supreme Court there ac
knowledged that a FELA injury might have multiple causes, but con
sidered the respondent railroad’s part too indirect to establish the
requisite causation. That is the very reasoning this Court rejected in
Rogers. It is also the reasoning CSX asks this Court to resurrect.
The interpretation adopted today is informed by the statutory his
tory, see Trainmen v. Virginia ex rel. Virginia State Bar, 377 U. S. 1,
3, the precedents on which Rogers drew, see, e.g., Coray v. Southern
Pacific Co., 335 U. S. 520, 523–524, this Court’s subsequent deci
sions, see, e.g., Ferguson v. Moore-McCormack Lines, Inc., 352 U. S.
521, 523–524, the decisions of every Court of Appeals that reviews
FELA cases, and the overwhelming majority of state courts and
scholars. This understanding of Rogers “has been accepted as settled
law for several decades.” IBP, Inc. v. Alvarez, 546 U. S. 21, 32. To
discard or restrict the instruction now would ill serve stare decisis.
Pp. 6–12.
(b) CSX nonetheless worries that the Rogers “any part” instruction
opens the door to unlimited liability, inviting juries to impose liability
on the basis of “but for” causation. A half century’s experience with
Rogers gives little cause for concern: CSX has not identified even one
trial in which the instruction generated an absurd or untoward
award.
FELA’s “in whole or in part” language is straightforward.
“[R]easonable foreseeability of harm is an essential ingredient of
[FELA] negligence,” Gallick v. Baltimore & Ohio R. Co., 372 U. S.
108, 117 (emphasis added). If negligence is proved, however, and is
shown to have “played any part, even the slightest, in producing the
injury,” Rogers, 352 U. S., at 506, then the carrier is answerable in
damages even if “ ‘the extent of the [injury] or the manner in which it
occurred’ ” was not “[p]robable” or “foreseeable.” Gallick, 372 U. S.,
at 120–121, and n. 8. Properly instructed on negligence and causa
tion, and told, as is standard practice in FELA cases, to use their
“common sense” in reviewing the evidence, juries would have no war
rant to award damages in far out “but for” scenarios, and judges


4

CSX TRANSP., INC. v. MCBRIDE
Syllabus
would have no warrant to submit such cases to the jury. Pp. 12–14,
16–19.

GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to Part
III–A. BREYER, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined that opinion in full,
and THOMAS, J., joined as to all but Part III–A. ROBERTS, C. J., filed a
dissenting opinion, in which SCALIA, KENNEDY, and ALITO, JJ., joined.

