2

DEPIERRE v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

Physicians and Scientists as Amici Curiae 2–3 (herein
after Physicians Brief). Cocaine is derived from the coca
plant native to South America. The leaves of the coca
plant can be processed with water, kerosene, sodium car
bonate, and sulphuric acid to produce a paste-like sub
stance. R. Weiss, S. Mirin, & R. Bartel, Cocaine 10 (2d
ed. 1994). When dried, the resulting “coca paste” can be
vaporized (through the application of heat) and inhaled,
i.e., “smoked.” See United States Sentencing Commission,
Special Report to the Congress: Cocaine and Federal
Sentencing Policy 11–12 (1995) (hereinafter Commission
Report). Coca paste contains C17H21NO4—that is, cocaine
in its base form.
Dissolving coca paste in water and hydrochloric acid
produces (after several intermediate steps) cocaine hydro
chloride, which is a salt with the molecular formula
C17H22NO4+Cl-. Id., at 12; Physicians Brief 3. Cocaine
hydrochloride, therefore, is not a base. It generally comes
in powder form, which we will refer to as “powder cocaine.”
It is usually insufflated (breathed in through the nose),
though it can also be ingested or diluted in water and
injected. Because cocaine hydrochloride vaporizes at a
much higher temperature than chemically basic cocaine
(at which point the cocaine molecule tends to decompose),
it is generally not smoked. See Commission Report 11,
n. 15, 12–13.
Cocaine hydrochloride can be converted into cocaine in
its base form by combining powder cocaine with water and
a base, like sodium bicarbonate (also known as baking
soda). Id., at 14. The chemical reaction changes the
cocaine hydrochloride molecule into a chemically basic
——————
For our purposes, it is sufficient to note the fundamental proposition
that a base and an acid can combine to form a salt, and all three are
different types of compounds. See generally Brief for Individual Physi
cians and Scientists as Amici Curiae 8; A Dictionary of Chemistry 6–7,
62–63, 496 (J. Dainith ed., 5th ed. 2004).

