2

DEPIERRE v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
cocaine, freebase, and coca paste. On its plain terms, then, “cocaine
base” reaches more broadly than just crack cocaine. In arguing to the
contrary, DePierre urges the Court to stray far from the statute’s
text, which nowhere contains the term “crack cocaine.” The Govern
ment’s reading, on the other hand, follows the words Congress chose
to use. DePierre is correct that “cocaine base” is technically redun
dant—chemically speaking, cocaine is a base. But Congress had good
reason to use “cocaine base”—to make clear that clause (iii) does not
apply to offenses involving cocaine hydrochloride (i.e., powder co
caine) or other nonbasic cocaine-related substances. At the time the
statute was enacted, “cocaine” was commonly used to refer to powder
cocaine, and the scientific and medical literature often uses “cocaine”
to refer to all cocaine-related substances, including ones that are not
chemically basic. Pp. 7–10.
(b) This reading of “cocaine base” is also consistent with
§841(b)(1)’s somewhat confusing structure. Subsection (b)(1)(A)(ii)(II)
lists “cocaine,” along with “its salts, optical and geometric isomers,
and salts of isomers,” as elements subject to clause (ii)’s higher quan
tity threshold. DePierre is correct that, because “cocaine” and “co
caine base” both refer to chemically basic cocaine, offenses involving
a substance containing such cocaine will always be penalized accord
ing to the lower quantity threshold of clause (iii), and never the
higher threshold clause (ii) establishes for mixtures and substances
containing “cocaine.” But the Court does not agree that the term “co
caine” in clause (ii) is therefore superfluous—in light of the structure
of subclause (II), “cocaine” is needed as the reference point for “salts”
and “isomers,” which would otherwise be meaningless.
The term “cocaine” in clause (ii) also performs another critical func
tion. Clause (iii) penalizes offenses involving a mixture or substance
“described in clause (ii) which contains cocaine base.” Thus, clause
(ii) imposes a penalty for offenses involving cocaine-related sub
stances generally, and clause (iii) imposes a higher penalty for a sub
set of those substances—the ones that “contai[n] cocaine base.” For
this structure to work, however, §841(b)(1) must “describ[e] in clause
(ii)” substances containing chemically basic cocaine, which then com
prise the subset described in clause (iii). Congress thus had good
reason to include the term “cocaine” in clause (ii), and the slight in
consistency created by its use of “cocaine base” in clause (iii) is insuf
ficient reason to adopt DePierre’s interpretation. Pp. 10–13.
(c) DePierre’s additional arguments are unpersuasive. First, the
records of the 1986 congressional hearings do not support his conten
tion that Congress was exclusively concerned with offenses involving
crack cocaine. Second, reading “cocaine base” to mean chemically ba
sic cocaine, rather than crack cocaine, does not lead to an absurd re

