8

DEPIERRE v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

scribed in clause (ii) which contains cocaine base.”7
We agree with the Government that the most natural
reading of the term “cocaine base” is “cocaine in its base
form”—i.e., C17H21NO4, the molecule found in crack co
caine, freebase, and coca paste. On its plain terms, then,
“cocaine base” reaches more broadly than just crack co
caine. In arguing to the contrary, DePierre asks us to
stray far from the statute’s text, as the term “crack co
caine” appears nowhere in the ADAA (or the United States
Code, for that matter). While the Government’s reading is
not without its problems,8 that reading follows from the
words Congress chose to include in the text. See United
States v. Rodriquez, 553 U. S. 377, 384 (2008) (eschewing
an interpretation that was “not faithful to the statutory
text”). In short, the term “cocaine base” is more plausibly
read to mean the “chemically basic form of cocaine,” Brief
for United States 15, than it is “crack cocaine,” Brief for
——————
7 As noted earlier, §841(b)(1)(B) calls for a mandatory minimum 5
year sentence for offenses involving exactly the same substances; the
only difference in subparagraph (B) is that the threshold quantity in
clause (ii) is 500 grams, and in clause (iii) it is 5 grams. Because the
100-to-1 ratio is a feature of both §§841(b)(1)(A) and (B), and those
subparagraphs are identical in all other respects, throughout this
opinion we use the terms “clause (ii)” and “clause (iii)” to refer to those
clauses as present in either subparagraph.
8 The Government urges us to give “cocaine base” its “settled, unam
biguous scientific meaning,” i.e., “the form of cocaine classified chemi
cally as a base, with the chemical formula C17H21NO4 and a particular
molecular structure.” Brief for United States 20; cf. McDermott Int’l,
Inc. v. Wilander, 498 U. S. 337, 342 (1991) (“In the absence of contrary
indication, we assume that when a statute uses . . . a term [of art],
Congress intended it to have its established meaning”). But the scien
tifically proper appellation for C17H21NO4 is “cocaine” tout court, and
the Government cites no source that uses “cocaine base” to refer to
C17H21NO4 (save lower-court opinions construing the statute at issue
in this case). Therefore, there is no “settled meaning”—scientific or
otherwise—of “cocaine base” for us to apply to §841(b)(1).

