Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

need not decide now whether such deference would be
appropriate, because the Guidelines do not purport to
interpret §841(b)(1). See USSG §2D1.1(c), n. (D) (“ ‘Co
caine base,’ for the purposes of this guideline, means
‘crack’ ” (emphasis added)).13
We recognize that, because the definition of “cocaine
base” in clause (iii) differs from the Guidelines definition,
certain sentencing anomalies may result. For example, an
offense involving 5 grams of crack cocaine and one involv
ing 5 grams of coca paste both trigger a minimum 5
year sentence under §841(b)(1)(B)(iii). But defendants
convicted of offenses involving only 4 grams of each sub
stance—which do not trigger the statutory minimums—
would likely receive different sentences, because of the
Guidelines’ differential treatment of those substances with
respect to offense level.14 Compare USSG §2D1.1(c)(9)
(providing an offense level of 22 for at least 4 grams of
“cocaine base,” i.e., “crack”) with §2D1.1(c)(14) (providing
an offense level of 12 for less than 25 grams of “cocaine,”
which, under the Guidelines, includes coca paste). As we
have noted in previous opinions, however, such disparities
are the inevitable result of the dissimilar operation of the
fixed minimum sentences Congress has provided by stat——————
13 We

also disagree with DePierre’s contention that Congress’ failure
to reject the Guidelines definition of “cocaine base” means that it has
effectively adopted that interpretation with respect to the statute. See
Kimbrough v. United States, 552 U. S. 85, 106 (2007) (“Ordinarily, we
resist reading congressional intent into congressional inaction”).
14 In defining “cocaine base” as “crack,” the Commission explained
that “forms of cocaine base other than crack” are treated as “cocaine”
for purposes of the Guidelines. USSG App. C, Amdt. 487 (effective Nov.
1, 1993). This includes coca paste, which the Commission described as
“an intermediate step in the processing of coca leaves into cocaine
hydrochloride.” Ibid. As we have explained, however, coca paste is a
smokeable form of cocaine in its own right, and we see no reason why,
as a statutory matter, it should be subject to lesser penalties than crack
or freebase.

