12

DEPIERRE v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

statute as faithfully as possible to its actual text.11 And as
noted earlier, there is no textual support for DePierre’s
interpretation of “cocaine base” to mean “crack cocaine.”
We also recognize that our reading of “cocaine” in sub
clause (II) and “cocaine base” in clause (iii) to both refer to
chemically basic cocaine is in tension with the usual rule
that “when the legislature uses certain language in one
part of the statute and different language in another, the
court assumes different meanings were intended.” Sosa v.
Alvarez-Machain, 542 U. S. 692, 711, n. 9 (2004) (internal
quotation marks omitted). However, because “Congress
sometimes uses slightly different language to convey the
same message,” Deal v. United States, 508 U. S. 129, 134
(1993) (internal quotation marks omitted), we must be
careful not to place too much emphasis on the marginal
semantic divergence between the terms “cocaine” and
“cocaine base.” As we have already explained, Congress
had good reason to employ the latter term in clause (iii),
and the slight inconsistency in nomenclature is insuffi
cient reason to adopt DePierre’s interpretation. Cf. Public
Lands Council v. Babbitt, 529 U. S. 728, 746–747 (2000)
——————
11 At the time the ADAA was enacted, the definition of “narcotic drug”
in the same subchapter of the United States Code included, as relevant,
the following:
“(C) Coca leaves, except coca leaves and extracts of coca leaves from
which cocaine, ecgonine, and derivatives of ecgonine or their salts have
been removed.
“(D) Cocaine, its salts, optical and geometric isomers, and salts of
isomers.
“(E) Ecgonine, its derivatives, their salts, isomers, and salts of isomers.
“(F) Any compound, mixture, or preparation which contains any quan
tity of any of the substances referred to in [the preceding] subpara
graphs . . . . ” 21 U. S. C. §802(17) (1982 ed., Supp. III).
Accordingly, the likely explanation for the ADAA’s curious structure is
that Congress simply adopted this preexisting enumeration of cocaine
related controlled substances, and then engrafted clause (iii) to provide
enhanced penalties for the subset of offenses involving chemically basic
cocaine.

