10

DEPIERRE v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

tionary 317 (15th ed. 2007). Accordingly, Congress’ choice
to use the admittedly redundant term “cocaine base” to
refer to chemically basic cocaine is best understood as an
effort to make clear that clause (iii) does not apply to
offenses involving powder cocaine or other nonbasic
cocaine-related substances.
B
Notwithstanding DePierre’s arguments to the contrary,
reading “cocaine base” to mean chemically basic cocaine is
also consistent with §841(b)(1)’s somewhat confounding
structure. DePierre is correct that the interpretation we
adopt today raises the question why Congress included the
word “cocaine” in subclause (II) of clause (ii). That sub
clause lists “cocaine, its salts, optical and geometric iso
mers, and salts of isomers” as elements subject to clause
(ii)’s higher quantity threshold.
§§841(b)(1)(A)(ii)(II),
(B)(ii)(II) (emphasis added). If, as we conclude, the terms
“cocaine” and “cocaine base” both mean chemically basic
cocaine, offenses involving a mixture or substance which
contains such cocaine will always be penalized according
to the lower quantity thresholds of clause (iii), and never
the higher quantity thresholds clause (ii) establishes for
mixtures and substances containing “cocaine.”10
While this much is true, we do not agree with DePierre
that the word “cocaine” in subclause (II) is therefore su
perfluous. For without the word “cocaine” subclause (II)
makes no sense: It would provide a minimum sentence for
offenses involving a specified quantity of simply “its salts,
optical and geometric isomers, and salts of isomers.” In
——————
10 DePierre makes a similar argument with respect to coca leaves:
Because they contain chemically basic cocaine, he contends, under the
Government’s interpretation offenses involving coca leaves will never
be subject to the lower quantity threshold associated with subclause (I),
rendering that provision superfluous. For reasons discussed later, see
infra, at 15–16, we are not convinced.

