Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

Petitioner 24, 28.9
We agree with DePierre that using the term “cocaine
base” to refer to C17H21NO4 is technically redundant; as
noted earlier, chemically speaking cocaine is a base. If
Congress meant in clause (iii) to penalize more severely
offenses involving “a mixture or substance . . . which
contains” cocaine in its base form it could have simply
(and more correctly) used the word “cocaine” instead. But
Congress had good reason to use “cocaine base” in the
ADAA—to distinguish the substances covered by clause
(iii) from other cocaine-related substances. For example,
at the time Congress enacted the statute, the word “co
caine” was commonly used to refer to cocaine hydrochlo
ride, i.e., powder cocaine. See, e.g., United States v. Mon
toya de Hernandez, 473 U. S. 531, 536, 544 (1985)
(repeatedly referring to cocaine hydrochloride as “co
caine”); “Crack” Cocaine, Hearing before the Permanent
Subcommittee on Investigations of the Senate Committee
on Governmental Affairs, 99th Cong., 2d Sess., 94 (1986)
(hereinafter Crack Cocaine Hearing) (prepared statement
of David L. Westrate, Assistant Administrator, Drug
Enforcement Admin., Dept. of Justice) (discussing produc
tion of “a white, crystalline powder, cocaine hydrochloride,
otherwise known simply as cocaine”).
To make things more confusing, in the scientific and
medical literature the word “cocaine” is often used to refer
to all cocaine-related substances, including powder co
caine. See, e.g., J. Fay, The Alcohol/Drug Abuse Diction
ary and Encyclopedia 26–27 (1988); Weiss et al., Cocaine,
at 15–25; R. Lewis, Hawley’s Condensed Chemical Dic
——————
9 The statute itself gives us good reason to reject DePierre’s reading.
Substituting “crack cocaine” for “cocaine base” would mean that clause
(iii) only applies to a “mixture or substance . . . which contains [crack
cocaine].” But crack cocaine is itself a “substance” involved in drug
offenses; it is the end product that is bought, sold, and consumed. We
are aware of no substance that “contains” crack cocaine.

