(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

STOLT-NIELSEN S. A. ET AL. v. ANIMALFEEDS IN-

TERNATIONAL CORP. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 08–1198. Argued December 9, 2009—Decided April 27, 2010
Petitioner shipping companies serve much of the world market for par
cel tankers—seagoing vessels with compartments that are separately
chartered to customers, such as respondent (AnimalFeeds), who wish
to ship liquids in small quantities. AnimalFeeds ships its goods pur
suant to a standard contract known in the maritime trade as a char
ter party. The charter party that AnimalFeeds uses contains an arbi
tration clause. AnimalFeeds brought a class action antitrust suit
against petitioners for price fixing, and that suit was consolidated
with similar suits brought by other charterers, including one in
which the Second Circuit subsequently reversed a lower court ruling
that the charterers’ claims were not subject to arbitration. As a con
sequence, the parties in this case agree that they must arbitrate their
antitrust dispute. AnimalFeeds sought arbitration on behalf of a
class of purchasers of parcel tanker transportation services. The par
ties agreed to submit the question whether their arbitration agree
ment allowed for class arbitration to a panel of arbitrators, who
would be bound by rules (Class Rules) developed by the American
Arbitration Association following Green Tree Financial Corp. v. Baz
zle, 539 U. S. 444. One Class Rule requires an arbitrator to deter
mine whether an arbitration clause permits class arbitration. The
parties selected an arbitration panel, designated New York City as
the arbitration site, and stipulated that their arbitration clause was
“silent” on the class arbitration issue. The panel determined that the
arbitration clause allowed for class arbitration, but the District Court
vacated the award. It concluded that the arbitrators’ award was
made in “manifest disregard” of the law, for had the arbitrators con
ducted a choice-of-law analysis, they would have applied the rule of

