2

STOLT-NIELSEN S. A. v. ANIMALFEEDS INT’L CORP.
Syllabus
federal maritime law requiring contracts to be interpreted in light of
custom and usage. The Second Circuit reversed, holding that be
cause petitioners had cited no authority applying a maritime rule of
custom and usage against class arbitration, the arbitrators’ decision
was not in manifest disregard of maritime law; and that the arbitra
tors had not manifestly disregarded New York law, which had not es
tablished a rule against class arbitration.

Held: Imposing class arbitration on parties who have not agreed to au
thorize class arbitration is inconsistent with the Federal Arbitration
Act (FAA), 9 U. S. C. §1 et seq. Pp. 7–23.
(a) The arbitration panel exceeded its powers by imposing its own
policy choice instead of identifying and applying a rule of decision de
rived from the FAA or from maritime or New York law. Pp. 7–12.
(1) An arbitration decision may be vacated under FAA §10(a)(4)
on the ground that the arbitrator exceeded his powers, “only when
[an] arbitrator strays from interpretation and application of the
agreement and effectively ‘dispense[s] his own brand of industrial
justice,’ ” Major League Baseball Players Assn. v. Garvey, 532 U. S.
504, 509 (per curiam), for an arbitrator’s task is to interpret and en
force a contract, not to make public policy. P. 7.
(2) The arbitration panel appears to have rested its decision on
AnimalFeeds’ public policy argument for permitting class arbitration
under the charter party’s arbitration clause. However, because the
parties agreed that their agreement was “silent” on the class arbitra
tion issue, the arbitrators’ proper task was to identify the rule of law
governing in that situation. Instead, the panel based its decision on
post-Bazzle arbitral decisions without mentioning whether they were
based on a rule derived from the FAA or on maritime or New York
law. Rather than inquiring whether those bodies of law contained a
“default rule” permitting an arbitration clause to allow class arbitra
tion absent express consent, the panel proceeded as if it had a com
mon-law court’s authority to develop what it viewed as the best rule
for such a situation. Finding no reason to depart from its perception
of a post-Bazzle consensus among arbitrators that class arbitration
was beneficial in numerous settings, the panel simply imposed its
own conception of sound policy and permitted class arbitration. The
panel’s few references to intent do not show that the panel did any
thing other than impose its own policy preference. Thus, under FAA
§10(b), this Court must either “direct a rehearing by the arbitrators”
or decide the question originally referred to the panel. Because there
can be only one possible outcome on the facts here, there is no need to
direct a rehearing by the arbitrators. Pp. 7–12.
(b) Bazzle did not control resolution of the question whether the in
stant charter party permits arbitration to proceed on behalf of this

