6

STOLT-NIELSEN S. A. v. ANIMALFEEDS INT’L CORP.
Opinion of the Court

case law established a rule against class arbitration. Id.,
at 98–99.
We granted certiorari. 557 U. S. ___ (2009).2
——————
2 Invoking

an argument not pressed in or considered by the courts
below, the dissent concludes that the question presented is not ripe for
our review. See post, at 1, 3–6 (opinion of GINSBURG, J.). In so doing,
the dissent offers no clear justification for now embracing an argument
“we necessarily considered and rejected” in granting certiorari. United
States v. Williams, 504 U. S. 36, 40 (1992). Ripeness reflects constitu­
tional considerations that implicate “Article III limitations on judicial
power,” as well as “prudential reasons for refusing to exercise jurisdic­
tion.” Reno v. Catholic Social Services, Inc., 509 U. S. 43, 57, n. 18
(1993). In evaluating a claim to determine whether it is ripe for judicial
review, we consider both “the fitness of the issues for judicial decision”
and “the hardship of withholding court consideration.” National Park
Hospitality Assn. v. Department of Interior, 538 U. S. 803, 808 (2003).
To the extent the dissent believes that the question on which we
granted certiorari is constitutionally unripe for review, we disagree.
The arbitration panel’s award means that petitioners must now submit
to class determination proceedings before arbitrators who, if petitioners
are correct, have no authority to require class arbitration absent the
parties’ agreement to resolve their disputes on that basis. See Class
Rule 4(a) (cited in App. 57a); Brief for American Arbitration Association
as Amicus Curiae 17. Should petitioners refuse to proceed with what
they maintain is essentially an ultra vires proceeding, they would
almost certainly be subject to a petition to compel arbitration under 9
U. S. C. §4. Cf. Regional Rail Reorganization Act Cases, 419 U. S. 102,
143 (1974) (“Where the inevitability of the operation of a statute
against certain individuals is patent, it is irrelevant to the existence of
a justiciable controversy that there will be a time delay before the
disputed provisions will come into effect”). We think it is clear on these
facts that petitioners have demonstrated sufficient hardship, and that
their question is fit for our review at this time. To the extent the
dissent believes that the question is prudentially unripe, we reject that
argument as waived, Sprietsma v. Mercury Marine, 537 U. S. 51, 56,
n. 4 (2002), and we see no reason to disregard the waiver. We express
no view as to whether, in a similar case, a federal court may consider a
question of prudential ripeness on its own motion. See National Park
Hospitality Assn., supra, at 808 (“[E]ven in a case raising only pruden­
tial concerns, the question of ripeness may be considered on a court’s
own motion”).

