4

STOLT-NIELSEN S. A. v. ANIMALFEEDS INT’L CORP.
Opinion of the Court

539 U. S. 444 (2003), and Class Rule 3, in accordance with
the plurality opinion in that case, requires an arbitrator,
as a threshold matter, to determine “whether the applica­
ble arbitration clause permits the arbitration to proceed
on behalf of or against a class.” App. 56a.
The parties selected a panel of arbitrators and stipu­
lated that the arbitration clause was “silent” with respect
to class arbitration. Counsel for AnimalFeeds explained to
the arbitration panel that the term “silent” did not simply
mean that the clause made no express reference to class
arbitration. Rather, he said, “[a]ll the parties agree that
when a contract is silent on an issue there’s been no
agreement that has been reached on that issue.” Id.,
at 77a.
After hearing argument and evidence, including testi­
mony from petitioners’ experts regarding arbitration
customs and usage in the maritime trade, the arbitrators
concluded that the arbitration clause allowed for class
arbitration. They found persuasive the fact that other
arbitrators ruling after Bazzle had construed “a wide
variety of clauses in a wide variety of settings as allowing
for class arbitration,” but the panel acknowledged that
none of these decisions was “exactly comparable” to the
present dispute. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 49a–50a.
Petitioners’ expert evidence did not show an “inten[t] to
preclude class arbitration,” the arbitrators reasoned, and
petitioners’ argument would leave “no basis for a class
action absent express agreement among all parties and
the putative class members.” Id., at 51a.
The arbitrators stayed the proceeding to allow the par­
ties to seek judicial review, and petitioners filed an appli­
cation to vacate the arbitrators’ award in the District
Court for the Southern District of New York. See 9
U. S. C. §10(a)(4) (authorizing a district court to “make an
order vacating the award upon the application of any
party to the arbitration . . . where the arbitrators exceeded

