2

STOLT-NIELSEN S. A. v. ANIMALFEEDS INT’L CORP.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

ocean carriers (collectively, Stolt-Nielsen) with a conspir
acy to extract supracompetitive prices from their custom
ers (buyers of ocean-transportation services). That court
action terminated when the Second Circuit held, first, that
the parties’ transactions were governed by contracts (char
ter parties) with enforceable arbitration clauses, and
second, that the antitrust claims were arbitrable. JLM
Industries, Inc. v. Stolt-Nielsen S. A., 387 F. 3d 163, 175,
181 (2004).
Cargo-shipper AnimalFeeds International Corp. (Ani
malFeeds) thereupon filed a demand for class arbitration
of the antitrust-conspiracy claims.3 Stolt-Nielsen con
tested AnimalFeeds’ right to proceed on behalf of a class,
but agreed to submission of that threshold dispute to a
panel of arbitrators. Thus, the parties entered into a
supplemental agreement to choose arbitrators and in
struct them to “follow . . . Rul[e] 3 . . . of the American
Arbitration Association’s Supplementary Rules for Class
Arbitrations.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 59a. Rule 3, in turn,
directed the panel to “determine . . . whether the applica
ble arbitration clause permits the arbitration to proceed
on behalf of . . . a class.” App. 56a.
After receiving written submissions and hearing argu
ments, the arbitration panel rendered a clause
construction award. It decided unanimously—and only—
that the “arbitration claus[e] [used in the parties’ stan
dard-form shipping contracts] permit[s] this . . . arbitra
tion to proceed as a class arbitration.” App. to Pet. for
Cert. 52a. Stolt-Nielsen petitioned for court review urging
vacatur of the clause-construction award on the ground
——————
3 Counsel for AnimalFeeds submitted in arbitration that “[i]t would
cost . . . the vast majority of absent class members, and indeed the
current claimants, . . . more to litigate the matter on an individual basis
than they could recover. An antitrust case, particularly involving an
international cartel[,] . . . is extraordinarily difficult and expensive to
litigate.” App. 82a (paragraph break omitted).

