Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
class. Pp. 12–17.
(1) No single rationale commanded a majority in Bazzle, which
concerned contracts between a commercial lender and its customers
that had an arbitration clause that did not expressly mention class
arbitration. The plurality decided only the question whether the
court or arbitrator should decide whether the contracts were “silent”
on the class arbitration issue, concluding that it was the arbitrator.
JUSTICE STEVENS’ opinion bypassed that question, resting instead on
his resolution of the questions of what standard the appropriate deci
sionmaker should apply in determining whether a contract allows
class arbitration, and whether, under whatever standard is appropri
ate, class arbitration had been properly ordered in the case at hand.
Pp. 12–15.
(2) The Bazzle opinions appear to have baffled these parties at
their arbitration proceeding. For one thing, the parties appear to
have believed that Bazzle requires an arbitrator, not a court, to de
cide whether a contract permits class arbitration, a question ad
dressed only by the plurality. That question need not be revisited
here because the parties expressly assigned that issue to the arbitra
tion panel, and no party argues that this assignment was impermis
sible. Both the parties and the arbitration panel also seem to have
misunderstood Bazzle as establishing the standard to be applied in
deciding whether class arbitration is permitted. However, Bazzle left
that question open. Pp. 15–17.
(c) Imposing class arbitration here is inconsistent with the FAA.
Pp. 17–23.
(1) The FAA imposes rules of fundamental importance, including
the basic precept that arbitration “is a matter of consent, not coer
cion.” Volt v. Board of Trustees of Leland Stanford Junior Univ., 489
U. S. 468, 479. The FAA requires that a “written provision in any
maritime transaction” calling for the arbitration of a controversy
arising out of such transaction “shall be valid, irrevocable, and en
forceable, save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the
revocation of any contract,” 9 U. S. C. §2, and permits a party to an
arbitration agreement to petition a federal district court for an order
directing that arbitration proceed “in the manner provided for in such
agreement,” §4. Thus, this Court has said that the FAA’s central
purpose is to ensure that “private agreements to arbitrate are en
forced according to their terms.” Volt, 489 U. S., at 479. Whether en
forcing an agreement to arbitrate or construing an arbitration clause,
courts and arbitrators must “give effect to the [parties’] contractual
rights and expectations.” Ibid. The parties’ “intentions control,”
Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc., 473 U. S.
614, 626, and the parties are “generally free to structure their arbi

