Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

51a. Accordingly, finding no convincing ground for depart­
ing from the post-Bazzle arbitral consensus, the panel held
that class arbitration was permitted in this case. App. to
Pet. for Cert. 52a. The conclusion is inescapable that the
panel simply imposed its own conception of sound policy.7
2
It is true that the panel opinion makes a few references
to intent, but none of these shows that the panel did any­
thing other than impose its own policy preference. The
opinion states that, under Bazzle, “arbitrators must look
to the language of the parties’ agreement to ascertain the
parties’ intention whether they intended to permit or to
preclude class action,” and the panel added that “[t]his is
also consistent with New York law.” App. to Pet. for Cert.
49a. But the panel had no occasion to “ascertain the
parties’ intention” in the present case because the parties
were in complete agreement regarding their intent. In the
very next sentence after the one quoted above, the panel
——————
customs” and the “custom of the sea . . . includes a customary interpre­
tation of contract language”).
7 The dissent calls this conclusion “hardly fair,” noting that the word
“ ‘policy’ is not so much as mentioned in the arbitrators’ award.” Post,
at 8. But just as merely saying something is so does not make it so, cf.
United States v. Morrison, 529 U. S. 598, 614 (2000), the arbitrators
need not have said they were relying on policy to make it so. At the
hearing before the arbitration panel, one of the arbitrators recognized
that the body of post-Bazzle arbitration awards on which AnimalFeeds
relied involved “essentially consumer non-value cases.” App. 82a. In
response, counsel for AnimalFeeds defended the applicability of those
awards by asserting that the “vast majority” of the claimants against
petitioners “have negative value claims . . . meaning it costs more to
litigate than you would get if you won.” Id., at 82a–83a. The panel
credited this body of awards in concluding that petitioners had not
demonstrated the parties’ intent to preclude class arbitration, and
further observed that if petitioners’ anticonsolidation precedents
controlled, then “there would appear to be no basis for a class action
absent express agreement among all parties and the putative class
members.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 50a, 51a.

