22

STOLT-NIELSEN S. A. v. ANIMALFEEDS INT’L CORP.
Opinion of the Court

consent to resolve disputes through class-wide arbitration.
Cf. First Options, supra, at 945 (noting that “one can
understand why courts might hesitate to interpret silence
or ambiguity on the ‘who should decide arbitrability’ point
as giving the arbitrators that power, for doing so might too
often force unwilling parties to arbitrate” contrary to their
expectations).
Consider just some of the fundamental changes brought
about by the shift from bilateral arbitration to class-action
arbitration. An arbitrator chosen according to an agreed­
upon procedure, see, e.g., supra, at 2, no longer resolves a
single dispute between the parties to a single agreement,
but instead resolves many disputes between hundreds or
perhaps even thousands of parties. See App. 86a (“[W]e
believe domestic class members could be in the hundreds”
and that “[t]here could be class members that ship to and
from the U. S. who are not domestic who we think would
be covered”); see also, e.g., Bazzle, 351 S. C., at 251, 569
S. E. 2d, at 352–353 (involving a class of 1,899 individuals
that was awarded damages, fees, and costs of more than
$14 million by a single arbitrator). Under the Class Rules,
“the presumption of privacy and confidentiality” that
applies in many bilateral arbitrations “shall not apply in
class arbitrations,” see Addendum to Brief for American
Arbitration Association as Amicus Curiae 10a (Class Rule
9(a)), thus potentially frustrating the parties’ assumptions
when they agreed to arbitrate. The arbitrator’s award no
longer purports to bind just the parties to a single arbitra­
tion agreement, but adjudicates the rights of absent par­
ties as well. Cf. Ortiz v. Fibreboard Corp., 527 U. S. 815,
846 (1999) (noting that “the burden of justification rests on
the exception” to the general rule that “one is not bound by
a judgment in personam in a litigation in which he is not
designated as a party or to which he has not been made a
party by service of process” (internal quotation marks
omitted)). And the commercial stakes of class-action

