Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

The Court features a statement counsel for AnimalFeeds made at the hearing before the arbitration panel,
and maintains that it belies any argument that the clause
in question permits class arbitration: “All the parties
agree that when a contract is silent on an issue there’s
been no agreement that has been reached on that issue.”
Ante, at 4 (quoting App. 77a); see ante, at 8, 11–12, 20, 23,
and n. 10. The sentence quoted from the hearing tran
script concluded: “therefore there has been no agreement
to bar class arbitrations.” App. 77a (emphasis added).
Counsel quickly clarified his position: “It’s also undisputed
that the arbitration clause here contains broad language
and this language should be interpreted to permit class
arbitrations.” Id., at 79a. See also id., at 80a (noting
consistent recognition by arbitration panels that “a silent
broadly worded arbitration clause, just like the one at
issue here, should be construed to permit class arbitra
tion”); id., at 88a (“[B]road . . . language . . . silent as to
class proceedings should be interpreted to permit a class
proceeding.”).
Stolt-Nielsen, the panel acknowledged, had vigorously
argued, with the support of expert testimony, that “the
bulk of international shippers would never intend to have
their disputes decided in a class arbitration.” App. to Pet.
for Cert. 52a. That concern, the panel suggested, might be
met at a later stage; “if a class is certified,” the panel
noted, class membership could be confined to those who
affirmatively “ ‘opt in’ ” to the proceeding. Ibid.
The question properly before the Court is not whether
the arbitrators’ ruling was erroneous, but whether the
arbitrators “exceeded their powers.” §10(a)(4). The arbi
trators decided a threshold issue, explicitly committed to
them, see supra, at 2, about the procedural mode available
for presentation of AnimalFeeds’ antitrust claims. Cf.
Shady Grove Orthopedic Associates, P. A. v. Allstate Ins.
Co., 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (plurality opinion) (slip op.,

