16

STOLT-NIELSEN S. A. v. ANIMALFEEDS INT’L CORP.
Opinion of the Court

fact, however, only the plurality decided that question.
But we need not revisit that question here because the
parties’ supplemental agreement expressly assigned this
issue to the arbitration panel, and no party argues that
this assignment was impermissible.
Unfortunately, however, both the parties and the arbitration panel seem to have misunderstood Bazzle in another respect, namely, that it established the standard to
be applied by a decision maker in determining whether a
contract may permissibly be interpreted to allow class
arbitration. The arbitration panel began its discussion
by stating that the parties “differ regarding the rule of
interpretation to be gleaned from [the Bazzle] decision.”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 49a (emphasis added). The panel
continued:
“Claimants argue that Bazzle requires clear language
that forbids class arbitration in order to bar a class
action. The Panel, however, agrees with Respondents
that the test is a more general one—arbitrators must
look to the language of the parties’ agreement to ascertain the parties’ intention whether they intended to
permit or to preclude class action.” Ibid.
As we have explained, however, Bazzle did not establish
the rule to be applied in deciding whether class arbitration
is permitted.8 The decision in Bazzle left that question
——————
8 AnimalFeeds

invokes the parties’ supplemental agreement as evidence that petitioners “waived” any claim that the arbitrators could not
construe the arbitration agreement to permit class arbitration. Brief
for Respondent 15. The dissent concludes, likewise, that the existence
of the parties’ supplemental agreement renders petitioners’ argument
under §10(a)(4) “scarcely debatable.” Post, at 7. These arguments are
easily answered by the clear terms of the supplemental agreement
itself. The parties expressly provided that their supplemental agreement “does not alter the scope of the Parties’ arbitration agreements in
any Charter Party Agreement,” and that “[n]either the fact of this
Agreement nor any of its terms may be used to support or oppose any

