Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–1159
_________________

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE LELAND STANFORD 

JUNIOR UNIVERSITY, PETITIONER v. ROCHE 

MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC., ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT

[June 6, 2011]


CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS delivered the opinion of the
Court.
Since 1790, the patent law has operated on the premise
that rights in an invention belong to the inventor. The
question here is whether the University and Small Busi
ness Patent Procedures Act of 1980—commonly referred to
as the Bayh-Dole Act—displaces that norm and automati
cally vests title to federally funded inventions in federal
contractors. We hold that it does not.
I

A

In 1985, a small California research company called
Cetus began to develop methods for quantifying blood
borne levels of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the
virus that causes AIDS. A Nobel Prize winning technique
developed at Cetus—polymerase chain reaction, or PCR—
was an integral part of these efforts. PCR allows billions
of copies of DNA sequences to be made from a small initial
blood sample.
In 1988, Cetus began to collaborate with scientists at


2

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR 

UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC. 

Opinion of the Court 


Stanford University’s Department of Infectious Diseases
to test the efficacy of new AIDS drugs. Dr. Mark Holodniy
joined Stanford as a research fellow in the department
around that time. When he did so, he signed a Copyright
and Patent Agreement (CPA) stating that he “agree[d] to
assign” to Stanford his “right, title and interest in” inven
tions resulting from his employment at the University.
App. to Pet. for Cert. 118a–119a.
At Stanford Holodniy undertook to develop an improved
method for quantifying HIV levels in patient blood sam
ples, using PCR. Because Holodniy was largely unfamiliar
with PCR, his supervisor arranged for him to conduct
research at Cetus. As a condition of gaining access to
Cetus, Holodniy signed a Visitor’s Confidentiality Agree
ment (VCA). That agreement stated that Holodniy “will
assign and do[es] hereby assign” to Cetus his “right, title
and interest in each of the ideas, inventions and improve
ments” made “as a consequence of [his] access” to Cetus.
Id., at 122a–124a.
For the next nine months, Holodniy conducted research
at Cetus. Working with Cetus employees, Holodniy de
vised a PCR-based procedure for calculating the amount of
HIV in a patient’s blood. That technique allowed doctors
to determine whether a patient was benefiting from HIV
therapy.
Holodniy then returned to Stanford where he and other
University employees tested the HIV measurement tech
nique. Over the next few years, Stanford obtained written
assignments of rights from the Stanford employees in
volved in refinement of the technique, including Holodniy,
and filed several patent applications related to the proce
dure. Stanford secured three patents to the HIV meas
urement process.
In 1991, Roche Molecular Systems, a company that
specializes in diagnostic blood screening, acquired Cetus’s
PCR-related assets, including all rights Cetus had ob


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

tained through agreements like the VCA signed by Holod
niy. After conducting clinical trials on the HIV quantifica
tion method developed at Cetus, Roche commercialized the
procedure. Today, Roche’s HIV test “kits are used in
hospitals and AIDS clinics worldwide.” Brief for Respon
dents 10–11.
B
In 1980, Congress passed the Bayh-Dole Act to “promote
the utilization of inventions arising from federally sup
ported research,” “promote collaboration between commer
cial concerns and nonprofit organizations,” and “ensure
that the Government obtains sufficient rights in federally
supported inventions.” 35 U. S. C. §200. To achieve these
aims, the Act allocates rights in federally funded “subject
invention[s]” between the Federal Government and federal
contractors (“any person, small business firm, or nonprofit
organization that is a party to a funding agreement”).
§§201(e), (c), 202(a). The Act defines “subject invention”
as “any invention of the contractor conceived or first actu
ally reduced to practice in the performance of work under
a funding agreement.” §201(e).
The Bayh-Dole Act provides that contractors may “elect
to retain title to any subject invention.” §202(a). To be
able to retain title, a contractor must fulfill a number of
obligations imposed by the statute. The contractor must
“disclose each subject invention to the [relevant] Federal
agency within a reasonable time”; it must “make a written
election within two years after disclosure” stating that
the contractor opts to retain title to the invention; and the
contractor must “file a patent application prior to any
statutory bar date.” §§202(c)(1)–(3). The “Federal Gov
ernment may receive title” to a subject invention if a
contractor fails to comply with any of these obligations.
Ibid.
The Government has several rights in federally funded


4

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR 

UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC. 

Opinion of the Court 


subject inventions under the Bayh-Dole Act. The agency
that granted the federal funds receives from the contractor
“a nonexclusive, nontransferrable, irrevocable, paid-up
license to practice . . . [the] subject invention.” §202(c)(4).
The agency also possesses “[m]arch-in rights,” which
permit the agency to grant a license to a responsible third
party under certain circumstances, such as when the con
tractor fails to take “effective steps to achieve practical
application” of the invention. §203. The Act further pro
vides that when the contractor does not elect to retain title
to a subject invention, the Government “may consider and
after consultation with the contractor grant requests for
retention of rights by the inventor.” §202(d).
Some of Stanford’s research related to the HIV meas
urement technique was funded by the National Institutes
of Health (NIH), thereby subjecting the invention to the
Bayh-Dole Act. Accordingly, Stanford disclosed the in
vention, conferred on the Government a nonexclusive,
nontransferable, paid-up license to use the patented proce
dure, and formally notified NIH that it elected to retain
title to the invention.
C
In 2005, the Board of Trustees of Stanford University
filed suit against Roche Molecular Systems, Inc., Roche
Diagnostics Corporation, and Roche Diagnostics Opera
tions, Inc. (collectively Roche), contending that Roche’s
HIV test kits infringed Stanford’s patents. As relevant
here, Roche responded by asserting that it was a co-owner
of the HIV quantification procedure, based on Holodniy’s
assignment of his rights in the Visitor’s Confidentiality
Agreement. As a result, Roche argued, Stanford lacked
standing to sue it for patent infringement. 487 F. Supp.
2d 1099, 1111, 1115 (ND Cal. 2007). Stanford claimed
that Holodniy had no rights to assign because the Univer
sity’s HIV research was federally funded, giving the school


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

superior rights in the invention under the Bayh-Dole Act.
Ibid.1
The District Court held that the “VCA effectively as
signed any rights that Holodniy had in the patented in
vention to Cetus,” and thus to Roche. Id., at 1117. But
because of the operation of the Bayh-Dole Act, “Holodniy
had no interest to assign.” Id., at 1117, 1119. The court
concluded that the Bayh-Dole Act “provides that the indi
vidual inventor may obtain title” to a federally funded
invention “only after the government and the contracting
party have declined to do so.” Id., at 1118.
The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit disagreed.
First, the court concluded that Holodniy’s initial agree
ment with Stanford in the Copyright and Patent Agree
ment constituted a mere promise to assign rights in the
future, unlike Holodniy’s agreement with Cetus in the
Visitor’s Confidentiality Agreement, which itself assigned
Holodniy’s rights in the invention to Cetus. See 583 F. 3d
832, 841–842 (2009). Therefore, as a matter of contract
law, Cetus obtained Holodniy’s rights in the HIV quantifi
cation technique through the VCA.2 Next, the court ex
plained that the Bayh-Dole Act “does not automatically
void ab initio the inventors’ rights in government-funded
inventions” and that the “statutory scheme did not auto
matically void the patent rights that Cetus received from
Holodniy.” Id., at 844–845. The court held that “Roche
possesse[d] an ownership interest in the patents-in-suit”
——————
1 Roche submitted a host of other claims to the District Court, includ
ing that it had “shop rights” to the patents and was entitled to a license
to use the patents. See 583 F. 3d 832, 838 (CA Fed. 2009). None of
those claims is now before us; we deal only with Roche’s claim to co
ownership to rebut Stanford’s standing to bring an infringement action.
2 Because the Federal Circuit’s interpretation of the relevant assign
ment agreements is not an issue on which we granted certiorari, we
have no occasion to pass on the validity of the lower court’s construction
of those agreements.


6

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR 

UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC. 

Opinion of the Court 


that was not extinguished by the Bayh-Dole Act, “de
priv[ing] Stanford of standing.” Id., at 836–837. The
Court of Appeals then remanded the case with instruc
tions to dismiss Stanford’s infringement claim. Id., at 849.
We granted certiorari. 562 U. S. ___ (2010).
II 

A

Congress has the authority “[t]o promote the Progress of
Science and useful Arts, by securing . . . to Authors and
Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings
and Discoveries.” U. S. Const. Art. I, §8, cl. 8. The first
Congress put that power to use by enacting the Patent Act
of 1790. That Act provided “[t]hat upon the petition of any
person or persons . . . setting forth, that he, she, or they,
hath or have invented or discovered” an invention, a pat
ent could be granted to “such petitioner or petitioners” or
“their heirs, administrators or assigns.” Act of Apr. 10,
1790, §1, 1 Stat. 109–110. Under that law, the first patent
was granted in 1790 to Samuel Hopkins, who had devised
an improved method for making potash, America’s first
industrial chemical. U. S. Patent No. 1 (issued July 31,
1790).3
Although much in intellectual property law has changed
in the 220 years since the first Patent Act, the basic idea
that inventors have the right to patent their inventions
has not. Under the law in its current form, “[w]hoever
invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine,
manufacture, or composition of matter . . . may obtain a
patent therefor.” 35 U. S. C. §101. The inventor must
attest that “he believes himself to be the original and first
inventor of the [invention] for which he solicits a patent.”
——————
3 The

patent was signed by President George Washington, Secretary
of State Thomas Jefferson, and Attorney General Edmund Randolph.
See Maxey, Samuel Hopkins, The Holder of the First U. S. Patent: A
Study of Failure, 122 Pa. Magazine of Hist. and Biography 6 (1998).


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

§115. In most cases, a patent may be issued only to an
applying inventor, or—because an inventor’s interest in
his invention is “assignable in law by an instrument in
writing”—an inventor’s assignee. §§151, 152, 261.
Our precedents confirm the general rule that rights in
an invention belong to the inventor. See, e.g., Gayler v.
Wilder, 10 How. 477, 493 (1851) (“the discoverer of a new
and useful improvement is vested by law with an inchoate
right to its exclusive use, which he may perfect and make
absolute by proceeding in the manner which the law re
quires”); Solomons v. United States, 137 U. S. 342, 346
(1890) (“whatever invention [an inventor] may thus con
ceive and perfect is his individual property”); United
States v. Dubilier Condenser Corp., 289 U. S. 178, 188
(1933) (an inventor owns “the product of [his] original
thought”). The treatises are to the same effect. See, e.g., 8
Chisum on Patents §22.01, p. 22–2 (2011) (“The presump
tive owner of the property right in a patentable invention
is the single human inventor”).
It is equally well established that an inventor can assign
his rights in an invention to a third party. See Dubilier
Condenser Corp., supra, at 187 (“A patent is property and
title to it can pass only by assignment”); 8 Chisum on
Patents, supra, §22.01, at 22–2 (“The inventor . . . [may]
transfer ownership interests by written assignment to
anyone”). Thus, although others may acquire an interest
in an invention, any such interest—as a general rule—
must trace back to the inventor.
In accordance with these principles, we have recognized
that unless there is an agreement to the contrary, an
employer does not have rights in an invention “which is
the original conception of the employee alone.” Dubilier
Condenser Corp., 289 U. S., at 189. Such an invention
“remains the property of him who conceived it.” Ibid. In
most circumstances, an inventor must expressly grant his
rights in an invention to his employer if the employer is to


8

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR
UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC.
Opinion of the Court

obtain those rights. See id., at 187 (“The respective rights
and obligations of employer and employee, touching an
invention conceived by the latter, spring from the contract
of employment”).
B
Stanford and the United States as amicus curiae con
tend that the Bayh-Dole Act reorders the normal priority
of rights in an invention when the invention is conceived
or first reduced to practice with the support of federal
funds. In their view, the Act moves inventors from the
front of the line to the back by vesting title to federally
funded inventions in the inventor’s employer—the federal
contractor. See Brief for Petitioner 26–27; Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 6.
Congress has in the past divested inventors of their
rights in inventions by providing unambiguously that
inventions created pursuant to specified federal contracts
become the property of the United States. For example,
with respect to certain contracts dealing with nuclear
material and atomic energy, Congress provided that title
to such inventions “shall be vested in, and be the property
of, the [Atomic Energy] Commission.” 42 U. S. C. §2182.
Congress has also enacted laws requiring that title to
certain inventions made pursuant to contracts with the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration “shall be
the exclusive property of the United States,” Pub. L. 111–
314, §3, 124 Stat. 3339, 51 U. S. C. §20135(b)(1), and that
title to certain inventions under contracts with the De
partment of Energy “shall vest in the United States.” 42
U. S. C. §5908.
Such language is notably absent from the Bayh-Dole
Act. Nowhere in the Act is title expressly vested in con
tractors or anyone else; nowhere in the Act are inventors
expressly deprived of their interest in federally funded
inventions. Instead, the Act provides that contractors may


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

“elect to retain title to any subject invention.” 35 U. S. C.
§202(a). A “subject invention” is defined as “any invention
of the contractor conceived or first actually reduced to
practice in the performance of work under a funding
agreement.” §201(e).
Stanford asserts that the phrase “invention of the con
tractor” in this provision “is naturally read to include all
inventions made by the contractor’s employees with the
aid of federal funding.” Brief for Petitioner 32 (footnote
omitted). That reading assumes that Congress subtly set
aside two centuries of patent law in a statutory definition.
It also renders the phrase “of the contractor” superfluous.
If the phrase “of the contractor” were deleted from the
definition of “subject invention,” the definition would cover
“any invention . . . conceived or first actually reduced to
practice in the performance of work under a funding
agreement.” Reading “of the contractor” to mean “all
inventions made by the contractor’s employees with the
aid of federal funding,” as Stanford would, adds nothing
that is not already in the definition, since the definition
already covers inventions made under the funding agree
ment. That is contrary to our general “reluctan[ce] to
treat statutory terms as surplusage.” Duncan v. Walker,
533 U. S. 167, 174 (2001) (internal quotation marks
omitted).
Construing the phrase to refer instead to a particular
category of inventions conceived or reduced to practice
under a funding agreement—inventions “of the contrac
tor,” that is, those owned by or belonging to the con
tractor—makes the phrase meaningful in the statutory
definition. And “invention owned by the contractor” or
“invention belonging to the contractor” are natural read
ings of the phrase “invention of the contractor.” As we
have explained, “[t]he use of the word ‘of’ denotes owner
ship.” Poe v. Seaborn, 282 U. S. 101, 109 (1930); see FloresFigueroa v. United States, 556 U. S. ___, ___, ___


10

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR
UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC.
Opinion of the Court

(2009) (slip op., at 2, 11) (treating the phrase “identifica
tion [papers] of another person” as meaning such items
belonging to another person (internal quotation marks
omitted)); Ellis v. United States, 206 U. S. 246, 259 (1907)
(interpreting the phrase “works of the United States” to
mean “works belonging to the United States” (internal
quotation marks omitted)).
That reading follows from a common definition of the
word “of.” See Webster’s Third New International Dic
tionary 1565 (2002) (“of” can be “used as a function word
indicating a possessive relationship”); New Oxford Ameri
can Dictionary 1180 (2d ed. 2005) (defining “of” as “indi
cating an association between two entities, typically one of
belonging”); Webster’s New Twentieth Century Dictionary
1241 (2d ed. 1979) (defining “of” as “belonging to”).
Stanford’s reading of the phrase “invention of the con
tractor” to mean “all inventions made by the contractor’s
employees” is plausible enough in the abstract; it is often
the case that whatever an employee produces in the course
of his employment belongs to his employer. No one would
claim that an autoworker who builds a car while working
in a factory owns that car. But, as noted, patent law has
always been different: We have rejected the idea that mere
employment is sufficient to vest title to an employee’s
invention in the employer. Against this background, a
contractor’s invention—an “invention of the contractor”—
does not automatically include inventions made by the
contractor’s employees.4
——————
4 The

dissent suggests that “we could interpret the Bayh-Dole Act as
ordinarily assuming, and thereby ordinarily requiring, an assignment
of patent rights by the federally funded employee to the federally
funded employer.” Post, at 8. That suggestion is based in large part on
Executive Order 10096, which “governs Federal Government employee
to-employer patent right assignments.” Post, at 9. Lest there be any
doubt, employees of nonfederal entities that have federal funding
contracts—like Holodniy—are not federal employees. And there is no


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

The Bayh-Dole Act’s provision stating that contractors
may “elect to retain title” confirms that the Act does not
vest title. 35 U. S. C. §202(a) (emphasis added). Stanford
reaches the opposite conclusion, but only because it reads
“retain” to mean “acquire” and “receive.” Brief for Peti
tioner 36 (internal quotation marks omitted). That is
certainly not the common meaning of “retain.” “[R]etain”
means “to hold or continue to hold in possession or use.”
Webster’s Third, supra, at 1938; see Webster’s New Colle
giate Dictionary 980 (1980) (“to keep in possession or
use”); American Heritage Dictionary 1109 (1969) (“[t]o
keep or hold in one’s possession”). You cannot retain
something unless you already have it. See Alaska v.
United States, 545 U. S. 75, 104 (2005) (interpreting the
phrase “the United States shall retain title to all property”
to mean that “[t]he United States . . . retained title to its
property located within Alaska’s borders”) (emphasis
added). The Bayh-Dole Act does not confer title to feder
ally funded inventions on contractors or authorize contrac
tors to unilaterally take title to those inventions; it simply
assures contractors that they may keep title to whatever it
is they already have. Such a provision makes sense in a
statute specifying the respective rights and responsibili
ties of federal contractors and the Government.
The Bayh-Dole Act states that it “take[s] precedence
over any other Act which would require a disposition of
rights in subject inventions . . . that is inconsistent with”
the Act. 35 U. S. C. §210(a). The United States as amicus
curiae argues that this provision operates to displace the
basic principle, codified in the Patent Act, that an inventor
owns the rights to his invention. See Brief for United
States 21. But because the Bayh-Dole Act, including
—————— 

equivalent executive order governing invention rights with respect to 

federally funded research; that issue is of course addressed by the 

Bayh-Dole Act. 



12

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR
UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC.
Opinion of the Court

§210(a), applies only to “subject inventions”—“inventions
of the contractor”—it does not displace an inventor’s ante
cedent title to his invention. Only when an invention
belongs to the contractor does the Bayh-Dole Act come into
play. The Act’s disposition of rights—like much of the
rest of the Bayh-Dole Act—serves to clarify the order of
priority of rights between the Federal Government and a
federal contractor in a federally funded invention that
already belongs to the contractor. Nothing more.5
The isolated provisions of the Bayh-Dole Act dealing
with inventors’ rights in subject inventions are consistent
with our construction of the Act. Under the Act, a federal
agency may “grant requests for retention of rights by the
inventor . . . [i]f a contractor does not elect to retain title to
a subject invention.” §202(d). If an employee inventor
never had title to his invention because title vested in the
contractor by operation of law—as Stanford submits—it
would be odd to allow the Government to grant “requests
for retention of rights by the inventor.” By using the word
“retention,” §202(d) assumes that the inventor had rights
in the subject invention at some point, undermining the
notion that the Act automatically vests title to federally
funded inventions in federal contractors.6
——————
5 Far

from superseding the Patent Act in such a backhanded way, it is
clear that §210(a)’s concern is far narrower. That provision specifies 21
different statutory provisions that the Bayh-Dole Act “take[s] prece
dence over,” the vast majority of which deal with the division of owner
ship in certain inventions between a contractor and the Government.
35 U. S. C. §§210(a)(1)–(21); see, e.g., §§210(a)(19)–(20) (the Bayh-Dole
Act takes precedence over “section 6(b) of the Solar Photovoltaic Energy
Research Development and Demonstration Act” and “section 12 of the
Native Latex Commercialization and Economic Development Act”).
6 Stanford contends that it cannot be the case “that the contractor can
only ‘retain title’ to an invention that it already owns, while an inventor
may be considered for ‘retention’ of title only when he has assigned title
away.” Reply Brief for Petitioner 8. That argument has some force.
But there may be situations where an inventor, by the terms of an


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

The limited scope of the Act’s procedural protections
also bolsters our conclusion. The Bayh-Dole Act expressly
confers on contractors the right to challenge a Govern
ment-imposed impediment to retaining title to a subject
invention. §202(b)(4). As Roche correctly notes, however,
“the Act contains not a single procedural protection for
third parties that have neither sought nor received federal
funds,” such as cooperating private research institutions.
Brief for Respondents 29. Nor does the Bayh-Dole Act
allow inventors employed by federal contractors to contest
their employer’s claim to a subject invention. The Act, for
example, does not expressly permit an interested third
party or an inventor to challenge a claim that a particular
invention was supported by federal funding. In a world in
which there is frequent collaboration between private
entities, inventors, and federal contractors, see Brief for
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America
as Amicus Curiae 22–23, that absence would be deeply
troubling. But the lack of procedures protecting inventor
and third-party rights makes perfect sense if the Act
applies only when a federal contractor has already ac
quired title to an inventor’s interest. In that case, there is
no need to protect inventor or third-party rights, because
the only rights at issue are those of the contractor and the
Government.
The Bayh-Dole Act applies to subject inventions “con
ceived or first actually reduced to practice in the perform
ance of work” “funded in whole or in part by the Federal
Government.” 35 U. S. C. §§201(e), 201(b) (emphasis
added). Under Stanford’s construction of the Act, title to
—————— 

assignment, has subsidiary rights in an invention to which a contractor

has title, as §202(d) suggests. Compare §202(d) (“retention of rights”)

with §202(a) (“retain title”) (emphasis added). And at the end of the 

day, it is Stanford’s contention that “retain” must be “read as a syno

nym for ‘acquire’ or ‘receive’ ” that dooms its argument on this point.

Brief for Petitioner 37. 



14

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR
UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC.
Opinion of the Court

one of its employee’s inventions could vest in the Univer
sity even if the invention was conceived before the inven
tor became a University employee, so long as the inven
tion’s reduction to practice was supported by federal
funding. What is more, Stanford’s reading suggests that
the school would obtain title to one of its employee’s inven
tions even if only one dollar of federal funding was applied
toward the invention’s conception or reduction to practice.
It would be noteworthy enough for Congress to supplant
one of the fundamental precepts of patent law and deprive
inventors of rights in their own inventions. To do so under
such unusual terms would be truly surprising. We are
confident that if Congress had intended such a sea change
in intellectual property rights it would have said so
clearly—not obliquely through an ambiguous definition of
“subject invention” and an idiosyncratic use of the word
“retain.” Cf. Whitman v. American Trucking Assns., Inc.,
531 U. S. 457, 468 (2001) (“Congress . . . does not alter
the fundamental details of a regulatory scheme in vague
terms or ancillary provisions”).
Though unnecessary to our conclusion, it is worth noting
that our construction of the Bayh-Dole Act is reflected in
the common practice among parties operating under the
Act. Contractors generally institute policies to obtain
assignments from their employees. See Brief for Respon
dents 34; Brief for Pharmaceutical Research and Manufac
turers of America as Amicus Curiae 13–18. Agencies that
grant funds to federal contractors typically expect those
contractors to obtain assignments. So it is with NIH, the
agency that granted the federal funds at issue in this case.
In guidance documents made available to contractors, NIH
has made clear that “[b]y law, an inventor has initial
ownership of an invention ” and that contractors should
therefore “have in place employee agreements requiring
an inventor to ‘assign’ or give ownership of an invention to
the organization upon acceptance of Federal funds.” NIH


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

Policies, Procedures, and Forms, A “20–20” View of Inven
tion Reporting to the National Institutes of Health (Sept.
22, 1995). Such guidance would be unnecessary if Stan
ford’s reading of the statute were correct.
Stanford contends that reading the Bayh-Dole Act as
not vesting title to federally funded inventions in federal
contractors “fundamentally undermin[es]” the Act’s frame
work and severely threatens its continued “successful
application.” Brief for Petitioner 45. We do not agree. As
just noted, universities typically enter into agreements
with their employees requiring the assignment to the
university of rights in inventions. With an effective as
signment, those inventions—if federally funded—become
“subject inventions” under the Act, and the statute as a
practical matter works pretty much the way Stanford says
it should. The only significant difference is that it does so
without violence to the basic principle of patent law that
inventors own their inventions.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals for the Federal
Circuit is affirmed.
It is so ordered.

