Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

permission. See id., at 493. In so holding, we affirmed the
principal theory of liability underlying copyright infringe
ment suits that other freelance authors had filed after the
Court of Appeals had issued its opinion in Tasini. These
other suits, which were stayed pending our decision in
Tasini, resumed after we issued our opinion and were
consolidated in the United States District Court for the
Southern District of New York by the Judicial Panel on
Multidistrict Litigation.
The consolidated complaint alleged that the named
plaintiffs each own at least one copyright, typically in a
freelance article written for a newspaper or a magazine,
that they had registered in accordance with §411(a). The
class, however, included both authors who had registered
their copyrighted works and authors who had not. See
App. 94.
Because of the growing size and complexity of the law
suit, the District Court referred the parties to mediation.
For more than three years, the freelance authors, the
publishers (and their insurers), and the electronic data
bases (and their insurers) negotiated. Finally, in March
2005, they reached a settlement agreement that the par
ties intended “to achieve a global peace in the publishing
industry.” In re Literary Works in Electronic Databases
Copyright Litigation, 509 F. 3d 116, 119 (CA2 2007).
The parties moved the District Court to certify a class
for settlement and to approve the settlement agreement.
Ten freelance authors, including Irvin Muchnick (herein
after Muchnick respondents), objected. The District Court
overruled the objections; certified a settlement class of
freelance authors under Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
23(a) and (b)(3); approved the settlement as fair, reason
able, and adequate under Rule 23(e); and entered final
judgment. At no time did the Muchnick respondents or
any other party urge the District Court to dismiss the
case, or to refuse to certify the class or approve the settle

