2

REED ELSEVIER, INC. v. MUCHNICK
Syllabus
jurisdictional if Congress “clearly states that [it] count[s] as jurisdic
tional”; a condition “not rank[ed]” as such should be treated “as non
jurisdictional in character.” Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp., 546 U. S. 500,
515–516. In Arbaugh, the Court held that the employee-numerosity
coverage requirement of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was
not a jurisdictional requirement because the provision did not
“clearly stat[e]” that the numerosity rule counted as jurisdictional,
this Court’s prior Title VII cases did not compel the conclusion that
the rule nonetheless was jurisdictional, and the requirement’s loca
tion in a provision separate from Title VII’s jurisdiction-granting sec
tion indicated that Congress had not ranked the rule as jurisdic
tional. Pp. 5–7.
(b) Like the Title VII numerosity requirement in Arbaugh, §411(a)
does not “clearly stat[e]” that its registration requirement is “jurisdic
tional.” 546 U. S., at 515. Although §411(a)’s last sentence contains
the word “jurisdiction,” that sentence speaks to a court’s adjudicatory
authority to determine a copyright claim’s registrability and says
nothing about whether a federal court has subject-matter jurisdiction
to adjudicate claims for infringement of unregistered works. More
over, §411(a)’s registration requirement, like Title VII’s employee
numerosity requirement, is located in a provision “separate” from
those granting federal courts subject-matter jurisdiction over those
respective claims, ibid., and no other factor suggests that §411(a)’s
registration requirement can be read to “ ‘speak in jurisdictional
terms or refer in any way to the jurisdiction of the district courts,’ ”
ibid. This conclusion is not affected by the fact that the employee
numerosity requirement in Arbaugh was considered an element of a
Title VII claim rather than a prerequisite to initiating a lawsuit. See
Zipes v. Trans World Airlines, Inc., 455 U. S. 385, 393. Pp. 7–11.
(c) A contrary result is not required by Bowles v. Russell, 551 U. S.
205. There, in finding that Congress had ranked as jurisdictional 28
U. S. C. §2107’s requirement that parties in a civil action file a notice
of appeal within 30 days of the judgment, this Court analyzed §2107’s
specific language and the historical treatment accorded to that type
of limitation. That analysis is consistent with the Arbaugh frame
work because context is relevant to whether a statute “rank[s]” a re
quirement as jurisdictional. Pp. 11–14.
(d) The Court declines to apply judicial estoppel to affirm the Sec
ond Circuit’s judgment vacating the settlement. While some of peti
tioners’ arguments below are in tension with those made in this
Court, accepting their arguments here does not create the type of “in
consistent court determinations” in their favor that estoppel is meant
to address. See New Hampshire v. Maine, 532 U. S. 742. Pp. 14–15.
(e) Because §411(a) does not restrict a federal court’s subject

