(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

REED ELSEVIER, INC., ET AL. v. MUCHNICK ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 08–103.

Argued October 7, 2009—Decided March 2, 2010

The Copyright Act (Act) generally requires copyright holders to register
their works before suing for copyright infringement. 17 U. S. C. A.
§411(a). The complaint in this consolidated, class-action copyright in
fringement suit alleged that the named plaintiffs each own at least
one copyright, typically in a freelance article written for a newspaper
or magazine, that they had registered in accordance with §411(a).
The class, however, included both authors who had registered their
works and authors who had not. The parties moved the District
Court to certify a settlement class and approve a settlement agree
ment. The District Court did so over the objections of some freelance
authors. On appeal, the Second Circuit sua sponte raised the ques
tion whether §411(a) deprives federal courts of subject-matter juris
diction over infringement claims involving unregistered copyrights,
concluding that the District Court lacked jurisdiction to certify the
class or approve the settlement.
Held: Section 411(a)’s registration requirement is a precondition to fil
ing a copyright infringement claim. A copyright holder’s failure to
comply with that requirement does not restrict a federal court’s sub
ject-matter jurisdiction over infringement claims involving unregis
tered works. Pp. 5–16.
(a) “Jurisdiction” refers to “a court’s adjudicatory authority,” Kon
trick v. Ryan, 540 U. S. 443, 455. Thus, “jurisdictional” properly ap
plies only to “prescriptions delineating the classes of cases (subject
matter jurisdiction) and the persons (personal jurisdiction)” implicat
ing that authority. Ibid. Because the distinction between jurisdic
tional conditions and claim-processing rules can be confusing in prac
tice, federal courts and litigants should use the term “jurisdictional”
only when it is apposite. Ibid. A statutory requirement is considered

