14

REED ELSEVIER, INC. v. MUCHNICK
Opinion of the Court

of federal courts. Although §411(a)’s historical treatment
as “jurisdictional” is a factor in the analysis, it is not
dispositive. The other factors discussed above demon
strate that §411(a)’s registration requirement is more
analogous to the nonjurisdictional conditions we consid
ered in Zipes and Arbaugh than to the statutory time limit
at issue in Bowles.8 We thus conclude that §411(a)’s regis
tration requirement is nonjurisdictional, notwithstanding
its prior jurisdictional treatment.9
III
Amicus argues that even if §411(a) is nonjurisdictional,
we should nonetheless affirm on estoppel grounds the
Court of Appeals’ judgment vacating the District Court’s
order approving the settlement and dismissing the case.
According to amicus, petitioners asserted previously in
these proceedings that copyright registration was jurisdic
tional, and this assertion should estop them from now
asserting a right to waive objections to the authors’ failure
to register. Amicus urges us to prevent the parties “from
‘playing fast and loose with the courts’ by ‘deliberately
changing positions according to the exigencies of the mo
——————
8 This conclusion mirrors our holding in Zipes that Title VII’s EEOC
filing requirement was nonjurisdictional, even though some of our own
decisions had characterized it as jurisdictional. See 455 U. S., at 395
(noting that “the legal character of the requirement was not at issue in
those” earlier cases); see also National Railroad Passenger Corporation
v. Morgan, 536 U. S. 101, 109, 121 (2002) (relying on the analysis in
Zipes).
9 Amicus’ remaining jurisdictional argument—that the policy goals
underlying copyright registration support construing §411(a)’s registra
tion provisions as jurisdictional, see Amicus Brief 45—is similarly
unavailing. We do not agree that a condition should be ranked as
jurisdictional merely because it promotes important congressional
objectives. See Arbaugh v. Y & H Corp., 546 U. S. 500, 504, 515–516
(2006) (holding that Title VII’s numerosity requirement is nonjurisdic
tional even though it serves the important policy goal of “spar[ing] very
small businesses from Title VII liability”).

