6

REED ELSEVIER, INC. v. MUCHNICK
Opinion of the Court

elements of a cause of action as jurisdictional limitations,
particularly when that characterization was not central to
the case, and thus did not require close analysis. See
Arbaugh, supra, at 511–512 (citing examples); Steel Co.,
523 U. S., at 91 (same). Our recent cases evince a marked
desire to curtail such “drive-by jurisdictional rulings,”
ibid., which too easily can miss the “critical difference[s]”
between true jurisdictional conditions and nonjurisdic
tional limitations on causes of action, Kontrick, supra, at
456; see also Arbaugh, 546 U. S., at 511.
In light of the important distinctions between jurisdic
tional prescriptions and claim-processing rules, see, e.g.,
id., at 514, we have encouraged federal courts and liti
gants to “facilitat[e]” clarity by using the term “jurisdic
tional” only when it is apposite, Kontrick, supra, at 455.
In Arbaugh, we described the general approach to distin
guish “jurisdictional” conditions from claim-processing
requirements or elements of a claim:
“If the Legislature clearly states that a threshold limi
tation on a statute’s scope shall count as jurisdic
tional, then courts and litigants will be duly in
structed and will not be left to wrestle with the issue.
But when Congress does not rank a statutory limita
tion on coverage as jurisdictional, courts should treat
the restriction as nonjurisdictional in character.” 546
U. S., at 515–516 (citation and footnote omitted).
The plaintiff in Arbaugh brought a claim under Title VII
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which makes it unlawful
“for an employer . . . to discriminate,” inter alia, on the
basis of sex. 42 U. S. C. §2000e–2(a)(1). But employees
can bring Title VII claims only against employers that
have “fifteen or more employees.” §2000e(b). Arbaugh
addressed whether that employee numerosity requirement
“affects federal-court subject-matter jurisdiction or, in
stead, delineates a substantive ingredient of a Title VII

