Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

35

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

psychosis.” Id., at ER–169. The available records con
firmed that Pinholster suffered from longstanding seizure
disorders, which may have been caused by his childhood
head injuries.
On this record, I do not see how it can be said that “[t]he
‘new’ evidence largely duplicated the mitigation evidence
at trial.” Ante, at 29; see Arizona v. Fulminante, 499 U. S.
279, 298–299 (1991) (evidence is not “merely cumulative”
if it corroborates other evidence that is “unbelievable” on
its own). Brashear’s self-interested testimony was not
confirmed with objective evidence, as the prosecutor high
lighted. The new evidence would have “destroyed the
[relatively] benign conception of [Pinholster’s] upbringing”
presented by his mother. Rompilla, 545 U. S., at 391. The
jury heard no testimony at all that Pinholster likely suf
fered from brain damage or bipolar mood disorder, and
counsel offered no evidence to help the jury understand
the likely effect of Pinholster’s head injuries or his bizarre
behavior on the night of the homicides. The jury heard no
testimony recounting the substantial evidence of Pinhol
ster’s likely neurological problems. And it heard no medi
cal evidence that Pinholster suffered from epilepsy.
The majority responds that “much” of Pinholster’s new
mitigating evidence “is of questionable mitigating value.”
Ante, at 29. By presenting psychiatric testimony, it con
tends, “Pinholster would have opened the door to rebuttal
by a state expert.” Ibid. But, because the California
Supreme Court denied Pinholster’s petition on the plead
ings, it had no reason to know what a state expert might
have said. Moreover, given the record evidence, it is rea
sonably probable that at least one juror would have cred
ited his expert. In any event, even if a rebuttal expert
testified that Pinholster suffered from antisocial personal
ity disorder, this would hardly have come as a surprise to
the jury. See ante, at 22 (describing Pinholster as a “psy
chotic client whose performance at trial hardly endeared

