Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

31

Opinion of the Court

to be “materially indistinguishable” from Terry Williams
and Rompilla v. Beard, 545 U. S. 374 (2005). 590 F. 3d, at
684. But this Court did not apply AEDPA deference to the
question of prejudice in those cases; each of them lack the
important “doubly deferential” standard of Strickland and
AEDPA. See Terry Williams, 529 U. S., at 395–397 (re­
viewing a state-court decision that did not apply the cor­
rect legal standard); Rompilla, supra, at 390 (reviewing
Strickland prejudice de novo because the state-court deci­
sion did not reach the question). Those cases therefore
offer no guidance with respect to whether a state court has
unreasonably determined that prejudice is lacking. We
have said time and again that “an unreasonable applica­
tion of federal law is different from an incorrect applica­
tion of federal law.” Richter, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 11)
(internal quotation marks omitted). Even if the Court of
Appeals might have reached a different conclusion as an
initial matter, it was not an unreasonable application of
our precedent for the California Supreme Court to con­
clude that Pinholster did not establish prejudice.20
*
*
*
The judgment of the United States Court of Appeals for
the Ninth Circuit is reversed.
It is so ordered.
——————
20 Because

Pinholster has failed to demonstrate that the adjudication
of his claim based on the state-court record resulted in a decision
“contrary to” or “involv[ing] an unreasonable application” of federal
law, a writ of habeas corpus “shall not be granted” and our analysis is
at an end. 28 U. S. C. §2254(d). We are barred from considering the
evidence Pinholster submitted in the District Court that he contends
additionally supports his claim. For that reason, we need not decide
whether §2254(e)(2) prohibited the District Court from holding the
evidentiary hearing or whether a district court may ever choose to hold
an evidentiary hearing before it determines that §2254(d) has been
satisfied.

