Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

25

Opinion of the Court

in that case the defendant’s trial counsel specifically ac­
knowledged a standard practice for capital cases in Mary­
land that was inconsistent with what he had done. 539
U. S., at 524.
At bottom, JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s view is grounded in
little more than her own sense of “prudence,” post, at 26
(internal quotation marks omitted), and what appears to
be her belief that the only reasonable mitigation strategy
in capital cases is to “help” the jury “understand” the
defendant, post, at 35. According to JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR,
that Pinholster was an unsympathetic client “com­
pound[ed], rather than excuse[d], counsel’s deficiency” in
pursuing further evidence “that could explain why Pinhol­
ster was the way he was.” Post, at 30. But it certainly can
be reasonable for attorneys to conclude that creating
sympathy for the defendant’s family is a better idea be­
cause the defendant himself is simply unsympathetic.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s approach is flatly inconsistent
with Strickland’s recognition that “[t]here are countless
ways to provide effective assistance in any given case.”
466 U. S., at 689. There comes a point where a defense
attorney will reasonably decide that another strategy is in
order, thus “mak[ing] particular investigations unneces­
sary.” Id., at 691; cf. 590 F. 3d, at 692 (Kozinski, C. J.,
dissenting) (“The current infatuation with ‘humanizing’
the defendant as the be-all and end-all of mitigation disre­
gards the possibility that this may be the wrong tactic in
some cases because experienced lawyers conclude that the
jury simply won’t buy it”). Those decisions are due “a
heavy measure of deference.” Strickland, supra, at 691.
The California Supreme Court could have reasonably
concluded that Pinholster’s counsel made such a reasoned
decision in this case.
We have recently reiterated that “ ‘[s]urmounting Strick
land’s high bar is never an easy task.’ ” Richter, supra, at
___ (slip op., at 15) (quoting Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U. S.

