Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

31

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

broader range of potential mitigating circumstances.
“The record of the actual sentencing proceedings under
scores the unreasonableness of counsel’s conduct by
suggesting that their failure to investigate thoroughly re
sulted from inattention, not reasoned strategic judgment.”
Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 526. Dettmar told the trial judge
that he was unprepared to present any mitigation evi
dence. The mitigation case that counsel eventually put on
can be described, at best, as “halfhearted.” Ibid. Counsel
made no effort to bolster Brashear’s self-interested testi
mony with school or medical records, as the prosecutor
effectively emphasized in closing argument. And because
they did not pursue obvious leads, they failed to recognize
that Brashear’s testimony painting Pinholster as the bad
apple in a normal, nondeprived family was false.
In denying Pinholster’s claim, the California Supreme
Court necessarily overlooked Strickland’s clearly estab
lished admonition that “strategic choices made after less
than complete investigation are reasonable precisely to
the extent that reasonable professional judgments support
the limitations.” 466 U. S., at 690–691. As in Wiggins, in
light of the information available to Pinholster’s counsel, it
is plain that “reasonable professional judgments” could not
have supported their woefully inadequate investigation.25
466 U. S., at 691. Accordingly, the California Supreme
Court could not reasonably have concluded that Pinholster
——————
25 The

majority chastises the Court of Appeals for “attributing strict
rules to this Court’s recent case law.” Ante, at 24. I agree that courts
should not interpret our cases to prescribe strict rules regarding the
required scope of mitigation investigations. See Rompilla v. Beard, 545
U. S. 374, 394 (2005) (O’Connor, J., concurring) (noting “our longstand
ing case-by-case approach to determining whether an attorney’s per
formance was unconstitutionally deficient under Strickland”). The
Ninth Circuit, however, did no such thing. It appropriately gave
thoughtful consideration to the guideposts contained in these cases,
just as we have previously done. See, e.g., Bobby v. Van Hook, 558
U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (per curiam) (slip op., at 8).

