Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

41

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

was duplicative of the evidence submitted to the California
Supreme Court. The additional evidence presented at the
hearing only confirmed that the California Supreme Court
could not reasonably have rejected Pinholster’s claim.29
For example, the probation report presented by the
State confirmed that counsel had in their possession in
formation that would have led any reasonable attorney “to
investigate further.” Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 527. Counsel
nevertheless took no action to investigate these leads.
Pinholster’s experts opined that his childhood head
traumas likely resulted in brain injury and conferred a
risk of epilepsy. Although the State presented testimony
that Pinholster had antisocial personality disorder, it was
not clear error for the District Court to conclude that
jurors could have credited Pinholster’s experts. Even the
——————
29 The

State argues that the District Court was not entitled to rely on
the evidence adduced at the hearing because Pinholster was not dili
gent in developing his claims in state court and the hearing was there
fore barred by 28 U. S. C. §2254(e)(2). This argument is somewhat
imprecise. Pinholster’s allegations in his amended federal petition
were “identical” to the allegations he presented to the California
Supreme Court, ante, at 6, and he diligently requested a hearing in
state court. The State presumably means to argue that Pinholster’s
new expert testimony changed “the factual basis” of his claim such that,
by the time of the evidentiary hearing, he no longer satisfied
§2254(e)(2). However, at oral argument, the State suggested that
Pinholster was presenting an altogether new claim in the federal court.
See Tr. of Oral Arg. 18. If that is the case, §2254(d)(1) does not apply at
all, and the State should be arguing lack of exhaustion or procedural
default. I do not understand Pinholster to have presented a new claim
to the District Court.
In any event, Pinholster satisfied §2254(e)(2) in this case. He made
“a reasonable attempt, in light of the information available at the time,
to investigate and pursue claims in state court.” Michael Williams, 529
U. S., at 435. His experts relied on the very same facts and evidence. I
cannot read §2254(e)(2) to impose a strict requirement that petitioners
must use the same experts they presented to the state court. This rule
would result in numerous practical problems, for example in the case of
the unanticipated death of an expert.

