Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

27

Opinion of the Court

ing at age 17, breaking his wife’s jaw,18 resisting arrest by
faking seizures, and assaulting and spitting on police
officers. The jury also heard about Pinholster’s involve­
ment in juvenile gangs and his substantial disciplinary
record in both county and state jails, where he had threat­
ened, assaulted, and thrown urine at guards, and fought
with other inmates. While in jail, Pinholster had been
segregated for a time due to his propensity for violence
and placed on a “special disciplinary diet” reserved only
for the most disruptive inmates. 52 Tr. 7305.
The mitigating evidence consisted primarily of the
penalty-phase testimony of Pinholster’s mother, Brashear,
who gave a detailed account of Pinholster’s troubled child­
hood and adolescence. Early childhood was quite difficult.
The family “didn’t have lots of money.” Id., at 7404.
When he was very young, Pinholster suffered two serious
head injuries, first at age 2 or 3 when he was run over by a
car, and again at age 4 or 5 when he went through the
windshield during a car accident. When he was 5, Pinhol­
ster’s stepfather moved in and was abusive, or nearly so.
Pinholster always struggled in school. He was disrup­
tive in kindergarten and was failing by first grade. He got
in fights and would run out of the classroom. In third
grade, Pinholster’s teacher suggested that he was more
than just a “ ‘disruptive child.’ ” Id., at 7394. Following
tests at a clinic, Pinholster was sent to a school for educa­
tionally handicapped children where his performance
improved.
At age 10, psychiatrists recommended that Pinholster
be sent to a mental institution, although he did not go.
Pinholster had continued to initiate fights with his broth­
ers and to act like “Robin Hood” around the neighborhood,
——————
18 Pinholster’s wife waived her spousal privilege to testify to this fact.
She acknowledged that her testimony would be used to argue that her
husband should be executed.

