26

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

cluded for lack of notice, and if that failed, to put on Pin
holster’s mother.” Ante, at 19. This is the sort of “ ‘post
hoc rationalization’ for counsel’s decisionmaking that
contradicts the available evidence of counsel’s actions”
that courts cannot indulge. Harrington, 562 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 20) (quoting Wiggins v. Smith, 539 U. S. 510,
526–527 (2003)). The majority’s explanation for counsel’s
conduct contradicts the best available evidence of counsel’s
actions: Dettmar’s frank, contemporaneous statement to
the trial judge that he “had not prepared any evidence by
way of mitigation.” 52 Tr. 7250. The majority’s conjecture
that counsel had in fact prepared a mitigation defense,
based primarily on isolated entries in counsel’s billing
records, requires it to assume that Dettmar was lying to
the trial judge.20
In any event, even if Pinholster’s counsel had a strategic
reason for their actions, that would not automatically
render their actions reasonable. For example, had counsel
decided their best option was to move to exclude the ag
gravating evidence, it would have been unreasonable to
forgo a mitigation investigation on the hope that the mo
tion would be granted. With a client’s life at stake, it
would “flou[t] prudence,” Rompilla v. Beard, 545 U. S. 374,
——————
20 The

majority misleadingly cites entries showing that counsel were
preparing Brashear’s penalty phase testimony after counsel learned
that the State intended to present aggravation evidence. The cited
entries predating that event show only that counsel conducted about
one day’s worth of investigation—consisting of talking to Brashear and
researching epilepsy—two months before the penalty phase. See 3
Clerk’s Tr. 798 (1.5-hour phone call to Brashear on Jan. 13); id., at 864,
869 (3-hour meeting with Brashear regarding “childhood problems” on
Feb. 23); id., at 869 (3.5 hours for “[r]esearch re; epilepsy and conf. with
nurse” on Feb. 25). There is no evidence in the records that counsel
actually planned to present mitigating evidence. Indeed, their complete
failure to follow up on any of the information they learned in their
minimal investigation only confirms that they were not planning to
present mitigating evidence. See infra, at 29–31.

