Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

23

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

summarized in a declaration by Dr. George Woods. Dr.
Woods opined that Pinholster “suffer[ed] from severe and
long standing seizure disorders,” id., at ER–156, that his
childhood head traumas “may have been the precipitating
factors for [his] seizure disorder,” id., at ER–157, and that
he suffered from bipolar mood disorder. He pointed to
trial testimony that immediately before the burglary on
the night of the homicides, Pinholster announced that he
“ ‘ha[d] a message from God’ ”—which Dr. Woods believed
to reflect “[a]uditory hallucinations” and “severe psycho
sis.” Id., at ER–169. He concluded that at the time of the
homicides Pinholster “was suffering from bipolar mood
disorder with psychotic ideation and was suffering a com
plex partial seizure.” Id., at ER–170. He also observed
that Pinholster’s “grossly dysfunctional family, the abuse
he received as a child, his history of suffering from sub
stantial seizure and mood disorders, his frequently un
treated psychiatric and psychological disabilities and his
educational handicaps were relevant circumstances which
would extenuate the gravity of the crime.” Id., at ER–171.
On the basis of Pinholster’s submission, the California
Supreme Court denied Pinholster’s ineffective-assistance
of-counsel claim.
Pinholster then filed a habeas petition in Federal Dis
trict Court. He included an additional exhibit: a declara
tion by Dr. John Stalberg, a psychiatrist who had hastily
examined Pinholster and produced a two-page report in
the middle of the original trial.18 After reviewing the new
material collected by Pinholster’s habeas counsel, Dr.
Stalberg stated that the available evidence showed a
——————
18 Counsel had arranged for Dr. Stalberg to examine Pinholster in the
middle of his original trial. The only documents they provided to him
were police reports relating to the case and a 1978 probation report. In
a two-page report that focused primarily on Pinholster’s mental state at
the time of the offenses, Dr. Stalberg concluded that Pinholster had
“psychopathic personality traits.” Id., at ER–187.

