10

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

filing a federal habeas petition has expired, however, a
state court orders the State to disclose additional docu
ments the petitioner had timely requested under the
State’s public records Act. The disclosed documents reveal
that the State withheld other exculpatory witness state
ments, but state law would not permit the petitioner to
present the new evidence in a successive petition.6
Under our precedent, if the petitioner had not presented
his Brady claim to the state court at all, his claim would
be deemed defaulted and the petitioner could attempt to
show cause and prejudice to overcome the default. See
Michael Williams, 529 U. S., at 444; see also n. 1, supra.
If, however, the new evidence merely bolsters a Brady
claim that was adjudicated on the merits in state court, it
is unclear how the petitioner can obtain federal habeas
relief after today’s holding. What may have been a rea
sonable decision on the state-court record may no longer
be reasonable in light of the new evidence. See Kyles v.
Whitley, 514 U. S. 419, 436 (1995) (materiality of Brady
evidence is viewed “collectively, not item by item”). Be
cause the state court adjudicated the petitioner’s Brady
claim on the merits, §2254(d)(1) would still apply. Yet,
under the majority’s interpretation of §2254(d)(1), a fed
eral court is now prohibited from considering the new
evidence in determining the reasonableness of the state
court decision.
The majority’s interpretation of §2254(d)(1) thus sug
gests the anomalous result that petitioners with new
claims based on newly obtained evidence can obtain fed
eral habeas relief if they can show cause and prejudice for
their default but petitioners with newly obtained evidence
supporting a claim adjudicated on the merits in state court
——————
6 See, e.g., id., at 37–38 (statement by counsel for the respondent
warden that Virginia law bars all successive habeas applications, even
in cases where the petitioner has new evidence).

