Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

claim . . . unless the adjudication of the claim”:
“(1) resulted in a decision that was contrary to, or
involved an unreasonable application of, clearly estab­
lished Federal law, as determined by the Supreme
Court of the United States; or
“(2) resulted in a decision that was based on an un­
reasonable determination of the facts in light of the
evidence presented in the State court proceeding.”
This is a “difficult to meet,” Harrington v. Richter, 562
U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 12), and “highly deferen­
tial standard for evaluating state-court rulings, which
demands that state-court decisions be given the benefit of
the doubt,” Woodford v. Visciotti, 537 U. S. 19, 24 (2002)
(per curiam) (citation and internal quotation marks omit­
ted). The petitioner carries the burden of proof. Id., at 25.
We now hold that review under §2254(d)(1) is limited to
the record that was before the state court that adjudicated
the claim on the merits. Section 2254(d)(1) refers, in the
past tense, to a state-court adjudication that “resulted in”
a decision that was contrary to, or “involved” an unrea­
sonable application of, established law. This backward­
looking language requires an examination of the state­
court decision at the time it was made. It follows that the
record under review is limited to the record in existence at
that same time⎯i.e., the record before the state court.
This understanding of the text is compelled by “the
broader context of the statute as a whole,” which demon­
strates Congress’ intent to channel prisoners’ claims first
to the state courts. Robinson v. Shell Oil Co., 519 U. S.
337, 341 (1997). “The federal habeas scheme leaves pri­
mary responsibility with the state courts . . . .” Visciotti,
supra, at 27. Section 2254(b) requires that prisoners must
ordinarily exhaust state remedies before filing for federal
habeas relief. It would be contrary to that purpose to
allow a petitioner to overcome an adverse state-court

