Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

cannot obtain federal habeas relief if they cannot first
satisfy §2254(d)(1) without the new evidence. That the
majority’s interpretation leads to this anomaly is good
reason to conclude that its interpretation is wrong. See
Keeney v. Tamayo-Reyes, 504 U. S. 1, 7–8 (1992) (“[I]t is
. . . irrational to distinguish between failing to properly
assert a federal claim in state court and failing in state
court to properly develop such a claim”).
The majority responds to this anomaly by suggesting
that my hypothetical petitioner “may well [have] a new
claim.”7 Ante, at 14, n. 10. This suggestion is puzzling.
New evidence does not usually give rise to a new claim; it
merely provides additional proof of a claim already adjudi
cated on the merits.8 The majority presumably means
to suggest that the petitioner might be able to obtain
federal-court review of his new evidence if he can show
cause and prejudice for his failure to present the “new”
claim to a state court. In that scenario, however, the
federal court would review the purportedly “new” claim de
novo. The majority’s approach thus threatens to replace
deferential review of new evidence under §2254(d)(1) with
de novo review of new evidence in the form of “new”
claims.9 Because it is unlikely that Congress intended
de novo review—the result suggested by the majority’s
opinion—it must have intended for district courts to
consider newly discovered evidence in conducting the
§2254(d)(1) analysis.
——————
7 The majority declines, however, to provide any guidance to the lower
courts on how to distinguish claims adjudicated on the merits from new
claims.
8 Even if it can fairly be argued that my hypothetical petitioner has a
new claim, the majority fails to explain how a diligent petitioner with
new evidence supporting an existing claim can present his new evi
dence to a federal court.
9 In this vein, it is the majority’s approach that “would not take seri
ously AEDPA’s requirement that federal courts defer to state-court
decisions.” Ante, at 10, n. 3.

