(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CULLEN, ACTING WARDEN v. PINHOLSTER
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–1088. Argued November 9, 2010—Decided April 4, 2011
A California jury convicted respondent Pinholster on two counts of first
degree murder. At the penalty phase before the same jury, the prose
cution produced eight witnesses, who testified about Pinholster’s his
tory of threatening and violent behavior. Pinholster’s trial counsel,
who unsuccessfully sought to exclude the aggravating evidence on the
ground that the prosecution had not given Pinholster proper notice
under California law, called only Pinholster’s mother. Counsel did
not call a psychiatrist, though they had consulted with Dr. Stalberg,
who had diagnosed Pinholster with antisocial personality disorder.
The jury recommended the death penalty, and Pinholster was sen
tenced to death. Pinholster twice sought habeas relief in the Califor
nia Supreme Court, alleging, inter alia, that his trial counsel had
failed to adequately investigate and present mitigating evidence dur
ing the penalty phase. He introduced additional evidence to support
his claim: school, medical, and legal records; and declarations from
family members, one of his trial attorneys, and Dr. Woods, a psychia
trist who diagnosed him with bipolar mood disorder and seizure dis
orders, and who criticized Dr. Stalberg’s report. Each time, the State
Supreme Court unanimously and summarily denied the claim on the
merits. Subsequently, a Federal District Court held an evidentiary
hearing and granted Pinholster federal habeas relief under 28
U. S. C. §2254. Affirming, the en banc Ninth Circuit considered the
new evidence adduced in the District Court hearing and held that the
State Supreme Court’s decision “involved an unreasonable applica
tion of . . . clearly established Federal law,” §2254(d)(1).
Held:
1. Review under §2254(d)(1) is limited to the record that was before
the state court that adjudicated the claim on the merits. Pp. 8–14.

