28

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
Opinion of the Court

“[s]tealing from the rich and giving to the poor.” Id., at
7395. Brashear had thought then that “[s]omething was
not working right.” Id., at 7396.
By age 10 or 11, Pinholster was living in boy’s homes
and juvenile halls. He spent six months when he was 12
in a state mental institution for emotionally handicapped
children. By the time he was 18, Pinholster was in county
jail, where he was beaten badly. Brashear suspected that
the beating caused Pinholster’s epilepsy, for which he has
been prescribed medication. After a stint in state prison,
Pinholster returned home but acted “unusual” and had
trouble readjusting to life. Id., at 7405.
Pinholster’s siblings were “basically very good children,”
although they would get into trouble. Id., at 7401. His
brother, Terry, had been arrested for drunk driving and
his sister, Tammy, for public intoxication. Tammy also
was arrested for drug possession and was self-destructive
and “wild.” Ibid. Pinholster’s eldest brother, Alvin, died a
fugitive from California authorities.19
In addition to Brashear’s penalty-phase testimony,
Pinholster had previously presented mitigating evidence
during the guilt phase from his brother, Terry. Terry
testified that Pinholster was “more or less in institutions
all his life,” suffered from epilepsy, and was “more or less”
drunk on the night of the murders. 42 id., at 6015, 6036.
After considering this aggravating and mitigating evi­
dence, the jury returned a sentence of death. The state
——————
19 JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR criticizes Brashear’s testimony as “self­
interested,” post, at 31, but the whole premise of the family-sympathy
defense is the family’s interest. She similarly makes much of the fact
that the prosecutor “belittle[d]” Brashear’s testimony in closing argu­
ment. Post, at 33. We fail to see the point. Any diligent prosecutor
would have challenged whatever mitigating evidence the defense had
put on. And, we would certainly not expect the prosecutor’s closing
argument to have described the evidence in the light most favorable to
Pinholster. But see ibid., n. 26.

