Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

may be unable to develop the factual record in state court
through no fault of their own. We should not interpret
§2254(d)(1) to foreclose these diligent petitioners from
accessing the Great Writ when the state court will not
consider the new evidence and could not reasonably have
reached the same conclusion with the new evidence before
it.
II
I also disagree with the Court’s conclusion that the
Court of Appeals erred in holding that Pinholster had
satisfied §2254(d)(1) on the basis of the state-court
record.13
A
The majority omits critical details relating to the per
formance of Pinholster’s trial counsel, the mitigating
evidence they failed to discover, and the history of these
proceedings. I therefore highlight several aspects of the
facts and history of this case.
——————
13 I

agree with the majority that the state-court record in this case
consists of “the ‘allegations of [the] habeas corpus petition . . . and . . .
any matter of record pertaining to the case.’ ” Ante, at 16, n. 12 (quot
ing In re Hochberg, 2 Cal. 3d 870, 874, n. 2, 471 P. 2d 1, 3–4, n. 2
(1970); some internal quotation marks omitted).
The majority does not decide which of the two state-court decisions
should be reviewed. See ante, at 15, n. 11. One amicus argues that
Pinholster must prove that both state-court decisions involved an
unreasonable application of law. See Brief for Criminal Justice Legal
Foundation as Amicus Curiae 26. This argument is based on amicus’
understanding that the California Supreme Court rejected the second
petition as successive and, alternatively, on the merits. The State has
not argued, however, that the second ruling rests on a procedural
ground. See ante, at 6, n. 2. When a state court denies two petitions on
the merits and the difference between the petitions is that the second
petition contains additional evidence supporting the petitioner’s claim,
I see no reason why the petitioner must independently show that the
first decision was unreasonable.

