6

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
Opinion of the Court

was held in abeyance to allow Pinholster to go back to
state court.
In August 1997, Pinholster filed his second state habeas
petition, this time including Dr. Stalberg’s declaration and
requesting judicial notice of the documents previously
submitted in support of his first state habeas petition. His
allegations of penalty-phase ineffective assistance of coun­
sel mirrored those in his federal habeas petition. The
California Supreme Court again unanimously and sum­
marily denied the petition “on the substantive ground that
it is without merit.”2 App. to Pet. for Cert. 300.
Having presented Dr. Stalberg’s declaration to the state
court, Pinholster returned to the District Court. In No­
vember 1997, he filed an amended petition for a writ of
habeas corpus. His allegations of penalty-phase ineffec­
tive assistance of counsel were identical to those in his
second state habeas petition. Both parties moved for
summary judgment and Pinholster also moved, in the
alternative, for an evidentiary hearing.
The District Court concluded that the Antiterrorism and
Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), 110 Stat.
1214, did not apply and granted an evidentiary hearing.
Before the hearing, the State deposed Dr. Stalberg, who
stated that none of the new material he reviewed altered
his original diagnosis. Dr. Stalberg disagreed with Dr.
Woods’ conclusion that Pinholster suffers from bipolar
disorder. Pinholster did not call Dr. Stalberg to testify at
the hearing. He presented two new medical experts: Dr.
Sophia Vinogradov, a psychiatrist who diagnosed Pinhol­
ster with organic personality syndrome and ruled out
antisocial personality disorder, and Dr. Donald Olson, a
——————
2 A majority also “[s]eparately and independently” denied several
claims, including penalty-phase ineffective assistance of counsel, as
untimely, successive, and barred by res judicata. Id., at 300. The State
has not argued that these procedural rulings constitute adequate and
independent state grounds that bar federal habeas review.

