Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Dettmar and I did not prepare a case in mitigation. We
felt there would be no penalty phase hearing inasmuch as
we did not receive written notice of evidence in aggrava
tion pursuant to Penal Code §190.3”). Brainard further
confirmed what was apparent from the mitigation case
they eventually put on: They conducted virtually no miti
gation investigation. See id., at ER–182 (“I have no recol
lection of Mr. Dettmar having secured or reviewed any of
Scott’s medical records, nor did I see any of Scott’s medical
records. So far as I recollect, neither Mr. Dettmar nor
myself interviewed any of Scott’s previous medical provid
ers”); id., at ER–183 (“I do not recall interviewing or at
tempting to interview Scott’s family members or any other
persons regarding penalty phase testimony, except Mrs.
Brashears [sic]”); ibid. (“I have no recollection of seeing or
attempting to secure Scott’s school records, juvenile re
cords, medical records, or records of prior placements”);
ibid. (“I have no recollection of interviewing or attempting
to interview Scott’s former school teachers, counselors, or
juvenile officers”).16
Statements by relatives (none of whom trial counsel had
attempted to interview regarding Pinholster’s background)
and documentary evidence revealed that the picture of
Pinholster’s family life painted by his mother at trial was
false. Pinholster was “raised in chaos and poverty.” Id.,
at ER–312. A relative remembered seeing the children
mix together flour and water in an attempt to get some
thing to eat. Pinholster’s stepfather beat him several
times a week, including at least once with a two-by-four
board. “There was so much violence in [the] home” that
Pinholster’s brother “dreaded coming home each day.” Id.,
at ER–313. Pinholster’s half sister was removed from the
home as a result of a beating by his stepfather.
——————
16 Counsel’s billing records, which were before the California Supreme
Court as part of the trial record, confirmed Brainard’s recollection.

