40

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

psychiatrist who had examined Pinholster in the middle of
trial,28 and Dr. David Rudnick. Although Dr. Stalberg
maintained that Pinholster suffered from antisocial per
sonality disorder, which was his original diagnosis in the
middle of trial, he again emphasized that there was “vo
luminous” and “compelling” mitigation evidence that had
not previously been made available to him or presented to
the jury. Id., at ER–926, ER–953. He stated that conver
sations with Pinholster’s family revealed that he and his
siblings were “raised like animals, wild animals,” id., at
ER–948, and he opined that Pinholster’s upbringing was a
risk factor for antisocial personality disorder. See ibid.
(Pinholster’s upbringing “would speak volumes, looking at
it from a mitigation point of view”). And he agreed that
the mitigation evidence presented at trial was “profoundly
misleading.” Id., at ER–966. Dr. Rudnick testified that
Pinholster suffered from antisocial personality disorder.
The State also introduced into evidence the 1978 proba
tion report that Pinholster’s counsel had in their posses
sion at the time of his trial. The report demonstrated that
counsel were aware that Pinholster was in classes for
educationally handicapped children, that he was commit
ted to a state hospital for emotionally handicapped chil
dren, and that he suffered two “severe head injuries.” Id.,
at SER–243.
B
Much of the evidence presented at the federal hearing
——————
28 Before the hearing, Dr. Stalberg had opined that Pinholster was
“substantially impaired by a bipolar mood disorder operating synergis
tically with intoxication and a seizure disorder at the time the crime
was committed.” Record ER–587. At a prehearing deposition, however,
Dr. Stalberg revised his opinion and stated that he continued to believe
that Pinholster suffered from psychopathic personality traits. After the
deposition, Pinholster elected to proceed with a different expert, pre
sumably in light of Dr. Stalberg’s unexpected change in position. The
State then retained Dr. Stalberg as its own expert.

