Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

29

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Wiggins is illustrative of the competence we have re
quired of counsel in a capital case. There, counsel’s in
vestigation was limited to three sources: psychological
testing, a presentencing report, and Department of Social
Services records. 539 U. S., at 523–524. The records
revealed that the petitioner’s mother was an alcoholic,
that he displayed emotional difficulties in foster care, that
he was frequently absent from school, and that on one
occasion, his mother left him alone for days without food.
Id., at 525. In these circumstances, we concluded, “any
reasonably competent attorney would have realized that
pursuing these leads was necessary to making an in
formed choice among possible defenses.” Ibid. Accord
ingly, we held, the state court’s assumption that counsel’s
investigation was adequate was an unreasonable applica
tion of Strickland. 539 U. S., at 528.23
This case is remarkably similar to Wiggins. As the
majority reads the record, counsel’s mitigation investiga
tion consisted of talking to Pinholster’s mother, consulting
with Dr. Stalberg, and researching epilepsy.24 Ante, at 20.
What little information counsel gleaned from this “rudi
mentary” investigation, Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 524, would
have led any reasonable attorney “to investigate further,”
id., at 527. Counsel learned from Pinholster’s mother that
he attended a class for educationally handicapped chil
dren, that a psychologist had recommended placing him in
a mental institution, and that he spent time in a state
——————
23 As the majority notes, see ante, at 24–25, Wiggins’ trial counsel
acknowledged that the investigation he conducted was inconsistent
with standard practice in Maryland. See 539 U. S., at 524. We inde
pendently concluded, however, that the investigation “was also unrea
sonable in light of what counsel actually discovered in the . . . records.”
Id., at 525 (emphasis added).
24 The majority also posits that Brainard likely spent time preparing
Pinholster’s brother Terry. However, Terry averred in a declaration
that Pinholster’s attorneys “never asked [him] any questions relating to
Scott’s background or [their] family history.” Record ER–313.

