Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

37

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

More fundamentally, however, I cannot agree with the
premise that “[t]hose cases . . . offer no guidance with
respect to whether a state court has unreasonably deter
mined that prejudice is lacking.” Ante, at 31 (emphasis
deleted). In each of these cases, we did not purport to
create new law; we simply applied the same clearly estab
lished precedent, Strickland, to a different set of facts.
Because these cases illuminate the kinds of mitigation
evidence that suffice to establish prejudice under Strick
land, they provide useful, but not dispositive, guidance for
courts to consider when determining whether a state court
has unreasonably applied Strickland.
In many cases, a state court presented with additional
mitigation evidence will reasonably conclude that there is
no “reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofes
sional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been
different.” Strickland, 466 U. S., at 694. This is not such
a case. Admittedly, Pinholster unjustifiably stabbed and
killed two people, and his history of violent outbursts and
burglaries surely did not endear him to the jury. But the
homicides did not appear premeditated. And the State’s
aggravation case was no stronger than in Rompilla and
Terry Williams. See 545 U. S., at 378, 383 (the defendant
committed murder by torture and had a significant history
of violent felonies, including a rape); 529 U. S., at 418
(Rehnquist, C. J., concurring in part and dissenting in
part) (the defendant had a lifetime of crime, and after the
murder he “savagely beat an elderly woman,” set a home
on fire, and stabbed a man (internal quotation marks
omitted)). Even on the trial record, it took the jury two
days to decide on a penalty. The contrast between the “not
—————— 

able in at least two respects”: (1) It applied the wrong legal standard,

see 529 U. S., at 397, and (2) it “failed to accord appropriate weight to 

the body of mitigation evidence available to trial counsel,” id., at 398.

We did not purport to conduct de novo review. 


