Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

inter alia, ineffective assistance of counsel at the penalty
phase of his trial. He alleged that Brainard and Dettmar
had failed to adequately investigate and present mitigat­
ing evidence, including evidence of mental disorders.
Pinholster supported this claim with school, medical, and
legal records, as well as declarations from family mem­
bers, Brainard, and Dr. George Woods, a psychiatrist who
diagnosed Pinholster with bipolar mood disorder and
seizure disorders. Dr. Woods criticized Dr. Stalberg’s
report as incompetent, unreliable, and inaccurate. The
California Supreme Court unanimously and summarily1
denied Pinholster’s penalty-phase ineffective-assistance
claim “on the substantive ground that it is without merit.”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 302.
Pinholster filed a federal habeas petition in April 1997.
He reiterated his previous allegations about penalty-phase
ineffective assistance and also added new allegations that
his trial counsel had failed to furnish Dr. Stalberg with
adequate background materials. In support of the new
allegations, Dr. Stalberg provided a declaration stating
that in 1984, Pinholster’s trial counsel had provided him
with only some police reports and a 1978 probation report.
Dr. Stalberg explained that, had he known about the
material that had since been gathered by Pinholster’s
habeas counsel, he would have conducted “further inquiry”
before concluding that Pinholster suffered only from a
personality disorder. App. to Brief in Opposition 219. He
noted that Pinholster’s school records showed evidence of
“some degree of brain damage.” Ibid. Dr. Stalberg did
not, however, retract his earlier diagnosis. The parties
stipulated that this declaration had never been submitted
to the California Supreme Court, and the federal petition
——————
1 Although the California Supreme Court initially issued an order
asking the State to respond, it ultimately withdrew that order as “improvidently issued.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 302.

