36

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

him to the jury”). It is for this reason that it was espe
cially important for counsel to present the available evi
dence to help the jury understand Pinholster. See Sears,
561 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 6–7).
Had counsel conducted an adequate investigation, the
judge and jury would have heard credible evidence show
ing that Pinholster’s criminal acts and aggressive tenden
cies were “attributable to a disadvantaged background, or
to emotional and mental problems.” Penry, 492 U. S., at
319 (internal quotation marks omitted). They would have
learned that Pinholster had the “ ‘kind of troubled history
we have declared relevant to assessing a defendant’s
moral culpability.’ ” Porter, 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 12)
(quoting Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 535). Applying Strickland,
we have repeatedly found “a reasonable probability,” 466
U. S., at 694, that the sentencer would have reached a
different result had counsel presented similar evidence.
See, e.g., Porter, 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 12–13) (evi
dence of the defendant’s childhood history of physical
abuse, brain abnormality, limited schooling, and heroic
military service); Rompilla, 545 U. S., at 392 (evidence of
severe abuse and neglect as a child, as well as brain
damage); Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 535 (evidence of the de
fendant’s “severe privation and abuse” as a child, home
lessness, and “diminished mental capacities”); Terry
Williams, 529 U. S., at 398 (evidence of childhood
mistreatment and neglect, head injuries, possible organic
mental impairments, and borderline mental retardation).
The majority does not dispute the similarity between
this case and the cited cases. However, it criticizes the
Court of Appeals for relying on Rompilla and Terry Wil
liams on the ground that we reviewed the prejudice ques
tion de novo in those cases. See ante, at 31. I do not read
Terry Williams to review the prejudice question de novo.27
——————
27 Terry

Williams held that the state court’s decision was “unreason

