Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

Opinion of the Court

ing the guilt phase. Infra, at 28.
The record also shows that Pinholster’s counsel con­
fronted a challenging penalty phase with an unsympa­
thetic client, which limited their feasible mitigation
strategies. By the end of the guilt phase, the jury had
observed Pinholster “glor[y]” in “his criminal disposition”
and “hundreds of robberies.” Pinholster, 1 Cal. 4th, at
945, 907, 824 P. 2d, at 611, 584. During his cross­
examination, Pinholster laughed or smirked when he told
the jury that his “occupation” was “a crook,” when he was
asked whether he had threatened a potential witness, and
when he described thwarting police efforts to recover a
gun he had once used. 44 Tr. 6225. He bragged about
being a “professional robber.” 43 id., at 6204. To support his defense, Pinholster claimed that he used only
guns⎯not knives⎯to commit his crimes. But during
cross-examination, Pinholster admitted that he had previ­
ously been convicted of using a knife in a kidnaping.
Pinholster also said he was a white supremacist and that
he frequently carved swastikas into other people’s prop­
erty as “a sideline to robbery.” 44 id., at 6246.
Trial counsel’s psychiatric expert, Dr. Stalberg, had
concluded that Pinholster showed no significant signs or
symptoms of mental disorder or defect other than his
“psychopathic personality traits.” App. 131. Dr. Stalberg
was aware of Pinholster’s hyperactivity as a youngster,
hospitalization at age 14 for incorrigibility, alleged epilep­
tic disorder, and history of drug dependency. Neverthe­
less, Dr. Stalberg told counsel that Pinholster did not
appear to suffer from brain damage, was not significantly
intoxicated or impaired on the night in question, and did
not have an impaired ability to appreciate the criminality
of his conduct.
Given these impediments, it would have been a reason­
able penalty-phase strategy to focus on evoking sympathy
for Pinholster’s mother. In fact, such a family sympathy

