22

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
Opinion of the Court

defense is precisely how the State understood defense
counsel’s strategy. The prosecutor carefully opened her
cross-examination of Pinholster’s mother with, “I hope you
understand I don’t enjoy cross-examining a mother of
anybody.” 52 Tr. 7407. And in her closing argument, the
prosecutor attempted to undercut defense counsel’s strat­
egy by pointing out, “Even the most heinous person born,
even Adolph Hitler[,] probably had a mother who loved
him.” 53 id., at 7452.
Pinholster’s only response to this evidence is a series of
declarations from Brainard submitted with Pinholster’s
first state habeas petition, seven years after the trial.
Brainard declares that he has “no recollection” of inter­
viewing any family members (other than Pinholster’s
mother) regarding penalty-phase testimony, of attempting
to secure Pinholster’s school or medical records, or of
interviewing any former teachers or counselors. Pet. for
Writ of Habeas Corpus in No. S004616 (Cal.), Exh. 3.
Brainard also declares that Dettmar was primarily re­
sponsible for mental health issues in the case, but he has
“no recollection” of Dettmar ever having secured Pinhol­
ster’s medical records. Id., Exh. 2. Dettmar neither con­
firmed nor denied Brainard’s statements, as he had died
by the time of the first state habeas petition. 590 F. 3d, at
700 (Kozinski, C. J., dissenting).
In sum, Brainard and Dettmar made statements sug­
gesting that they were not surprised that the State in­
tended to put on aggravating evidence, billing records
show that they spent time investigating mitigating evi­
dence, and the record demonstrates that they represented
a psychotic client whose performance at trial hardly en­
deared him to the jury. Pinholster has responded to this
evidence with only a handful of post-hoc nondenials by one
of his lawyers. The California Supreme Court could have
reasonably concluded that Pinholster had failed to rebut
the presumption of competence mandated by Strickland—

