10

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
Opinion of the Court

decision with new evidence introduced in a federal habeas
court and reviewed by that court in the first instance
effectively de novo.
Limiting §2254(d)(1) review to the state-court record is
consistent with our precedents interpreting that statu­
tory provision. Our cases emphasize that review under
§2254(d)(1) focuses on what a state court knew and did.
State-court decisions are measured against this Court’s
precedents as of “the time the state court renders its deci­
sion.” Lockyer v. Andrade, 538 U. S. 63, 71–72 (2003). To
determine whether a particular decision is “contrary to”
then-established law, a federal court must consider
whether the decision “applies a rule that contradicts
[such] law” and how the decision “confronts [the] set of
facts” that were before the state court. Williams v. Taylor,
529 U. S. 362, 405, 406 (2000) (Terry Williams). If the
state-court decision “identifies the correct governing legal
principle” in existence at the time, a federal court must
assess whether the decision “unreasonably applies that
principle to the facts of the prisoner’s case.” Id., at 413. It
would be strange to ask federal courts to analyze whether
a state court’s adjudication resulted in a decision that
unreasonably applied federal law to facts not before the
state court.3
——————
3 JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR argues that there is nothing strange about al­
lowing consideration of new evidence under §2254(d)(1) because, in her
view, it would not be “so different” from some other tasks that courts
undertake. Post, at 13 (dissenting opinion). What makes the consid­
eration of new evidence strange is not how “different” the task would
be, but rather the notion that a state court can be deemed to have
unreasonably applied federal law to evidence it did not even know
existed. We cannot comprehend how exactly a state court would have
any control over its application of law to matters beyond its knowledge.
Adopting JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s approach would not take seriously
AEDPA’s requirement that federal courts defer to state-court decisions
and would effectively treat the statute as no more than a “ ‘mood’ that
the Federal Judiciary must respect,” Terry Williams, 529 U. S., at 386

