4

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
Syllabus
sented extensive aggravating evidence at both the guilt and penalty
phases. The mitigating evidence consisted primarily of the penalty
phase testimony of Pinholster’s mother and guilt-phase testimony
given by his brother. After considering the evidence, the jury re
turned a sentence of death, which the state trial court found sup
ported overwhelmingly by the weight of the evidence. Pp. 26–29.
(2) There is no reasonable probability that the additional evi
dence presented at Pinholster’s state proceedings would have
changed the verdict. The “new” evidence largely duplicated the miti
gation evidence of his mother and brother at trial. To the extent that
there were new factual allegations or evidence, much of it is of ques
tionable mitigating value. Dr. Woods’ testimony would have opened
the door to rebuttal by a state expert; and new evidence relating to
Pinholster’s substance abuse, mental illness, and criminal problems
could lead a jury to conclude that he was beyond rehabilitation. The
remaining new material in the state habeas record is sparse. Given
what little additional mitigating evidence Pinholster presented in
state habeas, the Court cannot say that the State Supreme Court’s
determination was unreasonable. Pp. 29–30.
(3) Because this Court did not apply AEDPA deference to the
question of prejudice in Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362, and Rom
pilla v. Beard, 545 U. S. 374, those cases lack the important “doubly
deferential” standard of Strickland and AEDPA, and thus offer no
guidance with respect to whether a state court has unreasonably de
termined that prejudice is lacking. Pp. 30–31.

590 F. 3d 651, reversed.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA and KENNEDY, JJ., joined in full; in which ALITO, J.,
joined as to all but Part II; in which BREYER, J., joined as to Parts I and
II; and in which GINSBURG and KAGAN, JJ., joined as to Part II. ALITO,
J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
BREYER, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part.
SOTOMAYOR, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG and KAGAN, JJ., joined as to Part II.

