30

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

hospital for emotionally handicapped children. They knew
that Pinholster had been diagnosed with epilepsy.
“[A]ny reasonably competent attorney would have real
ized that pursuing” the leads suggested by this informa
tion “was necessary to making an informed choice among
possible defenses.” Id., at 525; see also Penry v. Lynaugh,
492 U. S. 302, 319 (1989) (“[E]vidence about the defen
dant’s background and character is relevant because of the
belief, long held by this society, that defendants who
commit criminal acts that are attributable to a disadvan
taged background, or to emotional and mental problems,
may be less culpable than defendants who have no such
excuse” (internal quotation marks omitted)). Yet counsel
made no effort to obtain the readily available evidence
suggested by the information they learned, such as Pin
holster’s schooling or medical records, or to contact
Pinholster’s school authorities. They did not contact Dr.
Dubin or the many other health-care providers who had
treated Pinholster. Put simply, counsel “failed to act while
potentially powerful mitigating evidence stared them in
the face.” Bobby, 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 8) (citing
Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 525).
The “impediments” facing counsel, ante, at 21, did not
justify their minimal investigation. It is true that Pinhol
ster was “an unsympathetic client.” Ibid. But this fact
compounds, rather than excuses, counsel’s deficiency in
ignoring the glaring avenues of investigation that could
explain why Pinholster was the way he was. See Sears,
561 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 7) (“This evidence might not
have made Sears any more likable to the jury, but it might
well have helped the jury understand Sears, and his hor
rendous acts—especially in light of his purportedly stable
upbringing”). Nor can Dr. Stalberg’s two-page report,
which was based on a very limited record and focused
primarily on Pinholster’s mental state at the time of
the homicides, excuse counsel’s failure to investigate the

