Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

assistance claim on the state-court record. Section 2254(d)
prohibits habeas relief.
A
Section 2254(d) applies to Pinholster’s claim because
that claim was adjudicated on the merits in state-court
proceedings. No party disputes that Pinholster’s federal
petition alleges an ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claim
that had been included in both of Pinholster’s state habeas
petitions. The California Supreme Court denied each of
those petitions “on the substantive ground that it is with­
out merit.”11
Section 2254(d) applies even where there has been a
summary denial. See Richter, 562 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
8). In these circumstances, Pinholster can satisfy the
“unreasonable application” prong of §2254(d)(1) only by
showing that “there was no reasonable basis” for the
California Supreme Court’s decision. Id., at ___ (slip op.,
at 8). “[A] habeas court must determine what arguments
or theories . . . could have supporte[d] the state court’s
decision; and then it must ask whether it is possible fair­
minded jurists could disagree that those arguments or
——————
11 The State does not contest that the alleged claim was adjudicated
on the merits by the California Supreme Court, but it asserts that some
of the evidence adduced in the federal evidentiary hearing fundamen­
tally changed Pinholster’s claim so as to render it effectively unadjudi­
cated. See Brief for Petitioner 28–31; Reply Brief for Petitioner 4–5; Tr.
of Oral Arg. 18. Pinholster disagrees and argues that the evidence
adduced in the evidentiary hearing simply supports his alleged claim.
Brief for Respondent 33–37.
We need not resolve this dispute because, even accepting Pinholster’s
position, he is not entitled to federal habeas relief. Pinholster has
failed to show that the California Supreme Court unreasonably applied
clearly established federal law on the record before that court, infra, at
18–23, 26–30, which brings our analysis to an end. Even if the evi­
dence adduced in the District Court additionally supports his claim, as
Pinholster contends, we are precluded from considering it. See n. 20,
infra.

