6

BUCK v. THALER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

corpus.” Miller-El v. Cockrell, 537 U. S. 322, 338 (2003).
Instead, a petitioner must show that “jurists of reason
could disagree with the district court’s resolution of his
constitutional claims or that jurists could conclude the
issues presented are adequate to deserve encouragement
to proceed further.” Id., at 327. See also 28 U. S. C.
§2253(c)(2).
Buck has met this standard. The Rule 60 relief that
he sought in the District Court was highly discretionary.
Liljeberg v. Health Services Acquisition Corp., 486 U. S.
847 (1988). Yet the District Court denied relief based on
a record compromised by the State’s misleading remarks
and omissions. I realize that, in denying Buck’s Rule 59(e)
motion, the District Court was aware of Buck’s arguments
that the State had mischaracterized Alba and Blue. But
the District Court lacked other information that might
have influenced its decision. Significantly, the District
Court could not know that the State would later concede
in the Fifth Circuit that it had mischaracterized Alba.
Nor, for similar reasons, did the District Court have the
opportunity to evaluate the State’s subsequent efforts in
the Fifth Circuit and this Court to try to distinguish
Buck’s case from Alba and Blue. The State argues that
although the defendants in those cases each proffered
Quijano as a witness, they did not, like Buck, elicit racerelated testimony on direct examination; instead, the
prosecution first did so on cross-examination.
This distinction is accurate but not necessarily substantial. The context in which Buck’s counsel addressed race
differed markedly from how the prosecutor used it. On
direct examination, Quijano referred to race as part of his
overall opinion that Buck would pose a low threat to society were he imprisoned. This is exactly how the State has
characterized Quijano’s testimony. E.g., Thaler’s Reply to
Buck’s Motion for Relief from Judgment and Motion for
Stay of Execution in No. 4:04–cv–03965 (SD Tex.), pp. 15–

