Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

dano’s case Dr. Quijano testified for the State.” Id., at 20
(citation omitted; emphasis in original); see also ibid.
(“Therefore, because it was Buck who called Dr. Quijano to
testify and derived the benefit of Dr. Quijano’s overall
opinion that Buck was unlikely to be a future danger
despite the existence of some negative factors, this case
does not represent the odious error contained in the Saldano cases”). This was obviously not accurate. Like Buck,
the defendants in both Blue and Alba called Quijano to the
stand. But on the ground that only Buck had called Quijano as a witness, the State urged the District Court that
“the former actions of the Director [in the other five cases]
are not applicable and should not be considered in deciding this case.” Record, Doc. 6, at 20.2 The District Court
applied the procedural bar raised by the State and dismissed Buck’s petition.
Buck later brought the State’s misstatements to light in
a motion to reopen the judgment under Rule 60 of the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. In response, the State
erroneously identified Alba as a case in which the prosecution had called Quijano to the stand, and omitted any
mention of Blue. After the District Court denied Buck’s
Rule 60 motion, Buck highlighted these errors in a motion
under Rule 59(e) to alter or amend the judgment, which
the District Court also denied. The Fifth Circuit denied
Buck’s application for a certificate of appealability (COA)
to review these two judgments.
I believe the Fifth Circuit erred in doing so. To obtain a
COA, a petitioner need not “prove, before the issuance of a
COA, that some jurists would grant the petition for habeas
——————
2 Perhaps, under a generous reading of the State’s briefing, the State
meant to convey to the District Court that Buck’s case was distinguishable from the others not only because he called Quijano as a witness,
but also because he elicited race-related testimony. But that is not
what the briefing says. The distinction that the State offered—that
Buck alone proffered Quijano as a witness—is incorrect.

