4

BUCK v. THALER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

“testimony was offered by Dr. Quijano that race should be
a factor for the jury to consider” in making its sentencing
determination. Record in No. 4:04–cv–03965 (SD Tex.),
Doc. 27–5, p. 30 (hereinafter Record) (internal quotation
marks omitted). These were the five cases listed above
(besides Saldano), as well as Buck’s. The attorney general
declared that “it is inappropriate to allow race to be considered as a factor in our criminal justice system.” Ibid.
(internal quotation marks omitted). Accordingly, in five of
the six cases the attorney general identified, the State
confessed error and did not raise procedural defenses to
the defendants’ federal habeas petitions. Five of the six
defendants were thus resentenced, each to death.
Only in Buck’s case, the last of the six cases to reach
federal habeas review, did the State assert a procedural
bar. Why the State chose to treat Buck differently from
each of the other defendants has not always been clear.
As the Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit recognized in
the decision that is the subject of this petition, “We are
provided with no explanation for why the State declined
to act consistently with its Attorney General’s public
announcement with respect to petitioner Buck.” No. 11–
70025, 2011 WL 4067164, *8, n. 41 (Sept. 14, 2011).
What we do know is that the State justified its assertion
of a procedural defense in the District Court based on
statements and omissions that were misleading. The
State found itself “compelled” to treat Buck’s case differently from Saldano’s because of a “critical distinction”:
“Buck himself, not the State[,] offered Dr. Quijano’s testimony into evidence.” Record, Doc. 6, at 17. The State
created the unmistakable impression that Buck’s case
differed from the others in that only Buck called Quijano
as a witness. The State asserted, “[T]he Director is obviously aware of the prior confessions of error in other federal habeas corpus cases involving similar testimony by
Dr. Quijano. However, this case is not Saldano. In Sal-

