2

BUCK v. THALER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

tive incidents either at TDC or in jail,” and that “that’s a
good sign that this person is controllable within a jail or
prison setting.” Id., at 115. He also explained that Buck’s
“victim [was] not random” because “there [was] a preexisting relationship,” and that this reduced the probability that Buck would pose a future danger. Id., at 112.
Ultimately, when the defense asked Quijano whether
Buck was likely to commit violent criminal acts if he were
sentenced to life imprisonment, Quijano replied, “The
probability of that happening in prison would be low.” Id.,
at 115. The defense also offered into evidence, over the
prosecutor’s objection, a report containing Quijano’s psychological evaluation of Buck, which substantially mirrored Quijano’s trial testimony.1
On cross-examination, the prosecutor began by asking
Quijano about the financial compensation he received in
return for his time and the methods he used to examine
Buck. The prosecutor then said that she would “like to
ask [Quijano] some questions from [his] report.” Id., at
155. After inquiring about the statistical factors of past
crimes and age and how they might indicate future dangerousness in Buck’s case, the prosecutor said: “You have
determined that the sex factor, that a male is more violent
than a female because that’s just the way it is, and that
the race factor, black, increases the future dangerousness
for various complicated reasons; is that correct?” Id., at
160. Quijano answered, “Yes.” Ibid. After additional
cross-examination and testimony from a subsequent witness, the prosecutor argued to the jury in summation that
——————
1 The report listed the following statistical factors relevant to the
question whether Buck would pose a continuing threat to society:
past crimes, age, sex, race, socioeconomics, employment stability, and
substance abuse. As to race, the report stated: “4. Race. Black:
Increased probability. There is an over-representation of Blacks among
the violent offenders.” Defense Exh. 1 in No. 699684 (208th Jud. Dist.,
Harris Cty., Tex.), p. 7.

