10

WOOD v. ALLEN
Opinion of the Court

reasonable merely because the federal habeas court would
have reached a different conclusion in the first instance.
Cf. id., at 411. In Rice, for example, in which we assumed,
arguendo, that only §2254(d)(2) and not §2254(e)(1) ap
plied, 546 U. S., at 339, we rejected the Ninth Circuit’s
conclusion that a state-court factual determination was
unreasonable. We noted that even if “[r]easonable minds
reviewing the record might disagree” about the finding in
question, “on habeas review that does not suffice to super
sede the trial court’s . . . determination.” Id., at 341–342.
In this case, the evidence in the state-court record dem
onstrated that all of Wood’s counsel read the Kirkland
report. App. 12, 174, 210, 283. Trotter testified that
Dozier told him that nothing in the report merited further
investigation, a recollection that is supported by contem
poraneous letters Trotter wrote to Dozier and Ralph not
ing that no independent psychological evaluations had
been conducted because Dozier had said they would not be
needed. Id., at 283, 343, 345. Trotter also told the sen
tencing judge that counsel did not intend to introduce the
Kirkland report to the jury. Id., at 12. This evidence in
the state-court record can fairly be read to support the
Rule 32 court’s factual determination that counsel’s failure
to pursue or present evidence of Wood’s mental deficien
cies was not mere oversight or neglect but was instead the
result of a deliberate decision to focus on other defenses.
Arguing that the state court’s factual determination to
this effect was unreasonable, Wood calls our attention to
Dozier’s testimony during the Rule 32 proceedings that
evidence of Wood’s mental health problems would have
been presented during the penalty phase if counsel had
been aware of it, id., at 169; that Dozier did not recall
whether he had decided not to present evidence based on
the Kirkland report, id., at 168, 171; and that Dozier and
Ralph had designated the inexperienced Trotter to be in
charge of the penalty phase proceedings, id., at 270–271.

