4

WOOD v. ALLEN
Opinion of the Court

testify was not in Wood’s best interest.” Id., at 271a–272a.
The court concluded that these strategic decisions were
reasonable and thus that counsel had not performed defi
ciently. Ibid. The court further concluded that there was
“no reasonable probability” of a different outcome had the
evidence developed in the Rule 32 hearings been presented
to the jury or to the sentencing court. Id., at 273a. The
Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals affirmed, App. 589–
610, and the Alabama Supreme Court denied certiorari,
id., at 4.
Wood then filed a petition for federal habeas relief
under §2254. The District Court rejected all of Wood’s
claims save one: that counsel’s failure to investigate and
present mitigation evidence of his mental deficiencies
during the penalty phase constituted ineffective assistance
of counsel. 465 F. Supp. 2d 1211, 1239–1245 (MD Ala.
2006). According to the court, there was “nothing in the
record to even remotely support a finding that counsel
made a strategic decision not to let the jury at the penalty
stage know about Wood’s mental condition.” Id., at 1242.
Ralph and Dozier, the court noted, had placed the inexpe
rienced Trotter in charge of the penalty phase. At the
Rule 32 hearing, Trotter testified that he had seen the
references to Wood’s intellectual functioning in the Kirk
land report but did not recall considering whether to
pursue that issue. Trotter further testified that he had
unsuccessfully attempted to subpoena Wood’s school re
cords and that he did not recall speaking to any of Wood’s
teachers. Trotter had also written to an attorney at the
Southern Poverty Law Center explaining that he was
“ ‘stressed out over this case and [didn’t] have anyone with
whom to discuss the case, including the other two attor
neys.’ ” Id., at 1241. Shortly before the penalty phase
began, Trotter told the judge that he would request fur
ther psychological evaluation before the judge’s sentencing
hearing, even though the evaluation would come too late

