(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

WOOD v. ALLEN, COMMISSIONER, ALABAMA 

DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS, ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–9156. Argued November 4, 2009—Decided January 20, 2010
Under 28 U. S. C. §2254(d)(2), a federal court may grant a state pris
oner habeas relief if his claim was adjudicated on the merits in state
court and “resulted in a decision . . . based on an unreasonable de
termination of the facts in light of the evidence presented in the State
court proceeding.” Under §2254(e)(1), “a determination of a factual
issue made by a State court [is] presumed to be correct,” and the peti
tioner has “the burden of rebutting the presumption of correctness by
clear and convincing evidence.”
Petitioner Wood was convicted of capital murder and sentenced to
death in Alabama state court. Two of his court-appointed attorneys,
Dozier and Ralph, had significant trial experience, but the third,
Trotter, had only recently been admitted to the bar. After exhausting
his appeals, Wood sought postconviction relief under Alabama Rule of
Criminal Procedure 32, arguing, among other things, that he was
mentally retarded and not eligible for the death penalty, and that his
trial counsel were ineffective because they failed to investigate and
present evidence of his mental deficiencies during the trial’s penalty
phase. The Rule 32 court conducted evidentiary hearings and denied
the claims initially and on remand. As to the mental retardation
claim, it found that Wood had not shown deficits in his adaptive func
tioning. As to the ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claim, it concluded
that he had not established that his counsel’s performance was defi
cient or that any deficiency prejudiced his defense. In so doing, it
made a factual finding that counsel had made a strategic decision not
to pursue evidence of Wood’s alleged retardation. Observing that
counsel had asked Dr. Kirkland to conduct a mental evaluation, had
thoroughly reviewed his report, and had determined that no further

