6

WOOD v. ALLEN
Opinion of the Court

neither an unreasonable application of clearly established
law nor based on an unreasonable determination of the
facts. With respect to the facts, the court concluded that
the evidence presented in the Rule 32 hearings supported
the state court’s findings that counsel made a strategic
decision not to present mental health evidence during the
penalty phase. “At a minimum,” the court noted, “Wood
has not presented evidence, much less clear and convinc
ing evidence, that counsel did not make such decisions.”
Id., at 1304, n. 23. The court also agreed with the state
court’s legal conclusion that counsel’s strategic decision
was reasonable. According to the court, the silent record
created a presumption that counsel exercised sound pro
fessional judgment, supported by ample reasons, not to
present the information they had obtained. These reasons
included unfavorable information in Dr. Kirkland’s report,
such as details about Wood’s 19 earlier arrests and his
previous attempt to murder another ex-girlfriend, as well
as Dr. Kirkland’s conclusion that, notwithstanding Wood’s
mental deficiencies, Wood had a high level of adaptive
functioning. Id., at 1304–1306. The court added that the
investigation preceding counsel’s decision was sufficient to
permit them to make a reasoned decision, crediting the
Rule 32 court’s findings that, inter alia, counsel not only
employed an investigator who sought mitigation evidence
from family members but also themselves met with family
members and sought guidance from capital defense or
ganizations. Id., at 1307–1308. The court also accepted as
not “objectively unreasonable” the state court’s determina
tion that Wood had failed to show prejudice from counsel’s
failure to present evidence of his mental deficiencies. Id.,
at 1309, 1314.
The dissent, implicitly considering the factual question
whether counsel made a strategic decision as part and
parcel of the legal question whether any strategic decision
was reasonable, concluded that “[n]o such strategic deci

