Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

Trotter, in turn, testified that he did not recall considering
Wood’s mental deficiencies. Id., at 288. Wood also ob
serves that the Kirkland report was prepared for the guilt
phase, not the penalty phase, and a strategic decision not
to use the Kirkland report in the former does not necessar
ily carry over into the latter. Id., at 324. Wood notes that
his counsel sought to obtain additional evidence about his
mental health to use in mitigation after reviewing the
Kirkland report, but they failed to pursue it, in part out of
a belief that the sentencing judge would not grant a con
tinuance to permit them to investigate. Id., at 285, 343–
346. Finally, Wood emphasizes that his counsel must
have thought that evidence of his mental deficiencies was
important because they presented it to the judge at the
final sentencing hearing. Id., at 88.
Most of the evidence Wood highlights, however, speaks
not to whether counsel made a strategic decision, but
rather to whether counsel’s judgment was reasonable—a
question we do not reach. See Part II–B, infra. As for any
evidence that may plausibly be read as inconsistent with
the finding that counsel made a strategic decision, we
conclude that it does not suffice to demonstrate that the
finding was unreasonable.3
——————
3 The

dissent suggests that counsel could not have made a strategic
decision not to pursue evidence of Wood’s mental deficiencies because
there could be no reasonable justification for doing so. Post, at 3–5
(opinion of STEVENS, J., joined by KENNEDY, J.). This interpretation
conflates the question whether a decision was strategic with the ques
tion whether a strategic decision was reasonable. Cf. post, at 2, n. 1.
Without expressing a view on the ultimate reasonableness of the
decision not to pursue this evidence further, we note that the Eleventh
Circuit majority observed that the state court could reasonably have
determined that counsel had strategic grounds for their decision. In
particular, evidence about Wood’s mental deficiencies may have led to
rebuttal testimony about the capabilities he demonstrated through his
extensive criminal history, an extraordinarily limited amount of which
was actually admitted at the penalty phase of the trial. Counsel’s

