Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

to be considered by the jury. Id., at 1241–1242. Based on
this evidence, the District Court concluded that the state
court’s finding “that a strategic decision was made not to
investigate or introduce to the sentencing jury evidence of
mental retardation [was] an unreasonable determination
of the facts in light of the clear and convincing evidence
presented in the record.” Ibid.
Having rejected the state court’s factual determinations,
the District Court held that counsel’s performance was
deficient and that counsel’s deficient performance preju
diced Wood, concluding that the state court’s holdings to
the contrary constituted “an unreasonable application of
federal law under Strickland.” Id., at 1245. The court
granted the petition on this claim and ordered the State
either to resentence Wood to life without parole or to
conduct a new sentencing hearing.
In a divided opinion, the Eleventh Circuit reversed the
grant of habeas relief. 542 F. 3d 1281 (2008). The major
ity began by explaining the standard of review: “Section
2254(d) permits federal habeas relief only where the state
courts’ decisions were (1) ‘contrary to, or involved an un
reasonable application of, clearly established Federal law,
as determined by the Supreme Court of the United States,’
or (2) ‘based on an unreasonable determination of the facts
in light of the evidence presented in the State court pro
ceeding.’ ” Id., at 1285 (quoting §§2254(d)(1)–(2)). A “ ‘de
termination of a factual issue made by a State court shall
be presumed to be correct,’ ” the majority explained, and
the petitioner “ ‘shall have the burden of rebutting the
presumption of correctness by clear and convincing evi
dence.’ ” Ibid. (quoting §2254(e)(1)). “Thus,” the majority
stated, the federal habeas court’s “ ‘review of findings of
fact by the state court is even more deferential than under
a clearly erroneous standard of review.’ ” Ibid.
The majority then held that the Alabama court’s rejec
tion of Wood’s ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claim was

