Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., dissenting

(Barkett, J., concurring in part, dissenting in part). On
the contrary, the Court recognizes that Wood has pointed
to substantial evidence that Trotter, the attorney who had
primary responsibility for Wood’s penalty phase, believed
that further investigation had value, ante, at 10–11.
Despite the fact that Trotter had a meager five months of
experience as a lawyer when he was appointed to repre
sent Wood, App. 261, even he knew that further investigation into any mental or psychological deficits was in
order.5
In my view, any decision to abandon an investigation
into the mitigating evidence signaled by Dr. Kirkland’s
report was so obviously unreasonable that the decision
itself is highly persuasive evidence that counsel did not
have any strategy in mind when they did so. I share the
view of my dissenting colleague below that the District
——————
there is no evidence to support a conclusion that there was a strategic
decision on the latter, which is a necessary prerequisite for counsel to
make reasoned choices with respect to what evidence should go before
the jury during the penalty phase of a capital trial. See, e.g., Wiggins,
539 U. S., at 522 (explaining that “counsel’s failure to uncover and
present voluminous mitigating evidence at sentencing could not be
justified as a tactical decision to focus on [defendant’s] voluntary
confessions, because counsel had not ‘fulfill[ed] their obligation to
conduct a thorough investigation of the defendant’s background’ ”
(quoting Williams, 529 U. S., at 396)).
5 Shortly before the penalty phase commenced, Trotter sent letters to
his two more experienced co-counsel imploring that “we should request
an independent psychological evaluation—even if that means asking for
a postponement of the sentencing hearing.” App. 343 (letter from
Trotter to Dozier); id., at 345 (letter from Trotter to Ralph). Trotter
attempted to procure Wood’s school records and speak to his former
special education teachers in order to obtain “anything that would be
able to be used as a mitigating factor,” id., at 267 (testimony of Trotter),
but he failed to follow up on a subpoena issued for the records and
never spoke at length with any of Wood’s teachers, id., at 267–268.
Notably, at least two of these former teachers were willing to testify on
Wood’s behalf at the state postconviction hearing, see id., at 401–421
(testimony of Maddox and Penn).

