2

WOOD v. ALLEN
Syllabus
investigation was warranted, the court additionally held that counsel
appeared to have made a strategic decision not to present their lim
ited mental-deficiency evidence to the jury because having Dr. Kirk
land testify was not in Wood’s best interest. It also found no reason
able probability of a different outcome had the evidence developed in
the Rule 32 proceedings been presented at trial. Woods subsequently
sought federal habeas relief under §2254. The District Court rejected
all but his ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claim. The District Court
concluded that the state court’s finding that counsel made a strategic
decision was an unreasonable determination of the facts. The court
further held that counsel’s performance was deficient and had preju
diced Wood, and that the state court’s contrary holdings were an un
reasonable application of federal law under Strickland v. Washing
ton, 466 U. S. 668. Reversing, the Eleventh Circuit held that the
state court’s rejection of Wood’s ineffective-assistance claim was nei
ther an unreasonable application of clearly established law nor based
on an unreasonable determination of the facts. With respect to the
facts, it concluded that the evidence in the Rule 32 hearings sup
ported the state court’s strategic-decision finding, and it agreed with
the state court’s legal conclusion that counsel’s strategic decision was
reasonable and that Wood had failed to show prejudice. Wood’s cer
tiorari petition raises the questions (1) whether, in order to obtain re
lief under §2254(d)(2), a petitioner must establish only that the state
court factual determination on which the decision was based was
“unreasonable,” or whether §2254(e)(1) additionally requires a peti
tioner to rebut a presumption that the determination was correct
with clear and convincing evidence; and (2) whether the state court’s
strategic-decision determination was reasonable.

Held:
1. Even under Wood’s reading of §2254(d)(2), the state court’s con
clusion that his counsel made a strategic decision not to pursue or
present evidence of his mental deficiencies was not an unreasonable
determination of the facts in light of the evidence presented in the
state-court proceedings. This Court need not reach the question
whether §2254(e)(1) applies in every case presenting a challenge un
der §2254(d)(2), see Rice v. Collins, 546 U. S. 333, 339, because its
view of the state court’s factual determination here does not depend
on an interpretative difference regarding the relationship between
those provisions. While “[t]he term ‘unreasonable’ is . . . difficult to
define,” Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362, 410, it suffices to say that
a state-court factual determination is not unreasonable merely be
cause the federal habeas court would have reached a different conclu
sion in the first instance. See Rice, supra, at 341–342. Here, the
state-court record shows that all of Wood’s counsel read the Kirkland

