12

WOOD v. ALLEN
Opinion of the Court

Reviewing all of the evidence, we agree with the State
that even if it is debatable, it is not unreasonable to con
clude that, after reviewing the Kirkland report, counsel
made a strategic decision not to inquire further into the
information contained in the report about Wood’s mental
deficiencies and not to present to the jury such informa
tion as counsel already possessed about these deficiencies.
Cf. Rice, supra, at 341–342. For that reason, we agree
with the Court of Appeals that the District Court erred in
holding to the contrary.
B
Wood also argues that the state-court decision involved
an unreasonable application of Strickland under
§2254(d)(1) because counsel failed to make a reasonable
investigation of Wood’s mental deficiencies before deciding
not to pursue or present such evidence. Without a reason
able investigation, Wood contends, these decisions were an
unreasonable exercise of professional judgment and con
stituted deficient performance under Strickland. We
agree with the State, however, that this argument is not
“fairly included” in the questions presented under this
Court’s Rule 14.1(a). Whether the state court reasonably
determined that there was a strategic decision under
§2254(d)(2) is a different question from whether the stra
tegic decision itself was a reasonable exercise of profes
——————
decision successfully thwarted the prosecutor’s efforts to admit evidence
that Wood murdered his ex-girlfriend while on parole for an attempted
murder of a different ex-girlfriend that was strikingly similar in execu
tion to the subsequent successful murder. App. 23–24. Moreover, as
the Eleventh Circuit majority noted, evidence of Wood’s mental defi
ciencies also could have undercut the defense’s argument that he left
school to support his family, suggesting instead that he left school
because of educational difficulties. 542 F. 3d, at 1305–1306. Counsel’s
decision about which avenues to investigate can therefore plausibly be
described as strategic rather than necessarily being the product of
“happenstance, inattention, or neglect,” post, at 4.

