(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

TAPIA v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–5400. Argued April 18, 2011—Decided June 16, 2011
Petitioner Tapia was convicted of, inter alia, smuggling unauthorized
aliens into the United States. The District Court imposed a 51
month prison term, reasoning that Tapia should serve that long in
order to qualify for and complete the Bureau of Prisons’ Residential
Drug Abuse Program (RDAP). On appeal, Tapia argued that length
ening her prison term to make her eligible for RDAP violated 18
U. S. C. §3582(a), which instructs sentencing courts to “recogniz[e]
that imprisonment is not an appropriate means of promoting correc
tion and rehabilitation.” The Ninth Circuit disagreed. Relying on
Circuit precedent, it held that a sentencing court cannot impose a
prison term to assist a defendant’s rehabilitation, but once impris
onment is chosen, the court may consider the defendant’s rehabilita
tion needs in setting the sentence’s length.
Held: Section 3582(a) does not permit a sentencing court to impose or
lengthen a prison term in order to foster a defendant’s rehabilitation.
Pp. 3–15.
(a) For nearly a century, the Federal Government used an inde
terminate sentencing system premised on faith in rehabilitation.
Mistretta v. United States, 488 U. S. 361, 363. Because that system
produced “serious disparities in [the] sentences” imposed on similarly
situated defendants, id., at 365, and failed to “achieve rehabilitation,”
id., at 366, Congress enacted the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984
(SRA), replacing the system with one in which Sentencing Guidelines
would provide courts with “a range of determinate sentences,” id., at
368. Under the SRA, a sentencing judge must impose at least im
prisonment, probation, or a fine. See §3551(b). In determining the
appropriate sentence, judges must consider retribution, deterrence,
incapacitation, and rehabilitation, §3553(a)(2), but a particular pur

