Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

sion’s language, could end there as well. As just noted,
that section instructs courts to “recogniz[e] that impris
onment is not an appropriate means of promoting correc
tion and rehabilitation.” A common—and in context the
most natural—definition of the word “recognize” is “to ac
knowledge or treat as valid.” Random House Dictionary of
the English Language 1611 (2d ed. 1987). And a thing
that is not “appropriate” is not “suitable or fitting for a
particular purpose.” Id., at 103. Putting these two defini
tions together, §3582(a) tells courts that they should ac
knowledge that imprisonment is not suitable for the pur
pose of promoting rehabilitation. And when should courts
acknowledge this? Section §3582(a) answers: when “de
termining whether to impose a term of imprisonment, and,
if a term of imprisonment is to be imposed, [when] deter
mining the length of the term.” So a court making these
decisions should consider the specified rationales of
punishment except for rehabilitation, which it should ac
knowledge as an unsuitable justification for a prison term.
As against this understanding, amicus argues that
§3582(a)’s “recognizing” clause is not a flat prohibition
but only a “reminder” or a “guide [for] sentencing judges’
cognitive processes.” Brief for Court-Appointed Amicus
Curiae in Support of Judgment Below 23–24 (hereinafter
Amicus Brief) (emphasis deleted). Amicus supports this
view by offering a string of other definitions of the
word “recognize”: “ ‘recall to mind,’ ‘realize,’ or ‘perceive
clearly.’ ” Id., at 24 (quoting dictionary definitions). Once
these are plugged in, amicus suggests, §3582(a) reveals
itself as a kind of loosey-goosey caution not to put too
much faith in the capacity of prisons to rehabilitate.
But we do not see how these alternative meanings of
“recognize” help amicus’s cause. A judge who “perceives
clearly” that imprisonment is not an appropriate means of
promoting rehabilitation would hardly incarcerate some
one for that purpose. Ditto for a judge who “realizes” or

