Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

available medical, psychiatric, or psychological treatment,
including treatment for drug or alcohol dependency, as
specified by the court, and [to] remain in a specified insti
tution if required for that purpose.” §3563(b)(9).
If Congress had similarly meant to allow courts to base
prison terms on offenders’ rehabilitative needs, it would
have given courts the capacity to ensure that offenders
participate in prison correctional programs. But in fact,
courts do not have this authority. When a court sentences
a federal offender, the BOP has plenary control, subject to
statutory constraints, over “the place of the prisoner’s
imprisonment,” §3621(b), and the treatment programs (if
any) in which he may participate, §§3621(e), (f ); §3624(f ).
See also 28 CFR pt. 544 (2010) (BOP regulations for ad
ministering inmate educational, recreational, and voca
tional programs); 28 CFR pt. 550, subpart F (drug abuse
treatment programs). A sentencing court can recommend
that the BOP place an offender in a particular facility
or program. See §3582(a). But decisionmaking authority
rests with the BOP.
This case well illustrates the point. As noted earlier,
the District Court “strongly recommend[ed]” that Tapia
participate in RDAP, App. 29, and serve her sentence at
FCI Dublin, “where they have the facilities to really help
her,” id., at 28. But the court’s recommendations were
only recommendations—and in the end they had no effect.
See Amicus Brief 42 (“[Tapia] was not admitted to RDAP,
nor even placed in the prison recommended by the district
court”); Reply Brief for United States 8, n. 1 (“According to
BOP records, [Tapia] was encouraged to enroll [in RDAP]
during her psychology intake screening at [the federal
prison], but she stated that she was not interested, and
she has not volunteered for the program”). The sentencing
court may have had plans for Tapia’s rehabilitation, but it
lacked the power to implement them. That incapacity
speaks volumes. It indicates that Congress did not intend

