8

TAPIA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

“recalls” that imprisonment is not a way to rehabilitate an
offender. To be sure, the drafters of the “recognizing”
clause could have used still more commanding language:
Congress could have inserted a “thou shalt not” or equiva
lent phrase to convey that a sentencing judge may never,
ever, under any circumstances consider rehabilitation in
imposing a prison term. But when we interpret a statute,
we cannot allow the perfect to be the enemy of the merely
excellent. Congress expressed itself clearly in §3582(a),
even if armchair legislators might come up with some
thing even better. And what Congress said was that when
sentencing an offender to prison, the court shall consider
all the purposes of punishment except rehabilitation—
because imprisonment is not an appropriate means of
pursuing that goal.
Amicus also claims, echoing the Ninth Circuit’s reason
ing in Duran, that §3582(a)’s “recognizing” clause bars
courts from considering rehabilitation only when imposing
a prison term, and not when deciding on its length. The
argument goes as follows. Section 3582(a) refers to two
decisions: “The court, [1] in determining whether to im
pose a term of imprisonment, and, if a term of imprison
ment is to be imposed, [2] in determining the length of the
term” must consider the purposes of punishment listed
in §3553(a)(2), subject to the caveat of the “recognizing”
clause. But that clause says only that “imprisonment” is
not an appropriate means of rehabilitation. Because the
“primary meaning of ‘imprisonment’ is ‘the act of confining
a person,’ ” amicus argues, the clause relates only to
[1] the decision to incarcerate, and not to [2] the separate
determination of the sentence’s length. Amicus Brief 52.
We again disagree. Under standard rules of grammar,
§3582(a) says: A sentencing judge shall recognize that
imprisonment is not appropriate to promote rehabilita
tion when the court considers the applicable factors of
§3553(a)(2); and a court considers these factors when

