Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

determining both whether to imprison an offender and
what length of term to give him.
The use of the
word “imprisonment” in the “recognizing” clause does not
destroy—but instead fits neatly into—this construction.
“Imprisonment” as used in the clause most naturally
means “[t]he state of being confined” or “a period of con
finement.” Black’s Law Dictionary 825 (9th ed. 2009); see
also Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1137
(1993) (the “state of being imprisoned”). So the word does
not distinguish between the defendant’s initial placement
behind bars and his continued stay there. As the D. C.
Circuit noted in rejecting an identical argument, “[a]
sentencing court deciding to keep a defendant locked up
for an additional month is, as to that month, in fact choos
ing imprisonment over release.” In re Sealed Case, 573
F. 3d 844, 850 (2009).4 Accordingly, the word “imprison
ment” does not change the function of the “recognizing”
clause—to constrain a sentencing court’s decision both to
impose and to lengthen a prison term.5
The context of §3582(a) puts an exclamation point on
this textual conclusion. As noted earlier, supra, at 6,
another provision of the SRA restates §3582(a)’s message,
——————
4 Indeed, we can scarcely imagine a reason why Congress would have
wanted to draw the distinction that amicus urges on us. That distinc
tion would prevent a court from considering rehabilitative needs in
imposing a 1-month sentence rather than probation, but not in choosing
a 60-month sentence over a 1-month term. The only policy argument
amicus can offer in favor of this result is that “[t]he effects of impris
onment plateau a short while after the incarceration” and “ ‘[t]he dif
ference in harm between longer and shorter prison terms is smaller
than typically assumed.’ ” Amicus Brief 56. But nothing in the SRA
indicates that Congress is so indifferent to the length of prison terms.
5 The Government argues that “Congress did not intend to prohibit
courts from imposing less imprisonment in order to promote a defen
dant’s rehabilitation.” Brief for United States 40 (emphasis added).
This case does not require us to address that question, and nothing in
our decision expresses any views on it.

