4

TAPIA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

Discretion allowed “the judge and the parole officer to
[base] their respective sentencing and release decisions
upon their own assessments of the offender’s amenability
to rehabilitation.” Mistretta, 488 U. S., at 363. A convict,
the theory went, should generally remain in prison only
until he was able to reenter society safely. His release
therefore often coincided with “the successful completion
of certain vocational, educational, and counseling pro
grams within the prisons.” S. Rep. No. 98–225, p. 40
(1983) (hereinafter S. Rep.). At that point, parole officials
could “determin[e] that [the] prisoner had become reha
bilitated and should be released from confinement.” Stith
& Cabranes, supra, at 18.3
But this model of indeterminate sentencing eventually
fell into disfavor. One concern was that it produced “[s]eri
ous disparities in [the] sentences” imposed on similarly situated defendants. Mistretta, 488 U. S., at 365.
Another was that the system’s attempt to “achieve reha
bilitation of offenders had failed.” Id., at 366. Lawmakers
and others increasingly doubted that prison programs
could “rehabilitate individuals on a routine basis”—or that
parole officers could “determine accurately whether or
when a particular prisoner ha[d] been rehabilitated.”
S. Rep., at 40.
——————
3 The statutes governing punishment of drug-addicted offenders (like
Tapia) provide an example of this system at work. If a court concluded
that such an offender was “likely to be rehabilitated through treat
ment,” it could order confinement “for treatment . . . for an indetermi
nate period of time” not to exceed the lesser of 10 years or the statutory
maximum for the offender’s crime. 18 U. S. C. §4253(a) (1982 ed.); see
also §4251(c) (“ ‘Treatment’ includes confinement and treatment in an
institution . . . and includes, but is not limited to, medical, educational,
social, psychological, and vocational services, corrective and preventive
guidance and training, and other rehabilitative services”). Once the
offender had undergone treatment for six months, the Attorney General
could recommend that the Board of Parole release him from custody,
and the Board could then order release “in its discretion.” §4254.

