2

TAPIA v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
pose may apply differently, or not at all, depending on the kind of
sentence under consideration. As relevant here, a court ordering im
prisonment must “recogniz[e] that imprisonment is not an appropri
ate means of promoting correction and rehabilitation.” §3582(a). A
similar provision instructs the Sentencing Commission, as the Sen
tencing Guidelines’ author, to “insure that the guidelines reflect the
inappropriateness of imposing a sentence to a term of imprisonment
for the purpose of rehabilitating the defendant.” 28 U. S. C. §994(k).
Pp. 3–6.
(b) Consideration of Tapia’s claim starts with §3582(a)’s clear text.
Putting together the most natural definitions of “recognize”—“to ac
knowledge or treat as valid”—and not “appropriate”—not “suitable or
fitting for a particular purpose”—§3582(a) tells courts to acknowledge
that imprisonment is not suitable for the purpose of promoting reha
bilitation. It also instructs courts to make that acknowledgment
when “determining whether to impose a term of imprisonment, and
. . . [when] determining the length of the term.” Amicus, appointed to
defend the judgment below, argues that the “recognizing” clause is
merely a caution for judges not to put too much faith in the capacity
of prisons to rehabilitate. But his alternative interpretation is un
persuasive, as Congress expressed itself clearly in §3582(a). Amicus
also errs in echoing the Ninth Circuit’s reasoning that §3582’s term
“imprisonment” relates to the decision whether to incarcerate, not the
determination of the sentence’s length. Because “imprisonment”
most naturally means “the state of being confined” or “a period of con
finement,” it does not distinguish between the defendant’s initial
placement behind bars and his continued stay there.
Section 3582(a)’s context supports this textual conclusion. By re
stating §3582(a)’s message to the Sentencing Commission, Congress
ensured that all sentencing officials would work in tandem to imple
ment the statutory determination to “reject imprisonment as a means
of promoting rehabilitation.” Mistretta, 488 U. S., at 367. Equally il
luminating is the absence of any provision authorizing courts to en
sure that offenders participate in prison rehabilitation programs.
When Congress wanted sentencing courts to take account of rehabili
tative needs, it gave them authority to do so. See, e.g., §3563(b)(9).
In fact, although a sentencing court can recommend that an offender
be placed in a particular facility or program, see §3582(a), the author
ity to make the placement rests with the Bureau of Prisons, see, e.g.,
§3621(e). The point is well illustrated here, where the District
Court’s strong recommendations that Tapia participate in RDAP and
be placed in a particular facility went unfulfilled. Finally, for those
who consider legislative history useful, the key Senate Report on the
SRA provides corroborating evidence. Pp. 6–12.

