10

TAPIA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

but to a different audience. That provision, 28 U. S. C.
§994(k), directs the Sentencing Commission to ensure that
the Guidelines “reflect the inappropriateness of imposing a
sentence to a term of imprisonment for the purpose of
rehabilitating the defendant or providing the defendant
with needed educational or vocational training, medical
care, or other correctional treatment.” In this way, Con
gress ensured that all sentencing officials would work
in tandem to implement the statutory determination to
“rejec[t] imprisonment as a means of promoting rehabilita
tion.” Mistretta, 488 U. S., at 367 (citing 28 U. S. C.
§994(k)). Section 994(k) bars the Commission from rec
ommending a “term of imprisonment”—a phrase that
again refers both to the fact and to the length of incarcera
tion—based on a defendant’s rehabilitative needs. And
§3582(a) prohibits a court from considering those needs to
impose or lengthen a period of confinement when selecting
a sentence from within, or choosing to depart from, the
Guidelines range. Each actor at each stage in the sentenc
ing process receives the same message: Do not think about
prison as a way to rehabilitate an offender.
Equally illuminating here is a statutory silence—the
absence of any provision granting courts the power to
ensure that offenders participate in prison rehabilitation
programs. For when Congress wanted sentencing courts
to take account of rehabilitative needs, it gave courts
the authority to direct appropriate treatment for offend
ers. Thus, the SRA instructs courts, in deciding whether
to impose probation or supervised release, to consider
whether an offender could benefit from training and treat
ment programs. See 18 U. S. C. §3562(a); §3583(c). And
so the SRA also authorizes courts, when imposing those
sentences, to order an offender’s participation in cer
tain programs and facilities. §3563(b)(9); §3563(b)(11);
§3563(a)(4); §3583(d). As a condition of probation, for
example, the court may require the offender to “undergo

