Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

treatment programs (including for drug addiction) tar
geted to offenders’ particular needs. See id., at 21, 25, 27–
28. So even after the passage of §3582(a), amicus argues,
a court may impose or lengthen a prison sentence to pro
mote an offender’s participation in a targeted treatment
program. The only thing the court may not do is to impose
a prison term on the ground that confinement itself—its
inherent solitude and routine—will lead to rehabilitation.
We think this reading of the SRA is too narrow. For one
thing, the relevant history shows that at the time of
the SRA’s enactment, prison rehabilitation efforts focused
on treatment, counseling, and training programs, not on
seclusion and regimentation. See Rotman, The Failure of
Reform: United States, 1865–1965, in Oxford History of
the Prison: The Practice of Punishment in Western Society
169, 189–190 (N. Morris & D. Rothman eds. 1995) (de
scribing the pre-SRA “therapeutic model of rehabilitation”
as characterized by “individualized treatment” and “voca
tional training and group counseling programs”); see also
n. 3, supra (noting pre-SRA statutes linking the confine
ment of drug addicts to the completion of treatment pro
grams). Indeed, Congress had in mind precisely these
programs when it prohibited consideration of rehabilita
tion in imposing a prison term. See 28 U. S. C. §994(k)
(instructing the Sentencing Commission to prevent the
use of imprisonment to “provid[e] the defendant with
needed educational or vocational training . . . or other
correctional treatment”); S. Rep., at 40 (rejecting the
“model of ‘coercive’ rehabilitation—the theory of correction
that ties prison release dates to the successful completion
of certain vocational, educational, and counseling pro
grams within the prisons”). Far from falling outside the
“rehabilitation model,” these programs practically defined
it.
It is hardly surprising, then, that amicus’s argument
finds little support in the statutory text. Read most natu

