16

MATRIXX INITIATIVES, INC. v. SIRACUSANO
Opinion of the Court

232 (quoting TSC Industries, 426 U. S., at 449; emphasis
added). For the reasons just stated, the mere existence of
reports of adverse events—which says nothing in and of
itself about whether the drug is causing the adverse
events—will not satisfy this standard. Something more is
needed, but that something more is not limited to statisti­
cal significance and can come from “the source, content,
and context of the reports,” supra, at 15. This contextual
inquiry may reveal in some cases that reasonable inves­
tors would have viewed reports of adverse events as mate­
rial even though the reports did not provide statistically
significant evidence of a causal link.10
Moreover, it bears emphasis that §10(b) and Rule 10b–
5(b) do not create an affirmative duty to disclose any and
all material information. Disclosure is required under
these provisions only when necessary “to make . . . state­
ments made, in the light of the circumstances under which
they were made, not misleading. 17 CFR §240.10b–5(b);
see also Basic, 485 U. S., at 239, n. 17 (“Silence, absent a
duty to disclose, is not misleading under Rule 10b–5”).
Even with respect to information that a reasonable inves­
tor might consider material, companies can control what
they have to disclose under these provisions by controlling
what they say to the market.
2
Applying Basic’s “total mix” standard in this case, we
conclude that respondents have adequately pleaded mate­
riality. This is not a case about a handful of anecdotal
——————
10 We note that our conclusion accords with views of the SEC, as ex­
pressed in an amicus curiae brief filed in this case. See Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 11–12; see also TSC Industries, Inc. v. North
way, Inc., 426 U. S. 438, 449, n. 10 (1976) (“[T]he SEC’s view of the
proper balance between the need to insure adequate disclosure and the
need to avoid the adverse consequences of setting too low a threshold
for civil liability is entitled to consideration”).

