4

MATRIXX INITIATIVES, INC. v. SIRACUSANO
Opinion of the Court

the University of Colorado, Dr. Bruce Jafek, had observed
10 patients suffering from anosmia after Zicam use.
Linschoten and Jafek planned to present their findings at
a meeting of the American Rhinologic Society in a poster
presentation entitled “Zicam® Induced Anosmia.” Ibid.
(internal quotation marks omitted). The American Rhi­
nologic Society posted their abstract in advance of the
meeting. The presentation described in detail a 55-year­
old man with previously normal taste and smell who
experienced severe burning in his nose, followed immedi­
ately by a loss of smell, after using Zicam. It also reported
10 other Zicam users with similar symptoms.
Matrixx learned of the doctors’ planned presentation.
Clarot sent a letter to Dr. Jafek warning him that he did
not have permission to use Matrixx’s name or the names
of its products. Dr. Jafek deleted the references to Zicam
in the poster before presenting it to the American Rhi­
nologic Society.
The following month, two plaintiffs commenced a prod­
uct liability lawsuit against Matrixx alleging that Zicam
had damaged their sense of smell. By the end of the class
period on February 6, 2004, nine plaintiffs had filed four
lawsuits.
Respondents allege that Matrixx made a series of public
statements that were misleading in light of the foregoing
information. In October 2003, after they had learned of
Dr. Jafek’s study and after Dr. Jafek had presented his
findings to the American Rhinologic Society, Matrixx
stated that Zicam was “ ‘poised for growth in the upcoming
cough and cold season’ ” and that the company had “ ‘very
strong momentum.’ ”2 Id., at 72a–74a. Matrixx further
——————
2 At oral argument, counsel for the United States, which submitted an
amicus curiae brief in support of respondents, suggested that some of
these statements might qualify as nonactionable “puffery.” Tr. of Oral
Arg. 51–52. This question is not before us, as Matrixx has not ad­
vanced such an argument.

