Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

with a pharmaceutical company’s products cannot be
material absent a sufficient number of such reports to
establish a statistically significant risk that the product is
in fact causing the events.6 Absent statistical significance,
Matrixx argues, adverse event reports provide only “anec­
dotal” evidence that “the user of a drug experienced an
adverse event at some point during or following the use
of that drug.” Brief for Petitioners 17. Accordingly,
it contends, reasonable investors would not consider such
reports relevant unless they are statistically significant
because only then do they “reflect a scientifically reliable
basis for inferring a potential causal link between product
use and the adverse event.” Id., at 32.
As in Basic, Matrixx’s categorical rule would “artificially
exclud[e]” information that “would otherwise be consid­
ered significant to the trading decision of a reasonable
investor.” 485 U. S., at 236. Matrixx’s argument rests on
the premise that statistical significance is the only reliable
indication of causation. This premise is flawed: As the
SEC points out, “medical researchers . . . consider multiple
——————
adverse events to the FDA. During the class period, manufacturers of
over-the-counter drugs such as Zicam Cold Remedy had no obligation to
report adverse events to the FDA. In 2006, Congress enacted legisla­
tion to require manufacturers of over-the-counter drugs to report any
“serious adverse event” to the FDA within 15 business days. See 21
U. S. C. §§379aa(b), (c).
6 “A study that is statistically significant has results that are unlikely
to be the result of random error . . . .” Federal Judicial Center, Refer­
ence Manual on Scientific Evidence 354 (2d ed. 2000). To test for
significance, a researcher develops a “null hypothesis”—e.g., the asser­
tion that there is no relationship between Zicam use and anosmia. See
id., at 122. The researcher then calculates the probability of obtaining
the observed data (or more extreme data) if the null hypothesis is true
(called the p-value). Ibid. Small p-values are evidence that the null
hypothesis is incorrect. See ibid. Finally, the researcher compares the
p-value to a preselected value called the significance level. Id., at 123.
If the p-value is below the preselected value, the difference is deemed
“significant.” Id., at 124.

