Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

consumers who had lost their sense of smell (a condition
called anosmia) after using Zicam Cold Remedy. Respon­
dents’ consolidated amended complaint alleges the follow­
ing facts, which the courts below properly assumed to be
true. See Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip
op., at 14).
In 1999, Dr. Alan Hirsch, neurological director of the
Smell & Taste Treatment and Research Foundation, Ltd.,
called Matrixx’s customer service line after discovering a
possible link between Zicam nasal gel and a loss of smell
“in a cluster of his patients.” App. 67a–68a. Dr. Hirsch
told a Matrixx employee that “previous studies had dem­
onstrated that intranasal application of zinc could be
problematic.” Id., at 68a. He also told the employee about
at least one of his patients who did not have a cold and
who developed anosmia after using Zicam.
In September 2002, Timothy Clarot, Matrixx’s vice
president for research and development, called Miriam
Linschoten, Ph.D., at the University of Colorado Health
Sciences Center after receiving a complaint from a per­
son Linschoten was treating who had lost her sense of
smell after using Zicam. Clarot informed Linschoten that
Matrixx had received similar complaints from other cus­
tomers. Linschoten drew Clarot’s attention to “previous
studies linking zinc sulfate to loss of smell.” Ibid. Clarot
gave her the impression that he had not heard of the
studies. She asked Clarot whether Matrixx had done any
studies of its own; he responded that it had not but that it
had hired a consultant to review the product. Soon there­
after, Linschoten sent Clarot abstracts of the studies she
had mentioned. Research from the 1930’s and 1980’s had
confirmed “[z]inc’s toxicity.” Id., at 69a. Clarot called
Linschoten to ask whether she would be willing to partici­
pate in animal studies that Matrixx was planning, but she
declined because her focus was human research.
By September 2003, one of Linschoten’s colleagues at

