2

MATRIXX INITIATIVES, INC. v. SIRACUSANO
Syllabus
ity requirement is satisfied when there is “ ‘a substantial likelihood
that the disclosure of the omitted fact would have been viewed by the
reasonable investor as having significantly altered the “total mix” of
information made available.’ ” Id., at 231–232. The Court declined to
adopt a bright-line rule for determining materiality in Basic, observ
ing that “[a]ny approach that designates a single fact or occurrence as
always determinative of an inherently fact-specific finding such as
materiality, must necessarily be overinclusive or underinclusive.”
Id., at 236. Here, Matrixx’s bright-line rule—that adverse event re
ports regarding a pharmaceutical company’s products are not mate
rial absent a sufficient number of such reports to establish a statisti
cally significant risk that the product is causing the events—would
“artificially exclud[e]” information that “would otherwise be consid
ered significant to [a reasonable investor’s] trading decision.” Ibid.
Matrixx’s premise that statistical significance is the only reliable in
dication of causation is flawed. Both medical experts and the Food
and Drug Administration rely on evidence other than statistically
significant data to establish an inference of causation. It thus stands
to reason that reasonable investors would act on such evidence. Be
cause adverse reports can take many forms, assessing their material
ity is a fact-specific inquiry, requiring consideration of their source,
content, and context. The question is whether a reasonable investor
would have viewed the nondisclosed information “ ‘as having signifi
cantly altered the “total mix” of information made available.’ ” Id., at
232. Something more than the mere existence of adverse event re
ports is needed to satisfy that standard, but that something more is
not limited to statistical significance and can come from the source,
content, and context of the reports. Pp. 9–16.
(2) Applying Basic’s “total mix” standard here, respondents ade
quately pleaded materiality. The complaint’s allegations suffice to
“raise a reasonable expectation that discovery will reveal evidence”
satisfying the materiality requirement, Bell Atlantic Corp. v.
Twombly, 550 U. S. 544, 556, and to “allo[w] the court to draw the
reasonable inference that the defendant is liable,” Ashcroft v. Iqbal,
556 U. S. ___, ___. Assuming the complaint’s allegations to be true,
Matrixx received reports from medical experts and researchers that
plausibly indicated a reliable causal link between Zicam and anos
mia. Consumers likely would have viewed Zicam’s risk as substan
tially outweighing its benefit. Viewing the complaint’s allegations as
a whole, the complaint alleges facts suggesting a significant risk to
the commercial viability of Matrixx’s leading product. It is substan
tially likely that a reasonable investor would have viewed this infor
mation “ ‘as having significantly altered the “total mix” of informa
tion made available.’ ”
Basic, supra, at 232.
Assuming the

