(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MATRIXX INITIATIVES, INC., ET AL. v. SIRACUSANO
ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–1156. Argued January 10, 2011—Decided March 22, 2011
Respondents filed this securities fraud class action, alleging that peti
tioners (hereinafter Matrixx) violated §10(b) of the Securities Ex
change Act of 1934 and Securities and Exchange Commission Rule
10b–5 by failing to disclose reports of a possible link between Ma
trixx’s leading product, Zicam Cold Remedy, and loss of smell (anos
mia), rendering statements made by Matrixx misleading. Matrixx
moved to dismiss the complaint, arguing that respondents had not
pleaded the element of a material misstatement or omission and the
element of scienter. The District Court granted the motion, but the
Ninth Circuit reversed. It held that the District Court erred in re
quiring an allegation of statistical significance to establish material
ity, concluding instead that the complaint adequately alleged infor
mation linking Zicam and anosmia that would have been significant
to a reasonable investor. It also held that Matrixx’s withholding of
information about reports of adverse effects and about pending law
suits by Zicam users gave rise to a strong inference of scienter.
Held: Respondents have stated a claim under §10(b) and Rule 10b–5.
Pp. 8–22.
(a) To prevail on their claim, respondents must prove, as relevant
here, a material misrepresentation or omission by Matrixx and sci
enter. See Stoneridge Investment Partners, LLC v. Scientific-Atlanta,
Inc., 552 U. S. 148, 157. Matrixx contends that they failed to plead
these required elements because they did not allege that the reports
Matrixx received reflected statistically significant evidence that Zi
cam caused anosmia. Pp. 8–9.
(b) Respondents have adequately pleaded materiality. Pp. 9–19.
(1) Under Basic Inc. v. Levinson, 485 U. S. 224, §10(b)’s material

