Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

note that, as these courts have recognized, “medical pro­
fessionals and researchers do not limit the data they
consider to the results of randomized clinical trials or to
statistically significant evidence.” Brief for Medical Re­
searchers as Amici Curiae 31.
The FDA similarly does not limit the evidence it consid­
ers for purposes of assessing causation and taking regula­
tory action to statistically significant data. In assessing
the safety risk posed by a product, the FDA considers
factors such as “strength of the association,” “temporal
relationship of product use and the event,” “consistency of
findings across available data sources,” “evidence of a
dose-response for the effect,” “biologic plausibility,” “seri­
ousness of the event relative to the disease being treated,”
“potential to mitigate the risk in the population,” “feasibil­
ity of further study using observational or controlled
clinical study designs,” and “degree of benefit the product
provides, including availability of other therapies.”8 FDA,
Guidance for Industry: Good Pharmacovigilance Practices and Pharmacoepidemiologic Assessment 18 (2005)
(capitalization omitted), http://www.fda.gov/downloads/
RegulatingInformation/Guidances/UCM126834.pdf (all In­
ternet materials as visited Mar. 17, 2011, and available in
Clerk of Court’s case file); see also Brief for United States
as Amicus Curiae 19–20 (same); FDA, The Clinical Impact of Adverse Event Reporting 6 (1996) (similar),
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/safety/MedWatch/UCM1685
05.pdf. It “does not apply any single metric for determin­
ing when additional inquiry or action is necessary, and it
certainly does not insist upon ‘statistical significance.’ ”
Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 19.
Not only does the FDA rely on a wide range of evidence
of causation, it sometimes acts on the basis of evidence
that suggests, but does not prove, causation. For example,
——————
8 See

also n. 7, supra.

