Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

reports, as Matrixx suggests. Assuming the complaint’s
allegations to be true, as we must, Matrixx received in­
formation that plausibly indicated a reliable causal link
between Zicam and anosmia. That information included
reports from three medical professionals and researchers
about more than 10 patients who had lost their sense of
smell after using Zicam. Clarot told Linschoten that
Matrixx had received additional reports of anosmia. (In
addition, during the class period, nine plaintiffs com­
menced four product liability lawsuits against Matrixx
alleging a causal link between Zicam use and anosmia.)11
Further, Matrixx knew that Linschoten and Dr. Jafek had
presented their findings about a causal link between
Zicam and anosmia to a national medical conference de­
voted to treatment of diseases of the nose.12 Their presen­
tation described a patient who experienced severe burning
in his nose, followed immediately by a loss of smell, after
using Zicam—suggesting a temporal relationship between
Zicam use and anosmia.
Critically, both Dr. Hirsch and Linschoten had also
drawn Matrixx’s attention to previous studies that had
demonstrated a biological causal link between intranasal
application of zinc and anosmia.13 Before his conversation
——————
11 It

is unclear whether these plaintiffs were the same individuals
whose symptoms were reported by the medical professionals.
12 Matrixx contends that Dr. Jafek and Linschoten’s study was not
reliable because they did not sufficiently rule out the common cold as a
cause for their patients’ anosmia. We note that the complaint alleges
that, in one instance, a consumer who did not have a cold lost his sense
of smell after using Zicam. More importantly, to survive a motion to
dismiss, respondents need only allege “enough facts to state a claim to
relief that is plausible on its face.” Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550
U. S. 544, 570 (2007). For all the reasons we state in the opinion,
respondents’ allegations plausibly suggest that Dr. Jafek and Linscho­
ten’s conclusions were based on reliable evidence of a causal link
between Zicam and anosmia.
13 Matrixx contends that these studies are not reliable evidence of

