14

MATRIXX INITIATIVES, INC. v. SIRACUSANO
Opinion of the Court

the FDA requires manufacturers of over-the-counter drugs
to revise their labeling “to include a warning as soon as
there is reasonable evidence of an association of a serious
hazard with a drug; a causal relationship need not have
been proved.” 21 CFR §201.80(e). More generally, the
FDA may make regulatory decisions against drugs based
on postmarketing evidence that gives rise to only a suspi­
cion of causation. See FDA, The Clinical Impact of Ad­
verse Event Reporting, supra, at 7 (“[A]chieving certain
proof of causality through postmarketing surveillance is
unusual. Attaining a prominent degree of suspicion is
much more likely, and may be considered a sufficient basis
for regulatory decisions” (footnote omitted)).9
This case proves the point. In 2009, the FDA issued a
warning letter to Matrixx stating that “[a] significant and
growing body of evidence substantiates that the Zicam
Cold Remedy intranasal products may pose a serious risk
to consumers who use them.” App. 270a. The letter cited
as evidence 130 reports of anosmia the FDA had received,
the fact that the FDA had received few reports of anosmia
associated with other intranasal cold remedies, and “evi­
dence in the published scientific literature that various
salts of zinc can damage olfactory function in animals and
——————
9 See

also GAO, M. Crosse et al., Drug Safety: Improvement Needed
in FDA’s Postmarket Decision-making and Oversight Process 7 (GAO–
06–402, 2006) (“If FDA has information that a drug on the market may
pose a significant health risk to consumers, it weighs the effect of the
adverse events against the benefit of the drug to determine what
actions, if any, are warranted. This decision-making process is complex
and encompasses many factors, such as the medical importance and
utility of the drug, the drug’s extent of usage, the severity of the
disease being treated, the drug’s efficacy in treating this disease,
and the availability of other drugs to treat the same disorder”),
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d06402.pdf; Federal Judicial Center,
supra n. 6, at 33 (“[R]isk assessors may pay heed to any evidence that
points to a need for caution, rather than assess the likelihood that a
causal relationship in a specific case is more likely than not”).

