Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

Opinion of the Court

ences. “Rather,” it argues, “the most obvious inference is
that petitioners did not disclose the [reports] simply be­
cause petitioners believed they were far too few . . . to
indicate anything meaningful about adverse reactions to
use of Zicam.” Brief for Petitioners 49. Matrixx’s pro­
posed bright-line rule requiring an allegation of statistical
significance to establish a strong inference of scienter is
just as flawed as its approach to materiality.
The inference that Matrixx acted recklessly (or inten­
tionally, for that matter) is at least as compelling, if not
more compelling, than the inference that it simply thought
the reports did not indicate anything meaningful about
adverse reactions. According to the complaint, Matrixx
was sufficiently concerned about the information it re­
ceived that it informed Linschoten that it had hired a
consultant to review the product, asked Linschoten to
participate in animal studies, and convened a panel of
physicians and scientists in response to Dr. Jafek’s pres­
entation. It successfully prevented Dr. Jafek from using
Zicam’s name in his presentation on the ground that he
needed Matrixx’s permission to do so. Most significantly,
Matrixx issued a press release that suggested that studies
had confirmed that Zicam does not cause anosmia when,
in fact, it had not conducted any studies relating to anos­
mia and the scientific evidence at that time, according to
the panel of scientists, was insufficient to determine
whether Zicam did or did not cause anosmia.15
——————
15 One of Matrixx’s amici argues that “the most cogent inference re­
garding Matrixx’s state of mind is that it delayed releasing information
regarding anosmia complaints in order to provide itself an opportunity
to carefully review all evidence regarding any link between Zicam and
anosmia.” Brief for Washington Legal Foundation as Amicus Curiae
26. We do not doubt that this may be the most cogent inference in some
cases. Here, however, the misleading nature of Matrixx’s press release
is sufficient to render the inference of scienter at least as compelling as
the inference suggested by amicus.

