Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

expressed its expectation that revenues would “ ‘be up in
excess of 50% and that earnings, per share for the full year
[would] be in the 25 to 30 cent range.’ ” Id., at 74a. In
January 2004, Matrixx raised its revenue guidance, pre­
dicting an increase in revenues of 80 percent and earnings
per share in the 33-to-38-cent range.
In its Form 10–Q filed with the SEC in November 2003,
Zicam warned of the potential “ ‘material adverse effect’ ”
that could result from product liability claims, “ ‘whether
or not proven to be valid.’ ” Id., at 75a–76a. It stated that
product liability actions could materially affect Matrixx’s
“ ‘product branding and goodwill,’ ” leading to reduced
customer acceptance.3 Id., at 76a. It did not disclose,
however, that two plaintiffs had already sued Matrixx for
allegedly causing them to lose their sense of smell.
On January 30, 2004, Dow Jones Newswires reported
that the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) was “ ‘look­
ing into complaints that an over-the-counter common-cold
medicine manufactured by a unit of Matrixx Initiatives,
Inc. (MTXX) may be causing some users to lose their sense
of smell’ ” in light of at least three product liability law­
suits. Id., at 79a–80a. Matrixx’s stock fell from $13.55 to
$11.97 per share after the report. In response, on Febru­
ary 2, Matrixx issued a press release that stated:
“All Zicam products are manufactured and mar­
keted according to FDA guidelines for homeopathic
medicine. Our primary concern is the health and
safety of our customers and the distribution of factual information about our products. Matrixx believes
statements alleging that intranasal Zicam products
caused anosmia (loss of smell) are completely un­
——————
3 Respondents

also allege that Matrixx falsely reported its financial
results in the Form 10–Q by failing to reserve for or disclose potential
liability, in violation of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. The
Court of Appeals did not rely on these allegations.

