18

MATRIXX INITIATIVES, INC. v. SIRACUSANO
Opinion of the Court

with Linschoten, Clarot, Matrixx’s vice president of re­
search and development, was seemingly unaware of these
studies, and the complaint suggests that, as of the class
period, Matrixx had not conducted any research of its own
relating to anosmia. See, e.g., App. 84a (referencing a
press report, issued after the end of the class period, not­
ing that Matrixx said it would begin conducting “ ‘animal
and human studies to further characterize these post­
marketing complaints’ ”). Accordingly, it can reasonably
be inferred from the complaint that Matrixx had no basis
for rejecting Dr. Jafek’s findings out of hand.
We believe that these allegations suffice to “raise a
reasonable expectation that discovery will reveal evidence”
satisfying the materiality requirement, Bell Atlantic Corp.
v. Twombly, 550 U. S. 544, 556 (2007), and to “allo[w] the
court to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant
is liable for the misconduct alleged,” Iqbal, 556 U. S., at
___ (slip op., at 14). The information provided to Matrixx
by medical experts revealed a plausible causal relation­
ship between Zicam Cold Remedy and anosmia. Consum­
ers likely would have viewed the risk associated with
Zicam (possible loss of smell) as substantially outweighing
the benefit of using the product (alleviating cold symp­
toms), particularly in light of the existence of many alter­
native products on the market. Importantly, Zicam Cold
Remedy allegedly accounted for 70 percent of Matrixx’s
sales. Viewing the allegations of the complaint as a whole,
——————
causation because the studies used zinc sulfate, whereas the active
ingredient in Matrixx is zinc gluconate. Respondents’ complaint,
however, alleges that the studies confirmed the toxicity of “zinc.” App.
68a. Matrixx further contends that studies relating to fish cannot
reliably prove causation with respect to humans. The complaint
references several studies, however, only one of which involved fish. In
any event, the existence of the studies suggests a plausible biological
link between zinc and anosmia, which, in combination with the other
allegations, is sufficient to survive a motion to dismiss.

