Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

Opinion of the Court

McCoy further contends that our reliance here on an
agency interpretation presented outside the four corners of
the Official Staff Commentary will require future liti­
gants, as well as the Board, to expend time and resources
“to comb through . . . correspondence, publications, and
the agency’s website to determine the agency’s position.”
Brief for Respondent 37–38. We are not convinced.
McCoy may be correct that the Board established the
Official Staff Commentary so as to centralize its opinion­
making process and avoid “overburdening the industry
with excessive detail and multiple research sources.” 46
Fed. Reg. 50288. But his suggestion that, if we accord
deference to an amicus brief, all other “unofficial” sources
will be fair game is of no moment. Today we decide only
that the amicus brief submitted by the Board is entitled to
deference in light of “the circumstances of this case.”
Auer, 519 U. S., at 462.
Accordingly, we conclude that, at the time of the trans­
actions at issue in this case, Regulation Z did not require
Chase to provide McCoy with a change-in-terms notice
before it implemented the Agreement term allowing it to
raise his interest rate following delinquency or default.
*
*
*
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the United
States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit is reversed,
and the case is remanded for further proceedings consis­
tent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.
——————
increase may occur under the creditor’s contract reservation right to
increase the periodic rate.” It would seem that the narrower latitude
Chase had under the Agreement to set the precise new rate within a
specified range after McCoy defaulted is not the kind of “discretion” the
last example of Comment 9(c)–1 contemplates. In short, analogizing to
the Comment’s examples suggests that Chase’s action in setting a new
rate was most likely a “specific change” that the Agreement itself
contemplated, and subsequent disclosure was not clearly required.

