2

CHASE BANK USA, N. A. v. MCCOY
Syllabus
Z requires issuers to provide notice of an interest-rate increase prior
to its effective date.

Held: At the time of the transactions at issue, Regulation Z did not re
quire Chase to provide McCoy with a change-in-terms notice before
implementing the agreement term allowing it to raise his interest
rate, up to a pre-set maximum, following delinquency or default.
Pp. 7–19.
(a) This case requires the Court to determine the meaning of a
regulation promulgated by the Board under its statutory authority.
However, Regulation Z’s text is unclear with respect to the crucial in
terpretive question at issue: whether a change to an interest rate,
pursuant to previously-disclosed contractual provision, constitutes a
change to a “term required to be disclosed under §226.6” requiring a
subsequent disclosure under §226.9(c)(1). Because of this ambiguity,
the Court must look to the Board’s own interpretation of the regula
tion for guidance in deciding this case. Pp. 7–12.
(b) The Board has made clear in its amicus brief to this Court that,
in its view, Chase was not required to give McCoy notice of the inter
est rate increase under the applicable version of Regulation Z. This
Court defers to an agency’s interpretation of its own regulation, ad
vanced in a legal brief, unless that interpretation is “plainly errone
ous or inconsistent with the regulation.” Auer v. Robbins, 519 U. S.
452, 461 (internal quotation marks omitted). In Auer, the Court de
ferred to the Secretary of Labor’s interpretation of his own regula
tion, presented in an amicus brief submitted by the agency at the
Court’s invitation. The Court held that the fact that the interpreta
tion came in a legal brief did not, “in the circumstances of th[at] case,
make it unworthy of deference.” Id., at 462. The interpretation was
“in no sense a post hoc rationalization advanced by an agency seeking
to defend past agency action against attack,” ibid. (internal quotation
marks and alteration omitted), and there was “no reason to suspect
that the interpretation [did] not reflect the agency’s fair and consid
ered judgment on the matter in question,” ibid. The brief submitted
by the Board here, at the Court’s invitation, is no different. As in
Auer, there is no reason to believe that the Board’s interpretation is a
“post hoc rationalization” taken as a litigation position, for the Board
is not a party to this case. And its interpretation is neither “plainly
erroneous” nor “inconsistent with” the indeterminate text of Regula
tion Z. Thus, there is no reason to suspect that the Board’s position
in its amicus brief reflects anything other than its fair and considered
judgment as to what the regulation required at the time this dispute
arose. That Congress and the Board may currently hold a different
view does not mean that deference is not warranted to the Board’s
understanding of what the applicable version of Regulation Z re

