(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CHASE BANK USA, N. A. v. MCCOY, INDIVIDUALLY AND
ON BEHALF OF ALL OTHERS SIMILARLY SITUATED
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–329.

Argued December 8, 2010—Decided January 24, 2011

Regulation Z—promulgated by the Federal Reserve Board (Board) pur
suant to its authority under the Truth in Lending Act—requires
credit card issuers to disclose certain information to cardholders. The
version of the regulation in effect at the time this dispute arose
obliges issuers to provide to cardholders an “[i]nitial disclosure
statement,” 12 CFR §226.6, specifying “each periodic rate that may
be used to compute the finance charge,” §226.6(a)(2). It also imposes
“[s]ubsequent disclosure requirements,” §226.9, including notice to
cardholders “[w]henever any term required to be disclosed under
§226.6 is changed,” §226.9(c)(1). When “a periodic rate or other fi
nance charge is increased because of the consumer’s delinquency or
default,” notice must be given “before the effective date of the
change.” Ibid.
At the time respondent McCoy filed suit, he was the holder of a
credit card issued by petitioner Chase Bank. The cardholder agree
ment provided, in relevant part, that McCoy was eligible for “Pre
ferred rates” as long as he met certain conditions. If any of those
conditions were not met, Chase reserved the right to raise the rate,
up to a pre-set maximum, and to apply the change to both existing
and new balances. McCoy alleges that Chase increased his interest
rate due to his delinquency or default and applied that increase ret
roactively, and that this action violated Regulation Z because Chase
did not notify him of the increase until after it had taken effect. The
District Court dismissed his complaint, holding that because the in
crease did not constitute a “change in terms” under §226.9(c), Chase
was not required to notify him of the increase before implementing it.
The Ninth Circuit reversed in relevant part, holding that Regulation

