18

CHASE BANK USA, N. A. v. MCCOY
Opinion of the Court

or default might trigger an increased interest rate and
states the maximum level to which the rate could be in­
creased, the “specific change” that ensues upon default has
been set forth initially and no additional notice is required
before implementation. McCoy argues to the contrary:
Under Comment 9(c)–1, any new rate imposed after delin­
quency or default must be disclosed prior to the effective
date, if the particular rate (rather than the maximum
rate) was not specifically mentioned in the agreement. On
the whole, then, the Official Staff Commentary’s explana­
tion of Regulation Z does not resolve the uncertainty in the
regulatory text, and offers us no reason to disregard
the interpretation advanced in the Board’s amicus brief.10
——————
10 In concluding otherwise, the Ninth Circuit focused on the examples
Comment 9(c)–1 provides of changes that, if set forth initially, require
no further disclosure when put into effect:
“No notice of a change in terms need be given if the specific change is
set forth initially, such as: Rate increases under a properly disclosed
variable-rate plan, a rate increase that occurs when an employee has
been under a preferential rate agreement and terminates employment,
or an increase that occurs when the consumer has been under an
agreement to maintain a certain balance in a savings account in order
to keep a particular rate and the account balance falls below the
specified minimum.”
The Ninth Circuit concluded that, in contrast to each of these three
examples, “the increase here occurs at Chase’s discretion.” 559 F. 3d
963, 966 (2009). That is, once the triggering event—McCoy’s default—
occurred, Chase had the latitude to increase the interest rate as it saw
fit (up to the limit specified in the Pricing Schedule).
We are not persuaded by the Ninth Circuit’s reasoning. Certainly,
under a “variable-rate” plan the interest rate fluctuates according to an
external variable easily discernable by the cardholder (like the Federal
Prime rate), and the issuer has no discretion. See ibid. But the Com­
ment’s second and third examples do not appear to be significantly
different from this case: The agreement contains a preset rate, but it
also provides that, on the occurrence of a predefined event (terminating
employment or a low account balance), the rate will increase.
Moreover, Comment 9(c)–1 further states that notice is needed “if the
contract allows the creditor to increase the rate at its discretion but
does not include specific terms for an increase”—for example, “when an

