14

CHASE BANK USA, N. A. v. MCCOY
Opinion of the Court

461–462. Responding to the petitioners’ objection that the
agency’s interpretation came in a legal brief, we held that
this fact did not, “in the circumstances of this case, make
it unworthy of deference.” Id., at 462. We observed that
“[t]he Secretary’s position is in no sense a ‘post hoc ration­
alizatio[n]’ advanced by an agency seeking to defend past
agency action against attack.” Ibid. (quoting Bowen v.
Georgetown Univ. Hospital, 488 U. S. 204, 212 (1988)). We
added: “There is simply no reason to suspect that the
interpretation does not reflect the agency’s fair and con­
sidered judgment on the matter in question.” Auer, 519
U. S., at 462.
The brief submitted by the Board in the present case, at
our invitation, is no different. As in Auer, there is no
reason to believe that the interpretation advanced by the
Board is a “post hoc rationalization” taken as a litigation
position. The Board is not a party to this case. And as is
evident from our discussion of Regulation Z itself, see Part
II–A, supra, the Board’s interpretation is neither “plainly
erroneous” nor “inconsistent with” the indeterminate text
of the regulation. In short, there is no reason to suspect
that the position the Board takes in its amicus brief re­
flects anything other than the agency’s fair and considered
judgment as to what the regulation required at the time
this dispute arose.
McCoy may well be correct in asserting that it is better
policy to oblige credit-card issuers to give advance notice
of a rate increase; after all, both Congress and the Board
have recently indicated that such a requirement is war­
ranted. See Credit CARD Act, §101(a)(1), 123 Stat. 1735–
1736; 12 CFR §226.9(g) (2009). That Congress and the
Board may currently hold such views does not mean,
however, that deference is not warranted to the Board’s
different understanding of what the pre-2009 version of
Regulation Z required. To the contrary, the interpretation
the Board advances in its amicus brief is entirely consis­

