10

CHASE BANK USA, N. A. v. MCCOY
Opinion of the Court

McCoy argues that the plain text of the regulation indi­
cates that a change in the periodic rate due to such default
is a “change in terms” requiring notice under §226.9(c)(1).
We recognize that McCoy’s argument has some force;
read in isolation, the language quoted above certainly
suggests that credit card issuers must provide notice of an
interest-rate increase imposed pursuant to cardholder
delinquency or default. But McCoy’s analysis begs the key
question: whether the increase actually changed a “term”
of the Agreement that was “required to be disclosed under
§226.6.” If not, §226.9(c)’s subsequent notice requirement
with respect to a “change in terms” does not apply. Chase
argues precisely this: The increase did not change a term
in the Agreement, but merely implemented one that had
been initially disclosed, as required. This interpretation,
though not commanded by the text of the regulation, is
reasonable. Section 226.6(a)(2) requires initial disclosure
of “each periodic rate that may be used to compute the
finance charge.” The Agreement itself discloses both the
initial rate (Preferred rate) and the maximum rate to be
imposed in the event of default (Non-Preferred rate). See
Brief for Respondent 8, n. 2; Brief for Petitioner 13–14.4
Accordingly, it is plausible to understand the Agreement
to initially disclose “each periodic rate” to be applied to the
account, and Chase arguably did not “change” those rates
as a result of McCoy’s default. Instead, Chase merely
implemented the previously disclosed term specifying the
Non-Preferred rate.5
——————
4 The

Pricing Schedule referred to in the Agreement is not contained
in the case record, nor are its contents apparent from the parties’ briefs,
but neither side disputes that it specified a maximum Non-Preferred
rate applicable to the Agreement.
5 We are not persuaded by McCoy’s argument that, although Chase
did not change a “contract term” when it raised his interest rate pursu­
ant to the terms of the Agreement, it changed a “credit term,” thereby
triggering §226.9(c)’s notice requirement. The relevant text of Regula­

