Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

deciding this case.7
In its brief to this Court, the Board explains that the
Ninth Circuit “erred in concluding that, at the time of
the transactions at issue in this case, Regulation Z required
credit card issuers to provide a change-in-terms notice be­
fore implementing a contractual default-rate provision.”
See Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 11; see also
ibid. (stating that when a term of an agreement author­
ized the credit provider “to increase a consumer’s interest
rate if the consumer failed to make timely payments . . .
any resulting rate increase did not represent a ‘change in
terms,’ but rather the implementation of terms already set
forth in the initial disclosure statement”); id., at 15–16
(stating that “[w]hen a cardholder agreement identifies a
contingency that triggers a rate increase, and the maxi­
mum possible rate that the issuer may charge if that
contingency occurs,” then “no change-in-terms notice is
required” under Regulation Z).8 Under the principles set
forth in Auer, we give deference to this interpretation.
In Auer we deferred to the Secretary of Labor’s interpre­
tation of his own regulation, presented in an amicus brief
submitted by the agency at our invitation. 519 U. S., at
——————
7 We note that, in reaching its decision, the Ninth Circuit did not
have the benefit of briefing from the Board. The Ninth Circuit appar­
ently did not solicit the views of the Board in the proceedings below, see
Brief for Petitioner 16, and the First Circuit did not solicit the Board’s
views in Shaner v. Chase Bank USA, N. A., 587 F. 3d 488 (2009), until
after the Ninth Circuit issued its opinion in this case, see Order in No.
09–1157 (CA1, Aug. 4, 2009).
8 This is consistent with the view the Board advanced in its amicus
brief to the First Circuit, in which the Board noted that it “has in­
terpreted the applicable provisions of Regulation Z not to require a
pre-effective date change-in-terms notice for an increase in annual per­
centage rate when the contingency that will trigger a rate increase and
the specific consequences for the consumer’s rate are set forth in the
initial card member agreement.” App. to Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae 2a.

