Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

This reading still leaves the question why §226.9(c)(1)
refers to interest-rate increases resulting from delin­
quency or default if such increases do not constitute a
“change in terms.” One reasonable explanation Chase
offers is that §226.9(c)(1) refers to interest-rate increases
that were not specifically outlined in the agreement’s
initial terms (unlike those in the present Agreement). For
example, credit card agreements routinely include a “res­
ervation of rights” provision giving the issuer discretion to
change the terms of the contract, often as a means of
responding to events that raise doubts about the card­
holder’s creditworthiness. An issuer may exercise this
general contract-modification authority and raise the
interest rate applicable to the account to address any
heightened risk. See Brief for Petitioner 6. In such a case,
§226.9(c)(1) is best read to require that notice must be
given prior to the effective date of the increase, because
the unilateral increase instituted by the issuer actually
changed a term—the interest rate—in a manner not spe­
cifically contemplated by the agreement.6 See Comment
9(c)–1 (providing that notice is required if the agreement
“does not include specific terms for an increase (for exam­
——————
tion Z does not refer to, let alone distinguish between, “contract terms”
and “credit terms,” and McCoy’s repeated citations to TILA’s broad
policy statement do not convince us that such a distinction is war­
ranted. See 15 U. S. C. §1601(a) (“It is the purpose of this subchapter
to assure a meaningful disclosure of credit terms so that the consumer
will be able to compare more readily the various credit terms available
to him and avoid the uninformed use of credit”).
6 The Government offers an alternative example. Assume that the
agreement is similar to the one at issue here, with a specified maxi­
mum level to which the interest rate can be increased if the cardholder
defaults. If default occurs but the issuer raises the rate above the
contractual maximum, notice must be given prior to the effective date
because the issuer actually changed the term of the contract initially
specifying the maximum rate possible. See Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae 14–15.

