16

CHASE BANK USA, N. A. v. MCCOY
Opinion of the Court

quotation marks omitted). Accordingly, under our prece­
dent deference to the Board’s interpretation of its own
regulation, as presented in the agency’s amicus brief, is
wholly appropriate.
C
McCoy further argues that deference to a legal brief is
inappropriate because the interpretation of Regulation Z
in the Official Staff Commentary commands a different
result. To be sure, the Official Staff Commentary promul­
gated by the Board as an interpretation of Regulation Z
may warrant deference as a general matter. See Anderson
Bros. Ford v. Valencia, 452 U. S. 205, 219 (1981) (holding
that “the Board’s interpretation of its own regulation”
should generally “be accepted by the courts”); Milhollin,
444 U. S., at 565 (“Unless demonstrably irrational, Fed­
eral Reserve Board staff opinions construing [TILA] or
Regulation [Z] should be dispositive”). We find, however,
that the Commentary at issue here largely replicates the
ambiguity present in the regulatory text, and therefore it
offers us nothing to which we can defer with respect to the
precise interpretive question before us.9 Cf. Smith v. City
——————
9 We are not persuaded by McCoy’s argument that the Board’s own
regulations make the Official Staff Commentary “the exclusive source of
authorized staff opinion.” Brief for Respondent 36 (emphasis added).
In the regulations McCoy cites the Board has indicated only that the
central purpose of the Commentary is to present agency interpretations
that, if relied upon, provide the basis for invoking the good-faith de­
fense to liability under TILA. See 15 U. S. C. §1640(f) (precluding
liability for “any act done or omitted in good faith in conformity . . .
with any interpretation . . . by an official or employee . . . duly author­
ized by the Board to issue such interpretations . . . under such proce­
dures as the Board may prescribe”); 12 CFR pt. 226, App. C (2008)
(“[O]fficial staff interpretations of this regulation . . . provide the
protection afforded under [§1640(f)]”); id., Supp. I, Introduction ¶1, p.
451 (same); 46 Fed. Reg. 50288 (1981) (same). McCoy cites no authority
indicating that, in promulgating the Commentary and establishing
certain statutory safe harbors, the Board intended to limit its ability to

