Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

of Jackson, 544 U. S. 228, 248 (2005) (O’Connor, J., con­
curring in judgment) (noting that deference is not war­
ranted when “there is no reasoned agency reading of the
text to which we might defer”).
The Ninth Circuit relied primarily on Comment 9(c)(1)–
3, which states in relevant part that “a notice of change in
terms is required, but it may be mailed or delivered as late
as the effective date of the change . . . [i]f there is an
increased periodic rate or any other finance charge attri­
butable to the consumer’s delinquency or default.” This
exposition of the regulation does not add any clarity to the
regulatory text, which expresses the same requirement.
See §226.9(c)(1) (2008) (“[I]f a periodic rate or other fi­
nance charge is increased because of the consumer’s delin­
quency or default . . . notice shall be given . . . before the
effective date of the change”). And like §226.9(c), Com­
ment 9(c) is entitled “Change in terms.” Accordingly,
Chase’s plausible interpretation of §226.9(c)(1) is equally
applicable to Comment 9(c)(1)–3: On Chase’s view, be­
cause the interest-rate increase at issue in this case did
not constitute a “change in terms,” the disclosure require­
ments in the regulation and Commentary simply do not
come into play. See supra, at 10–11.
Comment 9(c)–1 is also ambiguous, though the most
plausible reading supports Chase’s position more than it
does McCoy’s. The Comment begins: “No notice of a
change in terms need be given if the specific change is set
forth initially” in the agreement. We do not find that the
Comment’s addition of the modifier “specific” to the word
“change” enables us to determine, any more than we could
in light of the text of the regulation, see supra, at 12,
whether the interest-rate increase at issue in this case
was a “change in terms” requiring notice. According to
Chase, as long as the agreement explains that delinquency
—————— 

issue authoritative interpretations for other purposes. 


