Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

the State emphasizes that the SLD report of Bullcoming’s
BAC was “unsworn.” Brief for Respondent 13; post, at 2
(“only sworn statement” here was that of Razatos, “who
was present and [did] testif[y]”). As the New Mexico
Supreme Court recognized, “ ‘the absence of [an] oath [i]s
not dispositive’ in determining if a statement is testimo­
nial.” 226 P. 3d, at 8 (quoting Crawford, 541 U. S., at 52).
Indeed, in Crawford, this Court rejected as untenable any
construction of the Confrontation Clause that would ren­
der inadmissible only sworn ex parte affidavits, while
leaving admission of formal, but unsworn statements
“perfectly OK.” Id., at 52–53, n. 3. Reading the Clause in
this “implausible” manner, ibid., the Court noted, would
make the right to confrontation easily erasable. See
Davis, 547 U. S., at 830–831, n. 5; id., at 838 (THOMAS, J.,
concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part).
In all material respects, the laboratory report in this
case resembles those in Melendez-Diaz. Here, as in
Melendez-Diaz, a law-enforcement officer provided seized
evidence to a state laboratory required by law to assist in
police investigations, N. M. Stat. Ann. §29–3–4 (2004).
Like the analysts in Melendez-Diaz, analyst Caylor tested
the evidence and prepared a certificate concerning the
result of his analysis. App. 62. Like the Melendez-Diaz
certificates, Caylor’s certificate is “formalized” in a signed
document, Davis, 547 U. S., at 837, n. 2 (opinion of
THOMAS, J.), headed a “report,” App. 62. Noteworthy as
well, the SLD report form contains a legend referring to
municipal and magistrate courts’ rules that provide for the
admission of certified blood-alcohol analyses.
In sum, the formalities attending the “report of blood
alcohol analysis” are more than adequate to qualify Cay­
lor’s assertions as testimonial. The absence of notariza­
tion does not remove his certification from Confrontation
Clause governance. The New Mexico Supreme Court,
guided by Melendez-Diaz, correctly recognized that Cay­

