12

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Opinion of the Court

depended on “live, in-court testimony [by] a qualified ana­
lyst,” 226 P. 3d, at 10, the New Mexico Supreme Court
believed that Razatos could substitute for Caylor because
Razatos “qualified as an expert witness with respect to the
gas chromatograph machine and the SLD’s labora­
tory procedures,” id., at 9. But surrogate testimony of the
kind Razatos was equipped to give could not convey what
Caylor knew or observed about the events his certification
concerned, i.e., the particular test and testing process he
employed.7 Nor could such surrogate testimony expose
any lapses or lies on the certifying analyst’s part.8 Signifi­
cant here, Razatos had no knowledge of the reason why
Caylor had been placed on unpaid leave. With Caylor on
the stand, Bullcoming’s counsel could have asked ques­
tions designed to reveal whether incompetence, evasive­
ness, or dishonesty accounted for Caylor’s removal from
his work station. Notable in this regard, the State never
asserted that Caylor was “unavailable”; the prosecution
conveyed only that Caylor was on uncompensated leave.
Nor did the State assert that Razatos had any “independ­
ent opinion” concerning Bullcoming’s BAC. See Brief for
Respondent 58, n. 15. In this light, Caylor’s live testimony
could hardly be typed “a hollow formality,” post, at 4.
More fundamentally, as this Court stressed in Craw
ford, “[t]he text of the Sixth Amendment does not sug­
——————
7 We do not question that analyst Caylor, in common with other ana­
lysts employed by SLD, likely would not recall a particular test, given
the number of tests each analyst conducts and the standard procedure
followed in testing. Even so, Caylor’s testimony under oath would have
enabled Bullcoming’s counsel to raise before a jury questions concern­
ing Caylor’s proficiency, the care he took in performing his work, and
his veracity. In particular, Bullcoming’s counsel likely would have
inquired on cross-examination why Caylor had been placed on unpaid
leave.
8 At Bullcoming’s trial, Razatos acknowledged that “you don’t know
unless you actually observe the analysis that someone else conducts,
whether they followed th[e] protocol in every instance.” App. 59.

