4

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Opinion of the Court

affect the validity of the analysis.” Id., at 65. Finally, in a
block headed “certificate of reviewer,” the SLD examiner
who reviewed Caylor’s analysis certified that Caylor was
qualified to conduct the BAC test, and that the “estab­
lished procedure” for handling and analyzing Bullcoming’s
sample “ha[d] been followed.” Id., at 62 (capitalization
omitted).
SLD analysts use gas chromatograph machines to de­
termine BAC levels. Operation of the machines requires
specialized knowledge and training. Several steps are
involved in the gas chromatograph process, and human
error can occur at each step.1
——————
1 Gas

chromatography is a widely used scientific method of quan­
titatively analyzing the constituents of a mixture. See generally H.
McNair & J. Miller, Basic Gas Chromatography (2d ed. 2009) (hereinaf­
ter McNair). Under SLD’s standard testing protocol, the analyst ex­
tracts two blood samples and inserts them into vials containing an
“internal standard”—a chemical additive. App. 53. See McNair 141–
142. The analyst then “cap[s] the [two] sample[s],” “crimp[s] them with
an aluminum top,” and places the vials into the gas chromatograph
machine. App. 53–54. Within a few hours, this device produces a
printed graph—a chromatogram—along with calculations representing
a software-generated interpretation of the data. See Brief for State of
New Mexico Dept. of Health, SLD as Amicus Curiae 16–17.
Although the State presented testimony that obtaining an accurate
BAC measurement merely entails “look[ing] at the [gas chromatograph]
machine and record[ing] the results,” App. 54, authoritative sources re­
veal that the matter is not so simple or certain. “In order to perform
quantitative analyses satisfactorily and . . . support the results under
rigorous examination in court, the analyst must be aware of, and
adhere to, good analytical practices and understand what is being done
and why.” Stafford, Chromatography, in Principles of Forensic Toxicol­
ogy 92, 114 (B. Levine 2d ed. 2006). See also McNair 137 (“Errors that
occur in any step can invalidate the best chromatographic analysis, so
attention must be paid to all steps.”); D. Bartell, M. McMurray, &
A. ImObersteg, Attacking and Defending Drunk Driving Tests §16:80
(2d revision 2010) (stating that 93% of errors in laboratory tests for
BAC levels are human errors that occur either before or after machines
analyze samples). Even after the machine has produced its printed
result, a review of the chromatogram may indicate that the test was not

