Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

gest any open-ended exceptions from the confrontation re­
quirement to be developed by the courts.” 541 U. S., at 54.
Nor is it “the role of courts to extrapolate from the words
of the [Confrontation Clause] to the values behind it, and
then to enforce its guarantees only to the extent they serve
(in the courts’ views) those underlying values.” Giles v.
California, 554 U. S. 353, 375 (2008). Accordingly, the
Clause does not tolerate dispensing with confrontation
simply because the court believes that questioning one
witness about another’s testimonial statements provides a
fair enough opportunity for cross-examination.
A recent decision involving another Sixth Amendment
right—the right to counsel—is instructive. In United
States v. Gonzalez-Lopez, 548 U. S. 140 (2006), the Gov­
ernment argued that illegitimately denying a defendant
his counsel of choice did not violate the Sixth Amendment where “substitute counsel’s performance” did not
demonstrably prejudice the defendant. Id., at 144–145.
This Court rejected the Government’s argument. “[T]rue
enough,” the Court explained, “the purpose of the rights
set forth in [the Sixth] Amendment is to ensure a fair
trial; but it does not follow that the rights can be disre­
garded so long as the trial is, on the whole, fair.” Id., at
145. If a “particular guarantee” of the Sixth Amendment
is violated, no substitute procedure can cure the violation,
and “[n]o additional showing of prejudice is required to
make the violation ‘complete.’ ” Id., at 146. If repre­
sentation by substitute counsel does not satisfy the Sixth
Amendment, neither does the opportunity to confront a
substitute witness.
In short, when the State elected to introduce Caylor’s
certification, Caylor became a witness Bullcoming had the
right to confront. Our precedent cannot sensibly be read
any other way. See Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S., at ___ (slip
op., at 6) (KENNEDY, J., dissenting) (Court’s holding means
“the . . . analyst who must testify is the person who signed

