10

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

op., at 2–3, 22–23). If this Court persists in applying
wooden formalism in order to bar reliable testimony of
fered by the prosecution—testimony thought proper for
many decades in state and federal courts committed to
devising fair trial processes—then the States might find it
necessary and appropriate to enact statutes to accommo
date this new, intrusive federal regime. If they do, those
rules could remain on State statute books for decades,
even if subsequent decisions of this Court were to better
implement the objectives of Crawford. This underscores
the disruptive, long-term structural consequences of deci
sions like the one the Court announces today.
States also may decide it is proper and appropriate to
enact statutes that require defense counsel to give ad
vance notice if they are going to object to introduction of a
report without the presence in court of the technician who
prepared it. Indeed, today’s opinion relies upon laws of
that sort as a palliative to the disruption it is causing.
Ante, at 17 (plurality opinion). It is quite unrealistic,
however, to think that this will take away from the de
fense the incentives to insist on having the certifying
analyst present. There is in the ordinary case that pro
ceeds to trial no good reason for defense counsel to waive
the right of confrontation as the Court now interprets it.
Today’s opinion repeats an assertion from MelendezDiaz that its decision will not “impose an undue burden on
the prosecution.” Ante, at 16 (plurality opinion). But
evidence to the contrary already has begun to mount. See,
e.g., Brief for State of California et al. as Amici Curiae 7
(explaining that the 10 toxicologists for the Los Angeles
Police Department spent 782 hours at 261 court appear
ances during a 1-year period); Brief for National District
Attorneys Assocation et al. as Amici Curiae 23 (observing
that each blood-alcohol analyst in California processes
3,220 cases per year on average). New and more rigorous
empirical studies further detailing the unfortunate effects

