8

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

preparation for trial. The danger is that innocent defen
dants may be convicted on the basis of unreliable, un
tested statements by those who observed—or claimed to
have observed—preparation for or commission of the
crime. And, of course, those statements might not have
been uttered at all or—even if spoken—might not have
been true.
A rule that bars testimony of that sort, however, pro
vides neither cause nor necessity to impose a constitu
tional bar on the admission of impartial lab reports like
the instant one, reports prepared by experienced techni
cians in laboratories that follow professional norms and
scientific protocols. In addition to the constitutional right
to call witnesses in his own defense, the defendant in this
case was already protected by checks on potential prosecu
torial abuse such as free retesting for defendants; result
blind issuance of reports; testing by an independent
agency; routine processes performed en masse, which
reduce opportunities for targeted bias; and labs operating
pursuant to scientific and professional norms and over
sight. See Brief for Respondent 5, 14–15, 41, 54; New
Mexico Scientific Laboratory Brief 2, 26.
In addition to preventing the State from conducting ex
parte trials, Crawford’s rejection of the regime of Ohio v.
Roberts, 448 U. S. 56 (1980), seemed to have two under
lying jurisprudential objectives. One was to delink the
intricacies of hearsay law from a constitutional mandate;
and the other was to allow the States, in their own courts
and legislatures and without this Court’s supervision, to
explore and develop sensible, specific evidentiary rules
pertaining to the admissibility of certain statements.
These results were to be welcomed, for this Court lacks
the experience and day-to-day familiarity with the trial
process to suit it well to assume the role of national tribu
nal for rules of evidence. Yet far from pursuing these
objectives, the Court rejects them in favor of their oppo

