4

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in part

I agree with the Court’s assessment that the certificate at
issue here is a formal statement, despite the absence of
notarization. Ante, at 14–15; Crawford, 541 U. S., at 52
(“[T]he absence of [an] oath [is] not dispositive”). The
formality derives from the fact that the analyst is asked to
sign his name and “certify” to both the result and the
statements on the form. A “certification” requires one
“[t]o attest” that the accompanying statements are true.
Black’s Law Dictionary 258 (9th ed. 2009) (definition of
“certify”); see also id., at 147 (defining “attest” as “[t]o bear
witness; testify,” or “[t]o affirm to be true or genuine; to
authenticate by signing as a witness”).
In sum, I am compelled to conclude that the report has a
“primary purpose of creating an out-of-court substitute for
trial testimony,” Bryant, 562 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 11),
which renders it testimonial.
B
After holding that the report was testimonial, the New
Mexico Supreme Court nevertheless held that its admis­
sion was permissible under the Confrontation Clause for
two reasons: because Caylor was a “mere scrivener,” and
because Razatos could be cross-examined on the workings
of the gas chromatograph and laboratory procedures. 226
P. 3d, at 8–10. The Court convincingly explains why those
——————
monial purpose. Formality is not the sole indicator of the testimonial
nature of a statement because it is too easily evaded. See Davis v.
Washington, 547 U. S. 813, 838 (2006) (THOMAS, J., concurring in
judgment in part and dissenting in part). Nonetheless formality has
long been a hallmark of testimonial statements because formality
suggests that the statement is intended for use at trial. As we ex­
plained in Bryant, informality, on the other hand, “does not necessarily
indicate . . . lack of testimonial intent.” 562 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
19). The dissent itself recognizes the relevance of formality to the
testimonial inquiry when it notes the formality of the problematic
unconfronted statements in Sir Walter Raleigh’s trial. Post, at 7–8
(opinion of KENNEDY, J.).

