6

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in part

dress what degree of involvement is sufficient because
here Razatos had no involvement whatsoever in the rele­
vant test and report.
Third, this is not a case in which an expert witness was
asked for his independent opinion about underlying testi­
monial reports that were not themselves admitted into
evidence. See Fed. Rule Evid. 703 (explaining that facts or
data of a type upon which experts in the field would rea­
sonably rely in forming an opinion need not be admissible
in order for the expert’s opinion based on the facts and
data to be admitted). As the Court notes, ante, at 12, the
State does not assert that Razatos offered an independent,
expert opinion about Bullcoming’s blood alcohol concentra­
tion. Rather, the State explains, “[a]side from reading a
report that was introduced as an exhibit, Mr. Razatos
offered no opinion about Petitioner’s blood alcohol content
. . . .” Brief for Respondent 58, n. 15 (citation omitted).
Here the State offered the BAC report, including Caylor’s
testimonial statements, into evidence. We would face a
different question if asked to determine the constitutional­
ity of allowing an expert witness to discuss others’ testi­
monial statements if the testimonial statements were not
themselves admitted as evidence.
Finally, this is not a case in which the State introduced
only machine-generated results, such as a printout from a
gas chromatograph. The State here introduced Caylor’s
statements, which included his transcription of a blood
alcohol concentration, apparently copied from a gas chro­
matograph printout, along with other statements about
the procedures used in handling the blood sample. See
ante, at 10; App. 62 (“I certify that I followed the proce­
dures set out on the reverse of this report, and the state­
ments in this block are correct”). Thus, we do not decide
whether, as the New Mexico Supreme Court suggests, 226
P. 3d, at 10, a State could introduce (assuming an ade­
quate chain of custody foundation) raw data generated by

