18

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Opinion GINSBURG,
Opinion ofof the CourtJ.

been conducted [do] go to trial,” defendants “regularly . . .
[stipulate] to the admission of [the] analysis.” PDS Brief
20. “[A]s a result, analysts testify in only a very small
percentage of cases,” id., at 21, for “[i]t is unlikely that
defense counsel will insist on live testimony whose effect
will be merely to highlight rather than cast doubt upon
the forensic analysis.” Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 22).9
Tellingly, in jurisdictions in which “it is the [acknowl­
edged] job of . . . analysts to testify in court . . . about their
test results,” the sky has not fallen. PDS Brief 23. State
and municipal laboratories “make operational and staffing
decisions” to facilitate analysts’ appearance at trial. Ibid.
Prosecutors schedule trial dates to accommodate analysts’
availability, and trial courts liberally grant continuances
when unexpected conflicts arise. Id., at 24–25. In rare
cases in which the analyst is no longer employed by the
laboratory at the time of trial, “the prosecution makes the
effort to bring that analyst . . . to court.” Id., at 25. And,
as is the practice in New Mexico, see supra, at 16, labora­
tories ordinarily retain additional samples, enabling them
to run tests again when necessary.10
——————
9 The dissent argues otherwise, reporting a 71% increase, from 2008
to 2010, in the number of subpoenas for New Mexico analysts’ testi­
mony in impaired-driving cases. Post, at 11. The dissent is silent,
however, on the number of instances in which subpoenaed analysts in
fact testify, i.e., the figure that would reveal the actual burden of
courtroom testimony. Moreover, New Mexico’s Department of Health,
Scientific Laboratory Division, has attributed the “chaotic” conditions
noted by the dissent, ibid., to several favors, among them, staff attri­
tion, a state hiring freeze, a 15% increase in the number of blood
samples received for testing, and “wildly” divergent responses by New
Mexico District Attorneys to Melendez-Diaz. Brief for State of New
Mexico Dept. of Health, SLD as Amicus Curiae 2–5. Some New Mexico
District Attorneys’ offices, we are informed, “subpoen[a] every analyst
with any connection to a blood sample,” id., at 5, an exorbitant practice
that undoubtedly inflates the number of subpoenas issued.
10 The dissent refers, selectively, to experience in Los Angeles, post, at

