Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

custody. App. 56 (laboratory employee’s testimony agree
ing that “once the material is prepared and placed in the
machine, you don’t need any particular expertise to record
the results”). The information contained in the report was
the result of a scientific process comprising multiple par
ticipants’ acts, each with its own evidentiary significance.
These acts included receipt of the sample at the labora
tory; recording its receipt; storing it; placing the sample
into the testing device; transposing the printout of the
results of the test onto the report; and review of the re
sults. See Id., at 48–56; see also Brief for State of New
Mexico Dept. of Health Scientific Laboratory Division as
Amicus Curiae 4 (hereinafter New Mexico Scientific Labo
ratory Brief) (“Each blood sample has original testing
work by . . . as many as seve[n] analysts . . . .”); App. 62
(indicating that this case involved three laboratory ana
lysts who, respectively, received, analyzed, and reviewed
analysis of the sample); cf. Brief for State of Indiana et al.
as Amici Curiae in Briscoe v. Virginia, O. T. 2009, No. 07–
11191, p. 10 (hereinafter Indiana Brief) (explaining that
DNA analysis can involve the combined efforts of up to 40
analysts).
In the New Mexico scientific laboratory where the blood
sample was processed, analyses are run in batches involv
ing 40–60 samples. Each sample is identified by a com
puter-generated number that is not linked back to the file
containing the name of the person from whom the sample
came until after all testing is completed. See New Mexico
Scientific Laboratory Brief 26. The analysis is mechani
cally performed by the gas chromatograph, which may
operate—as in this case—after all the laboratory employ
ees leave for the day. See id., at 17. And whatever the
result, it is reported to both law enforcement and the
defense. See id., at 36.
The representative of the testing laboratory whom the
prosecution called was a scientific analyst named Mr.

