OCTOBER TERM, 2010

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW MEXICO
No. 09–10876.

Argued March 2, 2011—Decided June 23, 2011

The Sixth Amendment’s Confrontation Clause gives the accused “[i]n
all criminal prosecutions, . . . the right . . . to be confronted with the
witnesses against him.” In Crawford v. Washington, 541 U. S. 36, 59,
this Court held that the Clause permits admission of “[t]estimonial
statements of witnesses absent from trial . . . only where the decla
rant is unavailable, and only where the defendant has had a prior
opportunity to cross-examine.” Later, in Melendez-Diaz v. Massachu
setts, 557 U. S. ___, the Court declined to create a “forensic evidence”
exception to Crawford, holding that a forensic laboratory report, cre
ated specifically to serve as evidence in a criminal proceeding, ranked
as “testimonial” for Confrontation Clause purposes. Absent stipula
tion, the Court ruled, the prosecution may not introduce such a re
port without offering a live witness competent to testify to the truth
of the report’s statements. 557 U. S., at ___.
Petitioner Bullcoming’s jury trial on charges of driving while in
toxicated (DWI) occurred after Crawford, but before Melendez-Diaz.
Principal evidence against him was a forensic laboratory report certi
fying that his blood-alcohol concentration was well above the thresh
old for aggravated DWI. Bullcoming’s blood sample had been tested
at the New Mexico Department of Health, Scientific Laboratory Divi
sion (SLD), by a forensic analyst named Caylor, who completed,
signed, and certified the report. However, the prosecution neither
called Caylor to testify nor asserted he was unavailable; the record
showed only that Caylor was placed on unpaid leave for an undis
closed reason. In lieu of Caylor, the State called another analyst,
Razatos, to validate the report. Razatos was familiar with the testing
device used to analyze Bullcoming’s blood and with the laboratory’s
testing procedures, but had neither participated in nor observed the
test on Bullcoming’s blood sample. Bullcoming’s counsel objected, as

