Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
such as the read-out of a radar gun, the state court’s reasoning would
permit another officer to introduce the information, so long as he or
she was equipped to testify about the technology the observing officer
deployed and the police department’s standard operating procedures.
As, e.g., Davis v. Washington, 547 U. S. 813, 826, makes plain, how
ever, such testimony would violate the Confrontation Clause. The
comparative reliability of an analyst’s testimonial report does not
dispense with the Clause. Crawford, 541 U. S., at 62. The analysts
who write reports introduced as evidence must be made available for
confrontation even if they have “the scientific acumen of Mme. Curie
and the veracity of Mother Teresa.” Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S., at ___,
n. 6. Pp. 10–11.
(ii) Nor was Razatos an adequate substitute witness simply be
cause he qualified as an expert with respect to the testing machine
and the SLD’s laboratory procedures. Surrogate testimony of the
kind Razatos was equipped to give could not convey what Caylor
knew or observed about the events he certified, nor expose any lapses
or lies on Caylor’s part. Significantly, Razatos did not know why
Caylor had been placed on unpaid leave. With Caylor on the stand,
Bullcoming’s counsel could have asked Caylor questions designed to
reveal whether Caylor’s incompetence, evasiveness, or dishonesty ac
counted for his removal from work. And the State did not assert that
Razatos had any independent opinion concerning Bullcoming’s blood
alcohol content. More fundamentally, the Confrontation Clause does
not tolerate dispensing with confrontation simply because the court
believes that questioning one witness about another’s testimonial
statements provides a fair enough opportunity for cross-examination.
Although the purpose of Sixth Amendment rights is to ensure a fair
trial, it does not follow that such rights can be disregarded because,
on the whole, the trial is fair. United States v. Gonzalez-Lopez, 548
U. S. 140, 145. If a “particular guarantee” is violated, no substitute
procedure can cure the violation. Id., at 146. Pp. 11–14.
(b) Melendez-Diaz precluded the State’s argument that introduc
tion of the SLD report did not implicate the Confrontation Clause be
cause the report is nontestimonial. Like the certificates in MelendezDiaz, the SLD report is undoubtedly an “affirmation made for the
purpose of establishing or proving some fact” in a criminal proceed
ing. 557 U. S., at ___. Created solely for an “evidentiary purpose,”
id., at ___, the report ranks as testimonial. In all material respects,
the SLD report resembles the certificates in Melendez-Diaz. Here, as
there, an officer provided seized evidence to a state laboratory re
quired by law to assist in police investigations. Like the MelendezDiaz analysts, Caylor tested the evidence and prepared a certificate
concerning the result of his analysis. And like the Melendez-Diaz

