6

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Opinion of the Court

record” during the testimony of Gerasimos Razatos, an
SLD scientist who had neither observed nor reviewed
Caylor’s analysis. Id., at 44.
Bullcoming’s counsel opposed the State’s proposal. Id.,
at 44–45. Without Caylor’s testimony, defense counsel
maintained, introduction of the analyst’s finding would
violate Bullcoming’s Sixth Amendment right “to be con­
fronted with the witnesses against him.” Ibid.2 The trial
court overruled the objection, id., at 46–47, and admitted
the SLD report as a business record, id., at 44–46, 57.3
The jury convicted Bullcoming of aggravated DWI, and the
New Mexico Court of Appeals upheld the conviction, con­
cluding that “the blood alcohol report in the present case
was non-testimonial and prepared routinely with guaran­
tees of trustworthiness.” 2008–NMCA–097, §17, 189 P. 3d
679, 685.
C
While Bullcoming’s appeal was pending before the New
Mexico Supreme Court, this Court decided Melendez-Diaz.
In that case, “[t]he Massachusetts courts [had] admitted
into evidence affidavits reporting the results of forensic
analysis which showed that material seized by the police
and connected to the defendant was cocaine.” 557 U. S., at
___ (slip op., at 1). Those affidavits, the Court held, were
“ ‘testimonial,’ rendering the affiants ‘witnesses’ subject to
——————
2 The

State called as witnesses the arresting officer and the nurse
who drew Bullcoming’s blood. Bullcoming did not object to the State’s
failure to call the SLD intake employee or the reviewing analyst. “It
is up to the prosecution,” the Court observed in Melendez-Diaz v. Massa
chusetts, 557 U. S. ___, ___, n. 1 (2009) (slip op., at 5, n. 1), “to decide
what steps in the chain of custody are so crucial as to require evidence;
but what testimony is introduced must (if the defendant objects) be
introduced live.”
3 The trial judge noted that, when he started out in law practice,
“there were no breath tests or blood tests. They just brought in the cop,
and the cop said, ‘Yeah, he was drunk.’ ” App. 47.

