2

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Syllabus
serting that introduction of Caylor’s report without his testimony
would violate the Confrontation Clause, but the trial court overruled
the objection, admitted the SLD report as a business record, and
permitted Razatos to testify. Bullcoming was convicted, and, while
his appeal was pending before the New Mexico Supreme Court, this
Court decided Melendez-Diaz. The state high court acknowledged
that the SLD report qualified as testimonial evidence under
Melendez-Diaz, but held that the report’s admission did not violate
the Confrontation Clause because: (1) certifying analyst Caylor was a
mere scrivener who simply transcribed machine-generated test re
sults, and (2) SLD analyst Razatos, although he did not participate in
testing Bullcoming’s blood, qualified as an expert witness with re
spect to the testing machine and SLD procedures. The court affirmed
Bullcoming’s conviction.

Held: The judgment is reversed, and the case is remanded.
147 N. M. 487, 226 P. 3d 1, reversed and remanded.
JUSTICE GINSBURG delivered the opinion of the Court with respect
to all but Part IV and footnote 6. The Confrontation Clause, the opin
ion concludes, does not permit the prosecution to introduce a forensic
laboratory report containing a testimonial certification, made in or
der to prove a fact at a criminal trial, through the in-court testimony
of an analyst who did not sign the certification or personally perform
or observe the performance of the test reported in the certification.
The accused’s right is to be confronted with the analyst who made the
certification, unless that analyst is unavailable at trial, and the ac
cused had an opportunity, pretrial, to cross-examine that particular
scientist. Pp. 8–16.
(a) If an out-of-court statement is testimonial, it may not be intro
duced against the accused at trial unless the witness who made the
statement is unavailable and the accused has had a prior opportunity
to confront that witness. Pp. 8–14.
(i) Caylor’s certification reported more than a machine-generated
number: It represented that he received Bullcoming’s blood sample
intact with the seal unbroken; that he checked to make sure that the
forensic report number and the sample number corresponded; that he
performed a particular test on Bullcoming’s sample, adhering to a
precise protocol; and that he left the report’s remarks section blank,
indicating that no circumstance or condition affected the sample’s in
tegrity or the analysis’ validity. These representations, relating to
past events and human actions not revealed in raw, machine
produced data, are meet for cross-examination. The potential ramifi
cations of the state court’s reasoning, therefore, raise red flags. Most
witnesses testify to their observations of factual conditions or events.
Where, for example, a police officer’s report recorded an objective fact

