8

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
Opinion of the Court

a forensic laboratory report containing a testimonial certi­
fication, made in order to prove a fact at a criminal trial,
through the in-court testimony of an analyst who did not
sign the certification or personally perform or observe the
performance of the test reported in the certification. 561
U. S. ___ (2010). Our answer is in line with controlling
precedent: As a rule, if an out-of-court statement is testi­
monial in nature, it may not be introduced against the
accused at trial unless the witness who made the state­
ment is unavailable and the accused has had a prior op­
portunity to confront that witness. Because the New
Mexico Supreme Court permitted the testimonial state­
ment of one witness, i.e., Caylor, to enter into evidence
through the in-court testimony of a second person, i.e.,
Razatos, we reverse that court’s judgment.
II
The Sixth Amendment’s Confrontation Clause confers
upon the accused “[i]n all criminal prosecutions, . . . the
right . . . to be confronted with the witnesses against him.”
In a pathmarking 2004 decision, Crawford v. Washington,
we overruled Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U. S. 56 (1980), which
had interpreted the Confrontation Clause to allow admis­
sion of absent witnesses’ testimonial statements based on
a judicial determination of reliability. See Roberts, 448
U. S., at 66. Rejecting Roberts’ “amorphous notions of ‘re­
liability,’ ” Crawford, 541 U. S., at 61, Crawford held
that fidelity to the Confrontation Clause permitted admis­
sion of “[t]estimonial statements of witnesses absent from
trial . . . only where the declarant is unavailable, and only
where the defendant has had a prior opportunity to cross­
examine,” id., at 59. See Michigan v. Bryant, 562 U. S.
___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 7) (“[F]or testimonial evidence
to be admissible, the Sixth Amendment ‘demands what
the common law required: unavailability [of the witness]
and a prior opportunity for cross-examination.’ ” (quoting

