4

BULLCOMING v. NEW MEXICO
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

Razatos. He testified that he “help[ed] in overseeing the
administration of these programs throughout the State,”
and he was qualified to answer questions concerning each
of these steps. App. 49. The Court has held that the
government need not produce at trial “everyone who laid
hands on the evidence,” Melendez-Diaz, supra, at ___, n. 1
(slip op., at 5, n. 1). Here, the defense used the opportu
nity in cross-examination to highlight the absence at trial
of certain laboratory employees. Under questioning by
Bullcoming’s attorney, Razatos acknowledged that his
name did not appear on the report; that he did not receive
the sample, perform the analysis, or complete the review;
and that he did not know the reason for some personnel
decisions. App. 58. After weighing arguments from de
fense counsel concerning these admissions, and after con
sidering the testimony of Mr. Razatos, who knew the
laboratory’s protocols and processes, the jury found no
reasonable doubt as to the defendant’s guilt.
In these circumstances, requiring the State to call the
technician who filled out a form and recorded the results
of a test is a hollow formality. The defense remains free to
challenge any and all forensic evidence. It may call and
examine the technician who performed a test. And it may
call other expert witnesses to explain that tests are not
always reliable or that the technician might have made a
mistake. The jury can then decide whether to credit the
test, as it did here. The States, furthermore, can assess
the progress of scientific testing and enact or adopt stat
utes and rules to ensure that only reliable evidence is
admitted. Rejecting these commonsense arguments and
the concept that reliability is a legitimate concern, the
Court today takes a different course. It once more as
sumes for itself a central role in mandating detailed evi
dentiary rules, thereby extending and confirming
Melendez-Diaz’s “vast potential to disrupt criminal proce
dures.” 557 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 3) (KENNEDY, J.,

