Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

ALITO, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1371
_________________

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOCIETY CHAPTER OF THE UNI- 

VERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, HASTINGS COLLEGE OF 

THE LAW, AKA HASTINGS CHRISTIAN FELLOW- 

SHIP, PETITIONER v. LEO P. MARTINEZ ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[June 28, 2010] 


JUSTICE ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, JUSTICE
SCALIA, and JUSTICE THOMAS join, dissenting.
The proudest boast of our free speech jurisprudence is
that we protect the freedom to express “the thought that
we hate.” United States v. Schwimmer, 279 U. S. 644,
654–655 (1929) (Holmes, J., dissenting). Today’s decision
rests on a very different principle: no freedom for expres
sion that offends prevailing standards of political correct
ness in our country’s institutions of higher learning.
The Hastings College of the Law, a state institution,
permits student organizations to register with the law
school and severely burdens speech by unregistered
groups. Hastings currently has more than 60 registered
groups and, in all its history, has denied registration to
exactly one: the Christian Legal Society (CLS). CLS
claims that Hastings refused to register the group because
the law school administration disapproves of the group’s
viewpoint and thus violated the group’s free speech rights.
Rejecting this argument, the Court finds that it has
been Hastings’ policy for 20 years that all registered or
ganizations must admit any student who wishes to join.
Deferring broadly to the law school’s judgment about the
permissible limits of student debate, the Court concludes


2

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

ALITO, J., dissenting 


that this “accept-all-comers” policy, ante, at 1, is both
viewpoint-neutral and consistent with Hastings’ pro
claimed policy of fostering a diversity of viewpoints among
registered student groups.
The Court’s treatment of this case is deeply disappoint
ing. The Court does not address the constitutionality of
the very different policy that Hastings invoked when it
denied CLS’s application for registration. Nor does the
Court address the constitutionality of the policy that
Hastings now purports to follow. And the Court ignores
strong evidence that the accept-all-comers policy is not
viewpoint neutral because it was announced as a pretext
to justify viewpoint discrimination. Brushing aside incon
venient precedent, the Court arms public educational
institutions with a handy weapon for suppressing the
speech of unpopular groups—groups to which, as Hastings
candidly puts it, these institutions “do not wish to . . . lend
their name[s].” Brief for Respondent Hastings College of
Law 11; see also id., at 35.
I
The Court provides a misleading portrayal of this case.
As related by the Court, (1) Hastings, for the past 20
years, has required any student group seeking registration
to admit any student who wishes to join, ante, at 5; (2) the
effects of Hastings’ refusal to register CLS have been of
questionable importance, see ante, at 24–25; and (3) this
case is about CLS’s desire to obtain “a state subsidy,” ante,
at 15. I begin by correcting the picture.
A
The Court bases all of its analysis on the proposition
that the relevant Hastings’ policy is the so-called accept
all-comers policy. This frees the Court from the difficult
task of defending the constitutionality of either the policy
that Hastings actually—and repeatedly—invoked when it


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

ALITO, J., dissenting

denied registration, i.e., the school’s written Nondiscrimi
nation Policy, or the policy that Hastings belatedly un
veiled when it filed its brief in this Court. Overwhelming
evidence, however, shows that Hastings denied CLS’s
application pursuant to the Nondiscrimination Policy and
that the accept-all-comers policy was nowhere to be found
until it was mentioned by a former dean in a deposition
taken well after this case began.
The events that gave rise to this litigation began in
2004, when a small group of Hastings students sought to
register a Hastings chapter of CLS, a national organiza
tion of Christian lawyers and law students. All CLS
members must sign a Statement of Faith affirming belief
in fundamental Christian doctrines, including the belief
that the Bible is “the inspired Word of God.” App. 226. In
early 2004, the national organization adopted a resolution
stating that “[i]n view of the clear dictates of Scripture,
unrepentant participation in or advocacy of a sexually
immoral lifestyle is inconsistent with an affirmation of the
Statement of Faith, and consequently may be regarded by
CLS as disqualifying such an individual from CLS mem
bership.” Id., at 146. The resolution made it clear that “a
sexually immoral lifestyle,” in CLS’s view, includes engag
ing in “acts of sexual conduct outside of God’s design for
marriage between one man and one woman.” Ibid. It was
shortly after this resolution was passed that the Hastings
chapter of CLS applied to register with the law school.
Hastings sponsors an active program of “registered
student organizations” (RSOs) pursuant to the law school’s
avowed responsibility to “ensure an opportunity for the
expression of a variety of viewpoints” and promote “the
highest standards of . . . freedom of expression,” App. to
Pet. for Cert. 82a, 74a. During the 2004–2005 school year,
Hastings had more than 60 registered groups, including
political groups (e.g., the Hastings Democratic Caucus and
the Hastings Republicans), religious groups (e.g., the


4

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

ALITO, J., dissenting 


Hastings Jewish Law Students Association and the Hast
ings Association of Muslim Law Students), groups that
promote social causes (e.g., both pro-choice and pro-life
groups), groups organized around racial or ethnic identity
(e.g., the Black Law Students Association, the Korean
American Law Society, La Raza Law Students Associa
tion, and the Middle Eastern Law Students Association),
and groups that focus on gender or sexuality (e.g., the
Clara Foltz Feminist Association and Students Raising
Consciousness at Hastings). See App. 236–245; Brief for
Petitioner 3–4.
Not surprisingly many of these registered groups were
and are dedicated to expressing a message. For example,
Silenced Right, a pro-life group, taught that “all human
life from the moment of conception until natural death is
sacred and has inherent dignity,” id., at 244, while Law
Students for Choice aimed to “defend and expand repro
ductive rights,” id., at 243. The American Constitution
Society sought “to counter . . . a narrow conservative vi
sion” of American law,” id., at 236, and the UC Hastings
Student Animal Defense Fund aimed “at protecting the
lives and advancing the interests of animals through the
legal system,” id., at 245.
Groups that are granted registration are entitled to
meet on university grounds and to access multiple chan
nels for communicating with students and faculty—
including posting messages on designated bulletin boards,
sending mass e-mails to the student body, distributing
material through the Student Information Center, and
participating in the annual student organizations fair.
App. to Pet. for Cert. 7a, 85a. They may also apply for
limited travel funds, id., at 7a, which appear to total about
$4,000 to $5,000 per year, App. 217—or less than $85 per
registered group. Most of the funds available to RSOs
come from an annual student activity fee that every stu
dent must pay. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 89a–93a.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

ALITO, J., dissenting

When CLS applied for registration, Judy Hansen Chap
man, the Director of Hastings’ Office of Student Services,
sent an e-mail to an officer of the chapter informing him
that “CLS’s bylaws did not appear to be compliant” with
the Hastings Nondiscrimination Policy, App. 228, 277, a
written policy that provides in pertinent part that “[t]he
University of California, Hastings College of the Law shall
not discriminate unlawfully on the basis of race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, disability, age, sex or
sexual orientation,” id., at 220. As far as the record re
flects, Ms. Chapman made no mention of an accept-all
applicants policy.
A few days later, three officers of the chapter met with
Ms. Chapman, and she reiterated that the CLS bylaws did
not comply with “the religion and sexual orientation provi
sions of the Nondiscrimination Policy and that they would
need to be amended in order for CLS to become a regis
tered student organization.” Id., at 228. About a week
later, Hastings sent CLS a letter to the same effect. Id., at
228–229, 293–295. On both of these occasions, it appears
that not a word was said about an accept-all-comers
policy.
When CLS refused to change its membership require
ments, Hastings denied its request for registration—thus
making CLS the only student group whose application for
registration has ever been rejected. Brief in Opposition 4.
In October 2004, CLS brought this action under 42
U. S. C. §1983 against the law school’s dean and other
school officials, claiming, among other things, that the law
school, by enacting and enforcing the Nondiscrimination
Policy, had violated CLS’s First Amendment right to
freedom of speech. App. 78.
In May 2005, Hastings filed an answer to CLS’s first
amended complaint and made an admission that is signifi
cant for present purposes. In its complaint, CLS had
alleged that the Nondiscrimination Policy discriminates


6

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

ALITO, J., dissenting 


against religious groups because it prohibits those groups
“from selecting officers and members dedicated to a par
ticular set of religious ideals or beliefs” but “permits politi
cal, social and cultural student organizations to select
officers and members dedicated to their organization’s
ideals and beliefs.” Id., at 79. In response, Hastings
admitted that its Nondiscrimination Policy “permits politi
cal, social, and cultural student organizations to select
officers and members who are dedicated to a particular set
of ideals or beliefs.” Id., at 93. The Court states that
“Hastings interprets the Nondiscrimination Policy, as it
relates to the RSO program, to mandate acceptance of all
comers.” Ante, at 4. But this admission in Hastings’
answer shows that Hastings had not adopted this inter
pretation when its answer was filed.
Within a few months, however, Hastings’ position
changed. In July 2005, Mary Kay Kane, then the dean of
the law school, was deposed, and she stated: “It is my view
that in order to be a registered student organization you
have to allow all of our students to be members and full
participants if they want to.” App. 343. In a declaration
filed in October 2005, Ms. Chapman provided a more
developed explanation, stating: “Hastings interprets the
Nondiscrimination Policy as requiring that student or
ganizations wishing to register with Hastings allow any
Hastings student to become a member and/or seek a lead
ership position in the organization.” Id., at 349.
Hastings claims that this accept-all-comers policy has
existed since 1990 but points to no evidence that the policy
was ever put in writing or brought to the attention of
members of the law school community prior to the dean’s
deposition. Indeed, Hastings has adduced no evidence of
the policy’s existence before that date. And while Dean
Kane and Ms. Chapman stated, well after this litigation
had begun, that Hastings had such a policy, neither they
nor any other Hastings official has ever stated in a deposi


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

ALITO, J., dissenting

tion, affidavit, or declaration when this policy took effect.
Hastings’ effort to portray the accept-all-comers policy
as merely an interpretation of the Nondiscrimination
Policy runs into obvious difficulties. First, the two policies
are simply not the same: The Nondiscrimination Policy
proscribes discrimination on a limited number of specified
grounds, while the accept-all-comers policy outlaws all
selectivity. Second, the Nondiscrimination Policy applies
to everything that Hastings does, and the law school does
not follow an accept-all-comers policy in activities such as
admitting students and hiring faculty.
In an effort to circumvent this problem, the Court writes
that “Hastings interprets the Nondiscrimination Policy, as
it relates to the RSO program, to mandate acceptance of all
comers.” Ante, at 4 (emphasis added). This puts Hastings
in the implausible position of maintaining that the Non
discrimination Policy means one thing as applied to the
RSO program and something quite different as applied to
all of Hastings’ other activities. But the Nondiscrimina
tion Policy by its terms applies fully to all components of
the law school, “including administration [and] faculty.”
App. 220.
Third, the record is replete with evidence that, at least
until Dean Kane unveiled the accept-all-comers policy in
July 2005, Hastings routinely registered student groups
with bylaws limiting membership and leadership positions
to those who agreed with the groups’ viewpoints. For
example, the bylaws of the Hastings Democratic Caucus
provided that “any full-time student at Hastings may
become a member of HDC so long as they do not exhibit a
consistent disregard and lack of respect for the objective of
the organization as stated in Article 3, Section 1.” App. to
Pet. for Cert. 118a (emphasis added). The constitution of
the Association of Trial Lawyers of America at Hastings
provided that every member must “adhere to the objec
tives of the Student Chapter as well as the mission of


8

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL., 

HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ 

ALITO, J., dissenting 


ATLA.” Id., at 110a. A student could become a member of
the Vietnamese American Law Society so long as the
student did not “exhibit a consistent disregard and lack of
respect for the objective of the organization,” which cen
ters on a “celebrat[ion] [of] Vietnamese culture.” Id., at
146a–147a. Silenced Right limited voting membership to
students who “are committed” to the group’s “mission” of
“spread[ing] the pro-life message.” Id., at 142a–143a. La
Raza limited voting membership to “students of Raza
background.” App. 192. Since Hastings requires any
student group applying for registration to submit a copy of
its bylaws, see id., at 249–250, Hastings cannot claim that
it was unaware of such provisions. And as noted, CLS was
denied registration precisely because Ms. Chapman re
viewed its bylaws and found them unacceptable.
We are told that, when CLS pointed out these discrep
ancies during this litigation, Hastings took action to en
sure that student groups were in fact complying with the
law school’s newly disclosed accept-all-comers policy. For
example, Hastings asked La Raza to revise its bylaws to
allow all students to become voting members. App. to Pet.
for Cert. 66a. See also Brief for State of Michigan et al. as
Amici Curiae 2, n. 1 (relating anecdotally that Hastings
recently notified the Hastings Democrats that “to main
tain the Club’s standing as a student organization,” it
must “open its membership to all students, regardless of
party affiliation”). These belated remedial efforts suggest,
if anything, that Hastings had no accept-all-comers policy
until this litigation was well under way.
Finally, when Hastings filed its brief in this Court, its
policy, which had already evolved from a policy prohibiting
certain specified forms of discrimination into an accept-all
comers policy, underwent yet another transformation.
Now, Hastings claims that it does not really have an
accept-all-comers policy; it has an accept-some-comers
policy. Hastings’ current policy, we are told, “does not


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

ALITO, J., dissenting

foreclose neutral and generally applicable membership
requirements unrelated to ‘status or beliefs.’ ” Brief for
Respondent Hastings College of Law 5. Hastings’ brief
goes on to note with seeming approval that some regis
tered groups have imposed “even conduct requirements.”
Ibid. Hastings, however, has not told us which “conduct
requirements” are allowed and which are not—although
presumably requirements regarding sexual conduct fall
into the latter category.
When this case was in the District Court, that court
took care to address both the Nondiscrimination Policy
and the accept-all-comers policy. See, e.g., App. to Pet. for
Cert. 8a–9a, 16a–17a, 21a–24a, 26a, 27a, 32a, 44a, 63a.
On appeal, however, a panel of the Ninth Circuit, like the
Court today, totally ignored the Nondiscrimination Policy.
CLS’s argument in the Ninth Circuit centered on the
Nondiscrimination Policy, and CLS argued strenuously, as
it had in the District Court, that prior to the former dean’s
deposition, numerous groups had been permitted to re
strict membership to students who shared the groups’
views.1 Nevertheless, the Ninth Circuit disposed of CLS’s
——————
1 CLS consistently argued in the courts below that Hastings had ap
plied its registration policy in a discriminatory manner. See, e.g.,
Plaintiff’s Notice of Motion for Summary Judgment and Memorandum
in Support of Motion for Summary Judgment in No. C 04–4484–JSW
(ND Cal.), pp. 6–7 (“Hastings allows other registered student organiza
tions to require that their members and/or leaders agree with the
organization’s beliefs and purposes”). CLS took pains to bring forward
evidence to substantiate this claim. See supra, at 7–8.
CLS’s brief in the Court of Appeals reiterated its contention that
Hastings had not required all RSOs to admit all student applicants.
CLS’s brief stated that “Hastings allows other registered student
organizations to require that their leaders and/or members agree with
the organization’s beliefs and purposes.” Brief for Appellant in No. 06–
15956 (CA9), pp. 14–15 (citing examples). See also id., at 54–55 (“Hast
ings routinely recognizes student groups that limit membership or
leadership on the basis of belief. . . . Hastings’ actual practice demon
strates that the forum is not reserved to student organizations that do


10

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

appeal with a two-sentence, not-precedential opinion that
solely addressed the accept-all-comers policy. Christian
Legal Soc. Chapter of Univ. of Cal. v. Kane, 319 Fed. Appx.
645–646 (2009).
Like the majority of this Court, the Ninth Circuit relied
on the following Joint Stipulation, which the parties filed
in December 2005, well after Dean Kane’s deposition:
“Hastings requires that registered student organiza
tions allow any student to participate, become a mem
ber, or seek leadership positions in the organization,
regardless of their status or beliefs.” App. 221.
Citing the binding effect of stipulations, the majority
sternly rejects what it terms “CLS’s unseemly attempt to
escape from the stipulation and shift its target to [the
Nondiscrimination Policy].” Ante, at 11–12.
I agree that the parties must be held to their Joint
Stipulation, but the terms of the stipulation should be
respected. What was admitted in the Joint Stipulation
filed in December 2005 is that Hastings had an accept-all
comers policy. CLS did not stipulate that its application
had been denied more than a year earlier pursuant to such
a policy. On the contrary, the Joint Stipulation notes that
the reason repeatedly given by Hasting at that time was
that the CLS bylaws did not comply with the Nondis
crimination Policy. See App. 228–229. Indeed, the parties
did not even stipulate that the accept-all-comers policy
existed in the fall of 2004. In addition, Hastings itself is
now attempting to walk away from this stipulation by
disclosing that its real policy is an accept-some-comers
policy.
——————
not discriminate on the basis of belief”). Responding to these argu
ments, the law school remarked that CLS “repeatedly asserts that
‘Hastings routinely recognizes student groups that limit membership or
leadership on the basis of belief.’ ” Brief for Appellees in No. 06–15956
(CA9), p. 4.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

ALITO, J., dissenting

The majority’s insistence on the binding effect of stipu
lations contrasts sharply with its failure to recognize the
binding effect of a party’s admissions in an answer. See
American Title Insurance Co. v. Lacelaw Corp., 861 F. 2d
224, 226 (CA9 1988) (“Factual assertions in pleadings and
pretrial orders, unless amended, are considered judicial
admissions conclusively binding on the party who made
them”); Bakersfield Westar Ambulance, Inc. v. Community
First Bank, 123 F. 3d 1243, 1248 (CA9 1997) (quoting
Lacelaw, supra). As noted above, Hastings admitted in its
answer, which was filed prior to the former dean’s deposi
tion, that at least as of that time, the law school did not
follow an accept-all-comers policy and instead allowed
“political, social, and cultural student organizations to
select officers and members who are dedicated to a par
ticular set of ideals or beliefs.” App. 93.
B
The Court also distorts the record with respect to the
effect on CLS of Hastings’ decision to deny registration.
The Court quotes a letter written by Hastings’ general
counsel in which she stated that Hastings “ ‘would be
pleased to provide [CLS] the use of Hastings facilities for
its meetings and activities.’ ” Ante, at 6 (quoting App.
294). Later in its opinion, the Court reiterates that “Hast
ings offered CLS access to school facilities to conduct
meetings,” ante, at 24, but the majority does not mention
that this offer was subject to important qualifications. As
Hastings’ attorney put it in the District Court, Hastings
told CLS: “ ‘Hastings allows community groups to some
degree to use its facilities, sometimes on a pay basis, I
understand, if they’re available after priority is given to
registered organizations’. We offered that.” App. 442.
The Court also fails to mention what happened when
CLS attempted to take advantage of Hastings’ offer. On
August 19, 2005, the local CLS president sent an e-mail to


12

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

Ms. Chapman requesting permission to set up an “advice
table” on a campus patio on August 23 and 24 so that
members of CLS could speak with students at the begin
ning of the fall semester. Id., at 298. This request—
merely to set up a table on a patio—could hardly have
interfered with any other use of the law school’s premises
or cost the school any money. But although the request
was labeled “time sensitive,” ibid., Ms. Chapman did not
respond until the dates in question had passed, and she
then advised the student that all further inquiries should
be made through CLS’s attorney. Id., at 297–298.
In September 2005, CLS tried again. Through counsel,
CLS sought to reserve a room on campus for a guest
speaker who was scheduled to appear on a specified date.
Id., at 302–303. Noting Ms. Chapman’s tardy response on
the prior occasion, the attorney asked to receive a re
sponse before the scheduled date, but once again no an
swer was given until after the date had passed. Id., at
300.
Other statements in the majority opinion make it seem
as if the denial of registration did not hurt CLS at all. The
Court notes that CLS was able to hold Bible-study meet
ings and other events. Ante, at 6. And “[a]lthough CLS
could not take advantage of RSO-specific methods of com
munication,” the Court states, “the advent of electronic
media and social-networking sites reduces the importance
of those channels.” Ante, at 24.
At the beginning of the 2005 school year, the Hastings
CLS group had seven members, App. to Pet. for Cert. 13a,
so there can be no suggestion that the group flourished.
And since one of CLS’s principal claims is that it was
subjected to discrimination based on its viewpoint, the
majority’s emphasis on CLS’s ability to endure that dis
crimination—by using private facilities and means of
communication—is quite amazing.
This Court does not customarily brush aside a claim of


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

ALITO, J., dissenting

unlawful discrimination with the observation that the
effects of the discrimination were really not so bad. We
have never before taken the view that a little viewpoint
discrimination is acceptable. Nor have we taken this
approach in other discrimination cases.
C
Finally, I must comment on the majority’s emphasis on
funding. According to the majority, CLS is “seeking what
is effectively a state subsidy,” ante, at 15, and the question
presented in this case centers on the “use of school funds,”
ante, at 1. In fact, funding plays a very small role in this
case. Most of what CLS sought and was denied—such as
permission to set up a table on the law school patio—
would have been virtually cost free. If every such activity
is regarded as a matter of funding, the First Amendment
rights of students at public universities will be at the
mercy of the administration. As CLS notes, “[t]o univer
sity students, the campus is their world. The right to
meet on campus and use campus channels of communica
tion is at least as important to university students as the
right to gather on the town square and use local communi
cation forums is to the citizen.” Reply Brief for Petitioner
13.
II
To appreciate how far the Court has strayed, it is in
structive to compare this case with Healy v. James, 408
U. S. 169 (1972), our only First Amendment precedent
involving a public college’s refusal to recognize a student
group. The group in Healy was a local chapter of the
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS). When the stu
dents who applied for recognition of the chapter were
asked by a college committee whether they would “ ‘re
spond to issues of violence as other S.D.S. chapters have,’ ”
their answer was that their “ ‘action would have to be


14

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

dependent upon each issue.’ ” Id., at 172–173. They simi
larly refused to provide a definitive answer when asked
whether they would be willing to “use any means possible”
to achieve their aims. Id., at 173. The president of the
college refused to allow the group to be recognized, con
cluding that the philosophy of the SDS was “antithetical to
the school’s policies” and that it was doubtful that the
local chapter was independent of the national organiza
tion, the “ ‘published aims and philosophy’ ” of which in
cluded “ ‘disruption and violence.’ ” Id., at 174–175, and
n. 4.
The effects of nonrecognition in Healy were largely the
same as those present here. The SDS was denied the use
of campus facilities, as well as access to the customary
means used for communication among the members of the
college community. Id., at 176, 181–182.
The lower federal courts held that the First Amendment
rights of the SDS chapter had not been violated, and when
the case reached this Court, the college, much like today’s
majority, sought to minimize the effects of nonrecognition,
arguing that the SDS members “still may meet as a group
off campus, that they still may distribute written material
off campus, and that they still may meet together infor
mally on campus . . . as individuals.” Id., at 182–183.
This Court took a different view. The Court held that
the denial of recognition substantially burdened the stu
dents’ right to freedom of association. After observing that
“[t]he primary impediment to free association flowing from
nonrecognition is the denial of use of campus facilities for
meetings and other appropriate purposes,” id., at 181, the
Court continued:
“Petitioners’ associational interests also were cir
cumscribed by the denial of the use of campus bulletin
boards and the school newspaper. If an organization
is to remain a viable entity in a campus community in


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

ALITO, J., dissenting

which new students enter on a regular basis, it must
possess the means of communicating with these stu
dents. Moreover, the organization’s ability to partici
pate in the intellectual give and take of campus de
bate, and to pursue its stated purposes, is limited by
denial of access to the customary media for communi
cating with the administration, faculty members, and
other students. Such impediments cannot be viewed
as insubstantial.” Id., at 181–182.
It is striking that all of these same burdens are now
borne by CLS. CLS is prevented from using campus facili
ties—unless at some future time Hastings chooses to
provide a timely response to a CLS request and allow the
group, as a favor or perhaps in exchange for a fee, to set
up a table on the patio or to use a room that would other
wise be unoccupied. And CLS, like the SDS in Healy, has
been cut off from “the customary media for communicating
with the administration, faculty members, and other
students.” Id., at 181–182.
It is also telling that the Healy Court, unlike today’s
majority, refused to defer to the college president’s judg
ment regarding the compatibility of “sound educational
policy” and free speech rights. The same deference argu
ments that the majority now accepts were made in defense
of the college president’s decision to deny recognition in
Healy. Respondents in that case emphasized that the
college president, not the courts, had the responsibility of
administering the institution and that the courts should
allow him “ ‘wide discretion . . . in determining what ac
tions are most compatible with its educational objectives.’ ”
Brief for Respondents in Healy v. James, O. T. 1971, No.
71–452, pp. 7–8. A supporting amicus contended that
college officials “must be allowed a very broad discretion in
formulating and implementing policies.” Brief for Board of
Trustees, California State Colleges 6. Another argued


16

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

that universities should be permitted to impose restric
tions on speech that would not be tolerated elsewhere.
Brief for American Association of Presidents of Independ
ent Colleges and Universities 11–12.
The Healy Court would have none of this. Unlike the
Court today, the Healy Court emphatically rejected the
proposition that “First Amendment protections should
apply with less force on college campuses than in the
community at large.” 408 U. S., at 180. And on one key
question after another—whether the local SDS chapter
was independent of the national organization, whether the
group posed a substantial threat of material disruption,
and whether the students’ responses to the committee’s
questions about violence and disruption signified a will
ingness to engage in such activities—the Court drew
its own conclusions, which differed from the college
president’s.
The Healy Court was true to the principle that when it
comes to the interpretation and application of the right to
free speech, we exercise our own independent judgment.
We do not defer to Congress on such matters, see Sable
Communications of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492 U. S. 115, 129
(1989), and there is no reason why we should bow to uni
versity administrators.
In the end, I see only two possible distinctions between
Healy and the present case. The first is that Healy did not
involve any funding, but as I have noted, funding plays
only a small part in this case. And if Healy would other
wise prevent Hastings from refusing to register CLS, I see
no good reason why the potential availability of funding
should enable Hastings to deny all of the other rights that
go with registration.
This leaves just one way of distinguishing Healy: the
identity of the student group. In Healy, the Court warned
that the college president’s views regarding the philosophy
of the SDS could not “justify the denial of First Amend


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

ALITO, J., dissenting

ment rights.” 408 U. S., at 187. Here, too, disapproval of
CLS cannot justify Hastings’ actions.2
III
The Court pays little attention to Healy and instead
focuses solely on the question whether Hastings’ registra
tion policy represents a permissible regulation in a limited
public forum. While I think that Healy is largely control
ling, I am content to address the constitutionality of Hast
ings’ actions under our limited public forum cases, which
lead to exactly the same conclusion.
In this case, the forum consists of the RSO program.
Once a public university opens a limited public forum, it
“must respect the lawful boundaries it has itself set.”
Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515
U. S. 819, 829 (1995). The university “may not exclude
speech where its distinction is not ‘reasonable in light of
the purpose served by the forum.’ ” Ibid. (quoting Corne
lius v. NAACP Legal Defense & Ed. Fund, Inc., 473 U. S.
788, 806 (1985)). And the university must maintain strict
viewpoint neutrality. Board of Regents of Univ. of Wis.
System v. Southworth, 529 U. S. 217, 234 (2000); Rosen
berger, supra, at 829.
This requirement of viewpoint neutrality extends to the
expression of religious viewpoints. In an unbroken line of
decisions analyzing private religious speech in limited
public forums, we have made it perfectly clear that
“[r]eligion is [a] viewpoint from which ideas are conveyed.”
——————
2 The Court attempts to distinguish Healy on the ground that there
the college “explicitly denied the student group official recognition
because of the group’s viewpoint.” Ante, at 17, n. 15. The same, how
ever, is true here. CLS was denied recognition under the Nondiscrimi
nation Policy because of the viewpoint that CLS sought to express
through its membership requirements. See supra, at 5; infra, at 18–23.
And there is strong evidence that Hastings abruptly shifted from the
Nondiscrimination Policy to the accept-all-comers policy as a pretext for
viewpoint discrimination. See infra, at 31–35.


18

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

Good News Club v. Milford Central School, 533 U. S. 98,
112, and n. 4 (2001). See Rosenberger, supra, at 831;
Lamb’s Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free School Dist.,
508 U. S. 384, 393–394 (1993); Widmar v. Vincent, 454
U. S. 263, 277 (1981).
We have applied this analysis in cases in which student
speech was restricted because of the speaker’s religious
viewpoint, and we have consistently concluded that such
restrictions constitute viewpoint discrimination. E.g.,
Rosenberger, supra, at 845–846; Widmar, supra, at 267,
n. 5, 269, 277; see also Good News Club, supra, at 106–
107, 109–110; Lamb’s Chapel, supra, at 392–393, 394. We
have also stressed that the rules applicable in a limited
public forum are particularly important in the university
setting, where “the State acts against a background of
tradition of thought and experiment that is at the center
of our intellectual and philosophic tradition.” Rosenberger,
supra, at 835.
IV
Analyzed under this framework, Hastings’ refusal to
register CLS pursuant to its Nondiscrimination Policy
plainly fails.3 As previously noted, when Hastings refused
——————
3 CLS sought a declaratory judgment that this policy is unconstitu
tional and an injunction prohibiting its enforcement. See App. 80.
Particularly in light of Hastings’ practice of changing its announced
policies, these requests are not moot. It is well settled that the volun
tary cessation of allegedly unlawful conduct does not moot a case in
which the legality of that conduct is challenged. See City of Mesquite v.
Aladdin’s Castle, Inc., 455 U. S. 283, 289 (1982); see also Allee v.
Medrano, 416 U. S. 802, 810–811 (1974); DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416
U. S. 312, 318 (1974) (per curiam). If the rule were otherwise, the
courts would be compelled to leave “ ‘[t]he defendant . . . free to return
to his old ways.’ ” United States v. Concentrated Phosphate Export
Assn., Inc., 393 U. S. 199, 203 (1968) (quoting United States v. W. T.
Grant Co., 345 U. S. 629, 632 (1953)). Here, there is certainly a risk
that Hastings will “return to [its] old ways,” and therefore CLS’s
requests for declaratory and injunctive relief with respect to the Non


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

ALITO, J., dissenting

to register CLS, it claimed that the CLS bylaws impermis
sibly discriminated on the basis of religion and sexual
orientation. As interpreted by Hastings and applied
to CLS, both of these grounds constituted viewpoint
discrimination.
Religion. The First Amendment protects the right of
“ ‘expressive association’ ”—that is, “the right to associate
for the purpose of speaking.” Rumsfeld v. Forum for Aca
demic and Institutional Rights, Inc., 547 U. S. 47, 68
(2006) (quoting Boy Scouts of America v. Dale, 530 U. S.
640, 644 (2000)). And the Court has recognized that “[t]he
forced inclusion of an unwanted person in a group in
fringes the group’s freedom of expressive association if the
presence of that person affects in a significant way the
group’s ability to advocate public or private viewpoints.”
Dale, supra, at 648.
With one important exception, the Hastings Nondis
crimination Policy respected that right. As Hastings
stated in its answer, the Nondiscrimination Policy “per
mit[ted] political, social, and cultural student organiza
tions to select officers and members who are dedicated to a
particular set of ideals or beliefs.” App. 93. But the policy
singled out one category of expressive associations for
disfavored treatment: groups formed to express a religious
message. Only religious groups were required to admit
students who did not share their views. An environmen
talist group was not required to admit students who re
——————
discrimination Policy are not moot. If, as the Court assumes, the
parties stipulated that the only relevant policy is the accept-all-comers
policy, then the District Court should not have addressed the constitu
tionality of the Nondiscrimination Policy. But the District Court
approved both policies, and the Court of Appeals affirmed the judg
ment. That judgment remains binding on CLS, so it is only appropriate
that CLS be permitted to challenge that determination now. The
question of the constitutionality of the Nondiscrimination Policy falls
comfortably within the question presented, and CLS raised that issue
in its brief. See Brief for Petitioner 41–46.


20

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

jected global warming. An animal rights group was not
obligated to accept students who supported the use of
animals to test cosmetics. But CLS was required to admit
avowed atheists. This was patent viewpoint discrimina
tion. “By the very terms of the [Nondiscrimination Policy],
the University . . . select[ed] for disfavored treatment
those student [groups] with religious . . . viewpoints.”
Rosenberger, 515 U. S., at 831. It is no wonder that the
Court makes no attempt to defend the constitutionality of
the Nondiscrimination Policy.
Unlike the Court, JUSTICE STEVENS attempts a defense,
contending that the Nondiscrimination Policy is viewpoint
neutral. But his arguments are squarely contrary to
established precedent.
JUSTICE STEVENS first argues that the Nondiscrimina
tion Policy is viewpoint neutral because it “does not regu
late expression or belief at all” but instead regulates con
duct. See ante, at 2 (concurring opinion). This Court has
held, however, that the particular conduct at issue here
constitutes a form of expression that is protected by the
First Amendment. It is now well established that the
First Amendment shields the right of a group to engage in
expressive association by limiting membership to persons
whose admission does not significantly interfere with the
group’s ability to convey its views. See Dale, supra, at
648; Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U. S. 609, 623
(1984); see also New York State Club Assn., Inc. v. City of
New York, 487 U. S. 1, 13 (1988) (acknowledging that an
“association might be able to show that it is organized for
specific expressive purposes and that it will not be able to
advocate its desired viewpoints nearly as effectively if it
cannot confine its membership to those who share the
same sex, for example, or the same religion”); Widmar,
supra, at 268–269 (“[T]he First Amendment rights of
speech and association extend to the campuses of state
universities”). Indeed, the opinion of the Court, which


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

ALITO, J., dissenting

JUSTICE STEVENS joins, acknowledges this rule. See ante,
at 13.
JUSTICE STEVENS also maintains that the Nondiscrimi
nation Policy is viewpoint neutral because it prohibits all
groups, both religious and secular, from engaging in reli
gious speech. See ante, at 3. This argument is also con
trary to established law. In Rosenberger, the dissent,
which JUSTICE STEVENS joined, made exactly this argu
ment. See 515 U. S., at 895–896 (opinion of Souter, J.).
The Court disagreed, holding that a policy that treated
secular speech more favorably than religious speech dis
criminated on the basis of viewpoint.4 515 U. S., at 831.
The Court reaffirmed this holding in Good News Club, 533
U. S., at 112, and n. 4.
Here, the Nondiscrimination Policy permitted member
ship requirements that expressed a secular viewpoint. See
App. 93. (For example, the Hastings Democratic Caucus
and the Hastings Republicans were allowed to exclude
members who disagreed with their parties’ platforms.)
But religious groups were not permitted to express a
religious viewpoint by limiting membership to students
who shared their religious viewpoints. Under established
——————
4 In Rosenberger the university argued that the denial of student
activity funding for all groups that sought to express a religious view
point was “facially neutral.” See Brief for Respondents in Rosenberger
v. Rector & Visitors of Univ. of Va., O. T. 1994, No. 94–329, p. 2; 515
U. S., at 824–825. The Rosenberger dissenters agreed that the univer
sity’s policy did not constitute viewpoint discrimination because “it
applie[d] to Muslim and Jewish and Buddhist advocacy as well as to
Christian,” and it “applie[d] to agnostics and atheists as well as it does
to deists and theists.” Id., at 895–896 (opinion of Souter, J.); cf. ante, at
2–3 (opinion of STEVENS, J.) (asserting that under Hastings’ Nondis
crimination Policy “all acts of religious discrimination” are prohibited
(emphasis added)). But the Court flatly rejected this argument. See
515 U. S., at 831 (“Religion may be a vast area of inquiry, but it also
provides, as it did here, a specific premise, a perspective, a standpoint
from which a variety of subjects may be discussed and considered”).


22

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

precedent, this was viewpoint discrimination.5
It bears emphasis that permitting religious groups to
limit membership to those who share the groups’ beliefs
would not have the effect of allowing other groups to dis
criminate on the basis of religion. It would not mean, for
example, that fraternities or sororities could exclude stu
dents on that basis. As our cases have recognized, the
right of expressive association permits a group to exclude
an applicant for membership only if the admission of that
person would “affec[t] in a significant way the group’s
ability to advocate public or private viewpoints.” Dale,
530 U. S., at 648. Groups that do not engage in expressive
association have no such right. Similarly, groups that are
dedicated to expressing a viewpoint on a secular topic (for
example, a political or ideological viewpoint) would have
no basis for limiting membership based on religion be
cause the presence of members with diverse religious
beliefs would have no effect on the group’s ability to ex
press its views. But for religious groups, the situation is
very different. This point was put well by a coalition of
Muslim, Christian, Jewish, and Sikh groups: “Of course
there is a strong interest in prohibiting religious discrimi
nation where religion is irrelevant. But it is fundamen
tally confused to apply a rule against religious discrimina
tion to a religious association.” Brief for American Islamic
Congress et al. as Amici Curiae 3.
Sexual orientation. The Hastings Nondiscrimination
Policy, as interpreted by the law school, also discriminated
on the basis of viewpoint regarding sexual morality. CLS
——————
5 It is not at all clear what JUSTICE STEVENS means when he refers to
religious “status” as opposed to religious belief. See ante, at 2, n. 1.
But if by religious status he means such things as the religion into
which a person was born or the religion of a person’s ancestors, then
prohibiting discrimination on such grounds would not involve viewpoint
discrimination. Such immutable characteristics are quite different
from viewpoint.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

ALITO, J., dissenting

has a particular viewpoint on this subject, namely, that
sexual conduct outside marriage between a man and a
woman is wrongful. Hastings would not allow CLS to
express this viewpoint by limiting membership to persons
willing to express a sincere agreement with CLS’s views.
By contrast, nothing in the Nondiscrimination Policy
prohibited a group from expressing a contrary viewpoint
by limiting membership to persons willing to endorse
that group’s beliefs. A Free Love Club could require mem
bers to affirm that they reject the traditional view of sex
ual morality to which CLS adheres. It is hard to see
how this can be viewed as anything other than viewpoint
discrimination.
V
Hastings’ current policy, as announced for the first time
in the brief filed in this Court, fares no better than the
policy that the law school invoked when CLS’s application
was denied. According to Hastings’ brief, its new policy,
contrary to the position taken by Hastings officials at an
earlier point in this litigation, really does not require a
student group to accept all comers. Now, Hastings ex
plains, its policy allows “neutral and generally applicable
membership requirements unrelated to ‘status or beliefs.’ ”
Brief for Respondent Hastings College of Law 5. As ex
amples of permissible membership requirements, Hast
ings mentions academic standing, writing ability, “dues,
attendance, and even conduct requirements.” Ibid. (em
phasis added).
It seems doubtful that Hastings’ new policy permits
registered groups to condition membership eligibility on
whatever “conduct requirements” they may wish to im
pose. If that is the school’s current policy, it is hard to see
why CLS may not be registered, for what CLS demands is
that members foreswear “unrepentant participation in or
advocacy of a sexually immoral lifestyle.” App. 146. That


24

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

should qualify as a conduct requirement.
If it does not, then what Hastings’ new policy must
mean is that registered groups may impose some, but not
all, conduct requirements. And if that is the case, it is
incumbent on Hastings to explain which conduct require
ments are acceptable, which are not, and why CLS’s re
quirement is not allowed. Hastings has made no effort to
provide such an explanation.6
VI
I come now to the version of Hastings’ policy that the
Court has chosen to address. This is not the policy that
Hastings invoked when CLS was denied registration. Nor
is it the policy that Hastings now proclaims—and pre
sumably implements. It is a policy that, as far as the
record establishes, was in force only from the time when it
was first disclosed by the former dean in July 2005 until
Hastings filed its brief in this Court in March 2010. Why
we should train our attention on this particular policy and
not the other two is a puzzle. But in any event, it is clear
that the accept-all-comers policy is not reasonable in light
of the purpose of the RSO forum, and it is impossible to
say on the present record that it is viewpoint neutral.
A
Once a state university opens a limited forum, it “must
respect the lawful boundaries it has itself set.” Rosenber
ger, 515 U. S., at 829. Hastings’ regulations on the regis
tration of student groups impose only two substantive
limitations: A group seeking registration must have stu
dent members and must be non-commercial. App. to Pet.
for Cert. 82a–83a, Hastings Board of Directors, Policies
and Regulations Applying to College Activities, Organiza
——————
6Nor does the Court clarify this point. Suggesting that any conduct
requirement must relate to “gross misconduct,” ante, at 4, n. 2, is not
helpful.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

ALITO, J., dissenting

tions and Students §34.10 (June 22, 1990) (hereinafter
Hastings Regulations). Access to the forum is not limited
to groups devoted to particular purposes. The regulations
provide that a group applying for registration must submit
an official document including “a statement of its purpose,”
id., at 83a (Hastings Regulations §34.10.A.1 (emphasis
added)), but the regulations make no attempt to define the
limits of acceptable purposes. The regulations do not
require a group seeking registration to show that it has a
certain number of members or that its program is of inter
est to any particular number of Hastings students. Nor do
the regulations require that a group serve a need not met
by existing groups.
The regulations also make it clear that the registration
program is not meant to stifle unpopular speech. They
proclaim that “[i]t is the responsibility of the Dean to
ensure an ongoing opportunity for the expression of a
variety of viewpoints.” Id., at 82a (Hastings Regulations
§33.11). They also emphatically disclaim any endorse
ment of or responsibility for views that student groups
may express. Id., at 85a (Hastings Regulations §34.10.D).
Taken as a whole, the regulations plainly contemplate
the creation of a forum within which Hastings students
are free to form and obtain registration of essentially the
same broad range of private groups that nonstudents may
form off campus. That is precisely what the parties in this
case stipulated: The RSO forum “seeks to promote a diver
sity of viewpoints among registered student organizations,
including viewpoints on religion and human sexuality.”
App. 216 (emphasis added).
The way in which the RSO forum actually developed
corroborates this design. As noted, Hastings had more
than 60 RSOs in 2004–2005, each with its own independ
ently devised purpose. Some addressed serious social
issues; others—for example, the wine appreciation and
ultimate Frisbee clubs—were simply recreational. Some


26

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

organizations focused on a subject but did not claim to
promote a particular viewpoint on that subject (for exam
ple, the Association of Communications, Sports & Enter
tainment Law); others were defined, not by subject, but by
viewpoint. The forum did not have a single Party Politics
Club; rather, it featured both the Hastings Democratic
Caucus and the Hastings Republicans. There was no
Reproductive Issues Club; the forum included separate
pro-choice and pro-life organizations. Students did not see
fit to create a Monotheistic Religions Club, but they have
formed the Hastings Jewish Law Students Association
and the Hastings Association of Muslim Law Students. In
short, the RSO forum, true to its design, has allowed
Hastings students to replicate on campus a broad array of
private, independent, noncommercial organizations that is
very similar to those that nonstudents have formed in the
outside world.
The accept-all-comers policy is antithetical to the design
of the RSO forum for the same reason that a state-imposed
accept-all-comers policy would violate the First Amend
ment rights of private groups if applied off campus. As
explained above, a group’s First Amendment right of
expressive association is burdened by the “forced inclu
sion” of members whose presence would “affec[t] in a
significant way the group’s ability to advocate public or
private viewpoints.” Dale, 530 U. S., at 648. The Court
has therefore held that the government may not compel a
group that engages in “expressive association” to admit
such a member unless the government has a compelling
interest, “ ‘unrelated to the suppression of ideas, that
cannot be achieved through means significantly less re
strictive of associational freedoms.’ ” Ibid. (quoting Rob
erts, 468 U. S., at 623).
There can be no dispute that this standard would not
permit a generally applicable law mandating that private
religious groups admit members who do not share the


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

27

ALITO, J., dissenting

groups’ beliefs. Religious groups like CLS obviously en
gage in expressive association, and no legitimate state
interest could override the powerful effect that an accept
all-comers law would have on the ability of religious
groups to express their views. The State of California
surely could not demand that all Christian groups admit
members who believe that Jesus was merely human.
Jewish groups could not be required to admit anti-Semites
and Holocaust deniers. Muslim groups could not be forced
to admit persons who are viewed as slandering Islam.
While there can be no question that the State of Califor
nia could not impose such restrictions on all religious
groups in the State, the Court now holds that Hastings, a
state institution, may impose these very same require
ments on students who wish to participate in a forum that
is designed to foster the expression of diverse viewpoints.
The Court lists four justifications offered by Hastings in
defense of the accept-all-comers policy and, deferring to
the school’s judgment, ante, at 21, the Court finds all those
justifications satisfactory, ante, at 21–24. If we carry
out our responsibility to exercise our own independent
judgment, however, we must conclude that the justifica
tions offered by Hastings and accepted by the Court are
insufficient.
The Court first says that the accept-all-comers policy is
reasonable because it helps Hastings to ensure that “ ‘lead
ership, educational, and social opportunities’ ” are afforded
to all students. Ante, at 21–22 (quoting Brief for Respon
dent Hastings College of Law 32). The RSO forum, how
ever, is designed to achieve these laudable ends in a very
different way—by permitting groups of students, no mat
ter how small, to form the groups they want. In this way,
the forum multiplies the opportunity for students to serve
in leadership positions; it allows students to decide which
educational opportunities they wish to pursue through
participation in extracurricular activities; and it permits


28

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

them to create the “social opportunities” they desire by
forming whatever groups they wish to create.
Second, the Court approves the accept-all-comers policy
because it is easier to enforce than the Nondiscrimination
Policy that it replaced. It would be “a daunting labor,” the
Court warns, for Hastings to try to determine whether
a group excluded a member based on belief as opposed to
status. Ante, at 22; see also ante, at 2–3, n. 1 (opinion
of STEVENS, J.) (referring to the “impossible task of
separating out belief-based from status-based religious
discrimination”).
This is a strange argument, since the Nondiscrimination
Policy prohibits discrimination on substantially the same
grounds as the antidiscrimination provisions of many
States,7 including California, and except for the inclusion
of the prohibition of discrimination based on sexual orien
tation, the Nondiscrimination Policy also largely tracks
federal antidiscrimination laws.8 Moreover, Hastings now
willingly accepts greater burdens under its latest policy,
which apparently requires the school to distinguish be
tween certain “conduct requirements” that are allowed
and others that are not. Nor is Hastings daunted by the
labor of determining whether a club admissions exam
legitimately tests knowledge or is a pretext for screening
——————
7 See, e.g., Cal. Gov. Code Ann. §12940(a) (West 2005); N. J. Stat.
Ann. §10:5–12(a) (West 2002); N. Y. Exec. Law Ann. §296(1)(a) (West
2010).
8 See, e.g., Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U. S. C. §2000e et seq. (Title
VII); Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 252, as amended, 42 U. S. C.
§2000d et seq. (Title VI); Age Discrimination in Employment Act of
1967, 81 Stat. 602, as amended, 29 U. S. C. §621 et seq.; Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990, 104 Stat. 337, 42 U. S. C. §12101 et seq.
However, Title VII, which prohibits employment discrimination on the
basis of religion, provides that religious associations and schools can
hire on the basis of religion and that any employer can hire on the basis
of religion if it is a bona fide occupational qualification. 42 U. S. C.
§§2000e–1(a), 2000e–2(e).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

29

ALITO, J., dissenting

out students with disfavored beliefs. Asked at oral argu
ment whether CLS could require applicants to pass a test
on the Bible, Hastings’ attorney responded: “If it were
truly an objective knowledge test, it would be okay.” Tr. of
Oral Arg. 52. The long history of disputes about the
meaning of Bible passages belies any suggestion that it
would be an easy task to determine whether the grading of
such a test was “objective.”
Third, the Court argues that the accept-all-comers
policy, by bringing together students with diverse views,
encourages tolerance, cooperation, learning, and the de
velopment of conflict-resolution skills. Ante, at 23. These
are obviously commendable goals, but they are not un
dermined by permitting a religious group to restrict mem
bership to persons who share the group’s faith. Many
religious groups impose such restrictions. See, e.g., Brief
for Agudath Israel of America as Amicus Curiae 3
(“[B]ased upon millennia-old Jewish laws and traditions,
Orthodox Jewish institutions . . . regularly differentiate
between Jews and non-Jews”). Such practices are not
manifestations of “contempt” for members of other faiths.
Cf. ante, at 6 (opinion of STEVENS, J.) (invoking groups
that have “contempt for Jews, blacks, and women”). Nor
do they thwart the objectives that Hastings endorses. Our
country as a whole, no less than the Hastings College of
Law, values tolerance, cooperation, learning, and the
amicable resolution of conflicts. But we seek to achieve
those goals through “[a] confident pluralism that conduces
to civil peace and advances democratic consensus
building,” not by abridging First Amendment rights. Brief
for Gays and Lesbians for Individual Liberty as Amicus
Curiae 35.
Fourth, the Court observes that Hastings’ policy “incor
porates—in fact, subsumes—state-law proscriptions on
discrimination.” Ante, at 23. Because the First Amend
ment obviously takes precedence over any state law, this


30

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

would not justify the Hastings policy even if it were true—
but it is not. The only Hastings policy considered by the
Court—the accept-all-comers policy—goes far beyond any
California antidiscrimination law. Neither Hastings nor
the Court claims that California law demands that state
entities must accept all comers. Hastings itself certainly
does not follow this policy in hiring or student admissions.
Nor is it at all clear that California law requires Hast
ings to deny registration to a religious group that limits
membership to students who share the group’s religious
beliefs. Hastings cites no California court decision or
administrative authority addressing this question. In
stead, Hastings points to a statute prohibiting discrimina
tion on specified grounds, including religion or sexual
orientation, “in any program or activity conducted by”
certain postsecondary educational institutions. Cal. Educ.
Code Ann. §66270 (West Supp. 2010) (emphasis added).
Hastings, however, does not conduct the activities of the
student groups it registers. Indeed, Hastings disclaims
such responsibility, stating both in its regulations and its
Handbook for Student Organizations that it “does not
sponsor student organizations and therefore does not
accept liability for activities of student organizations.”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 85a (Hastings Regulations §34.10.D);
App. 250. In addition, as CLS notes, another provision of
California law specifically exempts “any funds that are
used directly or indirectly for the benefit of student or
ganizations” from a ban on state funding of private groups
that discriminate on any of the grounds listed in §66270.
See §92150 (West Supp. 2010).
The authority to decide whether §66270 or any other
provision of California law requires religious student
groups at covered institutions to admit members who do
not share the groups’ religious views is of course a ques
tion of state law that we cannot resolve. The materials
that have been brought to our attention, however, provide


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

31

ALITO, J., dissenting

little support for the majority’s suggested interpretation.
In sum, Hastings’ accept-all-comers policy is not reason
able in light of the stipulated purpose of the RSO forum: to
promote a diversity of viewpoints “among”—not within—
“registered student organizations.” App. 216 (emphasis
added).9
B
The Court is also wrong in holding that the accept-all
comers policy is viewpoint neutral. The Court proclaims
that it would be “hard to imagine a more viewpoint
neutral policy,” ante, at 28, but I would not be so quick to
jump to this conclusion. Even if it is assumed that the
policy is viewpoint neutral on its face,10 there is strong
——————
9 Although we have held that the sponsor of a limited public forum
“must respect the lawful boundaries it has itself set,” Rosenberger, 515
U. S., at 829, the Court now says that, if the exclusion of a group is
challenged, the sponsor can retroactively redraw the boundary lines in
order to justify the exclusion. See ante, at 21, n. 17. This approach
does not respect our prior holding.
10 In Board of Regents of Univ. of Wis. System v. Southworth, 529
U. S. 217 (2000), the Court considered a university rule permitting the
“defund[ing]” of a registered student group through a student referen
dum. See id., at 224–225. “To the extent the referendum substitutes
majority determinations for viewpoint neutrality,” the Court observed,
“it would undermine the constitutional protection the [university’s
registered student organization] program requires.” Id., at 235. “The
whole theory of viewpoint neutrality is that minority views are treated
with the same respect as are majority views.” Ibid.
Hastings’ accept-all-comers policy bears a resemblance to the South
wark referendum process. Both permit the majority to silence a disfa
vored organization. There is force to CLS’s argument that “[a]llowing
all students to join and lead any group, even when they disagree with
it, is tantamount to establishing a majoritarian heckler’s veto” and
“potentially turn[s] every group into an organ for the already-dominant
opinion.” Brief for Petitioner 51.
The Court attempts to distinguish Southworth as involving a funding
mechanism for student groups that operated selectively, based on
groups’ viewpoints. Ante, at 29, n. 25. But that mechanism—a student
referendum process—placed all students at risk of “being required to


32

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

evidence in the record that the policy was announced as a
pretext.
The adoption of a facially neutral policy for the purpose
of suppressing the expression of a particular viewpoint is
viewpoint discrimination. See Crawford v. Board of Ed. of
Los Angeles, 458 U. S. 527, 544 (1982) (“[A] law neutral on
its face still may be unconstitutional if motivated by a
discriminatory purpose”). A simple example illustrates
this obvious point. Suppose that a hated student group at
a state university has never been able to attract more than
10 members. Suppose that the university administration,
for the purpose of preventing that group from using the
school grounds for meetings, adopts a new rule under
which the use of its facilities is restricted to groups with
more than 25 members. Although this rule would be
neutral on its face, its adoption for a discriminatory reason
would be illegal.
Here, CLS has made a strong showing that Hastings’
sudden adoption and selective application of its accept-all
comers policy was a pretext for the law school’s unlawful
denial of CLS’s registration application under the Nondis
crimination Policy.
Shifting policies. When Hastings denied CLS’s applica
tion in the fall of 2004, the only policy mentioned was the
Nondiscrimination Policy. In July 2005, the former dean
suggested in a deposition that the law school actually
followed the very different accept-all-comers policy. In
March of this year, Hastings’ brief in this Court rolled out
still a third policy. As is recognized in the employment
discrimination context, where issues of pretext regularly
arise, “[s]ubstantial changes over time in [an] employer’s
——————
pay fees which are subsidies for speech they find objectionable, even
offensive,” solely upon a majority vote of the student body. See 529
U. S., at 230, 235. That is no different in principle than an accept-all
comers policy that places all student organizations at risk of take-over
by a majority that is hostile to a group’s viewpoint.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

33

ALITO, J., dissenting

proffered reason for its employment decision support a
finding of pretext.” Kobrin v. University of Minnesota, 34
F. 3d 698, 703 (CA8 1994); see also, e.g., Aragon v. Repub
lic Silver State Disposal Inc., 292 F. 3d 654, 661 (CA9
2002); Cicero v. Borg-Warner Automotive, Inc., 280 F. 3d
579, 592 (CA6 2001).
Timing. The timing of Hastings’ revelation of its new
policies closely tracks the law school’s litigation posture.
When Hastings denied CLS registration, it cited only the
Nondiscrimination Policy. Later, after CLS alleged that
the Nondiscrimination Policy discriminated against reli
gious groups, Hastings unveiled its accept-all-comers
policy. Then, after we granted certiorari and CLS’s open
ing brief challenged the constitutionality—and the plausi
bility—of the accept-all-comers policy, Hastings disclosed
a new policy. As is true in the employment context,
“[w]hen the justification for an adverse . . . action changes
during litigation, that inconsistency raises an issue
whether the proffered reason truly motivated the defen
dant’s decision.” Cicero, supra, at 592.
Lack of documentation. When an employer has a writ
ten policy and then relies on a rule for which there is no
written documentation, that deviation may support an
inference of pretext. See, e.g., Diaz v. Eagle Produce Ltd.
Partnership, 521 F. 3d 1201, 1214 (CA9 2008); Rudin v.
Lincoln Land Community College, 420 F. 3d 712, 727 (CA7
2005); Machinchick v. PB Power, Inc., 398 F. 3d 345, 354,
n. 29 (CA5 2005); Russell v. TG Missouri Corp., 340 F. 3d
735, 746 (CA8 2003); Mohammed v. Callaway, 698 F. 2d
395, 399–400, 401 (CA10 1983).
Here, Hastings claims that it has had an accept-all
comers policy since 1990, but it has not produced a single
written document memorializing that policy. Nor has it
cited a single occasion prior to the dean’s deposition when
this putative policy was orally disclosed to either student
groups interested in applying for registration or to the


34

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

Office of Student Services, which was charged with re
viewing the bylaws of applicant groups to ensure that they
were in compliance with the law school’s policies.
Nonenforcement. Since it appears that no one was told
about the accept-all-comers policy before July 2005, it is
not surprising that the policy was not enforced. The re
cord is replete with evidence that Hastings made no effort
to enforce the all-comers policy until after it was pro
claimed by the former dean. See, e.g., App. to Pet. for
Cert. 118a (Hastings Democratic Caucus); id., at 110a
(Association of Trial Lawyers of America at Hastings); id.,
at 146a–147a (Vietnamese American Law Society); id., at
142a–143a (Silent Right); App. 192 (La Raza). See gener
ally supra, at 7–8. If the record here is not sufficient to
permit a finding of pretext, then the law of pretext is dead.
The Court—understandably—sidesteps this issue. The
Court states that the lower courts did not address the
“argument that Hastings selectively enforces its all-comer
policy,”11 that “this Court is not the proper forum to air the
issue in the first instance,” and that “[o]n remand, the
Ninth Circuit may consider CLS’s pretext argument if,
and to the extent, it is preserved.” Ante, at 31–32.
Because the Court affirms the entry of summary judg
ment in favor of respondents, it is not clear how CLS will
be able to ask the Ninth Circuit on remand to review its
claim of pretext. And the argument that we should not
——————
11 As

previously noted, CLS consistently argued in the courts below
that Hastings had applied its registration policy in a discriminatory
manner. See supra, at 9–10, n. 1. The Court would ignore these
arguments because counsel for CLS acknowledged below that Hastings
has an all-comers policy. See ante, at 9, n. 5 (quoting examples). But
as the Court itself acknowledges, counsel for CLS stated at oral argu
ment in this Court that “the Court needs to . . . reach the constitution
ality of the all-comers policy as applied to CLS in this case.” Tr. of Oral
Arg. 59 (emphasis added); ante, at 9, n. 5. And as the record shows,
CLS has never ceded its argument that Hastings applies its accept-all
comers policy unequally.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

35

ALITO, J., dissenting

address this issue of pretext because the Ninth Circuit did
not do so is hard to take, given that the Ninth Circuit
barely addressed anything, disposing of this case in pre
cisely two sentences.
Neither of those two sentences addressed the “novel
question,” ante, at 1, to which the bulk of this Court’s
opinion is devoted, i.e., whether the accept-all-comers
policy is reasonable in light of the purposes of the RSO
forum and is viewpoint neutral, see ante, at 17–31. If it is
appropriate for us to consider that issue, then the Ninth
Circuit’s failure to address the issue of pretext should not
stand in the way of review by this Court.
C
One final aspect of the Court’s decision warrants com
ment. In response to the argument that the accept-all
comers-policy would permit a small and unpopular group
to be taken over by students who wish to silence its mes
sage, the Court states that the policy would permit a
registered group to impose membership requirements
“designed to ensure that students join because of their
commitment to a group’s vitality, not its demise.” Ante, at
27. With this concession, the Court tacitly recognizes that
Hastings does not really have an accept-all-comers pol
icy—it has an accept-some-dissident-comers policy—and
the line between members who merely seek to change a
group’s message (who apparently must be admitted) and
those who seek a group’s “demise” (who may be kept out)
is hopelessly vague.
Here is an example. Not all Christian denominations
agree with CLS’s views on sexual morality and other
matters. During a recent year, CLS had seven members.
Suppose that 10 students who are members of denomina
tions that disagree with CLS decided that CLS was mis
representing true Christian doctrine. Suppose that these
students joined CLS, elected officers who shared their


36

CHRISTIAN LEGAL SOC. CHAPTER OF UNIV. OF CAL.,
HASTINGS COLLEGE OF LAW v. MARTINEZ
ALITO, J., dissenting

views, ended the group’s affiliation with the national
organization, and changed the group’s message. The new
leadership would likely proclaim that the group was “vi
tal” but rectified, while CLS, I assume, would take the
view that the old group had suffered its “demise.”
Whether a change represents reform or transformation
may depend very much on the eye of the beholder.
JUSTICE KENNEDY takes a similarly mistaken tack. He
contends that CLS “would have a substantial case on the
merits if it were shown that the all-comers policy was . . .
used to infiltrate the group or challenge its leadership in
order to stifle its views,” ante, at 4 (concurring opinion),
but he does not explain on what ground such a claim could
succeed. The Court holds that the accept-all-comers policy
is viewpoint neutral and reasonable in light of the pur
poses of the RSO forum. How could those characteristics
be altered by a change in the membership of one of the
forum’s registered groups? No explanation is apparent.
In the end, the Court refuses to acknowledge the conse
quences of its holding. A true accept-all-comers policy
permits small unpopular groups to be taken over by stu
dents who wish to change the views that the group ex
presses. Rules requiring that members attend meetings,
pay dues, and behave politely, see ante, at 27, would not
eliminate this threat.
The possibility of such takeovers, however, is by no
means the most important effect of the Court’s holding.
There are religious groups that cannot in good conscience
agree in their bylaws that they will admit persons who do
not share their faith, and for these groups, the conse
quence of an accept-all-comers policy is marginalization.
See Brief for Evangelical Scholars (Officers and 24 Former
Presidents of the Evangelical Theological Society) et al. as
Amici Curiae 19 (affirmance in this case “will allow every
public college and university in the United States to ex
clude all evangelical Christian organizations”); Brief for


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

37

ALITO, J., dissenting

Agudath Israel of America as Amicus Curiae 3, 8 (affir
mance would “point a judicial dagger at the heart of the
Orthodox Jewish community in the United States” and
permit that community to be relegated to the status of “a
second-class group”); Brief for Union of Orthodox Jewish
Congregations of America as Amicus Curiae 3 (affirmance
“could significantly affect the ability of [affiliated] student
clubs and youth movements . . . to prescribe requirements
for their membership and leaders based on religious be
liefs and commitments”). This is where the Court’s deci
sion leads.
*
*
*
I do not think it is an exaggeration to say that today’s
decision is a serious setback for freedom of expression in
this country. Our First Amendment reflects a “profound
national commitment to the principle that debate on
public issues should be uninhibited, robust, and wide
open.” New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254, 270
(1964). Even if the United States is the only Nation that
shares this commitment to the same extent, I would not
change our law to conform to the international norm. I
fear that the Court’s decision marks a turn in that direc
tion. Even those who find CLS’s views objectionable
should be concerned about the way the group has been
treated—by Hastings, the Court of Appeals, and now this
Court. I can only hope that this decision will turn out to
be an aberration.

