Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–553
_________________

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN 

CHURCH AND SCHOOL, PETITIONER v.

EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY

COMMISSION ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT

[January 11, 2012]


CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS delivered the opinion of the
Court.
Certain employment discrimination laws authorize
employees who have been wrongfully terminated to sue
their employers for reinstatement and damages. The
question presented is whether the Establishment and Free
Exercise Clauses of the First Amendment bar such an
action when the employer is a religious group and the
employee is one of the group’s ministers.
I

A

Petitioner Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church
and School is a member congregation of the Lutheran
Church–Missouri Synod, the second largest Lutheran
denomination in America. Hosanna-Tabor operated a
small school in Redford, Michigan, offering a “Christcentered education” to students in kindergarten through
eighth grade. 582 F. Supp. 2d 881, 884 (ED Mich. 2008)
(internal quotation marks omitted).


2

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH

AND SCHOOL v. EEOC 

Opinion of the Court 


The Synod classifies teachers into two categories:
“called” and “lay.” “Called” teachers are regarded as
having been called to their vocation by God through a
congregation. To be eligible to receive a call from a congregation, a teacher must satisfy certain academic
requirements. One way of doing so is by completing a
“colloquy” program at a Lutheran college or university. The
program requires candidates to take eight courses of
theological study, obtain the endorsement of their local
Synod district, and pass an oral examination by a faculty
committee. A teacher who meets these requirements may
be called by a congregation. Once called, a teacher receives the formal title “Minister of Religion, Commissioned.” App. 42, 48. A commissioned minister serves for
an open-ended term; at Hosanna-Tabor, a call could be
rescinded only for cause and by a supermajority vote of the
congregation.
“Lay” or “contract” teachers, by contrast, are not required to be trained by the Synod or even to be Lutheran.
At Hosanna-Tabor, they were appointed by the school
board, without a vote of the congregation, to one-year
renewable terms. Although teachers at the school generally performed the same duties regardless of whether they
were lay or called, lay teachers were hired only when
called teachers were unavailable.
Respondent Cheryl Perich was first employed by
Hosanna-Tabor as a lay teacher in 1999. After Perich completed her colloquy later that school year, Hosanna-Tabor
asked her to become a called teacher. Perich accepted the
call and received a “diploma of vocation” designating her a
commissioned minister. Id., at 42.
Perich taught kindergarten during her first four years
at Hosanna-Tabor and fourth grade during the 2003–2004
school year. She taught math, language arts, social studies, science, gym, art, and music. She also taught a religion class four days a week, led the students in prayer and


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

devotional exercises each day, and attended a weekly
school-wide chapel service. Perich led the chapel service
herself about twice a year.
Perich became ill in June 2004 with what was eventually diagnosed as narcolepsy. Symptoms included sudden
and deep sleeps from which she could not be roused.
Because of her illness, Perich began the 2004–2005 school
year on disability leave. On January 27, 2005, however,
Perich notified the school principal, Stacey Hoeft, that she
would be able to report to work the following month.
Hoeft responded that the school had already contracted
with a lay teacher to fill Perich’s position for the remainder of the school year. Hoeft also expressed concern that
Perich was not yet ready to return to the classroom.
On January 30, Hosanna-Tabor held a meeting of its
congregation at which school administrators stated that
Perich was unlikely to be physically capable of returning
to work that school year or the next. The congregation
voted to offer Perich a “peaceful release” from her call,
whereby the congregation would pay a portion of her
health insurance premiums in exchange for her resignation as a called teacher. Id., at 178, 186. Perich refused to
resign and produced a note from her doctor stating that
she would be able to return to work on February 22. The
school board urged Perich to reconsider, informing her
that the school no longer had a position for her, but Perich
stood by her decision not to resign.
On the morning of February 22—the first day she was
medically cleared to return to work—Perich presented
herself at the school. Hoeft asked her to leave but she
would not do so until she obtained written documentation
that she had reported to work. Later that afternoon, Hoeft
called Perich at home and told her that she would likely be
fired. Perich responded that she had spoken with an
attorney and intended to assert her legal rights.
Following a school board meeting that evening, board


4

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH

AND SCHOOL v. EEOC 

Opinion of the Court 


chairman Scott Salo sent Perich a letter stating that
Hosanna-Tabor was reviewing the process for rescinding
her call in light of her “regrettable” actions. Id., at 229.
Salo subsequently followed up with a letter advising
Perich that the congregation would consider whether to
rescind her call at its next meeting. As grounds for termination, the letter cited Perich’s “insubordination and
disruptive behavior” on February 22, as well as the damage she had done to her “working relationship” with the
school by “threatening to take legal action.” Id., at 55.
The congregation voted to rescind Perich’s call on April 10,
and Hosanna-Tabor sent her a letter of termination the
next day.
B
Perich filed a charge with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, alleging that her employment had
been terminated in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 104 Stat. 327, 42 U. S. C. §12101 et seq.
(1990). The ADA prohibits an employer from discriminating against a qualified individual on the basis of disability.
§12112(a). It also prohibits an employer from retaliating
“against any individual because such individual has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by [the ADA] or
because such individual made a charge, testified, assisted,
or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under [the ADA].” §12203(a).1
——————
1 The ADA itself provides religious entities with two defenses to
claims of discrimination that arise under subchapter I of the Act. The
first provides that “[t]his subchapter shall not prohibit a religious
corporation, association, educational institution, or society from giving
preference in employment to individuals of a particular religion to
perform work connected with the carrying on by such [entity] of its
activities.” §12113(d)(1) (2006 ed., Supp. III). The second provides that
“[u]nder this subchapter, a religious organization may require that all
applicants and employees conform to the religious tenets of such
organization.” §12113(d)(2). The ADA’s prohibition against retaliation,


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

The EEOC brought suit against Hosanna-Tabor, alleging that Perich had been fired in retaliation for threatening to file an ADA lawsuit. Perich intervened in the
litigation, claiming unlawful retaliation under both the
ADA and the Michigan Persons with Disabilities Civil Rights
Act, Mich. Comp. Laws §37.1602(a) (1979). The EEOC
and Perich sought Perich’s reinstatement to her former
position (or frontpay in lieu thereof), along with backpay,
compensatory and punitive damages, attorney’s fees, and
other injunctive relief.
Hosanna-Tabor moved for summary judgment. Invoking what is known as the “ministerial exception,” the
Church argued that the suit was barred by the First
Amendment because the claims at issue concerned the
employment relationship between a religious institution
and one of its ministers. According to the Church, Perich
was a minister, and she had been fired for a religious
reason—namely, that her threat to sue the Church violated the Synod’s belief that Christians should resolve their
disputes internally.
The District Court agreed that the suit was barred by
the ministerial exception and granted summary judgment
in Hosanna-Tabor’s favor. The court explained that
“Hosanna-Tabor treated Perich like a minister and held her
out to the world as such long before this litigation began,”
and that the “facts surrounding Perich’s employment in a
religious school with a sectarian mission” supported the
Church’s characterization. 582 F. Supp. 2d, at 891–892.
In light of that determination, the court concluded that it
could “inquire no further into her claims of retaliation.”
Id., at 892.
The Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit vacated and
—————— 

§12203(a), appears in a different subchapter—subchapter IV. The 

EEOC and Perich contend, and Hosanna-Tabor does not dispute, that 

these defenses therefore do not apply to retaliation claims. 



6

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH

AND SCHOOL v. EEOC 

Opinion of the Court 


remanded, directing the District Court to proceed to the
merits of Perich’s retaliation claims. The Court of Appeals
recognized the existence of a ministerial exception barring
certain employment discrimination claims against religious institutions—an exception “rooted in the First
Amendment’s guarantees of religious freedom.” 597 F. 3d
769, 777 (2010). The court concluded, however, that
Perich did not qualify as a “minister” under the exception,
noting in particular that her duties as a called teacher
were identical to her duties as a lay teacher. Id., at 778–
781. Judge White concurred. She viewed the question
whether Perich qualified as a minister to be closer than
did the majority, but agreed that the “fact that the duties
of the contract teachers are the same as the duties of the
called teachers is telling.” Id., at 782, 784.
We granted certiorari. 563 U. S. ___ (2011).
II
The First Amendment provides, in part, that “Congress
shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion,
or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.” We have said
that these two Clauses “often exert conflicting pressures,”
Cutter v. Wilkinson, 544 U. S. 709, 719 (2005), and that
there can be “internal tension . . . between the Establishment Clause and the Free Exercise Clause,” Tilton v.
Richardson, 403 U. S. 672, 677 (1971) (plurality opinion).
Not so here. Both Religion Clauses bar the government
from interfering with the decision of a religious group to
fire one of its ministers.
A
Controversy between church and state over religious
offices is hardly new. In 1215, the issue was addressed in
the very first clause of Magna Carta. There, King John
agreed that “the English church shall be free, and shall
have its rights undiminished and its liberties unimpaired.”


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

The King in particular accepted the “freedom of elections,”
a right “thought to be of the greatest necessity and importance to the English church.” J. Holt, Magna Carta
App. IV, p. 317, cl. 1 (1965).
That freedom in many cases may have been more theoretical than real. See, e.g., W. Warren, Henry II 312
(1973) (recounting the writ sent by Henry II to the electors
of a bishopric in Winchester, stating: “I order you to hold a
free election, but forbid you to elect anyone but Richard
my clerk”). In any event, it did not survive the reign of
Henry VIII, even in theory. The Act of Supremacy of 1534,
26 Hen. 8, ch. 1, made the English monarch the supreme
head of the Church, and the Act in Restraint of Annates,
25 Hen. 8, ch. 20, passed that same year, gave him the
authority to appoint the Church’s high officials. See G.
Elton, The Tudor Constitution: Documents and Commentary 331–332 (1960). Various Acts of Uniformity, enacted
subsequently, tightened further the government’s grip on
the exercise of religion. See, e.g., Act of Uniformity, 1559,
1 Eliz., ch. 2; Act of Uniformity, 1549, 2 & 3 Edw. 6, ch. 1.
The Uniformity Act of 1662, for instance, limited service
as a minister to those who formally assented to prescribed
tenets and pledged to follow the mode of worship set forth
in the Book of Common Prayer. Any minister who refused
to make that pledge was “deprived of all his Spiritual
Promotions.” Act of Uniformity, 1662, 14 Car. 2, ch. 4.
Seeking to escape the control of the national church, the
Puritans fled to New England, where they hoped to elect
their own ministers and establish their own modes of
worship. See T. Curry, The First Freedoms: Church and
State in America to the Passage of the First Amendment 3
(1986); McConnell, The Origins and Historical Understanding of Free Exercise of Religion, 103 Harv. L. Rev.
1409, 1422 (1990). William Penn, the Quaker proprietor
of what would eventually become Pennsylvania and Delaware, also sought independence from the Church of Eng-


8

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH

AND SCHOOL v. EEOC 

Opinion of the Court 


land. The charter creating the province of Pennsylvania
contained no clause establishing a religion. See S. Cobb,
The Rise of Religious Liberty in America 440–441 (1970).
Colonists in the South, in contrast, brought the Church
of England with them. But even they sometimes chafed at
the control exercised by the Crown and its representatives
over religious offices. In Virginia, for example, the law
vested the governor with the power to induct ministers
presented to him by parish vestries, 2 Hening’s Statutes
at Large 46 (1642), but the vestries often refused to make
such presentations and instead chose ministers on their
own. See H. Eckenrode, Separation of Church and State
in Virginia 13–19 (1910). Controversies over the selection
of ministers also arose in other Colonies with Anglican
establishments, including North Carolina. See C. Antieau, A. Downey, & E. Roberts, Freedom from Federal
Establishment: Formation and Early History of the First
Amendment Religion Clauses 10–11 (1964). There, the
royal governor insisted that the right of presentation lay
with the Bishop of London, but the colonial assembly
enacted laws placing that right in the vestries. Authorities in England intervened, repealing those laws as inconsistent with the rights of the Crown. See id., at 11;
Weeks, Church and State in North Carolina, Johns Hopkins U. Studies in Hist. & Pol. Sci., 11th Ser., Nos. 5–6,
pp. 29–36 (1893).
It was against this background that the First Amendment was adopted. Familiar with life under the established Church of England, the founding generation sought
to foreclose the possibility of a national church. See 1
Annals of Cong. 730–731 (1789) (noting that the Establishment Clause addressed the fear that “one sect might
obtain a pre-eminence, or two combine together, and
establish a religion to which they would compel others to
conform” (remarks of J. Madison)). By forbidding the
“establishment of religion” and guaranteeing the “free


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

exercise thereof,” the Religion Clauses ensured that the
new Federal Government—unlike the English Crown—
would have no role in filling ecclesiastical offices. The
Establishment Clause prevents the Government from
appointing ministers, and the Free Exercise Clause prevents it from interfering with the freedom of religious
groups to select their own.
This understanding of the Religion Clauses was reflected in two events involving James Madison, “ ‘the leading
architect of the religion clauses of the First Amendment.’ ”
Arizona Christian School Tuition Organization v. Winn,
563 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 13) (quoting Flast v.
Cohen, 392 U. S. 83, 103 (1968)). The first occurred in
1806, when John Carroll, the first Catholic bishop in the
United States, solicited the Executive’s opinion on who
should be appointed to direct the affairs of the Catholic
Church in the territory newly acquired by the Louisiana
Purchase. After consulting with President Jefferson, thenSecretary of State Madison responded that the selection
of church “functionaries” was an “entirely ecclesiastical”
matter left to the Church’s own judgment. Letter from
James Madison to Bishop Carroll (Nov. 20, 1806), reprinted in 20 Records of the American Catholic Historical Society 63 (1909). The “scrupulous policy of the Constitution
in guarding against a political interference with religious
affairs,” Madison explained, prevented the Government
from rendering an opinion on the “selection of ecclesiastical individuals.” Id., at 63–64.
The second episode occurred in 1811, when Madison was
President. Congress had passed a bill incorporating the
Protestant Episcopal Church in the town of Alexandria in
what was then the District of Columbia. Madison vetoed
the bill, on the ground that it “exceeds the rightful authority to which Governments are limited, by the essential
distinction between civil and religious functions, and
violates, in particular, the article of the Constitution of the


10

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
AND SCHOOL v. EEOC
Opinion of the Court

United States, which declares, that ‘Congress shall make
no law respecting a religious establishment.’ ” 22 Annals
of Cong. 982–983 (1811). Madison explained:
“The bill enacts into, and establishes by law, sundry
rules and proceedings relative purely to the organization and polity of the church incorporated, and
comprehending even the election and removal of the
Minister of the same; so that no change could be made
therein by the particular society, or by the general
church of which it is a member, and whose authority
it recognises.” Id., at 983 (emphasis added).
B
Given this understanding of the Religion Clauses—and
the absence of government employment regulation generally—it was some time before questions about government
interference with a church’s ability to select its own ministers came before the courts. This Court touched upon the
issue indirectly, however, in the context of disputes over
church property. Our decisions in that area confirm that
it is impermissible for the government to contradict a
church’s determination of who can act as its ministers.
In Watson v. Jones, 13 Wall. 679 (1872), the Court considered a dispute between antislavery and proslavery
factions over who controlled the property of the Walnut
Street Presbyterian Church in Louisville, Kentucky. The
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church had recognized the antislavery faction, and this Court—applying
not the Constitution but a “broad and sound view of the
relations of church and state under our system of laws”—
declined to question that determination. Id., at 727. We
explained that “whenever the questions of discipline, or of
faith, or ecclesiastical rule, custom, or law have been
decided by the highest of [the] church judicatories to which
the matter has been carried, the legal tribunals must
accept such decisions as final, and as binding on them.”


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

Ibid. As we would put it later, our opinion in Watson
“radiates . . . a spirit of freedom for religious organizations, an independence from secular control or manipulation—in short, power to decide for themselves, free from
state interference, matters of church government as well
as those of faith and doctrine.” Kedroff v. Saint Nicholas
Cathedral of Russian Orthodox Church in North America,
344 U. S. 94, 116 (1952).
Confronting the issue under the Constitution for the
first time in Kedroff, the Court recognized that the
“[f]reedom to select the clergy, where no improper methods
of choice are proven,” is “part of the free exercise of religion” protected by the First Amendment against government interference. Ibid. At issue in Kedroff was the right
to use a Russian Orthodox cathedral in New York City.
The Russian Orthodox churches in North America had
split from the Supreme Church Authority in Moscow, out
of concern that the Authority had become a tool of the
Soviet Government.
The North American churches
claimed that the right to use the cathedral belonged to an
archbishop elected by them; the Supreme Church Authority claimed that it belonged instead to an archbishop appointed by the patriarch in Moscow. New York’s highest
court ruled in favor of the North American churches,
based on a state law requiring every Russian Orthodox
church in New York to recognize the determination of the
governing body of the North American churches as authoritative. Id., at 96–97, 99, n. 3, 107, n. 10.
This Court reversed, concluding that the New York law
violated the First Amendment. Id., at 107. We explained
that the controversy over the right to use the cathedral
was “strictly a matter of ecclesiastical government, the
power of the Supreme Church Authority of the Russian
Orthodox Church to appoint the ruling hierarch of the
archdiocese of North America.” Id., at 115. By “pass[ing]
the control of matters strictly ecclesiastical from one


12

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
AND SCHOOL v. EEOC
Opinion of the Court

church authority to another,” the New York law intruded
the “power of the state into the forbidden area of religious freedom contrary to the principles of the First Amendment.” Id., at 119. Accordingly, we declared the law
unconstitutional because it “directly prohibit[ed] the free
exercise of an ecclesiastical right, the Church’s choice of its
hierarchy.” Ibid.
This Court reaffirmed these First Amendment principles in Serbian Eastern Orthodox Diocese for United States
and Canada v. Milivojevich, 426 U. S. 696 (1976), a case
involving a dispute over control of the American-Canadian
Diocese of the Serbian Orthodox Church, including its
property and assets. The Church had removed Dionisije
Milivojevich as bishop of the American-Canadian Diocese
because of his defiance of the church hierarchy. Following
his removal, Dionisije brought a civil action in state court
challenging the Church’s decision, and the Illinois Supreme Court “purported in effect to reinstate Dionisije as
Diocesan Bishop,” on the ground that the proceedings
resulting in his removal failed to comply with church laws
and regulations. Id., at 708.
Reversing that judgment, this Court explained that the
First Amendment “permit[s] hierarchical religious organizations to establish their own rules and regulations for
internal discipline and government, and to create tribunals for adjudicating disputes over these matters.” Id., at
724. When ecclesiastical tribunals decide such disputes,
we further explained, “the Constitution requires that civil
courts accept their decisions as binding upon them.” Id.,
at 725. We thus held that by inquiring into whether the
Church had followed its own procedures, the State Supreme Court had “unconstitutionally undertaken the
resolution of quintessentially religious controversies
whose resolution the First Amendment commits exclusively to the highest ecclesiastical tribunals” of the Church.
Id., at 720.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

C
Until today, we have not had occasion to consider whether this freedom of a religious organization to select its
ministers is implicated by a suit alleging discrimination in
employment. The Courts of Appeals, in contrast, have had
extensive experience with this issue. Since the passage of
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U. S. C. §2000e
et seq., and other employment discrimination laws, the
Courts of Appeals have uniformly recognized the existence
of a “ministerial exception,” grounded in the First Amendment, that precludes application of such legislation to
claims concerning the employment relationship between a
religious institution and its ministers.2
We agree that there is such a ministerial exception. The
members of a religious group put their faith in the hands
of their ministers. Requiring a church to accept or retain
an unwanted minister, or punishing a church for failing to
do so, intrudes upon more than a mere employment decision. Such action interferes with the internal governance
of the church, depriving the church of control over the
selection of those who will personify its beliefs. By imposing an unwanted minister, the state infringes the Free
Exercise Clause, which protects a religious group’s right to
shape its own faith and mission through its appointments.
——————
2 See Natal v. Christian and Missionary Alliance, 878 F. 2d 1575,
1578 (CA1 1989); Rweyemamu v. Cote, 520 F. 3d 198, 204–209 (CA2
2008); Petruska v. Gannon Univ., 462 F. 3d 294, 303–307 (CA3 2006);
EEOC v. Roman Catholic Diocese, 213 F. 3d 795, 800–801 (CA4 2000);
Combs v. Central Tex. Annual Conference, 173 F. 3d 343, 345–350 (CA5
1999); Hollins v. Methodist Healthcare, Inc., 474 F. 3d 223, 225–227
(CA6 2007); Schleicher v. Salvation Army, 518 F. 3d 472, 475 (CA7
2008); Scharon v. St. Luke’s Episcopal Presbyterian Hospitals, 929 F. 2d
360, 362–363 (CA8 1991); Werft v. Desert Southwest Annual Conference,
377 F. 3d 1099, 1100–1104 (CA9 2004); Bryce v. Episcopal Church, 289
F. 3d 648, 655–657 (CA10 2002); Gellington v. Christian Methodist
Episcopal Church, Inc., 203 F. 3d 1299, 1301–1304 (CA11 2000); EEOC
v. Catholic Univ., 83 F. 3d 455, 460–463 (CADC 1996).


14

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
AND SCHOOL v. EEOC
Opinion of the Court

According the state the power to determine which individuals will minister to the faithful also violates the Establishment Clause, which prohibits government involvement
in such ecclesiastical decisions.
The EEOC and Perich acknowledge that employment
discrimination laws would be unconstitutional as applied
to religious groups in certain circumstances. They grant,
for example, that it would violate the First Amendment for
courts to apply such laws to compel the ordination of
women by the Catholic Church or by an Orthodox Jewish
seminary. Brief for Federal Respondent 31; Brief for
Respondent Perich 35–36. According to the EEOC and
Perich, religious organizations could successfully defend
against employment discrimination claims in those circumstances by invoking the constitutional right to freedom
of association—a right “implicit” in the First Amendment.
Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U. S. 609, 622
(1984). The EEOC and Perich thus see no need—and no
basis—for a special rule for ministers grounded in the
Religion Clauses themselves.
We find this position untenable. The right to freedom of
association is a right enjoyed by religious and secular
groups alike. It follows under the EEOC’s and Perich’s
view that the First Amendment analysis should be the
same, whether the association in question is the Lutheran
Church, a labor union, or a social club. See Perich Brief
31; Tr. of Oral Arg. 28. That result is hard to square with
the text of the First Amendment itself, which gives special solicitude to the rights of religious organizations. We
cannot accept the remarkable view that the Religion
Clauses have nothing to say about a religious organization’s freedom to select its own ministers.
The EEOC and Perich also contend that our decision in
Employment Div., Dept. of Human Resources of Ore. v.
Smith, 494 U. S. 872 (1990), precludes recognition of a
ministerial exception. In Smith, two members of the


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

Native American Church were denied state unemployment
benefits after it was determined that they had been fired
from their jobs for ingesting peyote, a crime under Oregon
law. We held that this did not violate the Free Exercise
Clause, even though the peyote had been ingested for
sacramental purposes, because the “right of free exercise
does not relieve an individual of the obligation to comply
with a valid and neutral law of general applicability on the
ground that the law proscribes (or prescribes) conduct that
his religion prescribes (or proscribes).” Id., at 879 (internal quotation marks omitted).
It is true that the ADA’s prohibition on retaliation, like
Oregon’s prohibition on peyote use, is a valid and neutral
law of general applicability. But a church’s selection of its
ministers is unlike an individual’s ingestion of peyote.
Smith involved government regulation of only outward
physical acts. The present case, in contrast, concerns
government interference with an internal church decision
that affects the faith and mission of the church itself. See
id., at 877 (distinguishing the government’s regulation of
“physical acts” from its “lend[ing] its power to one or
the other side in controversies over religious authority or
dogma”). The contention that Smith forecloses recognition
of a ministerial exception rooted in the Religion Clauses
has no merit.
III
Having concluded that there is a ministerial exception
grounded in the Religion Clauses of the First Amendment,
we consider whether the exception applies in this case.
We hold that it does.
Every Court of Appeals to have considered the question
has concluded that the ministerial exception is not limited
to the head of a religious congregation, and we agree. We
are reluctant, however, to adopt a rigid formula for deciding when an employee qualifies as a minister. It is enough


16

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
AND SCHOOL v. EEOC
Opinion of the Court

for us to conclude, in this our first case involving the
ministerial exception, that the exception covers Perich,
given all the circumstances of her employment.
To begin with, Hosanna-Tabor held Perich out as a
minister, with a role distinct from that of most of its members. When Hosanna-Tabor extended her a call, it issued
her a “diploma of vocation” according her the title “Minister of Religion, Commissioned.” App. 42. She was tasked
with performing that office “according to the Word of God
and the confessional standards of the Evangelical Lutheran Church as drawn from the Sacred Scriptures.” Ibid.
The congregation prayed that God “bless [her] ministrations to the glory of His holy name, [and] the building of
His church.” Id., at 43. In a supplement to the diploma,
the congregation undertook to periodically review Perich’s
“skills of ministry” and “ministerial responsibilities,” and
to provide for her “continuing education as a professional
person in the ministry of the Gospel.” Id., at 49.
Perich’s title as a minister reflected a significant degree
of religious training followed by a formal process of commissioning. To be eligible to become a commissioned
minister, Perich had to complete eight college-level courses in subjects including biblical interpretation, church
doctrine, and the ministry of the Lutheran teacher. She
also had to obtain the endorsement of her local Synod
district by submitting a petition that contained her academic transcripts, letters of recommendation, personal
statement, and written answers to various ministryrelated questions. Finally, she had to pass an oral examination by a faculty committee at a Lutheran college. It
took Perich six years to fulfill these requirements. And
when she eventually did, she was commissioned as a
minister only upon election by the congregation, which
recognized God’s call to her to teach. At that point, her
call could be rescinded only upon a supermajority vote of
the congregation—a protection designed to allow her to


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of the Court

“preach the Word of God boldly.” Brief for Lutheran
Church-Missouri Synod as Amicus Curiae 15.
Perich held herself out as a minister of the Church by
accepting the formal call to religious service, according to
its terms. She did so in other ways as well. For example,
she claimed a special housing allowance on her taxes that
was available only to employees earning their compensation “ ‘in the exercise of the ministry.’ ” App. 220 (“If you
are not conducting activities ‘in the exercise of the ministry,’ you cannot take advantage of the parsonage or
housing allowance exclusion” (quoting Lutheran ChurchMissouri Synod Brochure on Whether the IRS Considers
Employees as a Minister (2007)). In a form she submitted
to the Synod following her termination, Perich again
indicated that she regarded herself as a minister at
Hosanna-Tabor, stating: “I feel that God is leading me to
serve in the teaching ministry . . . . I am anxious to be in
the teaching ministry again soon.” App. 53.
Perich’s job duties reflected a role in conveying the
Church’s message and carrying out its mission. HosannaTabor expressly charged her with “lead[ing] others toward
Christian maturity” and “teach[ing] faithfully the Word of
God, the Sacred Scriptures, in its truth and purity and as
set forth in all the symbolical books of the Evangelical
Lutheran Church.” Id., at 48. In fulfilling these responsibilities, Perich taught her students religion four days a
week, and led them in prayer three times a day. Once a
week, she took her students to a school-wide chapel service, and—about twice a year—she took her turn leading
it, choosing the liturgy, selecting the hymns, and delivering a short message based on verses from the Bible. During her last year of teaching, Perich also led her fourth
graders in a brief devotional exercise each morning. As a
source of religious instruction, Perich performed an important role in transmitting the Lutheran faith to the next
generation.


18

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
AND SCHOOL v. EEOC
Opinion of the Court

In light of these considerations—the formal title given
Perich by the Church, the substance reflected in that title,
her own use of that title, and the important religious
functions she performed for the Church—we conclude
that Perich was a minister covered by the ministerial
exception.
In reaching a contrary conclusion, the Court of Appeals
committed three errors. First, the Sixth Circuit failed to
see any relevance in the fact that Perich was a commissioned minister. Although such a title, by itself, does not
automatically ensure coverage, the fact that an employee
has been ordained or commissioned as a minister is surely
relevant, as is the fact that significant religious training
and a recognized religious mission underlie the description
of the employee’s position. It was wrong for the Court of
Appeals—and Perich, who has adopted the court’s view,
see Perich Brief 45—to say that an employee’s title does
not matter.
Second, the Sixth Circuit gave too much weight to the
fact that lay teachers at the school performed the same
religious duties as Perich. We express no view on whether
someone with Perich’s duties would be covered by the
ministerial exception in the absence of the other considerations we have discussed. But though relevant, it cannot
be dispositive that others not formally recognized as ministers by the church perform the same functions—
particularly when, as here, they did so only because
commissioned ministers were unavailable.
Third, the Sixth Circuit placed too much emphasis on
Perich’s performance of secular duties. It is true that her
religious duties consumed only 45 minutes of each workday, and that the rest of her day was devoted to teaching
secular subjects. The EEOC regards that as conclusive,
contending that any ministerial exception “should be
limited to those employees who perform exclusively religious functions.” Brief for Federal Respondent 51. We


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

19

Opinion of the Court

cannot accept that view. Indeed, we are unsure whether
any such employees exist. The heads of congregations
themselves often have a mix of duties, including secular
ones such as helping to manage the congregation’s finances, supervising purely secular personnel, and overseeing
the upkeep of facilities.
Although the Sixth Circuit did not adopt the extreme
position pressed here by the EEOC, it did regard the
relative amount of time Perich spent performing religious
functions as largely determinative. The issue before us,
however, is not one that can be resolved by a stopwatch.
The amount of time an employee spends on particular
activities is relevant in assessing that employee’s status,
but that factor cannot be considered in isolation, without
regard to the nature of the religious functions performed
and the other considerations discussed above.
Because Perich was a minister within the meaning of
the exception, the First Amendment requires dismissal of
this employment discrimination suit against her religious
employer. The EEOC and Perich originally sought an
order reinstating Perich to her former position as a called
teacher. By requiring the Church to accept a minister it
did not want, such an order would have plainly violated
the Church’s freedom under the Religion Clauses to select
its own ministers.
Perich no longer seeks reinstatement, having abandoned
that relief before this Court. See Perich Brief 58. But that
is immaterial. Perich continues to seek frontpay in lieu of
reinstatement, backpay, compensatory and punitive damages, and attorney’s fees. An award of such relief would
operate as a penalty on the Church for terminating an
unwanted minister, and would be no less prohibited by the
First Amendment than an order overturning the termination. Such relief would depend on a determination that
Hosanna-Tabor was wrong to have relieved Perich of her
position, and it is precisely such a ruling that is barred by


20

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
AND SCHOOL v. EEOC
Opinion of the Court

the ministerial exception.3
The EEOC and Perich suggest that Hosanna-Tabor’s
asserted religious reason for firing Perich—that she violated the Synod’s commitment to internal dispute resolution—was pretextual. That suggestion misses the point of
the ministerial exception. The purpose of the exception is
not to safeguard a church’s decision to fire a minister only
when it is made for a religious reason. The exception
instead ensures that the authority to select and control
who will minister to the faithful—a matter “strictly ecclesiastical,” Kedroff, 344 U. S., at 119—is the church’s
alone.4
IV
The EEOC and Perich foresee a parade of horribles that
will follow our recognition of a ministerial exception to
employment discrimination suits. According to the EEOC
and Perich, such an exception could protect religious
organizations from liability for retaliating against employ——————
3 Perich does not dispute that if the ministerial exception bars her
retaliation claim under the ADA, it also bars her retaliation claim
under Michigan law.
4 A conflict has arisen in the Courts of Appeals over whether the ministerial exception is a jurisdictional bar or a defense on the merits.
Compare Hollins, 474 F. 3d, at 225 (treating the exception as jurisdictional); and Tomic v. Catholic Diocese of Peoria, 442 F. 3d 1036, 1038–
1039 (CA7 2006) (same), with Petruska, 462 F. 3d, at 302 (treating the
exception as an affirmative defense); Bryce, 289 F. 3d, at 654 (same);
Bollard v. California Province of Soc. of Jesus, 196 F. 3d 940, 951 (CA9
1999) (same); and Natal, 878 F. 2d, at 1576 (same). We conclude that
the exception operates as an affirmative defense to an otherwise
cognizable claim, not a jurisdictional bar. That is because the issue
presented by the exception is “whether the allegations the plaintiff
makes entitle him to relief,” not whether the court has “power to hear
[the] case.” Morrison v. National Australia Bank Ltd., 561 U. S. ___,
___ (2010) (slip op., at 4–5) (internal quotation marks omitted). District
courts have power to consider ADA claims in cases of this sort, and to
decide whether the claim can proceed or is instead barred by the
ministerial exception.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

21

Opinion of the Court

ees for reporting criminal misconduct or for testifying
before a grand jury or in a criminal trial. What is more,
the EEOC contends, the logic of the exception would confer on religious employers “unfettered discretion” to violate employment laws by, for example, hiring children or
aliens not authorized to work in the United States. Brief
for Federal Respondent 29.
Hosanna-Tabor responds that the ministerial exception
would not in any way bar criminal prosecutions for interfering with law enforcement investigations or other
proceedings. Nor, according to the Church, would the
exception bar government enforcement of general laws
restricting eligibility for employment, because the exception applies only to suits by or on behalf of ministers
themselves. Hosanna-Tabor also notes that the ministerial exception has been around in the lower courts for 40
years, see McClure v. Salvation Army, 460 F. 2d 553, 558
(CA5 1972), and has not given rise to the dire consequences predicted by the EEOC and Perich.
The case before us is an employment discrimination suit
brought on behalf of a minister, challenging her church’s
decision to fire her. Today we hold only that the ministerial exception bars such a suit. We express no view on
whether the exception bars other types of suits, including
actions by employees alleging breach of contract or tortious conduct by their religious employers. There will be
time enough to address the applicability of the exception
to other circumstances if and when they arise.
*
*
*
The interest of society in the enforcement of employment discrimination statutes is undoubtedly important.
But so too is the interest of religious groups in choosing
who will preach their beliefs, teach their faith, and carry
out their mission. When a minister who has been fired
sues her church alleging that her termination was dis-


22

HOSANNA-TABOR EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH
AND SCHOOL v. EEOC
Opinion of the Court

criminatory, the First Amendment has struck the balance
for us. The church must be free to choose those who will
guide it on its way.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals for the Sixth
Circuit is reversed.
It is so ordered.

