(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BARBER ET AL. v. THOMAS, WARDEN
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–5201. Argued March 30, 2010—Decided June 7, 2010
The federal sentencing statute at issue provides that a “prisoner . . .
serving a term of imprisonment of more than 1 year . . . may receive
credit toward the service of [that] sentence . . . of up to 54 days at the
end of each year” subject to the Bureau of Prison’s (BOP) “determina
tion . . . that, during that year, the prisoner” has behaved in an ex
emplary fashion. 18 U. S. C. §3624(b)(1). Credit “for the last year or
portion of a year of the term of imprisonment [is] prorated . . . .” Ibid.
The BOP applies this statute using a methodology that awards 54
days of credit at the end of each year the prisoner serves and sets
those days to the side. When the difference between the time re
maining in the sentence and the amount of accumulated credit is less
than one year, the BOP awards a prorated amount of credit for that
final year proportional to the awards in other years.
Petitioners claim that the BOP’s calculation method is unlawful
because §3624(b)(1) requires a calculation based on the length of the
term of imprisonment imposed by the sentencing judge, not the
length of time that the prisoner actually serves. The District Court
rejected this challenge in each of petitioner’s cases, and the Ninth
Circuit affirmed.
Held: Because the BOP’s method for calculating good time credit re
flects the most natural reading of the statute, it is lawful. Pp. 5–17.
(a) The statute’s language and purpose, taken together, support the
BOP’s method. That method tracks §3624(b)’s language by providing
a prisoner a maximum credit of 54 days for each full year of impris
onment and a proportionally adjusted amount of credit for any addi
tional time served that is less than a full year. As §3624(b) directs,
the BOP awards the credit “at the end of each year” of imprisonment.
Petitioners’ approach cannot be reconciled with the statute. Because


2

BARBER v. THOMAS
Syllabus
it awards credit for the sentence imposed, regardless of how much
time is actually served, a prisoner could receive credit for a year that
he does not spend in prison. Moreover the calculation of credit for
such a year would not be made “at the end of” that year. Nor could
the BOP determine whether the prisoner had exemplary behavior
“during that year.” This language did not find its way into the stat
ute by accident. The differences between the prior provision (re
pealed in 1984)—which granted the prisoner a deduction at the out
set of his sentence, subject to forfeiture for breaking prison rules—
and the present statute—under which “credit” is “earned” “at the end
of” the year based on an evaluation of behavior “during that year”—
show an intent to move from a prospective entitlement to a retrospec
tive award. The BOP’s method also furthers the basic purpose of the
statute. Section 3624 was part of the comprehensive Sentencing Re
form Act of 1984, which sought to achieve both increased sentencing
uniformity and greater honesty by “mak[ing] all sentences basically
determinate.” Mistretta v. United States, 488 U. S. 361, 367. There
after, the sentence the judge imposed would be the one the offender
actually served, with a sole statutory exception for good time credits.
Ibid. Section 3624(b) states the reason for the exception: to provide
an incentive for prisoners to “compl[y] with institutional disciplinary
regulations.” The exception is limited and tailored to its purpose—
credit is earned at the end of the year after compliance with institu
tional rules is demonstrated and thereby rewards and reinforces a
readily identifiable period of good behavior. The BOP’s approach fur
thers §3624’s objectives by tying the award directly to good behavior
during the preceding year. In contrast, petitioners’ approach would
allow a prisoner to earn credit for both the portion of his sentence
that he served and the portion offset with earned credit, which would
loosen the statute’s connection between good behavior and the good
time award. Pp. 5–8.
(b) Arguments to the contrary are unconvincing. Context indicates
that the phrase “term of imprisonment” as used in the portion of
§3624(b) at issue here refers to prison time actually served not, as pe
titioners contend, to the sentence imposed by the judge. Petitioners’
reliance on legislative history is misplaced. A U. S. Sentencing Com
mission Supplementary Report is not helpful to them either, because
there is no indication that the Commission, in that report or in the
Guidelines themselves, considered or referred to the particular ques
tion whether to base good time credit on time served or the sentence
imposed. Nor, in light of the statute’s text, structure, history, and
purpose, is this a case in which there is a “grievous ambiguity or un
certainty in the statute,” Muscarello v. United States, 524 U. S. 125,
139, permitting application of the rule of lenity. Because the BOP’s


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
calculation system applies the statute as its language is most natu
rally read, and in accordance with the statute’s basic purpose, this
Court need not determine the extent to which Congress has granted
the BOP authority to interpret the statute more broadly, or differ
ently than it has done here. Cf. Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural Re
sources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U. S. 837, 844–845. And because
the BOP’s approach reflects the statute’s most natural reading and is
the most consistent with its purpose, it is also preferable to the dis
sent’s alternative interpretation. Pp. 8–17.
Affirmed.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, THOMAS, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. KENNEDY, J., filed a dissenting opinion in which STEVENS and GINSBURG,
JJ., joined.

