No. 132, Orig. SOUTHEAST INTERSTATE LOW-LEVEL RADIO-  [June 1, 2010] JUSTICE KENNEDY, with whom JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR joins, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment. The Court is correct, in my view, to conclude that we may not “add provisions to a federal statute.” Ante, at 20. Plaintiffs do not request as much, however, in contending that North Carolina was required by the Compact to carry out its obligations in good faith. Rather, plaintiffs’ argu ment is that the Compact’s terms, properly construed, speak not only to the specific duties imposed upon the parties but also to the manner in which those duties must be carried out. This is an interpretive argument familiar to contract disputes. See, e.g., Restatement (Second) of Contracts §205 (1979) (hereinafter Restatement). As the opinion for the Court notes, congressional con sent to an interstate compact gives it the status of a fed eral statute. See ante, at 20. This is an apt and proper way to indicate that a compact has all the dignity of an Act of Congress. And that is surely what was meant in it was stated that the Court may not “ ‘order relief incon sistent with [the] express terms’ ” of a compact. Ante, at 20 (quoting New Jersey; alteration in original; some inter
449 U. S. 433, 438 (1981) (“[C]ongressional consent trans forms an interstate compact . . . into a law of the United States”). From this principle, however, it simply does not follow that a law’s nature and origin as a compact must be dis missed as irrelevant. Like a treaty, a compact represents an agreement between parties. See New Jersey, supra, at 831 (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (“[T]he Compact here is of course a treaty”). The Court’s duty in interpreting a com pact involves ascertaining the intent of the parties. See to be interpreted upon the principles which govern the interpretation of contracts . . . with a view to making effective the purposes of the high contracting parties”); receive a fair interpretation, according to the intention of the contracting parties”). Carrying out this duty may lead the Court to consult sources that might differ from those normally reviewed when an ordinary federal statute is at issue. That much is surely implicit in the Court’s refer ence to contract law principles elsewhere in its opinion in the instant case. See, e.g., ante, at 14 (“[T]he parties’ course of performance under the Compact is highly signifi cant”); ibid. (citing the Restatement); id., at 18–19 (same); see also New Jersey, supra, at 830–831 (SCALIA, J., dis senting) (construing a compact in light of “hornbook con tracts law that the practical construction of an ambiguous agreement revealed by later conduct of the parties is good indication of its meaning”). That said, it is quite correct to hold here that the rea sonable expectations of the contracting States, as mani fested in the Compact, do not reveal an intent to limit North Carolina’s power of withdrawal. For purposes of rejecting this argument, it is sufficient to note—as the Court does—that the Compact permits any State to with
draw; imposes no limitation on this right; and explicitly provides that the Compact shall not be construed to abridge the sovereign rights of any party State. See ante, at 20–21. Federalism concerns also counsel reluctance to find that a State has implicitly restricted its sovereignty in such a manner. The Court is therefore correct to reject plaintiffs’ final exception. With these observations, I join the Court’s opinion with the exception of Part II–E.