Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 132, Orig.
_________________

STATE OF ALABAMA, STATE OF FLORIDA, STATE OF

TENNESSEE, COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA, AND

SOUTHEAST INTERSTATE LOW-LEVEL RADIO- 

ACTIVE WASTE MANAGEMENT COMMISSION, 

PLAINTIFFS v. STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA

ON EXCEPTIONS TO THE PRELIMINARY AND SECOND REPORTS
OF THE SPECIAL MASTER
[June 1, 2010]

CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS, with whom JUSTICE THOMAS
joins, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
The parties to this case are Alabama, Florida, North
Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and the Southeast Inter
state Low-Level Radioactive Waste Management Commis
sion. One of these things is not like the others: The Com
mission is not a sovereign State. The Court entertains its
suit—despite North Carolina’s sovereign immunity—
because the Commission “asserts the same claims and
seeks the same relief as the other plaintiffs.” Ante, at 23.
Our Constitution does not countenance such “no harm, no
foul” jurisdiction, and I respectfully dissent.
The Court has made this mistake before. In Arizona v.
California, 460 U. S. 605 (1983), we allowed Indian Tribes
that could not sue sovereign States to piggyback on the
claims of the United States, which could. We reasoned
that once the United States had initiated suit, the state
defendants could “no longer . . . assert [their] immunity
with respect to the subject matter of [the] action,” so the
Tribes were free to pile on and join the suit. Id., at 614.
Today the Court retraces Arizona’s steps, quoting that
case for the proposition that when private plaintiffs “ ‘do


2

ALABAMA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

not seek to bring new claims or issues, . . . our judicial
power over the controversy is not enlarged . . . , and the
States’ sovereign immunity protected by the Eleventh
Amendment is not compromised.’ ” Ante, at 23 (quoting
Arizona, supra, at 614).
That statement is contrary to the language of the Con
stitution. The Eleventh Amendment provides:
“The Judicial power of the United States shall not
be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity,
commenced or prosecuted against one of the United
States by Citizens of another State, or by Citizens or
Subjects of any Foreign State.”
The immunity conferred is against the “commence[ment]
or prosecut[ion]” of “any suit in law or equity.” There is no
carve-out for suits “prosecuted” by private parties so long
as those parties “ ‘do not seek to bring new claims or is
sues.’ ” Ante, at 23 (quoting Arizona, supra, at 614).
Understandably, the Court’s opinion leans heavily on
Arizona, which has never been squarely overruled. Ante,
at 23–24. But Arizona itself is built on sand. The relevant
portion of that opinion is almost wholly unreasoned. It
cites only a footnote in a prior case, the pertinent para
graph of which failed even to discuss the State’s immunity
from private suit. See 460 U. S., at 614 (citing Maryland
v. Louisiana, 451 U. S. 725, 745, n. 21 (1981)). That para
graph addressed only intervention, not sovereign immu
nity, and the two issues are distinct. See South Carolina
v. North Carolina, 558 U. S. ___, ___, n. 5 (2010) (slip op.,
at 10, n. 5).
Most importantly, the subsequent development of our
sovereign immunity jurisprudence has only undermined
Arizona’s already weak foundations. We recognized in
Alden v. Maine, 527 U. S. 706, 718 (1999), that the Consti
tution left intact the States’ pre-existing “immunity from
private suits”; as the Eleventh Amendment confirms, the


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

States did not “ ‘surrender . . . this immunity in the plan of
the convention.’ ” Id., at 717 (quoting The Federalist No.
81, p. 487 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961) (A. Hamilton)); see also
Alden, supra, at 718–722, 755–756. There is no reason to
suppose that the States, at the founding, made an excep
tion for private suits that happen to mimic other plaintiffs’
claims—and neither Arizona nor the Court today suggests
otherwise.
Whether or not a plaintiff “seeks the same relief” or
imposes any “additional defense or liability,” ante, at 23–
24, simply does not matter in light of our recognition that
sovereign immunity provides an “immunity from suit,” not
a “defense to . . . liability.” Federal Maritime Comm’n v.
South Carolina Ports Authority, 535 U. S. 743, 766 (2002).
As we have explained, “the relief sought by a plaintiff
suing a State is irrelevant to the question whether the suit
is barred.” Seminole Tribe of Fla. v. Florida, 517 U. S. 44,
58 (1996). Indeed, we have suggested that private parties
may not sue even if a court is “precluded . . . from award
ing them any relief.” Federal Maritime Comm’n, supra, at
766 (emphasis added) (dictum). It is the fact that a pri
vate party is allowed to sue a sovereign State—not the
burden of litigation or the relief sought—that infringes the
immunity of the State. “The Eleventh Amendment is
concerned not only with the States’ ability to withstand
suit, but with their privilege not to be sued.” Puerto Rico
Aqueduct and Sewer Authority v. Metcalf & Eddy, Inc.,
506 U. S. 139, 147, n. 5 (1993).
It is therefore impossible for the Court to hear private
claims against a nonconsenting State without expanding
“our judicial power over the controversy.” Arizona, supra,
at 614. Sovereign immunity is a limitation on that power.
The similarity of claims may be relevant to joinder or
intervention, but those are procedural means of processing
claims, not fonts of judicial authority. See Henderson v.
United States, 517 U. S. 654, 664 (1996).


4

ALABAMA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.

Nor may the Court entertain private claims without
“compromis[ing]” “the States’ sovereign immunity.” Ari
zona, 460 U. S., at 614. As a party, the Commission enjoys
legally enforceable rights against the defendant State: It
may object to settlement, seek taxation of costs, advance
arguments we are obliged to consider, and plead the
judgment as res judicata in future litigation. If the Com
mission truly sought nothing for itself—other than “a full
exposition of the issues,” Preliminary Report of the Special
Master 14—it could have participated as an amicus.
The Commission and North Carolina know that more is
at stake if the Commission is allowed to sue the State. It
is precisely the Commission’s status as a party, its attempt
to “prosecut[e]” a “suit in law or equity . . . against one of
the United States,” U. S. Const., Amdt. 11, that sovereign
immunity forbids.
I would sustain North Carolina’s first exception to the
Special Master’s reports.*

——————
* I also join JUSTICE BREYER’s opinion and all of the Court’s opinion
save Parts II–D and III–B. JUSTICE THOMAS joins all but Part III–B of
the Court’s opinion.

