6

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, LLC
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

interpret the new provision in that manner. See Chevron
U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.,
467 U. S. 837, 843–845 (1984).
In an earlier case, and in an unrelated controversy not
implicating the Internal Revenue Code, the Court held
that a judicial construction of an ambiguous statute did
not foreclose an agency’s later, inconsistent interpretation
of the same provision. National Cable & Telecommunications Assn. v. Brand X Internet Services, 545 U. S. 967,
982–983 (2005) (“Only a judicial precedent holding that
the statute unambiguously forecloses the agency’s interpretation, and therefore contains no gap for the agency to
fill, displaces a conflicting agency construction”). This
general rule recognizes that filling gaps left by ambiguities in a statute “involves difficult policy choices that
agencies are better equipped to make than courts.” Id., at
980. There has been no opportunity to decide whether the
analysis would be any different if an agency sought to
interpret an ambiguous statute in a way that was inconsistent with this Court’s own, earlier reading of the law.
See id., at 1003 (Stevens, J., concurring).
These issues are not implicated here. In Colony the
Court did interpret the same phrase that must be interpreted in this case. The language was in a predecessor
statute, however, and Congress has added new language
that, in my view, controls the analysis and should instruct
the Court to reach a different outcome today. The Treasury Department’s regulations were promulgated in light of
these statutory revisions, which were not at issue in Colony. There is a serious difficulty to insisting, as the Court
does today, that an ambiguous provision must continue to
be read the same way even after it has been reenacted
with additional language suggesting Congress would
permit a different interpretation. Agencies with the responsibility and expertise necessary to administer ongoing
regulatory schemes should have the latitude and discre-

