Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

In Colony this Court held that taxpayer misstatements,
overstating the basis in property, do not fall within the
scope of the statute. But the Court recognized the Commissioner’s contrary argument for inclusion. 357 U. S., at
32. Then as now, the Code itself defined “gross income” in
this context as the difference between gross revenue (often
the amount the taxpayer received upon selling the property) and basis (often the amount the taxpayer paid for the
property). Compare 26 U. S. C. §§22, 111 (1940 ed.) with
§§61(a)(3), 1001(a) (2000 ed.). And, the Commissioner
pointed out, an overstatement of basis can diminish the
“amount” of the gain just as leaving the item entirely off
the return might do. 357 U. S., at 32. Either way, the
error wrongly understates the taxpayer’s income.
But, the Court added, the Commissioner’s argument did
not fully account for the provision’s language, in particular
the word “omit.” The key phrase says “omits . . . an
amount.” The word “omits” (unlike, say, “reduces” or “understates”) means “ ‘[t]o leave out or unmentioned; not
to insert, include, or name.’ ” Ibid. (quoting Webster’s New
International Dictionary (2d ed. 1939)). Thus, taken
literally, “omit” limits the statute’s scope to situations in
which specific receipts or accruals of income are left out
of the computation of gross income; to inflate the basis,
however, is not to “omit” a specific item, not even of profit.
While finding this latter interpretation of the language
the “more plausibl[e],” the Court also noted that the language was not “unambiguous.” Colony, 357 U. S., at 33. It
then examined various congressional Reports discussing
the relevant statutory language. It found in those Reports
“persuasive indications that Congress merely had in
mind failures to report particular income receipts and
accruals, and did not intend the [extended] limitation
to apply whenever gross income was understated . . . .”
Id., at 35.

