2

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, LLC
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

trumps an agency construction otherwise entitled to Chev­
ron deference only if the prior court decision holds that its
construction follows from the unambiguous terms of the
statute.” Id., at 982.
In cases decided pre-Brand X, the Court had no inkling
that it must utter the magic words “ambiguous” or “unambiguous” in order to (poof !) expand or abridge executive power, and (poof !) enable or disable administrative
contradiction of the Supreme Court. Indeed, the Court
was unaware of even the utility (much less the necessity)
of making the ambiguous/nonambiguous determination in
cases decided pre-Chevron, before that opinion made the
so-called “Step 1” determination of ambiguity vel non a
customary (though hardly mandatory1) part of judicialreview analysis. For many of those earlier cases, therefore, it will be incredibly difficult to determine whether the
decision purported to be giving meaning to an ambiguous,
or rather an unambiguous, statute.
Thus, one would have thought that the Brand X majority would breathe a sigh of relief in the present case, involving a pre-Chevron opinion that (mirabile dictu) makes
it inescapably clear that the Court thought the statute
ambiguous: “It cannot be said that the language is unam­
biguous.” Colony, supra, at 33 (emphasis added). As
today’s plurality opinion explains, Colony “said that the
taxpayer had the better side of the textual argument,”
ante, at 10 (emphasis added)—not what Brand X requires
——————
1 “Step 1” has never been an essential part of Chevron analysis.
Whether a particular statute is ambiguous makes no difference if the
interpretation adopted by the agency is clearly reasonable—and it
would be a waste of time to conduct that inquiry. See Entergy Corp. v.
Riverkeeper, Inc., 556 U. S. 208, 218, and n. 4 (2009). The same would
be true if the agency interpretation is clearly beyond the scope of any
conceivable ambiguity. It does not matter whether the word “yellow” is
ambiguous when the agency has interpreted it to mean “purple.” See
Stephenson & Vermeule, Chevron Has Only One Step, 95 Va. L. Rev.
597, 599 (2009).

