4

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, LLC
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

seemingly, is that post-Chevron a finding of ambiguity is
accompanied by a finding of agency authority to resolve
the ambiguity, but pre-Chevron that was not so. The
premise is false. Post-Chevron cases do not “conclude”
that Congress wanted the particular ambiguity resolved
by the agency; that is simply the legal effect of ambiguity—a legal effect that should obtain whenever the
language is in fact (as Colony found) ambiguous.
Does the plurality feel that it ought not give effect to
Colony’s determination of ambiguity because the Court did
not know, in that era, the importance of that determination—that it would empower the agency to (in effect)
revise the Court’s determination of statutory meaning?
But as I suggested earlier, that was an ignorance which all
of our cases shared not just pre-Chevron, but pre-Brand X.
Before then it did not really matter whether the Court was
resolving an ambiguity or setting forth the statute’s clear
meaning. The opinion might (or might not) advert to
that point in the course of its analysis, but either way
the Court’s interpretation of the statute would be the law.
So it is no small number of still-authoritative cases
that today’s plurality opinion would exile to the Land of
Uncertainty.
Perhaps sensing the fragility of its new approach, the
plurality opinion then pivots (as the à la mode vernacular
has it)—from focusing on whether Colony concluded that
there was gap-filling authority to focusing on whether
Colony concluded that there was any gap to be filled: “The
question is whether the Court in Colony concluded that
the statute left such a gap. And, in our view, the opinion
. . . makes clear that it did not.” Ante, at 11. How does the
plurality know this? Because Justice Harlan’s opinion
“said that the taxpayer had the better side of the textual
argument”; because it found that legislative history indicated “that Congress intended overstatements of basis to
fall outside the statute’s scope”; because it concluded that

