(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, 

LLC, ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
No. 11–139.

Argued January 17, 2012—Decided April 25, 2012

Ordinarily, the Government must assess a deficiency against a taxpayer within “3 years after the return was filed,” 26 U. S. C. §6501(a),
but that period is extended to 6 years when a taxpayer “omits from
gross income an amount properly includible therein which is in excess of 25 percent of the amount of gross income stated in the return,”
§6501(e)(1)(A). Respondent taxpayers overstated the basis of certain
property that they had sold. As a result, their returns understated
the gross income they received from the sale by an amount in excess
of 25%. The Commissioner asserted the deficiency outside the 3-year
limitations period but within the 6-year period. The Fourth Circuit
concluded that the taxpayers’ overstatements of basis, and resulting
understatements of gross income, did not trigger the extended limitations period.
Held: The judgment is affirmed.
634 F. 3d 249, affirmed.
JUSTICE BREYER delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to
Part IV–C, concluding that §6501(e)(1)(A) does not apply to an overstatement of basis. Pp. 2–8.
(a) In Colony, Inc. v. Commissioner, 357 U. S. 28, the Court interpreted a provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1939 containing
language materially indistinguishable from the language at issue
here, holding that taxpayer misstatements that overstate the basis in
property do not fall within the statute’s scope. The Court recognized
that such an overstatement wrongly understates a taxpayer’s income,
but concluded that the phrase “omits . . . an amount” limited the
statute’s scope to situations in which specific receipts are left out of

