4

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, LLC
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

would not be activated by a business’s overstatement of
the cost of goods sold. This did important work. There
are, after all, unique complexities involved in calculating
inventory costs. See, e.g., O. Whittington & K. Pany,
Principles of Auditing and Other Assurance Services 488
(15th ed. 2006) (“The audit of inventories presents the
auditors with significant risk because: (a) they often represent a very substantial portion of current assets, (b)
numerous valuation methods are used for inventories, (c)
the valuation of inventories directly affects cost of goods
sold, and (d) the determination of inventory quality, condition, and value is inherently complex”); see also Internal
Revenue Service, Publication 538, Accounting Periods and
Methods 17 (rev. Mar. 2008) (discussing methods for
identifying the cost of items in inventory). Congress
sought fit to make clear that errors in these kinds of calculations would not extend the limitations period.
Colony itself might be classified as a special “business
inventory” case. Unlike the taxpayers here, the taxpayer
in Colony claimed to be a business with income from the
sale of goods, though the “goods” it held for sale were real
estate lots. See Intermountain Ins. Serv. of Vail v. Commissioner, 650 F. 3d 691, 703 (CADC 2011) (Tatel, J.)
(“Colony described itself as a taxpayer in a trade or business with income from the sale of goods or services—i.e.,
as falling within [clause] (i)’s scope had the subsection
applied pre-1954 . . .”). The Court, in turn, observed that
its construction of the pre-1954 statute in favor of the
taxpayer was “in harmony with the unambiguous language of [newly enacted] §6501(e)(1)(A).” 357 U. S., at 37.
Clause (i) of the new provision, as just noted, ensured that
the extended limitations period would not cover overstated
costs of goods sold. The revised statute’s special treatment
of these costs suggests that overstatements of basis in
other cases could have the effect of extending the limitations period.

