Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

the same language the Court considered in Colony; but the
statutory interpretation issue here cannot be resolved, and
the Colony decision cannot be deemed controlling, without
first considering the inferences that should be drawn from
added statutory text. The additional language was not
part of the statute that governed the taxpayer’s liability in
Colony, and the Court did not consider it in that case.
Congress revised the Internal Revenue Code in 1954,
several years before Colony was decided but after the tax
years in question in that case. Although the interpretation adopted by the Court in Colony can be a proper beginning point for the interpretation of the revised statute,
it ought not to be the end.
The central language of the new provision remained
the same as the old, with the longer period of limitations
still applicable where a taxpayer had “omit[ted] from gross
income an amount . . . in excess of 25 per[cent] of the
amount of gross income stated in the return.” In Colony,
however, the Court left open whether Congress had nonetheless “manifested an intention to clarify or to change the
1939 Code.” Id., at 37. The 1954 revisions, of course,
could not provide a direct response to Colony, which had
not yet been decided. But there were indications that,
whatever the earlier version of the statute had meant,
Congress expected that the overstatement of basis would
be considered an omission from gross income as a general
rule going forward.
For example, the new law created a special exception for
businesses by defining their gross income to be “the total
of the amounts received or accrued from the sale of goods
or services” without factoring in “the cost of such sales or
services.” 26 U. S. C. §6501(e)(1)(A)(i) (1958 ed.) (currently §6501(e)(1)(B)(i) (2006 ed., Supp. IV)). The principal purpose of this provision, perhaps motivated by the
facts in the Third Circuit’s Uptegrove decision, seems to have
been to ensure that the extended statute of limitations

