Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

tion to implement their interpretation of provisions reenacted in a new statutory framework. And this is especially
so when the new language enacted by Congress seems to
favor the very interpretation at issue. The approach taken
by the Court instead forecloses later interpretations of a
law that has changed in relevant ways. Cf. United States
v. Mead Corp., 533 U. S. 218, 247 (2001) (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (“Worst of all, the majority’s approach will lead
to the ossification of large portions of our statutory law.
Where Chevron applies, statutory ambiguities remain ambiguities subject to the agency’s ongoing clarification”).
The Court goes too far, in my respectful view, in constricting Congress’s ability to leave agencies in charge of filling
statutory gaps.
Our legal system presumes there will be continuing
dialogue among the three branches of Government on
questions of statutory interpretation and application. See
Blakely v. Washington, 542 U. S. 296, 326 (2004)
(KENNEDY, J., dissenting) (“Constant, constructive discourse between our courts and our legislatures is an integral and admirable part of the constitutional design”);
Mistretta v. United States, 488 U. S. 361, 408 (1989) (“Our
principle of separation of powers anticipates that the
coordinate Branches will converse with each other on
matters of vital common interest”). In some cases Congress will set out a general principle, to be administered in
more detail by an agency in the exercise of its discretion.
The agency may be in a proper position to evaluate the
best means of implementing the statute in its practical
application. Where the agency exceeds its authority, of
course, courts must invalidate the regulation. And agency
interpretations that lead to unjust or unfair consequences
can be corrected, much like disfavored judicial interpretations, by congressional action. These instructive exchanges would be foreclosed by an insistence on adhering
to earlier interpretations of a statute even in light of new,

