2

UNITED STATES v. HOME CONCRETE & SUPPLY, LLC
Syllabus
the computation of gross income. The Court also noted that while the
statute’s language was not “unambiguous,” id., at 33, the statutory
history showed that Congress intended to restrict the extended limitations period to situations that did not include overstatements of basis. Finally, the Court found its conclusion “in harmony with the
unambiguous language of §6501(e)(1)(A),” id., at 37, the provision
enacted as part of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 and applicable
here. Pp. 2–4.
(b) Colony determines the outcome of this case. The operative language of the 1939 provision and the provision at issue is identical. It
would be difficult to give the same language here a different interpretation without overruling Colony, a course of action stare decisis
counsels against. John R. Sand & Gravel Co. v. United States, 552
U. S. 130, 139. The Government suggests that differences in other
nearby parts of the 1954 Code favor a different interpretation than
the one adopted in Colony. However, its arguments are too fragile to
bear the significant weight it seeks to place upon them. Pp. 4–7.
(c) The Court also rejects the Government’s argument that a recently promulgated Treasury Regulation interpreting the statute’s
operative language in its favor should be granted deference under
Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467
U. S. 837. See National Cable & Telecommunications Assn. v. Brand
X Internet Services, 545 U. S. 967, 982. Colony has already interpreted the statute, and there is no longer any different construction that
is consistent with Colony and available for adoption by the agency.
Pp. 7–8.

BREYER, J. delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to Part IV–C.
ROBERTS, C. J., and THOMAS and ALITO, JJ., joined that opinion in full,
and SCALIA, J., joined except for Part IV–C. SCALIA, J., filed an opinion
concurring in part and concurring in the judgment. KENNEDY, J., filed
a dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined.

