Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

ALITO, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–751
_________________

ALBERT SNYDER, PETITIONER v. FRED W. 

PHELPS, SR., ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT

[March 2, 2011] 


JUSTICE ALITO, dissenting.
Our profound national commitment to free and open
debate is not a license for the vicious verbal assault that
occurred in this case.
Petitioner Albert Snyder is not a public figure. He is
simply a parent whose son, Marine Lance Corporal Mat
thew Snyder, was killed in Iraq. Mr. Snyder wanted what
is surely the right of any parent who experiences such an
incalculable loss: to bury his son in peace. But respon
dents, members of the Westboro Baptist Church, deprived
him of that elementary right. They first issued a press
release and thus turned Matthew’s funeral into a tumul
tuous media event. They then appeared at the church,
approached as closely as they could without trespassing,
and launched a malevolent verbal attack on Matthew and
his family at a time of acute emotional vulnerability. As a
result, Albert Snyder suffered severe and lasting emo
tional injury.1 The Court now holds that the First
Amendment protected respondents’ right to brutalize Mr.
Snyder. I cannot agree.
I
Respondents and other members of their church have
——————
1 See

580 F. 3d 206, 213–214, 216 (CA4 2009).


2

SNYDER v. PHELPS
ALITO, J., dissenting

strong opinions on certain moral, religious, and political
issues, and the First Amendment ensures that they have
almost limitless opportunities to express their views.
They may write and distribute books, articles, and other
texts; they may create and disseminate video and audio
recordings; they may circulate petitions; they may speak
to individuals and groups in public forums and in any
private venue that wishes to accommodate them; they may
picket peacefully in countless locations; they may appear
on television and speak on the radio; they may post mes
sages on the Internet and send out e-mails. And they may
express their views in terms that are “uninhibited,” “ve
hement,” and “caustic.” New York Times Co. v. Sullivan,
376 U. S. 254, 270 (1964).
It does not follow, however, that they may intentionally
inflict severe emotional injury on private persons at a time
of intense emotional sensitivity by launching vicious ver
bal attacks that make no contribution to public debate. To
protect against such injury, “most if not all jurisdictions”
permit recovery in tort for the intentional infliction of
emotional distress (or IIED). Hustler Magazine, Inc. v.
Falwell, 485 U. S. 46, 53 (1988).
This is a very narrow tort with requirements that “are
rigorous, and difficult to satisfy.” W. Keeton, D. Dobbs, R.
Keeton, & D. Owen, Prosser and Keeton on Law of Torts
§12, p. 61 (5th ed. 1984). To recover, a plaintiff must show
that the conduct at issue caused harm that was truly
severe. See Figueiredo-Torres v. Nickel, 321 Md. 642, 653,
584 A. 2d 69, 75 (1991) (“[R]ecovery will be meted out
sparingly, its balm reserved for those wounds that are
truly severe and incapable of healing themselves” (inter
nal quotation marks omitted)); Harris v. Jones, 281 Md.
560, 571, 380 A. 2d 611, 616 (1977) (the distress must be
“ ‘so severe that no reasonable man could be expected to
endure it’ ” (quoting Restatement (Second) of Torts §46,
Comment j (1963–1964))).


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

ALITO, J., dissenting

A plaintiff must also establish that the defendant’s
conduct was “ ‘so outrageous in character, and so extreme
in degree, as to go beyond all possible bounds of decency,
and to be regarded as atrocious, and utterly intolerable in
a civilized community.’ ” Id., at 567, 380 A. 2d, at 614
(quoting Restatement (Second) of Torts §46, Comment d).
Although the elements of the IIED tort are difficult to
meet, respondents long ago abandoned any effort to show
that those tough standards were not satisfied here. On
appeal, they chose not to contest the sufficiency of the
evidence. See 580 F. 3d 206, 216 (CA4 2009). They did
not dispute that Mr. Snyder suffered “ ‘wounds that are
truly severe and incapable of healing themselves.’ ” Fi
gueiredo-Torres, supra, at 653, 584 A. 2d, at 75. Nor did
they dispute that their speech was “ ‘so outrageous in
character, and so extreme in degree, as to go beyond all
possible bounds of decency, and to be regarded as atro
cious, and utterly intolerable in a civilized community.’ ”
Harris, supra, at 567, 380 A. 2d, at 614. Instead, they
maintained that the First Amendment gave them a license
to engage in such conduct. They are wrong.
II
It is well established that a claim for the intentional
infliction of emotional distress can be satisfied by speech.
Indeed, what has been described as “[t]he leading case”
recognizing this tort involved speech. Prosser and Keeton,
supra, §12, at 60 (citing Wilkinson v. Downton, [1897] 2
Q. B. 57); see also Restatement (Second) of Torts §46,
illustration 1. And although this Court has not decided
the question, I think it is clear that the First Amendment
does not entirely preclude liability for the intentional
infliction of emotional distress by means of speech.
This Court has recognized that words may “by their very
utterance inflict injury” and that the First Amendment
does not shield utterances that form “no essential part of


4

SNYDER v. PHELPS
ALITO, J., dissenting

any exposition of ideas, and are of such slight social value
as a step to truth that any benefit that may be derived
from them is clearly outweighed by the social interest in
order and morality.” Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315
U. S. 568, 572 (1942); see also Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310
U. S. 296, 310 (1940) (“[P]ersonal abuse is not in any
proper sense communication of information or opinion
safeguarded by the Constitution”). When grave injury is
intentionally inflicted by means of an attack like the one
at issue here, the First Amendment should not interfere
with recovery.
III
In this case, respondents brutally attacked Matthew
Snyder, and this attack, which was almost certain to
inflict injury, was central to respondents’ well-practiced
strategy for attracting public attention.
On the morning of Matthew Snyder’s funeral, respon
dents could have chosen to stage their protest at countless
locations. They could have picketed the United States
Capitol, the White House, the Supreme Court, the Penta
gon, or any of the more than 5,600 military recruiting
stations in this country. They could have returned to the
Maryland State House or the United States Naval Acad
emy, where they had been the day before. They could
have selected any public road where pedestrians are al
lowed. (There are more than 4,000,000 miles of public
roads in the United States.2) They could have staged their
protest in a public park. (There are more than 20,000
public parks in this country.3) They could have chosen any
——————
2 See Dept. of Transp., Federal Highway Administration, Highway Sta
tistics 2008, Table HM–12M, http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/
statistics/2008/hm12m.cfm (all Internet materials as visited Feb. 25, 2011,
and available in Clerk of Court’s case file).
3 See
Trust for Public Land, 2010 City Park Facts, http://
www.tpl.org/content_documents/CityParkFacts_2010.pdf.


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

ALITO, J., dissenting

Catholic church where no funeral was taking place.
(There are nearly 19,000 Catholic churches in the United
States.4) But of course, a small group picketing at any of
these locations would have probably gone unnoticed.
The Westboro Baptist Church, however, has devised a
strategy that remedies this problem. As the Court notes,
church members have protested at nearly 600 military
funerals. Ante, at 1. They have also picketed the funerals
of police officers,5 firefighters,6 and the victims of natural
disasters,7 accidents,8 and shocking crimes.9 And in ad
vance of these protests, they issue press releases to ensure
that their protests will attract public attention.10
This strategy works because it is expected that respon
dents’ verbal assaults will wound the family and friends of
the deceased and because the media is irresistibly drawn
to the sight of persons who are visibly in grief. The more
outrageous the funeral protest, the more publicity the
Westboro Baptist Church is able to obtain. Thus, when
the church recently announced its intention to picket the
funeral of a 9-year-old girl killed in the shooting spree in
Tucson—proclaiming that she was “better off dead”11—
their announcement was national news,12 and the church
——————
4 See United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, Catholic Informa
tion Project, http://www.usccb.org/comm/cip.shtml#toc4.
5 See http://www.godhatesfags.com/fliers/20110124_St-Petersburg-FLDead-Police.pdf.
6 See http://www.godhatesfags.com/fliers/20110120_Dead-VolunteerFirefighter-Connecting_the_Dots-Baltimore-MD.pdf.
7 See
http://www.godhatesfags.com/fliers/20110104_Newburg-andRolla-MO-Tornado-Connecting-the-Dots.pdf.
8 See http://www.godhatesfags.com/fliers/20101218_Wichita-KS-TwoDead-Wichita-Bikers.pdf.
9 See
http://www.godhatesfags.com/fliers/20110129_Tampa-FL-GodSent-Military-Mom-Shooter-to-Kill-Kids.pdf.
10 See nn. 5–9, supra.
11 See
http://www.godhatesfags.com/fliers/20110109_AZ-ShooterConnecting-the-Dots-Day-2.pdf.
12 See, e.g., Stanglin, Anti-Gay Church Group Plans to Picket Tucson


6

SNYDER v. PHELPS
ALITO, J., dissenting

was able to obtain free air time on the radio in exchange
for canceling its protest.13 Similarly, in 2006, the church
got air time on a talk radio show in exchange for canceling
its threatened protest at the funeral of five Amish girls
killed by a crazed gunman.14
In this case, respondents implemented the Westboro
Baptist Church’s publicity-seeking strategy. Their press
release stated that they were going “to picket the funeral
of Lance Cpl. Matthew A. Snyder” because “God Almighty
killed Lance Cpl. Snyder. He died in shame, not honor—
for a fag nation cursed by God . . . . Now in Hell—sine
die.” Supp. App. in No. 08–1026 (CA4), p. 158a. This
announcement guaranteed that Matthew’s funeral would
be transformed into a raucous media event and began the
wounding process. It is well known that anticipation may
heighten the effect of a painful event.
On the day of the funeral, respondents, true to their
word, displayed placards that conveyed the message prom
ised in their press release. Signs stating “God Hates You”
——————
Funerals, USA Today, Jan. 10, 2011, http://content.usatoday.com/communities/
ondeadline/post/2011/01/anti-gay-church-group-plans-to-picket-tucston
funerals/1; Mohanani, Group to Picket 9-Year-Old Tucson Victim’s
Funeral, Palm Beach Post, Jan. 11, 2011, http://www.palmbeachpost.com/
news/nation/group-to-picket-9-year-old-tucson-victims-1177921.html; Mehta
& Santa Cruz, Tucson Rallies to Protect Girl’s Family from Protesters,
Los Angeles Times, Jan. 11, 2011, http://articles.latimes.com/
2011/jan/11/nation/la-na-funeral-protest-20110112; Medrano, Funeral
Protest: Arizona Rallies to Foil Westboro Baptist Church, Christian
Science Monitor, Jan. 11, 2011, http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/2011/
0111/Funeral-protest-Arizona-rallies-to-foil-Westboro-Baptist-Church.
13 See Santa Cruz & Mehta, Westboro Church Agrees Not to Take
Protest to Shooting Victims’ Funerals, Los Angeles Times, Jan.
13, 2011, http://articles.latimes.com/2011/jan/13/nation/la-na-funeral
protest-20110113;
http://www.godhatesfags.com/fliers/20110112_AZShooter-Mike-Gallagher-Radio-Exchange.pdf.
14 See Steinberg, Air Time Instead of Funeral Protest, N. Y. Times,
Oct. 6, 2006, p. A14.


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

ALITO, J., dissenting

and “Thank God for Dead Soldiers” reiterated the message
that God had caused Matthew’s death in retribution for
his sins. App. to Brief for Appellants in No. 08–1026
(CA4), pp. 3787, 3788 (hereinafter App.). Others, stating
“You’re Going to Hell” and “Not Blessed Just Cursed,”
conveyed the message that Matthew was “in Hell—sine
die.” Id., at 3783.
Even if those who attended the funeral were not alerted
in advance about respondents’ intentions, the meaning of
these signs would not have been missed. Since respon
dents chose to stage their protest at Matthew Snyder’s
funeral and not at any of the other countless available
venues, a reasonable person would have assumed that
there was a connection between the messages on the
placards and the deceased. Moreover, since a church
funeral is an event that naturally brings to mind thoughts
about the afterlife, some of respondents’ signs—e.g., “God
Hates You,” “Not Blessed Just Cursed,” and “You’re Going
to Hell”—would have likely been interpreted as referring
to God’s judgment of the deceased.
Other signs would most naturally have been understood
as suggesting—falsely—that Matthew was gay. Homo
sexuality was the theme of many of the signs. There were
signs reading “God Hates Fags,” “Semper Fi Fags,” “Fags
Doom Nations,” and “Fag Troops.” Id., at 3781–3787.
Another placard depicted two men engaging in anal inter
course. A reasonable bystander seeing those signs would
have likely concluded that they were meant to suggest
that the deceased was a homosexual.
After the funeral, the Westboro picketers reaffirmed the
meaning of their protest. They posted an online account
entitled “The Burden of Marine Lance Cpl. Matthew A.
Snyder. The Visit of Westboro Baptist Church to Help the
Inhabitants of Maryland Connect the Dots!” Id., at 3788.15
——————
15 The

Court refuses to consider the epic because it was not discussed


8

SNYDER v. PHELPS
ALITO, J., dissenting

Belying any suggestion that they had simply made general
comments about homosexuality, the Catholic Church, and
the United States military, the “epic” addressed the Sny
der family directly:
“God blessed you, Mr. and Mrs. Snyder, with a re
source and his name was Matthew. He was an arrow
in your quiver! In thanks to God for the comfort the
child could bring you, you had a DUTY to prepare that
child to serve the LORD his GOD—PERIOD! You did
JUST THE OPPOSITE—you raised him for the devil.
.
.
.
.
.
“Albert and Julie RIPPED that body apart and
taught Matthew to defy his Creator, to divorce, and to
commit adultery. They taught him how to support the
largest pedophile machine in the history of the entire
world, the Roman Catholic monstrosity. Every dime
they gave the Roman Catholic monster they con
demned their own souls. They also, in supporting sa
tanic Catholicism, taught Matthew to be an idolater.
.
.
.
.
.
“Then after all that they sent him to fight for the
United States of Sodom, a filthy country that is in lock
step with his evil, wicked, and sinful manner of life,
putting him in the cross hairs of a God that is so mad
——————
in Snyder’s petition for certiorari. Ante, at 3, n. 1. The epic, however, is
not a distinct claim but a piece of evidence that the jury considered in
imposing liability for the claims now before this Court. The protest and
the epic are parts of a single course of conduct that the jury found to
constitute intentional infliction of emotional distress. See 580 F. 3d,
at 225 (“[T]he Epic cannot be divorced from the general context of
the funeral protest”). The Court’s strange insistence that the epic “is
not properly before us,” ante, at 3, n. 1, means that the Court has not
actually made “an independent examination of the whole record,” ante,
at 7 (internal quotation marks omitted). And the Court’s refusal to
consider the epic contrasts sharply with its willingness to take notice of
Westboro’s protest activities at other times and locations. See ante,
at 9.


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

ALITO, J., dissenting

He has smoke coming from his nostrils and fire from
his mouth! How dumb was that?” Id., at 3791.
In light of this evidence, it is abundantly clear that
respondents, going far beyond commentary on matters of
public concern, specifically attacked Matthew Snyder
because (1) he was a Catholic and (2) he was a member of
the United States military. Both Matthew and petitioner
were private figures,16 and this attack was not speech on a
matter of public concern. While commentary on the Cath
olic Church or the United States military constitutes
speech on matters of public concern, speech regarding
Matthew Snyder’s purely private conduct does not.
JUSTICE BREYER provides an apt analogy to a case in
which the First Amendment would permit recovery in tort
for a verbal attack:
“[S]uppose that A were physically to assault B, know
ing that the assault (being newsworthy) would provide
A with an opportunity to transmit to the public his
views on a matter of public concern. The constitu
tionally protected nature of the end would not shield
A’s use of unlawful, unprotected means. And in some
circumstances the use of certain words as means
would be similarly unprotected.” Ante, at 1 (concur
ring opinion).
This captures what respondents did in this case. In
deed, this is the strategy that they have routinely em
ployed—and that they will now continue to employ—
inflicting severe and lasting emotional injury on an ever
growing list of innocent victims.
IV
The Court concludes that respondents’ speech was
protected by the First Amendment for essentially three
——————
16 See

533 F. Supp. 2d 567, 577 (Md. 2008).


10

SNYDER v. PHELPS
ALITO, J., dissenting

reasons, but none is sound.
First—and most important—the Court finds that “the
overall thrust and dominant theme of [their] demonstra
tion spoke to” broad public issues. Ante, at 8. As I have
attempted to show, this portrayal is quite inaccurate;
respondents’ attack on Matthew was of central impor
tance. But in any event, I fail to see why actionable
speech should be immunized simply because it is inter
spersed with speech that is protected. The First Amend
ment allows recovery for defamatory statements that are
interspersed with nondefamatory statements on matters
of public concern, and there is no good reason why respon
dents’ attack on Matthew Snyder and his family should be
treated differently.
Second, the Court suggests that respondents’ personal
attack on Matthew Snyder is entitled to First Amendment
protection because it was not motivated by a private
grudge, see ante, at 9, but I see no basis for the strange
distinction that the Court appears to draw. Respondents’
motivation—“to increase publicity for its views,” ibid.—did
not transform their statements attacking the character
of a private figure into statements that made a contri
bution to debate on matters of public concern. Nor did
their publicity-seeking motivation soften the sting of their
attack. And as far as culpability is concerned, one might
well think that wounding statements uttered in the heat
of a private feud are less, not more, blameworthy than
similar statements made as part of a cold and calculated
strategy to slash a stranger as a means of attracting pub
lic attention.
Third, the Court finds it significant that respondents’
protest occurred on a public street, but this fact alone
should not be enough to preclude IIED liability. To be
sure, statements made on a public street may be less
likely to satisfy the elements of the IIED tort than state
ments made on private property, but there is no reason


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

ALITO, J., dissenting

why a public street in close proximity to the scene of a
funeral should be regarded as a free-fire zone in which
otherwise actionable verbal attacks are shielded from
liability. If the First Amendment permits the States to
protect their residents from the harm inflicted by such
attacks—and the Court does not hold otherwise—then the
location of the tort should not be dispositive. A physical
assault may occur without trespassing; it is no defense
that the perpetrator had “the right to be where [he was].”
See ante, at 11. And the same should be true with respect
to unprotected speech. Neither classic “fighting words”
nor defamatory statements are immunized when they
occur in a public place, and there is no good reason to treat
a verbal assault based on the conduct or character of a
private figure like Matthew Snyder any differently.
One final comment about the opinion of the Court is in
order. The Court suggests that the wounds inflicted by
vicious verbal assaults at funerals will be prevented or at
least mitigated in the future by new laws that restrict
picketing within a specified distance of a funeral. See
ante, at 10–11. It is apparent, however, that the enact
ment of these laws is no substitute for the protection
provided by the established IIED tort; according to the
Court, the verbal attacks that severely wounded petitioner
in this case complied with the new Maryland law regulat
ing funeral picketing. See ante, at 11, n. 5. And there is
absolutely nothing to suggest that Congress and the state
legislatures, in enacting these laws, intended them to
displace the protection provided by the well-established
IIED tort.
The real significance of these new laws is not that they
obviate the need for IIED protection. Rather, their enact
ment dramatically illustrates the fundamental point that
funerals are unique events at which special protection
against emotional assaults is in order. At funerals, the
emotional well-being of bereaved relatives is particularly


12

SNYDER v. PHELPS
ALITO, J., dissenting

vulnerable. See National Archives and Records Admin. v.
Favish, 541 U. S. 157, 168 (2004). Exploitation of a fu
neral for the purpose of attracting public attention “in
trud[es] upon their . . . grief,” ibid., and may permanently
stain their memories of the final moments before a loved
one is laid to rest. Allowing family members to have a few
hours of peace without harassment does not undermine
public debate. I would therefore hold that, in this setting,
the First Amendment permits a private figure to recover
for the intentional infliction of emotional distress caused
by speech on a matter of private concern.
V
In reversing the District Court judgment in favor of
petitioner, the Court of Appeals relied on several grounds
not discussed in the opinion of this Court or in the sepa
rate opinion supporting affirmance. I now turn briefly to
those issues.
First, the Court of Appeals held that the District Court
erred by allowing the jury to decide whether respondents’
speech was “ ‘directed specifically at the Snyder family.’ ”
580 F. 3d, at 221. It is not clear whether the Court of
Appeals thought that this was a question for the trial
judge alone or a question on which the judge had to make
a preliminary ruling before sending it to the jury. In
either event, however, the submission of this question to
the jury was not reversible error because, as explained
above, it is clear that respondents’ statements targeted the
Snyders.
Second, the Court of Appeals held that the trial judge
went astray in allowing the jury to decide whether re
spondents’ speech was so “ ‘offensive and shocking as to
not be entitled to First Amendment protection.’ ” Ibid.
This instruction also did respondents no harm. Because
their speech did not relate to a matter of public concern, it
was not protected from liability by the First Amendment,


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

ALITO, J., dissenting

and the only question for the jury was whether the ele
ments of the IIED tort were met.
Third, the Court of Appeals appears to have concluded
that the First Amendment does not permit an IIED plain
tiff to recover for speech that cannot reasonably be inter
preted as stating actual facts about an individual. See id.,
at 222. In reaching this conclusion, the Court of Appeals
relied on two of our cases—Milkovich v. Lorain Journal
Co., 497 U. S. 1 (1990), and Hustler, 485 U. S. 46—but
neither supports the broad proposition that the Court of
Appeals adopted.
Milkovich was a defamation case, and falsity is an ele
ment of defamation. Nothing in Milkovich even hints that
the First Amendment requires that this defamation ele
ment be engrafted onto the IIED tort.
Hustler did involve an IIED claim, but the plaintiff
there was a public figure, and the Court did not suggest
that its holding would also apply in a case involving a
private figure. Nor did the Court suggest that its holding
applied across the board to all types of IIED claims. In
stead, the holding was limited to “publications such as the
one here at issue,” namely, a caricature in a magazine.
485 U. S., at 56. Unless a caricature of a public figure can
reasonably be interpreted as stating facts that may be
proved to be wrong, the caricature does not have the same
potential to wound as a personal verbal assault on a vul
nerable private figure.
Because I cannot agree either with the holding of this
Court or the other grounds on which the Court of Appeals
relied, I would reverse the decision below and remand for
further proceedings.17
——————
17 The Court affirms the decision of the Fourth Circuit with respect to
petitioner’s claim of intrusion upon seclusion on a ground not addressed
by the Fourth Circuit. I would not reach out to decide that issue but
would instead leave it for the Fourth Circuit to decide on remand. I
would likewise allow the Fourth Circuit on remand to decide whether


14

SNYDER v. PHELPS 

ALITO, J., dissenting 


VI 

Respondents’ outrageous conduct caused petitioner
great injury, and the Court now compounds that injury by
depriving petitioner of a judgment that acknowledges the
wrong he suffered.
In order to have a society in which public issues can be
openly and vigorously debated, it is not necessary to allow
the brutalization of innocent victims like petitioner. I
therefore respectfully dissent.

—————— 

the judgment on the claim of civil conspiracy can survive in light of the

ultimate disposition of the IIED and intrusion upon seclusion claims. 


