4

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR 

UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC. 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


at 42 U. S. C. §2457), repealed by §6, 124 Stat. 3444;
Federal Nonnuclear Energy Research and Development
Act of 1974, §9, 88 Stat. 1887 (codified as amended at 42
U. S. C. §5908(a)). And they have included Government
regulations, established prior to the Bayh-Dole Act’s en
actment, that work in roughly similar ways. See, e.g., 45
CFR §650.4(b) (1977) (National Science Foundation regu
lations providing that Foundation would “determine the
disposition of the invention [made under the grant] and
title to and rights under any patent application”); §§8.1(a),
8.2(d) (Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
regulations providing that inventions made under de
partment grants “shall be subject to determination” by the
agency and that the department may “require that all
domestic rights in the invention shall be assigned to the
United States”).
These legal rules provide the basic background against
which Congress passed the Bayh-Dole Act. And the Act’s
provisions reflect a related effort to assure that rights to
inventions arising out of research for which the public has
paid are distributed and used in ways that further specific
important public interests. I agree with the majority that
the Act does not simply take the individual inventors’
rights and grant them to the Government. Rather, it
assumes that the federal funds’ recipient, say a university
or small business, will possess those rights. The Act
leaves those rights in the hands of that recipient, not
because it seeks to make the public pay twice for the same
invention, but for a special public policy reason. In doing
so, it seeks to encourage those institutions to commercial
ize inventions that otherwise might not realize their po
tentially beneficial public use. 35 U. S. C. §200. The Act
helps assure that commercialization (while “promot[ing]
free competition” and “protect[ing] the public,” ibid.) by
imposing a set of conditions upon the federal funds recipi
ent, by providing that sometimes the Government will

