8

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR 

UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC. 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


explanation for what seems a significant change in the
law. See 939 F. 2d, at 1572. Nor did it give any explana
tion for that change in its opinion in this case. See 583
F. 3d, at 841–842. The Federal Circuit’s FilmTec rule
undercuts the objectives of the Bayh-Dole Act. While the
cognoscenti may be able to meet the FilmTec rule in future
contracts simply by copying the precise words blessed by
the Federal Circuit, the rule nonetheless remains a tech
nical drafting trap for the unwary. See AAU Brief 35–36.
But cf. ante, at 15 (assuming ease of obtaining effective
assignments). It is unclear to me why, where the BayhDole Act is at issue, we should prefer the Federal Circuit’s
FilmTec rule to the rule, of apparently much longer vin
tage, that would treat both agreements in this case as
creating merely equitable rights.
At the same time, the Federal Circuit’s reasoning brings
about an interpretation contrary to the intention of the
parties to the earlier, Stanford, contract. See App. to Pet.
for Cert. 120a (provision in Stanford contract promising
that Dr. Holodniy “will not enter into any agreement
creating copyright or patent obligations in conflict with
this agreement”). And it runs counter to what may well
have been the drafters’ reasonable expectations of how
courts would interpret the relevant language.
Second, we could interpret the Bayh-Dole Act as ordi
narily assuming, and thereby ordinarily requiring, an
assignment of patent rights by the federally funded em
ployee to the federally funded employer. I concede that
this interpretation would treat federally funded employees
of contractors (subject to the Act) differently than the law
ordinarily treats private sector employees. The Court long
ago described the latter, private sector principles. In
United States v. Dubilier Condenser Corp., 289 U. S. 178
(1933), the Court explained that a “patent is property, and
title to it can pass only by assignment.” Id., at 187. It
then described two categories of private sector employee

