Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

BREYER, J., dissenting

take direct control of the patent rights, and by adding that
on occasion the Government will permit the individual
inventor to retain those rights. §§202–203.
Given this basic statutory objective, I cannot so easily
accept the majority’s conclusion—that the individual in
ventor can lawfully assign an invention (produced by
public funds) to a third party, thereby taking that inven
tion out from under the Bayh-Dole Act’s restrictions,
conditions, and allocation rules. That conclusion, in my
view, is inconsistent with the Act’s basic purposes. It may
significantly undercut the Act’s ability to achieve its objec
tives. It allows individual inventors, for whose invention
the public has paid, to avoid the Act’s corresponding re
strictions and conditions. And it makes the commerciali
zation and marketing of such an invention more difficult:
A potential purchaser of rights from the contractor, say a
university, will not know if the university itself possesses
the patent right in question or whether, as here, the indi
vidual, inadvertently or deliberately, has previously as
signed the title to a third party.
Moreover, I do not agree that the language to which the
majority points—the words “invention of the contractor”
and “retain”—requires its result. As the majority con
cedes, Stanford’s alternative reading of the phrase “ ‘in
vention of the contractor’ ” is “plausible enough in the
abstract.” Ante, at 10. Nor do I agree that the Act’s lack
of an explicit provision for “an interested third party” to
claim that an invention was not the result of federal fund
ing “bolsters” the majority’s interpretation. Ante, at 13.
In any event, universities and businesses have worked out
ways to protect the various participants to research. See
Brief for Association of American Universities et al. as
Amici Curiae 22–24 (hereinafter AAU Brief); App. 118–
124 (Materials Transfer Agreement between Cetus and
Stanford University).
Ultimately, the majority rejects Stanford’s reading (and

