2

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR 

UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC. 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


the invention, will likely obtain (or retain) any resulting patent rights (normally in that just-listed order). 35
U. S. C. §§202–203. The statute applies to “subject in
vention[s]” defined as “any invention of the contractor
conceived or first actually reduced to practice in the per
formance of work under a funding agreement.” §201(e)
(emphasis added). Since the “contractor” (e.g., a univer
sity or small business) is unlikely to “conceiv[e]” of an idea
or “reduc[e]” it “to practice” other than through its employ
ees, the term “invention of the contractor” must refer
to the work and ideas of those employees. We all agree
that the term covers those employee inventions that the
employee properly assigns to the contractor, i.e., his or
her employer. But does the term “subject invention”
also include inventions that the employee fails to assign
properly?
II
Congress enacted this statute against a background
norm that often, but not always, denies individual inven
tors patent rights growing out of research for which the
public has already paid. This legal norm reflects the fact
that patents themselves have both benefits and costs.
Patents, for example, help to elicit useful inventions and
research and to assure public disclosure of technological
advances. See, e.g., Mazer v. Stein, 347 U. S. 201, 219
(1954); Bilski v. Kappos, 561 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op.,
at 4); id., at ___ (slip op., at 10) (Stevens, J., concurring in
judgment). But patents sometimes mean unnecessarily
high prices or restricted dissemination; and they some
times discourage further innovation and competition by re
quiring costly searches for earlier, related patents or by
tying up ideas, which, were they free, would more effec
tively spur research and development. See, e.g., Labora
tory Corp. of America Holdings v. Metabolite Laboratories,
Inc., 548 U. S. 124, 128 (2006) (BREYER, J., dissenting

