2

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR 

UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC. 

Syllabus 

(Bayh-Dole Act or Act) allocates rights in federally funded “subject
invention[s]” between the Federal Government and federal contrac
tors. 35 U. S. C. §§201(e), (c), 202(a). The Act defines “subject inven
tion” as “any invention of the contractor conceived or first actually
reduced to practice in the performance of work under a funding
agreement,” §201(e), and provides that contractors may “elect to re
tain title to any subject invention,” §202(a). Because some of Stan
ford’s research on the HIV measurement technique was funded by
the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Bayh-Dole Act applied.
In accordance with the Act’s requirements, Stanford notified NIH
that it was electing to retain title to the invention and conferred on
the Government a license to use the patented procedure.
Petitioner, the Board of Trustees of Stanford University, filed suit
against respondents (Roche), claiming that their HIV test kits in
fringed Stanford’s patents. Roche responded that Holodniy’s agree
ment with Cetus gave it co-ownership of the procedure, and thus
Stanford lacked standing to sue it for patent infringement. Stanford
countered that Holodniy had no rights to assign because the Univer
sity had superior rights under the Bayh-Dole Act. The District Court
agreed with Stanford and held that under the Bayh-Dole Act, Holod
niy had no rights to assign to Cetus. The Court of Appeals for the
Federal Circuit disagreed, concluding that Holodniy’s agreement with
Cetus assigned his rights to Cetus, and thus to Roche. It also found
that the Bayh-Dole Act did not automatically void an inventor’s
rights in federally funded inventions. Thus, the Act did not extin
guish Roche’s ownership interest in the invention, and Stanford was
deprived of standing.

Held: The Bayh-Dole Act does not automatically vest title to federally
funded inventions in federal contractors or authorize contractors to
unilaterally take title to such inventions. Pp. 6–15.
(a) Since 1790, patent law has operated on the premise that rights
in an invention belong to the inventor. See, e.g., Gayler v. Wilder, 10
How. 477, 493. In most cases, a patent may be issued only to an ap
plying inventor, or—because an inventor’s interest in his invention is
assignable in law by an instrument in writing—an inventor’s as
signee. See United States v. Dubilier Condenser Corp., 289 U. S. 178,
187. Absent an agreement to the contrary, an employer does not
have rights in an invention “which is the original conception of the
employee alone,” id., at 189; an inventor must expressly grant those
rights to his employer, see id., at 187. Pp. 6–8.
(b) Stanford and amicus United States contend that, when an in
vention is conceived or first reduced to practice with the support of
federal funds, the Bayh-Dole Act vests title to those inventions in the
inventor’s employer—the federal contractor. Congress has in the

