Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

“elect to retain title to any subject invention.” 35 U. S. C.
§202(a). A “subject invention” is defined as “any invention
of the contractor conceived or first actually reduced to
practice in the performance of work under a funding
agreement.” §201(e).
Stanford asserts that the phrase “invention of the con
tractor” in this provision “is naturally read to include all
inventions made by the contractor’s employees with the
aid of federal funding.” Brief for Petitioner 32 (footnote
omitted). That reading assumes that Congress subtly set
aside two centuries of patent law in a statutory definition.
It also renders the phrase “of the contractor” superfluous.
If the phrase “of the contractor” were deleted from the
definition of “subject invention,” the definition would cover
“any invention . . . conceived or first actually reduced to
practice in the performance of work under a funding
agreement.” Reading “of the contractor” to mean “all
inventions made by the contractor’s employees with the
aid of federal funding,” as Stanford would, adds nothing
that is not already in the definition, since the definition
already covers inventions made under the funding agree
ment. That is contrary to our general “reluctan[ce] to
treat statutory terms as surplusage.” Duncan v. Walker,
533 U. S. 167, 174 (2001) (internal quotation marks
omitted).
Construing the phrase to refer instead to a particular
category of inventions conceived or reduced to practice
under a funding agreement—inventions “of the contrac
tor,” that is, those owned by or belonging to the con
tractor—makes the phrase meaningful in the statutory
definition. And “invention owned by the contractor” or
“invention belonging to the contractor” are natural read
ings of the phrase “invention of the contractor.” As we
have explained, “[t]he use of the word ‘of’ denotes owner
ship.” Poe v. Seaborn, 282 U. S. 101, 109 (1930); see FloresFigueroa v. United States, 556 U. S. ___, ___, ___

