10

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR
UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC.
Opinion of the Court

(2009) (slip op., at 2, 11) (treating the phrase “identifica
tion [papers] of another person” as meaning such items
belonging to another person (internal quotation marks
omitted)); Ellis v. United States, 206 U. S. 246, 259 (1907)
(interpreting the phrase “works of the United States” to
mean “works belonging to the United States” (internal
quotation marks omitted)).
That reading follows from a common definition of the
word “of.” See Webster’s Third New International Dic
tionary 1565 (2002) (“of” can be “used as a function word
indicating a possessive relationship”); New Oxford Ameri
can Dictionary 1180 (2d ed. 2005) (defining “of” as “indi
cating an association between two entities, typically one of
belonging”); Webster’s New Twentieth Century Dictionary
1241 (2d ed. 1979) (defining “of” as “belonging to”).
Stanford’s reading of the phrase “invention of the con
tractor” to mean “all inventions made by the contractor’s
employees” is plausible enough in the abstract; it is often
the case that whatever an employee produces in the course
of his employment belongs to his employer. No one would
claim that an autoworker who builds a car while working
in a factory owns that car. But, as noted, patent law has
always been different: We have rejected the idea that mere
employment is sufficient to vest title to an employee’s
invention in the employer. Against this background, a
contractor’s invention—an “invention of the contractor”—
does not automatically include inventions made by the
contractor’s employees.4
——————
4 The

dissent suggests that “we could interpret the Bayh-Dole Act as
ordinarily assuming, and thereby ordinarily requiring, an assignment
of patent rights by the federally funded employee to the federally
funded employer.” Post, at 8. That suggestion is based in large part on
Executive Order 10096, which “governs Federal Government employee
to-employer patent right assignments.” Post, at 9. Lest there be any
doubt, employees of nonfederal entities that have federal funding
contracts—like Holodniy—are not federal employees. And there is no

