Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

superior rights in the invention under the Bayh-Dole Act.
Ibid.1
The District Court held that the “VCA effectively as
signed any rights that Holodniy had in the patented in
vention to Cetus,” and thus to Roche. Id., at 1117. But
because of the operation of the Bayh-Dole Act, “Holodniy
had no interest to assign.” Id., at 1117, 1119. The court
concluded that the Bayh-Dole Act “provides that the indi
vidual inventor may obtain title” to a federally funded
invention “only after the government and the contracting
party have declined to do so.” Id., at 1118.
The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit disagreed.
First, the court concluded that Holodniy’s initial agree
ment with Stanford in the Copyright and Patent Agree
ment constituted a mere promise to assign rights in the
future, unlike Holodniy’s agreement with Cetus in the
Visitor’s Confidentiality Agreement, which itself assigned
Holodniy’s rights in the invention to Cetus. See 583 F. 3d
832, 841–842 (2009). Therefore, as a matter of contract
law, Cetus obtained Holodniy’s rights in the HIV quantifi
cation technique through the VCA.2 Next, the court ex
plained that the Bayh-Dole Act “does not automatically
void ab initio the inventors’ rights in government-funded
inventions” and that the “statutory scheme did not auto
matically void the patent rights that Cetus received from
Holodniy.” Id., at 844–845. The court held that “Roche
possesse[d] an ownership interest in the patents-in-suit”
——————
1 Roche submitted a host of other claims to the District Court, includ
ing that it had “shop rights” to the patents and was entitled to a license
to use the patents. See 583 F. 3d 832, 838 (CA Fed. 2009). None of
those claims is now before us; we deal only with Roche’s claim to co
ownership to rebut Stanford’s standing to bring an infringement action.
2 Because the Federal Circuit’s interpretation of the relevant assign
ment agreements is not an issue on which we granted certiorari, we
have no occasion to pass on the validity of the lower court’s construction
of those agreements.

