Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

the former did not. Quoting its 1991 opinion in FilmTec
Corp. v. Allied-Signal, Inc., 939 F. 2d 1568, 1572, the
Circuit declared that “ ‘[o]nce the invention is made and
[the] application for [a] patent is filed, . . . legal title to the
rights accruing thereunder would be in the assignee [i.e.,
Cetus] . . . , and the assignor-inventor would have nothing
remaining to assign.’ ” 583 F. 3d, at 842.
Given what seem only slight linguistic differences in the
contractual language, this reasoning seems to make too
much of too little. Dr. Holodniy executed his agreement
with Stanford in 1988. At that time, patent law appears
to have long specified that a present assignment of future
inventions (as in both contracts here) conveyed equitable,
but not legal, title. See, e.g., G. Curtis, A Treatise on the
Law of Patents for Useful Inventions §170, p. 155 (3d ed.
1867) (“A contract to convey a future invention . . . cannot
alone authorize a patent to be taken by the party in whose
favor such a contract was intended to operate”); Comment,
Contract Rights as Commercial Security: Present and
Future Intangibles, 67 Yale L. J. 847, 854, n. 27 (1958)
(“The rule generally applicable grants equitable enforce
ment to an assignment of an expectancy but demands a
further act, either reduction to possession or further as
signment of the right when it comes into existence”).
Under this rule, both the initial Stanford and later
Cetus agreements would have given rise only to equitable
interests in Dr. Holodniy’s invention. And as between
these two claims in equity, the facts that Stanford’s con
tract came first and that Stanford subsequently obtained a
postinvention assignment as well should have meant that
Stanford, not Cetus, would receive the rights its contract
conveyed.
In 1991, however, the Federal Circuit, in FilmTec,
adopted the new rule quoted above—a rule that distin
guishes between these equitable claims and, in effect, says
that Cetus must win. The Federal Circuit provided no

