10

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR
UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC.
BREYER, J., dissenting

give ownership of an invention to the organization upon
acceptance of Federal funds,” as the Bayh-Dole Act “re
quire[s]”). And an amicus brief, filed by major associa
tions of universities, scientists, medical researchers, and
others, argues that we should interpret the rules govern
ing assignments of the employees at issue here (and
consequently the Act’s reference to “inventions of the con
tractor”) in a similar way. AAU Brief 5–14.
The District Court in this case adopted roughly this
approach. 487 F. Supp. 2d 1099, 1118 (ND Cal. 2007)
(“[A]lthough title still vests in the named inventor, the
inventor remains under a legal obligation to assign his
interest either to the government or the nonprofit contrac
tor unless the inventor acts within the statutory frame
work to retain title”). And since a university often enters
into a grant agreement with the Government for a re
searcher’s benefit and at his request, see J. Hall, Grant
Management 205 (2010), implying such a presumption in
favor of compliance with the grant agreement, and thus
with the Bayh-Dole Act, would ordinarily be equitable.
IV
As I have suggested, these views are tentative. That is
because the parties have not fully argued these matters
(though one amicus brief raises the license interpretation
question, see Brief for Alexander M. Shukh as Amicus
Curiae 18–24, and at least one other can be read as sup
porting something like the equitable presumption I have
described, see AAU Brief 5–14). Cf. ante, at 5, n. 2. While
I do not understand the majority to have foreclosed a
similarly situated party from raising these matters in a
future case, see ibid., I believe them relevant to our efforts
to answer the question presented here. Consequently, I
would vacate the judgment of the Federal Circuit and
remand this case to provide the parties with an opportu
nity to argue these, or related, matters more fully.

