4

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR 

UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC. 

Opinion of the Court 


subject inventions under the Bayh-Dole Act. The agency
that granted the federal funds receives from the contractor
“a nonexclusive, nontransferrable, irrevocable, paid-up
license to practice . . . [the] subject invention.” §202(c)(4).
The agency also possesses “[m]arch-in rights,” which
permit the agency to grant a license to a responsible third
party under certain circumstances, such as when the con
tractor fails to take “effective steps to achieve practical
application” of the invention. §203. The Act further pro
vides that when the contractor does not elect to retain title
to a subject invention, the Government “may consider and
after consultation with the contractor grant requests for
retention of rights by the inventor.” §202(d).
Some of Stanford’s research related to the HIV meas
urement technique was funded by the National Institutes
of Health (NIH), thereby subjecting the invention to the
Bayh-Dole Act. Accordingly, Stanford disclosed the in
vention, conferred on the Government a nonexclusive,
nontransferable, paid-up license to use the patented proce
dure, and formally notified NIH that it elected to retain
title to the invention.
C
In 2005, the Board of Trustees of Stanford University
filed suit against Roche Molecular Systems, Inc., Roche
Diagnostics Corporation, and Roche Diagnostics Opera
tions, Inc. (collectively Roche), contending that Roche’s
HIV test kits infringed Stanford’s patents. As relevant
here, Roche responded by asserting that it was a co-owner
of the HIV quantification procedure, based on Holodniy’s
assignment of his rights in the Visitor’s Confidentiality
Agreement. As a result, Roche argued, Stanford lacked
standing to sue it for patent infringement. 487 F. Supp.
2d 1099, 1111, 1115 (ND Cal. 2007). Stanford claimed
that Holodniy had no rights to assign because the Univer
sity’s HIV research was federally funded, giving the school

