12

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR
UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC.
Opinion of the Court

§210(a), applies only to “subject inventions”—“inventions
of the contractor”—it does not displace an inventor’s ante
cedent title to his invention. Only when an invention
belongs to the contractor does the Bayh-Dole Act come into
play. The Act’s disposition of rights—like much of the
rest of the Bayh-Dole Act—serves to clarify the order of
priority of rights between the Federal Government and a
federal contractor in a federally funded invention that
already belongs to the contractor. Nothing more.5
The isolated provisions of the Bayh-Dole Act dealing
with inventors’ rights in subject inventions are consistent
with our construction of the Act. Under the Act, a federal
agency may “grant requests for retention of rights by the
inventor . . . [i]f a contractor does not elect to retain title to
a subject invention.” §202(d). If an employee inventor
never had title to his invention because title vested in the
contractor by operation of law—as Stanford submits—it
would be odd to allow the Government to grant “requests
for retention of rights by the inventor.” By using the word
“retention,” §202(d) assumes that the inventor had rights
in the subject invention at some point, undermining the
notion that the Act automatically vests title to federally
funded inventions in federal contractors.6
——————
5 Far

from superseding the Patent Act in such a backhanded way, it is
clear that §210(a)’s concern is far narrower. That provision specifies 21
different statutory provisions that the Bayh-Dole Act “take[s] prece
dence over,” the vast majority of which deal with the division of owner
ship in certain inventions between a contractor and the Government.
35 U. S. C. §§210(a)(1)–(21); see, e.g., §§210(a)(19)–(20) (the Bayh-Dole
Act takes precedence over “section 6(b) of the Solar Photovoltaic Energy
Research Development and Demonstration Act” and “section 12 of the
Native Latex Commercialization and Economic Development Act”).
6 Stanford contends that it cannot be the case “that the contractor can
only ‘retain title’ to an invention that it already owns, while an inventor
may be considered for ‘retention’ of title only when he has assigned title
away.” Reply Brief for Petitioner 8. That argument has some force.
But there may be situations where an inventor, by the terms of an

