Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

The limited scope of the Act’s procedural protections
also bolsters our conclusion. The Bayh-Dole Act expressly
confers on contractors the right to challenge a Govern
ment-imposed impediment to retaining title to a subject
invention. §202(b)(4). As Roche correctly notes, however,
“the Act contains not a single procedural protection for
third parties that have neither sought nor received federal
funds,” such as cooperating private research institutions.
Brief for Respondents 29. Nor does the Bayh-Dole Act
allow inventors employed by federal contractors to contest
their employer’s claim to a subject invention. The Act, for
example, does not expressly permit an interested third
party or an inventor to challenge a claim that a particular
invention was supported by federal funding. In a world in
which there is frequent collaboration between private
entities, inventors, and federal contractors, see Brief for
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America
as Amicus Curiae 22–23, that absence would be deeply
troubling. But the lack of procedures protecting inventor
and third-party rights makes perfect sense if the Act
applies only when a federal contractor has already ac
quired title to an inventor’s interest. In that case, there is
no need to protect inventor or third-party rights, because
the only rights at issue are those of the contractor and the
Government.
The Bayh-Dole Act applies to subject inventions “con
ceived or first actually reduced to practice in the perform
ance of work” “funded in whole or in part by the Federal
Government.” 35 U. S. C. §§201(e), 201(b) (emphasis
added). Under Stanford’s construction of the Act, title to
—————— 

assignment, has subsidiary rights in an invention to which a contractor

has title, as §202(d) suggests. Compare §202(d) (“retention of rights”)

with §202(a) (“retain title”) (emphasis added). And at the end of the 

day, it is Stanford’s contention that “retain” must be “read as a syno

nym for ‘acquire’ or ‘receive’ ” that dooms its argument on this point.

Brief for Petitioner 37. 


