Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
past divested inventors of their rights in inventions by providing un
ambiguously that inventions created pursuant to certain specified
federal contracts become the Government’s property. Such unambi
guous language is notably absent from the Bayh-Dole Act. Instead,
the Act provides that contractors may “elect to retain title to any sub
ject invention,” §202(a), defining a “subject invention” as “any inven
tion of the contractor conceived or first actually reduced to practice in
the performance of work under a funding agreement,” §201(e).
Stanford contends that “invention of the contractor” means all in
ventions that a contractor’s employees make with the aid of federal
funds. That reading assumes that Congress subtly set aside two cen
turies of patent law in a statutory definition. This Court has rejected
the idea that mere employment is sufficient to vest title to an em
ployee’s invention in the employer. Stanford’s reading also renders
the phrase “of the contractor” superfluous since the definition already
covers inventions made under a funding agreement. Construing the
phrase to refer instead to a particular category of inventions con
ceived or reduced to practice under a funding agreement—inventions
“of the contractor,” that is, those owned by or belonging to the con
tractor—makes the phrase meaningful in the statutory definition.
And “invention owned by the contractor” or “invention belonging to
the contractor” are natural readings of the phrase “invention of the
contractor.”
Section 202(a), which states that contractors may “elect to retain
title,” confirms that the Act does not vest title. Stanford reaches the
opposite conclusion, but only because it reads “retain” to mean “ac
quire” and “receive.” That is certainly not the common meaning of
“retain,” which is “to hold or continue to hold in possession or use.”
You cannot retain something unless you already have it. And
§210(a)—which provides that the Act “take[s] precedence over any
other Act which would require a disposition of rights in subject inven
tions . . . that is inconsistent with” the Act—does not displace the ba
sic principle that an inventor owns the rights to his invention. Only
when an invention belongs to the contractor does the Bayh-Dole Act
come into play. The Act’s disposition of rights does nothing more
than clarify the order of priority of rights between the Federal Gov
ernment and a federal contractor in a federally funded invention that
already belongs to the contractor.
The Act’s isolated provisions dealing with inventors’ rights in sub
ject inventions are consistent with the Court’s construction of the Act.
See §202(d). That construction is also bolstered by the Act’s limited
procedural protections, which expressly give contractors the right to
challenge a Government-imposed impediment to retaining title to a
subject invention, §202(b)(4), but do not provide similar protection for

