Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

The Bayh-Dole Act’s provision stating that contractors
may “elect to retain title” confirms that the Act does not
vest title. 35 U. S. C. §202(a) (emphasis added). Stanford
reaches the opposite conclusion, but only because it reads
“retain” to mean “acquire” and “receive.” Brief for Peti
tioner 36 (internal quotation marks omitted). That is
certainly not the common meaning of “retain.” “[R]etain”
means “to hold or continue to hold in possession or use.”
Webster’s Third, supra, at 1938; see Webster’s New Colle
giate Dictionary 980 (1980) (“to keep in possession or
use”); American Heritage Dictionary 1109 (1969) (“[t]o
keep or hold in one’s possession”). You cannot retain
something unless you already have it. See Alaska v.
United States, 545 U. S. 75, 104 (2005) (interpreting the
phrase “the United States shall retain title to all property”
to mean that “[t]he United States . . . retained title to its
property located within Alaska’s borders”) (emphasis
added). The Bayh-Dole Act does not confer title to feder
ally funded inventions on contractors or authorize contrac
tors to unilaterally take title to those inventions; it simply
assures contractors that they may keep title to whatever it
is they already have. Such a provision makes sense in a
statute specifying the respective rights and responsibili
ties of federal contractors and the Government.
The Bayh-Dole Act states that it “take[s] precedence
over any other Act which would require a disposition of
rights in subject inventions . . . that is inconsistent with”
the Act. 35 U. S. C. §210(a). The United States as amicus
curiae argues that this provision operates to displace the
basic principle, codified in the Patent Act, that an inventor
owns the rights to his invention. See Brief for United
States 21. But because the Bayh-Dole Act, including
—————— 

equivalent executive order governing invention rights with respect to 

federally funded research; that issue is of course addressed by the 

Bayh-Dole Act. 


