14

BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF LELAND STANFORD JUNIOR
UNIV. v. ROCHE MOLECULAR SYSTEMS, INC.
Opinion of the Court

one of its employee’s inventions could vest in the Univer
sity even if the invention was conceived before the inven
tor became a University employee, so long as the inven
tion’s reduction to practice was supported by federal
funding. What is more, Stanford’s reading suggests that
the school would obtain title to one of its employee’s inven
tions even if only one dollar of federal funding was applied
toward the invention’s conception or reduction to practice.
It would be noteworthy enough for Congress to supplant
one of the fundamental precepts of patent law and deprive
inventors of rights in their own inventions. To do so under
such unusual terms would be truly surprising. We are
confident that if Congress had intended such a sea change
in intellectual property rights it would have said so
clearly—not obliquely through an ambiguous definition of
“subject invention” and an idiosyncratic use of the word
“retain.” Cf. Whitman v. American Trucking Assns., Inc.,
531 U. S. 457, 468 (2001) (“Congress . . . does not alter
the fundamental details of a regulatory scheme in vague
terms or ancillary provisions”).
Though unnecessary to our conclusion, it is worth noting
that our construction of the Bayh-Dole Act is reflected in
the common practice among parties operating under the
Act. Contractors generally institute policies to obtain
assignments from their employees. See Brief for Respon
dents 34; Brief for Pharmaceutical Research and Manufac
turers of America as Amicus Curiae 13–18. Agencies that
grant funds to federal contractors typically expect those
contractors to obtain assignments. So it is with NIH, the
agency that granted the federal funds at issue in this case.
In guidance documents made available to contractors, NIH
has made clear that “[b]y law, an inventor has initial
ownership of an invention ” and that contractors should
therefore “have in place employee agreements requiring
an inventor to ‘assign’ or give ownership of an invention to
the organization upon acceptance of Federal funds.” NIH

