2

SOSSAMON v. TEXAS
Syllabus
tional limitation on the power of the federal courts. See Pennhurst
State School and Hospital v. Halderman, 465 U. S. 89, 98. This
Court has consistently made clear that “federal jurisdiction over suits
against unconsenting States ‘was not contemplated by the Constitu
tion when establishing the judicial power of the United States.’ ”
Seminole Tribe of Fla. v. Florida, 517 U. S. 44, 54. A State, however,
may choose to waive its immunity. Clark v. Barnard, 108 U. S. 436,
447–448. The “ ‘test for determining whether [it has done so] is a
stringent one.’ ” College Savings Bank v. Florida Prepaid Postsec­
ondary Ed. Expense Bd., 527 U. S. 666, 675. The State’s consent to
suit must be “unequivocally expressed” in the relevant statute’s text.
Pennhurst, supra, at 99. A waiver “will be strictly construed, in
terms of its scope, in favor of the sovereign.” Lane v. Peña, 518 U. S.
187, 192. Pp. 4–6.
(b) RLUIPA’s authorization of “appropriate relief against a gov
ernment,” is not an unequivocal expression of state consent. Pp. 6–
10.
(1) “Appropriate relief” is open-ended and ambiguous about the
relief it includes. “Appropriate” is inherently context-dependent.
And the context here—where the defendant is a sovereign—suggests,
if anything, that monetary damages are not “suitable” or “proper.”
See Federal Maritime Comm’n v. South Carolina Ports Authority, 535
U. S. 743, 765. Further, where a statute is susceptible of multiple
plausible interpretations, including one preserving immunity, this
Court will not consider a State to have waived its sovereign immu
nity. Sossamon’s and Texas’ conflicting plausible arguments about
whether immunity is preserved here demonstrate that “appropriate
relief” in RLUIPA is not so free from ambiguity that the Court may
conclude that the States, by receiving federal funds, have unequivo
cally expressed intent to waive their immunity. Pp. 6–9.
(2) The Court’s use of the phrase “appropriate relief” in Franklin
v. Gwinnett County Public Schools, 503 U. S. 60, and Barnes v. Gor­
man, 536 U. S. 181, does not compel a contrary conclusion. In those
cases, where there was no express congressional intent to limit reme
dies available against municipal entities under an implied right of
action, the Court presumed that compensatory damages were avail
able. Franklin, supra, at 73. But that presumption is irrelevant to
construing the scope of an express waiver of sovereign immunity,
where the question is not whether Congress has given clear direction
that it intends to exclude a damages remedy, but whether it has
given clear direction that it intends to include a damages remedy.
Pp. 9–10.
(c) Sossamon mistakenly contends that Congress’ enactment of
RLUIPA §3 pursuant to the Spending Clause put the States on notice

