Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

contract-law principles apply to all issues that they raise.”
Barnes, supra, at 189, n. 2. We have not relied on the
Spending Clause contract analogy to expand liability
beyond what would exist under non-spending statutes,
much less to extend monetary liability against the States,
as Sossamon would have us do. In fact, in Barnes and
Franklin, the Court discussed the Spending Clause con
text only as a potential limitation on liability. See Barnes,
supra, at 187–188; Franklin, supra, at 74–75.
In any event, applying ordinary contract principles here
would make little sense because contracts with a sovereign
are unique. They do not traditionally confer a right of
action for damages to enforce compliance: “ ‘The contracts
between a Nation and an individual are only binding on
the conscience of the sovereign and have no pretensions to
compulsive force. They confer no right of action independ
ent of the sovereign will.’ ” Lynch v. United States, 292
U. S. 571, 580–581 (1934) (quoting The Federalist, No. 81,
at 511 (A. Hamilton)).7
More fundamentally, Sossamon’s implied-contract
remedies proposal cannot be squared with our longstand
ing rule that a waiver of sovereign immunity must be
expressly and unequivocally stated in the text of the rele
vant statute. It would be bizarre to create an “unequivocal
statement” rule and then find that every Spending Clause
enactment, no matter what its text, satisfies that rule
because it includes unexpressed, implied remedies against
the States. The requirement of a clear statement in the
text of the statute ensures that Congress has specifically
considered state sovereign immunity and has intentionally
legislated on the matter. Cf. Spector v. Norwegian Cruise
Line Ltd., 545 U. S. 119, 139 (2005) (plurality opinion)
——————
7 Of course, the Federal Government has, by statute, waived its sov
ereign immunity to damages for breach of contract in certain contexts.
See, e.g., 28 U. S. C. §1491(a)(1).

