14

SOSSAMON v. TEXAS
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Of course, under the rule the majority announces, Con
gress can revise RLUIPA to provide specifically for mone
tary relief against the States, perhaps by inserting the
phrase “including monetary relief” into the text of
§2000cc–2(a). But we have never demanded that a waiver
be presented in a particular formulation to be effective; we
only require that it be clear. See, e.g., Edelman v. Jordan,
415 U. S. 651, 673 (1974) (holding that waiver may be
found in “express language” or by “overwhelming implica
tions from the text” (internal quotation marks omitted)).
In holding to the contrary, the majority erects a formalis
tic barrier to the vindication of statutory rights deliber
ately provided for by Congress.
More problematically, because there is no apparent
reason why the term “appropriate relief” is sufficiently
clear as to equitable relief but not as to monetary relief,
we are left with the very real possibility that, in order to
secure a waiver of immunity under the majority’s new
rule, Congress must now itemize in the statutory text
every type of relief meant to be available against sovereign
defendants. I, for one, do not relish the prospect of federal
courts being presented with endless state challenges to all
manner of federal statutes, on the ground that Congress
failed to predict that a laundry list of terms must be in
cluded to waive sovereign immunity to all forms of relief.
I would avoid the problems the majority’s decision invites
and hold instead that, as is the case here, when a general
statutory term like “appropriate relief” is used, clear no
tice has been provided and a State’s acceptance of federal
funds constitutes a waiver of sovereign immunity to all
relief, equitable and monetary.
——————
868, 882–883 (CA7 2009) (affirming the District Court’s dismissal as
moot of a RLUIPA claim because there was no evidence that the prison
intended to revoke the plaintiff ’s religious diet); El v. Evans, 694
F. Supp. 2d 1009, 1012–1013 (SD Ill. 2010) (similar).

