Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
that they would be liable for damages because Spending Clause legis
lation operates as a contract and damages are always available for a
breach of contract. While acknowledging the contract-law analogy,
this Court has been clear “not [to] imply . . . that suits under Spend
ing Clause legislation are suits in contract, or that contract-law prin
ciples apply to all issues that they raise,” Barnes, supra, at 188, n. 2,
or to rely on that analogy to expand liability beyond what would exist
under nonspending statutes, much less to extend monetary liability
against the States. Applying ordinary contract principles here would
also make little sense because contracts with a sovereign are unique:
They do not traditionally confer a right of action for damages to en
force compliance. More fundamentally, Sossamon’s implied-contract
remedy cannot be squared with the rule that a sovereign immunity
waiver must be expressly and unequivocally stated in the relevant
statute’s text. Pp. 10–12.
(d) Sossamon also errs in arguing that Texas was put on notice that
it could be sued for damages under RLUIPA by §1003 of the Rehabili
tation Act Amendments of 1986, which expressly waives state sover
eign immunity for violations of “section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act
of 1973, title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the Age Dis
crimination Act of 1975, title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, or the
provisions of any other Federal statute prohibiting discrimination by
recipients of Federal financial assistance,” 42 U. S. C. §2000d–7.
Even if such a residual clause could constitute an unequivocal textual
waiver, RLUIPA §3—which prohibits “substantial burden[s]” on reli
gious exercise—is not unequivocally a “statute prohibiting discrimi
nation” within §1003’s meaning. All the statutory provisions enu
merated in §1003 explicitly prohibit discrimination; a State might
reasonably conclude that the residual clause, strictly construed, cov
ers only provisions using the term “discrimination.” Pp. 12–14.
560 F. 3d 316, affirmed.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, GINSBURG, and ALITO, JJ., joined. SOTOMAYOR, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which BREYER, J., joined.
KAGAN, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.

