12

SOSSAMON v. TEXAS
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

egregious and unnecessary ways”); ibid. (“Institutional
residents’ rights to practice their faith is at the mercy of
those running the institution . . .”). It is difficult to believe
that Congress would have devoted such care and effort to
establishing significant statutory protections for religious
exercise and specifically extended those protections to
persons in state institutions, yet withheld from plaintiffs a
crucial tool for securing the rights the statute guarantees.
By depriving prisoners of a damages remedy for viola
tions of their statutory rights, the majority ensures that
plaintiffs suing state defendants under RLUIPA will be
forced to seek enforcement of those rights with one hand
tied behind their backs. Most obviously, the majority’s
categorical denial of monetary relief means that a plaintiff
who prevails on the merits of his claim that a State has
substantially burdened his religious exercise will often be
denied redress for the injury he has suffered, because in
many instances “prospective relief accords . . . no remedy
at all.” Franklin, 503 U. S., at 76; see H. R. Rep. No. 102–
40, pt. 2, p. 25 (1991) (Report of Committee on the Judici
ary on the Civil Rights Act of 1991) (“The limitation of
relief under Title VII to equitable remedies often means
that victims . . . may not recover for the very real effects of
the [statutory violation]”). Injunctive relief from a federal
court may address a violation going forward, but this
fact will be of cold comfort to the victims of serious, non
recurring violations for which equitable relief may be
inappropriate.
In addition, the unavailability of monetary relief will
effectively shield unlawful policies and practices from
judicial review in many cases. Under state law, discretion
to transfer prisoners “in a wide variety of circumstances is
vested in prison officials.” Meachum v. Fano, 427 U. S.
215, 227 (1976). A number of RLUIPA suits seeking in
junctive relief have been dismissed as moot because the
plaintiff was transferred from the institution where the

