6

SOSSAMON v. TEXAS
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

that monetary relief is available for violations of the sub
stantive conditions Congress attaches, through Spending
Clause legislation, to the acceptance of federal funding.
See Davis v. Monroe County Bd. of Ed., 526 U. S. 629, 640
(1999) (“[P]ursuant to Congress’ authority under the
Spending Clause . . . private damages actions are avail
able”); Gebser v. Lago Vista Independent School Dist., 524
U. S. 274, 287 (1998) (noting that “[w]hen Congress at
taches conditions to the award of federal funds under its
spending power . . . private actions holding the recipient
liable in monetary damages” are permissible). It would be
an odd derogation of the normal rules of statutory con
struction for state officials reading RLUIPA to assume
that Congress drafted the statute in ignorance of these
unambiguous precedents. See Merck & Co. v. Reynolds,
559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 12) (“We normally
assume that, when Congress enacts statutes, it is aware of
relevant judicial precedent”).3
C
Accordingly, it is difficult to understand the basis for the
Court’s position that the phrase “appropriate relief” in
§2000cc–2(a) fails to provide state officials with clear
notice that waiving sovereign immunity to monetary relief
——————
3 Curiously,

the majority appears to believe that it would be appro
priate for state officials to read the statutory phrase “appropriate relief ”
without reference to general remedies principles. See ante, at 12, n. 8.
It is well-established, however, that “Congress is understood to legis
late against a background of common-law . . . principles,” Astoria Fed.
Sav. & Loan Assn. v. Solimino, 501 U. S. 104, 108 (1991), and there can
be no doubt that general legal principles necessarily inform judicial
determinations as to what remedies are available to civil plaintiffs, see,
e.g., Atlantic Sounding Co. v. Townsend, 557 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip
op., at 15) (concluding that, in light of “general principles of maritime
tort law” punitive damages were a remedy available to the plaintiff
(internal quotation marks omitted)). Why Texas’s sovereign immunity
defense renders this approach improper is a mystery the majority
opinion leaves unsolved.

