8

SOSSAMON v. TEXAS
Opinion of the Court

(1989) (holding that “a permissible inference” is not the
necessary “unequivocal declaration” that States were
intended to be subject to damages actions); Nordic Village,
supra, at 37 (holding that the existence of “plausible”
interpretations that would not permit recovery “is enough
to establish that a reading imposing monetary liability on
the Government is not ‘unambiguous’ and therefore should
not be adopted”). That is the case here.
Sossamon argues that, because RLUIPA expressly
limits the United States to “injunctive or declaratory
relief ” to enforce the statute, the phrase “appropriate re
lief ” in the private cause of action necessarily must be
broader. 42 U. S. C. §2000cc–2(f). Texas responds that,
because the State has no immunity defense to a suit
brought by the Federal Government, Congress needed to
exclude damages affirmatively in that context but not in
the context of private suits. Further, the private cause of
action provides that a person may assert a violation of the
statute “as a claim or defense.” §2000cc–2(a) (emphasis
added). Because an injunction or declaratory judgment is
not “appropriate relief ” for a successful defense, Texas
explains, explicitly limiting the private cause of action to
those forms of relief would make no sense.
Sossamon also emphasizes that the statute requires
that it be “construed in favor of a broad protection of
religious exercise.” §2000cc–3(g). Texas responds that
this provision is best read as addressing the substantive
standards in the statute, not the scope of “appropriate
relief.” Texas also highlights Congress’ choice of the word
“relief,” which it argues primarily connotes equitable
relief. See Black’s Law Dictionary 1295 (7th ed. 1999)
(defining “relief ” as “[t]he redress or benefit, esp. equitable
in nature . . . , that a party asks of a court”).
These plausible arguments demonstrate that the phrase
“appropriate relief ” in RLUIPA is not so free from ambigu
ity that we may conclude that the States, by receiving

