Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

is a condition of accepting federal funds. In arguing that
“a waiver of sovereign immunity to other types of relief
does not waive immunity to damages,” ante, at 6 (empha
sis added), the majority appears to accept that equitable
relief is available to RLUIPA plaintiffs. See Madison, 474
F. 3d, at 131 (holding that a RLUIPA plaintiff’s “claims for
equitable relief are not barred by the Eleventh Amend
ment”); cf. 560 F. 3d 316, 331, 336 (CA5 2009) (reversing
the District Court’s grant of summary judgment to Texas
on one of petitioner’s RLUIPA claims for declaratory and
injunctive relief ). The explanation for the majority’s
implicit acceptance of suits for injunctive and declaratory
relief is obvious enough: It would be a particularly curious
reading of the statute to conclude that Congress’ express
provision of a private right of action to seek “appropriate
relief” against “a State” nonetheless left plaintiffs suing
for state violations of RLUIPA with no available relief.
It is not apparent, however, why the phrase “appropri
ate relief” is too ambiguous to secure a waiver of state
sovereign immunity with respect to damages but is clear
enough as to injunctive and other forms of equitable relief.
The majority appears to believe that equitable relief is a
“suitable” or “proper” remedy for a state violation of
RLUIPA’s substantive provisions but monetary relief is
not; therefore, a state official reading the “open-ended and
ambiguous” phrase “appropriate relief” will be unaware
that it includes damages but fully apprised that it makes
equitable relief available. See ante, at 6–7. But sovereign
immunity is not simply a defense against certain classes of
remedies—it is a defense against being sued at all. See,
e.g., Federal Maritime Comm’n v. South Carolina Ports
Authority, 535 U. S. 743, 766 (2002). As a result, there is
no inherent reason why the phrase “appropriate relief”
would provide adequate notice as to equitable remedies
but not as to monetary ones. In fact, as discussed earlier,
in light of general remedies principles the presumption

