10

SOSSAMON v. TEXAS
Opinion of the Court

direction that it intends to include a damages remedy.
The text must “establish unambiguously that the waiver
extends to monetary claims.” Nordic Village, 503 U. S., at
34. In Franklin and Barnes, congressional silence had an
entirely different implication than it does here. Whatever
“appropriate relief ” might have meant in those cases does
not translate to this context.6
B
Sossamon contends that, because Congress enacted §3 of
RLUIPA pursuant to the Spending Clause, the States
were necessarily on notice that they would be liable for
damages. He argues that Spending Clause legislation
operates as a contract and damages are always available
relief for a breach of contract, whether the contract explic
itly includes a damages remedy or not. Relying on Barnes
and Franklin, he asserts that all recipients of federal
funding are “ ‘generally on notice that [they are] subject
. . . to those remedies traditionally available in suits for
breach of contract,’ ” including compensatory damages.
Brief for Petitioner 27 (quoting Barnes, 536 U. S., at 187).
We have acknowledged the contract-law analogy, but we
have been clear “not [to] imply . . . that suits under Spend
ing Clause legislation are suits in contract, or that
——————
6 Nor can it be said that this Court’s use of the phrase “appropriate
relief ” in Franklin and Barnes somehow put the States on notice that
the same phrase in RLUIPA subjected them to suits for monetary
relief. Those cases did not involve sovereign defendants, so the Court
had no occasion to consider sovereign immunity. Liability against
nonsovereigns could not put the States on notice that they would be
liable in the same manner, absent an unequivocal textual waiver.
Moreover, the same phrase in RFRA had been interpreted not to
include damages relief against the Federal Government or the States
and so could have signaled to the States that damages are not “appro
priate relief ” under RLUIPA. See, e.g., Tinsley v. Pittari, 952 F. Supp.
384, 389 (ND Tex. 1996); Commack Self-Service Kosher Meats Inc. v.
New York, 954 F. Supp. 65, 69 (EDNY 1997).

