(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SOSSAMON v. TEXAS ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1438. Argued November 2, 2010—Decided April 20, 2011
After this Court held that the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of
1993 was unconstitutional as applied to state and local governments
because it exceeded Congress’ power under §5 of the Fourteenth
Amendment, see City of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U. S. 507, Congress
passed the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of
2000 (RLUIPA) pursuant to its Spending Clause and Commerce
Clause authority. RLUIPA targets two areas of state and local ac
tion: land–use regulation, RLUIPA §2, 42 U. S. C. §2000cc, and re
strictions on the religious exercise of institutionalized persons,
RLUIPA §3, §2000cc–1. It also provides an express private cause of
action for “appropriate relief against a government,” §2000cc–2(a),
including, inter alia, States, their instrumentalities and officers, and
persons acting under color of state law, §2000cc–5(4)(A).
Petitioner Sossamon, a Texas prison inmate, sued respondents, the
State and prison officials, seeking injunctive and monetary relief un
der RLUIPA for prison policies that prevented inmates from attend
ing religious services while on cell restriction for disciplinary infrac
tions and that barred use of the prison chapel for religious worship.
Granting respondents summary judgment, the District Court held
that sovereign immunity barred Sossamon’s claims for monetary re
lief. The Fifth Circuit affirmed, holding that the statutory phrase
“appropriate relief against a government” did not unambiguously no
tify Texas that its acceptance of federal funds was conditioned on a
waiver of sovereign immunity to claims for monetary relief.
Held: States, in accepting federal funding, do not consent to waive their
sovereign immunity to private suits for money damages under
RLUIPA. Pp. 4–14.
(a) Sovereign immunity principles enforce an important constitu

