Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

STEVENS, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1175
_________________

FLORIDA, PETITIONER v. KEVIN DEWAYNE POWELL
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF

FLORIDA

[February 23, 2010] 


JUSTICE STEVENS, with whom JUSTICE BREYER joins as
to Part II, dissenting.
Today, the Court decides a case in which the Florida
Supreme Court held a local police practice violated the
Florida Constitution. The Court’s power to review that
decision is doubtful at best; moreover, the Florida Su
preme Court has the better view on the merits.
I
In this case, the Florida Supreme Court concluded that
“[b]oth Miranda and article I, section 9 of the Florida
Constitution require that a suspect be clearly informed of
the right to have a lawyer present during questioning,”
and that the warnings given to Powell did not satisfy
either the State or the Federal Constitution. 998 So. 2d
531, 542 (2008). In my view, the Florida Supreme Court
held on an adequate and independent state-law ground
that the warnings provided to Powell did not sufficiently
inform him of the “ ‘right to a lawyer’s help’ ” under the
Florida Constitution, id., at 535. This Court therefore
lacks jurisdiction to review the judgment below, notwith
standing the failure of that court to include some express
sentence that would satisfy this Court’s “plain-statement
rule,” ante, at 5.
The adequate-and-independent-state-ground doctrine
rests on two “cornerstones”: “[r]espect for the independ


2

FLORIDA v. POWELL
STEVENS, J., dissenting

ence of state courts” and “avoidance of rendering advisory
opinions.” Michigan v. Long, 463 U. S. 1032, 1040 (1983).
In Long, the Court adopted a novel presumption in favor
of jurisdiction when the independence of a state court’s
state-law judgment is not clear. But we only respect the
independence of state courts and avoid rendering advisory
opinions if we limit the application of that presumption to
truly ambiguous cases.1 This is not such a case.
“[I]f the same judgment would be rendered by the state
court after we corrected its views of federal laws, our
review could amount to nothing more than an advisory
opinion.” Herb v. Pitcairn, 324 U. S. 117, 126 (1945). In
Long we advised every state court of a formula by which it
could assure us that our review would indeed amount to
nothing more than an advisory opinion. The state court
“need only make clear by a plain statement in its judg
ment or opinion that the federal cases are being used only
for the purpose of guidance, and do not themselves compel
the result that the court has reached.” 463 U. S., at 1041.
That advice has sometimes been misunderstood as a com
mand that unless such a plain statement is included in a
state-court opinion, the court’s ruling cannot have rested
on an adequate and independent state ground. But the
real question is whether “the adequacy and independence
of any possible state law ground is . . . clear from the face
——————
1 In my view, this Court would better respect the independence of
state courts by applying the opposite presumption, as it did in the years
prior to 1983. See Long, 463 U. S., at 1066–1067 (STEVENS, J., dissent
ing). But accepting Long as the law, we can limit its negative effects—
unnecessary intrusion into the business of the state courts and unnec
essary advisory opinions—only if we limit its application to cases in
which the independence of the state-law ground is in serious doubt.
See Pennsylvania v. Labron, 518 U. S. 938, 950 (1996) (STEVENS, J.,
dissenting) (“[T]he unfortunate effects of [its] rule” are “exacerbate[d]
. . . to a nearly intolerable degree” when the Long presumption is
applied to cases in which “the state-law ground supporting th[e] judg
men[t] is so much clearer than has been true on most prior occasions”).


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., dissenting

of the opinion.” Id., at 1040–1041. Even if a state court
opinion does not include the magic words set forth in
Long, or some similarly explicit sentence, we lack jurisdic
tion if it is nonetheless apparent that the decision is in
deed supported by an adequate and independent state
ground. Contrary to the assumption made by the Court,
we have no power to assume jurisdiction that does not
otherwise exist simply because the Florida Supreme Court
did not include in its decision some express statement that
its interpretation of state law is independent.
In my view, we can tell from the face of the Florida
Supreme Court’s opinion that “the decision rested on a
state ground separate from Miranda,” ante, at 6. This
case is easily distinguished from Long in that regard. In
Long, although the Michigan Supreme Court had twice
cited the Michigan Constitution in its opinion, it “relied
exclusively on its understanding of Terry [v. Ohio, 392
U. S. 1 (1968),] and other federal cases. Not a single state
case was cited to support the state court’s holding that the
search of the passenger compartment was unconstitu
tional.” 463 U. S., at 1043. There was, in short, nothing
to “indicate that the decision below rested on grounds in
any way independent from the state court’s interpretation
of federal law.” Id., at 1044.
Other cases in which we have applied the Long pre
sumption have been similarly devoid of independent state
law analysis. We typically apply the Long presumption
when the state court’s decision cited a state constitutional
provision only a few times or not at all, and rested exclu
sively upon federal cases or upon state cases that them
selves cited only federal law.2 We have also applied Long
——————
2 See, e.g., Illinois v. Fisher, 540 U. S. 544, 547, n. (2004) (per curiam)
(describing decision below as relying upon the portion of a state prece
dent that solely discussed due process under the Federal Constitution);
Ohio v. Robinette, 519 U. S. 33, 37 (1996) (“[T]he only cases [the opin
ion] discusses or even cites are federal cases, except for one state case


4

FLORIDA v. POWELL
STEVENS, J., dissenting

when the state court’s decision indicated that under state
law, the relevant state constitutional provision is consid
ered coextensive with the federal one.3 This case shares
none of those features.4
——————
which itself applies the Federal Constitution”); Illinois v. Rodriguez,
497 U. S. 177, 182 (1990) (“The opinion does not rely on (or even men
tion) any specific provision of the Illinois Constitution, nor even the
Illinois Constitution generally. Even the Illinois cases cited by the
opinion rely on no constitutional provisions other than the Fourth and
Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution”); Florida v.
Riley, 488 U. S. 445, 448, n. 1 (1989) (plurality opinion) (finding Florida
Supreme Court mentioned the State Constitution three times but the
discussion “focused exclusively on federal cases dealing with the Fourth
Amendment”); Michigan v. Chesternut, 486 U. S. 567, 571, n. 3 (1988)
(describing state court as resting its holding on two state cases that
each relied upon federal law); New York v. P. J. Video, Inc., 475 U. S.
868, 872, n. 4 (1986) (“Here, the New York Court of Appeals cited the
New York Constitution only once, near the beginning of its opinion . . .
[and] repeatedly referred to the ‘First Amendment’ and ‘Fourth
Amendment’ during its discussion of the merits of the case”); Oliver v.
United States, 466 U. S. 170, 175, n. 5 (1984) (“The Maine Supreme
Judicial court referred only to the Fourth Amendment . . . [and] the
prior state cases that the court cited also construed the Federal Consti
tution”).
3 See, e.g., Fitzgerald v. Racing Assn. of Central Iowa, 539 U. S. 103,
106 (2003) (“The Iowa Supreme Court’s opinion . . . says that ‘Iowa
courts are to “apply the same analysis in considering the state equal
protection clause as . . . in considering the federal equal protection
claim” ’ ”); Pennsylvania v. Muniz, 496 U. S. 582, 588, n. 4 (1990) (state
court explained that relevant state constitutional provision “offers a
protection against self-incrimination identical to that provided by the
Fifth Amendment” (internal quotation marks omitted)); Maryland v.
Garrison, 480 U. S. 79, 83–84 (1987) (state-court opinion relied on state
cases but indicated “that the Maryland constitutional provision is
construed in pari materia with the Fourth Amendment”).
4 I do not mean to suggest that this Court has never reached out be
yond these bounds in order to decide a case. For example, in Labron,
518 U. S. 938, we found that a state court decision resting on the
“Commonwealth’s jurisprudence of the automobile exception,” Com
monwealth v. Labron, 543 Pa. 86, 100, 669 A. 2d 917, 924 (1995), was
not so clearly based on state law that the Long presumption did not
apply, even though only “some” of the state cases discussed in the state


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., dissenting

The Florida Supreme Court did not merely cite the
Florida Constitution a time or two without state-law
analysis.5 Rather, the court discussed and relied on the
separate rights provided under Art. I, §9 of the Florida
Constitution. For example, after a paragraph describing
the general scope of Miranda warnings under federal law,
the Court explained the general scope of warnings under
state law. 998 So. 2d, at 534–535 (“[T]o ensure the volun
tariness of confessions as required by article I, section 9 of
the Florida Constitution, this Court in Traylor v. State,
596 So. 2d 957 (Fla. 1992), outlined the . . . rights Florida
suspects must be told of prior to custodial interrogation,”
which includes “ ‘that they have a right to a lawyer’s
help’ ”). The court consistently referred to these state-law
rights as separate and distinct from Miranda, noting that
in its earlier cases, it had explained that “the require
ments of both the Fifth Amendment, as explained in
Miranda, and the Florida Constitution, as explained in
Traylor,” include “the requirement that a suspect be in
formed of the right to have counsel present during ques
tioning.” 998 So. 2d, at 537–538. And when applying the
law to the specific facts of this case, the Florida Supreme
Court again invoked the specific and distinct “right to a
——————
court’s opinion analyzed federal law. 518 U. S., at 939. The Court’s
analysis proved wrong; on remand, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court
reaffirmed its prior holding and “explicitly note[d] that it was, in fact,
decided upon independent grounds, i.e., Article I, Section 8 of the
Pennsylvania Constitution.” Commonwealth v. Labron, 547 Pa. 344,
345, 690 A. 2d 228 (1997). That we have overreached before is no
reason to repeat the mistake again.
5 In examining what the state-court opinion said regarding state law,
and whether the state precedent cited in the opinion relied upon state
law, I am undertaking no effort more arduous than what the Court has
typically undertaken in order to determine whether the Long presump
tion applies: examining how frequently a state-court opinion cited state
law, whether state law is coextensive with federal law, and whether the
cited state cases relied upon federal law. See nn. 2–3, supra.


6

FLORIDA v. POWELL
STEVENS, J., dissenting

lawyer’s help” under the Florida Constitution. Id., at 540.
Moreover, the state cases relied upon by the Florida
Supreme Court did not themselves rely exclusively on
federal law. The primary case relied upon for the state
law holding, Traylor, rested exclusively upon state law.
See 596 So. 2d, at 961. In that decision, the Florida Su
preme Court embraced the principle that “[w]hen called
upon to decide matters of fundamental rights, Florida’s
state courts are bound under federalist principles to give
primacy to our state Constitution and to give independent
legal import to every phrase and clause contained
therein.” Id., at 962. Elaborating upon the meaning of
Art. I, §9 of the Florida Constitution, the Florida Supreme
Court explained the roots of Florida’s commitment to
protecting its citizens from self-incrimination. Florida has
long “required as a matter of state law that one charged
with a crime be informed of his rights prior to rendering a
confession.” Id., at 964. It has required warnings before
some interrogations since at least 1889, and has for that
long excluded confessions obtained in violation of those
rules. Ibid. In sum, this case looks quite different from
those cases in which we have applied the Long presump
tion in the past.
The Court concludes otherwise by relying primarily
upon the formulation of the certified question and re
statements of that question within the Florida Supreme
Court’s opinion. See ante, at 6. Yet while the certified
question asks whether particular phrases “vitiate[d]
Miranda warnings,” 998 So. 2d, at 532 (capitalization and
footnote omitted), Miranda has become a generic term to
refer to the warnings suspects must be given before inter
rogation, see Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 792
(11th ed. 2003) (defining “Miranda” as “of, relating to, or
being the legal rights of an arrested person to have an
attorney and to remain silent so as to avoid self
incrimination”). Thus, its invocation of Miranda in the


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

STEVENS, J., dissenting

certified question and in its statement of the issue
presented is entirely consistent with the fact that the
state-law basis for its decision is fully adequate and
independent.
That said, I agree with the Court that the decision below
is interwoven with federal law. In reaching its state-law
holding, the Florida Supreme Court found Miranda and
our other precedents instructive.6 But that alone is insuf
ficient to assure our jurisdiction, even under Long. In my
view, the judgment—reversal of Powell’s conviction—is
supported by the Florida Supreme Court’s independent
and carefully considered holding that these warnings were
inadequate under the Florida Constitution. See 998
So. 2d, at 534–535, 537–538, 540, 542.
The Court acknowledges that nothing in today’s decision
“trenches on the Florida Supreme Court’s authority to
impose, based on the State’s Constitution, any additional
protections against coerced confessions it deems appropri
ate.” Ante, at 7. As the Florida Supreme Court has noted
on more than one occasion, its interpretation of the Flor
ida Constitution’s privilege against self-incrimination need
not track our construction of the parallel provision in the
——————
6 The Florida Supreme Court need not have decided that state-law
sources “gave Powell rights . . . broader than . . . those delineated in
Miranda,” ante, at 6, in order for its judgment to have rested upon an
independent state-law ground. The independence of a state-law ground
may be especially clear when a state court explicitly finds that the state
constitution is more protective of a certain right than the national
charter, but a state constitutional provision is no less independent for
providing the same protection in a given case as does the federal
provision, so long as the content of the state-law right is not compelled
by or dependent upon federal law. Unlike other provisions of Art. I of
the Florida Constitution, §9 does not contain an express proviso requir
ing that the right be construed in conformity with the analogous federal
provision. Compare Fla. Const., Art. I, §9, with Fla. Const., Art I, §12.
Furthermore, under Florida law the scope of Art. I, §9 is clearly not
dependent upon federal law. Rigterink v. State, 2 So. 3d 221, 241 (Fla.
2009); Traylor v. State, 596 So. 2d 957, 962 (Fla. 1992).


8

FLORIDA v. POWELL
STEVENS, J., dissenting

Federal Constitution. See Rigterink v. State, 2 So. 3d 221,
241 (2009) (“[T]he federal Constitution sets the floor, not
the ceiling, and this Court retains the ability to interpret
the right against self-incrimination afforded by the Florida
Constitution more broadly than that afforded by its fed
eral counterpart”); Traylor, 596 So. 2d, at 961–963. In this
very case, the Florida Supreme Court may reinstate its
judgment upon remand. If the Florida Supreme Court
does so, as I expect it will, this Court’s opinion on the
merits will qualify as the sort of advisory opinion that we
should studiously seek to avoid.
II
The Court’s decision on the merits is also unpersuasive.
As we recognized in Miranda, “the right to have counsel
present at [an] interrogation is indispensable to the pro
tection of the Fifth Amendment privilege.” Miranda v.
Arizona, 384 U. S. 436, 469 (1966). Furthermore, “the
need for counsel to protect the Fifth Amendment privilege
comprehends not merely a right to consult with counsel
prior to questioning, but also to have counsel present
during any questioning.” Id., at 470. Because the “ac
cused who does not know his rights and therefore does not
make a request may be the person who most needs coun
sel,” id., at 470–471, a defendant “must be clearly in
formed” regarding two aspects of his right to consult an
attorney: “the right to consult with a lawyer and to have
the lawyer with him during interrogation,” id., at 471.
In this case, the form regularly used by the Tampa
police warned Powell that he had “the right to talk to a
lawyer before answering any of our questions.” App. 3.
This informed him only of the right to consult with a
lawyer before questioning, the very right the Miranda
Court identified as insufficient to protect the Fifth
Amendment privilege. The warning did not say anything
about the right to have counsel present during interroga


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

STEVENS, J., dissenting

tion. Although we have never required “rigidity in the
form of the required warnings,” California v. Prysock, 453
U. S. 355, 359 (1981) (per curiam), this is, I believe, the
first time the Court has approved a warning which, if
given its natural reading, entirely omitted an essential
element of a suspect’s rights.
Despite the failure of the warning to mention it, in the
Court’s view the warning “reasonably conveyed” to Powell
that he had the right to a lawyer’s presence during the
interrogation. Ante, at 10. The Court cobbles together
this conclusion from two elements of the warning. First,
the Court assumes the warning regarding Powell’s right
“to talk to a lawyer before answering any of [the officers’]
questions,” App. 3, conveyed that “Powell could consult
with a lawyer before answering any particular question,”
ante, at 10 (emphasis added).7 Second, in the Court’s
view, the addition of a catchall clause at the end of the
recitation of rights “confirmed” that Powell could use his
right to consult an attorney “while the interrogation was
underway.” Ibid.
The more natural reading of the warning Powell was
given, which (1) contained a temporal limit and (2) failed
to mention his right to the presence of counsel in the
interrogation room, is that Powell only had the right to
consult with an attorney before the interrogation began,
not that he had the right to have an attorney with him
during questioning. Even those few Courts of Appeals
that have approved warnings that did not expressly men
——————
7 This

assumption makes it easier for the Court to conclude the warn
ing conveyed a right to have a lawyer present. If a suspect is told he
has the right to consult with an attorney before answering any particu
lar question, the Court may be correct that he would reasonably con
clude he has the right to a lawyer’s presence because otherwise he
would have to imagine he could consult his attorney in some unlikely
fashion (e.g., by leaving the interrogation room between every ques
tion).


10

FLORIDA v. POWELL
STEVENS, J., dissenting

tion the right to an attorney’s presence during interroga
tion8 have found language of the sort used in Powell’s
warning to be misleading. For instance, petitioner cites
the Second Circuit’s decision in United States v. Lamia,
429 F. 2d 373 (1970), as an example of a court applying
the properly flexible approach to Miranda. But in that
case, the Second Circuit expressly distinguished a warning
that a suspect “ ‘could consult an attorney prior to any
question,’ ” which was “affirmatively misleading since it
was thought to imply that the attorney could not be pre
sent during questioning.” 429 F. 2d, at 377.9 That even
——————
8 Several Courts of Appeals have held that warnings that did not
expressly inform a suspect of his right to have counsel present during
interrogation did not adequately inform a suspect of his Miranda
rights. See, e.g., United States v. Tillman, 963 F. 2d 137, 141 (CA6
1992); United States v. Bland, 908 F. 2d 471, 474 (CA9 1990); United
States v. Anthon, 648 F. 2d 669, 672–673 (CA10 1981); Windsor v.
United States, 389 F. 2d 530, 533 (CA5 1968). And most of the Circuits
that have not required express mention of the right to an attorney’s
presence have approved only general warnings regarding the right to
an attorney; that is, warnings which did not specifically mention the
right to counsel’s presence during interrogation but which also con
tained no limiting words that might mislead a suspect as to the broad
nature of his right to counsel. See, e.g., United States v. Frankson, 83
F. 3d 79, 82 (CA4 1996); United States v. Caldwell, 954 F. 2d 496, 502
(CA8 1992); United States v. Adams, 484 F. 2d 357, 361–362 (CA7
1973). I am doubtful that warning a suspect of his “right to counsel,”
without more, reasonably conveys a suspect’s full rights under
Miranda, but at least such a general warning does not include the same
sort of misleading temporal limitation as in Powell’s warning.
9 Petitioner also cites Bridgers v. Dretke, 431 F. 3d 853 (CA5 2005), in
which the Fifth Circuit held the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals did
not unreasonably apply clearly established federal law in finding
adequate a warning in which a suspect was informed that “he had the
right to the presence of an attorney before any questioning commenced.”
Id., at 857 (internal quotation marks omitted). But even assuming that
warning would sufficiently apprise an individual of his right to an
attorney’s presence during interrogation, the fact that the warning
mentioned an attorney’s presence materially distinguishes it from the
warning Powell received. The Fifth Circuit quoted with approval the


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

STEVENS, J., dissenting

the Courts of Appeals taking the most flexible approach to
Miranda have found warnings like Powell’s misleading
should caution the Court against concluding that such a
warning reasonably conveyed Powell’s right to have an
attorney with him during the interrogation.
When the relevant clause of the warning in this case is
given its most natural reading, the catchall clause does
not meaningfully clarify Powell’s rights. It communicated
that Powell could exercise the previously listed rights at
any time. Yet the only previously listed right was the
“right to talk to a lawyer before answering any of [the
officers’] questions.” App. 3 (emphasis added). Informing
Powell that he could exercise, at any time during the
interview, the right to talk to a lawyer before answering
any questions did not reasonably convey the right to talk
to a lawyer after answering some questions, much less
implicitly inform Powell of his right to have a lawyer with
him at all times during interrogation. An intelligent
suspect could reasonably conclude that all he was provided
was a one-time right to consult with an attorney, not a
right to have an attorney present with him in the interro
gation room at all times.10
——————
state court’s assessment that warning a suspect solely that “he had the
right to consult or speak to an attorney before questioning . . . might
have created the [impermissible] impression that the attorney could not
be present during interrogation.” Ibid. (internal quotation marks
omitted).
10 The Court supports its analysis by taking note of Powell’s testi
mony at trial, given after the trial judge had overruled his lawyer’s
objection that the warning he received was inadequate. In my view, the
testimony in context is not probative of what Powell thought the
warnings meant. It did not explore what Powell understood the warn
ings to mean, but simply established, as a prelude to Powell’s testimony
explaining his prior statement, that he had waived his rights. Regard
less, the testimony is irrelevant, as the Court acknowledges. “No
amount of circumstantial evidence that a person may have been aware
of [the right to have a lawyer with him during interrogation] will suffice
to stand” in the stead of an adequate warning. Miranda v. Arizona, 384


12

FLORIDA v. POWELL
STEVENS, J., dissenting

The Court relies on Duckworth v. Eagan, 492 U. S. 195
(1989), and Prysock, 453 U. S. 355, but in neither case did
the warning at issue completely omit one of a suspect’s
rights. In Prysock, the warning regarding the right to an
appointed attorney contained no temporal limitation, see
id., at 360–361, which clearly distinguishes that case from
Powell’s. In Duckworth, the suspect was explicitly in
formed that he had the right “to talk to a lawyer for advice
before we ask you any questions, and to have him with you
during questioning,” and that he had “this right to the
advice and presence of a lawyer even if you cannot afford
to hire one.” 492 U. S., at 198 (emphasis deleted; internal
quotation marks omitted). The warning thus conveyed in
full the right to appointed counsel before and during the
interrogation. Although the warning was arguably under
cut by the addition of a statement that an attorney would
be appointed “if and when you go to court,” the Court
found the suspect was informed of his full rights and the
warning simply added additional, truthful information
regarding when counsel would be appointed. Ibid. (em
phasis deleted; internal quotation marks omitted). Unlike
the Duckworth warning, Powell’s warning did not convey
his Miranda rights in full with the addition of some ar
guably misleading statement. Rather, the warning en
tirely failed to inform him of the separate and distinct
right “to have counsel present during any questioning.”
Miranda, 384 U. S., at 470.
In sum, the warning at issue in this case did not rea
sonably convey to Powell his right to have a lawyer with
him during the interrogation. “The requirement of warn
ings . . . [is] fundamental with respect to the Fifth
Amendment privilege and not simply a preliminary ritual
to existing methods of interrogation.” Id., at 476. In
determining that the warning implied what it did not say,
——————
U. S. 436, 471–472 (1966).


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

STEVENS, J., dissenting

it is the Court “that is guilty of attaching greater impor
tance to the form of the Miranda ritual than to the sub
stance of the message it is intended to convey.” Prysock,
453 U. S., at 366 (STEVENS, J., dissenting).
III
Whether we focus on Powell’s particular case, or the use
of the warning form as the standard used in one jurisdic
tion, it is clear that the form is imperfect. See ante, at 12.
As the majority’s decision today demonstrates, reasonable
judges may well differ over the question whether the
deficiency is serious enough to violate the Federal Consti
tution. That difference of opinion, in my judgment, falls
short of providing a justification for reviewing this case
when the judges of the highest court of the State have
decided the warning is insufficiently protective of the
rights of the State’s citizens. In my view, respect for the
independence of state courts, and their authority to set the
rules by which their citizens are protected, should result
in a dismissal of this petition.
I respectfully dissent.

