Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1175
_________________

FLORIDA, PETITIONER v. KEVIN DEWAYNE POWELL
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF

FLORIDA

[February 23, 2010] 


JUSTICE GINSBURG delivered the opinion of the Court.
In a pathmarking decision, Miranda v. Arizona, 384
U. S. 436, 471 (1966), the Court held that an individual
must be “clearly informed,” prior to custodial questioning,
that he has, among other rights, “the right to consult with
a lawyer and to have the lawyer with him during interro
gation.” The question presented in this case is whether
advice that a suspect has “the right to talk to a lawyer
before answering any of [the law enforcement officers’]
questions,” and that he can invoke this right “at any time
. . . during th[e] interview,” satisfies Miranda. We hold
that it does.
I
On August 10, 2004, law enforcement officers in Tampa,
Florida, seeking to apprehend respondent Kevin Dewayne
Powell in connection with a robbery investigation, entered
an apartment rented by Powell’s girlfriend. 969 So. 2d
1060, 1063 (Fla. App. 2007). After spotting Powell coming
from a bedroom, the officers searched the room and dis
covered a loaded nine-millimeter handgun under the bed.
Ibid.
The officers arrested Powell and transported him to the


2

FLORIDA v. POWELL
Opinion of the Court

Tampa Police headquarters. Ibid. Once there, and before
asking Powell any questions, the officers read Powell the
standard Tampa Police Department Consent and Release
Form 310. Id., at 1063–1064. The form states:
“You have the right to remain silent. If you give up
the right to remain silent, anything you say can be
used against you in court. You have the right to talk
to a lawyer before answering any of our questions. If
you cannot afford to hire a lawyer, one will be ap
pointed for you without cost and before any question
ing. You have the right to use any of these rights at
any time you want during this interview.” App. 3.
See also 969 So. 2d, at 1064.
Acknowledging that he had been informed of his rights,
that he “underst[oo]d them,” and that he was “willing to
talk” to the officers, Powell signed the form. App. 3. He
then admitted that he owned the handgun found in the
apartment. Powell knew he was prohibited from possess
ing a gun because he had previously been convicted of a
felony, but said he had nevertheless purchased and car
ried the firearm for his protection. See 969 So. 2d, at
1064; App. 29.
Powell was charged in state court with possession of a
weapon by a prohibited possessor, in violation of Fla. Stat.
Ann. §790.23(1) (West 2007).
Contending that the
Miranda warnings were deficient because they did not
adequately convey his right to the presence of an attorney
during questioning, he moved to suppress his inculpatory
statements. The trial court denied the motion, concluding
that the officers had properly notified Powell of his right to
counsel. 969 So. 2d, at 1064; App. 28. A jury convicted
Powell of the gun-possession charge. 969 So. 2d, at 1064.
On appeal, the Florida Second District Court of Appeal
held that the trial court should have suppressed Powell’s
statements. Id., at 1067. The Miranda warnings, the


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

appellate court concluded, did not “adequately inform
[Powell] of his . . . right to have an attorney present
throughout [the] interrogation.” 969 So. 2d, at 1063.
Considering the issue to be “one of great public impor
tance,” the court certified the following question to the
Florida Supreme Court:
“Does the failure to provide express advice of the right
to the presence of counsel during questioning vitiate
Miranda warnings which advise of both (A) the right
to talk to a lawyer ‘before questioning’ and (B) the
‘right to use’ the right to consult a lawyer ‘at any time’
during questioning?” Id., at 1067–1068 (some capi
talization omitted).
Surveying decisions of this Court as well as Florida
precedent, the Florida Supreme Court answered the certi
fied question in the affirmative. 998 So. 2d 531, 532
(2008). “Both Miranda and article I, section 9 of the Flor
ida Constitution,”1 the Florida High Court noted, “require
that a suspect be clearly informed of the right to have a
lawyer present during questioning.” Id., at 542. The court
found that the advice Powell received was misleading
because it suggested that Powell could “only consult with
an attorney before questioning” and did not convey Pow
ell’s entitlement to counsel’s presence throughout the
interrogation. Id., at 541. Nor, in the court’s view, did the
final catchall warning—“[y]ou have the right to use any of
these rights at any time you want during this interview”—
cure the defect the court perceived in the right-to-counsel
advice: “The catch-all phrase did not supply the missing
warning of the right to have counsel present during police
questioning,” the court stated, for “a right that has never
been expressed cannot be reiterated.” Ibid.
——————
1 Article I, §9 of the Florida Constitution states that “[n]o person shall
. . . be compelled in any criminal matter to be a witness against one
self.”


4

FLORIDA v. POWELL
Opinion of the Court

Justice Wells dissented. He considered it “unreasonable
to conclude that the broad, unqualified language read to
Powell would lead a person of ordinary intelligence to
believe that he or she had a limited right to consult with
an attorney that could only be exercised before answering
the first question posed by law enforcement.” Id., at 544.
The final sentence of the warning, he stressed, “avoid[ed]
the implication—unreasonable as it may [have] be[en]—
that advice concerning the right of access to counsel before
questioning conveys the message that access to counsel is
foreclosed during questioning.” Ibid. (internal quotation
marks omitted).
Criticizing the majority’s “technical
adherence to language . . . that has no connection with
whether the person who confessed understood his or her
rights,” id., at 545, he concluded that “[t]he totality of the
warning reasonably conveyed to Powell his continuing
right of access to counsel,” id., at 544.
We granted certiorari, 557 U. S. ___ (2009), and now
reverse the judgment of the Florida Supreme Court.
II
We first address Powell’s contention that this Court
lacks jurisdiction to hear this case because the Florida
Supreme Court, by relying not only on Miranda but also
on the Florida Constitution, rested its decision on an
adequate and independent state ground. Brief for Peti
tioner 15–23. See Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722,
729 (1991) (“This Court will not review a question of fed
eral law decided by a state court if the decision . . . rests
on a state law ground that is independent of the federal
question and adequate to support the judgment.”). “It is
fundamental,” we have observed, “that state courts be left
free and unfettered by us in interpreting their state con
stitutions.” Minnesota v. National Tea Co., 309 U. S. 551,
557 (1940). “But it is equally important that ambiguous or
obscure adjudications by state courts do not stand as


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

barriers to a determination by this Court of the validity
under the federal constitution of state action.” Ibid.
To that end, we announced, in Michigan v. Long, 463
U. S. 1032, 1040–1041 (1983), the following presumption:
“[W]hen . . . a state court decision fairly appears to
rest primarily on federal law, or to be interwoven with
the federal law, and when the adequacy and inde
pendence of any possible state law ground is not clear
from the face of the opinion, we will accept as the
most reasonable explanation that the state court de
cided the case the way it did because it believed that
federal law required it to do so.”
At the same time, we adopted a plain-statement rule to
avoid the presumption: “If the state court decision indi
cates clearly and expressly that it is alternatively based on
bona fide separate, adequate, and independent grounds,
we, of course, will not undertake to review the decision.”
Id., at 1041.2
Under the Long presumption, we have jurisdiction to
entertain this case. Although invoking Florida’s Constitu
tion and precedent in addition to this Court’s decisions,
the Florida Supreme Court treated state and federal law
as interchangeable and interwoven; the court at no point
——————
2 Dissenting

in Michigan v. Long, 463 U. S. 1032 (1983), JUSTICE
STEVENS did not urge, as he now does, inspection of state-court deci
sions to count the number of citations to state and federal provisions
and opinions, or heroic efforts to fathom what the state court really
meant. See post, at 3–7 (dissenting opinion). Instead, his preferred
approach was as clear as the Court’s. In lieu of “presuming that
adequate state grounds are not independent unless it clearly appears
otherwise,” he would have “presum[ed] that adequate state grounds are
independent unless it clearly appears otherwise.” Long, 463 U. S., at
1066; see post, at 2, n. 1. Either presumption would avoid arduous
efforts to detect, case by case, whether a state ground of decision is
truly “independent of the [state court’s] understanding of federal law.”
Long, 463 U. S., at 1066. Today, however, the dissent would require
this Court to engage in just that sort of inquiry.


6

FLORIDA v. POWELL
Opinion of the Court

expressly asserted that state-law sources gave Powell
rights distinct from, or broader than, those delineated in
Miranda. See Long, 463 U. S., at 1044.
Beginning with the certified question—whether the
advice the Tampa police gave to Powell “vitiate[d]
Miranda,” 998 So. 2d, at 532 (some capitalization omit
ted)—and continuing throughout its opinion, the Florida
Supreme Court trained on what Miranda demands, rather
than on what Florida law independently requires. See,
e.g., 998 So. 2d, at 533 (“The issue before this Court is
whether the failure to provide express advice of the right
to the presence of counsel during custodial interrogation
violates the principles espoused in Miranda v. Arizona,
384 U. S. 436.”); id., at 538 (“[T]he issue of [what] Miranda
requires . . . has been addressed by several of the Florida
district courts of appeal.”); id., at 542 (Powell received a
“narrower and less functional warning than that required
by Miranda.”).3 We therefore cannot identify, “from the
face of the opinion,” a clear statement that the decision
rested on a state ground separate from Miranda. See
Long, 463 U. S., at 1041 (the state court “need only make
clear by a plain statement in its judgment or opinion that
the federal cases are being used only for the purpose of
guidance, and do not themselves compel the result that
the court has reached”).4 “To avoid misunderstanding, the
——————
3 JUSTICE STEVENS suggests that these statements refer to Miranda
only in a “generic” sense to mean “the warnings suspects must be given
before interrogation.” Post, at 6. This explanation fails to account for
the Florida Supreme Court’s repeated citations to the opinion in
Miranda. In context, it is obvious that the court was attempting to
home in on what that opinion—which, of course, interpreted only the
Federal Constitution and not Florida law—requires. See, e.g., 998
So. 2d 531, 533, 534, 537, 538, 539, 540, 541, 542 (2008).
4 JUSTICE STEVENS agrees that the Florida Supreme Court’s decision
is interwoven with federal law, post, at 7, and lacks the plain statement
contemplated by Long, post, at 3. Nevertheless, he finds it possible to
discern an independent state-law basis for the decision. As Long makes


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

[Florida] Supreme Court must itself speak with the clarity
it sought to require of its State’s police officers.” Ohio v.
Robinette, 519 U. S. 33, 45 (1996) (GINSBURG, J., concur
ring in judgment).
Powell notes that “ ‘state courts are absolutely free to
interpret state constitutional provisions to accord greater
protection to individual rights than do similar provisions
of the United States Constitution.’ ” Brief for Respondent
19–20 (quoting Arizona v. Evans, 514 U. S. 1, 8 (1995)).
See also, e.g., Oregon v. Hass, 420 U. S. 714, 719 (1975);
Cooper v. California, 386 U. S. 58, 62 (1967). Powell is
right in this regard. Nothing in our decision today, we
emphasize, trenches on the Florida Supreme Court’s
authority to impose, based on the State’s Constitution, any
additional protections against coerced confessions it deems
appropriate. But because the Florida Supreme Court’s
decision does not “indicat[e] clearly and expressly that it is
alternatively based on bona fide separate, adequate, and
independent [state] grounds,” Long, 463 U. S., at 1041, we
have jurisdiction to decide this case.
III 

A

To give force to the Constitution’s protection against
compelled self-incrimination, the Court established in
Miranda “certain procedural safeguards that require
——————
clear, however, “when . . . [the] state court decision fairly appears to . . .
be interwoven with . . . federal law,” the only way to avoid the jurisdic
tional presumption is to provide a plain statement expressing inde
pendent reliance on state law. 463 U. S., at 1040. It is this plain
statement that makes “the adequacy and independence of any possible
state law ground . . . clear from the face of the opinion.” Id., at 1040–
1041. See also Ohio v. Robinette, 519 U. S. 33, 44 (1996) (GINSBURG, J.,
concurring in judgment) (“Long governs even when, all things consid
ered, the more plausible reading of the state court’s decision may be
that the state court did not regard the Federal Constitution alone as a
sufficient basis for its ruling.”).


8

FLORIDA v. POWELL
Opinion of the Court

police to advise criminal suspects of their rights under the
Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments before commencing
custodial interrogation.” Duckworth v. Eagan, 492 U. S.
195, 201 (1989). Intent on “giv[ing] concrete constitutional
guidelines for law enforcement agencies and courts to
follow,” 384 U. S., at 441–442, Miranda prescribed the
following four now-familiar warnings:
“[A suspect] must be warned prior to any questioning
[1] that he has the right to remain silent, [2] that any
thing he says can be used against him in a court of
law, [3] that he has the right to the presence of an at
torney, and [4] that if he cannot afford an attorney
one will be appointed for him prior to any questioning
if he so desires.” Id., at 479.
Miranda’s third warning—the only one at issue here—
addresses our particular concern that “[t]he circumstances
surrounding in-custody interrogation can operate very
quickly to overbear the will of one merely made aware of
his privilege [to remain silent] by his interrogators.” Id.,
at 469. Responsive to that concern, we stated, as “an
absolute prerequisite to interrogation,” that an individual
held for questioning “must be clearly informed that he has
the right to consult with a lawyer and to have the lawyer
with him during interrogation.” Id., at 471. The question
before us is whether the warnings Powell received satis
fied this requirement.
The four warnings Miranda requires are invariable, but
this Court has not dictated the words in which the essen
tial information must be conveyed. See California v.
Prysock, 453 U. S. 355, 359 (1981) (per curiam) (“This
Court has never indicated that the rigidity of Miranda
extends to the precise formulation of the warnings given a
criminal defendant.” (internal quotation marks omitted));
Rhode Island v. Innis, 446 U. S. 291, 297 (1980) (safe
guards against self-incrimination include “Miranda warn


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

ings . . . or their equivalent”). In determining whether
police officers adequately conveyed the four warnings, we
have said, reviewing courts are not required to examine
the words employed “as if construing a will or defining the
terms of an easement. The inquiry is simply whether the
warnings reasonably ‘conve[y] to [a suspect] his rights as
required by Miranda.’ ” Duckworth, 492 U. S., at 203
(quoting Prysock, 453 U. S., at 361).
B
Our decisions in Prysock and Duckworth inform our
judgment here. Both concerned a suspect’s entitlement to
adequate notification of the right to appointed counsel. In
Prysock, an officer informed the suspect of, inter alia, his
right to a lawyer’s presence during questioning and his
right to counsel appointed at no cost. 453 U. S., at 356–
357. The Court of Appeals held the advice inadequate to
comply with Miranda because it lacked an express state
ment that the appointment of an attorney would occur
prior to the impending interrogation. See 453 U. S., at
358–359. We reversed. Id., at 362. “[N]othing in the
warnings,” we observed, “suggested any limitation on the
right to the presence of appointed counsel different from
the clearly conveyed rights to a lawyer in general, includ
ing the right to a lawyer before [the suspect is] questioned,
. . . while [he is] being questioned, and all during the
questioning.” Id., at 360–361 (internal quotation marks
omitted).
Similarly, in Duckworth, we upheld advice that, in
relevant part, communicated the right to have an attorney
present during the interrogation and the right to an ap
pointed attorney, but also informed the suspect that the
lawyer would be appointed “if and when [the suspect goes]
to court.” 492 U. S., at 198 (emphasis deleted; internal
quotation marks omitted). “The Court of Appeals thought
th[e] ‘if and when you go to court’ language suggested that


10

FLORIDA v. POWELL
Opinion of the Court

only those accused who can afford an attorney have the
right to have one present before answering any ques
tions. ” Id., at 203 (some internal quotation marks omit
ted). We thought otherwise. Under the relevant state
law, we noted, “counsel is appointed at [a] defendant’s
initial appearance in court.” Id., at 204. The “if and when
you go to court” advice, we said, “simply anticipate[d]” a
question the suspect might be expected to ask after receiv
ing Miranda warnings, i.e., “when [will he] obtain coun
sel.” 492 U. S., at 204. Reading the “if and when” lan
guage together with the other information conveyed, we
held that the warnings, “in their totality, satisfied
Miranda.” Id., at 205.
We reach the same conclusion in this case. The Tampa
officers did not “entirely omi[t],” post, at 9, any informa
tion Miranda required them to impart. They informed
Powell that he had “the right to talk to a lawyer before
answering any of [their] questions” and “the right to use
any of [his] rights at any time [he] want[ed] during th[e]
interview.” App. 3. The first statement communicated
that Powell could consult with a lawyer before answering
any particular question, and the second statement con
firmed that he could exercise that right while the interro
gation was underway. In combination, the two warnings
reasonably conveyed Powell’s right to have an attorney
present, not only at the outset of interrogation, but at all
times.5
——————
5 JUSTICE STEVENS asserts that the Court today approves, for “the
first time[,] . . . a warning which, if given its natural reading, entirely
omitted an essential element of a suspect’s rights.” Post, at 9. See also
post, at 12 (“[T]he warning entirely failed to inform [Powell] of the
separate and distinct right ‘to have counsel present during any ques
tioning.’ ”). We find the warning in this case adequate, however, only
because it communicated just what Miranda prescribed. JUSTICE
STEVENS ascribes a different meaning to the warning Powell received,
but he cannot credibly suggest that the Court regards the warning to
have omitted a vital element of Powell’s rights.


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

To reach the opposite conclusion, i.e., that the attorney
would not be present throughout the interrogation, the
suspect would have to imagine an unlikely scenario: To
consult counsel, he would be obliged to exit and reenter
the interrogation room between each query. A reasonable
suspect in a custodial setting who has just been read his
rights, we believe, would not come to the counterintuitive
conclusion that he is obligated, or allowed, to hop in and
out of the holding area to seek his attorney’s advice.6
Instead, the suspect would likely assume that he must
stay put in the interrogation room and that his lawyer
would be there with him the entire time.7
The Florida Supreme Court found the warning mislead
ing because it believed the temporal language—that Pow
ell could “talk to a lawyer before answering any of [the
officers’] questions”—suggested Powell could consult with
an attorney only before the interrogation started. 998
So. 2d, at 541. See also Brief for Respondent 28–29. In
context, however, the term “before” merely conveyed when
Powell’s right to an attorney became effective—namely,
before he answered any questions at all. Nothing in the
words used indicated that counsel’s presence would be
restricted after the questioning commenced. Instead, the
warning communicated that the right to counsel carried
forward to and through the interrogation: Powell could
seek his attorney’s advice before responding to “any of [the
officers’] questions” and “at any time . . . during th[e]
——————
6 It is equally unlikely that the suspect would anticipate a scenario of
this order: His lawyer would be admitted into the interrogation room
each time the police ask him a question, then ushered out each time the
suspect responds.
7 Although it does not bear on our decision, Powell seems to have
understood the warning this way. The following exchange between
Powell and his attorney occurred when Powell testified at his trial:
“Q. You waived the right to have an attorney present during your
questioning by detectives; is that what you’re telling this jury?
“A. Yes.” App. 80.


12

FLORIDA v. POWELL
Opinion of the Court

interview.” App. 3 (emphasis added). Although the warn
ings were not the clearest possible formulation of
Miranda’s right-to-counsel advisement, they were suffi
ciently comprehensive and comprehensible when given a
commonsense reading.
Pursuing a different line of argument, Powell points out
that most jurisdictions in Florida and across the Nation
expressly advise suspects of the right to have counsel
present both before and during interrogation. Brief for
Respondent 41–44. If we find the advice he received ade
quate, Powell suggests, law enforcement agencies, hoping
to obtain uninformed waivers, will be tempted to end-run
Miranda by amending their warnings to introduce ambi
guity. Brief for Respondent 50–53. But as the United
States explained as amicus curiae in support of the State
of Florida, “law enforcement agencies have little reason to
assume the litigation risk of experimenting with novel
Miranda formulations,” Brief for United States as Amicus
Curiae 6; instead, it is “desirable police practice” and “in
law enforcement’s own interest” to state warnings with
maximum clarity, id., at 12. See also id., at 11 (“By using
a conventional and precise formulation of the warnings,
police can significantly reduce the risk that a court will
later suppress the suspect’s statement on the ground that
the advice was inadequate.”).
For these reasons, “all . . . federal law enforcement
agencies explicitly advise . . . suspect[s] of the full contours
of each [Miranda] right, including the right to the pres
ence of counsel during questioning.” Id., at 12. The stan
dard warnings used by the Federal Bureau of Investiga
tion are exemplary. They provide, in relevant part: “You
have the right to talk to a lawyer for advice before we ask
you any questions. You have the right to have a lawyer
with you during questioning.” Ibid., n. 3 (internal quota
tion marks omitted). This advice is admirably informa
tive, but we decline to declare its precise formulation


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

necessary to meet Miranda’s requirements. Different
words were used in the advice Powell received, but they
communicated the same essential message.
*
*
*
For the reasons stated, the judgment of the Supreme
Court of Florida is reversed, and the case is remanded for
further proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

