Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
applied this new principle to these cases. Its lack of notice to Fox and
ABC of its changed interpretation failed to give them “fair notice of
what is prohibited.” Williams, supra, at 304. Pp. 12–13.
(c) Neither of the Government’s contrary arguments is persuasive.
It claims that Fox cannot establish unconstitutional vagueness because the Commission declined to impose a forfeiture on Fox and said
that it would not consider the indecent broadcast in renewing station
licenses or in other contexts. But the Commission has the statutory
power to take into account “any history of prior offenses” when setting a forfeiture penalty, 47 U. S. C. §503(b)(2)(E), and the due process protection against vague regulations “does not leave [regulated
parties] . . . at the mercy of noblesse oblige.” United States v. Stevens,
559 U. S. ___, ___. The challenged orders could also have an adverse
impact on Fox’s reputation with audiences and advertisers alike.
The Government argues that ABC had notice that its broadcast
would be considered indecent. But an isolated statement in a 1960
Commission decision declaring that televising nudes might be contrary to §1464 does not suffice for the fair notice required when the
Government intends to impose over a $1 million fine for allegedly
impermissible speech. Moreover, previous Commission decisions had
declined to find isolated and brief moments of nudity actionably indecent. In light of these agency decisions, and the absence of any notice
in the 2001 Guidance that seven seconds of nude buttocks would be
found indecent, ABC lacked constitutionally sufficient notice prior to
being sanctioned. Pp. 13–17.
(d) It is necessary to make three observations about this decision’s
scope. First, because the Court resolves these cases on fair notice
grounds under the Due Process Clause, it need not address the First
Amendment implications of the Commission’s indecency policy or reconsider Pacifica at this time. Second, because the Court rules that
Fox and ABC lacked notice at the time of their broadcasts that their
material could be found actionably indecent under then-existing policies, the Court need not address the constitutionality of the current
indecency policy as expressed in the Golden Globes Order and subsequent adjudications. Third, this opinion leaves the Commission free
to modify its current indecency policy in light of its determination of
the public interest and applicable legal requirements and leaves
courts free to review the current, or any modified, policy in light of its
content and application. Pp. 17–18.
613 F. 3d 317 (first case) and 404 Fed. Appx. 530 (second case), vacated
and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, THOMAS, BREYER, ALITO, and KAGAN, JJ., joined.

