(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION ET AL. v.
FOX TELEVISION STATIONS, INC., ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 10–1293. Argued January 10, 2012—Decided June 21, 2012*
Title 18 U. S. C. §1464 bans the broadcast of “any obscene, indecent, or
profane language.”
The Federal Communications Commission
(Commission) began enforcing §1464 in the 1970’s. In FCC v. Pacifica Foundation, 438 U. S. 726, this Court found that the Commission’s
order banning George Carlin’s “Filthy Words” monologue passed
First Amendment scrutiny, but did not decide whether “an occasional
expletive . . . would justify any sanction,” id., at 750. In the ensuing
years, the Commission went from strictly observing the narrow circumstances of Pacifica to indicating that it would assess the full context of allegedly indecent broadcasts rather than limit its regulation
to an index of indecent words or pictures. However, it continued to
note the important difference between isolated and repeated broadcasts of indecent material. And in a 2001 policy statement, it even
included, as one of the factors significant to the determination of
what was patently offensive, “whether the material dwells on or repeats at length” the offending description or depiction.
It was against this regulatory background that the three incidents
at issue took place. Two concern isolated utterances of obscene words
during two live broadcasts aired by respondent Fox Television Stations, Inc. The third occurred during an episode of a television show
broadcast by respondent ABC Television Network, when the nude
buttocks of an adult female character were shown for approximately
seven seconds and the side of her breast for a moment. After these
incidents, but before the Commission issued Notices of Apparent Lia——————
* Together with Federal Communications Commission v. ABC, Inc.,
et al. (see this Court’s Rule 12.4), also on certiorari to the same court.

