Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

explanation justifying the about-face.” 489 F. 3d, at 455.
While noting its skepticism as to whether the Commis­
sion’s fleeting expletive regime “would pass constitutional
muster,” the Court of Appeals found it unnecessary to ad­
dress the issue. Id., at 462.
The case came here on certiorari. Citing the Adminis­
trative Procedure Act, 5 U. S. C. §551 et seq., this Court
noted that the Judiciary may set aside agency action that
is arbitrary or capricious. In the context of a change in
policy (such as the Commission’s determination that fleet­
ing expletives could be indecent), the decision held an
agency, in the ordinary course, should acknowledge that it
is in fact changing its position and “show that there are
good reasons for the new policy.” Fox I, 553 U. S., at 515.
There is no need, however, for an agency to provide de­
tailed justifications for every change or to show that the
reasons for the new policy are better than the reasons for
the old one. Ibid.
Judged under this standard, the Court in Fox I found
the Commission’s new indecency enforcement policy nei­
ther arbitrary nor capricious. Id., at 517. The Court noted
the Commission had acknowledged breaking new ground
in ruling that fleeting and nonliteral expletives could be
indecent under the controlling standards; the Court con­
cluded the agency’s reasons for expanding the scope of its
enforcement activity were rational. Ibid. Not only was it
“certainly reasonable to determine that it made no sense
to distinguish between literal and nonliteral uses of offen­
sive words,” ibid., but the Court agreed that the Commis­
sion’s decision to “look at the patent offensiveness of even
isolated uses of sexual and excretory words fits with the
context-based approach [approved] . . . in Pacifica.” Ibid.
Given that “[e]ven isolated utterances can . . . constitute
harmful ‘first blow[s]’ to children,” the Court held that
the Commission could “decide it needed to step away from
its old regime where nonrepetitive use of an expletive

