12

FCC v. FOX TELEVISION STATIONS, INC.
Opinion of the Court

(“Living under a rule of law entails various suppositions,
one of which is that ‘[all persons] are entitled to be in­
formed as to what the State commands or forbids’ ” (quot­
ing Lanzetta v. New Jersey, 306 U. S. 451, 453 (1939)
(alteration in original))). This requirement of clarity in
regulation is essential to the protections provided by the
Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment. See United
States v. Williams, 553 U. S. 285, 304 (2008). It requires
the invalidation of laws that are impermissibly vague. A
conviction or punishment fails to comply with due process
if the statute or regulation under which it is obtained
“fails to provide a person of ordinary intelligence fair
notice of what is prohibited, or is so standardless that
it authorizes or encourages seriously discriminatory en­
forcement.” Ibid. As this Court has explained, a regula­
tion is not vague because it may at times be difficult to
prove an incriminating fact but rather because it is un­
clear as to what fact must be proved. See id., at 306.
Even when speech is not at issue, the void for vagueness
doctrine addresses at least two connected but discrete due
process concerns: first, that regulated parties should know
what is required of them so they may act accordingly;
second, precision and guidance are necessary so that those
enforcing the law do not act in an arbitrary or discrimina­
tory way. See Grayned v. City of Rockford, 408 U. S. 104,
108–109 (1972). When speech is involved, rigorous adher­
ence to those requirements is necessary to ensure that
ambiguity does not chill protected speech.
These concerns are implicated here because, at the out­
set, the broadcasters claim they did not have, and do
not have, sufficient notice of what is proscribed. And
leaving aside any concerns about facial invalidity, they
contend that the lengthy procedural history set forth
above shows that the broadcasters did not have fair notice
of what was forbidden. Under the 2001 Guidelines in
force when the broadcasts occurred, a key consideration

