4

FCC v. FOX TELEVISION STATIONS, INC.
Opinion of the Court

the “repetitive occurrence of the ‘indecent’ words” (such as
in the Carlin monologue) and an “isolated” or “occasional”
expletive, that would not necessarily be actionable. 69
F. C. C. 2d, at 1254.
In 1987, the Commission determined it was applying the
Pacifica standard in too narrow a way. It stated that in
later cases its definition of indecent language would “ap­
propriately includ[e] a broader range of material than the
seven specific words at issue in [the Carlin monologue].”
In re Pacifica Foundation Inc., 2 FCC Rcd. 2698, 2699.
Thus, the Commission indicated it would use the “generic
definition of indecency” articulated in its 1975 Pacifica
order, Infinity Order, 3 FCC Rcd., at 930, and assess the
full context of allegedly indecent broadcasts rather than
limiting its regulation to a “comprehensive index . . . of
indecent words or pictorial depictions,” id., at 932.
Even under this context based approach, the Commis­
sion continued to note the important difference between
isolated and repeated broadcasts of indecent material. See
ibid. (considering variables in determining whether mate­
rial is patently offensive including “whether allegedly
offensive material is isolated or fleeting”). In the context
of expletives, the Commission determined “deliberate and
repetitive use in a patently offensive manner is a requisite
to a finding of indecency.” Pacifica Order, 2 FCC Rcd., at
2699. For speech “involving the description or depiction
of sexual or excretory functions . . . [t]he mere fact that
specific words or phrases are not repeated does not man­
date a finding that material that is otherwise patently
offensive . . . is not indecent.” Ibid.
In 2001, the Commission issued a policy statement
intended “to provide guidance to the broadcast industry
regarding [its] caselaw interpreting 18 U. S. C. §1464 and
[its] enforcement policies with respect to broadcast inde­
cency.” In re Industry Guidance on Commission’s Case
Law Interpreting 18 U. S. C. §1464 and Enforcement

