2

FCC v. FOX TELEVISION STATIONS, INC.
Syllabus
bility to Fox and ABC, the Commission issued its Golden Globes Order, declaring for the first time that fleeting expletives could be actionable. It then concluded that the Fox and ABC broadcasts violated
this new standard. It found the Fox broadcasts indecent, but declined to propose forfeitures. The Second Circuit reversed, finding
the Commission’s decision to modify its indecency enforcement regime to regulate fleeting expletives arbitrary and capricious. This
Court reversed and remanded for the Second Circuit to address respondents’ First Amendment challenges. FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc., 556 U. S. 502. On remand, the Second Circuit found the
policy unconstitutionally vague and invalidated it in its entirety. In
the ABC case, the Commission found the display actionably indecent,
and imposed a $27,500 forfeiture on each of the 45 ABC-affiliated
stations that aired the episode. The Second Circuit vacated the order
in light of its Fox decision.

Held: Because the Commission failed to give Fox or ABC fair notice
prior to the broadcasts in question that fleeting expletives and momentary nudity could be found actionably indecent, the Commission’s
standards as applied to these broadcasts were vague. Pp. 11–18.
(a) The fundamental principle that laws regulating persons or entities must give fair notice of what conduct is required or proscribed,
see, e.g., Connally v. General Constr. Co., 269 U. S. 385, 391, is essential to the protections provided by the Fifth Amendment’s Due Process Clause, see United States v. Williams, 553 U. S. 285, 304, which
requires the invalidation of impermissibly vague laws. A conviction
or punishment fails to comply with due process if the statute or regulation under which it is obtained “fails to provide a person of ordinary
intelligence fair notice of what is prohibited, or is so standardless
that it authorizes or encourages seriously discriminatory enforcement.” Ibid. The void for vagueness doctrine addresses at least two
connected but discrete due process concerns: Regulated parties
should know what is required of them so they may act accordingly;
and precision and guidance are necessary so that those enforcing the
law do not act in an arbitrary or discriminatory way. When speech is
involved, rigorous adherence to those requirements is necessary to
ensure that ambiguity does not chill protected speech. Pp. 11–12.
(b) These concerns are implicated here, where the broadcasters
claim that the lengthy procedural history of their cases shows that
they did not have fair notice of what was forbidden. Under the 2001
Guidelines in force when the broadcasts occurred, a key consideration
was “whether the material dwell[ed] on or repeat[ed] at length” the
offending description or depiction, but in the 2004 Golden Globes Order, issued after the broadcasts, the Commission changed course and
held that fleeting expletives could be a statutory violation. It then

