Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

was “ ‘whether the material dwell[ed] on or repeat[ed] at
length’ ” the offending description or depiction. 613 F. 3d,
at 322. In the 2004 Golden Globes Order, issued after the
broadcasts, the Commission changed course and held that
fleeting expletives could be a statutory violation. Fox I,
556 U. S., at 512. In the challenged orders now under
review the Commission applied the new principle promul­
gated in the Golden Globes Order and determined fleeting
expletives and a brief moment of indecency were action­
ably indecent. This regulatory history, however, makes it
apparent that the Commission policy in place at the time
of the broadcasts gave no notice to Fox or ABC that a
fleeting expletive or a brief shot of nudity could be action­
ably indecent; yet Fox and ABC were found to be in viola­
tion. The Commission’s lack of notice to Fox and ABC that
its interpretation had changed so the fleeting moments of
indecency contained in their broadcasts were a violation of
§1464 as interpreted and enforced by the agency “fail[ed]
to provide a person of ordinary intelligence fair notice of
what is prohibited.” Williams, supra, at 304. This would
be true with respect to a regulatory change this abrupt on
any subject, but it is surely the case when applied to the
regulations in question, regulations that touch upon “sen­
sitive areas of basic First Amendment freedoms,” Baggett
v. Bullitt, 377 U. S. 360, 372 (1964); see also Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, 521 U. S. 844, 870–871 (1997)
(“The vagueness of [a content-based regulation of speech]
raises special First Amendment concerns because of its ob­
vious chilling effect”).
The Government raises two arguments in response, but
neither is persuasive. As for the two fleeting expletives,
the Government concedes that “Fox did not have reason­
able notice at the time of the broadcasts that the Com­
mission would consider non-repeated expletives indecent.”
Brief for Petitioners 28, n. 3. The Government argues,
nonetheless, that Fox “cannot establish unconstitutional

