14

FCC v. FOX TELEVISION STATIONS, INC.
Opinion of the Court

vagueness on that basis . . . because the Commission did
not impose a sanction where Fox lacked such notice.” Ibid.
As the Court observed when the case was here three
Terms ago, it is true that the Commission declined to
impose any forfeiture on Fox, see 556 U. S., at 513, and in
its order the Commission claimed that it would not con­
sider the indecent broadcasts either when considering
whether to renew stations’ licenses or “in any other con­
text,” 21 FCC Rcd., at 13321, 13326. This “policy of for­
bearance,” as the Government calls it, does not suffice to
make the issue moot. Brief for Petitioners 31. Though the
Commission claims it will not consider the prior indecent
broadcasts “in any context,” it has the statutory power
to take into account “any history of prior offenses” when
setting the level of a forfeiture penalty. See 47 U. S. C.
§503(b)(2)(E). Just as in the First Amendment context,
the due process protection against vague regulations “does
not leave [regulated parties] . . . at the mercy of noblesse
oblige.” United States v. Stevens, 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010)
(slip op., at 18). Given that the Commission found it
was “not inequitable to hold Fox responsible for [the 2003
broadcast],” 21 FCC Rcd., at 13314, and that it has the
statutory authority to use its finding to increase any fu­
ture penalties, the Government’s assurance it will elect
not to do so is insufficient to remedy the constitutional
violation.
In addition, when combined with the legal consequence
described above, reputational injury provides further rea­
son for granting relief to Fox. Cf. Paul v. Davis, 424
U. S. 693, 708–709 (1976) (explaining that an “alteration
of legal status . . . combined with the injury resulting
from the defamation” justifies the invocation of procedural
safeguards). As respondent CBS points out, findings of
wrongdoing can result in harm to a broadcaster’s “reputa­
tion with viewers and advertisers.” Brief for Respondent
CBS Television Network Affiliates Assn. et al. 17. This

