Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–10245
_________________

WILLIAM FREEMAN, PETITIONER v.
UNITED STATES
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT

[June 23, 2011] 


JUSTICE KENNEDY announced the judgment of the Court
and delivered an opinion, in which JUSTICE GINSBURG,
JUSTICE BREYER, and JUSTICE KAGAN join.
The Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, 18 U. S. C. §3551
et seq., calls for the creation of Sentencing Guidelines to
inform judicial discretion in order to reduce unwarranted
disparities in federal sentencing. The Act allows retro
active amendments to the Guidelines for cases where
the Guidelines become a cause of inequality, not a bulwark
against it. When a retroactive Guideline amendment is
adopted, §3582(c)(2) permits defendants sentenced based
on a sentencing range that has been modified to move for
a reduced sentence.
The question here is whether defendants who enter into
plea agreements that recommend a particular sentence
as a condition of the guilty plea may be eligible for relief
under §3582(c)(2). See Fed. R. Crim. Proc. 11(c)(1)(C)
(authorizing such plea agreements). The Court of Appeals
for the Sixth Circuit held that, barring a miscarriage of
justice or mutual mistake, defendants who enter into
11(c)(1)(C) agreements cannot benefit from retroactive
Guideline amendments.
Five Members of the Court agree that this judgment
must be reversed. The Justices who join this plurality
opinion conclude that the categorical bar enacted by the


2

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

Court of Appeals finds no support in §3582(c)(2), Rule
11(c)(1)(C), or the relevant Guidelines policy statements.
In every case the judge must exercise discretion to im
pose an appropriate sentence. This discretion, in turn, is
framed by the Guidelines. And the Guidelines must be
consulted, in the regular course, whether the case is one in
which the conviction was after a trial or after a plea,
including a plea pursuant to an agreement that recom
mends a particular sentence. The district judge’s decision
to impose a sentence may therefore be based on the Guide
lines even if the defendant agrees to plead guilty under
Rule 11(c)(1)(C). Where the decision to impose a sentence
is based on a range later subject to retroactive amend
ment, §3582(c)(2) permits a sentence reduction.
Section 3582(c)(2) empowers district judges to correct sen
tences that depend on frameworks that later prove un
justified. There is no reason to deny §3582(c)(2) relief to
defendants who linger in prison pursuant to sentences
that would not have been imposed but for a since-rejected,
excessive range.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR would reverse the judgment on a
different ground set out in the opinion concurring in the
judgment. That opinion, like the dissent, would hold that
sentences following 11(c)(1)(C) agreement are based on the
agreement rather than the Guidelines, and therefore that
§3582(c)(2) relief is not available in the typical case. But
unlike the dissent she would permit the petitioner here to
seek a sentence reduction because his plea agreement in
express terms ties the recommended sentence to the
Guidelines sentencing range.
The reasons that lead those Members of the Court who
join this plurality opinion may be set forth as follows.
I
A
Federal courts are forbidden, as a general matter, to


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

“modify a term of imprisonment once it has been imposed,”
18 U. S. C. §3582(c); but the rule of finality is subject to a
few narrow exceptions. Here, the exception is contained in
a statutory provision enacted to permit defendants whose
Guidelines sentencing range has been lowered by retro
active amendment to move for a sentence reduction if the
terms of the statute are met. The statute provides:
“In the case of a defendant who has been sentenced to
a term of imprisonment based on a sentencing range
that has subsequently been lowered by the Sentencing
Commission pursuant to 28 U. S. C. 994(o) . . . the
court may reduce the term of imprisonment, after
considering the factors set forth in section 3553(a) to
the extent that they are applicable, if such a reduction
is consistent with applicable policy statements issued
by the Sentencing Commission.” §3582(c)(2).
This case concerns the application of the statute to cases
in which defendants enter into plea agreements under
Rule 11(c)(1)(C). That Rule permits the parties to “agree
that a specific sentence or sentencing range is the appro
priate disposition of the case, . . . [a request which] binds
the court once the court accepts the plea agreement.” The
question is whether defendants who enter into 11(c)(1)(C)
agreements that specify a particular sentence may be said
to have been sentenced “based on” a Guidelines sentencing
range, making them eligible for relief under §3582(c)(2).
B
Petitioner William Freeman was indicted in 2005 for
various crimes, including possessing with intent to dis
tribute cocaine base. 21 U. S. C. §§841(a)(1); (b)(1)(C). He
entered into an agreement under Rule 11(c)(1)(C) in which
he agreed to plead guilty to all charges. In return the
Government “agree[d] that a sentence of 106 months’ in
carceration is the appropriate disposition of this case.”


4

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

App. 26a. The agreement states that “[b]oth parties have
independently reviewed the Sentencing Guidelines appli
cable in this case,” and that “[Freeman] agrees to have his
sentence determined pursuant to the Sentencing Guide
lines.” The agreement reflects the parties’ expectation
that Freeman would face a Guidelines range of 46 to 57
months, id., at 27a–28a (Offense Level 19, Criminal His
tory Category IV), along with a consecutive mandatory
minimum of 60 months for possessing a firearm in fur
therance of a drug-trafficking crime under 18 U. S. C.
§924(c)(1)(A). The recommended sentence of 106 months
thus corresponded with the minimum sentence suggested
by the Guidelines, in addition to the 60-month §924(c)
(1)(A) sentence.
The District Court accepted the plea agreement. At the
sentencing hearing, the court “adopt[ed] the findings of
the probation officer disclosed in the probation report and
application of the guidelines as set out therein.” App. 47a.
“[H]aving considered the advisory guidelines and 18 USC
3553(a),” the court imposed the recommended 106-month
sentence, which was “within the guideline ranges”—the
46- to 57-month range the parties had anticipated plus the
mandatory 60 months under §924(c)(1)(A)—and “sufficient
to meet the objectives of the law.” Id. at 48a–49a.
Three years later, the Commission issued a retroactive
amendment to the Guidelines to remedy the significant
disparity between the penalties for cocaine base and pow
der cocaine offenses. See United States Sentencing Com
mission, Guidelines Manual Supp. App. C, Amdt. 706
(Nov. 2010) (USSG) (effective Nov. 1, 2007) (adjusting
Guidelines); id., Amdt. 713 (effective Mar. 3, 2008) (mak
ing Amendment 706 retroactive). Its effect was to reduce
Freeman’s applicable sentencing range to 37 to 46 months,
again with the consecutive 60-month mandatory mini
mum. App. 142a–144a (Sealed).
Freeman moved for a sentence reduction under


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

§3582(c)(2). The District Court, however, denied the
motion, and the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
affirmed. United States v. Goins, 355 Fed. Appx. 1 (2009).
Adhering to its decision in United States v. Peveler, 359
F. 3d 369 (2004), the Court of Appeals held that defen
dants sentenced following 11(c)(1)(C) agreements that
specify a particular sentence are ineligible for §3582(c)(2)
relief, barring a miscarriage of justice or mutual mistake.
This Court granted certiorari. 561 U. S. __ (2010).
II
Federal sentencing law requires the district judge in
every case to impose “a sentence sufficient, but not greater
than necessary, to comply with” the purposes of federal
sentencing, in light of the Guidelines and other §3553(a)
factors. 18 U. S. C. §3553(a). The Guidelines provide a
framework or starting point—a basis, in the commonsense
meaning of the term—for the judge’s exercise of discretion.
E.g., 1 Oxford English Dictionary 977 (2d ed. 1989). Rule
11(c)(1)(C) permits the defendant and the prosecutor to
agree that a specific sentence is appropriate, but that
agreement does not discharge the district court’s inde
pendent obligation to exercise its discretion. In the usual
sentencing, whether following trial or plea, the judge’s
reliance on the Guidelines will be apparent, for the judge
will use the Guidelines range as the starting point in the
analysis and impose a sentence within the range. Gall v.
United States, 552 U. S. 38, 49 (2007). Even where the
judge varies from the recommended range, id., at 50, if the
judge uses the sentencing range as the beginning point to
explain the decision to deviate from it, then the Guidelines
are in a real sense a basis for the sentence.
Rule 11(c)(1)(C) makes the parties’ recommended sen
tence binding on the court “once the court accepts the plea
agreement,” but the governing policy statement confirms
that the court’s acceptance is itself based on the Guide


6

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

lines. See USSG §6B1.2. That policy statement forbids
the district judge to accept an 11(c)(1)(C) agreement with
out first evaluating the recommended sentence in light
of the defendant’s applicable sentencing range. The com
mentary to §6B1.2 advises that a court may accept an
11(c)(1)(C) agreement “only if the court is satisfied either
that such sentence is an appropriate sentence within the
applicable guideline range or, if not, that the sentence de
parts from the applicable guideline range for justifiable
reasons.” Cf. Stinson v. United States, 508 U. S. 36 (1993)
(Guidelines commentary is authoritative). Any bargain
between the parties is contingent until the court accepts
the agreement. The Guidelines require the district judge
to give due consideration to the relevant sentencing range,
even if the defendant and prosecutor recommend a specific
sentence as a condition of the guilty plea.
This approach finds further support in the policy state
ment that applies to §3582(c)(2) motions. See USSG
§1B1.10. It instructs the district court in modifying a
sentence to substitute only the retroactive amendment
and then leave all original Guidelines determinations in
place. §1B1.10(b)(1). In other words, the policy statement
seeks to isolate whatever marginal effect the since
rejected Guideline had on the defendant’s sentence. Work
ing backwards from this purpose, §3582(c)(2) modification
proceedings should be available to permit the district
court to revisit a prior sentence to whatever extent the
sentencing range in question was a relevant part of the
analytic framework the judge used to determine the sen
tence or to approve the agreement. This is the only rule
consistent with the governing policy statement, a state
ment that rests on the premise that a Guideline range
may be one of many factors that determine the sentence
imposed.
Thus, the text and purpose of the three relevant
sources—the statute, the Rule, and the governing policy


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

statements—require the conclusion that the district court
has authority to entertain §3582(c)(2) motions when sen
tences are imposed in light of the Guidelines, even if the
defendant enters into an 11(c)(1)(C) agreement.
III
The transcript of petitioner’s sentencing hearing reveals
that his original sentence was based on the Guidelines.
The District Court first calculated the sentencing range,
as both §3553(a)(4) and §6B1.2(c) require. App. 47a, 49a.
It explained that it “considered the advisory guidelines
and 18 USC 3553(a),” and that “the sentence imposed . . .
fall[s] within the guideline rang[e] and [is] sufficient to
meet the objectives of the law.” Id., at 48a–49a. Apart
from the defense attorney’s initial statement that the case
involved a “(C) plea,” id., at 47a, the hearing proceeded as
if the agreement did not exist. The court expressed its
independent judgment that the sentence was appropriate
in light of the applicable Guidelines range, and its decision
was therefore “based on” that range.
IV
The Government asks this Court to hold that sentences
like petitioner’s, which follow an 11(c)(1)(C) agreement,
are based only on the agreement and not the Guidelines,
and therefore that defendants so sentenced are ineligible
for §3582(c)(2) relief. The Government’s position rests in
part on the concern that the conclusion reached here will
upset the bargain struck between prosecutor and defen
dant. See Brief for United States 42–43. That, however,
has nothing to do with whether a sentence is “based on”
the Guidelines under §3582(c)(2). And in any event, the
concern is overstated. Retroactive reductions to sentenc
ing ranges are infrequent, so the problem will not arise
often. Thompson, DOJ’s Attack on Federal Judicial “Leni
ency,” the Supreme Court’s Response, and the Future of


8

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

Criminal Sentencing, 44 Tulsa L. Rev. 519, 535 (2009).
More important, the district court’s authority under
§3582(c)(2) is subject to significant constraints, constraints
that can be enforced by appellate review.
The binding policy statement governing §3582(c)(2)
motions places considerable limits on district court discre
tion. All Guidelines decisions from the original sentencing
remain in place, save the sentencing range that was al
tered by retroactive amendment. USSG §1B1.10(b)(1). In
an initial sentencing hearing, a district court can vary
below the Guidelines; but, by contrast, below-Guidelines
modifications in §3582(c)(2) proceedings are forbidden,
USSG §1B1.10(b)(2)(A), except where the original sen
tence was itself a downward departure. §1B1.10(b)(2)(B).
And the court must always “consider the nature and seri
ousness of the danger to any person or the community that
may be posed by a reduction in the defendant’s term of
imprisonment.” §1B1.10, comment., n. 1(B)(ii). The dis
trict court’s authority is limited; and the Courts of Ap
peals, and ultimately this Court, can ensure that district
courts do not overhaul plea agreements, thereby abusing
their authority under §3582(c)(2). See Dillon v. United
States, 560 U. S. ___ (2010) (reviewing and affirming a
§3582(c)(2) sentence reduction); Gall, 552 U. S., at 49 (all
sentences are reviewable for abuse of discretion).
The Government would enact a categorical bar on
§3582(c)(2) relief. But such a bar would prevent district
courts from making an inquiry that is within their own
special knowledge and expertise. What is at stake in this
case is a defendant’s eligibility for relief, not the extent of
that relief. Indeed, even where a defendant is permitted
to seek a reduction, the district judge may conclude that a
reduction would be inappropriate. District judges have a
continuing professional commitment, based on scholarship
and accumulated experience, to a consistent sentencing
policy. They can rely on the frameworks they have de


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

vised to determine whether and to what extent a sentence
reduction is warranted in any particular case. They may,
when considering a §3582(c)(2) motion, take into account
a defendant’s decision to enter into an 11(c)(1)(C) agree
ment. If the district court, based on its experience and
informed judgment, concludes the agreement led to a more
lenient sentence than would otherwise have been imposed,
it can deny the motion, for the statute permits but does
not require the court to reduce a sentence. This discretion
ensures that §3582(c)(2) does not produce a windfall.
As noted, the opinion concurring in the judgment sug
gests an intermediate position. That opinion argues that
in general defendants sentenced following 11(c)(1)(C)
agreements are ineligible for §3582(c)(2) relief, but relief
may be sought where the plea agreement itself contem
plates sentence reduction. The statute, however, calls for
an inquiry into the reasons for a judge’s sentence, not the
reasons that motivated or informed the parties. If, as the
Government suggests, the judge’s decision to impose a
sentence is based on the agreement, then §3582(c)(2)
does not apply. The parties cannot by contract upset an
otherwise-final sentence. And the consequences of this
erroneous rule would be significant. By allowing modifica
tion only when the terms of the agreement contemplate it,
the proposed rule would permit the very disparities the
Sentencing Reform Act seeks to eliminate.
The Act aims to create a comprehensive sentencing
scheme in which those who commit crimes of similar
severity under similar conditions receive similar sen
tences.
See 18 U. S. C. §3553(a)(6); K. Stith & J.
Cabranes, Fear of Judging 104–105 (1998).
Section
3582(c)(2) contributes to that goal by ensuring that district
courts may adjust sentences imposed pursuant to a range
that the Commission concludes are too severe, out of step
with the seriousness of the crime and the sentencing
ranges of analogous offenses, and inconsistent with the


10

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

Act’s purposes.
The crack-cocaine range here is a prime example of an
unwarranted disparity that §3582(c)(2) is designed to cure.
The Commission amended the crack-cocaine Guidelines
to effect a “partial remedy” for the “urgent and compel
ling” problem of crack-cocaine sentences, which, the Com
mission concluded, “significantly undermines the various
congressional objectives set forth in the Sentencing Re
form Act.” United States Sentencing Commission, Report
to Congress: Cocaine and Federal Sentencing Policy,
pp. 8–10 (May 2007); see also USSG Supp. App. C, Amdt.
706; Kimbrough v. United States, 552 U. S. 85, 99–100
(2007). The Commission determined that those Guide
lines were flawed, and therefore that sentences that relied
on them ought to be reexamined. There is no good reason
to extend the benefit of the Commission’s judgment only to
an arbitrary subset of defendants whose agreed sentences
were accepted in light of a since-rejected Guidelines range
based on whether their plea agreements refer to the
Guidelines. Congress enacted §3582(c)(2) to remedy sys
temic injustice, and the approach outlined in the opinion
concurring in the judgment would undercut a systemic
solution.
Even when a defendant enters into an 11(c)(1)(C) agree
ment, the judge’s decision to accept the plea and impose
the recommended sentence is likely to be based on the
Guidelines; and when it is, the defendant should be eligi
ble to seek §3582(c)(2) relief. This straightforward analy
sis would avoid making arbitrary distinctions between
similar defendants based on the terms of their plea
agreements. And it would also reduce unwarranted dis
parities in federal sentencing, consistent with the pur
poses of the Sentencing Reform Act.
*
*
*
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed and


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011) 


11

Opinion of KENNEDY, J. 


this case is remanded for further proceedings.
It is so ordered.

