Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–10245
_________________

WILLIAM FREEMAN, PETITIONER v. 

UNITED STATES

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT

[June 23, 2011] 


CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS, with whom JUSTICE SCALIA,
JUSTICE THOMAS, and JUSTICE ALITO join, dissenting.
The plurality and the opinion concurring in the judg­
ment agree on very little except the judgment. I on the
other hand agree with much of each opinion, but disagree
on the judgment. I agree with the concurrence that the
sentence imposed under a Rule 11(c)(1)(C) plea agreement
is based on the agreement, not the Sentencing Guidelines.
I would, however, adhere to that logic regardless whether
the agreement could be said to “use” or “employ” a Guide­
lines range in arriving at the particular sentence specified
in the agreement. Ante, at 1 (opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.).
In that respect I agree with the plurality that the ap­
proach of the concurrence to determining when a Rule
11(c)(1)(C) sentence may be reduced is arbitrary and
unworkable. Ante, at 9–10.
Section 3582(c)(2) provides that “in the case of a defen­
dant who has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment
based on a sentencing range that has subsequently been
lowered by the Sentencing Commission,” a district court
“may reduce the term of imprisonment . . . if such a reduc­
tion is consistent with applicable policy statements issued
by the Sentencing Commission.” 18 U. S. C. §3582(c)(2).
The lone issue here is whether petitioner William Free­
man meets the initial prerequisite of having been sen­


2

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

tenced to a term of imprisonment “based on” a subse­
quently reduced sentencing range.
I agree with JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR that “the term of im­
prisonment imposed pursuant to a (C) agreement is, for
purposes of §3582(c)(2), ‘based on’ the agreement itself.”
Ante, at 3. In this case, Freeman executed a written plea
agreement in which the parties “agree[d] that a sentence
of 106 months’ incarceration [was] the appropriate disposi­
tion.” App. 26a. Because the plea agreement was entered
pursuant to Rule 11(c)(1)(C), that proposed sentence be­
came binding on the District Court once it accepted the
agreement. See Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 11(c)(1)(C) (the
parties’ “request” for “a specific sentence” “binds the court
once the court accepts the plea agreement”). As a result,
when determining the sentence to impose on Freeman, the
District Court needed to consult one thing and one thing
only—the plea agreement. See ante, at 2 (opinion of
SOTOMAYOR, J.) (“At the moment of sentencing, the court
simply implements the terms of the agreement it has al­
ready accepted”).
I also agree with JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR that the “term of
imprisonment imposed by the sentencing judge is dictated
by the terms of the agreement entered into by the par­
ties, not the judge’s Guidelines calculation,” and that
“[a]l-lowing district courts later to reduce a term of impris­
onment simply because the court itself considered the
Guidelines in deciding whether to accept the agreement
would transform §3582(c)(2) into a mechanism by which
courts could rewrite the terms of (C) agreements in ways
not contemplated by the parties.” Ante, at 3.
But then comes the O. Henry twist: After cogently ex­
plaining why a Rule 11(c)(1)(C) sentence is based on the
plea agreement, JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR diverges from that
straightforward conclusion and holds that Freeman never­
theless satisfies the threshold requirement in §3582(c)(2).
According to her opinion, if a Rule 11(c)(1)(C) “agreement


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

expressly uses a Guidelines sentencing range applicable
to the charged offense to establish the term of imprison­
ment”—or if such use is “evident from the agreement”—
then the defendant’s “term of imprisonment is ‘based on’
the range employed and the defendant is eligible for sen­
tence reduction under §3582(c)(2).” Ante, at 1, 6. This
exception is in my view as mistaken as the position of the
plurality—and basically for the same reasons.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR begins the departure from her
own rule innocently enough. As she explains, “some (C)
agreements may call for the defendant to be sentenced
within a particular Guidelines sentencing range.” Ante, at
5. In such a case, according to JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, there
can be “no doubt” that the prison term the court imposes is
“based on” the agreed-upon sentencing range, and there­
fore the defendant is eligible for sentence reduction. Ibid.
Whether or not that is true, it provides no support for
the next step:
“Similarly, a plea agreement might provide for a
specific term of imprisonment—such as a number of
months—but also make clear that the basis for the
specified term is a Guidelines sentencing range appli­
cable to the offense to which the defendant pleaded
guilty. As long as that sentencing range is evident
from the agreement itself . . . the term of imprison­
ment imposed by the court in accordance with that
agreement is ‘based on’ that range.” Ante, at 6.
This category of cases is not “similar” to the first at all.
It is one thing to say that a sentence imposed pursuant to
an agreement expressly providing that the court will
sentence the defendant within an applicable Guidelines
range is “based on” that range. It is quite another to
conclude that an agreement providing for a specific term is
“similarly” based on a Guidelines range, simply because
the specified term can be said to reflect that range.


4

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

According to the concurrence, if the parties simply “con­
sider[ ] the Guidelines” or “negotiate . . . by reference”
to them, the defendant is not eligible for a sentence reduc­
tion. Ante, at 4. If, however, the agreement sets forth a
specific term but it is somehow “clear that the basis for the
specified term is a Guidelines sentencing range,” then the
defendant is eligible for a sentence reduction. Ante, at 6.
This head-scratching distinction between negotiating by
reference to the Guidelines and using them as a basis for
the specified term makes for an unworkable test that can
yield only arbitrary results.
The confusion is compounded by the varying standards
in the concurrence. Sometimes the test is whether an
agreement “expressly uses” a Guidelines sentencing range,
ante, at 1, 6; see ante, at 7 (“explicitly employs”). Other
times the test is whether such use is “evident,” ante, at 6,
9; see ante, at 10, n. 9 (“clear”). A third option is whether
the agreement “indicate[s] the parties’ intent to base the
term of imprisonment on a particular Guideline range.”
Ante, at 7, n. 5 (emphasis added).
The error in the concurring opinion is largely attribut­
able to a mistaken shift in analysis. In the first half of the
opinion, the inquiry properly looks to what the judge does:
He is, after all, the one who imposes the sentence. After
approving the agreement, the judge considers only the
fixed term in the agreement, so the sentence he actually
imposes is not “based on” the Guidelines.
In the second half of the opinion, however, the analysis
suddenly shifts, and focuses on the parties: Did they “use”
or “employ” the Guidelines in arriving at the term in their
agreement?
But §3582(c)(2) is concerned only with
whether a defendant “has been sentenced to a term of
imprisonment based on a sentencing range.” Only a court
can sentence a defendant, so there is no basis for examin­
ing why the parties settled on a particular prison term.
This conclusion dovetails with USSG §1B1.10(b)(1)—


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

the Sentencing Commission’s policy statement governing
whether a defendant is eligible for a reduction under
§3582(c)(2). As we explained last Term, §3582(c)(2) re­
quires a district court “to follow the Commission’s instruc­
tions in §1B1.10 to determine the prisoner’s eligibility
for a sentence modification.” Dillon v. United States,
560 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 9). According to
§1B1.10(b)(1), the court must first determine “the
amended guideline range that would have been applicable
to the defendant” if the retroactively amended provision
had been in effect at the time of his sentencing. “In mak­
ing such determination, the court shall substitute only
the amendments . . . for the corresponding guideline pro­
visions that were applied when the defendant was sen
tenced.” USSG §1B1.10(b)(1), p. s. (emphasis added).
As noted, the District Court sentenced Freeman pursu­
ant to the term specified by his plea agreement; it never
“applied” a Guidelines provision in imposing his term of
imprisonment. The fact that the court may have “use[d]
the Guidelines as a yardstick in deciding whether to ac­
cept a (C) agreement does not mean that the term of im­
prisonment imposed by the court is ‘based on’ a particular
Guidelines sentencing range.” Ante, at 2–3 (opinion of
SOTOMAYOR, J.). Even if the Guidelines were “used” or
“employed” by the parties in arriving at the Rule
11(c)(1)(C) sentencing term, they were not “applied when
the defendant was sentenced.” Once the District Court
accepted the agreement, all that was later “applied” was
the sentence set forth in that agreement.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR is wrong to assert that her stan­
dard “does not rewrite the plea agreement” but rather
“enforces the agreement’s terms.” Ante, at 7. According to
the concurrence, “[w]hen a (C) agreement explicitly em­
ploys a particular Guidelines sentencing range to establish
the term of imprisonment, the agreement itself demon­
strates the parties’ intent that the imposed term of im­


6

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

prisonment will be based on that range,” and therefore
subject to reduction if the Commission subsequently low­
ers that range. Ibid. In this case, JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR
concludes that Freeman’s agreement contemplated such a
reduction, even though the parties had “agree[d] that a
sentence of 106 months’ incarceration is the appropriate
disposition of this case.” App. 26a.
There is, however, no indication whatever that the par­
ties to the agreement contemplated the prospect of low­
ered sentencing ranges. And it is fanciful to suppose that
the parties would have said “106 months” if what they
really meant was “a sentence at the lowest end of the
applicable Guidelines range.” Cf. App. 25a (parties in this
case recommending “a fine at the lowest end of the appli­
cable Guideline Range”). In concluding otherwise, the
concurrence “ignore[s] the agreement’s express terms.”
Ante, at 7, n. 4.
The reality is that whenever the parties choose a fixed
term, there is no way of knowing what that sentence was
“based on.” The prosecutor and the defendant could well
have had quite different reasons for concluding that 106
months was a good deal. Perhaps the prosecutor wanted
to devote the limited resources of his office to a different
area of criminal activity, rather than try this case. Per­
haps the defendant had reason to question the credibility
of one of his key witnesses, and feared a longer sentence if
the case went to trial.
Indeed, the fact that there may be uncertainty about
how to calculate the appropriate Guidelines range could be
the basis for agreement on a fixed term in a plea under
Rule 11(c)(1)(C). Here the agreement made clear that
there was some doubt about the Guidelines calculations.
See App. 28a (“Both parties reserve the right to object to
the USSG §4A1.1 calculation of defendant’s criminal
history”); ibid. (the parties acknowledge that their Guide­
lines calculations “are not binding upon the Court” and


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

that the “defendant understands the Court will independ­
ently calculate the Guidelines at sentencing and defendant
may not withdraw the plea of guilty solely because the
Court does not agree with . . . [the] Sentencing Guideline
application”).
In addition, parties frequently enter plea agreements
that reflect prosecutorial decisions not to pursue particu­
lar counts. If a defendant faces three counts, and agrees
to plead to one if the prosecutor does not pursue the other
two, is the sentence reflected in the Rule 11(c)(1)(C)
agreement in any sense “based on” the Guidelines sentenc­
ing range for the one count to which the defendant
pleaded? Surely not. The concurrence tacitly concedes as
much when it suggests that an agreement to “drop[ ] a
charge or forgo[ ] a future charge” could ultimately be
grounds for not reducing the defendant’s sentence. Ante,
at 8, n. 6. But what this really shows is a basic flaw in the
“based on” test adopted by that opinion.
Finally, JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s approach will foster con­
fusion in an area in need of clarity. As noted, courts
will be hard pressed to apply the distinction between
referring to and relying on a Guidelines range. Other
questions abound:
What if the agreement contains a particular Guidelines
calculation but the agreement’s stipulated sentence is out­
side the parties’ predicted Guidelines range? The test
in the concurring opinion is whether the agreement “uses”
or “employs” a Guidelines sentencing range to establish
the term of imprisonment, ante, at 1, not whether that
term falls within the range. In this case, what if the term
was 53 months—exactly half the low end of the sentencing
range anticipated by the parties? Is it “evident” in that
case that the Guidelines were used or employed to estab­
lish the agreed-upon sentence?*
——————
* JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR responds that “[i]f the agreement itself made


8

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

What if the plea agreement does not contain any refer­
ences to the Guidelines—not even the partial and tenta­
tive Guidelines calculations in Freeman’s agreement—but
the binding sentence selected by the parties corresponds
exactly to the low end of the applicable Guidelines range?
Is it “evident” in that case that the agreement is based on
a sentencing range?
What if the District Court calculates the applicable
Guidelines range differently than the parties? This is no
academic hypothetical. See, e.g., United States v. Frank
lin, 600 F. 3d 893, 896–897 (CA7 2010) (noting that “the
district court settled on a higher guidelines range than
that contemplated in the [Rule 11(c)(1)(C)] plea agree­
ment”). Is a Rule 11(c)(1)(C) sentence still subject to
reduction if the parties relied on the wrong sentencing
range? JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s surprising answer is “yes,”
see ante, at 9, n. 8, even though the governing Guide­
lines provision specifies that a defendant is only eligible
for sentence reduction if the amended Guideline has “the
effect of lowering the defendant’s applicable guideline
range”—presumably the correct applicable guideline
range. See USSG §1B1.10(a)(2), p. s. Relying on error is
just one unforeseen consequence of looking not to the
specified term in a Rule 11(c)(1)(C) agreement, but instead
trying to reconstruct what led the parties to agree to that
term in the first place.
This confusion will invite the very thing JUSTICE
SOTOMAYOR claims to disavow: a “free-ranging search” by
district courts “through the parties’ negotiating history in
search of a Guidelines sentencing range that might have
been relevant to the agreement.” Ante, at 5. This is par­
——————
clear” that the parties arrived at the 53-month figure by determining
the sentencing range and then halving the range’s low end—106
months—then the sentence could be reduced. Ante, at 10, n. 9. Does
the 53-month figure itself make that clear? What if the figure is 26½
months?


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

ticularly unfortunate given that the whole point of Rule
11(c)(1)(C) agreements is to provide the parties with cer­
tainty about sentencing.
*
*
*
As with any negotiation, parties entering a Rule 11(c)
(1)(C) plea agreement must take the bitter with the
sweet. Because of today’s decision, however, Freeman gets
more sweet and the Government more bitter than either
side bargained for. But those who will really be left with a
sour taste after today’s decision are the lower courts
charged with making sense of it going forward.
I respectfully dissent.

