OCTOBER TERM, 2010

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–10245.

Argued February 23, 2011—Decided June 23, 2011

In order to reduce unwarranted federal sentencing disparities, the Sen
tencing Reform Act of 1984 authorizes the United States Sentencing
Commission to create, and to retroactively amend, Sentencing Guide
lines to inform judicial discretion. Title 18 U. S. C. §3582(c)(2) per
mits a defendant who was sentenced to a term of imprisonment
“based on” a Guidelines sentencing range that has subsequently been
lowered by retroactive amendment to move for a sentence reduction.
This case concerns §3582(c)(2)’s application to cases in which the de
fendant and the Government have entered into a plea agreement un
der Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 11(c)(1)(C), which permits
the parties to “agree that a specific sentence or sentencing range is
the appropriate disposition of the case,” and “binds the court [to the
agreed-upon sentence] once [it] accepts the plea agreement.”
Petitioner Freeman was indicted for various crimes, including pos
sessing with intent to distribute cocaine base. 21 U. S. C. §841(a)(1).
He entered into an 11(c)(1)(C) agreement to plead guilty to all
charges; in return the Government agreed to a 106-month sentence.
The agreement states that the parties independently reviewed the
applicable Guidelines, noted that Freeman agreed to have his sen
tence determined under the Guidelines, and reflected the parties’ un
derstanding that the agreed-to sentence corresponded with the
minimum sentence suggested by the applicable Guidelines range of
46 to 57 months, along with a consecutive mandatory minimum of 60
months for possessing a firearm in furtherance of a drug-trafficking
crime under 18 U. S. C. §924(c)(1)(A). Three years after the District
Court accepted the plea agreement, the Commission issued a retroac
tive Guidelines amendment to remedy the significant disparity be
tween the penalties for cocaine base and powder cocaine offenses.


2

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
Because the amendment’s effect was to reduce Freeman’s applicable
sentencing range to 37 to 46 months plus the consecutive 60-month
mandatory minimum, he moved for a sentence reduction under
§3582(c)(2). However, the District Court denied the motion, and the
Sixth Circuit affirmed because its precedent rendered defendants
sentenced pursuant to 11(c)(1)(C) agreements ineligible for
§3582(c)(2) relief, barring a miscarriage of justice or mutual mistake.

Held: The judgment is reversed, and the case is remanded.
355 Fed. Appx. 1, reversed and remanded.
JUSTICE KENNEDY, joined by JUSTICE GINSBURG, JUSTICE BREYER,
and JUSTICE KAGAN, concluded that defendants who enter into
11(c)(1)(C) agreements that specify a particular sentence as a condi
tion of the guilty plea may be eligible for relief under §3582(c)(2). Pp.
5–10.
(a) The text and purpose of the statute, Rule 11(c)(1)(C), and the
governing Guidelines policy statements compel the conclusion that
the district court has authority to entertain §3582(c)(2) motions when
sentences are imposed in light of the Guidelines, even if the defen
dant enters into an 11(c)(1)(C) agreement. The district judge must,
in every case, impose “a sentence sufficient, but not greater than nec
essary, to comply with” the purposes of federal sentencing, in light of
the Guidelines and other relevant factors. §3553(a). The Guidelines
provide a framework or starting point—a basis, in the term’s com
monsense meaning—for the judge’s exercise of discretion. Rule
11(c)(1)(C) permits the defendant and the prosecutor to agree on a
specific sentence, but that agreement does not discharge the district
court’s independent obligation to exercise its discretion. In the usual
sentencing, whether following trial or plea, the judge’s reliance on the
Guidelines will be apparent when the judge uses the Guidelines
range as the starting point in the analysis and imposes a sentence
within the range. Gall v. United States, 552 U. S. 38, 49. Even
where the judge varies from the recommended range, id., at 50, if the
judge uses the sentencing range as the beginning point to explain the
deviation, then the Guidelines are in a real sense a basis for the sen
tence. The parties’ recommended sentence binds the court “once the
court accepts the plea agreement,” Rule 11(c)(1)(C), but the relevant
policy statement forbids the judge to accept an agreement without
first giving due consideration to the applicable Guidelines sentencing
range, even if the parties recommend a specific sentence as a condi
tion of the guilty plea, see U. S. Sentencing Commission, Guidelines
Manual §6B1.2. This approach finds further support in the policy
statement applicable to §3582(c)(2) motions, which instructs the dis
trict court in modifying a sentence to substitute the retroactive
amendment, but to leave all original Guidelines determinations in


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
place, §1B1.10(b)(1). Pp. 5–7.
(b) Petitioner’s sentencing hearing transcript reveals that the Dis
trict Court expressed its independent judgment that the sentence
was appropriate in light of the applicable Guidelines range. Its deci
sion was therefore “based on” that range within §3582(c)(2)’s mean
ing. P. 7.
(c) The Government’s argument that sentences that follow an
11(c)(1)(C) agreement are based only on the agreement itself and not
the Guidelines, and are therefore ineligible for §3582(c)(2) reduction,
must be rejected. Even when a defendant enters into an 11(c)(1)(C)
agreement, the judge’s decision to accept the plea and impose the
recommended sentence is likely to be based on the Guidelines; and
when it is, the defendant should be eligible to seek §3582(c)(2) relief.
Pp. 7–10.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR concluded that if an agreement under Federal
Rule of Criminal Procedure 11(c)(1)(C) ((C) agreement) expressly uses
a Guidelines sentencing range applicable to the charged offense to es
tablish the term of imprisonment, and that range is subsequently
lowered by the Sentencing Commission, the prison term is “based on”
the range employed and the defendant is eligible for sentence reduc
tion under 18 U. S. C. §3582(c)(2). Pp. 1–11.
(a) The term of imprisonment imposed by a district court pursuant
to a (C) agreement is “based on” the agreement itself, not on the
judge’s calculation of the Guidelines sentencing range. To hold oth
erwise would be to contravene the very purpose of (C) agreements—to
bind the district court and allow the Government and the defendant
to determine what sentence he will receive. Pp. 1–5.
(b) This does not mean, however, that a term of imprisonment im
posed under a (C) agreement can never be reduced under §3582(c)(2).
Because the very purpose of a (C) agreement is to allow the parties to
determine the defendant’s sentence, when the agreement itself em
ploys a particular Guidelines sentencing range applicable to the
charged offenses in establishing the term of imprisonment imposed
by the district court, the defendant is eligible to have his sentence re
duced under §3582(c)(2). Pp. 5–9.
(c) Freeman is eligible. The offense level and criminal history cate
gory set forth in his (C) agreement produce a sentencing range of 46
to 57 months; it is evident that the parties combined the 46-month
figure at the low end of the range with the 60-month mandatory
minimum sentence under §924(c)(1)(A) to establish the 106-month
sentence called for in the agreement. Under the amended Guide
lines, however, the applicable sentencing range is now 37 to 46
months. Therefore, Freeman’s prison term is “based on” a sentencing
range that “has subsequently been lowered by the Sentencing Com


4

FREEMAN v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
mission,” rendering him eligible for sentence reduction. Pp. 9–11.

KENNEDY, J., announced the judgment of the Court and delivered an
opinion, in which GINSBURG, BREYER, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. SOTOMAYOR, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment. ROBERTS,
C. J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which SCALIA, THOMAS, and ALITO,
JJ., joined.

