Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Per Curiam

geant Ryburn, and Officer Zepeda entered after Vincent.
Officer Zepeda was concerned about “officer safety” and
did not want Sergeant Ryburn to enter the house alone.
Id., at 3. The two remaining officers, who had been standing out of earshot while Sergeant Ryburn and Officer
Zepeda talked to Vincent and Mrs. Huff, entered the house
last, on the assumption that Mrs. Huff had given Sergeant
Ryburn and Officer Zepeda permission to enter. Id., at
3–4.
Upon entering the house, the officers remained in the
living room with Mrs. Huff and Vincent. Eventually,
Vincent’s father entered the room and challenged the
officers’ authority to be there. The officers remained inside the house for a total of 5 to 10 minutes. During that
time, the officers talked to Mr. Huff and Vincent. They
did not conduct any search of Mr. Huff, Mrs. Huff, or
Vincent, or any of their property. The officers ultimately
concluded that the rumor about Vincent was false, and
they reported their conclusion to the school. Id., at 4.
The Huffs brought this action against the officers under
Rev. Stat. §1979, 42 U. S. C. §1983. The complaint alleges
that the officers violated the Huffs’ Fourth Amendment
rights by entering their home without a warrant. Following a 2-day bench trial, the District Court entered judgment in favor of the officers. The District Court resolved
conflicting testimony regarding Mrs. Huff’s response to
Sergeant Ryburn’s inquiry about guns by finding that Mrs.
Huff “immediately turned around and ran into the house.”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 3. The District Court concluded that
the officers were entitled to qualified immunity because
Mrs. Huff’s odd behavior, combined with the information
the officers gathered at the school, could have led reasonable officers to believe “that there could be weapons inside
the house, and that family members or the officers themselves were in danger.” Id., at 6. The District Court noted
that “[w]ithin a very short period of time, the officers were

