4

RYBURN v. HUFF
Per Curiam

confronted with facts and circumstances giving rise to
grave concern about the nature of the danger they were
confronting.” Id., at 6–7. With respect to this kind of
“rapidly evolving incident,” the District Court explained,
courts should be especially reluctant “to fault the police for
not obtaining a warrant.” Id., at 7.
A divided panel of the Ninth Circuit affirmed the District Court as to the two officers who entered the house on
the assumption that Mrs. Huff had consented, but reversed as to petitioners. The majority upheld the District
Court’s findings of fact, but disagreed with the District
Court’s conclusion that petitioners were entitled to qualified immunity. The majority acknowledged that police
officers are allowed to enter a home without a warrant if
they reasonably believe that immediate entry is necessary
to protect themselves or others from serious harm, even if
the officers lack probable cause to believe that a crime has
been or is about to be committed. Id., at 24. But the
majority determined that, in this case, “any belief that
the officers or other family members were in serious, imminent harm would have been objectively unreasonable”
given that “[Mrs. Huff] merely asserted her right to end
her conversation with the officers and returned to her
home.” Id., at 25.
Judge Rawlinson dissented. She explained that “the
discrete incident that precipitated the entry in this case
was Mrs. Huff’s response to the question regarding whether there were guns in the house.” Id., at 31. She faulted
the majority for “recit[ing] a sanitized account of this
event” that differed markedly from the District Court’s
findings of fact, which the majority had conceded must be
credited. Judge Rawlinson looked to “cases that specifically address the scenario where officer safety concerns
prompted the entry” and concluded that, under the rationale articulated in those cases, “a police officer could
have reasonably believed that he was justified in making a

