Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

agreement that bound the government.
Moving beyond criminal prosecutions generally, Watson
next contends that contempt prosecutions are unique, and
thus should be exempt from the general rule. See Brief for
Respondent 24. If Watson means to argue that modern
criminal contempts are not “crimes,” that view was
squarely rejected by this Court in Bloom v. Illinois, 391
U. S. 194 (1968). See id., at 199–200 (holding that a
criminal contempt prosecution is a criminal prosecution
for the purposes of the Sixth Amendment); see also id., at
201 (“Criminal contempt is a crime in the ordinary sense”);
United States v. Providence Journal Co., 485 U. S. 693,
700 (1988) (“The fact that the allegedly criminal conduct
concerns the violation of a court order instead of common
law or a statutory prohibition does not render the prosecu
tion any less an exercise of the sovereign power of the
United States”).
In any event, even if contempt prosecutions might not
always count as “crimes,” this one undoubtedly does, as
Watson herself concedes. Brief for Respondent 34 (“[T]his
case was clearly a criminal contempt proceeding from
beginning to end”). That concession is well taken, given
that whether a particular punishment is criminal or civil
is “a matter of statutory construction,” Hudson, 522 U. S.,
at 99, and that the relevant provisions here make clear
that contempt proceedings like this one are criminal, see
D. C. Code §16–1005(f) (“[C]riminal contempt shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment
for not more than 180 days, or both”); see also D. C. Super.
Ct. Domestic Violence Rule 12(d) (labeled “Motion to adju
dicate criminal contempt,” and describing the violation as
“criminal contempt”). As Justice Holmes put it for the
Court: “These contempts are infractions of the law, visited
with punishment as such. If such acts are not criminal,
we are in error as to the most fundamental characteristic
of crimes as that word has been understood in English

