18

ABBOTT v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

has an expansive meaning.” 520 U. S., at 5 (holding that
“any other term of imprisonment” includes terms imposed
by state courts). See also Beaty, 556 U. S., at ___ (slip op.,
at 7) (the word “any” in “any other provision of law” was
“no warrant to limit the class of provisions of law”). But
our decision on the petitions of Abbott and Gould does not
turn on artificial confinement of the phrase “any other
provision of law.” We rely, instead, on the different direc
tion Congress prescribed for the “except” clause: It applies
only when “a greater minimum sentence is otherwise
provided.” “In the contest between reading” that phrase
“to refer to penalties for the [§924(c)] offense in question or
to penalties for any [other] offense [a defendant commits],
we believe the former is the most natural.” Easter, 553
F. 3d, at 526.9
*
*
*
For the reasons stated, the judgments of the Court of
Appeals for the Third Circuit and the Court of Appeals for
the Fifth Circuit are
Affirmed.
JUSTICE KAGAN took no part in the consideration or
decision of these cases.
——————
9 Abbott

and Gould invoke the rule of lenity as a final reason to con
strue the “except” clause to bar their punishments under §924(c); if
their proposed limitations are textually possible, they maintain, we
may not choose the Government’s. “[T]he touchstone of the rule of
lenity is statutory ambiguity.” Bifulco v. United States, 447 U. S. 381,
387 (1980) (internal quotation marks omitted). “[A]fter consulting
traditional canons of statutory construction,” United States v. Shabani,
513 U. S. 10, 17 (1994), we are persuaded that none remains here: The
“except” clause covers only conduct offending §924(c). Although the
clause might have been more meticulously drafted, the “grammatical
possibility” of a defendant’s interpretation does not command a resort
to the rule of lenity if the interpretation proffered by the defendant
reflects “an implausible reading of the congressional purpose.” Caron v.
United States, 524 U. S. 308, 316 (1998).

