Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

Clerk of Court’s case file). Congress, however, imposed
only a five-year minimum for firearm possession “in fur
therance of” a drug offense. As construed by Abbott and
Gould, the amendment to include firearm possession as a
§924(c) offense would spare the most serious drug offend
ers from any discrete punishment for the very firearm
activity the amendment targeted. “We are disinclined to
say that what Congress imposed with one hand . . . it
withdrew with the other . . . .” Logan v. United States, 552
U. S. 23, 35 (2007).
Abbott’s and Gould’s proposed readings, moreover,
would result in sentencing anomalies Congress surely did
not intend. We note first that §924(c), as they construe it,
would often impose no penalty at all for the conduct that
provision makes independently criminal. Tr. of Oral Arg.
52. For example, an individual who sold enough drugs to
receive a ten-year minimum sentence under §841(b)(1)(A)
could, so far as §924(c) is concerned, possess or even bran
dish a gun without incurring any additional punishment.
Stranger still, under the Abbott and Gould readings, the
worst offenders would often secure the shortest sentences.
Consider two defendants convicted of trafficking in co
caine. The first possesses 500 grams and is subject to a
mandatory minimum of five years, §841(b)(1)(B); the
second possesses five kilograms and is subject to a manda
tory minimum of ten years, §841(b)(1)(A). Both brandish
firearms, calling for a sentence of seven years under
§924(c)(1)(A)(ii). The first defendant, under all readings,
will spend at least 12 years in prison. The second defen
dant’s ten-year drug minimum, according to Abbott and
Gould, triggers the “except” clause and wipes out that
defendant’s §924(c) penalty; though the more culpable of
the two, the second defendant’s minimum term would be
just ten years. Brief for United States 40. Like the Third
Circuit below, “[w]e are confident that Congress did not
intend such a bizarre result.” 574 F. 3d, at 209.

