Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
original insistence that sentencing judges impose additional punish
ment for §924(c) violations. Abbott’s and Gould’s readings would un
dercut that same bill’s primary objective: to expand §924(c)’s coverage
to reach firearm possession. Their readings would also result in sen
tencing anomalies Congress surely did not intend. Section 924(c), as
they construe it, would often impose no penalty at all for the conduct
that provision makes independently criminal. Stranger still, the
worst offenders would often secure shorter sentences than less grave
offenders, because the highest sentences on other counts of conviction
would be most likely to preempt §924(c) sentences. Abbott and Gould
respond that sentencing judges may take account of any anomalies
and order appropriate adjustments. While a judge exercising discre
tion under 18 U. S. C. §3553(a) would not be required to sentence a
more culpable defendant to a lesser term, this Court doubts that Con
gress had such a cure in mind in 1998, seven years before United
States v. Booker, 543 U. S. 220, held that district courts have discre
tion to depart from the Sentencing Guidelines based on §3553(a).
Abbott and Gould alternatively contend that Congress could have an
ticipated that the then-mandatory Guidelines would resolve dispari
ties by prescribing a firearm enhancement to the predicate sentence.
But Congress expressly rejected an analogous scheme in 1984, when
it amended §924(c) to impose a penalty even when the predicate
crime itself prescribed a firearm enhancement. Between 1984 and
1998, Congress expanded the reach or increased the severity of
§924(c) four times, never suggesting that a Guidelines firearm en
hancement might suffice to accomplish §924(c)’s objective. Nor is
there any indication that Congress was contemplating the Guide
lines’ relationship to §924(c) when it added the “except” clause.
Pp. 8–14.
(c) The Government’s reading—that the “except” clause is triggered
only when another provision commands a longer term for conduct vio
lating §924(c)—makes far more sense. It gives effect to statutory
language commanding that all §924(c) offenders shall receive addi
tional punishment for their violation of that provision, a command re
iterated three times: First, the statute states that the §924(c)(1) pun
ishment “shall” be imposed “in addition to” the penalty for the
predicate offense, §924(c)(1)(A); second, §924(c) demands a discrete
punishment even if the predicate crime itself “provides for an en
hanced punishment if committed by the use of a deadly or dangerous
weapon or device,” ibid.; third, §924(c)(1)(D)(ii) rules out the possibil
ity that a §924(c) sentence might “run concurrently with any other
term of imprisonment.” Interpreting the “except” clause to train on
conduct offending §924(c) also makes sense as a matter of syntax.
The clause is a proviso, most naturally read to refer to the conduct

