2

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

Syllabus 

funds provision, arguing that it unconstitutionally penalizes their
speech and burdens their ability to fully exercise their First Amend
ment rights. The District Court entered a permanent injunction
against the enforcement of the matching funds provision. The Ninth
Circuit reversed, concluding that the provision imposed only a mini
mal burden and that the burden was justified by Arizona’s interest in
reducing quid pro quo political corruption.

Held: Arizona’s matching funds scheme substantially burdens political
speech and is not sufficiently justified by a compelling interest to
survive First Amendment scrutiny. Pp. 8–30.
(a) The matching funds provision imposes a substantial burden on
the speech of privately financed candidates and independent expendi
ture groups. Pp. 8–22.
(1) Petitioners contend that their political speech is substantially
burdened in the same way that speech was burdened by the so-called
“Millionaire’s Amendment” of the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act
of 2002, which was invalidated in Davis v. Federal Election Comm’n,
554 U. S. 724. That law—which permitted the opponent of a candi
date who spent over $350,000 of his personal funds to collect triple
the normal contribution amount, while the candidate who spent the
personal funds remained subject to the original contribution cap—
unconstitutionally forced a candidate “to choose between the First
Amendment right to engage in unfettered political speech and subjec
tion to discriminatory fundraising limitations.” Id., at 739. This
“unprecedented penalty” “impose[d] a substantial burden on the ex
ercise of the First Amendment right to use personal funds for cam
paign speech” that was not justified by a compelling government in
terest. Id., at 739–740. Pp. 8–10.
(2) The logic of Davis largely controls here. Once a privately fi
nanced candidate has raised or spent more than the State’s initial
grant to a publicly financed candidate, each personal dollar the pri
vately financed candidate spends results in an award of almost one
additional dollar to his opponent. The privately financed candidate
must “shoulder a special and potentially significant burden” when
choosing to exercise his First Amendment right to spend funds on his
own candidacy. 554 U. S., at 739. If the law at issue in Davis im
posed a burden on candidate speech, the Arizona law unquestionably
does so as well.
The differences between the matching funds provision and the law
struck down in Davis make the Arizona law more constitutionally
problematic, not less. First, the penalty in Davis consisted of raising
the contribution limits for one candidate, who would still have to
raise the additional funds. Here, the direct and automatic release of
public money to a publicly financed candidate imposes a far heavier

