4

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

Syllabus 

the state law. And burdening the speech of some—here privately fi
nanced candidates and independent expenditure groups—to increase
the speech of others is a concept “wholly foreign to the First Amend
ment,” Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 48–49; cf. Miami Herald Pub
lishing Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U. S. 241, 244, 258. That no candidate or
group is forced to express a particular message does not mean that
the matching funds provision does not burden their speech, especially
since the direct result of that speech is a state-provided monetary
subsidy to a political rival. And precedents upholding government
subsidies against First Amendment challenge provide no support for
matching funds; none of the subsidies at issue in those cases were
granted in response to the speech of another.
The burden on privately financed candidates and independent ex
penditure groups also cannot be analogized to the burden placed on
speakers by the disclosure and disclaimer requirements upheld in
Citizens United v. Federal Election Comm’n, 558 U. S. ___. A political
candidate’s disclosure of his funding resources does not result in a
cash windfall to his opponent, or affect their respective disclosure ob
ligations.
The burden imposed by the matching funds provision is evident
and inherent in the choice that confronts privately financed candi
dates and independent expenditure groups. Indeed every court to
have considered the question after Davis has concluded that a candi
date or independent group might not spend money if the direct result
of that spending is additional funding to political adversaries. Ari
zona is correct that the candidates do not complain that providing a
lump sum payment equivalent to the maximum state financing that
a candidate could obtain through matching funds would be imper
missible. But it is not the amount of funding that the State provides
that is constitutionally problematic. It is the manner in which that
funding is provided—in direct response to the political speech of pri
vately financed candidates and independent expenditure groups.
Pp. 14–22.
(b) Arizona’s matching funds provision is not “ ‘justified by a com
pelling state interest,’ ” Davis, supra, at 740. Pp. 22–28.
(1) There is ample support for the argument that the purpose of
the matching funds provision is to “level the playing field” in terms of
candidate resources. The clearest evidence is that the provision op
erates to ensure that campaign funding is equal, up to three times
the initial public funding allotment. The text of the Arizona Act con
firms this purpose. The provision setting up the matching funds re
gime is titled “Equal funding of candidates,” Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann.
§16–952; and the Act and regulations refer to the funds as “equaliz
ing funds,” e.g., §16–952(C)(4). This Court has repeatedly rejected

