26

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

KAGAN, J., dissenting 


at issue because it is a critical facet of Arizona’s public
financing program. The provision is no more than a dis
bursement mechanism; but it is also the thing that makes
the whole Clean Elections Act work. As described earlier,
see supra, at 5–6, public financing has an Achilles heel—
the difficulty of setting the subsidy at the right amount.
Too small, and the grant will not attract candidates to the
program; and with no participating candidates, the pro
gram can hardly decrease corruption. Too large, and the
system becomes unsustainable, or at the least an unneces
sary drain on public resources. But finding the sweet-spot
is near impossible because of variation, across districts
and over time, in the political system. Enter the matching
funds provision, which takes an ordinary lump-sum
amount, divides it into thirds, and disburses the last two
of these (to the extent necessary) via a self-calibrating
mechanism. That provision is just a fine-tuning of the
lump-sum program approved in Buckley—a fine-tuning, it
bears repeating, that prevents no one from speaking and
discriminates against no message. But that fine-tuning
can make the difference between a wholly ineffectual
program and one that removes corruption from the politi
cal system.12 If public financing furthers a compelling
interest—and according to this Court, it does—then so too
does the disbursement formula that Arizona uses to make
public financing effective. The one conclusion follows
directly from the other.
——————
12 For this reason, the majority is quite wrong to say that the State’s
interest in combating corruption does not support the matching fund
provision’s application to a candidate’s expenditure of his own money or
to an independent expenditure. Ante, at 25–26. The point is not that
these expenditures themselves corrupt the political process. Rather,
Arizona includes these, as well as all other, expenditures in the pro
gram to ensure that participating candidates receive the funds neces
sary to run competitive races—and so to attract those candidates in the
first instance. That is in direct service of the State’s anti-corruption
interest.

