(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC ET AL. v. BENNETT, SECRETARY OF

STATE OF ARIZONA, ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–238.

Argued March 28, 2011—Decided June 27, 2011*

The Arizona Citizens Clean Elections Act created a public financing
system to fund the primary and general election campaigns of candi
dates for state office. Candidates who opt to participate, and who ac
cept certain campaign restrictions and obligations, are granted an
initial outlay of public funds to conduct their campaign. They are
also granted additional matching funds if a privately financed candi
date’s expenditures, combined with the expenditures of independent
groups made in support of the privately financed candidate or in op
position to a publicly financed candidate, exceed the publicly financed
candidate’s initial state allotment. Once matching funds are trig
gered, a publicly financed candidate receives roughly one dollar for
every dollar raised or spent by the privately financed candidate—
including any money of his own that a privately financed candidate
spends on his campaign—and for every dollar spent by independent
groups that support the privately financed candidate. When there
are multiple publicly financed candidates in a race, each one receives
matching funds as a result of the spending of privately financed can
didates and independent expenditure groups. Matching funds top
out at two times the initial grant to the publicly financed candidate.
Petitioners, past and future Arizona candidates and two independ
ent expenditure groups that spend money to support and oppose Ari
zona candidates, challenged the constitutionality of the matching
——————
* Together with No. 10–239, McComish et al. v. Bennett, Secretary of
State of Arizona, et al., also on certiorari to the same court.

