Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

tics.” Ibid.
Once a privately financed candidate has raised or spent
more than the State’s initial grant to a publicly financed
candidate, each personal dollar spent by the privately
financed candidate results in an award of almost one
additional dollar to his opponent. That plainly forces the
privately financed candidate to “shoulder a special and
potentially significant burden” when choosing to exercise
his First Amendment right to spend funds on behalf of his
candidacy. Ibid. If the law at issue in Davis imposed a
burden on candidate speech, the Arizona law unques
tionably does so as well.
The penalty imposed by Arizona’s matching funds provi
sion is different in some respects from the penalty imposed
by the law we struck down in Davis. But those differences
make the Arizona law more constitutionally problematic,
not less. See Green Party of Conn. v. Garfield, 616 F. 3d
213, 244–245 (CA2 2010). First, the penalty in Davis
consisted of raising the contribution limits for one of the
candidates. The candidate who benefited from the in
creased limits still had to go out and raise the funds. He
may or may not have been able to do so. The other candi
date, therefore, faced merely the possibility that his oppo
nent would be able to raise additional funds, through
contribution limits that remained subject to a cap. And
still the Court held that this was an “unprecedented pen
alty,” a “special and potentially significant burden” that
had to be justified by a compelling state interest—a rigor
ous First Amendment hurdle. 554 U. S., at 739–740.
Here the benefit to the publicly financed candidate is the
direct and automatic release of public money. That is a
far heavier burden than in Davis.
Second, depending on the specifics of the election at
issue, the matching funds provision can create a multiplier
effect. In the Arizona Fourth District House election pre
viously discussed, see supra, at 4–6, if the spending cap

