12

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

KAGAN, J., dissenting 


easily survive First Amendment scrutiny.3
This suit, in fact, may merit less attention than any
challenge to a speech subsidy ever seen in this Court. In
the usual First Amendment subsidy case, a person com
plains that the government declined to finance his speech,
while bankrolling someone else’s; we must then decide
whether the government differentiated between these
speakers on a prohibited basis—because it preferred one
speaker’s ideas to another’s. See, e.g., id., at 577–578;
Regan, 461 U. S., at 543–545. But the candidates bringing
this challenge do not make that claim—because they were
never denied a subsidy. Arizona, remember, offers to
support any person running for state office. Petitioners
here refused that assistance. So they are making a novel
argument: that Arizona violated their First Amendment
rights by disbursing funds to other speakers even
though they could have received (but chose to spurn) the
same financial assistance. Some people might call that
chutzpah.
Indeed, what petitioners demand is essentially a right to
——————
3 The

majority claims that none of our subsidy cases involved the
funding of “respons[ive]” expression. See ante, at 17. But the majority
does not explain why this distinction, created to fit the facts of this
case, should matter so long as the government is not discriminating on
the basis of viewpoint. Indeed, the difference the majority highlights
should cut in the opposite direction, because facilitating responsive
speech fosters “uninhibited, robust, and wide-open” public debate. New
York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254, 270 (1964). In any event, the
majority is wrong to say that we have never approved funding to “allow
the recipient to counter” someone else’s political speech. Ante, at 17.
That is exactly what we approved in Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1 (1976)
(per curiam). See supra, at 5. The majority notes that the public
financing scheme in Buckley lacked the trigger mechanism used in the
Arizona law. See ante, at 17, n. 9. But again, that is just to describe a
difference, not to say why it matters. As I will show, the trigger is
constitutionally irrelevant—as we made clear in the very case (Davis v.
Federal Election Comm’n, 554 U. S. 724 (2008)) on which the majority
principally relies. See infra, at 17–19, 21–22.

