12

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

Opinion of the Court 


were exceeded, each dollar spent by the privately funded
candidate would result in an additional dollar of campaign
funding to each of that candidate’s publicly financed oppo
nents. In such a situation, the matching funds provi
sion forces privately funded candidates to fight a political
hydra of sorts. Each dollar they spend generates two
adversarial dollars in response. Again, a markedly more
significant burden than in Davis.
Third, unlike the law at issue in Davis, all of this is
to some extent out of the privately financed candidate’s
hands. Even if that candidate opted to spend less than the
initial public financing cap, any spending by independent
expenditure groups to promote the privately financed
candidate’s election—regardless whether such support
was welcome or helpful—could trigger matching funds.
What is more, that state money would go directly to the
publicly funded candidate to use as he saw fit. That
disparity in control—giving money directly to a publicly
financed candidate, in response to independent expendi
tures that cannot be coordinated with the privately funded
candidate—is a substantial advantage for the publicly
funded candidate. That candidate can allocate the money
according to his own campaign strategy, which the pri
vately financed candidate could not do with the independ
ent group expenditures that triggered the matching funds.
Cf. Citizens United, 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 41) (“ ‘The
absence of prearrangement and coordination of an expen
diture with the candidate or his agent . . . undermines the
value of the expenditure to the candidate’ ” (quoting Buck
ley, 424 U. S., at 47)).
The burdens that this regime places on independent
expenditure groups are akin to those imposed on the
privately financed candidates themselves. Just as with
the candidate the independent group supports, the more
money spent on that candidate’s behalf or in opposition to
a publicly funded candidate, the more money the publicly

