18

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

KAGAN, J., dissenting 


decides to run, he likely will choose to speak in different
ways—for example, by eschewing dubious, easy-to-answer
charges—because his opponent has the ability to respond.
Indeed, privately funded candidates may well find the
lump-sum system more burdensome than Arizona’s (as
suming the lump is big enough). Pretend you are financ
ing your campaign through private donations. Would you
prefer that your opponent receive a guaranteed, upfront
payment of $150,000, or that he receive only $50,000, with
the possibility—a possibility that you mostly get to con
trol—of collecting another $100,000 somewhere down the
road? Me too. That’s the first reason the burden on
speech cannot command a different result in this case
than in Buckley.
Number two: Our decisions about disclosure and dis
claimer requirements show the Court is wrong. Starting
in Buckley and continuing through last Term, the Court
has repeatedly declined to view these requirements as a sub
stantial First Amendment burden, even though they dis
courage some campaign speech. “It is undoubtedly true,”
we stated in Buckley, that public disclosure obligations “will deter some individuals” from engaging in ex
pressive activity. 424 U. S., at 68; see Davis, 554 U. S., at
744. Yet we had no difficulty upholding these require
ments there. And much more recently, in Citizens United
and Doe v. Reed, 561 U. S. ___ (2010), we followed that
precedent. “ ‘Disclosure requirements may burden the
ability to speak,” we reasoned, but they “do not prevent
anyone from speaking.’ ” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 7) (quoting
Citizens United, 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 51)). So too
here. Like a disclosure rule, the matching funds provision
may occasionally deter, but “impose[s] no ceiling” on elec
toral expression. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 51).
The majority breezily dismisses this comparison, label
ing the analogy “not even close” because disclosure re
quirements result in no payment of money to a speaker’s

