Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

KAGAN, J., dissenting

Arizona Clean Elections Act lands on the opposite side of
both: It grants a non-discriminatory speech subsidy.7 So
to say that Davis “largely controls” this case, ante, at 10, is
to decline to take our First Amendment doctrine seriously.
And let me be clear: This is not my own idiosyncratic
or post hoc view of Davis; it is the Davis Court’s self
expressed, contemporaneous view. That decision began,
continued, and ended by focusing on the Millionaire
Amendment’s “discriminatory contribution limits.” 554
U. S., at 740. We made that clear in the very first sen
tence of the opinion, where we summarized the question
presented. Id., at 728 (“In this appeal, we consider the
constitutionality of federal election law provisions that . . .
impose different campaign contribution limits on candi
dates”). And our focus on the law’s discriminatory restric
tions was evident again when we examined how the
Court’s prior holdings informed the case. Id., at 738 (“We
have never upheld the constitutionality of a law that
imposes different contribution limits for candidates”). And
then again, when we concluded that the Millionaire’s
Amendment could not stand. Id., at 740 (explaining that
the “the activation of a scheme of discriminatory contribu
tion limits” burdens speech). Our decision left no doubt
(because we repeated the point many times over, see also
id., at 729, 730, 739, 740, n. 7, 741, 744): The constitu
tional problem with the Millionaire’s Amendment lay in
its use of discriminatory speech restrictions.
——————
7 Of course, only publicly funded candidates receive the subsidy. But
that is because only those candidates have agreed to abide by stringent
spending caps (which privately funded candidates can exceed by any
amount). And Buckley specifically approved that exchange as consis
tent with the First Amendment. See 424 U. S., at 57, n. 65, 95. By
contrast, Davis involved a scheme in which one candidate in a race
received concrete fundraising advantages, in the form of asymmetrical
contribution limits, just because his opponent had spent a certain
amount of his own money.

