Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

KAGAN, J., dissenting

involving speech subsidies. According to the Court, the
special problem here lies in Arizona’s matching funds
mechanism, which the majority claims imposes a “sub
stantia[l] burde[n]” on a privately funded candidate’s
speech. Ante, at 2. Sometimes, the majority suggests that
this “burden” lies in the way the mechanism “ ‘diminish[es]
the effectiveness’ ” of the privately funded candidate’s
expression by enabling his opponent to respond. Ante, at
10 (quoting Davis v. Federal Election Comm’n, 554 U. S.
724, 736 (2008)); see ante, at 21–22. At other times, the
majority indicates that the “burden” resides in the deter
rent effect of the mechanism: The privately funded candi
date “might not spend money” because doing so will trig
ger matching funds. Ante, at 20. Either way, the majority
is wrong to see a substantial burden on expression.5
Most important, and as just suggested, the very notion
that additional speech constitutes a “burden” is odd and
unsettling. Here is a simple fact: Arizona imposes nothing
remotely resembling a coercive penalty on privately
funded candidates. The State does not jail them, fine
them, or subject them to any kind of lesser disability. (So
the majority’s analogies to a fine on speech, ante, at 19, 28,
are inapposite.) The only “burden” in this case comes from
the grant of a subsidy to another person, and the opportu
nity that subsidy allows for responsive speech. But that
——————
5 The majority’s error on this score extends both to candidates and to
independent expenditure groups. Contrary to the majority’s sugges
tion, see ante, at 14, n. 6, nearly all of my arguments showing that the
Clean Elections Act does not impose a substantial burden apply to both
sets of speakers (and apply regardless of whether independent or
candidate expenditures trigger the matching funds). That is also true
of every one of my arguments demonstrating the State’s compelling
interest in this legislation. See infra, at 22–26. But perhaps the best
response to the majority’s view that the Act inhibits independent
expenditure groups lies in an empirical fact already noted: Expendi
tures by these groups have risen by 253% since Arizona’s law was
enacted. See n. 2, supra.

