24

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

Opinion of the Court 


funds.10
We have repeatedly rejected the argument that the
government has a compelling state interest in “leveling
the playing field” that can justify undue burdens on politi
cal speech. See, e.g., Citizens United, 558 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 34). In Davis, we stated that discriminatory
contribution limits meant to “level electoral opportunities
for candidates of different personal wealth” did not serve
“a legitimate government objective,” let alone a compelling
one. 554 U. S., at 741 (internal quotation marks omitted).
And in Buckley, we held that limits on overall campaign
expenditures could not be justified by a purported govern
ment “interest in equalizing the financial resources of
candidates.” 424 U. S., at 56; see id., at 56–57. After all,
equalizing campaign resources “might serve not to equal
ize the opportunities of all candidates, but to handicap a
candidate who lacked substantial name recognition or
exposure of his views before the start of the campaign.”
Id., at 57.
“Leveling electoral opportunities means making and
implementing judgments about which strengths should be
permitted to contribute to the outcome of an election,”
Davis, supra, at 742—a dangerous enterprise and one that
cannot justify burdening protected speech. The dissent
essentially dismisses this concern, see post, at 27–29, but
it needs to be taken seriously; we have, as noted, held that
it is not legitimate for the government to attempt to equal
ize electoral opportunities in this manner. And such basic
——————
10 Prior

to oral argument in this case, the Citizens Clean Elections
Commission’s Web site stated that “ ‘The Citizens Clean Elections Act
was passed by the people of Arizona in 1998 to level the playing field
when it comes to running for office.’ ” AFEC Brief 10, n. 3 (quoting
http://www.azcleanelections.gov/about-us/get-involved.aspx); Tr. of Oral
Arg. 48. The Web site now says that “The Citizens Clean Elections Act
was passed by the people of Arizona in 1998 to restore citizen participa
tion and confidence in our political system.”

