16

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

KAGAN, J., dissenting 


means the majority cannot get out from under our subsidy
precedents. Once again: We have never, not once, under
stood a viewpoint-neutral subsidy given to one speaker to
constitute a First Amendment burden on another. (And
that is so even when the subsidy is not open to all, as it is
here.) Yet in this case, the majority says that the prospect
of more speech—responsive speech, competitive speech,
the kind of speech that drives public debate—counts as a
constitutional injury. That concept, for all the reasons
previously given, is “wholly foreign to the First Amend
ment.” Buckley, 424 U. S., at 49.
But put to one side this most fundamental objection
to the majority’s argument; even then, has the majority
shown that the burden resulting from the Arizona statute
is “substantial”? See Clingman v. Beaver, 544 U. S. 581,
592 (2005) (holding that stringent judicial review is “ap
propriate only if the burden is severe”). I will not quarrel
with the majority’s assertion that responsive speech by
one candidate may make another candidate’s speech less
effective, see ante, at 21–22; that, after all, is the whole
idea of the First Amendment, and a benefit of having more
responsive speech. See Abrams v. United States, 250 U. S.
616, 630 (1919) (Holmes., J., dissenting) (“[T]he best test
of truth is the power of the thought to get itself accepted in
the competition of the market”). And I will assume that
the operation of this statute may on occasion deter a pri
vately funded candidate from spending money, and con
veying ideas by that means.6 My guess is that this does
——————
6I

will note, however, that the record evidence of this effect is spotty
at best. The majority finds anecdotal evidence supporting its argument
on just 6 pages of a 4500-page summary judgment record. See ante, at
18–19. (The majority also cites sections of petitioners’ briefs, which cite
the same 6 pages in the record. See ante, at 19.) That is consistent
with the assessment of the District Court Judge who presided over the
proceedings in this case: He stated that petitioners had presented only
“vague” and “scattered” evidence of the law’s deterrent impact. App. to

