Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

Opinion of the Court

financed candidates); see also Day v. Holahan, 34 F. 3d
1356, 1360 (CA8 1994) (it is “clear” that matching funds
provisions infringe on “protected speech because of the
chilling effect” they have “on the political speech of the
person or group making the [triggering] expenditure”
(cited in Davis, supra, at 739)). The dissent’s disagree
ment is little more than disagreement with Davis.
The State correctly asserts that the candidates and
independent expenditure groups “do not . . . claim that a
single lump sum payment to publicly funded candidates,”
equivalent to the maximum amount of state financing that
a candidate can obtain through matching funds, would
impermissibly burden their speech. Brief for State Re
spondents 56; see Tr. of Oral Arg. 5. The State reasons
that if providing all the money up front would not burden
speech, providing it piecemeal does not do so either. And
the State further argues that such incremental admini
stration is necessary to ensure that public funding is not
under- or over-distributed. See Brief for State Respon
dents 56–57.
These arguments miss the point. It is not the amount of
funding that the State provides to publicly financed candi
dates that is constitutionally problematic in this case. It
is the manner in which that funding is provided—in direct
response to the political speech of privately financed can
didates and independent expenditure groups. And the fact
that the State’s matching mechanism may be more effi
cient than other alternatives—that it may help the State
in “finding the sweet-spot” or “fine-tuning” its financing
system to avoid a drain on public resources, post, at 26
(KAGAN, J., dissenting)—is of no moment; “the First
Amendment does not permit the State to sacrifice speech
for efficiency.” Riley v. National Federation of Blind of
N. C., Inc., 487 U. S. 781, 795 (1988).
The United States as amicus contends that “[p]roviding
additional funds to petitioners’ opponents does not make

