24

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM
CLUB PAC v. BENNETT
KAGAN, J., dissenting

compelling government interest. See, e.g., Davis, 554
U. S., at 741; Federal Election Comm’n v. National Con
servative Political Action Comm., 470 U. S. 480, 496–497
(1985) (NCPAC). And so too, these precedents are clear:
Public financing of elections serves this interest. See
supra, at 4–5. As Buckley recognized, and as I earlier
described, public financing “reduce[s] the deleterious
influence of large contributions on our political process.”
424 U. S., at 91; see id., at 96. When private contributions
fuel the political system, candidates may make corrupt
bargains to gain the money needed to win election. See
NCPAC, 470 U. S., at 497. And voters, seeing the depend
ence of candidates on large contributors (or on bundlers of
smaller contributions), may lose faith that their represen
tatives will serve the public’s interest. See Shrink Mis
souri, 528 U. S., at 390 (the “assumption that large donors
call the tune [may] jeopardize the willingness of voters to
take part in democratic governance”). Public financing
addresses these dangers by minimizing the importance of
private donors in elections. Even the majority appears to
agree with this premise. See ante, at 27 (“We have said
that . . . ‘public financing as a means of eliminating the
improper influence of large private contributions furthers
a significant governmental interest’ ”).
This compelling interest appears on the very face of
Arizona’s public financing statute. Start with the title:
The Citizens Clean Elections Act. Then proceed to the
statute’s formal findings. The public financing program,
the findings state, was “inten[ded] to create a clean elec
tions system that will improve the integrity of Arizona
state government by diminishing the influence of special
interest money.” §16–940(A) (West 2006). That measure
was needed because the prior system of private fundrais
ing had “[u]ndermine[d] public confidence in the integrity
of public officials;” allowed those officials “to accept large
campaign contributions from private interests over which

