28

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

KAGAN, J., dissenting 


the State has asserted in this Court; it is the interest
predominantly expressed in the “findings and declara
tions” section of the statute; and it is the interest univer
sally understood (stretching back to Teddy Roosevelt’s
time) to support public financing of elections. See supra,
at 4, 23–24. As against all this, the majority claims to
have found three smoking guns that reveal the State’s
true (and nefarious) intention to level the playing field.
But the only smoke here is the majority’s, and it is the
kind that goes with mirrors.
The majority first observes that the matching funds
provision is titled “ ‘Equal funding of candidates’ ” and that
it refers to matching grants as “ ‘equalizing funds.’ ” Ante,
at 23 (quoting §16–952). Well, yes. The statute provides
for matching funds (above and below certain thresholds); a
synonym for “match” is “equal”; and so the statute uses
that term. In sum, the statute describes what the statute
does. But the relevant question here (according to the
majority’s own analysis) is why the statute does that
thing—otherwise said, what interest the statute serves.
The State explains that its goal is to prevent corruption,
and nothing in the Act’s descriptive terms suggests any
other objective.
Next, the majority notes that the Act allows participat
ing candidates to accept private contributions if (but only
if) the State cannot provide the funds it has promised (for
example, because of a budget crisis). Ante, at 23 (citing
§16–954(F)). That provision, the majority argues, shows
that when push comes to shove, the State cares more
about “leveling” than about fighting corruption. Ante, at
23. But this is a plain misreading of the law. All the
statute does is assure participating candidates that they
will not be left in the lurch if public funds suddenly be
come unavailable. That guarantee helps persuade candi
dates to enter the program by removing the risk of a state
default. And so the provision directly advances the Act’s

