Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Syllabus
the argument that the government has a compelling state interest in
“leveling the playing field” that can justify undue burdens on political
speech, see, e.g., Citizens United, supra, at ___, and the burdens im
posed by matching funds cannot be justified by the pursuit of such an
interest. Pp. 22–25.
(2) Even if the objective of the matching funds provision is to
combat corruption—and not “level the playing field”—the burdens
that the matching funds provision imposes on protected political
speech are not justified. Burdening a candidate’s expenditure of his
own funds on his own campaign does not further the State’s anticor
ruption interest. Indeed, “reliance on personal funds reduces the
threat of corruption.” Davis, supra, at 740–741; see Buckley, supra,
at 53. The burden on independent expenditures also cannot be sup
ported by the anticorruption interest. Such expenditures are “politi
cal speech . . . not coordinated with a candidate.” Citizens United,
558 U. S., at ___. That separation negates the possibility that the ex
penditures will result in the sort of quid pro quo corruption with
which this Court’s case law is concerned. See e.g., id., at ___–___.
Moreover, “[t]he interest in alleviating the corrupting influence of
large contributions is served by . . . contribution limitations.” Buck
ley, supra, at 55. Given Arizona’s contribution limits, some of the
most austere in the Nation, its strict disclosure requirements, and
the general availability of public funding, it is hard to imagine what
marginal corruption deterrence could be generated by the matching
funds provision.
The State and the Clean Elections Institute contend that even if
the matching funds provision does not directly serve the anticorrup
tion interest, it indirectly does so by ensuring that enough candidates
participate in the State’s public funding system, which in turn helps
combat corruption. But the fact that burdening constitutionally pro
tected speech might indirectly serve the State’s anticorruption inter
est, by encouraging candidates to take public financing, does not es
tablish the constitutionality of the matching funds provision. The
matching funds provision substantially burdens speech, to an even
greater extent than the law invalidated in Davis. Those burdens
cannot be justified by a desire to “level the playing field,” and much of
the speech burdened by the matching funds provision does not pose a
danger of corruption. The fact that the State may feel that the
matching funds provision is necessary to allow it to calibrate its pub
lic funding system to achieve its desired level of participation—
without an undue drain on public resources—is not a sufficient justi
fication for the burden.
The flaw in the State’s argument is apparent in what its reasoning
would allow. By the State’s logic it could award publicly financed

