Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

Respondents 32 (quoting Johanns v. Livestock Marketing
Assn., 544 U. S. 550, 557 (2005)). True enough. But that
does not mean that the matching funds provision does
not burden speech. The direct result of the speech of pri
vately financed candidates and independent expenditure
groups is a state-provided monetary subsidy to a political
rival. That cash subsidy, conferred in response to political
speech, penalizes speech to a greater extent and more
directly than the Millionaire’s Amendment in Davis. The
fact that this may result in more speech by the other
candidates is no more adequate a justification here than it
was in Davis. See 554 U. S., at 741–742.
In disagreeing with our conclusion, the dissent relies
on cases in which we have upheld government subsidies
against First Amendment challenge, and asserts that
“[w]e have never, not once, understood a viewpoint-neutral
subsidy given to one speaker to constitute a First Amend
ment burden on another.” Post, at 16. But none of those
cases—not one—involved a subsidy given in direct re
sponse to the political speech of another, to allow the
recipient to counter that speech. And nothing in the
analysis we employed in those cases suggests that the
challenged subsidies would have survived First Amend
ment scrutiny if they were triggered by someone else’s
political speech.9
The State also argues, and the Court of Appeals con
cluded, that any burden on privately financed candidates
and independent expenditure groups is more analogous to
——————
9 The

dissent cites Buckley in response, see post, at 12, n. 3, but the
funding in Buckley was of course not triggered by the speech of a
publicly funded candidate’s political opponent, or the speech of anyone
else for that matter. See 424 U. S., at 91–95. Whether Arizona’s
matching funds provision comports with the First Amendment is not
simply a question of whether the State can give a subsidy to a candi
date to fund that candidate’s election, but whether that subsidy can be
triggered by the speech of another candidate or independent group.

