4

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

KAGAN, J., dissenting 


prevent both corruption and the appearance of corrup
tion—and so to protect our democratic system of govern
ance—citizens have implemented reforms designed to curb
the power of special interests.
Among these measures, public financing of elections has
emerged as a potentially potent mechanism to preserve
elected officials’ independence. President Theodore Roo
sevelt proposed the reform as early as 1907 in his State
of the Union address. “The need for collecting large cam
paign funds would vanish,” he said, if the government “pro
vided an appropriation for the proper and legitimate ex
penses” of running a campaign, on the condition that a
“party receiving campaign funds from the Treasury” would
forgo private fundraising. 42 Cong. Rec. 78 (1907). The
idea was—and remains—straightforward.
Candidates
who rely on public, rather than private, moneys are “be
holden [to] no person and, if elected, should feel no post
election obligation toward any contributor.” Republican
Nat. Comm. v. FEC, 487 F. Supp. 280, 284 (SDNY), aff’d
445 U. S. 955 (1980). By supplanting private cash in
elections, public financing eliminates the source of politi
cal corruption.
For this reason, public financing systems today dot the
national landscape. Almost one-third of the States have
adopted some form of public financing, and so too has
the Federal Government for presidential elections. See
R. Garrett, Congressional Research Service Report for
Congress, Public Financing of Congressional Campaigns:
Overview and Analysis 2, 32 (2009). The federal pro
gram—which offers presidential candidates a fixed public
subsidy if they abstain from private fundraising—
originated in the campaign finance law that Congress
enacted in 1974 on the heels of the Watergate scandal.
Congress explained at the time that the “potentia[l] for
abuse” inherent in privately funded elections was “all too
clear.” S. Rep. No. 93–689, p. 4 (1974). In Congress’s

