26

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

Opinion of the Court 


tures of his own money on his own campaign as contribu
tions, and to that extent cannot be supported by any anti
corruption interest.
We have also held that “independent expenditures . . .
do not give rise to corruption or the appearance of corrup
tion.” Citizens United, 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 42).
“By definition, an independent expenditure is political
speech presented to the electorate that is not coordinated with a candidate.” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 44). The
candidate-funding circuit is broken. The separation between
candidates and independent expenditure groups negates
the possibility that independent expenditures will result
in the sort of quid pro quo corruption with which our case
law is concerned. See id., at ___–___ (slip op., at 42–45);
cf. Buckley, 424 U. S., at 46. Including independent ex
penditures in the matching funds provision cannot be
supported by any anticorruption interest.
We have observed in the past that “[t]he interest in
alleviating the corrupting influence of large contributions
is served by . . . contribution limitations.” Id., at 55.
Arizona already has some of the most austere contribution
limits in the United States. See Randall v. Sorrell, 548
U. S. 230, 250–251 (2006) (plurality opinion). Contribu
tions to statewide candidates are limited to $840 per
contributor per election cycle and contributions to legisla
tive candidates are limited to $410 per contributor per
election cycle. See Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §§16–905(A)(1),
941(B)(1); Ariz. Dept. of State, Office of the Secretary of
State, 2009–2010 Contribution Limits, see supra, at 4.
Arizona also has stringent fundraising disclosure re
quirements. In the face of such ascetic contribution limits,
strict disclosure requirements, and the general availability
of public funding, it is hard to imagine what marginal
corruption deterrence could be generated by the matching
funds provision.
Perhaps recognizing that the burdens the matching

