22

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

KAGAN, J., dissenting 


But what of the trigger mechanism—in Davis, as here, a
candidate’s campaign expenditures? That, after all, is the
only thing that this case and Davis share. If Davis had
held that the trigger mechanism itself violated the First
Amendment, then the case would support today’s holding.
But Davis said nothing of the kind. It made clear that
the trigger mechanism could not rescue the discriminatory
contribution limits from constitutional invalidity; that the
limits went into effect only after a candidate spent sub
stantial personal resources rendered them no more per
missible under the First Amendment. See id., at 739. But
Davis did not call into question the trigger mechanism
itself. Indeed, Davis explained that Congress could have
used that mechanism to activate a non-discriminatory
(i.e., across-the-board) increase in contribution limits; in
that case, the Court stated, “Davis’ argument would
plainly fail.” Id., at 737.8 The constitutional infirmity in
Davis was not the trigger mechanism, but rather what lay
on the other side of it—a discriminatory speech restriction.
The Court’s response to these points is difficult to
fathom. The majority concedes that “our decision in Davis
focused on the asymmetrical contribution limits imposed
by the Millionaire’s Amendment.” Ante, at 14. That was
because, the majority explains, Davis presented only that
issue. See ante, at 14. And yet, the majority insists (with
out explaining how this can be true), the reach of Davis is
not so limited. And in any event, the majority claims, the
burden on speech is “greater in this case than in Davis.”
——————
8 Notably,

the Court found this conclusion obvious even though an
across-the-board increase in contribution limits works to the compara
tive advantage of the non-self-financing candidate—that is, the candi
date who actually depends on contributions. Such a system puts the
self-financing candidate to a choice: Do I stop spending, or do I allow
the higher contribution limits (which will help my opponent) to kick in?
That strategic choice parallels the one that the Arizona statute forces.
See supra, at 15.

