Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

KAGAN, J., dissenting

quash others’ speech through the prohibition of a (univer
sally available) subsidy program. Petitioners are able to
convey their ideas without public financing—and they
would prefer the field to themselves, so that they can
speak free from response. To attain that goal, they ask
this Court to prevent Arizona from funding electoral
speech—even though that assistance is offered to every
state candidate, on the same (entirely unobjectionable)
basis. And this Court gladly obliges.
If an ordinary citizen, without the hindrance of a law
degree, thought this result an upending of First Amend
ment values, he would be correct. That Amendment
protects no person’s, nor any candidate’s, “right to be free
from vigorous debate.” Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. v. Public
Util. Comm’n of Cal., 475 U. S. 1, 14 (1986) (plurality
opinion). Indeed, the Amendment exists so that this de
bate can occur—robust, forceful, and contested. It is the
theory of the Free Speech Clause that “falsehood and
fallacies” are exposed through “discussion,” “education,”
and “more speech.” Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357,
377 (1927) (Brandeis, J., concurring). Or once again from
Citizens United: “[M]ore speech, not less, is the governing
rule.” 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 45). And this is no
place more true than in elections, where voters’ ability to
choose the best representatives depends on debate—on
charge and countercharge, call and response. So to invali
date a statute that restricts no one’s speech and dis
criminates against no idea—that only provides more
voices, wider discussion, and greater competition in elec
tions—is to undermine, rather than to enforce, the First
Amendment.4
——————
4 The majority argues that more speech will quickly become “less
speech,” as candidates switch to public funding. Ante, at 15, n. 7. But
that claim misunderstands how a voluntary public financing system
works. Candidates with significant financial resources will likely
decline public funds, so that they can spend in excess of the system’s

