Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

KAGAN, J., dissenting

not happen often: Most political candidates, I suspect,
have enough faith in the power of their ideas to prefer
speech on both sides of an issue to speech on neither. But
I will take on faith that the matching funds provision may
lead one or another privately funded candidate to stop
spending at one or another moment in an election. Still,
does that effect count as a severe burden on expression?
By the measure of our prior decisions—which have upheld
campaign reforms with an equal or greater impact on
speech—the answer is no.
Number one: Any system of public financing, including
the lump-sum model upheld in Buckley, imposes a similar
burden on privately funded candidates. Suppose Arizona
were to do what all parties agree it could under Buckley—
provide a single upfront payment (say, $150,000) to a
participating candidate, rather than an initial payment
(of $50,000) plus 94% of whatever his privately funded
opponent spent, up to a ceiling (the same $150,000). That
system would “diminis[h] the effectiveness” of a privately
funded candidate’s speech at least as much, and in the
same way: It would give his opponent, who presumably
would not be able to raise that sum on his own, more
money to spend. And so too, a lump-sum system may
deter speech. A person relying on private resources might
well choose not to enter a race at all, because he knows he
will face an adequately funded opponent. And even if he
——————
Pet. for Cert. in No. 10–239, p. 54. The appellate court discerned even
less evidence of any deterrent effect. Id., at 30 (“No Plaintiff . . . has
pointed to any specific instance in which she or he has declined a
contribution or failed to make an expenditure for fear of triggering
matching funds”); see also id., at 28, 31, 34. I understand the majority
to essentially concede this point (“ ‘it is never easy to prove a negative,’ ”
ante, at 20) and to say it does not matter (“we do not need empirical
evidence,” ibid.). So I will not belabor the issue by detailing the sub
stantial testimony (much more than 6 pages worth) that the matching
funds provision has not put a dent in privately funded candidates’
spending.

