4

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

Opinion of the Court 


publicly financed opponent. In an election where a pri
vately funded candidate faces multiple publicly financed
candidates, one dollar raised or spent by the privately fi
nanced candidate results in an almost one dollar increase
in public funding to each of the publicly financed candi
dates.
Once the public financing cap is exceeded, additional
expenditures by independent groups can result in dollar
for-dollar matching funds as well. Spending by independ
ent groups on behalf of a privately funded candidate, or
in opposition to a publicly funded candidate, results in
matching funds. §16–952(C). Independent expenditures
made in support of a publicly financed candidate can
result in matching funds for other publicly financed candi
dates in a race. Ibid. The matching funds provision is not
activated, however, when independent expenditures are
made in opposition to a privately financed candidate.
Matching funds top out at two times the initial authorized
grant of public funding to the publicly financed candidate.
§16–952(E).
Under Arizona law, a privately financed candidate may
raise and spend unlimited funds, subject to state-imposed
contribution limits and disclosure requirements. Contri
butions to candidates for statewide office are limited to
$840 per contributor per election cycle and contributions
to legislative candidates are limited to $410 per contribu
tor per election cycle. See §§16–905(A)(1), 16–941(B)(1);
Ariz. Dept. of State, Office of the Secretary of State, 2009–
2010 Contribution Limits (rev. Aug. 14, 2009), http://
www.azsos.gov/election/2010/Info/Campaign_Contribution
_Limits_2010.htm (all Internet materials as visited June
24, 2011, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file).
An example may help clarify how the Arizona matching
funds provision operates. Arizona is divided into 30 dis
tricts for purposes of electing members to the State’s
House of Representatives. Each district elects two repre

