Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

27

Opinion of the Court

funds provision places on speech cannot be justified in
and of themselves, either as a means of leveling the play
ing field or directly fighting corruption, the State and the
Clean Elections Institute offer another argument: They
contend that the provision indirectly serves the anticor
ruption interest, by ensuring that enough candidates
participate in the State’s public funding system, which in
turn helps combat corruption.11 See Brief for State Re
spondents 46–47; Brief for Respondent Clean Elections
Institute 47–49. We have said that a voluntary system of
“public financing as a means of eliminating the improper
influence of large private contributions furthers a signifi
cant governmental interest.” Buckley, supra, at 96. But
the fact that burdening constitutionally protected speech
might indirectly serve the State’s anticorruption interest,
by encouraging candidates to take public financing, does
not establish the constitutionality of the matching funds
provision.
We have explained that the matching funds provision
substantially burdens the speech of privately financed
candidates and independent groups. It does so to an even
greater extent than the law we invalidated in Davis. We
have explained that those burdens cannot be justified by a
desire to “level the playing field.” We have also explained
that much of the speech burdened by the matching funds
provision does not, under our precedents, pose a danger of
corruption. In light of the foregoing analysis, the fact that
the State may feel that the matching funds provision is
——————
11 The

State claims that the Citizens Clean Elections Act was passed
in response to rampant corruption in Arizona politics—elected officials
“literally taking duffle bags full of cash in exchange for sponsoring
legislation.” Brief for State Respondents 45. That may be. But, as the
candidates and independent expenditure groups point out, the corrup
tion that plagued Arizona politics is largely unaddressed by the match
ing funds regime. AFEC Brief 11, n. 4. Public financing does nothing
to prevent politicians from accepting bribes in exchange for their votes.

