14

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

Opinion of the Court 


at 24) (“the First Amendment stands against attempts to
disfavor certain subjects or viewpoints”); Federal Election
Comm’n v. Wisconsin Right to Life, Inc., 551 U. S. 449,
477, n. 9 (2007) (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.) (the argument
that speakers can avoid the burdens of a law “by changing
what they say” does not mean the law complies with the
First Amendment).6
2
Arizona, the Clean Elections Institute, and the United
States offer several arguments attempting to explain away
the existence or significance of any burden imposed by
matching funds. None is persuasive.
Arizona contends that the matching funds provision is
distinguishable from the law we invalidated in Davis. The
State correctly points out that our decision in Davis fo
cused on the asymmetrical contribution limits imposed by
the Millionaire’s Amendment. See 554 U. S., at 729. But
that is not because—as the State asserts—the reach of
that opinion is limited to asymmetrical contribution limits.
Brief for State Respondents 26–32. It is because that was
the particular burden on candidate speech we faced in
Davis. And whatever the significance of the distinction in
general, there can be no doubt that the burden on speech
is significantly greater in this case than in Davis: That
means that the law here—like the one in Davis—must be

justified by a compelling state interest. 

—————— 

6 The dissent sees “chutzpah” in candidates exercising their right not
to participate in the public financing scheme, while objecting that the
system violates their First Amendment rights. See post, at 12 (opinion
of KAGAN, J.). The charge is unjustified, but, in any event, it certainly
cannot be leveled against the independent expenditure groups. The
dissent barely mentions such groups in its analysis, and fails to address
not only the distinctive burdens imposed on these groups—as set forth
above—but also the way in which privately financed candidates are
particularly burdened when matching funds are triggered by independ
ent group speech.

