20

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

KAGAN, J., dissenting 


Federal Election Comm’n, 554 U. S. 724—and it pegs
everything on that decision. See ante, at 9–12. But
Davis relies on principles that fit securely within our
First Amendment law and tradition—most unlike today’s
opinion.
As the majority recounts, Davis addressed the constitu
tionality of federal legislation known as the Millionaire’s
Amendment. Under that provision (which applied in elec
tions not involving public financing), a candidate’s expen
diture of more than $350,000 of his own money activated a
change in applicable contribution limits. Before, each
candidate in the race could accept $2,300 from any donor;
but now, the opponent of the self-financing candidate
could accept three times that much, or up to $6,900 per
contributor. So one candidate’s expenditure of personal
funds on campaign speech triggered discriminatory con
tribution restrictions favoring that candidate’s opponent.
Under the First Amendment, the similarity between
Davis and this case matters far less than the differences.
Here is the similarity: In both cases, one candidate’s cam
paign expenditure triggered . . . something. Now here are
the differences: In Davis, the candidate’s expenditure
triggered a discriminatory speech restriction, which Con
gress could not otherwise have imposed consistent with
the First Amendment; by contrast, in this case, the candi
date’s expenditure triggers a non-discriminatory speech
subsidy, which all parties agree Arizona could have pro
vided in the first instance. In First Amendment law, that
difference makes a difference—indeed, it makes all the
difference. As I have indicated before, two great fault
lines run through our First Amendment doctrine: one,
between speech restrictions and speech subsidies, and the
other, between discriminatory and neutral government
action. See supra, at 10–11. The Millionaire’s Amend
ment fell on the disfavored side of both divides: To reiter
ate, it imposed a discriminatory speech restriction. The

