18

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

Opinion of the Court 


the burden placed on speakers by the disclosure and
disclaimer requirements we recently upheld in Citizens
United than to direct restrictions on candidate and inde
pendent expenditures. See 611 F. 3d, at 525; Brief for
State Respondents 21, 35; Brief for Respondent Clean
Elections Institute 16–17. This analogy is not even close.
A political candidate’s disclosure of his funding resources
does not result in a cash windfall to his opponent, or affect
their respective disclosure obligations.
The State and the Clean Elections Institute assert that
the candidates and independent expenditure groups have
failed to “cite specific instances in which they decided not
to raise or spend funds,” Brief for State Respondents 11;
see id., at 11–12, and have “failed to present any reliable
evidence that Arizona’s triggered matching funds deter
their speech,” Brief for Respondent Clean Elections Insti
tute 6; see id., at 6–8. The record in this case, which we
must review in its entirety, does not support those asser
tions. See Bose Corp. v. Consumers Union of United
States, Inc., 466 U. S. 485, 499 (1984).
That record contains examples of specific candidates
curtailing fundraising efforts, and actively discouraging
supportive independent expenditures, to avoid triggering
matching funds. See, e.g., App. 567 (Rick Murphy), 578
(Dean Martin); App. to Pet. for Cert. in No. 10–239, at 329
(John McComish), 300 (Tony Bouie). The record also
includes examples of independent expenditure groups
deciding not to speak in opposition to a candidate, App.
569 (Arizona Taxpayers Action Committee), or in support
of a candidate, id., at 290 (Club for Growth), to avoid
triggering matching funds. In addition, Dr. David Primo,
an expert involved in the case, “found that privately fi
nanced candidates facing the prospect of triggering match
ing funds changed the timing of their fundraising activi
ties, the timing of their expenditures, and, thus, their
overall campaign strategy.” Reply Brief for Petitioner

