Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

stitutionally penalized their speech and burdened their
ability to fully exercise their First Amendment rights.
The District Court agreed that this provision “consti
tute[d] a substantial burden” on the speech of privately
financed candidates because it “award[s] funds to a [pri
vately financed] candidate’s opponent” based on the pri
vately financed candidate’s speech. App. to Pet. for Cert.
in No. 10–239, p. 69 (internal quotation marks omitted).
That court further held that “no compelling interest [was]
served by the” provision that might justify the burden
imposed. Id., at 69, 71. The District Court entered a
permanent injunction against the enforcement of the
matching funds provision, but stayed implementation of
that injunction to allow the State to file an appeal. Id., at
76–81.
The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit stayed the
District Court’s injunction pending appeal. Id., at 84–85.4
After hearing the case on the merits, the Court of Appeals
reversed the District Court. The Court of Appeals con
cluded that the matching funds provision “imposes only a
minimal burden on First Amendment rights” because it
“does not actually prevent anyone from speaking in the
first place or cap campaign expenditures.” 611 F. 3d 510,
513, 525 (2010). In that court’s view, any burden imposed
by the matching funds provision was justified because the
provision “bears a substantial relation to the State’s im
portant interest in reducing quid pro quo political corrup
tion.” Id., at 513.5
——————
4 Judge

Bea dissented from the stay of the District Court’s injunction,
stating that the Arizona public financing system unconstitutionally
prefers publicly financed candidates and that under the matching funds
scheme “it makes no more sense for [a privately financed candidate or
independent expenditure group] to spend money now than for a poker
player to make a bet if he knows the house is going to match his bet for
his opponent.” App. to Pet. for Cert. in No. 10–239, p. 87; see id., at 89.
5 One judge concurred, relying primarily on his view that “the Arizona

