30

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

KAGAN, J., dissenting 


Assume a State has two reasons to pass a statute affecting
speech. It wants to reduce corruption. But in addition,
it wishes to “level the playing field.” Under our First
Amendment law, the interest in preventing corruption is
compelling and may justify restraints on speech. But the
interest in “leveling the playing field,” according to well
established precedent, cannot support such legislation.13
So would this statute (assuming it met all other constitu
tional standards) violate the First Amendment?
The answer must be no. This Court, after all, has never
said that a law restricting speech (or any other constitu
tional right) demands two compelling interests. One is
enough. And this statute has one: preventing corruption.
So it does not matter that equalizing campaign speech is
an insufficient interest. The statute could violate the First
Amendment only if “equalizing” qualified as a forbidden
motive—a motive that itself could annul an otherwise
constitutional law. But we have never held that to be so.
And that should not be surprising: It is a “fundamental
principle of constitutional adjudication,” from which we
have deviated only in exceptional cases, “that this Court
will not strike down an otherwise constitutional statute on
the basis of an alleged illicit legislative motive.” United
States v. O’Brien, 391 U. S. 367, 383 (1968); see id., at 384
(declining to invalidate a statute when “Congress had the
undoubted power to enact” it without the suspect motive);
accord, Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC, 512
——————
13 I note that this principle relates only to actions restricting speech.
See Buckley, 424 U. S., at 48–49 (rejecting the notion “that government
may restrict the speech of some . . . to enhance the relative voice of
others”). As previously explained, speech subsidies stand on a different
constitutional footing, see supra, at 10–11; so long as the government
remains neutral among viewpoints, it may choose to assist the speech
of persons who might not otherwise be heard. But here I am assuming
for the sake of argument that the Clean Elections Act imposes the kind
of restraint on expression requiring that the State show a compelling
interest.

