Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

25

KAGAN, J., dissenting

they [had] governmental jurisdiction;” favored “a small
number of wealthy special interests” over “the vast major
ity of Arizona citizens;” and “[c]os[t] average taxpayers
millions of dollars in the form of subsidies and special
privileges for campaign contributors.” §16–940(B).10 The
State, appearing before us, has reiterated its important
anti-corruption interest. The Clean Elections Act, the
State avers, “deters quid pro quo corruption and the ap
pearance of corruption by providing Arizona candidates
with an option to run for office without depending on
outside contributions.” Brief for State Respondents 19.
And so Arizona, like many state and local governments,
has implemented public financing on the theory (which
this Court has previously approved, see supra, at 5), that
the way to reduce political corruption is to diminish the
role of private donors in campaigns.11
And that interest justifies the matching funds provision
——————
10 The legislative findings also echo what the Buckley Court found
true of public financing—that it “encourage[s] citizen participation in
the political process” and “promote[s] freedom of speech” by enhancing
the ability of candidates to “communicat[e] to voters.” §§16–940(A), (B).
11 The majority briefly suggests that the State’s “austere contribution
limits” lessen the need for public financing, see ante, at 26, but provides
no support for that dubious claim. As Arizona and other jurisdictions
have discovered, contribution limits may not eliminate the risk of
corrupt dealing between candidates and donors, especially given the
widespread practice of bundling small contributions into large pack
ages. See Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 31. For much this
reason, Buckley upheld both limits on contributions to federal candi
dates and public financing of presidential campaigns. See 424 U. S., at
23–38, 90–108. Arizona, like Congress, was “surely entitled to con
clude” that contribution limits were only a “partial measure,” id., at 28,
and that a functional public financing system was also necessary to
eliminate political corruption. In stating otherwise, the Court substi
tutes its judgment for that of Arizona’s voters, contrary to our practice
of declining to “second-guess a . . . determination as to the need for
prophylactic measures where corruption is the evil feared.” Federal
Election Comm’n v. National Right to Work Comm., 459 U. S. 197, 210
(1982).

