Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
burden. Second, in elections where there are multiple publicly fi
nanced candidates—a frequent occurrence in Arizona—the matching
funds provision can create a multiplier effect. Each dollar spent by
the privately funded candidate results in an additional dollar of fund
ing to each of that candidate’s publicly financed opponents. Third,
unlike the law in Davis, all of this is to some extent out of the pri
vately financed candidate’s hands. Spending by independent expen
diture groups to promote a privately financed candidate’s election
triggers matching funds, regardless whether such support is welcome
or helpful. Those funds go directly to the publicly funded candidate
to use as he sees fit. That disparity in control—giving money directly
to a publicly financed candidate, in response to independent expendi
tures that cannot be coordinated with the privately funded candi
date—is a substantial advantage for the publicly funded candidate.
The burdens that matching funds impose on independent expendi
ture groups are akin to those imposed on the privately financed can
didates themselves. The more money spent on behalf of a privately
financed candidate or in opposition to a publicly funded candidate,
the more money the publicly funded candidate receives from the
State. The effect of a dollar spent on election speech is a guaranteed
financial payout to the publicly funded candidate the group opposes,
and spending one dollar can result in the flow of dollars to multiple
candidates. In some ways, the burdens imposed on independent
groups by matching funds are more severe than the burdens imposed
on privately financed candidates. Independent groups, of course, are
not eligible for public financing. As a result, those groups can only
avoid matching funds by changing their message or choosing not to
speak altogether. Presenting independent expenditure groups with
such a choice—trigger matching funds, change your message, or do
not speak—makes the matching funds provision particularly burden
some to those groups and certainly contravenes “the fundamental
rule of protection under the First Amendment, that a speaker has the
autonomy to choose the content of his own message.” Hurley v. IrishAmerican Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston, Inc., 515 U. S.
557, 573. Pp. 10–14.
(3) The arguments of Arizona, the Clean Elections Institute, and
amicus United States attempting to explain away the existence or
significance of any burden imposed by matching funds are unpersua
sive.
Arizona correctly points out that its law is different from the law
invalidated in Davis, but there is no doubt that the burden on speech
is significantly greater here than in Davis. Arizona argues that the
provision actually creates more speech. But even if that were the
case, only the speech of publicly financed candidates is increased by

