Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

23

Opinion of the Court

in terms of candidate resources. The clearest evidence is
of course the very operation of the provision: It ensures
that campaign funding is equal, up to three times the
initial public funding allotment. The text of the Citizens
Clean Elections Act itself confirms this purpose. The sta
tutory provision setting up the matching funds regime
is titled “Equal funding of candidates.” Ariz. Rev. Stat.
Ann. §16–952 (West Supp. 2010). The Act refers to the
funds doled out after the Act’s matching mechanism is
triggered as “equalizing funds.” See §§16–952(C)(4), (5).
And the regulations implementing the matching funds
provision refer to those funds as “equalizing funds” as
well. See Citizens Clean Elections Commission, Ariz.
Admin. Rule R2–20–113.
Other features of the Arizona law reinforce this under
standing of the matching funds provision. If the Citizens
Clean Election Commission cannot provide publicly fi
nanced candidates with the moneys that the matching
funds provision envisions because of a shortage of funds,
the statute allows a publicly financed candidate to “accept
private contributions to bring the total monies received by
the candidate” up to the matching funds amount. Ariz.
Rev. Stat. Ann. §16–954(F) (West 2006). Limiting contri
butions, of course, is the primary means we have upheld to
combat corruption. Buckley, 424 U. S., at 23–35, 46–47.
Indeed the State argues that one of the principal ways
that the matching funds provision combats corruption is
by eliminating the possibility of any quid pro quo between
private interests and publicly funded candidates by elimi
nating contributions to those candidates altogether. See
Brief for State Respondents 45–46. But when confronted
with a choice between fighting corruption and equalizing
speech, the drafters of the matching funds provision chose
the latter. That significantly undermines any notion that
the “Equal funding of candidates” provision is meant to
serve some interest other than an interest in equalizing

