16

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

Opinion of the Court 


We have rejected government efforts to increase the
speech of some at the expense of others outside the cam
paign finance context. In Miami Herald Publishing Co. v.
Tornillo, 418 U. S. 241, 244, 258 (1974), we held unconsti
tutional a Florida law that required any newspaper assail
ing a political candidate’s character to allow that candi
date to print a reply. We have explained that while the
statute in that case “purported to advance free discussion,
. . . its effect was to deter newspapers from speaking out in
the first instance” because it “penalized the newspaper’s
own expression.” Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. v. Public Util.
Comm’n of Cal., 475 U. S. 1, 10 (1986) (plurality opinion).
Such a penalty, we concluded, could not survive First
Amendment scrutiny. The Arizona law imposes a similar
penalty: The State grants funds to publicly financed can
didates as a direct result of the speech of privately fi
nanced candidates and independent expenditure groups.
The argument that this sort of burden promotes free and
robust discussion is no more persuasive here than it was
in Tornillo.8
Arizona asserts that no “candidate or independent ex
penditure group is ‘obliged personally to express a mes
sage he disagrees with’ ” or “ ‘required by the government
to subsidize a message he disagrees with.’ ” Brief for State
——————
8 Along the same lines, we have invalidated government mandates
that a speaker “help disseminate hostile views” opposing that speaker’s
message. Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. v. Public Util. Comm’n of Cal., 475
U. S. 1, 14 (1986) (plurality opinion). In Pacific Gas, we found a public
utility commission order forcing a utility company to disseminate in its
billing envelopes views that the company opposed ran afoul of the First
Amendment. That case is of course distinguishable from the instant
case on its facts, but the central concern—that an individual should not
be compelled to “help disseminate hostile views”—is implicated here as
well. Ibid. If a candidate uses his own money to engage in speech
above the initial public funding threshold, he is forced to “help dissemi
nate hostile views” in a most direct way—his own speech triggers the
release of state money to his opponent.

