2

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

KAGAN, J., dissenting 


public financing program that gives candidates a fixed
public subsidy if they refrain from private fundraising.
But these measures do not work. Individuals who “bun
dle” campaign contributions become indispensable to
candidates in need of money. Simple disclosure fails to
prevent shady dealing. And candidates choose not to
participate in the public financing system because the
sums provided do not make them competitive with their
privately financed opponents. So the State remains af
flicted with corruption.
Voters of the second State, having witnessed this fail
ure, take an ever-so-slightly different tack to cleaning up
their political system. They too enact contribution limits
and disclosure requirements. But they believe that the
greatest hope of eliminating corruption lies in creating an
effective public financing program, which will break can
didates’ dependence on large donors and bundlers. These
voters realize, based on the first State’s experience, that
such a program will not work unless candidates agree to
participate in it. And candidates will participate only if
they know that they will receive sufficient funding to run
competitive races. So the voters enact a program that
carefully adjusts the money given to would-be officehold
ers, through the use of a matching funds mechanism, in
order to provide this assurance. The program does not
discriminate against any candidate or point of view, and
it does not restrict any person’s ability to speak. In fact,
by providing resources to many candidates, the program
creates more speech and thereby broadens public debate.
And just as the voters had hoped, the program accom
plishes its mission of restoring integrity to the political
system. The second State rids itself of corruption.
A person familiar with our country’s core values—our
devotion to democratic self-governance, as well as to “un
inhibited, robust, and wide-open” debate, New York Times
Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U. S. 254, 270 (1964)—might expect

