Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

KAGAN, J., dissenting

view, public financing represented the “only way . . . [to]
eliminate reliance on large private contributions” and its
attendant danger of corruption, while still ensuring that a
wide range of candidates had access to the ballot. Id., at 5
(emphasis deleted).
We declared the presidential public financing system con
stitutional in Buckley v. Valeo. Congress, we stated, had
created the program “for the ‘general welfare’—to reduce the deleterious influence of large contributions on
our political process,” as well as to “facilitate communica
tion by candidates with the electorate, and to free candi
dates from the rigors of fundraising.” 424 U. S., at 91. We
reiterated “that public financing as a means of eliminat
ing the improper influence of large private contributions
furthers a significant governmental interest.” Id., at 96.
And finally, in rejecting a challenge based on the First
Amendment, we held that the program did not “restrict[]
or censor speech, but rather . . . use[d] public money to
facilitate and enlarge public discussion and participation
in the electoral process.” Id., at 92–93. We declared this
result “vital to a self-governing people,” and so concluded
that the program “further[ed], not abridge[d], pertinent
First Amendment values.” Id., at 93. We thus gave state
and municipal governments the green light to adopt public
financing systems along the presidential model.
But this model, which distributes a lump-sum grant at
the beginning of an election cycle, has a significant weak
ness: It lacks a mechanism for setting the subsidy at a
level that will give candidates sufficient incentive to par
ticipate, while also conserving public resources. Public
financing can achieve its goals only if a meaningful num
ber of candidates receive the state subsidy, rather than
raise private funds. See 611 F. 3d 510, 527 (CA9 2010) (“A
public financing system with no participants does nothing
to reduce the existence or appearance of quid pro quo
corruption”). But a public funding program must be vol

