8

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

KAGAN, J., dissenting 


approach to the challenge that bedevils all public financ
ing schemes: fixing the amount of the subsidy. For each
electoral contest, the system calibrates the size of the
grant automatically to provide sufficient—but no more
than sufficient—funds to induce voluntary participation.
In effect, the program’s designers found the Goldilocks
solution, which produces the “just right” grant to ensure
that a participant in the system has the funds needed to
run a competitive race.
As the Court explains, Arizona’s matching funds ar
rangement responds to the shortcoming of the lump-sum
model by adjusting the public subsidy in each race to re
flect the expenditures of a privately financed candidate
and the independent groups that support him. See Ariz.
Rev. Stat. Ann. §16–940 et seq. (West 2006 and West
Supp. 2010). A publicly financed candidate in Arizona
receives an initial lump-sum to get his campaign off the
ground. See §16–951 (West 2006). But for every dollar his
privately funded opponent (or the opponent’s supporters)
spends over the initial subsidy, the publicly funded candi
date will—to a point—get an additional 94 cents. See
§16–952 (West Supp. 2010). Once the publicly financed
candidate has received three times the amount of the
initial disbursement, he gets no further public funding, see
ibid., and remains barred from receiving private contribu
tions, no matter how much more his privately funded
opponent spends, see §16–941(A).
This arrangement, like the lump-sum model, makes use
of a pre-set amount to provide financial support to partici
pants. For example, all publicly funded legislative candi
dates collect an initial grant of $21,479 for a general elec
tion race. And they can in no circumstances receive more
than three times that amount ($64,437); after that, their
privately funded competitors hold a marked advantage.
But the Arizona system improves on the lump-sum model
in a crucial respect. By tying public funding to private

