Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

The State argues that the matching funds provision
actually results in more speech by “increas[ing] debate
about issues of public concern” in Arizona elections and
“promot[ing] the free and open debate that the First
Amendment was intended to foster.” Brief for State Re
spondents 41; see Brief for Respondent Clean Elections
Institute 55. In the State’s view, this promotion of First
Amendment ideals offsets any burden the law might
impose on some speakers.
Not so. Any increase in speech resulting from the Ari
zona law is of one kind and one kind only—that of publicly
financed candidates. The burden imposed on privately
financed candidates and independent expenditure groups
reduces their speech; “restriction[s] on the amount of
money a person or group can spend on political communi
cation during a campaign necessarily reduces the quantity
of expression.” Buckley, 424 U. S., at 19. Thus, even if the
matching funds provision did result in more speech by
publicly financed candidates and more speech in general,
it would do so at the expense of impermissibly burdening
(and thus reducing) the speech of privately financed
candidates and independent expenditure groups. This
sort of “beggar thy neighbor” approach to free speech—
“restrict[ing] the speech of some elements of our society in
order to enhance the relative voice of others”—is “wholly
foreign to the First Amendment.” Id., at 48–49.7
——————
7 The

dissent also repeatedly argues that the Arizona matching funds
regime results in “more political speech,” post, at 9 (emphasis in origi
nal); see post, at 2, 10, 13, 16, 32, but—given the logic of the dissent’s
position—that is only as a step to less speech. If the matching funds
provision achieves its professed goal and causes candidates to switch to
public financing, post, at 25, 30, there will be less speech: no spending
above the initial state-set amount by formerly privately financed
candidates, and no associated matching funds for anyone. Not only
that, the level of speech will depend on the State’s judgment of the
desirable amount, an amount tethered to available (and often scarce)
state resources.

