Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

23

KAGAN, J., dissenting

Ante, at 14. But for reasons already stated, that is not
so. The burden on speech in Davis—the penalty that cam
paign spending triggered—was the discriminatory contri
bution restriction, which Congress could not otherwise
have imposed. By contrast, the thing triggered here is a
non-discriminatory subsidy, of a kind this Court has ap
proved for almost four decades. Maybe the majority is
saying today that it had something like this case in mind
all the time. But nothing in the logic of Davis controls this
decision.9
III
For all these reasons, the Court errs in holding that the
government action in this case substantially burdens
speech and so requires the State to offer a compelling in
terest. But in any event, Arizona has come forward with
just such an interest, explaining that the Clean Elections
Act attacks corruption and the appearance of corruption in
the State’s political system. The majority’s denigration of
this interest—the suggestion that it either is not real or
does not matter—wrongly prevents Arizona from protect
ing the strength and integrity of its democracy.
A
Our campaign finance precedents leave no doubt: Pre
venting corruption or the appearance of corruption is a
——————
9 The majority also briefly relies on Miami Herald Publishing Co. v.
Tornillo, 418 U. S. 241 (1974), but that case is still wider of the mark.
There, we invalidated a law compelling newspapers (by threat of
criminal sanction) to print a candidate’s rejoinder to critical commen
tary. That law, we explained, overrode the newspaper’s own editorial
judgment and forced the paper both to pay for and to convey a message
with which it disagreed. See id., at 256–258. An analogy might be if
Arizona forced privately funded candidates to purchase their opponents’
posters, and then to display those posters in their own campaign offices.
But that is very far from this case. The Arizona statute does not
require petitioners to disseminate or fund any opposing speech; nor
does it in any way associate petitioners with that speech.

