6

ARIZONA FREE ENTERPRISE CLUB’S FREEDOM 

CLUB PAC v. BENNETT

KAGAN, J., dissenting 


untary to pass constitutional muster, because of its re
strictions on contributions and expenditures. See Buckley,
424 U. S., at 57, n. 65, 95. And candidates will choose to
sign up only if the subsidy provided enables them to run
competitive races. If the grant is pegged too low, it puts
the participating candidate at a disadvantage: Because he
has agreed to spend no more than the amount of the sub
sidy, he will lack the means to respond if his privately
funded opponent spends over that threshold. So when
lump-sum grants do not keep up with campaign expendi
tures, more and more candidates will choose not to par
ticipate.1 But if the subsidy is set too high, it may impose
an unsustainable burden on the public fisc. See 611 F. 3d,
at 527 (noting that large subsidies would make public
funding “prohibitively expensive and spell its doom”). At
the least, hefty grants will waste public resources in the
many state races where lack of competition makes such
funding unnecessary.
The difficulty, then, is in finding the Goldilocks solu
tion—not too large, not too small, but just right. And
this in a world of countless variables—where the amount
of money needed to run a viable campaign against a pri
——————
1 The problem is apparent in the federal system. In recent years, the
number of presidential candidates opting to receive public financing
has declined because the subsidy has not kept pace with spending
by privately financed candidates. See Corrado, Public Funding of
Presidential Campaigns, in The New Campaign Finance Sourcebook
180, 200 (A. Corrado, T. Mann, D. Ortiz, & T. Potter eds. 2005). The
last election cycle offers a stark example: Then-candidate Barack
Obama raised $745.7 million in private funds in 2008, Federal Election
Commission, 2008 Presidential Campaign Financial Activity Summa
rized, June 8, 2009, online at http://www.fec.gov/press/press2009/
20090608PresStat.shtml, in contrast with the $105.4 million he could
have received in public funds, see Federal Election Commission, Presi
dential Election Campaign Fund, online at http://www.fec.gov/press/
bkgnd/fund.shtml (all Internet materials as visited June 24, 2011, and
available in Clerk of Court’s case file).

