(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ALVAREZ, COOK COUNTY STATE’S ATTORNEY v. 

SMITH ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–351.

Argued October 14, 2009—Decided December 8, 2009

Illinois law provides for forfeiture of movable personal property used to
facilitate a drug crime, permits police to seize the property without a
warrant, and allows the State to keep the property nearly five
months before beginning judicial forfeiture proceedings. Respon
dents, six individuals who had cars and cash seized under that law,
brought this federal civil rights action, claiming that the failure of
the State to provide a speedy postseizure hearing violated the federal
Due Process Clause. The District Court dismissed the case based on
Circuit precedent, but, on appeal, the Seventh Circuit departed from
that precedent and ruled for respondents. This Court granted certio
rari to review the Seventh Circuit’s due process determination, but
at oral argument the Court learned that all of the actual property
disputes between the parties had been resolved.
Held:
1. The case is moot. The Constitution permits this Court to decide
legal questions only in the context of actual “Cases” or “Controver
sies,” Art. III, §2, and an actual controversy must exist at all stages of
review, not just when the complaint is filed, Preiser v. Newkirk, 422
U. S. 395, 401. Here there is no longer any actual controversy re
garding ownership or possession of the underlying property. There is
no claim for damages before this Court; there is no properly certified
class or dispute over class certification; and this case does not fit
within the category of cases that are “capable of repetition” while
“evading review.” Only an abstract dispute about the law remains.
Pp. 4–6.
2. The judgment below is vacated. In moot cases, this Court nor
mally vacates the lower court judgment, which clears the path for re

