2

ALVAREZ v. SMITH
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

and valuable to the legal community as a whole. They are
not merely the property of private litigants . . . .’ ” Id., at
26 (quoting Izumi Seimitsu Kogyo Kabushiki Kaisha v.
U. S. Philips Corp., 510 U. S. 27, 40 (1993) (STEVENS, J.,
dissenting)). Hence, we will typically vacate a judgment
when the party seeking review has been “frustrated by the
vagaries of circumstance” or “when mootness results from
unilateral action of the party who prevailed below.” Ban
corp, 513 U. S., at 25. But we will typically decline to
vacate when “the party seeking relief from the judgment
below caused the mootness by voluntary action,” id., at 24,
including action taken in good faith and in conjunction
with the opposing party. Even when “respondent agreed
to [a] settlement that caused the mootness,” it remains
“petitioner’s burden, as the party seeking relief from the
status quo of the appellate judgment, to demonstrate not
merely equivalent responsibility for the mootness, but
equitable entitlement to the extraordinary remedy of
vacatur.” Id., at 26. “[M]ootness by reason of settlement
does not justify vacatur of a judgment under review.” Id.,
at 29.
In my view, the Court has misapplied these principles.
To be sure, the “settlement” between the parties in this
case might be distinguished from the more conventional
settlement reached by the parties in Bancorp. And we
have no evidence to suggest that petitioner returned re
spondents’ property prior to the conclusion of our review
with the purpose or expectation of manufacturing moot
ness. Nevertheless, petitioner’s decision to return the
automobiles when it did appears to have been legally
discretionary, as was the “compromise settlement” that it
reached with respondent Waldo regarding her cash, ante,
at 8. In light of petitioner’s purposive and voluntary
action that caused the mootness—along with its failure to
alert us to the relevant facts or to explain why vacatur
would serve the public interest—I believe it has failed to

