Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

7

Opinion of the Court

we would not do so. We said that, “[w]here mootness
results from settlement” rather than “ ‘happenstance,’ ” the
“losing party has voluntarily forfeited his legal remedy . . .
[and] thereby surrender[ed] his claim to the equitable
remedy of vacatur.” 513 U. S., at 25. The plaintiffs, point­
ing out that the State’s Attorney agreed to return all three
cars and some of the cash, claim that, with respect to at
least four of the plaintiffs, this case falls within Bancorp’s
“settlement” exception.
In our view, however, this case more closely resembles
mootness through “happenstance” than through “settle­
ment”—at least the kind of settlement that the Court
considered in Bancorp. Bancorp focused upon a bank­
ruptcy-related dispute that involved a legal question
whether a bankruptcy court could lawfully confirm a
debtor’s Chapter 11 reorganization plan if the plan relied
upon what the debtor said was a special exception (called
the “new value exception”) to ordinary creditor priority
rules. Id., at 19–20. The parties contested that legal issue
in the Bankruptcy Court; they contested it in an appeal of
the Bankruptcy Court’s order to the Federal District
Court; they contested it in a further appeal to the Court of
Appeals; and eventually they contested it in this Court.
Id., at 20. While the case was pending here, the parties
settled their differences in the Bankruptcy Court (the
court where the case originated)—including their differ­
ences on this particular contested legal point. Ibid. They
agreed upon a reorganization plan, which they said would
constitute a settlement that mooted the federal case. Ibid.
Recognizing that the reorganization plan that the Bank­
ruptcy Judge confirmed in the case amounted to a settle­
ment that mooted the case, this Court did not vacate the
lower court’s judgment. The Court’s reason for leaving the
lower court’s judgment in place was that mootness was not
a result of “the vagaries of circumstance.” Id., at 25.
Rather the party seeking review had “caused the mootness

