Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

STEVENS, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–6338
_________________

PERCY DILLON, PETITIONER v. UNITED STATES
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT

[June 17, 2010] 


JUSTICE STEVENS, dissenting.
When sentencing petitioner Percy Dillon for crack co­
caine-related offenses in 1993, the District Court stated
that the punishment Dillon received was “entirely too high
for the crime [he] committed.” App. 13. Bound by a sen­
tencing regime that was mandatory at the time, the judge
had no choice but to sentence Dillon to 322 months of
imprisonment—nearly 27 years behind bars. The judge
later explained that, were it within his discretion, he
would have sentenced Dillon to 5 years of imprisonment.
Id., at 62. Had Dillon been sentenced after our decision in
United States v. Booker, 543 U. S. 220 (2005), the judge
would have had that discretion. Instead, the District
Court was compelled to mete out a punishment that it
believed to be grossly disproportionate to the offense and,
therefore, “greater than necessary” to meet the goals of
our criminal justice system, 18 U. S. C. §3553(a).
The punishment Dillon received was so high, in part,
because at the time of his conviction our drug laws pun­
ished crack cocaine offenses 100 times more severely than
powder cocaine offenses. In 2007, as the Court explains,
see ante, at 3, the United States Sentencing Commission
(Commission) proposed a partial fix to this disparity,
lowering its Guidelines Manual1 ranges for crack cocaine
——————
1 The

Guidelines Manual itself contains two types of provisions:


2

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

offenses to a 20:1 ratio. See United States Sentencing
Commission, Guidelines Manual Supp. App. C, Amdt. 706
(Nov. 2009) (USSG) (effective Nov. 1, 2007). Pursuant to
its congressional mandate, see 28 U. S. C. §994(u), the
Commission made this change retroactive for those indi­
viduals, like Dillon, who were still serving sentences for
crack cocaine offenses. See USSG Supp. App. C, Amdt.
713 (effective Mar. 3, 2008).
Although Dillon does not have a constitutional right to
obtain the benefit of the Commission’s change, it is undis­
puted that he has a statutory right to do so. Under 18
U. S. C. §3582(c)(2), a federal prisoner “who has been
sentenced to a term of imprisonment based on a sentenc­
ing range that has subsequently been lowered” by the
Commission may seek a sentence reduction, but only after
the court “consider[s] the factors set forth in section
3553(a),” and only “if such a reduction is consistent with
applicable policy statements issued by the Sentencing
Commission.” Dillon sought such relief. His 322-month
sentence was reduced to a 270-month sentence—still 17½
years more than the sentencing judge thought necessary
as an initial matter.
In his §3582(c)(2) proceeding, Dillon alleged that his
circumstances warranted an additional reduction in light
of the fact that his sentence was “greater than necessary”
to effectuate the goals of our sentencing system, §3553(a).
He also emphasized that he has been a model inmate
during his 17 years in federal prison. Once again, how­
ever, the District Court felt that its hands were tied, this
——————
guidelines, see 28 U. S. C. §994(a)(1), and policy statements, see
§944(a)(2). I use “Guidelines” in this opinion to refer to both the guide­
lines as described in §994(a)(1), as well as more generally to all of the
provisions in the Guidelines Manual. The section numbers of both
types of provisions are enumerated identically within the Commission’s
Guidelines Manual, but their effects, as discussed in more detail herein,
are different.


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., dissenting

time because USSG §1B1.10(b)(2) purports to place a
mandatory limit on the extent of any sentence reduction
that a court may order pursuant to §3582(c)(2). And so,
giving the Commission’s statement the effect of law, the
District Court denied Dillon further relief.
Today, the Court holds that in this one limited nook of
sentencing law, the Commission retains the power to bind
judges that we struck down in Booker. In my view, the
Court’s decision to treat the Commission’s policy state­
ment as a mandatory command rather than an advisory
recommendation is unfaithful to Booker. It is also on
dubious constitutional footing, as it permits the Commis­
sion to exercise a barely constrained form of lawmaking
authority. And it is manifestly unjust. I would therefore
hold that in the context of a §3582(c)(2) sentence modifica­
tion proceeding, the District Court may consider, but is
not bound by, any applicable policy statements promul­
gated by the Commission. In other words, I would apply
Booker’s remedial holding to §3582(c)(2) proceedings.
I
Although I did not join JUSTICE BREYER’s remedial
opinion for the Court in Booker, it is nevertheless clear to
me that its scope applies to §3582(c)(2) proceedings.
As an initial matter, it is of no moment that the Booker
Court did not excise any portion of §3582 when crafting its
remedy. At the time, there was nothing in §3582(c)(2)—
separate and apart from the Guidelines’ general manda­
tory nature—that would have limited the District Court’s
discretion in a §3582(c)(2) proceeding. There was, conse­
quently, nothing that needed excising. Relief under
§3582(c)(2) is available if it is “consistent with” the Com­
mission’s related policy statement. And when we decided
Booker, the particular policy statement at issue,


4

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

§1B1.10(b), had no explicit binding effect.2
Prior to our decision in Booker, the Guidelines were
mandatory only by virtue of congressional mandate, and
not by virtue of Commission decree. See 18 U. S. C.
§3553(b)(1). Following Booker, the Commission’s policy
statement in §1B1.10 took effect in March 2008. That
statement, I will explain more fully in Part II, infra, is
now the only source of binding authority in §3582(c)(2)
proceedings, as it purports to have the effect of reinstating
a mandatory Guidelines regime within the context of a
sentence modification proceeding. It is now the Commis­
sion’s policy statement, and not an explicit congressional
mandate, that makes the Guidelines ranges binding under
§3582(c)(2).
As a matter of textual analysis, divorced from judicial
precedent, it is certainly reasonable for the Court to find
that the Commission can set mandatory limits on sentence
reductions under §3582(c)(2). But it is a mistake, in my
view, to take such a narrow approach to the question
presented by this case. The Court has turned a blind eye
to the fundamental sea-change that was our decision in
Booker.
——————
2 From 1989 to 1994, the policy statement in §1B1.10 also contained
what could be described fairly as a limitation on the “amount” of an
available sentence reduction. See USSG §1B1.10(c)(2) (Nov. 1990) (“[A]
reduction in a defendant’s term of imprisonment . . . may, in no event,
exceed the number of months by which the maximum of the guideline
range applicable to the defendant . . . has been lowered”). In 1994, as
part of Amendment 504 to the Guidelines Manual, the Commission
deleted this provision, explaining that this “rather complex subsection”
was an “unnecessary restriction on the court’s consideration of a
revised sentence.” USSG, App. C, Amdt. 504 (effective Nov. 1, 1994).
Later, in an “Application Note,” the Commission indicated that “the
amended guideline range” “limit[s] the extent to which an eligible
defendant’s sentence may be reduced.” Id., Amdt. 548 (effective Nov. 1,
1997). The bottom line is that it was the Guidelines’ mandatory nature,
and not the effect of a policy statement, that made the Guidelines
ranges binding in an 18 U. S. C. §3582(c)(2) proceeding.


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., dissenting

It is useful to put Booker in context. During the delib­
erations that led to the enactment of the Sentencing Re­
form Act of 1984, 18 U. S. C. §3551 et seq., 28 U. S. C.
§991, et seq., Congress considered—and rejected—a pro­
posal that would have made the Guidelines only advisory.
See Mistretta v. United States, 488 U. S. 361, 387 (1989).
Ultimately, the decision to authorize the Commission to
issue rules that “have the force and effect of laws” gener­
ated a serious debate over the constitutionality of the
Commission itself. See id., at 413 (SCALIA, J., dissenting).
While we resolved that constitutional debate in the
Commission’s favor in Mistretta, it became apparent dur­
ing the next two decades that the mandatory character of
the Guidelines, coupled with the practice of judicial fact­
finding, not only produced a host of excessively severe
sentences but also created an unacceptable risk of depriv­
ing defendants of long-settled constitutional protections.
See, e.g., Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U. S. 466, 490
(2000) (holding that “[o]ther than the fact of a prior convic­
tion, any fact that increases the penalty for a crime beyond
the prescribed statutory maximum must be submitted to a
jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt”); Ring v.
Arizona, 536 U. S. 584, 602 (2002) (holding that “[i]f a
State makes an increase in a defendant’s authorized pun­
ishment contingent on the finding of a fact, that fact—no
matter how the State labels it—must be found by a jury
beyond a reasonable doubt”); Blakely v. Washington, 542
U. S. 296, 304 (2004) (holding that “[w]hen a judge inflicts
punishment that the jury’s verdict alone does not allow,
the jury has not found all the facts ‘which the law makes
essential to the punishment,’ and the judge exceeds his
proper authority” (citation omitted)).
Over a series of cases, we arrived at our present under­
standing of determinate sentencing schemes: They are
constitutionally infirm if they mandate enhanced punish­
ments based on facts found only by a judge by a prepon­


6

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

derance of the evidence. By restoring the principles out­
lined in landmark cases such as In re Winship, 397 U. S.
358 (1970), Apprendi and its progeny fundamentally
changed the landscape of modern sentencing law,3 and in
so doing paved the way for Booker.
The Booker Court considered whether the Sentencing
Reform Act’s mandatory determinate sentencing scheme
infringed the jury-trial right. In the first of two opinions,
we held that the two applications of the Guidelines before
us violated the Sixth Amendment because the sentencing
judge in each case imposed a more severe sentence than
the facts found by the jury warranted. 543 U. S., at 235.
We recognized that if the Guidelines “could be read as
merely advisory provisions that recommended, rather
than required, the selection of particular sentences in
response to differing sets of facts, their use would not
implicate the Sixth Amendment.” Id., at 233. But we
rejected such an advisory reading of the Guidelines, as
they then stood. Id., at 234. To satisfy constitutional
guarantees, we explained that any fact that has the effect
of increasing the mandatory range must be “established by
a plea of guilty or . . . must be admitted by the defendant
or proved to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id., at
244. Otherwise, the sentence would violate the Sixth (and
the Fifth) Amendment.
In light of the potential for mandatory Guidelines sen­
tences to violate the Constitution, the Court had to elect
among possible remedies. As I explained in my dissent
from the Court’s second Booker opinion (the remedial one),
there was no need to find any constitutional infirmity in
any provision of the Sentencing Reform Act to provide
——————
3 See United States v. O’Brien, 560 U. S. ___, ___, and n. 1 (2010)
(STEVENS, J., concurring) (slip op., at 1–2, and n. 1) (discussing a
significant sentencing policy trend in 1970’s and 1980’s, involving a
shift to mandatory, determinate sentencing schemes based on judicial
factfinding by a preponderance standard).


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

STEVENS, J., dissenting

relief for the defendants in Booker, or to apply the Guide­
lines in a mandatory fashion in future cases—so long as
juries were allowed to decide the factual issues raised by
requests for enhanced sentences. See id., at 272–303
(STEVENS, J., dissenting in part). Notwithstanding the
fact that the Court could have retained the Guidelines’
mandatory prescriptive effect in a manner consonant with
the jury-trial right, the Court nevertheless adopted a
broad remedy that recast the Guidelines in their entirety.
That change did not respond to a determination that the
mandatory Guidelines regime itself violated the Sixth
Amendment. Neither my opinion for the Court with re­
spect to our constitutional holding, nor JUSTICE BREYER’s
remedial opinion, contained any such determination.
Instead, the Court’s decision to make the Guidelines dis­
cretionary rested entirely on the majority’s judgment that
Congress would have preferred that result to either an
increase in the jury’s role in making factual findings or a
decision invalidating the entire regime. Id., at 249. When
Congress was wrestling with the Sentencing Reform Act of
1984, it did not foresee Apprendi, Ring, and Blakely. The
Court made a policy-based prediction that, were Congress
to have had such foresight, it would not have elected—in
any respect—a mandatory sentencing regime.
The Court openly acknowledged this methodology:
“In essence, in what follows, we explain both (1) why
Congress would likely have preferred the total invali­
dation of the Act to an Act with the Court’s Sixth
Amendment requirement engrafted onto it, and (2)
why Congress would likely have preferred the excision
of some of the Act, namely the Act’s mandatory lan­
guage, to the invalidation of the entire Act. That is to
say, in light of today’s holding, we compare maintain­
ing the Act as written with jury factfinding added (the
dissenters’ proposed remedy) to the total invalidation


8

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

of the statute, and conclude that Congress would have
preferred the latter. We then compare our own rem­
edy to the total invalidation of the statute, and con­
clude that Congress would have preferred our rem­
edy.” 543 U. S., at 249.
Thus, rather than “maintaining the Act as written with
jury factfinding added,” ibid., the Court opted to alter the
Commission’s power in a more fundamental way: It did
away with a fixed, determinate sentencing regime based
on mandatory Guidelines. Henceforth the Commission
would guide and advise federal courts in the exercise of
their sentencing authority. But the Commission would
not bind.
The Court held as follows:
“We answer the question of remedy by finding the
provision of the federal sentencing statute that makes
the Guidelines mandatory, 18 U. S. C. §3553(b)(1)
(Supp. IV), incompatible with today’s constitutional
holding. We conclude that this provision must be sev­
ered and excised, as must one other statutory section,
§3742(e) (2000 ed. and Supp. IV), which depends upon
the Guidelines’ mandatory nature. So modified, the
federal sentencing statute, see Sentencing Reform Act
of 1984 (Sentencing Act), as amended, 18 U. S. C.
§3551 et seq., 28 U. S. C. §991 et seq., makes the
Guidelines effectively advisory. It requires a sentenc­
ing court to consider Guidelines ranges, see 18 U.S.C.
§3553(a)(4) (Supp. IV), but it permits the court to tai­
lor the sentence in light of other statutory concerns as
well, see §3553(a).” Id., at 245–246.
The only fair way to read the Booker majority’s remedy
is that it eliminated the mandatory features of the Guide­
lines—all of them.4 It is true that the Court explicitly
——————
4 See

also, e.g., Booker, 543 U. S., at 246 (opinion for the Court by


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

STEVENS, J., dissenting

severed only two specific statutory sections. But there
was not, at the time, even a whisper of a suggestion that
any other mandatory provision existed or that any should
be preserved.5
Were it not clear from the foregoing discussion of Booker
itself, our post-Booker decisions have repeatedly empha­
sized the completely advisory nature of the Guidelines.
See, e.g., Cunningham v. California, 549 U. S. 270, 286–
287 (2007) (“Under the system described in JUSTICE
BREYER’s opinion for the Court in Booker, judges would no
longer be tied to the sentencing range indicated in the
Guidelines. But they would be obliged to ‘take account of’
that range along with the sentencing goals Congress
enumerated in the [Sentencing Reform Act of 1984] at 18
U. S. C. §3553(a)”); Rita v. United States, 551 U. S. 338, 

351 (2007) (“[T]he sentencing court does not enjoy the

benefit of a legal presumption that the Guidelines sen­

tence should apply”); Gall v. United States, 552 U. S. 38, 

—————— 

BREYER, J.) (“The other approach, which we now adopt, would (through 

severance and excision of two provisions) make the Guidelines system
advisory while maintaining a strong connection between the sentence
imposed and the offender’s real conduct—a connection important to the
increased uniformity of sentencing that Congress intended its Guide­
lines system to achieve” (emphasis added)); id., at 254 (“Congress would
have preferred no mandatory system to the system the dissenters
envisage”); id., at 264 (“Finally, the Act without its ‘mandatory’ provi­
sion and related language remains consistent with Congress’ initial and
basic sentencing intent. . . . The system remaining after excision, while
lacking the mandatory features that Congress enacted, retains other
features that help to further these objectives” (emphasis added)); ibid.
(“The district courts, while not bound to apply the Guidelines, must
consult those Guidelines and take them into account when sentencing”
(emphasis added)).
5 It seems, however, that at least one additional provision of the Sen­
tencing Reform Act should have been excised, but was not, in order to
accomplish the Court’s remedy. Section §3742(g)(2), prescribes that the
Guidelines are to have binding effect upon a remand for a new sentence
in a direct appeal: “The court shall not impose a sentence outside the
applicable guidelines range . . . .”


10

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

46 (2007) (“As a result of our decision [in Booker], the
Guidelines are now advisory, and appellate review of
sentencing decisions is limited to determining whether
they are ‘reasonable’ ”); Kimbrough v. United States, 552
U. S. 85, 101 (2007) (“In sum, while the statute still re­
quires a court to give respectful consideration to the
Guidelines, Booker permits the court to tailor the sentence
in light of other statutory concerns as well” (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted)); Spears v. United
States, 555 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (per curiam) (slip op., at 5)
(“[W]e now clarify that district courts are entitled to reject
and vary categorically from the crack-cocaine Guidelines
based on a policy disagreement with those Guidelines”).6
Our case law is quite clear: The Guidelines no longer have
mandatory and binding effect, and the sentencing court
may not presume them correct or reasonable when it
considers an individual sentencing decision.
In light of this history, the limited nature of the
§3582(c)(2) proceeding is beside the point. Nothing turns
——————
6 See also Spears, 555 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 6) (“[D]istrict courts
are entitled to vary from the crack-cocaine guidelines in a mine-run
case where there are no ‘particular circumstances’ that would otherwise
justify a variance from the Guidelines’ sentencing range”); Kimbrough,
552 U. S., at 101 (“The Government acknowledges that the Guidelines
‘are now advisory’ and that, as a general matter, ‘courts may vary [from
Guidelines ranges] based solely on policy considerations, including
disagreements with the Guidelines’ ”); id., at 113–114 (SCALIA, J.,
concurring) (“[T]he district court is free to make its own reasonable
application of the §3553(a) factors, and to reject (after due considera­
tion) the advice of the Guidelines. If there is any thumb on the scales;
if the Guidelines must be followed even where the district court’s
application of the §3553(a) factors is entirely reasonable; then the
‘advisory’ Guidelines would, over a large expanse of their application,
entitle the defendant to a lesser sentence but for the presence of certain
additional facts found by judge rather than jury. This, as we said in
Booker, would violate the Sixth Amendment”); Gall, 552 U. S., at 50
(sentencing court “may not presume that the Guidelines range is
reasonable”).


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

STEVENS, J., dissenting

on whether the proceeding is best understood as a resen­
tencing or as a sentence modification procedure. Nor is it
relevant that Dillon has no right to be present at a pro­
ceeding under §3582(c)(2), ante, at 9–10, or that a sentence
reduction proceeding may not be “constitutionally com­
pelled,” ante, at 10–11. The Court’s general reliance on
Booker in this case, see ante, at 11–12, is odd because the
Booker Court explained its belief “that Congress would not
have authorized a mandatory system in some cases and a
nonmandatory system in others,” 543 U. S., at 266. Yet,
this is precisely the system the Court approves today.
Approaching this case as the Booker Court did, one must
ask whether it is likely that a fully informed Congress
would have created this kind of Commission: one endowed
with vast responsibilities for drafting advisory Guidelines
and policy statements, but also with the tiniest sliver of
lawmaking power to tie the hands of a district court’s
exercise of grace under §3582(c)(2). I think the answer is
obvious.
II
My understanding of the scope of the Booker remedy is
reinforced by an additional consideration: The Commis­
sion’s policy statement, to which the Court today allows
binding effect, may exceed the scope of the Commission’s
powers. No one disputes that Congress could have re­
jected the Court’s remedial holding in Booker if it so
wished. Instead, it is the Commission that has rejected
Booker’s application to §3582(c)(2), by purporting to give
mandatory force to its own policy statement. That action
presses the bounds of the authority Congress validly gave
the Commission in 1984, for it is not clear that Congress
has authorized the Commission to create this type of
policy statement or to circumvent a decision such as
Booker on its own accord.
We have been quite permissive of congressional delega­


12

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

tions in our separation-of-powers jurisprudence. “So long
as Congress ‘shall lay down by legislative act an intelligi­
ble principle to which the person or body authorized to
[exercise the delegated authority] is directed to conform,
such legislative action is not a forbidden delegation of
legislative power.’ ” Mistretta, 488 U. S., at 372 (quoting J.
W. Hampton, Jr., & Co. v. United States, 276 U. S. 394,
409 (1928)). Few legislative actions have been found to
offend this principle. 488 U. S., at 373.
More than 20 years ago, the Court upheld the constitu­
tionality of the Commission’s work from just such an
attack in Mistretta. We took sanctuary then in the fact
that, in enacting the Sentencing Reform Act and creating
the Commission, Congress had “se[t] forth more than
merely an ‘intelligible principle’ or minimal standard” for
the exercise of the Commission’s discretion, and had “ ‘ex­
plain[ed] what the Commission should do and how it
should do it, and se[t] out specific directives to govern
particular situations.’ ” Id., at 379. To this end, Congress
gave the Commission clear “goals,” id., at 374; specified
the “ ‘purposes of sentencing,’ ” ibid.; “prescribed the spe­
cific tool”—“the guidelines system”—the Commission was
to use in its work, ibid.; set limits on the appropriate
Guidelines ranges the Commission was to promulgate, id.,
at 375; and set forth “seven factors” and “11 factors,”
respectively, to assist the Commission with “its formula­
tion of offense categories” and its establishment of “catego­
ries of defendants” for sentencing purposes, id., at 375–
376.
We explained that “although Congress granted the
Commission substantial discretion in formulating guide­
lines, in actuality it legislated a full hierarchy of punish­
ment—from near maximum imprisonment, to substantial
imprisonment, to some imprisonment, to alternatives—
and stipulated the most important offense and offender
characteristics to place defendants within these catego­


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

STEVENS, J., dissenting

ries.” Id., at 377. There was, accordingly, no “concern of
encroachment and aggrandizement that has animated our
separation-of-powers jurisprudence and aroused our vigi­
lance against the ‘hydraulic pressure inherent within each
of the separate Branches to exceed the outer limits of its
power.’ ” Id., at 382 (quoting INS v. Chadha, 462 U. S.
919, 951 (1983)).
JUSTICE SCALIA disagreed. He argued forcefully that
Congress’ creation of the Commission was itself “a pure
delegation of legislative power” and therefore an abuse of
separation of powers. 488 U. S., at 420 (dissenting opin­
ion). “Congress’ commitment of such broad policy respon­
sibility to any institution,” in JUSTICE SCALIA’s view,
violated a core principle of our governing system: that
“basic policy decisions governing society are to be made by
the Legislature.” Id., at 415.
Although we acknowledged in Mistretta that Congress
had permissibly granted substantial powers to the Com­
mission to set law and policy on sentencing generally, we
had no occasion to consider whether it had spoken with
sufficient clarity respecting the Commission’s authority to
prescribe sentence reductions. That question has now
reared its head, and in my view it raises separation-of­
powers concerns significantly more difficult than those
presented in Mistretta.
First, I am doubtful that Congress authorized the type
of “policy statement” we find in USSG §1B1.10. Congress
instructed the Commission to promulgate “general policy
statements regarding application of the guidelines or any
other aspect of sentencing or sentence implementation
that in the view of the Commission would further the
purposes set forth in section 3553(a)(2) of title 18 . . .
including the appropriate use of,” inter alia, various “sen­
tence modification provisions.” 28 U. S. C. §994(a)(2). As
envisioned by the Sentencing Reform Act, the role of policy
statements was merely to inform the judge’s exercise of


14

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

discretion within an otherwise mandatory Guidelines
regime. See S. Rep. No. 98–225, p. 167 (1983) (explaining
that the “sentencing judge is required to take the policy
statements into account in deciding what sentence to
impose,” but that departure from a policy statement is not
itself grounds for appeal); see also id., at 166 (identifying
potential use of policy statement to “offe[r] recommenda­
tions as to how” to “trea[t]” “in the future” “existing dis­
parities which are not adequately cured by the guide­
lines”).
Congress reserved binding effect for the
Commission’s “guidelines,” which the Commission was to
promulgate pursuant to a distinct statutory provision,
§994(a)(1). The Sentencing Reform Act thus drew a basic
distinction: Guidelines would bind; policy statements
would advise.
Given that distinction, it is significant that Congress
elected to use the Commission’s policy-statement power to
set limitations on the sentencing modification procedures,
rather than invoking the Commission’s Guidelines power.
The Commission is now trying to use a policy statement to
have the mandatory effect of a guideline—inverting the
Sentencing Reform Act’s original design. I find no provi­
sion within §994(a)(2) that would authorize the Commis­
sion, via a policy statement, to create a binding Guidelines
regime. With respect to the type of action the Commission
has taken, there is certainly no provision that even ap­
proximates the detailed prescriptions on the Commission’s
power we considered in Mistretta.
Moreover, not only does nothing in §994(a)(2) appear to
authorize this type of policy statement, but there is also
nothing that appears to authorize the Commission, by its
own fiat, to limit the effect of our decision in Booker.
How to respond to Booker, and whether to retain man­
datory Guidelines, was a decision for Congress—and
Congress alone. Booker expressly left “[t]he ball” “in
Congress’ court,” explaining that “[t]he National Legisla­


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

STEVENS, J., dissenting

ture is equipped to devise and install, long term, the sen­
tencing system, compatible with the Constitution, that
Congress judges best for the federal system of justice.”
543 U. S., at 265; see also supra, at 3–4. That Congress
has declined to disturb Booker in the five years since its
issuance demonstrates not only that JUSTICE BREYER is
more clairvoyant than I am, but also that Congress has
acquiesced to a discretionary Guidelines regime. Con­
gress’ silence has deprived the Commission of any “intelli­
gible principle[s],” J. W. Hampton, 276 U. S., at 409, by
which to steer its consideration of the appropriate re­
sponse to Booker. And without such guidance, I fear that,
in promulgating USSG §1B1.10, the Commission may
have made the type of “basic policy decisio[n]” that
JUSTICE SCALIA reminded us is the province of the Legis­
lature, Mistretta, 488 U. S., at 415 (dissenting opinion).
Prior to the Commission’s 2008 overhaul of its policy
statement in §1B1.10—and even under the applicable
policy statement in effect when the Court decided
Booker—nothing in the Guidelines, see supra, at 3–4, and
n. 2, as understood in light of Booker, would have pre­
cluded Dillon from obtaining the type of discretionary
sentence reduction he now seeks (assuming he was so
eligible). Standing in Dillon’s way presently are two pro­
visions of §1B1.10, revised contemporaneously with the
Commission’s decision to make its amendments to the
crack cocaine offense Guidelines retroactive.
There can be no question that the purpose of the Com­
mission’s amendments to its policy statement in §1B1.10
was to circumvent the Booker remedy. See Brief for Fed­
eral Public and Community Defenders et al. as Amici
Curiae 3–9 (describing history of promulgation of current
version of §1B1.10). To this end, the Commission dis­
claimed that proceedings under §3582(c)(2) “constitute a
full resentencing of the defendant.” USSG §1B1.10(a)(3).
And it advised that “the court shall not reduce the defen­


16

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

dant’s term of imprisonment under 18 U. S. C. §3582(c)(2)
and this policy statement to a term that is less than the
minimum of the amended guideline range determined”
under the new range. §1B1.10(b)(2)(A). In other words,
the Commission told federal courts that its Guidelines, at
least in §3582(c)(2) proceedings, remain mandatory and
binding.
Had the Commission taken it upon itself, by issuance of
a general policy statement, to make its Guidelines manda­
tory but subject to jury findings in all cases, we would
either strike down such an act on separation-of-powers
grounds or apply the same remedy we did in Booker to
render the statement advisory. It makes little difference,
in my view, that the Commission has only rejected the
Booker remedy in this single procedure. The encroach­
ment is the same, if only more subtle. Any legislative
response to Booker was a decision for Congress to make—
not the Commission.
III
Separate from the arguments noted above, the Court’s
decision today may reflect a concern that a contrary hold­
ing would discourage the Commission from issuing retro­
active amendments to the Guidelines, owing to a fear of
burdening the district courts. In what might be described
as a subtle threat, the Commission has highlighted this
point in its amicus brief supporting the Government. The
brief explains that holding for Dillon would introduce
uncertainty into the Commission’s “assessments about the
effects of retroactivity decisions,” making these decisions
“very difficult” and “weigh[ing] against making Guideline
amendments retroactive in the future.” Brief for United
States Sentencing Commission as Amicus Curiae 21.7
——————
7 The Government’s argument along these lines is less subtle: “To
forbid the Sentencing Commission from limiting the scope of Section
3582(c)(2) sentence reduction proceedings to the scope of the amend­


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

STEVENS, J., dissenting

Even if that explanation were accurate, it should not
influence our assessment of the legal question before us.
The Commission has a statutory obligation to review and
amend Guidelines ranges. 28 U. S. C. §994(o). And Con­
gress has commanded that the Commission “shall specify
in what circumstances” an amendment is retroactive,
indicating that most, if not all, substantial amendments
are to receive some type of retroactive effect. §994(u); see
also S. Rep. No. 98–225, at 180 (“It should be noted that
the Committee does not expect that the Commission will
recommend
adjusting
existing
sentences
under
[§3582(c)(2)] when guidelines are simply refined in a way
that might cause isolated instances of existing sentences
falling above the old guidelines or when there is only a
minor downward adjustment in the guidelines”). In other
words, while Congress has left the retroactivity decision to
the Commission’s discretion, it has done so with the pre­
sumption that some form of retroactive relief is appropri­
ate when a Guidelines amendment is nontrivial.8 I cannot
——————
ments themselves would inevitably discourage the Sentencing Commis­
sion from ever authorizing sentence reductions.” Brief for United
States 37.
8 As the Court notes, I do agree that §994(u) authorizes the Commis­
sion to determine the retroactive effect of sentence reductions. Ante, at
13. I understand §994(u) as directing the Commission to prescribe the
retroactive effect, if any, of its Guidelines amendments. The power to
make retroactivity determinations is meaningfully different, however,
from the other power the Court claims for the Commission. In granting
the former power, Congress has instructed the Commission to perform
a gate keeping function by determining which individuals are eligible
for relief pursuant to §3582(c)(2). By contrast, the other power the
Court claims for the Commission today is the type of mandatory sen­
tencing authority at issue in Booker. Contrary to the Court’s conclu­
sion, the Commission after Booker does not have the power to bind the
district court in setting a particular sentence.
I also cannot accept the Court’s broad understanding of the power
the Commission derives from §994(u), see ante, at 8, because it suffers
from the same delegation concerns I discussed above, see supra, 11–16.


18

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

accept that the Commission would ignore its obligations,
and would withhold retroactive application of a Guidelines
reduction, simply because a judge would have discretion
to enter a below-Guidelines sentence in a §3582(c)(2)
proceeding.
Undoubtedly, discretionary application of the Guidelines
in §3582(c)(2) proceedings would impose a greater burden
on the district courts. Such a process would require case­
specific evaluations rather than the rote, two-level reduc­
tions the Commission envisioned when it made Amend­
ment 706 retroactive. But it is important to remember
that §3582(c)(2) already requires the district court to
consider the §3553(a) factors when it determines whether
to grant a reduction, as well as the extent of the reduction.
And any additional consideration of evidence proffered to
justify a downward departure need not create a great deal
of work. Indeed, it need not create any particular adver­
sarial process at all: The Commission could simply advise
the district courts to review paper submissions, including
the original presentence report and objections, as well as
any new submissions. By now, courts are intimately
familiar with our post-Booker sentencing regime and the
discretionary application of the §3553(a) factors.
The facts of Dillon’s case show why any additional bur­
den on the courts caused by applying Booker’s remedial
holding likely pales in comparison to the benefit of achiev­
ing more tailored, proportionate sentences for those indi­
viduals currently serving terms of imprisonment that
exceed what is “necessary” to meet the goals of our sen­
tencing system, §3553(a). Dillon was 23 years old when he
was sentenced to nearly 27 years’ imprisonment for his
——————
I do not think the Commission’s authority encompasses the ability to
promulgate binding Guidelines via policy statements. And this matter
is separate from its power to promulgate Guidelines—a power unaf­
fected by our decision in Booker.


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

STEVENS, J., dissenting

drug crimes. His attorney urged the District Court to
enter a below-Guidelines sentence because of, inter alia,
the gross disparity between sentences for crack and pow­
der cocaine offenses. App. 8–9. It would take another 14
years for this Court to agree, finally, in Kimbrough, 552
U. S. 85, that sentencing courts could consider this unjust
disparity.
But the District Court, constrained by the then­
mandatory Guidelines, increased Dillon’s sentence based
on judge-found facts by more than 10 years over the sen­
tence authorized by the jury’s verdict. See Brief for Peti­
tioner 2, and n. 2. The court could only lament: “I person­
ally don’t believe that you should be serving 322 months.
But I feel I am bound by those Guidelines and I don’t feel
there is any grounds for . . . depart[ing] from those Guide­
lines.” App. 12–13. The court acknowledged: “I don’t say
to you that these penalties are fair. I don’t think they are
fair.” Id., at 13. The court also implored Dillon to make
something of the hand he had dealt himself: “I hope that
while you are in prison . . . that you will take some time to
consider the direction that your life will take when you do
return to society. . . . It is only through people like you if
you spread the word that other young men of your age will
hesitate to get involved in [dealing drugs].” Ibid.
Dillon has done just that. He has participated in out­
reach efforts in the communities in which he has been
imprisoned, doing extensive work with adolescents to steer
them away from a life of drugs and crime. Brief for Peti­
tioner 5–6. Working with two universities, he has facili­
tated the initiation of an African-American Studies pro­
gram at Hunters Point Family, a Bay Area organization
devoted to assisting at-risk youth. He has also played a
large role in initiating a similar program at his prison
facility. Berkeley’s Prison Outreach Coordinator stated to
the District Court that “without [Dillon’s] insight and
advice, our project would not have succeeded and grown


20

DILLON v. UNITED STATES
STEVENS, J., dissenting

the way it has.” Id., at 6 (internal quotation marks omit­
ted). Dillon has also prepared himself for a successful life
once he returns to society. He has obtained his general
equivalency diploma (GED), taken vocational classes in
property management, and has job prospects awaiting him
upon release. Id., at 6–7.
The Government concedes that Dillon has undertaken
“significant institutional rehabilitation and education.”
Brief for United States 11. The Court of Appeals acknowl­
edged that “[i]f Booker did apply in proceedings pursuant
to §3582, Dillon would likely be an ideal candidate for a
non-Guidelines sentence.” 572 F. 3d 146, 147 (CA3 2009).
And yet, now, the Government will continue to spend more
than $25,000 a year to keep Dillon behind bars until his
release date.9
Given the circumstances of his case, I can scarcely think
of a greater waste of this Nation’s precious resources. Cf.
Barber v. Thomas, ante, at ___ (2010) (slip op., at 1)
(KENNEDY, J., dissenting) (“And if the only way to call
attention to the human implications of this case is to
speak in terms of economics, then it should be noted that
the Court’s interpretation comes at a cost to the taxpayers
of untold millions of dollars”). Dillon’s continued impris­
onment is a truly sad example of what I have come to view
as an exceptionally, and often mindlessly, harsh federal
punishment scheme.
IV
Neither the interests of justice nor common sense lends
any support to the decision to preserve the single sliver of
the Commission’s lawmaking power that the Court resur­
——————
9 See Hanlon, Hecker, & Gopstein, Expanding the Zones: A Modest
Proposal to Increase the Use of Alternatives to Incarceration in Federal
Sentencing, 24 ABA Criminal Justice, No. 4, pp. 26, 28 (Winter 2010)
(“In fiscal year 2008, it cost $25,894.50 to incarcerate an offender in a
federal Bureau of Prisons facility for 12 months”).


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

STEVENS, J., dissenting

rects today. I had thought Booker dismantled the manda­
tory Guidelines regime. The Court ought to finish the job.
I respectfully dissent.

