(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CSX TRANSPORTATION, INC. v. ALABAMA DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–520.

Argued November 10, 2010—Decided February 22, 2011

Petitioner (CSX) is an interstate rail carrier that operates, and pays
taxes, in Alabama. The State imposes sales and use taxes on rail
roads when they purchase or consume diesel fuel, but exempts their
main competitors—interstate motor and water carriers. CSX sued
respondents, the Alabama Department of Revenue and its Commis
sioner (Alabama), claiming that this tax scheme discriminates
against railroads in violation of the Railroad Revitalization and
Regulatory Reform Act of 1976 (4–R Act or Act), which bars four
forms of discriminatory taxation, 49 U. S. C. §11501(b). Three of the
delineated prohibitions deal with property taxes, §§11501(b)(1)–(3),
and the fourth is a catch-all provision that forbids a State to
“[i]mpose another tax that discriminates against a rail carrier,”
§11501(b)(4). The District Court dismissed CSX’s suit as not cogni
zable under the 4–R Act on the basis of this Court’s decision in De
partment of Revenue of Ore. v. ACF Industries, Inc., 510 U. S. 332,
and the Eleventh Circuit affirmed.
Held: CSX may challenge Alabama’s sales and use taxes under
§11501(b)(4). Pp. 5–19.
(a) CSX is challenging “another tax” within subsection (b)(4)’s plain
meaning. The Act does not define “tax.” Thus, this Court looks to the
word’s ordinary definition, which is expansive. A State seeking to
raise revenue may choose among multiple forms of taxation on prop
erty, income, transactions, or activities. “[A]nother tax” is thus best
understood to encompass any tax a State might impose, on any asset
or transaction, except the property taxes already addressed in sub
sections (b)(1)–(3). There is no reason to interpret subsection (b)(4)
as applying only to the gross-receipts taxes that some States imposed


2

CSX TRANSPORTATION, INC. v. ALABAMA DEPT. OF 

REVENUE
Syllabus 





in lieu of property taxes at the time of the Act’s passage. Moreover,
CSX’s complaint, contrary to the Eleventh Circuit’s apparent view,
does protest Alabama’s imposition of taxes on its fuel. The exemp
tions the State has given may play a central role in CSX’s argument,
but the complaint’s essential subject remains the taxes imposed.
The key question thus becomes whether a tax might be said to “dis
criminate” against a railroad under subsection (b)(4) where the State
has granted exemptions from the tax to other entities (here, the rail
road’s competitors). Because the statute does not define “discrimi
nates,” the Court again looks to the term’s ordinary meaning, which
is to fail to treat all persons equally when no reasonable distinction
can be found between those favored and those not favored. To charge
one group of taxpayers a 2% rate and another group a 4% rate, if the
groups are the same in all relevant respects, is to discriminate
against the latter. That discrimination continues if the favored
group’s rate goes down to 0%, which is all an exemption is. To say
that such a tax does not “discriminate” is to adopt a definition at odds
with the word’s natural meaning. This Court has repeatedly recog
nized that tax schemes with exemptions may be discriminatory. See,
e.g., Davis v. Michigan Department of Treasury, 489 U. S. 803. And
even Department of Revenue of Ore. v. ACF Industries, Inc., 510 U. S.
332, on which the Eleventh Circuit heavily relied in dismissing CSX’s
suit, made clear that tax exemptions “could be a variant of tax dis
crimination.” Id., at 343. In addition, the statute’s prohibition of dis
crimination applies regardless whether the favored entities are inter
state or local. The distinctions drawn in the statute are not between
interstate and local actors, as Alabama suggests, but between rail
roads and all other actors, whether interstate or local. Pp. 5–10.
(b) ACF Industries does not require a different result. There, the
Court held that railroads could not contest property tax exemptions
under subsection (b)(4), reasoning that it would be illogical to permit
such a challenge when subsections (b)(1)–(3)—the §11501 provisions
specifically addressing property taxes—permitted States to grant
property tax exemptions. Such a reading would “subvert the statu
tory plan” and “contravene the ‘elementary canon of construction that
a statute should be interpreted so as not to render one part inopera
tive.’ ” 510 U. S., at 340. Contrary to Alabama’s argument, this
structural analysis does not apply here. Subsections (b)(1)–(3) spe
cifically allow property tax exemptions, but neither they nor any
other provision of the Act speaks to non-property exemptions like
those at issue here. Because Congress has expressed no intent to
“allo[w] the States to grant” non-property exemptions, id., at 343,
reading subsection (b)(4) to encompass them poses no danger of “nul
lify[ing]” a congressional policy choice or otherwise “subverting the


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
statutory plan,” id., at 340, 343. Alabama’s other efforts to borrow
from ACF Industries’ analysis similarly fail. Also unavailing is Ala
bama’s argument that, even if ACF Industries’ reasoning is limited to
property tax exemptions, its holding must extend to non-property tax
exemptions in order to prevent inconsistent or anomalous results in
the treatment of property and non-property taxes. Pp. 11–18.
350 Fed. Appx. 318, reversed and remanded.
KAGAN, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined. THOMAS, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, J.,
joined.

