No. 09–520 [February 22, 2011]  JUSTICE THOMAS, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG joins, dissenting. I agree with the Court that Alabama’s sales and use taxes are “another tax” within the meaning of 49 U. S. C. §11501(b)(4) and that a scheme of tax exemptions is capa ble of making a tax discriminatory. Ante, at 6–8. As a general matter, therefore, I agree that Alabama’s sales and use taxes could potentially violate subsection (b)(4), and would do so if their exemptions “discriminate[d] against a rail carrier.” §11501(b)(4). The majority’s hold ing stops there, see ante, at 10, n. 8, but I would go on. I would hold that, to violate §11501(b)(4), a tax exemp tion scheme must target or single out railroads by com parison to general commercial and industrial taxpayers. Although parts of the majority’s discussion appear to question this standard, see ante, at 8–11, the limited holding does not foreclose it. Because CSX cannot prove facts that would satisfy that standard in this case, I would affirm. In my view, “another tax that discriminates against a rail carrier” in §11501(b)(4) means a tax—or tax exemp tion scheme—that targets or singles out railroads as
compared to other commercial and industrial taxpayers. That reading settles the ambiguity in the word “discrimi nates” by reference to the rest of the statute and gives subsection (b)(4) a reach consistent with the problem the statute addressed. “Discriminates,” standing alone, is a flexible word. Compare, e.g., Clackamas Gastroenterology Associates, purpose of [the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 is] ridding the Nation of the evil of discrimination”), with opinion) (“[U]nconstitutional discrimination occurs only when the electoral system is arranged in a manner that will consistently degrade a voter’s or a group of voters’ 330, 338 (2007) (“In this context, ‘discrimination’ simply means differential treatment of in-state and out-of-state economic interests that benefits the former and burdens the latter” (some internal quotation marks omitted)). Even though “discriminate” has a general legal meaning relating to differential treatment, its precise contours still Comm’n of New York City, 463 U. S. 582, 592 (1983) (opin ion of White, J.) (“The language of Title VI on its face is ambiguous; the word ‘discrimination’ is inherently so”); (opinion of Powell, J.) (“The concept of ‘discrimination’ . . . is susceptible of varying interpretations”). Here, the word “discriminates” in subsection (b)(4) is ambiguous as to the appropriate comparison class. Burlington Northern R. Co. 1993) (“To be discriminatory, a tax must be discriminatory as compared to someone else”). It is also ambiguous as to
what type of difference is required to violate the statute— e.g., any distinction, singling out, or something in between. Therefore, I would use the context to resolve the mean ing of the word as it is used in subsection (b)(4). See Rob interpretation focuses on “the language itself, the specific context in which that language is used, and the broader context of the statute as a whole”). We did precisely that 510 U. S. 332 (1994), where we similarly faced a question about the meaning of subsection (b)(4). In that case, our structural analysis of §11501(b) was “central to the inter pretation of subsection (b)(4).” Id., at 340. The structure of §11501(b) is straightforward. Subsec tions (b)(1) through (3) instruct that States may not assess railroad property at “a higher ratio to the true market value . . . than . . . other commercial and industrial prop erty,” 49 U. S. C. §11501(b)(1), collect taxes based on those inflated assessments, §11501(b)(2), or set property tax rates for railroad property higher than that “applicable to commercial and industrial property” in the same assess ment jurisdiction, §11501(b)(3). Subsection (b)(4) then forbids “[i]mpos[ing] another tax that discriminates against a rail carrier.” I would look to subsections (b)(1) through (3) to deter mine the meaning of “discriminates” in (b)(4). As many lower courts have correctly recognized, subsection (b)(4) is a residual clause, naturally appurtenant to subsections (b)(1) through (3).1 Moreover, the phrase “another tax that discriminates” in subsection (b)(4) suggests that the previ
ous subsections all describe taxes that “discriminate” in a manner similar to that forbidden by subsection (b)(4). See Guardianship Estate of Keffeler, 537 U. S. 371, 384 (2003) (reading the phrase “other legal process” restrictively because “where general words follow specific words in a statutory enumeration, the general words are construed to embrace only objects similar in nature to those objects enumerated by the preceding specific words” (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)). Subsections (b)(1) through (3) each prohibit particular types of state taxes that target or single out railroad prop erty for less favorable tax treatment than other commer cial and industrial property. First, the “discriminat[ion]” addressed in subsections (b)(1) through (3) can only be described as taxes that target or single out railroad prop erty. Those subsections specifically concern taxes that affect railroad property differently from the way they affect a larger class of comparative taxpayers’ property. See §§11501(b)(1)–(3); cf. ante, at 9 (“[E]ach of subsection (b)’s provisions proscribes taxes that specially burden a rail carrier’s property or otherwise discriminate against a rail carrier” (emphasis deleted)). Second, each subsection refers to the same comparison class—other “commercial and industrial property.” §§11501(b)(1)–(3). I think it follows that, under subsection (b)(4), a tax “discriminates against a rail carrier” if it similarly targets railroads for tax treatment less favorable than other com mercial and industrial taxpayers. As we found in ACF Industries, the structure of the statute provides a light by which to navigate the meaning of subsection (b)(4). The background of §11501(b) also supports this under standing of subsection (b)(4). In previous cases, we have identified the problem that made subsection (b) necessary.
At the time the Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act (4–R Act) was enacted, it was clear that “rail roads ‘ “are easy prey for State and local tax assessors” in that they are “nonvoting, often nonresident, targets for local taxation,” who cannot easily remove themselves from the locality.’ ” ACF Industries, supra, at 336 (quoting 480 U. S. 123, 131 (1987) (quoting, in turn, S. Rep. No. 91– 630, p. 3 (1969))). The “temptation to excessively tax nonvoting, nonresident businesses . . . made federal legis lation in this area necessary.” Western Air Lines, supra, at Comm’n, 481 U. S. 454, 457 (1987) (noting that “[a]fter an extended period of congressional investigation, Congress concluded that ‘railroads are over-taxed by at least $50 million each year’ ” (quoting H. R. Rep. No. 94–725, p. 78 (1975))). In other words, §11501(b) responded primarily to what its text describes—property taxes that soaked the rail roads. The obvious rationale supporting subsections (b)(1) through (3) is that the “way to prevent tax discrimination against the railroads is to tie their tax fate to the fate of a large and local group of taxpayers.” Kansas City Southern 441 (CA9 1996). In this way, subsections (b)(1) through (3) establish a political check on the taxation of rail roads. States cannot impose excessive property taxes on the nonvoting, nonresident railroads without imposing the same taxes more generally on voting, resident local businesses. Absent any indication that subsection (b)(4), as a resid ual clause, has any different aim, it is reasonable to con clude that it shares the same one as subsections (b)(1) through (3). See, e.g., Kansas City Southern R. Co., supra, at 373–374 (Congress included subsection (b)(4) “to ensure
that states did not shift to new forms of tax discrimination outside the letter of the first three subsections”); Burling 1991) (“Subsection (b)(4) is . . . designed to prevent the state from accomplishing the forbidden end of discriminat ing against railroads by substituting another type of tax”). Subsection (b)(4) should be understood to tackle the issue of systemic railroad over-taxation the same way that the other subsections do—by linking the taxation of railroads to the taxation of businesses with local political influence. Thus, a “tax that discriminates against a rail carrier” is a tax that targets or singles out rail carriers compared to commercial and industrial taxpayers. Under this test, CSX’s complaint was properly dis missed. CSX has not alleged that Alabama’s sales and use taxes target railroads compared to general commercial and industrial taxpayers. See ACF Industries, 510 U. S., at 346–347 (leaving open a case in which “railroads— either alone or as part of some isolated and targeted group—are the only commercial entities” subject to a tax); F. 3d 1306, 1316 (CA11 2008). CSX alleges that it paid a tax on its fuel that certain rail competitors did not have to pay. But it concedes, as it must, that the sales and use taxes are “generally applicable.” Pet. for Cert. i; see Ala. Code §40–23–2(1) (2010 Cum. Supp.) (imposing a four percent sales tax on “every person, firm, or corporation . . . selling at retail any tangible personal property whatso ever”); §40–23–61(a) (2003); see also Norfolk Southern R. Co., supra, at 1316; Tr. of Oral Arg. 36. Discrete exemptions for certain railroad competitors— namely, fuel exemptions for interstate motor carriers and interstate ships and barges—do not make a generally applicable tax “discriminat[ory]” under subsection (b)(4).
Widespread exemptions could theoretically cause a facially general tax to target railroads, but the limited exemptions at issue here do not suggest that, and CSX has not argued it.2 Accordingly, CSX has not stated a cognizable claim for discrimination under §11501(b)(4). The Court does not settle the ambiguity in the word “discriminates” in subsection (b)(4)—leaving open both the appropriate comparison class and the type of differential treatment required to constitute discrimination.3 The majority “hold[s] only that §11501(b)(4) enables a railroad to challenge an excise or other non-property tax as dis criminatory on the basis of the tax scheme’s exemptions.” Ante, at 10, n. 8. Thus, when the majority says that “a state excise tax that applies to railroads but exempts their interstate competitors is subject to challenge under sub section (b)(4),” ante, at 10, it must mean only that a tax exemption scheme could potentially violate subsection (b)(4). As I understand it, the majority does not decide whether
CSX has stated a claim even in this case but instead leaves that issue for remand. Accordingly, States remain free to argue—and lower courts to hold—that complaints like CSX’s should be dismissed for failing to state a “dis criminat[ion]” claim under §11501(b)(4) when they do not allege that railroads are targeted or singled out compared to commercial and industrial taxpayers generally. Nonetheless, despite the majority’s assertion that it is “inappropriate” to address whether Alabama’s tax scheme actually discriminates within the meaning of §11501(b)(4), ante, at 10, n. 8, parts of its opinion suggest an answer to that question that I believe is incorrect. Relying on the second definition in Black’s Law Dictionary, the majority defines “discriminates” as “ ‘failure to treat all persons equally when no reasonable distinction can be found be tween those favored and those not favored.’ ” Ante, at 8. This definition of “discriminate,” combined with the major ity’s insistence that the “distinctions drawn in §11501(b) are . . . between railroads and other actors, whether inter state or local,” suggests that the comparison class could be anyone.4 Ante, at 10. The majority ultimately implies that “another tax that discriminates against a rail carrier” is any tax that draws a distinction between a rail carrier and anyone else without sufficient justification. See ante, at 10, n. 8 (“Whether the railroad will prevail . . . depends on whether the State offers a sufficient justification for de
clining to provide the exemption at issue to rail carriers”). I do not read subsection (b)(4) so independently of (b)(1) through (3). Perhaps, as the majority asserts, subsection (b)(4) is not an ideal candidate for ejusdem generis. Ante, at 16–17. But given the ambiguity of subsection (b)(4), (b)(1) through (3) are the best guides for understanding its proper scope—something we recognized in ACF Industries. 510 U. S., at 343. It is more reasonable to discern the meaning of “discriminates” in subsection (b)(4) using the preceding subsections than to pluck from the dictionary a definition for such a context-dependent term. Detaching subsection (b)(4) from the rest of the section would expand its meaning well beyond the scope of the problem that necessitated §11501(b). Instead of simply eliminating the particular vulnerability of railroads by tying their tax fate to that of general commercial and industrial taxpayers, railroads would receive a surprising windfall: most-favored taxpayer status. This would con vert subsection (b)(4) from a shield into a sword. The implication of the majority opinion is that if every person and business in the State of Alabama paid a $1 annual tax, and one person was exempt, CSX could sue under subsection (b)(4) and require the State to either exempt CSX also or “offe[r] a sufficient justification” for the distinction. See ante, at 10, n. 8. Although the major ity denies that this would provide railroads most-favored taxpayer status, see ibid., it acknowledges that States would have to justify any tax distinction that railroads argue may disfavor them. The only bulwark against requiring States to give rail roads every tax exemption that anyone else gets would be open-ended judicial determinations of what is “sufficient justification” for such distinctions. Ibid. Unsurprisingly, the statute provides no guidance for what “sufficient justi fication” might mean, but neither does the majority. There are all sorts of reasons that might lead a State to
distinguish between railroads and others for tax purposes. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 58. For instance, in this case, Ala bama points out that motor carriers and interstate water carriers pay a separate—and frequently higher—tax on fuel from which railroads are effectively exempt. Brief for Respondents 12–16, 59–60. That might be a “sufficient justification” for their exemptions from the taxes here, but the majority expressly disclaims reaching that question. Ante, at 5, n. 5.5 Of course, logically extending the mean ing of “discriminates” from subsections (b)(1) through (3) would avoid this problem, as there is no need for “justifica tion” at all: A tax either targets railroads by comparison to commercial and industrial taxpayers or it does not. * * * I disagree with the meaning of “discriminat[e]” in sub section (b)(4) that the majority seems to imply. The rest of §11501(b) provides a logical and coherent way to deter mine what subsection (b)(4) means, and we have used that methodology before. See ACF Industries, 510 U. S., at 340. The best way to read subsection (b)(4) is as prohibit ing taxes that target or single out railroads as compared to general commercial and industrial taxpayers. That is the test I would establish, and I do not understand the major ity to foreclose the lower courts from utilizing it. Under that test, CSX’s challenge to Alabama’s sales and use taxes was properly dismissed. Accordingly, I respectfully dissent.
——————
1 See,

e.g., Kansas City Southern R. Co. v. McNamara, 817 F. 2d 368,
373–374 (CA5 1987); Burlington Northern R. Co. v. Superior, 932 F. 2d
1185, 1186 (CA7 1991); Alabama Great Southern R. Co. v. Eagerton,
663 F. 2d 1036, 1041 (CA11 1981).


——————
2 Although the majority rightly observes that whether a given tax is
discriminatory may often be a difficult question, see ante, at 19, this is
not a close case. I therefore need not define the exact boundaries of
what constitutes targeting or singling out. See, e.g., Norfolk Southern
R. Co. v. Alabama Dept. of Revenue, 550 F. 3d 1306, 1316, n. 16 (CA11
2008) (listing examples of courts finding railroads targeted by various
state tax schemes).
3 The majority declines to reach the comparison class issue. But the
question presented was: “Whether a State’s exemptions of rail carrier
competitors, but not rail carriers, from generally applicable sales and
use taxes on fuel subject the taxes to challenge under 49 U. S. C.
§11501(b)(4) as ‘another tax that discriminates against a rail carrier.’ ”
The question presented thus asks whether CSX can challenge a “gener
ally applicable” tax based on exemptions granted to rail competitors—a
straightforward comparison class issue. The lower courts have split
over the proper scope of the comparison class, and the issue was pre
sented in this case. I would decide it.


——————
4 A comparison class of “anyone” is broader than either of the sides in
the lower courts’ split on this issue. Courts usually disagree over
whether to use commercial and industrial taxpayers or railroad com
petitors as the comparison class. Compare Burlington Northern, S. F.
R. Co. v. Lohman, 193 F. 3d 984, 985–986 (CA8 1999) (applying a
comparison class of rail competitors); Burlington Northern R. Co. v.
Commissioner of Revenue, 509 N. W. 2d 551, 553 (Minn. 1993) (same),
with Kansas City Southern R. Co., 817 F. 2d, at 375 (using commercial
and industrial taxpayers as the comparison class); Atchison, T. & S. F.
R. Co. v. Arizona, 78 F. 3d 438, 441 (CA9 1996) (same).


——————
5 The majority appears to consider “sufficient justification” as a poten
tial defense for the State, see ante, at 10, n. 8, but since it derives from
the meaning of “discriminates,” a lack of sufficient justification would
seem to be a part of what a railroad would have to plead in order to
state a claim for a violation of §11501(b)(4).




