2

CSX TRANSP., INC. v. MCBRIDE
Opinion of the Court

engineer for petitioner CSX Transportation, Inc., which
operates an interstate system of railroads. On April 12,
2004, CSX assigned McBride to assist on a local run be­
tween Evansville, Indiana, and Mount Vernon, Illinois.
The run involved frequent starts and stops to add and
remove individual rail cars, a process known as “switch­
ing.” The train McBride was to operate had an unusual
engine configuration: two “wide-body” engines followed
by three smaller conventional cabs. McBride protested
that the configuration was unsafe, because switching with
heavy, wide-body engines required constant use of a hand­
operated independent brake. But he was told to take the
train as is. About ten hours into the run, McBride injured
his hand while using the independent brake. Despite two
surgeries and extensive physical therapy, he never re­
gained full use of the hand.
Seeking compensation for his injury, McBride com­
menced a FELA action against CSX in the U. S. District
Court for the Southern District of Illinois. He alleged that
CSX was twice negligent: First, the railroad required him
to use equipment unsafe for switching; second, CSX failed
to train him to operate that equipment. App. 24a–26a. A
verdict for McBride would be in order, the District Court
instructed, if the jury found that CSX “was negligent” and
that the “negligence caused or contributed to” McBride’s
injury. Id., at 23a.
CSX sought additional charges that the court declined to
give. One of the rejected instructions would have required
“the plaintiff [to] show that . . . the defendant’s negligence
was a proximate cause of the injury.” Id., at 34a. Another
would have defined “proximate cause” to mean “any cause
which, in natural or probable sequence, produced the
injury complained of,” with the qualification that a proxi­
mate cause “need not be the only cause, nor the last or
nearest cause.” Id., at 32a.
Instead, the District Court employed, as McBride re­

