Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

Even the Court seems to appreciate that it is creating a
troubling gap in the FELA negligence action and ought to
do something to patch it over. The something it proposes
is “[r]easonable foreseeability of harm,” ante, at 16 (inter­
nal quotation marks omitted). Foreseeability as a test for
proximate causation would be one thing; foreseeability
has, after all, long been an aspect of proximate cause. But
that is not the test the Court prescribes. It instead limits
the foreseeability inquiry to whether the defendant was
negligent in the first place.
The Court observes that juries may be instructed that a
defendant’s negligence depends on “what a reasonably
prudent person would anticipate or foresee as creating a
potential for harm.” 5 L. Sand et al., Modern Federal Jury
Instructions–Civil ¶89.10, p. 89–21 (2010); see ante, at 16–
17. That’s all fine and good when a defendant’s negligence
results directly in the plaintiff’s injury (nevermind that no
“reasonable foreseeability” instruction was given in this
case). For instance, if I drop a piano from a window and it
falls on a person, there is no question that I was negligent
and could have foreseen that the piano would hit some­
one—as, in fact, it did. The problem for the Court’s test
arises when the negligence does not directly produce the
injury to the plaintiff: I drop a piano; it cracks the side­
walk; during sidewalk repairs weeks later a man barreling
down the sidewalk on a bicycle hits a cone that repairmen
have placed around their worksite, and is injured. Was
I negligent in dropping the piano because I could have
foreseen “a mishap and injury,” ante, at 17 (emphasis
added; internal quotation marks omitted)? Yes. Did my
negligence cause “[the] mishap and injury” that resulted?
It depends on what is meant by cause. My negligence was
a “but for” cause of the injury: If I had not dropped the
piano, the bicyclist would not have crashed. But is it a
—————— 

as the cause of negligently inflicted harm”). 


