Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

ple causes may act concurrently, we clarified that a rail­
road’s negligence need not be the “sole, efficient, producing cause of injury,” id., at 506. The question was simply
whether “employer negligence played any part, even the
slightest, in producing the injury.” Ibid. “It does not
matter,” we continued, “that, from the evidence, the jury
may also with reason, on grounds of probability, attribute
the result to other causes, including the employee’s con
tributory negligence.” Ibid. (emphasis added).
The Court today takes the “any part, even the slightest”
language out of context and views it as a rejection of proxi­
mate cause. But Rogers was talking about contributory
negligence—it said so—and the language it chose confirms
just that. “Slight” negligence was familiar usage in this
context. The statute immediately preceding FELA, passed
just two years earlier in 1906, moved part way from con­
tributory to comparative negligence. It provided that “the
fact that the employee may have been guilty of contribu­
tory negligence shall not bar a recovery where his contrib­
utory negligence was slight and that of the employer
was gross in comparison.” Act of June 11, 1906, §2, 34
Stat. 232. Other statutes similarly made this halfway
stop on the road from contributory to pure comparative
negligence, again using the term “slight.” See Dobbs §201,
at 503 (“One earlier [version of comparative fault] . . .
allowed the negligent plaintiff to recover if the plaintiff’s
negligence was slight and the defendant’s gross. . . . Mod­
ern comparative negligence law works differently, reduc­
ing the plaintiff’s recovery in proportion to the plaintiff’s
fault”); V. Schwartz, Comparative Negligence §2.01[b][2],
p. 33 (5th ed. 2010) (a “major form of modified comparative
negligence is the ‘slight-gross’ system”); id. §3.04[b], at
75. In 1908, FELA completed the transition to pure com­
parative negligence with respect to rail workers. See
Dobbs §201, at 503. Under FELA, it does not matter
whose negligence was “slight” or “gross.” The use of the term

