14

CSX TRANSP., INC. v. MCBRIDE
Opinion GINSBURG,
Opinion ofof the CourtJ.

drafters of the 1965 federal model instructions, see supra,
at 11–12: Under FELA, injury “is proximately caused” by
the railroad’s negligence if that negligence “played any
part . . . in . . . causing the injury.” Avoiding “dialectical
subtleties” that confound attempts to convey intelligibly to
juries just what “proximate cause” means, see Coray, 335
U. S., at 524, the Rogers instruction uses the everyday
words contained in the statute itself. Jurors can compre­
hend those words and apply them in light of their ex­
perience and common sense. Unless and until Congress
orders otherwise, we see no good reason to tamper with an
instruction tied to FELA’s text, long employed by lower
courts, and hardly shown to be unfair or unworkable.
A
As we have noted, see supra, at 5–6, the phrase “proxi­
mate cause” is shorthand for the policy-based judgment
that not all factual causes contributing to an injury should
be legally cognizable causes. Prosser and Keeton explain:
“In a philosophical sense, the consequences of an act go
forward to eternity, and the causes of an event go back to
the dawn of human events, and beyond.” §41, p. 264. To
prevent “infinite liability,” ibid., courts and legislatures
appropriately place limits on the chain of causation that
may support recovery on any particular claim.
The term “proximate cause” itself is hardly essential to
the imposition of such limits. It is a term notoriously
confusing. See, e.g., Prosser and Keeton §42, p. 273 (“The
word ’proximate’ is a legacy of Lord Chancellor Bacon, who
in his time committed other sins. . . . It is an unfortunate
word, which places an entirely wrong emphasis upon the
factor of physical or mechanical closeness. For this reason
‘legal cause’ or perhaps even ‘responsible cause’ would be a
more appropriate term.” (footnotes omitted)).
And the lack of consensus on any one definition of
“proximate cause” is manifest. Id., §41, p. 263. Common­

