Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
natural and probable consequence of any negligence of defendant.”
Ibid. This Court reversed. FELA, this Court affirmed, did not incor
porate any traditional common-law formulation of “proximate causa
tion[,] which [requires] the jury [to] find that the defendant’s negli
gence was the sole, efficient, producing cause of injury.” Id., at 506.
Whether the railroad’s negligent act was the “immediate reason” for
the fall, the Court added, was “irrelevant.” Id., at 503. The Court
then announced its “any part . . . in producing the injury” test, id., at
506.
Rogers is most sensibly read as a comprehensive statement of
FELA’s causation standard. The State Supreme Court there ac
knowledged that a FELA injury might have multiple causes, but con
sidered the respondent railroad’s part too indirect to establish the
requisite causation. That is the very reasoning this Court rejected in
Rogers. It is also the reasoning CSX asks this Court to resurrect.
The interpretation adopted today is informed by the statutory his
tory, see Trainmen v. Virginia ex rel. Virginia State Bar, 377 U. S. 1,
3, the precedents on which Rogers drew, see, e.g., Coray v. Southern
Pacific Co., 335 U. S. 520, 523–524, this Court’s subsequent deci
sions, see, e.g., Ferguson v. Moore-McCormack Lines, Inc., 352 U. S.
521, 523–524, the decisions of every Court of Appeals that reviews
FELA cases, and the overwhelming majority of state courts and
scholars. This understanding of Rogers “has been accepted as settled
law for several decades.” IBP, Inc. v. Alvarez, 546 U. S. 21, 32. To
discard or restrict the instruction now would ill serve stare decisis.
Pp. 6–12.
(b) CSX nonetheless worries that the Rogers “any part” instruction
opens the door to unlimited liability, inviting juries to impose liability
on the basis of “but for” causation. A half century’s experience with
Rogers gives little cause for concern: CSX has not identified even one
trial in which the instruction generated an absurd or untoward
award.
FELA’s “in whole or in part” language is straightforward.
“[R]easonable foreseeability of harm is an essential ingredient of
[FELA] negligence,” Gallick v. Baltimore & Ohio R. Co., 372 U. S.
108, 117 (emphasis added). If negligence is proved, however, and is
shown to have “played any part, even the slightest, in producing the
injury,” Rogers, 352 U. S., at 506, then the carrier is answerable in
damages even if “ ‘the extent of the [injury] or the manner in which it
occurred’ ” was not “[p]robable” or “foreseeable.” Gallick, 372 U. S.,
at 120–121, and n. 8. Properly instructed on negligence and causa
tion, and told, as is standard practice in FELA cases, to use their
“common sense” in reviewing the evidence, juries would have no war
rant to award damages in far out “but for” scenarios, and judges

