10

CSX TRANSP., INC. v. MCBRIDE
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

“even the slightest” in Rogers makes perfect sense when
the decision is understood to be about multiple causes—
not about how direct any particular cause must be. See
Sorrell, 549 U. S., at 175 (Souter, J., concurring) (perti­
nent language concerned “multiplicity of causations,” not
“the necessary directness of . . . causation”).
The Court views Rogers as “describ[ing] the test for
proximate causation” under FELA, ante, at 13 (internal
quotation marks omitted), but Rogers itself says nothing of
the sort. See 352 U. S., at 506 (describing its test as “the
test of a jury case” (emphasis added)). Rogers did not set
forth a novel standard for proximate cause—much less an
instruction designed to guide jurors in determining causa­
tion. Indeed, the trial court in Rogers used the term
“proximate cause” in its jury instruction and directed the
jury to find that Rogers could not recover if his injuries
“were not directly . . . caused by” the railroad’s negligence.
Id., at 505, n. 9 (internal quotation marks omitted). Our
opinion quoted that instruction, ibid., but “took no issue
with [it] in this respect,” Sorrell, supra, at 176 (Souter, J.,
concurring).
A few of our cases have characterized Rogers as holding that “a relaxed standard of causation applies under
FELA.” Gottshall, 512 U. S., at 543; see Crane v. Cedar
Rapids & Iowa City R. Co., 395 U. S. 164, 166 (1969). Fair
enough; but these passing summations of Rogers do not
alter its holding. FELA did, of course, change common law
rules relating to causation in one respect: Under FELA, a
railroad’s negligence did not have to be the exclusive cause
of an injury. See Gottshall, supra, at 542–543 (“Congress
did away with several common-law tort defenses . . . .
Specifically, the statute . . . rejected the doctrine of con­
tributory negligence in favor of that of comparative negli­
gence”). And, unlike under FELA’s predecessor, the pro­
portionate degree of the employee’s negligence would not
necessarily bar his recovery. But we have never held—

