8

CSX TRANSP., INC. v. MCBRIDE
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

gency[,] . . . it was an emergency brought about by him­
self”). There were, we explained, “probative facts from
which the jury could find that [the railroad] was or should
have been aware of conditions which created a likelihood
that [Rogers] . . . would suffer just such an injury as he
did.” 352 U. S., at 503. We noted that “[c]ommon experi­
ence teaches both that a passing train will fan the flames
of a fire, and that a person suddenly enveloped in flames
and smoke will instinctively react by retreating from the
danger.” Ibid. In referring to this predictable sequence
of events, we described—in familiar terms—sufficient evi­
dence of proximate cause. We therefore held that the
railroad’s negligence could have been a cause of Rogers’s
injury regardless of whether “the immediate reason” why
Rogers slipped was the railroad’s negligence in permitting
gravel to remain on the surface or some other cause. Ibid.
(emphasis added).
Rogers thereby clarified that, under a statute in which
employer and employee could both be proximate causes of
an injury, a railroad’s negligence need not be the sole or
last cause in order to be proximate. That is an application
of proximate cause, not a repudiation of it. See Street 111
(“a cause may be sufficiently near in law to the damage to
be considered its effective legal cause without by any
means being the nearest or most proximate to the causes
which contribute of the injury”); 1 D. Dobbs, Law of Torts
§180, p. 445 (2001).
We then considered a second interpretation. The Mis­
souri Supreme Court’s opinion could alternatively be read
as having held that Rogers’s “conduct was at least as
probable a cause for his mishap as any negligence of the
[railroad],” and that—in those circumstances—“there was
no case for the jury.” 352 U. S., at 505 (emphasis added).
If this was the principle the court applied below, it was
also wrong and for many of the same reasons.
Under a comparative negligence scheme in which multi­

