8

CSX TRANSP., INC. v. MCBRIDE
Opinion of the Court

(FELA case “rarely presents more than the single question
whether negligence of the employer played any part, how­
ever small, in the injury”).2
Rogers is most sensibly read as a comprehensive state­
ment of the FELA causation standard. Notably, the Mis­
souri Supreme Court in Rogers did not doubt that a FELA
injury might have multiple causes, including railroad
negligence and employee negligence. See 284 S. W. 2d, at
472 (reciting FELA’s “in whole or in part” language). But
the railroad’s part, according to the state court, was too
indirect, not sufficiently “natural and probable,” to estab­
lish the requisite causation. Ibid. That is the very reason­
ing the Court rejected in Rogers. It is also the reasoning
CSX asks us to resurrect.
Our understanding is informed by the statutory history
and precedent on which Rogers drew. Before FELA was
enacted, the “harsh and technical” rules of state common
law had “made recovery difficult or even impossible” for in­
jured railroad workers. Trainmen v. Virginia ex rel. Vir
ginia State Bar, 377 U. S. 1, 3 (1964). “[D]issatisfied with
the [railroad’s] common-law duty,” Congress sought to “sup­
plan[t] that duty with [FELA’s] far more drastic duty of
paying damages for injury or death at work due in
whole or in part to the employer’s negligence.” Rogers, 352
U. S., at 507. Yet, Rogers observed, the Missouri court
and other lower courts continued to ignore FELA’s “sig­
nifican[t]” departures from the “ordinary common-law
——————
2 In face of Rogers’ repeated admonition that the “any part . . . in pro­
ducing the injury” test was the single test for causation under FELA,
the dissent speculates that Rogers was simply making a veiled ref­
erence to a particular form of modified comparative negligence, i.e.,
allowing plaintiff to prevail on showing that her negligence was “slight”
while the railroad’s was “gross.” Post, at 9–10. That is not what Rogers
conveyed. To repeat, Rogers instructed that “the test of a jury case
[under FELA] is simply whether . . . employer negligence played any
part, even the slightest, in producing the injury.” 352 U. S., at 506.

