2

CSX TRANSP., INC. v. MCBRIDE
Syllabus

598 F. 3d 388, affirmed.
JUSTICE GINSBURG delivered the opinion of the Court with
respect to all but Part III–A, concluding, in accord with FELA’s text
and purpose, Rogers, and the uniform view of the federal appellate
courts, that FELA does not incorporate stock “proximate cause” stan
dards developed in nonstatutory common-law tort actions. The
charge proper in FELA cases simply tracks the language Congress
employed, informing juries that a defendant railroad “caused or con
tributed to” a railroad worker’s injury “if [the railroad’s] negligence
played a part—no matter how small—in bringing about the injury.”
That, indeed, is the test Congress prescribed for proximate causation
in FELA cases. Pp. 4–14, 16–19.
(a) CSX’s interpretation of Rogers is not persuasive. Pp. 4–12.
(1) Given FELA’s “broad” causation language, Urie v. Thompson,
337 U. S. 163, 181, and Congress’ “humanitarian” and “remedial
goal[s]” in enacting the statute, FELA’s causation standard is “re
laxed” compared to that applicable in common-law tort litigation,
Consolidated Rail Corporation v. Gottshall, 512 U. S. 532, 542–543.
Rogers described that relaxed standard as “whether the proofs justify
with reason the conclusion that employer negligence played any part,
even the slightest, in producing the injury or death for which dam
ages are sought.” 352 U. S., at 506. Because the District Court’s in
struction tracked Rogers’ language, the instruction was plainly
proper so long as Rogers actually prescribes the causation definition
applicable under FELA. See Patterson v. McLean Credit Union, 491
U. S. 164, 172. CSX, however, contends that Rogers was a narrowly
focused decision that did not displace common-law formulations of
“proximate cause.” Drawing largely on Justice Souter’s concurrence
in Norfolk Southern R. Co. v. Sorrell, 549 U. S. 158, 173, CSX urges
that Rogers’ “any part . . . in producing the injury” test displaced only
common-law restrictions on recovery for injuries involving contribu
tory negligence or other multiple causes, but did not address the req
uisite directness of a cause. Pp. 4–6.
(2) In Rogers, the employee was burning vegetation that lined his
employer’s railroad tracks. A passing train fanned the flames, which
spread to the top of the culvert where he was standing. Attempting
to escape, he slipped and fell on the sloping gravel covering the cul
vert, sustaining serious injuries. 352 U. S., at 501–503. The state
court jury returned a verdict for him, but the Missouri Supreme
Court reversed. Even if the railroad had been negligent in failing to
maintain a flat surface, the court reasoned, the employee was at fault
because of his lack of attention to the spreading fire. As the fire “was
something extraordinary, unrelated to, and disconnected from the in
cline of the gravel,” the court found that “plaintiff’s injury was not the

