Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

contributory negligence shall not bar a recovery”); §54
(“employee shall not be held to have assumed the risks of
his employment”).
As the very first section of the statute, Section 1 simply
outlines who could be sued by whom and for what types
of injuries. It provides that “[e]very common carrier by
railroad . . . shall be liable in damages to any person suf­
fering injury while he is employed by such carrier . . . for
such injury or death resulting in whole or in part from the
negligence of any of the officers, agents, or employees of
such carrier.” §51. The Court’s theory seems to be that
the words “in whole or in part” signal a departure from the
historic requirement of proximate cause. But those words
served a very different purpose. They did indeed mark an
important departure from a common law principle, but it
was the principle of contributory negligence—not proxi­
mate cause.
As noted, FELA abolished the defense of contributory
negligence; the “in whole or in part” language simply re­
flected the fact that the railroad would remain liable
even if its negligence was not the sole cause of injury. See
Sorrell, 549 U. S., at 170. The Congress that was so clear
when it was abolishing common law limits on recovery
elsewhere in FELA did not abrogate the fundamental
principle of proximate cause in the oblique manner the
Court suggests. “[I]f Congress had intended such a sea
change” in negligence principles “it would have said so
clearly.” Board of Trustees of Leland Stanford Junior
Univ. v. Roche Molecular Systems, Inc., 563 U. S. ___, ___
(2011) (slip op., at 14).
The language the Court adopts as an instruction on
causation requires only that negligence have “ ‘played any
part, even the slightest, in producing the injury.’ ” Ante, at
17 (quoting Rogers, 352 U. S., at 506; emphasis deleted);
see also ante, at 18–19 (“Juries in such cases are properly
instructed that a defendant railroad ‘caused or contributed

