14

CSX TRANSP., INC. v. MCBRIDE
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

legal cause? No.
In one respect the Court’s test is needlessly rigid. If
courts must instruct juries on foreseeability as an aspect
of negligence, why not instruct them on foreseeability as
an aspect of causation? And if the jury is simply supposed
to intuit that there should also be limits on the legal chain
of causation—and that “but for” cause is not enough—why
hide the ball? Why not simply tell the jury? Finally, if
the Court intends “foreseeability of harm” to be a kind
of poorman’s proximate cause, then where does the Court
find that requirement in the test Rogers—or FELA—pre­
scribes? Could it be derived from the common law?
Where does “foreseeability of harm” as the sole protec­
tion against limitless liability run out of steam? An an­
swer would seem only fair to the common law.
A railroad negligently fails to maintain its boiler, which
overheats. An employee becomes hot while repairing it
and removes his jacket. When finished with the repairs,
he grabs a thermos of coffee, which spills on his now-bare
arm, burning it. Was the risk that someone would be
harmed by the failure to maintain the boiler foreseeable?
Was the risk that an employee would be burned while
repairing the overheated boiler foreseeable? Can the
railroad be liable under the Court’s test for the coffee
burn? According to the Court’s opinion, it does not matter
that the “manner in which [the injury] occurred was not
. . . foreseeable,” ante, at 17 (internal quotation marks
omitted), so long as some negligence—any negligence at
all—can be established.
The Court’s opinion fails to settle on a single test for
answering these questions: Is it that the railroad’s negli­
gence “pla[y] a part—no matter how small—in bringing
about the [plaintiff’s] injury,” as the Court indicates on
pages 5, 17 note 13, and 19, or that “negligence play any
part, even the slightest, in producing the injury,” as sug­
gested at pages 8 note 2, 11 note 4, and 17? The Court

