18

CSX TRANSP., INC. v. MCBRIDE
Opinion of the Court

heart attack after railroad forced him to work more than
12 hours with inadequate breaks; applying Rogers, appel­
late court affirmed grant of summary judgment for lack of
causation). See also supra, at 13 (Rogers has generated no
extravagant jury awards or appellate court decisions).
In addition to the constraints of common sense, FELA’s
limitations on who may sue, and for what, reduce the risk
of exorbitant liability. As earlier noted, see supra, at 4,
the statute confines the universe of compensable injuries
to those sustained by employees, during employment. §51.
Hence there are no unforeseeable plaintiffs in FELA cases.
And the statute weeds out the injuries most likely to bear
only a tenuous relationship to railroad negligence, namely,
those occurring outside the workplace.14
There is a real risk, on the other hand, that the “in
natural or probable sequence” charge sought by CSX
would mislead. If taken to mean the plaintiff’s injury
must probably (“more likely than not”) follow from the
railroad’s negligent conduct, then the force of FELA’s
“resulting in whole or in part” language would be blunted.
Railroad negligence would “probably” cause a worker’s in­
jury only if that negligence was a dominant contributor to
the injury, not merely a contributor in any part.
*
*
*
For the reasons stated, it is not error in a FELA case to
refuse a charge embracing stock proximate cause termi­
nology. Juries in such cases are properly instructed that a
——————
14 CSX observes, as does the dissent, post, at 4, that we have applied
traditional notions of proximate causation under the RICO, antitrust,
and securities fraud statutes. But those statutes cover broader classes
of potential injuries and complainants. And none assign liability in
language akin to FELA’s “resulting in whole or in part” standard. §51
(emphasis added). See Holmes v. Securities Investor Protection Corpo
ration, 503 U. S. 258, 265–268 (1992); Associated Gen. Contractors of
Cal., Inc. v. Carpenters, 459 U. S. 519, 529–535 (1983); Dura Pharma
ceuticals, Inc. v. Broudo, 544 U. S. 336, 342–346 (2005).

