Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

dant’s railroad tracks. A passing train had fanned the
flames, which spread from the vegetation to the top of a
culvert where the employee was standing. Attempting to
escape, the employee slipped and fell on the sloping gravel
covering the culvert, sustaining serious injuries. 352
U. S., at 501–503. A Missouri state-court jury returned a
verdict for the employee, but the Missouri Supreme Court
reversed. Even if the railroad had been negligent in fail­
ing to maintain a flat surface, the court reasoned, the
employee was at fault because of his lack of attention to
the spreading fire. Rogers v. Thompson, 284 S. W. 2d
467, 472 (Mo. 1955). As the fire “was something extraordi­
nary, unrelated to, and disconnected from the incline of
the gravel,” the court felt “obliged to say [that] plaintiff’s
injury was not the natural and probable consequence of
any negligence of defendant.” Ibid.
We held that the jury’s verdict should not have been
upset. Describing two potential readings of the Missouri
Supreme Court’s opinion, we condemned both. First, the
court erred in concluding that the employee’s negligence
was the “sole” cause of the injury, for the jury reasonably
found that railroad negligence played a part. Rogers, 352
U. S., at 504–505. Second, the court erred insofar as it
held that the railroad’s negligence was not a sufficient
cause unless it was the more “probable” cause of the in­
jury. Id., at 505. FELA, we affirmed, did not incorporate
any traditional common-law formulation of “proximate
causation[,] which [requires] the jury [to] find that the
defendant’s negligence was the sole, efficient, producing
cause of injury.” Id., at 506. Whether the railroad’s negli­
gent act was the “immediate reason” for the fall, we added,
was “an irrelevant consideration.” Id., at 503. We then
announced the “any part” test, id., at 506, and reiterated it
several times. See, e.g., id., at 507 (“narro[w]” and “single
inquiry” is whether “negligence of the employer played
any part at all” in bringing about the injury); id., at 508

