Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

negligence” scheme, to reinsert common-law formulations
of causation involving “probabilities,” and consequently to
“deprive litigants of their right to a jury determination.”
Id., at 507, 509–510. Aiming to end lower court disregard of congressional purpose, the Rogers Court repeatedly
called the “any part” test the “single” inquiry determining
causation in FELA cases. Id., at 507, 508 (emphasis
added). In short, CSX’s argument that the Rogers stan­
dard concerns only division of responsibility among multi­
ple actors, and not causation more generally, misses the
thrust of our decision in that case.
Tellingly, in announcing the “any part . . . in producing
the injury” test, Rogers cited Coray v. Southern Pacific
Co., 335 U. S. 520 (1949), a decision emphasizing that
FELA had parted from traditional common-law formula­
tions of causation. What qualified as a “proximate” or
legally sufficient cause in FELA cases, Coray had ex­
plained, was determined by the statutory phrase “result­
ing in whole or in part,” which Congress “selected . . . to fix
liability” in language that was “simple and direct.” Id., at
524. That straightforward phrase, Coray observed, was
incompatible with “dialectical subtleties” that common-law
courts employed to determine whether a particular cause
was sufficiently “substantial” to constitute a proximate
cause. Id., at 523–524.3
Our subsequent decisions have confirmed that Rogers
——————
3 The

dissent, while recognizing “the variety of formulations” courts
have employed to define “proximate cause,” post, at 2, does not say
which of the many formulations it would declare applicable in FELA
cases. We regard the phrase “negligence played a part—no matter how
small,” see Rogers, 352 U. S., at 508, as synonymous with “negligence
played any part, even the slightest,” see id., at 506, and the phrase “in
producing the injury” as synonymous with the phrase “in bringing
about the injury.” We therefore approve both the Seventh Circuit’s
instruction and the “any part, even the slightest, in producing the
injury” formulation. The host of definitions of proximate cause, in
contrast, are hardly synonymous.

