(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CSX TRANSPORTATION, INC. v. MCBRIDE
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–235.

Argued March 28, 2011—Decided June 23, 2011

Respondent McBride, a locomotive engineer with petitioner CSX
Transportation, Inc., an interstate railroad, sustained a debilitating
hand injury while switching railroad cars. He filed suit under the
Federal Employers’ Liability Act (FELA), which holds railroads liable
for employees’ injuries “resulting in whole or in part from [carrier]
negligence.” 45 U. S. C. §51. McBride alleged that CSX negligently
(1) required him to use unsafe switching equipment and (2) failed to
train him to operate that equipment. A verdict for McBride would be
in order, the District Court instructed, if the jury found that CSX’s
negligence “caused or contributed to” his injury. The court declined
CSX’s request for additional charges requiring McBride to “show that
. . . [CSX’s] negligence was a proximate cause of the injury” and de
fining “proximate cause” as “any cause which, in natural or probable
sequence, produced the injury complained of.” Instead, relying on
Rogers v. Missouri Pacific R. Co., 352 U. S. 500, the court gave the
Seventh Circuit’s pattern FELA instruction: “Defendant ‘caused or
contributed to’ Plaintiff’s injury if Defendant’s negligence played a
part—no matter how small—in bringing about the injury.” The jury
returned a verdict for McBride.
On appeal, CSX renewed its objection to the failure to instruct on
proximate cause, now defining the phrase to require a “direct relation
between the injury asserted and the injurious conduct alleged.” The
appeals court, however, approved the District Court’s instruction and
affirmed its judgment for McBride. Because Rogers had relaxed the
proximate cause requirement in FELA cases, the court said, an in
struction that simply paraphrased Rogers’ language could not be de
clared erroneous.
Held: The judgment is affirmed.

