Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–1259
_________________

UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. ANTOINE JONES
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT



[January 23, 2012]




JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, concurring.
I join the Court’s opinion because I agree that a search
within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment occurs, at a
minimum, “[w]here, as here, the Government obtains
information by physically intruding on a constitutionally
protected area.” Ante, at 6, n. 3. In this case, the Government installed a Global Positioning System (GPS)
tracking device on respondent Antoine Jones’ Jeep without
a valid warrant and without Jones’ consent, then used
that device to monitor the Jeep’s movements over the
course of four weeks. The Government usurped Jones’
property for the purpose of conducting surveillance on
him, thereby invading privacy interests long afforded, and
undoubtedly entitled to, Fourth Amendment protection.
See, e.g., Silverman v. United States, 365 U. S. 505, 511–
512 (1961).
Of course, the Fourth Amendment is not concerned only
with trespassory intrusions on property. See, e.g., Kyllo v.
United States, 533 U. S. 27, 31–33 (2001). Rather, even in
the absence of a trespass, “a Fourth Amendment search
occurs when the government violates a subjective expectation of privacy that society recognizes as reasonable.” Id.,
at 33; see also Smith v. Maryland, 442 U. S. 735, 740–741
(1979); Katz v. United States, 389 U. S. 347, 361 (1967)
(Harlan, J., concurring). In Katz, this Court enlarged its
then-prevailing focus on property rights by announcing


2

UNITED STATES v. JONES
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

that the reach of the Fourth Amendment does not “turn
upon the presence or absence of a physical intrusion.” Id.,
at 353. As the majority’s opinion makes clear, however,
Katz’s reasonable-expectation-of-privacy test augmented,
but did not displace or diminish, the common-law trespassory test that preceded it. Ante, at 8. Thus, “when the
Government does engage in physical intrusion of a constitutionally protected area in order to obtain information,
that intrusion may constitute a violation of the Fourth
Amendment.” United States v. Knotts, 460 U. S. 276, 286
(1983) (Brennan, J., concurring in judgment); see also, e.g.,
Rakas v. Illinois, 439 U. S. 128, 144, n. 12 (1978). JUSTICE
ALITO’s approach, which discounts altogether the constitutional relevance of the Government’s physical intrusion on
Jones’ Jeep, erodes that longstanding protection for privacy expectations inherent in items of property that people
possess or control. See post, at 5–7 (opinion concurring in
judgment). By contrast, the trespassory test applied in
the majority’s opinion reflects an irreducible constitutional
minimum: When the Government physically invades
personal property to gather information, a search occurs.
The reaffirmation of that principle suffices to decide this
case.
Nonetheless, as JUSTICE ALITO notes, physical intrusion
is now unnecessary to many forms of surveillance. Post, at
9–12. With increasing regularity, the Government will be
capable of duplicating the monitoring undertaken in this
case by enlisting factory- or owner-installed vehicle tracking devices or GPS-enabled smartphones. See United
States v. Pineda-Moreno, 617 F. 3d 1120, 1125 (CA9 2010)
(Kozinski, C. J., dissenting from denial of rehearing en
banc). In cases of electronic or other novel modes of surveillance that do not depend upon a physical invasion
on property, the majority opinion’s trespassory test may
provide little guidance. But “[s]ituations involving merely
the transmission of electronic signals without trespass


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

would remain subject to Katz analysis.” Ante, at 11. As
JUSTICE ALITO incisively observes, the same technological
advances that have made possible nontrespassory surveillance techniques will also affect the Katz test by shaping
the evolution of societal privacy expectations. Post, at
10–11. Under that rubric, I agree with JUSTICE ALITO that,
at the very least, “longer term GPS monitoring in investigations of most offenses impinges on expectations of
privacy.” Post, at 13.
In cases involving even short-term monitoring, some
unique attributes of GPS surveillance relevant to the Katz
analysis will require particular attention. GPS monitoring
generates a precise, comprehensive record of a person’s
public movements that reflects a wealth of detail about
her familial, political, professional, religious, and sexual
associations. See, e.g., People v. Weaver, 12 N. Y. 3d 433,
441–442, 909 N. E. 2d 1195, 1199 (2009) (“Disclosed in
[GPS] data . . . will be trips the indisputably private nature of which takes little imagination to conjure: trips
to the psychiatrist, the plastic surgeon, the abortion clinic,
the AIDS treatment center, the strip club, the criminal
defense attorney, the by-the-hour motel, the union meeting, the mosque, synagogue or church, the gay bar and
on and on”). The Government can store such records
and efficiently mine them for information years into the
future. Pineda-Moreno, 617 F. 3d, at 1124 (opinion of
Kozinski, C. J.). And because GPS monitoring is cheap
in comparison to conventional surveillance techniques and,
by design, proceeds surreptitiously, it evades the ordinary
checks that constrain abusive law enforcement practices:
“limited police resources and community hostility.” Illinois v. Lidster, 540 U. S. 419, 426 (2004).
Awareness that the Government may be watching chills
associational and expressive freedoms. And the Government’s unrestrained power to assemble data that reveal
private aspects of identity is susceptible to abuse. The net


4

UNITED STATES v. JONES
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

result is that GPS monitoring—by making available at a
relatively low cost such a substantial quantum of intimate
information about any person whom the Government, in
its unfettered discretion, chooses to track—may “alter the
relationship between citizen and government in a way
that is inimical to democratic society.” United States v.
Cuevas-Perez, 640 F. 3d 272, 285 (CA7 2011) (Flaum, J.,
concurring).
I would take these attributes of GPS monitoring into
account when considering the existence of a reasonable
societal expectation of privacy in the sum of one’s public
movements. I would ask whether people reasonably expect that their movements will be recorded and aggregated in a manner that enables the Government to ascertain,
more or less at will, their political and religious beliefs,
sexual habits, and so on. I do not regard as dispositive
the fact that the Government might obtain the fruits of
GPS monitoring through lawful conventional surveillance
techniques. See Kyllo, 533 U. S., at 35, n. 2; ante, at 11
(leaving open the possibility that duplicating traditional
surveillance “through electronic means, without an accompanying trespass, is an unconstitutional invasion of
privacy”). I would also consider the appropriateness of
entrusting to the Executive, in the absence of any oversight from a coordinate branch, a tool so amenable to
misuse, especially in light of the Fourth Amendment’s goal
to curb arbitrary exercises of police power to and prevent
“a too permeating police surveillance,” United States v.
Di Re, 332 U. S. 581, 595 (1948).*
——————
* United States v. Knotts, 460 U. S. 276 (1983), does not foreclose the
conclusion that GPS monitoring, in the absence of a physical intrusion,
is a Fourth Amendment search. As the majority’s opinion notes, Knotts
reserved the question whether “ ‘different constitutional principles
may be applicable’ ” to invasive law enforcement practices such as GPS
tracking. See ante, at 8, n. 6 (quoting 460 U. S., at 284).
United States v. Karo, 468 U. S. 705 (1984), addressed the Fourth


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

More fundamentally, it may be necessary to reconsider
the premise that an individual has no reasonable expectation of privacy in information voluntarily disclosed to third
parties. E.g., Smith, 442 U. S., at 742; United States v.
Miller, 425 U. S. 435, 443 (1976). This approach is ill
suited to the digital age, in which people reveal a great
deal of information about themselves to third parties in
the course of carrying out mundane tasks. People disclose
the phone numbers that they dial or text to their cellular providers; the URLs that they visit and the e-mail
addresses with which they correspond to their Internet
service providers; and the books, groceries, and medications they purchase to online retailers. Perhaps, as
JUSTICE ALITO notes, some people may find the “tradeoff ”
of privacy for convenience “worthwhile,” or come to accept
this “diminution of privacy” as “inevitable,” post, at 10,
and perhaps not. I for one doubt that people would accept
without complaint the warrantless disclosure to the Government of a list of every Web site they had visited in the
last week, or month, or year. But whatever the societal
expectations, they can attain constitutionally protected
status only if our Fourth Amendment jurisprudence ceases
——————
Amendment implications of the installation of a beeper in a container
with the consent of the container’s original owner, who was aware
that the beeper would be used for surveillance purposes. Id., at 707.
Owners of GPS-equipped cars and smartphones do not contemplate
that these devices will be used to enable covert surveillance of their
movements. To the contrary, subscribers of one such service greeted
a similar suggestion with anger. Quain, Changes to OnStar’s Privacy
Terms Rile Some Users, N. Y. Times (Sept. 22, 2011), online at
http://wheels.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/09/22/changes-to-onstars-privacyterms-rile-some-users (as visited Jan. 19, 2012, and available in Clerk
of Court’s case file). In addition, the bugged container in Karo lacked
the close relationship with the target that a car shares with its owner.
The bugged container in Karo was stationary for much of the Government’s surveillance. See 468 U. S., at 708–710. A car’s movements, by
contrast, are its owner’s movements.


6

UNITED STATES v. JONES
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

to treat secrecy as a prerequisite for privacy. I would not
assume that all information voluntarily disclosed to some
member of the public for a limited purpose is, for that
reason alone, disentitled to Fourth Amendment protection.
See Smith, 442 U. S., at 749 (Marshall, J., dissenting)
(“Privacy is not a discrete commodity, possessed absolutely
or not at all. Those who disclose certain facts to a bank or
phone company for a limited business purpose need not
assume that this information will be released to other
persons for other purposes”); see also Katz, 389 U. S., at
351–352 (“[W]hat [a person] seeks to preserve as private,
even in an area accessible to the public, may be constitutionally protected”).
Resolution of these difficult questions in this case is
unnecessary, however, because the Government’s physical
intrusion on Jones’ Jeep supplies a narrower basis for
decision. I therefore join the majority’s opinion.

