(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STATES v. JONES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT
No. 10–1259. Argued November 8, 2011—Decided January 23, 2012
The Government obtained a search warrant permitting it to install a
Global-Positioning-System (GPS) tracking device on a vehicle registered to respondent Jones’s wife. The warrant authorized installation in the District of Columbia and within 10 days, but agents installed the device on the 11th day and in Maryland. The Government
then tracked the vehicle’s movements for 28 days. It subsequently
secured an indictment of Jones and others on drug trafficking conspiracy charges. The District Court suppressed the GPS data obtained while the vehicle was parked at Jones’s residence, but held the
remaining data admissible because Jones had no reasonable expectation of privacy when the vehicle was on public streets. Jones was
convicted. The D. C. Circuit reversed, concluding that admission of
the evidence obtained by warrantless use of the GPS device violated
the Fourth Amendment.
Held: The Government’s attachment of the GPS device to the vehicle,
and its use of that device to monitor the vehicle’s movements, constitutes a search under the Fourth Amendment. Pp. 3–12.
(a) The Fourth Amendment protects the “right of the people to be
secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures.” Here, the Government’s physical intrusion on an “effect” for the purpose of obtaining information constitutes a “search.” This type of encroachment on an area enumerated
in the Amendment would have been considered a search within the
meaning of the Amendment at the time it was adopted. Pp. 3–4.
(b) This conclusion is consistent with this Court’s Fourth Amendment jurisprudence, which until the latter half of the 20th century
was tied to common-law trespass. Later cases, which have deviated
from that exclusively property-based approach, have applied the


2

UNITED STATES v. JONES
Syllabus
analysis of Justice Harlan’s concurrence in Katz v. United States, 389
U. S. 347, which said that the Fourth Amendment protects a person’s
“reasonable expectation of privacy,” id., at 360. Here, the Court need
not address the Government’s contention that Jones had no “reasonable expectation of privacy,” because Jones’s Fourth Amendment
rights do not rise or fall with the Katz formulation. At bottom, the
Court must “assur[e] preservation of that degree of privacy against
government that existed when the Fourth Amendment was adopted.”
Kyllo v. United States, 533 U. S. 27, 34. Katz did not repudiate the
understanding that the Fourth Amendment embodies a particular
concern for government trespass upon the areas it enumerates. The
Katz reasonable-expectation-of-privacy test has been added to, but
not substituted for, the common-law trespassory test. See Alderman
v. United States, 394 U. S. 165, 176; Soldal v. Cook County, 506 U. S.
56, 64. United States v. Knotts, 460 U. S. 276, and United States v.
Karo, 468 U. S. 705—post-Katz cases rejecting Fourth Amendment
challenges to “beepers,” electronic tracking devices representing another form of electronic monitoring—do not foreclose the conclusion
that a search occurred here. New York v. Class, 475 U. S. 106, and
Oliver v. United States, 466 U. S. 170, also do not support the Government’s position. Pp. 4–12.
(c) The Government’s alternative argument—that if the attachment and use of the device was a search, it was a reasonable one—is
forfeited because it was not raised below. P. 12.

615 F. 3d 544, affirmed.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, THOMAS, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. SOTOMAYOR,
J., filed a concurring opinion. ALITO, J., filed an opinion concurring in
the judgment, in which GINSBURG, BREYER, and KAGAN, JJ., joined.

