Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–1259
_________________

UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. ANTOINE JONES
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT



[January 23, 2012]




JUSTICE SCALIA delivered the opinion of the Court.
We decide whether the attachment of a GlobalPositioning-System (GPS) tracking device to an individual’s vehicle, and subsequent use of that device to monitor
the vehicle’s movements on public streets, constitutes a
search or seizure within the meaning of the Fourth
Amendment.
I
In 2004 respondent Antoine Jones, owner and operator
of a nightclub in the District of Columbia, came under
suspicion of trafficking in narcotics and was made the
target of an investigation by a joint FBI and Metropolitan
Police Department task force. Officers employed various
investigative techniques, including visual surveillance of
the nightclub, installation of a camera focused on the front
door of the club, and a pen register and wiretap covering
Jones’s cellular phone.
Based in part on information gathered from these
sources, in 2005 the Government applied to the United
States District Court for the District of Columbia for a
warrant authorizing the use of an electronic tracking
device on the Jeep Grand Cherokee registered to Jones’s


2

UNITED STATES v. JONES
Opinion of the Court

wife. A warrant issued, authorizing installation of the device in the District of Columbia and within 10 days.
On the 11th day, and not in the District of Columbia but
in Maryland,1 agents installed a GPS tracking device on
the undercarriage of the Jeep while it was parked in a
public parking lot. Over the next 28 days, the Government used the device to track the vehicle’s movements,
and once had to replace the device’s battery when the
vehicle was parked in a different public lot in Maryland.
By means of signals from multiple satellites, the device
established the vehicle’s location within 50 to 100 feet, and
communicated that location by cellular phone to a Government computer. It relayed more than 2,000 pages of
data over the 4-week period.
The Government ultimately obtained a multiple-count
indictment charging Jones and several alleged coconspirators with, as relevant here, conspiracy to distribute and possess with intent to distribute five kilograms or
more of cocaine and 50 grams or more of cocaine base, in
violation of 21 U. S. C. §§841 and 846. Before trial, Jones
filed a motion to suppress evidence obtained through the
GPS device. The District Court granted the motion only in
part, suppressing the data obtained while the vehicle was
parked in the garage adjoining Jones’s residence. 451
F. Supp. 2d 71, 88 (2006). It held the remaining data
admissible, because “ ‘[a] person traveling in an automobile on public thoroughfares has no reasonable expectation
of privacy in his movements from one place to another.’ ”
Ibid. (quoting United States v. Knotts, 460 U. S. 276, 281
(1983)). Jones’s trial in October 2006 produced a hung
jury on the conspiracy count.
In March 2007, a grand jury returned another indict——————
1 In this litigation, the Government has conceded noncompliance with
the warrant and has argued only that a warrant was not required.
United States v. Maynard, 615 F. 3d 544, 566, n. (CADC 2010).


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

ment, charging Jones and others with the same conspiracy. The Government introduced at trial the same GPSderived locational data admitted in the first trial, which
connected Jones to the alleged conspirators’ stash house
that contained $850,000 in cash, 97 kilograms of cocaine,
and 1 kilogram of cocaine base. The jury returned a guilty
verdict, and the District Court sentenced Jones to life
imprisonment.
The United States Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit reversed the conviction because of admission of the evidence obtained by warrantless use of
the GPS device which, it said, violated the Fourth Amendment. United States v. Maynard, 615 F. 3d 544 (2010).
The D. C. Circuit denied the Government’s petition for
rehearing en banc, with four judges dissenting. 625 F. 3d
766 (2010). We granted certiorari, 564 U. S. ___ (2011).


II

A

The Fourth Amendment provides in relevant part that
“[t]he right of the people to be secure in their persons,
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches
and seizures, shall not be violated.” It is beyond dispute
that a vehicle is an “effect” as that term is used in the
Amendment. United States v. Chadwick, 433 U. S. 1, 12
(1977). We hold that the Government’s installation of a
GPS device on a target’s vehicle,2 and its use of that device
to monitor the vehicle’s movements, constitutes a “search.”
——————
2 As

we have noted, the Jeep was registered to Jones’s wife. The Government acknowledged, however, that Jones was “the exclusive driver.”
Id., at 555, n. (internal quotation marks omitted). If Jones was not the
owner he had at least the property rights of a bailee. The Court of
Appeals concluded that the vehicle’s registration did not affect his
ability to make a Fourth Amendment objection, ibid., and the Government has not challenged that determination here. We therefore do not
consider the Fourth Amendment significance of Jones’s status.


4

UNITED STATES v. JONES
Opinion of the Court

It is important to be clear about what occurred in this
case: The Government physically occupied private property for the purpose of obtaining information. We have no
doubt that such a physical intrusion would have been
considered a “search” within the meaning of the Fourth
Amendment when it was adopted. Entick v. Carrington,
95 Eng. Rep. 807 (C. P. 1765), is a “case we have described
as a ‘monument of English freedom’ ‘undoubtedly familiar’
to ‘every American statesman’ at the time the Constitution
was adopted, and considered to be ‘the true and ultimate
expression of constitutional law’ ” with regard to search
and seizure. Brower v. County of Inyo, 489 U. S. 593, 596
(1989) (quoting Boyd v. United States, 116 U. S. 616, 626
(1886)). In that case, Lord Camden expressed in plain
terms the significance of property rights in search-andseizure analysis:
“[O]ur law holds the property of every man so sacred,
that no man can set his foot upon his neighbour’s close
without his leave; if he does he is a trespasser, though
he does no damage at all; if he will tread upon his
neighbour’s ground, he must justify it by law.” Entick,
supra, at 817.
The text of the Fourth Amendment reflects its close connection to property, since otherwise it would have referred
simply to “the right of the people to be secure against
unreasonable searches and seizures”; the phrase “in their
persons, houses, papers, and effects” would have been
superfluous.
Consistent with this understanding, our Fourth
Amendment jurisprudence was tied to common-law trespass, at least until the latter half of the 20th century.
Kyllo v. United States, 533 U. S. 27, 31 (2001); Kerr, The
Fourth Amendment and New Technologies: Constitutional
Myths and the Case for Caution, 102 Mich. L. Rev. 801,
816 (2004). Thus, in Olmstead v. United States, 277 U. S.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

438 (1928), we held that wiretaps attached to telephone
wires on the public streets did not constitute a Fourth
Amendment search because “[t]here was no entry of the
houses or offices of the defendants,” id., at 464.
Our later cases, of course, have deviated from that
exclusively property-based approach. In Katz v. United
States, 389 U. S. 347, 351 (1967), we said that “the Fourth
Amendment protects people, not places,” and found a
violation in attachment of an eavesdropping device to a
public telephone booth. Our later cases have applied the
analysis of Justice Harlan’s concurrence in that case,
which said that a violation occurs when government officers violate a person’s “reasonable expectation of privacy,”
id., at 360. See, e.g., Bond v. United States, 529 U. S. 334
(2000); California v. Ciraolo, 476 U. S. 207 (1986); Smith
v. Maryland, 442 U. S. 735 (1979).
The Government contends that the Harlan standard
shows that no search occurred here, since Jones had no
“reasonable expectation of privacy” in the area of the Jeep
accessed by Government agents (its underbody) and in the
locations of the Jeep on the public roads, which were
visible to all. But we need not address the Government’s
contentions, because Jones’s Fourth Amendment rights
do not rise or fall with the Katz formulation. At bottom,
we must “assur[e] preservation of that degree of privacy
against government that existed when the Fourth
Amendment was adopted.” Kyllo, supra, at 34. As explained, for most of our history the Fourth Amendment
was understood to embody a particular concern for government trespass upon the areas (“persons, houses, papers, and effects”) it enumerates.3 Katz did not repudiate
——————
3 JUSTICE ALITO’s concurrence (hereinafter concurrence) doubts the
wisdom of our approach because “it is almost impossible to think of
late-18th-century situations that are analogous to what took place in
this case.” Post, at 3 (opinion concurring in judgment). But in fact it
posits a situation that is not far afield—a constable’s concealing himself


6

UNITED STATES v. JONES
Opinion of the Court

that understanding. Less than two years later the Court
upheld defendants’ contention that the Government could
not introduce against them conversations between other
people obtained by warrantless placement of electronic
surveillance devices in their homes. The opinion rejected
the dissent’s contention that there was no Fourth
Amendment violation “unless the conversational privacy of
the homeowner himself is invaded.”4 Alderman v. United
States, 394 U. S. 165, 176 (1969). “[W]e [do not] believe
that Katz, by holding that the Fourth Amendment protects
persons and their private conversations, was intended
to withdraw any of the protection which the Amendment
extends to the home . . . .” Id., at 180.
More recently, in Soldal v. Cook County, 506 U. S. 56
(1992), the Court unanimously rejected the argument that
although a “seizure” had occurred “in a ‘technical’ sense”
when a trailer home was forcibly removed, id., at 62, no
Fourth Amendment violation occurred because law enforcement had not “invade[d] the [individuals’] privacy,”
id., at 60. Katz, the Court explained, established that
“property rights are not the sole measure of Fourth
——————
in the target’s coach in order to track its movements. Ibid. There is no
doubt that the information gained by that trespassory activity would be
the product of an unlawful search—whether that information consisted
of the conversations occurring in the coach, or of the destinations to
which the coach traveled.
In any case, it is quite irrelevant whether there was an 18th-century
analog. Whatever new methods of investigation may be devised, our
task, at a minimum, is to decide whether the action in question would
have constituted a “search” within the original meaning of the Fourth
Amendment. Where, as here, the Government obtains information by
physically intruding on a constitutionally protected area, such a search
has undoubtedly occurred.
4 Thus, the concurrence’s attempt to recast Alderman as meaning that
individuals have a “legitimate expectation of privacy in all conversations that [take] place under their roof,” post, at 6–7, is foreclosed by
the Court’s opinion. The Court took as a given that the homeowner’s
“conversational privacy” had not been violated.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

Amendment violations,” but did not “snuf[f ] out the previously recognized protection for property.” 506 U. S., at 64.
As Justice Brennan explained in his concurrence in
Knotts, Katz did not erode the principle “that, when the
Government does engage in physical intrusion of a constitutionally protected area in order to obtain information,
that intrusion may constitute a violation of the Fourth
Amendment.” 460 U. S., at 286 (opinion concurring in
judgment). We have embodied that preservation of past
rights in our very definition of “reasonable expectation
of privacy” which we have said to be an expectation “that
has a source outside of the Fourth Amendment, either by
reference to concepts of real or personal property law or
to understandings that are recognized and permitted by
society.” Minnesota v. Carter, 525 U. S. 83, 88 (1998)
(internal quotation marks omitted). Katz did not narrow
the Fourth Amendment’s scope.5
The Government contends that several of our post-Katz
cases foreclose the conclusion that what occurred here
constituted a search. It relies principally on two cases in
——————
5 The

concurrence notes that post-Katz we have explained that “ ‘an
actual trespass is neither necessary nor sufficient to establish a constitutional violation.’ ” Post, at 6 (quoting United States v. Karo, 468 U. S.
705, 713 (1984)). That is undoubtedly true, and undoubtedly irrelevant. Karo was considering whether a seizure occurred, and as the
concurrence explains, a seizure of property occurs, not when there is a
trespass, but “when there is some meaningful interference with an
individual’s possessory interests in that property.” Post, at 2 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Likewise with a search. Trespass alone
does not qualify, but there must be conjoined with that what was
present here: an attempt to find something or to obtain information.
Related to this, and similarly irrelevant, is the concurrence’s point
that, if analyzed separately, neither the installation of the device nor
its use would constitute a Fourth Amendment search. See ibid. Of
course not. A trespass on “houses” or “effects,” or a Katz invasion of
privacy, is not alone a search unless it is done to obtain information;
and the obtaining of information is not alone a search unless it is
achieved by such a trespass or invasion of privacy.


8

UNITED STATES v. JONES
Opinion of the Court

which we rejected Fourth Amendment challenges to
“beepers,” electronic tracking devices that represent another form of electronic monitoring. The first case, Knotts,
upheld against Fourth Amendment challenge the use of a
“beeper” that had been placed in a container of chloroform,
allowing law enforcement to monitor the location of the
container. 460 U. S., at 278. We said that there had been
no infringement of Knotts’ reasonable expectation of privacy since the information obtained—the location of the
automobile carrying the container on public roads, and
the location of the off-loaded container in open fields near
Knotts’ cabin—had been voluntarily conveyed to the public.6 Id., at 281–282. But as we have discussed, the Katz
reasonable-expectation-of-privacy test has been added to,
not substituted for, the common-law trespassory test. The
holding in Knotts addressed only the former, since the
latter was not at issue. The beeper had been placed in
the container before it came into Knotts’ possession, with
the consent of the then-owner. 460 U. S., at 278. Knotts
did not challenge that installation, and we specifically declined to consider its effect on the Fourth Amendment
analysis. Id., at 279, n. Knotts would be relevant, perhaps, if the Government were making the argument that
what would otherwise be an unconstitutional search is
not such where it produces only public information. The
Government does not make that argument, and we know
of no case that would support it.
The second “beeper” case, United States v. Karo, 468
U. S. 705 (1984), does not suggest a different conclusion.
There we addressed the question left open by Knotts,
whether the installation of a beeper in a container
——————
6 Knotts noted the “limited use which the government made of the
signals from this particular beeper,” 460 U. S., at 284; and reserved the
question whether “different constitutional principles may be applicable”
to “dragnet-type law enforcement practices” of the type that GPS
tracking made possible here, ibid.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

amounted to a search or seizure. 468 U. S., at 713. As in
Knotts, at the time the beeper was installed the container
belonged to a third party, and it did not come into possession of the defendant until later. 468 U. S., at 708. Thus,
the specific question we considered was whether the installation “with the consent of the original owner constitute[d] a search or seizure . . . when the container is delivered to a buyer having no knowledge of the presence of the
beeper.” Id., at 707 (emphasis added). We held not. The
Government, we said, came into physical contact with
the container only before it belonged to the defendant Karo;
and the transfer of the container with the unmonitored
beeper inside did not convey any information and thus did
not invade Karo’s privacy. See id., at 712. That conclusion is perfectly consistent with the one we reach here.
Karo accepted the container as it came to him, beeper and
all, and was therefore not entitled to object to the beeper’s
presence, even though it was used to monitor the container’s location. Cf. On Lee v. United States, 343 U. S. 747,
751–752 (1952) (no search or seizure where an informant,
who was wearing a concealed microphone, was invited into
the defendant’s business). Jones, who possessed the Jeep
at the time the Government trespassorily inserted the
information-gathering device, is on much different footing.
The Government also points to our exposition in New
York v. Class, 475 U. S. 106 (1986), that “[t]he exterior of
a car . . . is thrust into the public eye, and thus to examine
it does not constitute a ‘search.’ ” Id., at 114. That statement is of marginal relevance here since, as the Government acknowledges, “the officers in this case did more
than conduct a visual inspection of respondent’s vehicle,”
Brief for United States 41 (emphasis added). By attaching
the device to the Jeep, officers encroached on a protected
area. In Class itself we suggested that this would make a
difference, for we concluded that an officer’s momentary
reaching into the interior of a vehicle did constitute a


10

UNITED STATES v. JONES
Opinion of the Court

search.7 475 U. S., at 114–115.
Finally, the Government’s position gains little support
from our conclusion in Oliver v. United States, 466 U. S.
170 (1984), that officers’ information-gathering intrusion
on an “open field” did not constitute a Fourth Amendment
search even though it was a trespass at common law, id.,
at 183. Quite simply, an open field, unlike the curtilage of
a home, see United States v. Dunn, 480 U. S. 294, 300
(1987), is not one of those protected areas enumerated in
the Fourth Amendment. Oliver, supra, at 176–177. See
also Hester v. United States, 265 U. S. 57, 59 (1924). The
Government’s physical intrusion on such an area—unlike
its intrusion on the “effect” at issue here—is of no Fourth
Amendment significance.8
B
The concurrence begins by accusing us of applying
“18th-century tort law.” Post, at 1. That is a distortion.
What we apply is an 18th-century guarantee against unreasonable searches, which we believe must provide at
——————
7 The

Government also points to Cardwell v. Lewis, 417 U. S. 583
(1974), in which the Court rejected the claim that the inspection of an
impounded vehicle’s tire tread and the collection of paint scrapings
from its exterior violated the Fourth Amendment. Whether the plurality said so because no search occurred or because the search was reasonable is unclear. Compare id., at 591 (opinion of Blackmun, J.)
(“[W]e fail to comprehend what expectation of privacy was infringed”),
with id., at 592 (“Under circumstances such as these, where probable
cause exists, a warrantless examination of the exterior of a car is not
unreasonable . . . ”).
8 Thus, our theory is not that the Fourth Amendment is concerned
with “any technical trespass that led to the gathering of evidence.”
Post, at 3 (ALITO, J., concurring in judgment) (emphasis added). The
Fourth Amendment protects against trespassory searches only with
regard to those items (“persons, houses, papers, and effects”) that it
enumerates. The trespass that occurred in Oliver may properly be
understood as a “search,” but not one “in the constitutional sense.” 466
U. S., at 170, 183.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

a minimum the degree of protection it afforded when it
was adopted. The concurrence does not share that belief.
It would apply exclusively Katz’s reasonable-expectationof-privacy test, even when that eliminates rights that
previously existed.
The concurrence faults our approach for “present[ing]
particularly vexing problems” in cases that do not involve
physical contact, such as those that involve the transmission of electronic signals. Post, at 9. We entirely fail to
understand that point. For unlike the concurrence, which
would make Katz the exclusive test, we do not make trespass the exclusive test. Situations involving merely the
transmission of electronic signals without trespass would
remain subject to Katz analysis.
In fact, it is the concurrence’s insistence on the exclusivity of the Katz test that needlessly leads us into “particularly vexing problems” in the present case. This Court has
to date not deviated from the understanding that mere
visual observation does not constitute a search. See Kyllo,
533 U. S., at 31–32. We accordingly held in Knotts that
“[a] person traveling in an automobile on public thoroughfares has no reasonable expectation of privacy in his
movements from one place to another.” 460 U. S., at 281.
Thus, even assuming that the concurrence is correct to
say that “[t]raditional surveillance” of Jones for a 4-week
period “would have required a large team of agents, multiple vehicles, and perhaps aerial assistance,” post, at 12,
our cases suggest that such visual observation is constitutionally permissible. It may be that achieving the same
result through electronic means, without an accompanying trespass, is an unconstitutional invasion of privacy,
but the present case does not require us to answer that
question.
And answering it affirmatively leads us needlessly into
additional thorny problems. The concurrence posits that
“relatively short-term monitoring of a person’s movements


12

UNITED STATES v. JONES
Opinion of the Court

on public streets” is okay, but that “the use of longer term
GPS monitoring in investigations of most offenses” is no
good. Post, at 13 (emphasis added). That introduces yet
another novelty into our jurisprudence. There is no precedent for the proposition that whether a search has occurred depends on the nature of the crime being investigated. And even accepting that novelty, it remains
unexplained why a 4-week investigation is “surely” too
long and why a drug-trafficking conspiracy involving substantial amounts of cash and narcotics is not an “extraordinary offens[e]” which may permit longer observation.
See post, at 13–14. What of a 2-day monitoring of a
suspected purveyor of stolen electronics? Or of a 6-month
monitoring of a suspected terrorist? We may have to
grapple with these “vexing problems” in some future case
where a classic trespassory search is not involved and
resort must be had to Katz analysis; but there is no reason
for rushing forward to resolve them here.
III
The Government argues in the alternative that even if
the attachment and use of the device was a search, it was
reasonable—and thus lawful—under the Fourth Amendment because “officers had reasonable suspicion, and indeed probable cause, to believe that [Jones] was a leader
in a large-scale cocaine distribution conspiracy.” Brief for
United States 50–51. We have no occasion to consider this
argument. The Government did not raise it below, and
the D. C. Circuit therefore did not address it. See 625
F. 3d, at 767 (Ginsburg, Tatel, and Griffith, JJ., concurring in denial of rehearing en banc). We consider the
argument forfeited. See Sprietsma v. Mercury Marine, 537
U. S. 51, 56, n. 4 (2002).
*
*
*
The judgment of the Court of Appeals for the D. C.
Circuit is affirmed.
It is so ordered.

