Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

THOMAS, J., dissenting

ingly, I would take the case and decide the questions
presented in the Solicitor General’s brief.16

——————
as the Solicitor General is careful to note, Noriega is “the only person
currently detained by the United States as a prisoner of war.” Ibid.
(emphasis added). Accordingly, the lack of a circuit split on the ques
tion whether MCA §5(a) bars POWs in federal custody in the United
States from invoking the Geneva Conventions in habeas proceedings
does not negate the compelling reasons to grant review. Indeed, the
Court has taken cases in this area without the benefit of any opinion
from a court of appeals, see Ex parte Quirin, supra, and in splitless
cases involving rare facts and ongoing diplomatic negotiations, see
Kiyemba I, ante, p. ___. The Court has also granted review of separa
tion-of-powers and other important legal questions on records far less
developed than that here, see, e.g., Robertson v. United States ex rel.
Watson, ante, p. ___; Christian Legal Soc. Chapter of Univ. of Cal.
Hasting College of Law v. Martinez, ante, p. ___; on petitions that have
required us to reformulate the questions presented, see, e.g., Robertson,
supra; Reed Elsevier, Inc. v. Muchnick, 555 U. S. ___ (2009); and even
on petitions we initially denied, see Boumediene v. Bush, 551 U. S. 1160
(2007). The Solicitor General also claims (again based on the fact that
Noriega is “currently” the only POW in U. S. custody) that review is not
warranted because the Eleventh Circuit’s decision is of “limited ongoing
significance.” Ibid. This assertion is not persuasive for the reasons set
forth above.
16 As noted, the Solicitor General’s first question presented is whether
MCA §5(a) “precludes petitioner from invoking” the Third Geneva
Convention “as a source of rights in a habeas corpus proceeding.” Brief
in Opposition i. Such statutory questions do not automatically, or even
typically, require a court to consider the statute’s constitutionality.
Here, however, Noriega has consistently argued that, if the statute
precludes him from invoking the Geneva Conventions in the manner
the Solicitor General’s question describes and the Eleventh Circuit
held, the statute would violate the Suspension Clause. See supra, at
6−7. Thus, the Suspension Clause issue may in this case fairly be
viewed as implicit in the statutory question presented.

