10

NORIEGA v. PASTRANA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

that MCA §5(a) is unconstitutional because it “effectively
works a suspension of the writ” by imposing the same type
of statutory limitation the Court addressed in St. Cyr.
Reply to Brief in Opposition 2 (implicitly equating the
constitutional scope of the writ with §2241’s grant of
habeas corpus jurisdiction over individuals allegedly “held
in violation of the Constitution, laws, or treaties of the
United States”). The Eleventh Circuit, however, saw no
constitutional problem with the statute and upheld it as
valid and distinguishable from the provision deemed
unconstitutional in Boumediene. See 564 F. 3d, at 1294.
Addressing Noriega’s challenge to the Eleventh Circuit’s
decision would resolve the important statutory and consti
tutional questions here and would guide courts and the
political branches in addressing the same and similar
issues in other detainee cases. See, e.g., Al-Bihani, supra,
at *5 (“The Supreme Court has provided scant guidance on
these questions, consciously leaving the contours of the
substantive and procedural law of detention open for lower
courts to shape in a common law fashion.”). Recent court
decisions, as well as recent Executive Branch court filings
and policy determinations, specifically invoke the Geneva
Conventions as part of the law that governs detainee
treatment in the United States and abroad. For example,
in September 2009, the U.S. District Court for the District
of Columbia issued a redacted version of a classified
memorandum opinion in which it granted habeas corpus
relief in the oldest of the pending Guantanamo cases
because the petitioner’s indefinite detention was based
“almost exclusively” on unreliable “confessions” obtained
“using abusive techniques that violated the Army Field
——————
the Court concedes, the writ could not be suspended within the mean
ing of the Suspension Clause until Congress affirmatively provided for
habeas by statute, then surely Congress may subsequently alter what it
had initially provided for, lest the Clause become a one-way ratchet.”
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted)).

