Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

THOMAS, J., dissenting

corpus action. Pet. for Cert. 10; see also id., at 12 (“At
best, the statutory scheme is ambiguous”). Noriega next
asserts that, if the Eleventh Circuit’s interpretation of
§5(a) is correct, the provision violates the Supremacy
Clause, see id., at 11−12, and the Suspension Clause, see
Reply to Brief in Opposition 2. Noriega’s Supremacy
Clause argument is that, to the extent MCA §5(a) governs
his Geneva Convention claims, the provision impermissi
bly effects a “complete repudiation” of the treaty. Pet. for
Cert. 11. The Government responds that this argument
suffers from two fatal flaws. First, this Court has held
that a treaty, which is “ ‘primarily a compact between
independent nations,’ ” remains in force as the supreme
law of the land even where its enforcement is left to “in
ternational negotiations” rather than “domestic courts.”
Brief in Opposition 7 (quoting Head Money Cases, 112
U. S. 580, 598 (1884)); see Medellín, supra, at 505, and
n. 3. Second, “[w]hatever the domestic effect of the Third
Geneva Convention before the enactment of the MCA,”
this Court has held that ‘it is within Congress’ power to
change domestic law, even if the law originally arose from
a self-executing treaty.’ ” Brief in Opposition 7 (quoting
Noriega, supra, at 1295–1296); see also Medellín, supra, at
509, n. 5. Accordingly, the Government agrees with the
Eleventh Circuit that MCA §5(a) “does not change the
international obligations of the United States under the
Geneva Conventions,” but does “supersed[e] whatever
domestic effect the Geneva Conventions may have had in
actions such as this.” Brief in Opposition 7–8 (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted).
That brings
Noriega to his Suspension Clause argument. He replies
that, if MCA §5(a) operates in the manner the Govern
ment describes and the Eleventh Circuit held, the provi
sion is unconstitutional under Boumediene because it
“effectively works a suspension of the writ.” Reply to Brief
in Opposition 2 (asserting that “to divorce the writ from

