14

NORIEGA v. PASTRANA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

(as they did here) with Geneva Convention claims in
habeas corpus proceedings.13 And, it would give the politi
cal branches a clearer sense of the constitutional limits to
which new legislative or policy initiatives must adhere.
The latter benefit would also follow if we were to invali
date MCA §5(a). In addition, such a ruling could well
allow us to reach the question we left open in Hamdan—
whether the Geneva Conventions are self-executing and
judicially enforceable—because this case is not governed
by the Uniform Code of Military Justice provisions on
which the Hamdan majority relied in holding Common
Article III applicable to the proceedings in that case. See
Hamdan, 548 U. S., at 627–628; see also id., at 637, 642–
643 (KENNEDY, J., concurring in part). Finally, if the
Court were to conclude that the Conventions are self
executing and judicially enforceable in habeas corpus
proceedings, this case would present two additional ques
tions relevant to noncitizen detainee litigation: whether
federal courts may classify such detainees as POWs under
the Third Convention, and whether any of the Conven
tions requires the United States immediately to repatriate
detainees entitled to release from U. S. custody.14
Against these considerations, the Government pro
vides no compelling reason to decline review.15 Accord
——————
13 MCA §5(a) applies not only to individuals who, like Noriega, have
(rightly or not) been designated POWs, but also to “any person” who
invokes the Conventions as a source of rights in any “habeas or other
civil action” to which the United States is a party, see 120 Stat. 2631,
note following 28 U. S. C. §2241.
14 Both questions are subsumed in the second question in the Solicitor
General’s brief: “[w]hether, assuming petitioner can assert a claim
based on the Geneva Convention, his extradition to France would
violate the Convention.” Brief in Opposition i.
15 The Solicitor General’s principal ground for opposing certiorari is
that the Eleventh Circuit’s decision does not conflict with the decision
of any other Circuit. See Brief in Opposition 6. That is true but not
surprising. The original version of the MCA is only three years old and,

