Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
risdiction exclusive in TCPA enforcement actions brought by state
authorities, see 47 U. S. C. A. §227(g)(2) (Supp. 2011), and may simply have wanted to avoid any argument that federal jurisdiction was
also exclusive for private actions. Moreover, by providing that private actions may be brought in state court “if otherwise permitted by
the laws or rules of court of [the] State,” 47 U. S. C. §227(b)(3), Congress arguably gave States leeway they would otherwise lack to decide whether to entertain TCPA claims.
Arrow further asserts that making state-court jurisdiction over
§227(b)(3) claims exclusive serves Congress’ objective of enabling
States to control telemarketers whose interstate operations evaded
state law. Even so, jurisdiction conferred by 28 U. S. C. §1331 should
hold firm against “mere implication flowing from subsequent legislation.” Colorado River Water Conservation Dist. v. United States, 424
U. S. 800, 808, 809, n. 15. Furthermore, had Congress sought only to
fill a gap in the States’ enforcement capabilities, it could have provided that out-of-state telemarketing calls directed into a State would be
subject to the receiving State’s laws. Instead, Congress enacted detailed, uniform, federal substantive prescriptions and provided for a
regulatory regime administered by a federal agency.
Arrow’s reliance on a statement by Senator Hollings, the TCPA’s
sponsor, is misplaced. The remarks nowhere mention federal-court
jurisdiction or otherwise suggest that 47 U. S. C. §227(b)(3) is intended to divest federal courts of authority over TCPA claims. Even if
Hollings and other TCPA supporters expected private actions to proceed solely in state courts, their expectation would not control this
Court’s judgment on §1331’s compass. Arrow’s arguments that federal courts will be inundated by $500-per-violation TCPA claims or
that defendants could use federal-court removal to force small-claimscourt plaintiffs to abandon suit seem more imaginary than real.
Pp. 10–18.
421 Fed. Appx. 920, reversed and remanded.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

