16

MIMS v. ARROW FINANCIAL SERVICES, LLC
Opinion of the Court

First, the views of a single legislator, even a bill’s sponsor, are not controlling. Consumer Product Safety Comm’n
v. GTE Sylvania, Inc., 447 U. S. 102, 118 (1980). Second,
Senator Hollings did not mention federal-court jurisdiction
or otherwise suggest that 47 U. S. C. §227(b)(3) is intended to divest federal courts of authority to hear TCPA
claims. Hollings no doubt believed that mine-run TCPA
claims would be pursued most expeditiously in state
small-claims court.14 But one cannot glean from his
statement any expectation that those courts, or state
courts generally, would have exclusive jurisdiction over
private actions alleging violations of the Act or of the
FCC’s implementing regulations. Third, even if we agreed
with Arrow that Senator Hollings expected private TCPA
actions to proceed solely in state courts, and even if other
supporters shared his view, that expectation would not
control our judgment on 28 U. S. C. §1331’s compass. Cf.
Yellow Freight, 494 U. S., at 826 (“persuasive showing
that most legislators, judges, and administrators . . .
involved in the enactment, amendment, enforcement, and
interpretation of Title VII expected that such litigation would be processed exclusively in federal courts”
did not overcome presumption of concurrent state-court
jurisdiction).
Among its arguments for state-court exclusivity, Arrow
raises a concern about the impact on federal courts were
we to uphold §1331 jurisdiction over private actions under
the TCPA. “[G]iven the enormous volume of telecommunications presenting potential claims,” Arrow projects, federal courts could be inundated by $500-per-violation TCPA
——————
14 The complaint in this very case, we note, could not have been
brought in small-claims court. Mims alleged some 12 calls, and sought
treble damages ($1,500) for each. See App. 9–14; Tr. of Oral Arg. 12.
The amount he sought to recover far exceeded the $5,000 ceiling on
claims a Florida small-claims court can adjudicate. See Fla. Small
Claims Rule 7.010(b) (rev. ed. 2011).

