2

MIMS v. ARROW FINANCIAL SERVICES, LLC
Opinion of the Court

Petitioner Marcus D. Mims, complaining of multiple
violations of the Act by respondent Arrow Financial Services, LLC (Arrow), a debt-collection agency, commenced
an action for damages against Arrow in the U. S. District
Court for the Southern District of Florida. Mims invoked
the court’s “federal question” jurisdiction, i.e., its authority
to adjudicate claims “arising under the . . . laws . . . of
the United States,” 28 U. S. C. §1331. The District Court,
affirmed by the U. S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh
Circuit, dismissed Mims’s complaint for want of subjectmatter jurisdiction. Both courts relied on Congress’ specification, in the TCPA, that a private person may seek
redress for violations of the Act (or of the Commission’s
regulations thereunder) “in an appropriate court of [a]
State,” “if [such an action is] otherwise permitted by the
laws or rules of court of [that] State.” 47 U. S. C.
§§227(b)(3), (c)(5).
The question presented is whether Congress’ provision
for private actions to enforce the TCPA renders state
courts the exclusive arbiters of such actions. We have long
recognized that “[a] suit arises under the law that creates
the cause of action.” American Well Works Co. v. Layne &
Bowler Co., 241 U. S. 257, 260 (1916). Beyond doubt, the
TCPA is a federal law that both creates the claim Mims
has brought and supplies the substantive rules that will
govern the case. We find no convincing reason to read into
the TCPA’s permissive grant of jurisdiction to state courts
any barrier to the U. S. district courts’ exercise of the
general federal-question jurisdiction they have possessed
since 1875. See Act of Mar. 3, 1875, §1, 18 Stat. 470; 13D
C. Wright, A. Miller, E. Cooper, & R. Freer, Federal Practice and Procedure §3561, p. 163 (3d ed. 2008) (hereinafter
Wright & Miller). We hold, therefore, that federal and
state courts have concurrent jurisdiction over private suits
arising under the TCPA.

