(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MIMS v. ARROW FINANCIAL SERVICES, LLC
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–1195. Argued November 28, 2011—Decided January 18, 2012
Consumer complaints about abuses of telephone technology—for example, computerized calls to private homes—prompted Congress to pass
the Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991 (TCPA or Act), 47
U. S. C. §227. Congress determined that federal legislation was
needed because telemarketers, by operating interstate, were escaping
state-law prohibitions on intrusive nuisance calls. The Act bans certain invasive telemarketing practices and directs the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to prescribe implementing regulations. It authorizes States to bring civil actions to enjoin prohibited
practices and recover damages on their residents’ behalf, 47 U. S. C.
A. §227(g)(1) (Supp. 2011), and provides that jurisdiction over these
state-initiated suits lies exclusively in the U. S. district courts,
§227(g)(2). It also permits a private person to seek redress for violations of the Act or regulations “in an appropriate court of [a] State,”
“if [such an action is] otherwise permitted by the laws or rules of
court of [that] State.” 47 U. S. C. §§227(b)(3), (c)(5).
Petitioner Mims filed a damages action in Federal District Court,
alleging that respondent Arrow, seeking to collect a debt, violated the
TCPA by repeatedly using an automatic telephone dialing system or
prerecorded or artificial voice to call Mims’s cellular phone without
his consent. Mims invoked the court’s “federal question” jurisdiction,
i.e., its authority to adjudicate claims “arising under the . . . laws . . .
of the United States,” 28 U. S. C. §1331. The District Court, affirmed
by the Eleventh Circuit, dismissed Mims’s complaint for want of subject-matter jurisdiction, concluding that the TCPA had vested jurisdiction over private actions exclusively in state courts.
Held: The TCPA’s permissive grant of jurisdiction to state courts does
not deprive the U. S. district courts of federal-question jurisdiction

