(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

VARTELAS v. HOLDER, ATTORNEY GENERAL
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 10–1211. Argued January 18, 2012—Decided March 28, 2012
Before passage of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 (IIRIRA), United States immigration law
provided deportation hearings for excludable aliens who had already
entered the United States and exclusion hearings for excludable aliens seeking entry into the United States. Lawful permanent residents were not regarded as making an “entry,” upon their return
from “innocent, casual, and brief excursion[s] . . . outside this country’s borders.” Rosenberg v. Fleuti, 374 U. S. 449, 462. In IIRIRA,
Congress abolished the distinction between exclusion and deportation
procedures, creating a uniform “removal” proceeding. See 8 U. S. C.
§§1229, 1229a. Congress made “admission” the key word, and defined “admission” to mean “the lawful entry of the alien into the
United States after inspection and authorization by an immigration
officer.” §1101(a)(13)(A). This alteration, the Board of Immigration
Appeals (BIA) determined, superseded Fleuti. Thus, lawful permanent residents returning from a trip abroad are now regarded as
seeking admission if they have “committed an offense identified in
section 1182(a)(2),” §1101(a)(13)(C)(v), including, as relevant here, “a
crime involving moral turpitude . . . or conspiracy to commit such a
crime,” §1182(a)(2)(A)(i).
Petitioner Vartelas, a lawful permanent resident of the United
States since 1989, pleaded guilty to a felony (conspiring to make a
counterfeit security) in 1994, and served a 4-month prison sentence.
In the years after his conviction, and even after IIRIRA’s passage,
Vartelas regularly traveled to Greece to visit his aging parents. In
2003, when Vartelas returned from a week-long trip to Greece, an
immigration officer classified him as an alien seeking “admission”
based on his 1994 conviction. At Vartelas’ removal proceedings, his


2

VARTELAS v. HOLDER
Syllabus
attorneys conceded removability and requested discretionary relief
under former §212(c) of the Immigration and Nationality Act. The
Immigration Judge denied the request for relief, and ordered Vartelas removed to Greece. The BIA affirmed. In 2008, Vartelas filed
with the BIA a timely motion to reopen the removal proceedings, alleging that his previous attorneys were ineffective for, among other
lapses, conceding his removability. He sought to withdraw the concession of removability on the ground that IIRIRA’s new “admission”
provision did not reach back to deprive him of lawful resident status
based on his pre-IIRIRA conviction. The BIA denied the motion. The
Second Circuit affirmed. Rejecting Vartelas’ argument that IIRIRA
operated prospectively and therefore did not govern his case, the Second Circuit reasoned that he had not relied on the prior legal regime
at the time he committed the disqualifying crime.

Held: The impact of Vartelas’ brief travel abroad on his permanent resident status is determined not by IIRIRA, but by the legal regime in
force at the time of his conviction. Pp. 7–17.
(a) Under the principle against retroactive legislation invoked by
Vartelas, courts read laws as prospective in application unless Congress has unambiguously instructed retroactivity. See Landgraf v.
USI Film Products, 511 U. S. 244, 263. The presumption against retroactive legislation “embodies a legal doctrine centuries older than
our Republic.” Id., at 265. Numerous decisions of this Court have
invoked Justice Story’s formulation for determining when a law’s retrospective application would collide with the doctrine, namely, as relevant here, when such application would “attac[h] a new disability, in
respect to transactions or considerations already past,” Society for
Propagation of Gospel v. Wheeler, 22 F. Cas. 756, 767. See, e.g., INS
v. St. Cyr, 533 U. S. 289, 321; Hughes Aircraft Co. v. United States ex
rel. Schumer, 520 U. S. 939, 947; Landgraf, 511 U. S., at 283. Vartelas urges that applying IIRIRA to him would attach a “new disability,” effectively a ban on travel outside the United States, “in respect
to” past events, specifically, his offense, guilty plea, conviction, and
punishment, all occurring prior to IIRIRA’s passage.
Congress did not expressly prescribe §1101(a)(13)’s temporal reach.
The Court, therefore, proceeds to the dispositive question whether
application of IIRIRA’s travel restraint to Vartelas “would have retroactive effect” Congress did not authorize. See id., at 280. Vartelas
presents a firm case for application of the antiretroactivity principle.
Beyond genuine doubt §1101(a)(13)(C)(v)’s restraint on lawful permanent residents like Vartelas ranks as a “new disability.” Once
able to journey abroad to, e.g., fulfill religious obligations or respond
to family emergencies, they now face potential banishment, a severe
sanction. See, e.g., Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U. S. ___, ___. The Gov-


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
ernment suggests that Vartelas could have avoided any adverse consequences if he simply stayed at home in the United States. But losing the ability to travel abroad is itself a harsh penalty, made all the
more devastating if it means enduring separation from close family
members.
This Court has rejected arguments for retroactivity in similar
cases, see Chew Heong v. United States, 112 U. S. 536, 559; St. Cyr,
533 U. S., at 321–323, and in cases in which the loss at stake was less
momentous, see Landgraf, 511 U. S., at 280–286; Hughes Aircraft,
520 U. S., at 946–950. Pp. 7–11.
(b) The Court finds disingenuous the Government’s argument that
no retroactive effect is involved in this case because the relevant
event is the alien’s post-IIRIRA return to the United States. Vartelas’ return occasioned his treatment as a new entrant, but the reason for his “new disability” was his pre-IIRIRA conviction. That past
misconduct is the wrongful activity targeted by §1101(a)(13)(C)(v).
Pp. 11–13.
(c) In determining that the change IIRIRA wrought had no retroactive effect, the Second Circuit homed in on the words “committed an
offense” in §1101(a)(13)(C)(v). It reasoned that reliance on the prior
law is essential to application of the antiretroactivity principle, and
that Vartelas did not commit his crime in reliance on immigration
laws. This reasoning is doubly flawed. A party is not required to
show reliance on the prior law in structuring his conduct. See, e.g.,
Landgraf, 511 U. S., at 282, n. 35. In any event, Vartelas likely relied on then-existing immigration law, and this likelihood strengthens the case for reading a newly enacted law prospectively. St. Cyr is
illustrative. There, a lawful permanent resident pleaded guilty to a
criminal charge that made him deportable. Under the immigration
law in effect when he was convicted, he would have been eligible to
apply for a waiver of deportation. But his removal proceeding was
commenced after IIRIRA withdrew that dispensation. Disallowance
of discretionary waivers attached a new disability to past conduct,
533 U. S., at 321. Aliens like St. Cyr “almost certainly relied upon
th[e] likelihood [of receiving discretionary relief] in deciding [to plead
guilty, thereby] forgo[ing] their right to a trial,” id., at 325. Because
applying the IIRIRA withdrawal to St. Cyr would have an “obvious
and severe retroactive effect,” ibid., and Congress made no such intention plain, ibid., n. 55, the prior law governed St. Cyr’s case. Vartelas’ case is at least as clear as St. Cyr’s for declining to apply a new
law retroactively. St. Cyr could seek only the Attorney General’s discretionary dispensation, while Vartelas, under Fleuti, was free, without seeking an official’s permission, to make short trips to see and assist his parents in Greece. The Second Circuit compounded its initial


4

VARTELAS v. HOLDER
Syllabus
misperception of the antiretroactivity principle by holding otherwise.
Fleuti continues to govern Vartelas’ short-term travel. Pp. 14–17.

620 F. 3d 108, reversed and remanded.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, BREYER, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined.
SCALIA, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which THOMAS and ALITO, JJ.,
joined.

