Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Per Curiam

Abrams v. Johnson, 521 U. S. 74, 79 (1997) (holding that
the District Court properly declined to defer to a precleared plan that used race as a predominant factor). For
example, in White, supra, an equal population challenge,
this Court reversed a District Court’s choice of interim
plan, and required the District Court to choose a plan
more closely resembling an enacted state plan, even
though the state plan itself had been held to violate the
one-person, one-vote principle. Similarly, in Upham v.
Seamon, although the state plan as a whole had been
denied §5 preclearance, this Court directed a District
Court to “defer to the legislative judgments the [state]
plans reflect,” insofar as they involved districts found to
meet the preclearance standard. 456 U. S. 37, 40–41
(1982) (per curiam). See also Whitcomb v. Chavis, 403
U. S. 124, 160–161 (1971) (equal protection challenge).
Section 5 prevents a state plan from being implemented
if it has not been precleared. But that does not mean that
the plan is of no account or that the policy judgments it
reflects can be disregarded by a district court drawing an
interim plan. On the contrary, the state plan serves as a
starting point for the district court. It provides important
guidance that helps ensure that the district court appropriately confines itself to drawing interim maps that
comply with the Constitution and the Voting Rights Act,
without displacing legitimate state policy judgments with
the court’s own preferences.
A district court making such use of a State’s plan must,
of course, take care not to incorporate into the interim
plan any legal defects in the state plan. See Abrams,
supra, at 85–86; White, supra, at 797. Where a State’s
plan faces challenges under the Constitution or §2 of the
Voting Rights Act, a district court should still be guided by
that plan, except to the extent those legal challenges are
shown to have a likelihood of success on the merits. Plaintiffs seeking a preliminary injunction of a statute must

