6

PERRY v. PEREZ
Per Curiam

normally demonstrate that they are likely to succeed on
the merits of their challenge to that law. See Winter v.
Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 555 U. S. 7, 20
(2008). There is no reason that plaintiffs seeking to defeat
the policies behind a State’s redistricting legislation
should not also have to meet that standard. And because
the local district court—here, the District Court for the
Western District of Texas—will ultimately decide the
merits of claims under §2 and the Constitution, it is well
equipped to apply that familiar standard.
The calculus with respect to §5 challenges is somewhat
different. Where a State has sought preclearance in the
District Court for the District of Columbia, §5 allows only
that court to determine whether the state plan complies
with §5. Consistent with that design, we have made clear
that other district courts may not address the merits of §5
challenges. See, e.g., Perkins v. Matthews, 400 U. S. 379,
385 (1971). The local district court drafting an interim
plan must therefore be careful not to prejudge the merits
of the preclearance proceedings. The court should presume neither that a State’s effort to preclear its plan will
succeed nor that it will fail.
The need to avoid prejudging the merits of preclearance
is satisfied by taking guidance from a State’s policy judgments unless they reflect aspects of the state plan that
stand a reasonable probability of failing to gain §5 preclearance. And by “reasonable probability” this Court
means in this context that the §5 challenge is not insubstantial. That standard ensures that a district court is not
deprived of important guidance provided by a state plan
due to §5 challenges that have no reasonable probability of
success but still respects the jurisdiction and prerogative
of those responsible for the preclearance determination.
And the reasonable probability standard adequately balances the unique preclearance scheme with the State’s
sovereignty and a district court’s need for policy guidance

