Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Per Curiam

in constructing an interim map. This Court recently noted
the “serious constitutional questions” raised by §5’s intrusion on state sovereignty. Northwest Austin, 557 U. S., at
204. Those concerns would only be exacerbated if §5
required a district court to wholly ignore the State’s policies in drawing maps that will govern a State’s elections,
without any reason to believe those state policies are
unlawful.
Appellees, however, contend that §5 demands exactly
that. In their view, this Court’s precedents require district
courts to ignore any state plan that has not received §5
preclearance. But the cases upon which appellees rely
hold only that a district court may not adopt an unprecleared plan as its own. See Lopez v. Monterey County,
519 U. S. 9 (1996); McDaniel v. Sanchez, 452 U. S. 130
(1981). They say nothing about whether a district court
may take guidance from the lawful policies incorporated in
such a plan for aid in drawing an interim map. Indeed, in
Upham this Court ordered a District Court to defer to the
unobjectionable aspects of a State’s plan even though that
plan had already been denied preclearance.
In this case, the District Court stated that it had
“giv[en] effect to as much of the policy judgments in the
Legislature’s enacted map as possible.” 1 App. 182. At
the same time, however, the court said that it was required to draw an “independent map” following “neutral
principles that advance the interest of the collective public
good.” Id., at 169–170. In the court’s view, it “was not
required to give any deference to the Legislature’s enacted
plan,” and it instead applied principles that it determined
“place the interests of the citizens of Texas first.” Id., at
171. To the extent the District Court exceeded its mission
to draw interim maps that do not violate the Constitution
or the Voting Rights Act, and substituted its own concept
of “the collective public good” for the Texas Legislature’s
determination of which policies serve “the interests of the

