4

PERRY v. PEREZ
Per Curiam

tion” of creating an interim plan. Connor, supra, at 415.
Even then, the plan already in effect may give sufficient
structure to the court’s endeavor. Where shifts in a
State’s population have been relatively small, a court may
need to make only minor or obvious adjustments to the
State’s existing districts in order to devise an interim plan.
But here the scale of Texas’ population growth appears
to require sweeping changes to the State’s current districts. In areas where population shifts are so large that
no semblance of the existing plan’s district lines can be
used, that plan offers little guidance to a court drawing an
interim map. The problem is perhaps most obvious in
adding new congressional districts: The old plan gives no
suggestion as to where those new districts should be
placed. In addition, experience has shown the difficulty of
defining neutral legal principles in this area, for redistricting ordinarily involves criteria and standards that have
been weighed and evaluated by the elected branches in the
exercise of their political judgment. See, e.g., Miller v.
Johnson, 515 U. S. 900, 915–916 (1995); White v. Weiser,
412 U. S. 783, 795–796 (1973). Thus, if the old state districts were the only source to which a district court could
look, it would be forced to make the sort of policy judgments for which courts are, at best, ill suited.
To avoid being compelled to make such otherwise standardless decisions, a district court should take guidance
from the State’s recently enacted plan in drafting an
interim plan. That plan reflects the State’s policy judgments on where to place new districts and how to shift
existing ones in response to massive population growth.
This Court has observed before that “faced with the necessity of drawing district lines by judicial order, a court, as a
general rule, should be guided by the legislative policies
underlying” a state plan—even one that was itself unenforceable—“to the extent those policies do not lead to
violations of the Constitution or the Voting Rights Act.”

