2

VARTELAS v. HOLDER
SCALIA, J., dissenting

nent residents convicted of offenses similar to Vartelas’s
must seek formal “admission” before they return to the
United States from abroad. Since Vartelas returned to the
United States after the statute’s effective date, the application of that text to his reentry does not give the statute a
retroactive effect.
In determining whether a statute applies retroactively,
we should concern ourselves with the statute’s actual
operation on regulated parties, not with retroactivity as an
abstract concept or as a substitute for fairness concerns.
It is impossible to decide whether a statute’s application
is retrospective or prospective without first identifying a
reference point—a moment in time to which the statute’s
effective date is either subsequent or antecedent. (Otherwise, the obvious question—retroactive in reference to
what?—remains unanswered.) In my view, the identity of
that reference point turns on the activity a statute is
intended to regulate. For any given regulated party, the
reference point (or “retroactivity event”) is the moment at
which the party does what the statute forbids or fails to do
what it requires. See Martin v. Hadix, 527 U. S. 343, 362–
363 (1999) (SCALIA, J., concurring in part and concurring
in judgment); Landgraf, supra, at 291 (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgments). With an identified reference point, the
retroactivity analysis is simple. If a person has engaged in
the primary regulated activity before the statute’s effective
date, then the statute’s application would be retroactive.
But if a person engages in the primary regulated activity
after the statute’s effective date, then the statute’s application is prospective only. In the latter case, the interpretive presumption against retroactivity does not bar the
statute’s application.
Under that commonsense approach, this is a relatively
easy case. Although the class of aliens affected by
§1101(a)(13)(C)(v) is defined with respect to past crimes,
the regulated activity is reentry into the United States. By

