Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

its terms, the statute is all about controlling admission at
the border. It specifies six criteria to identify lawful permanent residents who are subject to formal “admission”
procedures, most of which relate to the circumstances of
departure, the trip itself, or reentry. The titles of the
statutory sections containing §1101(a)(13)(C)(v) confirm
its focus on admission, rather than crime: The provision is
located within Title III of IIRIRA (“Inspection, Apprehension, Detention, Adjudication, and Removal of Inadmissible and Deportable Aliens”), under Subtitle A (“Revision of
Procedures for Removal of Aliens”), and §301 (“Treating
Persons Present in the United States Without Authorization as Not Admitted”). 110 Stat. 3009–575. And the
specific subsection of IIRIRA at issue (§301(a), entitled
“ ‘Admission’ Defined”) is an amendment to the definition
of “entry” in the general “Definitions” section of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA). See ante, at 2–3. The
original provision told border officials how to regulate
admission—not how to punish crime—and the amendment
does as well.
Section 1101(a)(13)(C)(v) thus has no retroactive effect
on Vartelas because the reference point here—Vartelas’s
readmission to the United States after a trip abroad—
occurred years after the statute’s effective date. Although
Vartelas cannot change the fact of his prior conviction,
he could have avoided entirely the consequences of
§1101(a)(13)(C)(v) by simply remaining in the United
States or, having left, remaining in Greece.
That
§1101(a)(13)(C)(v) had no effect on Vartelas until he performed a post-enactment activity is a clear indication
that the statute’s application is purely prospective. See
Fernandez-Vargas v. Gonzales, 548 U. S. 30, 45, n. 11,
46 (2006) (no retroactive effect where the statute in
question did “not operate on a completed preenactment
act” and instead turned on “a failure to take timely action
that would have avoided application of the new law

