14

VARTELAS v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

IV
The Second Circuit homed in on the words “committed
an offense” in §1101(a)(13)(C)(v) in determining that the
change IIRIRA wrought had no retroactive effect. 620
F. 3d, at 119–121. It matters not that Vartelas may have
relied on the prospect of continuing visits to Greece in
deciding to plead guilty, the court reasoned. “[I]t would
border on the absurd,” the court observed, “to suggest that
Vartelas committed his counterfeiting crime in reliance on
the immigration laws.” Id., at 120. This reasoning is
doubly flawed.
As the Government acknowledges, “th[is] Court has not
required a party challenging the application of a statute to
show [he relied on prior law] in structuring his conduct.”
Brief for Respondent 25–26. In Landgraf, for example,
the issue was the retroactivity of compensatory and punitive damages as remedies for employment discrimination.
“[C]oncerns of . . . upsetting expectations are attenuated in
the case of intentional employment discrimination,” the
Court noted, for such discrimination “has been unlawful
for more than a generation.” 511 U. S., at 282, n. 35. But
“[e]ven when the conduct in question is morally reprehensible or illegal,” the Court added, “a degree of unfairness is
inherent whenever the law imposes additional burdens
based on conduct that occurred in the past.” Id., at 283,
n. 35. And in Hughes Aircraft, the Court found that Congress’ 1986 removal of a defense to a qui tam action did
not apply to pre-1986 conduct in light of the presumption
against retroactivity. 520 U. S., at 941–942.8 As in Land——————
8 The deleted defense permitted qui tam defendants to escape liability
if the information on which a private plaintiff (relator) relied was
already in the Government’s possession. Detrimental reliance was
hardly apparent, for the Government, both before and after the statutory change, could bring suit with that information, and “the monetary
liability faced by [a False Claims Act] defendant is the same whether
the action is brought by the Government or by a qui tam relator.” 520

