Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

SCALIA, J., dissenting

dangers that arise postenactment.” Ante, at 13, n. 7. So
much for the new-disability-in-respect-to-past-events test;
it has now become a new-disability-not-designed-to-guardagainst-future-danger test. But why is guarding against
future danger the only reason Congress may wish to regulate future action in light of past events? It obviously is
not. So the Court must invent yet another doctrine to
address my first example, the law making persons
convicted of drug crimes ineligible for student loans.
According to the Court, that statute differs from
§1101(a)(13)(C)(v) because it “has a prospective thrust.”
Ante, at 13, n. 7. I cannot imagine what that means, other
than that the statute regulates post-enactment conduct. But, of course, so does §1101(a)(13)(C)(v). Rather
than reconciling any of these distinctions with Justice
Story’s formulation of retroactivity, the Court leaves to
lower courts the unenviable task of identifying newdisabilities-not-designed-to-guard-against-future-dangerand-also-lacking-a-prospective-thrust.
And anyway, is there any doubt that §1101(a)(13)(C)(v)
is intended to guard against the “dangers that arise
postenactment” from having aliens in our midst who have
shown themselves to have proclivity for crime? Must that
be rejected as its purpose simply because Congress has not
sought to achieve it by all possible means—by ferreting
out such dangerous aliens and going through the expensive and lengthy process of deporting them? At least some
of the post-enactment danger can readily be eliminated by
forcing lawful permanent residents who have committed
certain crimes to undergo formal “admission” procedures
at our borders. Indeed, by limiting criminal aliens’ opportunities to travel and then return to the United States,
§1101(a)(13)(C)(v) may encourage self-deportation. But all
this is irrelevant. The positing of legislative “purpose” is
always a slippery enterprise compared to the simple
determination of whether a statute regulates a future

