16

VARTELAS v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

ted). Aliens like St. Cyr, the Court observed, “almost
certainly relied upon th[e] likelihood [of receiving discretionary relief] in deciding [to plead guilty, thereby] forgo[ing] their right to a trial.” Id., at 325.9 Hence, applying
the IIRIRA withdrawal to St. Cyr would have an “obvious
and severe retroactive effect.” Ibid. Because Congress
made no such intention plain, ibid., n. 55, we held that the
prior law, permitting relief from deportation, governed St.
Cyr’s case.
As to retroactivity, one might think Vartelas’ case even
easier than St. Cyr’s. St. Cyr could seek the Attorney
General’s discretionary dispensation. Vartelas, under
Fleuti, was free, without seeking an official’s permission,
to make trips of short duration to see and assist his parents in Greece.10 The Second Circuit thought otherwise,
compounding its initial misperception (treating reliance as
essential to application of the antiretroactivity principle).
The deportation provision involved in St. Cyr, 8 U. S. C.
§1229b(a)(3), referred to the alien’s “convict[ion]” of a
crime, while the statutory words sub judice in Vartelas’
case were “committed an offense.” §1101(a)(13)(C)(v); see
supra, at 12–13.11 The practical difference, so far as retro——————
9 “There can be little doubt,” the Court noted in St. Cyr, “that, as
a general matter, alien defendants considering whether to enter into a
plea agreement are acutely aware of the immigration consequences of
their convictions.” 533 U. S., at 322. Indeed, “[p]reserving [their] right
to remain in the United States may be more important to [them] than
any potential jail sentence.” Ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted).
See Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 9–11)
(holding that counsel has a duty under the Sixth Amendment to inform
a noncitizen defendant that his plea would make him eligible for
deportation).
10 Armed with knowledge that a guilty plea would preclude travel
abroad, aliens like Vartelas might endeavor to negotiate a plea to a
nonexcludable offense—in Vartelas’ case, e.g., possession of counterfeit
securities—or exercise a right to trial.
11 After the words “committed an offense,” §1101(a)(13)(C)(v)’s next
words are “identified in section 1182(a)(2).” That section refers to “any

