Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

Nor do recidivism sentencing enhancements support the
Government’s position. Enhanced punishment imposed
for the later offense “ ‘is not to be viewed as . . . [an] additional penalty for the earlier crimes,’ but instead, as a
‘stiffened penalty for the latest crime, which is considered
to be an aggravated offense because [it is] a repetitive
one.’ ” Witte v. United States, 515 U. S. 389, 400 (1995)
(quoting Gryger v. Burke, 334 U. S. 728, 732 (1948)). In
Vartelas’ case, however, there is no “aggravated . . . repetitive” offense. There is, in contrast, no post-IIRIRA criminal offense at all. Vartelas’ travel abroad and return are
“innocent” acts, see Fleuti, 374 U. S., at 462, burdened
only because of his pre-IIRIRA offense.
In sum, Vartelas’ brief trip abroad post-IIRIRA involved
no criminal infraction. IIRIRA disabled him from leaving
the United States and returning as a lawful permanent
resident. That new disability rested not on any continuing
criminal activity, but on a single crime committed years
before IIRIRA’s enactment. The antiretroactivity principle
instructs against application of the new proscription
to render Vartelas a first-time arrival at the country’s
gateway.
——————
address dangers that arise postenactment: sex offenders with a history
of child molestation working in close proximity to children, and mentally unstable persons purchasing guns. The act of flying to Greece, in
contrast, does not render a lawful permanent resident like Vartelas
hazardous. Nor is it plausible that Congress’ solution to the problem of
dangerous lawful permanent residents would be to pass a law that
would deter such persons from ever leaving the United States.
As for student loans, it is unlikely that the provision noted by the
dissent, 20 U. S. C. §1091(r), would raise retroactivity questions in the
first place. The statute has a prospective thrust. It concerns
“[s]uspension of eligibility” when a student receiving a college loan
commits a drug crime. The suspension runs “from the date of th[e]
conviction” for specified periods, e.g., two years for a second offense of
possession. Moreover, eligibility may be restored before the period of
ineligibility ends if the student establishes, under prescribed criteria,
his rehabilitation.

