4

VARTELAS v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

post-IIRIRA, like Vartelas, may be required to “ ‘see[k] an
admission’ into the United States, without regard to
whether the alien’s departure from the United States
might previously have been ranked as ‘brief, casual, and
innocent’ under the Fleuti doctrine.” Id., at 1066.
An alien seeking “admission” to the United States is
subject to various requirements, see, e.g., §1181(a), and
cannot gain entry if she is deemed “inadmissible” on any of
the numerous grounds set out in the immigration statutes, see §1182. Under IIRIRA, lawful permanent residents
are regarded as seeking admission into the United States
if they fall into any of six enumerated categories.
§1101(a)(13)(C). Relevant here, the fifth of these categories covers aliens who “ha[ve] committed an offense identified in section 1182(a)(2) of this title.” §1101(a)(13)(C)(v).
Offenses in this category include “a crime involving moral
turpitude (other than a purely political offense) or an
attempt or conspiracy to commit such a crime.”
§1182(a)(2)(A)(i).
In sum, before IIRIRA, lawful permanent residents who
had committed a crime of moral turpitude could, under
the Fleuti doctrine, return from brief trips abroad without applying for admission to the United States. Under
IIRIRA, such residents are subject to admission procedures, and, potentially, to removal from the United States
on grounds of inadmissibility.3
——————
Vartelas does not challenge the ruling in Collado-Munoz. We therefore assume, but do not decide, that IIRIRA’s amendments to
§1101(a)(13)(A) abrogated Fleuti.
3 Although IIRIRA created a uniform removal procedure for both
excludable and deportable aliens, the list of criminal offenses that
subject aliens to exclusion remains separate from the list of offenses
that render an alien deportable. These lists are “sometimes overlapping and sometimes divergent.” Judulang v. Holder, 565 U. S. ___, ___
(2011) (slip op., at 2). Pertinent here, although a single crime involving
moral turpitude may render an alien inadmissible, it would not render
her deportable. See 8 U. S. C. §1182(a)(2) (listing excludable crimes);

