6

VARTELAS v. HOLDER
SCALIA, J., dissenting

concern: Because the Court believes that reentry after a
brief trip abroad should be lawful, it will decline to apply a
statute that clearly provides otherwise for certain criminal
aliens. (The same instinct likely produced the Court’s
questionable statutory interpretation in Rosenberg v.
Fleuti, 374 U. S. 449 (1963).) The Court’s test for retroactivity—asking whether the statute creates a “new disability” in “respect to past events”—invites this focus on fairness. Understandably so, since it is derived from a Justice
Story opinion interpreting a provision of the New Hampshire Constitution that forbade retroactive laws—a provision comparable to the Federal Constitution’s ex post facto
prohibition and bearing no relation to the presumption
against retroactivity. What is unfair or irrational (and
hence should be forbidden) has nothing to do with whether
applying a statute to a particular act is prospective (and
thus presumptively intended) or retroactive (and thus
presumptively unintended). On the latter question, the
“new disability in respect to past events” test provides no
meaningful guidance.
I can imagine countless laws that, like §1101(a)(13)
(C)(v), impose “new disabilities” related to “past events”
and yet do not operate retroactively. For example, a statute making persons convicted of drug crimes ineligible for
student loans. See, e.g., 20 U. S. C. §1091(r)(1). Or laws
prohibiting those convicted of sex crimes from working in
certain jobs that involve repeated contact with minors.
See, e.g., Cal. Penal Code Ann. §290.95(c) (West Supp.
2012). Or laws prohibiting those previously committed
for mental instability from purchasing guns. See, e.g., 18
U. S. C. §922(g)(4). The Court concedes that it would not
consider the last two laws inapplicable to pre-enactment
convictions or commitments. Ante, at 12, n. 7. The Court
does not deny that these statutes impose a “new disability
in respect to past events,” but it distinguishes them based
on the reason for their enactment: These statutes “address

