2

VARTELAS v. HOLDER
Syllabus
attorneys conceded removability and requested discretionary relief
under former §212(c) of the Immigration and Nationality Act. The
Immigration Judge denied the request for relief, and ordered Vartelas removed to Greece. The BIA affirmed. In 2008, Vartelas filed
with the BIA a timely motion to reopen the removal proceedings, alleging that his previous attorneys were ineffective for, among other
lapses, conceding his removability. He sought to withdraw the concession of removability on the ground that IIRIRA’s new “admission”
provision did not reach back to deprive him of lawful resident status
based on his pre-IIRIRA conviction. The BIA denied the motion. The
Second Circuit affirmed. Rejecting Vartelas’ argument that IIRIRA
operated prospectively and therefore did not govern his case, the Second Circuit reasoned that he had not relied on the prior legal regime
at the time he committed the disqualifying crime.

Held: The impact of Vartelas’ brief travel abroad on his permanent resident status is determined not by IIRIRA, but by the legal regime in
force at the time of his conviction. Pp. 7–17.
(a) Under the principle against retroactive legislation invoked by
Vartelas, courts read laws as prospective in application unless Congress has unambiguously instructed retroactivity. See Landgraf v.
USI Film Products, 511 U. S. 244, 263. The presumption against retroactive legislation “embodies a legal doctrine centuries older than
our Republic.” Id., at 265. Numerous decisions of this Court have
invoked Justice Story’s formulation for determining when a law’s retrospective application would collide with the doctrine, namely, as relevant here, when such application would “attac[h] a new disability, in
respect to transactions or considerations already past,” Society for
Propagation of Gospel v. Wheeler, 22 F. Cas. 756, 767. See, e.g., INS
v. St. Cyr, 533 U. S. 289, 321; Hughes Aircraft Co. v. United States ex
rel. Schumer, 520 U. S. 939, 947; Landgraf, 511 U. S., at 283. Vartelas urges that applying IIRIRA to him would attach a “new disability,” effectively a ban on travel outside the United States, “in respect
to” past events, specifically, his offense, guilty plea, conviction, and
punishment, all occurring prior to IIRIRA’s passage.
Congress did not expressly prescribe §1101(a)(13)’s temporal reach.
The Court, therefore, proceeds to the dispositive question whether
application of IIRIRA’s travel restraint to Vartelas “would have retroactive effect” Congress did not authorize. See id., at 280. Vartelas
presents a firm case for application of the antiretroactivity principle.
Beyond genuine doubt §1101(a)(13)(C)(v)’s restraint on lawful permanent residents like Vartelas ranks as a “new disability.” Once
able to journey abroad to, e.g., fulfill religious obligations or respond
to family emergencies, they now face potential banishment, a severe
sanction. See, e.g., Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U. S. ___, ___. The Gov-

