Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
ernment suggests that Vartelas could have avoided any adverse consequences if he simply stayed at home in the United States. But losing the ability to travel abroad is itself a harsh penalty, made all the
more devastating if it means enduring separation from close family
members.
This Court has rejected arguments for retroactivity in similar
cases, see Chew Heong v. United States, 112 U. S. 536, 559; St. Cyr,
533 U. S., at 321–323, and in cases in which the loss at stake was less
momentous, see Landgraf, 511 U. S., at 280–286; Hughes Aircraft,
520 U. S., at 946–950. Pp. 7–11.
(b) The Court finds disingenuous the Government’s argument that
no retroactive effect is involved in this case because the relevant
event is the alien’s post-IIRIRA return to the United States. Vartelas’ return occasioned his treatment as a new entrant, but the reason for his “new disability” was his pre-IIRIRA conviction. That past
misconduct is the wrongful activity targeted by §1101(a)(13)(C)(v).
Pp. 11–13.
(c) In determining that the change IIRIRA wrought had no retroactive effect, the Second Circuit homed in on the words “committed an
offense” in §1101(a)(13)(C)(v). It reasoned that reliance on the prior
law is essential to application of the antiretroactivity principle, and
that Vartelas did not commit his crime in reliance on immigration
laws. This reasoning is doubly flawed. A party is not required to
show reliance on the prior law in structuring his conduct. See, e.g.,
Landgraf, 511 U. S., at 282, n. 35. In any event, Vartelas likely relied on then-existing immigration law, and this likelihood strengthens the case for reading a newly enacted law prospectively. St. Cyr is
illustrative. There, a lawful permanent resident pleaded guilty to a
criminal charge that made him deportable. Under the immigration
law in effect when he was convicted, he would have been eligible to
apply for a waiver of deportation. But his removal proceeding was
commenced after IIRIRA withdrew that dispensation. Disallowance
of discretionary waivers attached a new disability to past conduct,
533 U. S., at 321. Aliens like St. Cyr “almost certainly relied upon
th[e] likelihood [of receiving discretionary relief] in deciding [to plead
guilty, thereby] forgo[ing] their right to a trial,” id., at 325. Because
applying the IIRIRA withdrawal to St. Cyr would have an “obvious
and severe retroactive effect,” ibid., and Congress made no such intention plain, ibid., n. 55, the prior law governed St. Cyr’s case. Vartelas’ case is at least as clear as St. Cyr’s for declining to apply a new
law retroactively. St. Cyr could seek only the Attorney General’s discretionary dispensation, while Vartelas, under Fleuti, was free, without seeking an official’s permission, to make short trips to see and assist his parents in Greece. The Second Circuit compounded its initial

