4

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

B
One month after the Liuzza murder, Richard Perkins, a
man who knew Thompson, approached the Liuzza family.
Perkins did so after the family’s announcement of a
$15,000 reward for information leading to the murderer’s
conviction. Police officers surreptitiously recorded the
Perkins-Liuzza conversations.2 As documented on tape,
Perkins told the family, “I don’t mind helping [you] catch
[the perpetrator], . . . but I would like [you] to help me
and, you know, I’ll help [you].” Id., at EX479, EX481.
Once the family assured Perkins, “we’re on your side, we
want to try and help you,” id., at EX481, Perkins inti
mated that Thompson and another man, Kevin Freeman,
had been involved in Liuzza’s murder. Perkins thereafter
told the police what he had learned from Freeman about
the murder, and that information was recorded in a police
report. Based on Perkins’ account, Thompson and Free
man were arrested on murder charges.
Freeman was six feet tall and went by the name “Kojak”
because he kept his hair so closely trimmed that his scalp
was visible. Unlike Thompson, Freeman fit the eyewit
ness’ initial description of the Liuzza assailant’s height
and hair style. As the Court notes, ante, at 4, n. 2, Free
man became the key witness for the prosecution at
Thompson’s trial for the murder of Liuzza.
After Thompson’s arrest for the Liuzza murder, the
father of the armed robbery victims saw a newspaper
photo of Thompson with a large Afro hairstyle and showed
——————
2 The

majority endorses the Fifth Circuit’s conclusion that, when
Thompson was tried for murder, no Brady violation occurred with
respect to these audio tapes “[b]ecause defense counsel had knowledge
of such evidence and could easily have requested access from the
prosecution.” Thompson v. Cain, 161 F. 3d 802, 806–807 (1998); ante,
at 17, n. 11. The basis for that asserted “knowledge” is a mystery. The
recordings secretly made did not come to light until long after Thomp
son’s trials.

