18

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
Opinion of the Court

interpret, and apply legal principles.
By the end of its opinion, however, the dissent finally
reveals that its real disagreement is not with our holding
today, but with this Court’s precedent. The dissent does
not see “any reason,” post, at 31, for the Court’s conclusion
in Bryan County that a pattern of violations is “ordinarily
necessary” to demonstrate deliberate indifference for
purposes of failure to train, 520 U. S., at 409. Cf. id., at
406–408 (explaining why a pattern of violations is ordinar
ily necessary). But cf. post, at 30–31 (describing our reli
ance on Bryan County as “imply[ing]” a new “limitation”
on §1983). As our precedent makes clear, proving that a
municipality itself actually caused a constitutional viola
tion by failing to train the offending employee presents
“difficult problems of proof,” and we must adhere to a
“stringent standard of fault,” lest municipal liability under
§1983 collapse into respondeat superior.12 Bryan County,
520 U. S., at 406, 410; see Canton, 489 U. S., at 391–392.
3
The District Court and the Court of Appeals panel erro
neously believed that Thompson had proved deliberate
indifference by showing the “obviousness” of a need for
additional training. They based this conclusion on Con
nick’s awareness that (1) prosecutors would confront
——————
12 Although the dissent acknowledges that “deliberate indifference
liability and respondeat superior liability are not one and the same,” the
opinion suggests that it believes otherwise. Post, at 32, n. 28; see, e.g.,
post, at 32 (asserting that “the buck stops with [the district attorney]”);
post, at 23 (suggesting municipal liability attaches when “the prosecu
tors” themselves are “deliberately indifferent to what the law re
quires”). We stand by the longstanding rule—reaffirmed by a unani
mous Court earlier this Term—that to prove a violation of §1983, a
plaintiff must prove that “the municipality’s own wrongful conduct”
caused his injury, not that the municipality is ultimately responsible
for the torts of its employees. Los Angeles County v. Humphries, ante,
at 9; see Humphries, ante, at 6, 7 (citing Monell, 436 U. S., at 691).

