10

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
Opinion of the Court

deliberate indifference for purposes of failure to train.
Bryan Cty., 520 U. S., at 409. Policymakers’ “continued
adherence to an approach that they know or should know
has failed to prevent tortious conduct by employees may
establish the conscious disregard for the consequences of
their action—the ‘deliberate indifference’—necessary to
trigger municipal liability.” Id., at 407. Without notice
that a course of training is deficient in a particular re
spect, decisionmakers can hardly be said to have deliber
ately chosen a training program that will cause violations
of constitutional rights.
Although Thompson does not contend that he proved a
pattern of similar Brady violations, 553 F. 3d, at 851,
vacated, 578 F. 3d 293 (en banc), he points out that, dur
ing the ten years preceding his armed robbery trial, Lou
isiana courts had overturned four convictions because of
Brady violations by prosecutors in Connick’s office.6 Those
four reversals could not have put Connick on notice that
the office’s Brady training was inadequate with respect to
the sort of Brady violation at issue here. None of those
cases involved failure to disclose blood evidence, a crime
lab report, or physical or scientific evidence of any kind.
Because those incidents are not similar to the violation at
issue here, they could not have put Connick on notice that
specific training was necessary to avoid this constitutional
violation.7
——————
6 Thompson

had every incentive at trial to attempt to establish a
pattern of similar violations, given that the jury instruction allowed
the jury to find deliberate indifference based on, among other things,
prosecutors’ “history of mishandling” similar situations. Record 1619.
7 Thompson also asserts that this case is not about a “single incident”
because up to four prosecutors may have been responsible for the
nondisclosure of the crime lab report and, according to his allegations,
withheld additional evidence in his armed robbery and murder trials.
But contemporaneous or subsequent conduct cannot establish a pattern
of violations that would provide “notice to the cit[y] and the opportunity
to conform to constitutional dictates . . . .” Canton, 489 U. S., at 395

