Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SCALIA, J., concurring

there would have been no need for Canton’s footnote to
confine its hypothetical to the extreme circumstance of
arming police officers with guns without telling them
about the constitutional limitations upon shooting fleeing
felons; the District Court’s instructions cover every recur
ring situation in which citizens’ rights can be violated.
That result cannot be squared with our admonition that
failure-to-train liability is available only in “limited cir
cumstances,” id., at 387, and that a pattern of consti
tutional violations is “ordinarily necessary to establish
municipal culpability and causation,” Board of Comm’rs of
Bryan Cty. v. Brown, 520 U. S. 397, 409 (1997). These
restrictions are indispensable because without them,
“failure to train” would become a talismanic incantation
producing municipal liability “[i]n virtually every instance
where a person has had his or her constitutional rights
violated by a city employee”—which is what Monell re
jects. Canton, 489 U. S., at 392. Worse, it would “engage
the federal courts in an endless exercise of second
guessing municipal employee-training programs,” thereby
diminishing the autonomy of state and local governments.
Ibid.
2. Perhaps for that reason, the dissent does not seri
ously contend that Thompson’s theory of recovery was
proper. Rather, it accuses Connick of acquiescing in that
theory at trial. See post, at 25. The accusation is false.
Connick’s central claim was and is that failure-to-train
—————— 

Brady material would have been produced if the prosecutors involved in 

his underlying criminal cases had been properly trained, supervised or 

monitored regarding the production of Brady evidence.’ ” Post, at 25, 

n. 17 (quoting Tr. 1100). How comforting that assurance is depends
entirely on what proper training consists of. If it is not limited to
training in aspects of Brady that have been repeatedly violated, but
includes—as the dissent would have it include here—training that
would avoid any one-time violation, the assurance is no assurance at
all.

