Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SCALIA, J., concurring

Due Process Clause requires a different result when we
deal with the failure of the State to preserve evidentiary
material of which no more can be said than that it could
have been subjected to tests, the results of which might
have exonerated the defendant.” Id., at 57. Perhaps one
day we will recognize a distinction between good-faith
failures to preserve from destruction evidence whose
inculpatory or exculpatory character is unknown, and
good-faith failures to turn such evidence over to the de
fense. But until we do so, a failure to train prosecutors to
observe that distinction cannot constitute deliberate indif
ference.
5. By now the reader has doubtless guessed the best
kept secret of this case: There was probably no Brady
violation at all—except for Deegan’s (which, since it was a
bad-faith, knowing violation, could not possibly be attrib
uted to lack of training).6 The dissent surely knows this,
which is why it leans heavily on the fact that Connick
conceded that Brady was violated. I can honor that con
cession in my analysis of the case because even if it ex
tends beyond Deegan’s deliberate actions, it remains
irrelevant to Connick’s training obligations. For any
Brady violation apart from Deegan’s was surely on the
very frontier of our Brady jurisprudence; Connick could
not possibly have been on notice decades ago that he was
required to instruct his prosecutors to respect a right to
untested evidence that we had not (and still have not)
——————
6 The dissent’s only response to this is that the jury must have found
otherwise, since it was instructed that “ ‘[f]or liability to attach because
of a failure to train, the fault must be in the training program itself, not
in any particular prosecutor.’ ” Post, at 28, n. 20 (quoting Tr. 1098).
But this instruction did not require the jury to find that Deegan did not
commit a bad-faith, knowing violation; it merely prevented the jury
from finding that, if he did so, Connick was liable for a failure to train.
I not only agree with that; it is part of my point.

