Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

stitutional. Ante, at 5.
The jury found, however, that Connick was deliberately
indifferent to the need to train prosecutors about Brady’s
command. On the special verdict form, the jury answered
yes to the following question:
“Was the Brady violation in the armed robbery case or
any infringements of John Thompson’s rights in the
murder trial substantially caused by [Connick’s] fail
ure, through deliberate indifference, to establish poli
cies and procedures to protect one accused of a crime
from these constitutional violations?” Record 1585.
Consistent with the question put to the jury, and with
out objection, the court instructed the jurors: “[Y]ou are
not limited to the nonproduced blood evidence and the
resulting infringement of Mr. Thompson’s right to testify
at the murder trial. You may consider all of the evidence
presented during this trial.” Tr. 1099; Record 1620.11 But
——————
11 The

court permitted Thompson to introduce evidence of other
Brady violations, but because “the blood evidence alone proved the
violation [of Thompson’s constitutional rights],” the court declined
specifically “to ask the jury [whether] this other stuff [was] also Brady.”
Tr. 1003. The court allowed Thompson to submit proof of other viola
tions to “sho[w] the cumulative nature . . . and impact [of] evidence . . .
as to . . . the training and deliberate indifference . . . .” Ibid. But cf.
ante, at 17, n. 11 (questioning how “these violations are relevant” to
this case). Far from indulging in my own factfindings, but cf. ante, at
16–17, n. 11, I simply recite the evidence supporting the jury’s verdict
in Thompson’s §1983 trial.
The Court misleadingly states that “the District Court instructed the
jury that the ‘only issue’ was whether the nondisclosure [of the crime
lab report] was caused by either a policy, practice, or custom of the dis
trict attorney’s office or a deliberately indifferent failure to train the
office’s prosecutors.” Ante, at 4. The jury instruction the majority cites
simply directed the jury that, with regard to the blood evidence, as a
matter of law, Thompson’s constitutional rights had been violated.
Record 1614–1615. The court did not preclude the jury from assessing
evidence of other infringements of Thompson’s rights. Id., at 1585; see
Kyles v. Whitley, 514 U. S. 419, 421 (1995) (“[T]he state’s obligation

