Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

it to his children. He reported to the District Attorney’s
Office that the children had identified Thompson as their
attacker, and the children then picked that same photo
out of a “photographic lineup.” Record EX120, EX642–
EX643. Indicting Thompson on the basis of these ques
tionable identifications, the District Attorney’s Office did
not pause to test the pant leg swatch dyed by the perpe
trator’s blood. This lapse ignored or overlooked a prosecu
tor’s notation that the Office “may wish to do [a] blood
test.” Id., at EX122.
The murder trial was scheduled to begin in mid-March
1985. Armed with the later indictment against Thompson
for robbery, however, the prosecutors made a strategic
choice: They switched the order of the two trials, proceed
ing first on the robbery indictment. Id., at EX128–EX129.
Their aim was twofold. A robbery conviction gained first
would serve to inhibit Thompson from testifying in his
own defense at the murder trial, for the prior conviction
could be used to impeach his credibility. In addition, an
armed robbery conviction could be invoked at the penalty
phase of the murder trial in support of the prosecution’s
plea for the death penalty. Id., at 682.
Recognizing the need for an effective prosecution team,
petitioner Harry F. Connick, District Attorney for the
Parish of Orleans, appointed his third-in-command, Eric
Dubelier, as special prosecutor in both cases. Dubelier
enlisted Jim Williams to try the armed robbery case and to
assist him in the murder case. Gerry Deegan assisted
Williams in the armed robbery case. Bruce Whittaker, the
fourth prosecutor involved in the cases, had approved
Thompson’s armed robbery indictment.3
——————
3 At

the time of their assignment, Dubelier had served in the District
Attorney’s Office for three and a half years, Williams, for four and a
half years, Deegan, a recent law school graduate, for less than one year,
and Whittaker, for three years.

