28

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

C
Unquestionably, a municipality that leaves police offi
cers untrained in constitutional limits on the use of deadly
weapons places lives in jeopardy. Canton, 489 U. S., at
390, n. 10. But as this case so vividly shows, a municipal
ity that empowers prosecutors to press for a death sen
tence without ensuring that those prosecutors know and
honor Brady rights may be no less “deliberately indiffer
——————
importance been brought home to prosecutors, surely at least one of the
four officers who knew of the swatch and lab report would have re
vealed their existence to defense counsel and the court.”); supra, at 23
(Connick did not want to hold prosecutors accountable for Brady
compliance because he felt that doing so would make his job more
difficult); supra, at 23 (Connick never disciplined a single prosecutor for
violating Brady); supra, at 27 (“Because prosecutors faced considerable
pressure to get convictions, and were instructed to turn over what was
required by state and federal law, but no more, the risk was all too real
that they would err by withholding rather than revealing information
favorable to the defense.” (citations and internal quotation marks
omitted)). But cf. ante, at 7, n. 5 (“The dissent believes that evidence
that the prosecutors allegedly ‘misapprehen[ded]’ Brady proves causa
tion.”).
I note, furthermore, that the jury received clear instructions on the
causation element, and neither Connick nor the majority disputes the
accuracy or adequacy of the instruction that, to prevail, Thompson
must prove “that more likely than not the Brady material would have
been produced if the prosecutors involved in his underlying criminal
cases had been properly trained, supervised or monitored regarding the
production of Brady evidence.” Tr. 1100.
The jury was properly instructed that “[f]or liability to attach because
of a failure to train, the fault must be in the training program itself, not
in any particular prosecutor.” Id., at 1098. Under that instruction, in
finding Connick liable, the jury necessarily rejected the argument—
echoed by JUSTICE SCALIA—that Deegan “was the only bad guy.” Id., at
1074. See also id., at 1057; ante, at 5. If indeed Thompson had shown
simply and only that Deegan deliberately withheld evidence, I would
agree that there would be no basis for liability. But, as reams of
evidence showed, disregard of Brady occurred, over and over again in
Orleans Parish, before, during, and after Thompson’s 1985 robbery and
murder trials.

