Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

31

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

tion.25 Nor is there any reason to imply such a limita
tion.26 A district attorney’s deliberate indifference might
be shown in several ways short of a prior pattern.27 This
——————
reaffirmed “that evidence of a single violation of federal rights, accom
panied by a showing that a municipality has failed to train its employ
ees to handle recurring situations presenting an obvious potential for
such a violation, could trigger municipal liability.” Id., at 409. Con
ducting this inquiry, the Court has acknowledged, “may not be an easy
task for the factfinder.” Canton v. Harris, 489 U. S. 378, 391 (1989).
Bryan County did not retreat from this Court’s conclusion in Canton
that “judge and jury, doing their respective jobs, will be adequate to the
task.” 489 U. S., at 391. See also Bryan County, 520 U. S., at 410
(absent a pattern, municipal liability may be predicated on “a particu
lar glaring omission in a training regimen”). But cf. ante, at 16–18
(suggesting that under no set of facts could a plaintiff establish deliber
ate indifference for failure to train prosecutors in their Brady obligation
without showing a prior pattern of violations).
25 When Congress sought to render a claim for relief contingent on
showing a pattern or practice, it did so expressly. See, e.g., 42 U. S. C.
§14141(a) (“It shall be unlawful for any governmental authority . . . to
engage in a pattern or practice of conduct by law enforcement officers
. . . that deprives persons of rights . . . protected by the Constitution
. . . .”); 15 U. S. C. §6104(a) (“Any person adversely affected by any
pattern or practice of telemarketing . . . may . . . bring a civil action
. . . .”); 49 U. S. C. §306(e) (authorizing the Attorney General to bring a
civil action when he “has reason to believe that a person is engaged in a
pattern or practice [of] violating this section”). See also 47 U. S. C.
§532(e)(2)–(3) (authorizing the Federal Communications Commission to
establish additional rules when “the Commission finds that the prior
adjudicated violations of this section constitute a pattern or practice of
violations”).
26 In the end, the majority leaves open the possibility that something
other than “a pattern of violations” could also give a district attorney
“specific reason” to know that additional training is necessary. See
ante, at 14–15. Connick, by his own admission, had such a reason. See
supra, at 18–20.
27 For example, a prosecutor’s office could be deliberately indifferent if
it had a longstanding open-file policy, abandoned that policy, but failed
to provide training to show prosecutors how to comply with their Brady
obligations in the altered circumstances. Or a district attorney could be
deliberately indifferent if he had a practice of paring well-trained
prosecutors with untrained prosecutors, knew that such supervision

