Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

27

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

Thompson’s trials and heard testimony that Connick’s
Office had one of the worst Brady records in the country.
Tr. 163. Because prosecutors faced considerable pressure
to get convictions, id., at 317, 341, and were instructed to
“turn over what was required by state and federal law, but
no more,” Brief for Petitioners 6–7, the risk was all too
real that they would err by withholding rather than re
vealing information favorable to the defense.
In sum, despite JUSTICE SCALIA’s protestations to the
contrary, ante, at 1, 5, the Brady violations in Thompson’s
prosecutions were not singular and they were not aberra
tional. They were just what one would expect given the
attitude toward Brady pervasive in the District Attorney’s
Office. Thompson demonstrated that no fewer than five
prosecutors—the four trial prosecutors and Riehlmann—
disregarded his Brady rights. He established that they
kept from him, year upon year, evidence vital to his de
fense. Their conduct, he showed with equal force, was a
foreseeable consequence of lax training in, and absence of
monitoring of, a legal requirement fundamental to a fair
trial.20
——————
20 The jury could draw a direct, causal connection between Connick’s
deliberate indifference, prosecutors’ misapprehension of Brady, and the
Brady violations in Thompson’s case. See, e.g., supra, at 17 (prosecu
tors’ misunderstandings of Brady “were in large part responsible for the
gross disregard of Brady rights Thompson experienced”); supra, at 18
(“The jury could attribute the violations of Thompson’s rights directly to
prosecutors’ misapprehension of Brady.”); supra, at 17–18 (Williams did
not believe Brady required disclosure of impeachment evidence and did
not believe he had any obligation to turn over the impeaching “close-cut
hair” police reports); supra, at 18 (At the time of the armed robbery
trial, Williams reported that the results of the blood test on the swatch
were “inconclusive”); ibid. (“[Williams] testified . . . that the lab report
was not Brady material . . . .”); supra, at 19–20 (Dubelier and Williams,
the lead prosecutors in Thompson’s trials, “learned the prosecutorial
craft in Connick’s Office,” “did not recall any Brady training,” demon
strated “a woefully deficient understanding of Brady,” and received no
supervision during Thompson’s trials); supra, at 21 (“Had Brady’s

