Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

sence of specific reason, such as a pattern of violations, to
believe that those tools are insufficient to prevent future
constitutional violations in “the usual and recurring situa
tions with which [the prosecutors] must deal.”9 Canton,
489 U. S., at 391. A licensed attorney making legal judg
ments, in his capacity as a prosecutor, about Brady mate
rial simply does not present the same “highly predictable”
constitutional danger as Canton’s untrained officer.
A second significant difference between this case and
the example in Canton is the nuance of the allegedly
necessary training. The Canton hypothetical assumes
that the armed police officers have no knowledge at all of
the constitutional limits on the use of deadly force. But it
is undisputed here that the prosecutors in Connick’s office
were familiar with the general Brady rule. Thompson’s
complaint therefore cannot rely on the utter lack of an
ability to cope with constitutional situations that underlies
the Canton hypothetical, but rather must assert that
prosecutors were not trained about particular Brady evi
dence or the specific scenario related to the violation in his
case. That sort of nuance simply cannot support an infer
ence of deliberate indifference here. As the Court said in
Canton, “[i]n virtually every instance where a person has
had his or her constitutional rights violated by a city
employee, a §1983 plaintiff will be able to point to some
thing the city ‘could have done’ to prevent the unfortunate
incident.” 489 U. S., at 392 (citing Tuttle, 471 U. S., at 823
(plurality opinion)).
Thompson suggests that the absence of any formal
training sessions about Brady is equivalent to the com
plete absence of legal training that the Court imagined in
——————
9 Contrary

to the dissent’s assertion, see post, at 31, n. 26 (citing post,
at 18–20), a prosecutor’s youth is not a “specific reason” not to rely on
professional training and ethical obligations. See supra, at 12 (citing
United States v. Cronic, 466 U. S. 648, 658, 664 (1984)).

