12

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
Opinion of the Court

Failure to train prosecutors in their Brady obligations
does not fall within the narrow range of Canton’s hypothe
sized single-incident liability. The obvious need for spe
cific legal training that was present in the Canton scenario
is absent here. Armed police must sometimes make split
second decisions with life-or-death consequences. There is
no reason to assume that police academy applicants are
familiar with the constitutional constraints on the use of
deadly force. And, in the absence of training, there is no
way for novice officers to obtain the legal knowledge they
require. Under those circumstances there is an obvious
need for some form of training. In stark contrast, legal
“[t]raining is what differentiates attorneys from average
public employees.” 578 F. 3d, at 304–305 (opinion of
Clement, J.).
Attorneys are trained in the law and equipped with the
tools to interpret and apply legal principles, understand
constitutional limits, and exercise legal judgment. Before
they may enter the profession and receive a law license,
all attorneys must graduate from law school or pass a
substantive examination; attorneys in the vast majority of
jurisdictions must do both. See, e.g., La. State Bar Assn.
(LSBA), Articles of Incorporation, La. Rev. Stat. Ann. §37,
ch. 4, App., Art. 14, §7 (1988 West Supp.) (as amended
through 1985). These threshold requirements are de
signed to ensure that all new attorneys have learned how
to find, understand, and apply legal rules. Cf. United
States v. Cronic, 466 U. S. 648, 658, 664 (1984) (noting
that the presumption “that the lawyer is competent to
provide the guiding hand that the defendant needs” ap
plies even to young and inexperienced lawyers in their
first jury trial and even when the case is complex).
Nor does professional training end at graduation. Most
jurisdictions require attorneys to satisfy continuing
education requirements. See, e.g., LSBA, Articles of In
corporation, Art. 16, Rule 1.1(b) (effective 1987); La. Sup.

