Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

train the prosecutors about their Brady disclosure obliga
tion with respect to evidence of this type and (2) that the
lack of training actually caused the Brady violation in this
case. Connick argues that he was entitled to judgment as
a matter of law because Thompson did not prove that he
was on actual or constructive notice of, and therefore
deliberately indifferent to, a need for more or different
Brady training. We agree.5
A
Title 42 U. S. C. §1983 provides in relevant part:
“Every person who, under color of any statute, ordi
nance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State . . .
subjects, or causes to be subjected, any citizen of the
——————
5 Because

we conclude that Thompson failed to prove deliberate indif
ference, we need not reach causation. Thus, we do not address whether
the alleged training deficiency, or some other cause, was the “ ‘moving
force,’ ” Canton v. Harris, 489 U. S. 378, 389 (1989) (quoting Monell v.
New York City Dept. of Social Servs., 436 U. S. 658, 694 (1978), and
Polk County v. Dodson, 454 U. S. 312, 326 (1981)), that “actually
caused” the failure to disclose the crime lab report, Canton, supra, at
391.
The same cannot be said for the dissent, however. Affirming the
verdict in favor of Thompson would require finding both that he proved
deliberate indifference and that he proved causation. Perhaps unsur
prisingly, the dissent has not conducted the second step of the analysis,
which would require showing that the failure to provide particular
training (which the dissent never clearly identifies) “actually caused”
the flagrant—and quite possibly intentional—misconduct that occurred
in this case. See post, at 21 (opinion of GINSBURG, J.) (assuming that,
“[h]ad Brady’s importance been brought home to prosecutors,” the
violation at issue “surely” would not have occurred). The dissent
believes that evidence that the prosecutors allegedly “misappre
hen[ded]” Brady proves causation. Post, at 27, n. 20. Of course, if
evidence of a need for training, by itself, were sufficient to prove that
the lack of training “actually caused” the violation at issue, no causa
tion requirement would be necessary because every plaintiff who
satisfied the deliberate indifference requirement would necessarily
satisfy the causation requirement.

