8

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

murder trial, held in May 1985, at which the prosecution’s
order-of-trial strategy achieved its aim.7 By prosecuting
Thompson for armed robbery first—and withholding blood
evidence that might have exonerated Thompson of that
charge—the District Attorney’s Office disabled Thompson
from testifying in his own defense at the murder trial.8 As
earlier observed, see supra, at 5, impeaching use of the
prior conviction would have severely undermined Thomp
son’s credibility. And because Thompson was effectively
stopped from testifying in his own defense, the testimony
of the witnesses against him gained force. The prosecu
tion’s failure to reveal evidence that could have impeached
those witnesses helped to seal Thompson’s fate.
First, the prosecution undermined Thompson’s efforts to
impeach Perkins. Perkins testified that he volunteered
information to the police with no knowledge of reward
money. Record EX366, EX372–EX373. Because prosecu
tors had not produced the audiotapes of Perkins’ conversa
tions with the Liuzza family (or a police summary of the
tapes), Thompson’s attorneys could do little to cast doubt
on Perkins’ credibility. In closing argument, the prosecu
tion emphasized that Thompson presented no “direct
evidence” that reward money had motivated any of the
witnesses. Id., at EX3171–EX3172.
Second, the prosecution impeded Thompson’s impeach
ment of key witness Kevin Freeman. It did so by failing to
disclose a police report containing Perkins’ account of
——————
7 During jury deliberations in the armed robbery case, Williams, the
only Orleans Parish trial attorney common to the two prosecutions, told
Thompson of his objective in no uncertain terms: “I’m going to fry you.
You will die in the electric chair.” Tr. 252–253.
8 The Louisiana Court of Appeal concluded, and Connick does not
dispute, that Thompson “would have testified in the absence of the
attempted armed robbery conviction.” State v. Thompson, 2002–0361,
p. 7 (7/17/02), 825 So. 2d 552, 556. But cf. ante, at 1, 3 (Thompson
“elected” not to testify).

