6

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
SCALIA, J., concurring

training would have prevented the good-faith nondisclo
sure of a blood report not known to be exculpatory?
Perhaps a better question to ask is what legally accurate
training would have prevented it. The dissent’s sugges
tion is to instruct prosecutors to ignore the portion of
Brady limiting prosecutors’ disclosure obligations to evi
dence that is “favorable to an accused,” 373 U. S., at 87.
Instead, the dissent proposes that “Connick could have
communicated to Orleans Parish prosecutors, in no uncer
tain terms, that, ‘[i]f you have physical evidence that, if
tested, can establish the innocence of the person who is
charged, you have to turn it over.’ ” Post, at 20, n. 13
(quoting Tr. of Oral Arg. 34). Though labeled a training
suggestion, the dissent’s proposal is better described as a
sub silentio expansion of the substantive law of Brady. If
any of our cases establishes such an obligation, I have
never read it, and the dissent does not cite it.5
Since Thompson’s trial, however, we have decided a case
that appears to say just the opposite of the training the
dissent would require: In Arizona v. Youngblood, 488 U. S.
51, 58 (1988), we held that “unless a criminal defendant
can show bad faith on the part of the police, failure to
preserve potentially useful evidence does not constitute a
denial of due process of law.” We acknowledged that
“Brady . . . makes the good or bad faith of the State irrele
vant when the State fails to disclose to the defendant
material exculpatory evidence,” but concluded that “the
——————
5 What the dissent does cite in support of its theory comes from an
unexpected source: Connick’s testimony about what qualifies as Brady
material. See post, at 20–21, n. 13. (“Or Connick could have told
prosecutors what he told the jury when he was asked whether a prose
cutor must disclose a crime lab report to the defense, even if the pros
ecutor does not know the defendant’s blood type: ‘Under the law, it
qualifies as Brady material.’ ” (quoting Tr. 872)). Given the effort the
dissent has expended persuading us that Connick’s understanding of
Brady is profoundly misguided, its newfound trust in his expertise on
the subject is, to the say the least, surprising.

