2

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
Syllabus
legal duty to avoid violating citizens’ rights may rise to the level of an
official government policy for §1983 purposes, but the failure to train
must amount to “deliberate indifference to the rights of persons with
whom the [untrained employees] come into contact.” Canton v. Har
ris, 489 U. S. 378, 388. Deliberate indifference in this context re
quires proof that city policymakers disregarded the “known or obvi
ous consequence” that a particular omission in their training
program would cause city employees to violate citizens’ constitutional
rights. Board of Comm’rs of Bryan Cty. v. Brown, 520 U. S. 397, 410.
Pp. 6–9.
(b) A pattern of similar constitutional violations by untrained em
ployees is “ordinarily necessary” to demonstrate deliberate indiffer
ence. Bryan Cty., supra, at 409. Without notice that a course of
training is deficient, decisionmakers can hardly be said to have delib
erately chosen a training program that will cause violations of consti
tutional rights. Thompson does not contend that he proved a pattern
of similar Brady violations, and four reversals by Louisiana courts for
dissimilar Brady violations in the 10 years before the robbery trial
could not have put the district attorney’s office on notice of the need
for specific training. Pp. 9–10.
(c) Thompson mistakenly relies on the “single-incident” liability
hypothesized in Canton, contending that the Brady violation in his
case was the “obvious” consequence of failing to provide specific
Brady training and that this “obviousness” showing can substitute
for the pattern of violations ordinarily necessary to establish munici
pal culpability. In Canton, the Court theorized that if a city armed
its police force and deployed them into the public to capture fleeing
felons without training the officers in the constitutional limitation on
the use of deadly force, the failure to train could reflect the city’s de
liberate indifference to the highly predictable consequence, namely,
violations of constitutional rights. Failure to train prosecutors in
their Brady obligations does not fall within the narrow range of Can
ton’s hypothesized single-incident liability. The obvious need for spe
cific legal training present in Canton’s scenario—police academy ap
plicants are unlikely to be familiar with constitutional constraints on
deadly force and, absent training, cannot obtain that knowledge—is
absent here. Attorneys are trained in the law and equipped with the
tools to interpret and apply legal principles, understand constitu
tional limits, and exercise legal judgment. They receive training be
fore entering the profession, must usually satisfy continuing educa
tion requirements, often train on the job with more experienced
attorneys, and must satisfy licensing standards and ongoing ethical
obligations. Prosecutors not only are equipped but are ethically
bound to know what Brady entails and to perform legal research

