(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CONNICK, DISTRICT ATTORNEY, ET AL. v. 

THOMPSON 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–571.

Argued October 6, 2010—Decided March 29, 2011

Petitioner the Orleans Parish District Attorney’s Office concedes that,
in prosecuting respondent Thompson for attempted armed robbery,
prosecutors violated Brady v. Maryland, 373 U. S. 83, by failing to
disclose a crime lab report. Because of his robbery conviction,
Thompson elected not to testify at his later murder trial and was
convicted. A month before his scheduled execution, the lab report
was discovered. A reviewing court vacated both convictions, and
Thompson was found not guilty in a retrial on the murder charge. He
then filed suit against the district attorney’s office under 42 U. S. C.
§1983, alleging, inter alia, that the Brady violation was caused by the
office’s deliberate indifference to an obvious need to train prosecutors
to avoid such constitutional violations. The district court held that,
to prove deliberate indifference, Thompson did not need to show a
pattern of similar Brady violations when he could demonstrate that
the need for training was obvious. The jury found the district attor
ney’s office liable for failure to train and awarded Thompson dam
ages. The Fifth Circuit affirmed by an equally divided court.
Held: A district attorney’s office may not be held liable under §1983 for
failure to train its prosecutors based on a single Brady violation. Pp.
6–20.
(a) Plaintiffs seeking to impose §1983 liability on local governments
must prove that their injury was caused by “action pursuant to offi
cial municipal policy,” which includes the decisions of a government’s
lawmakers, the acts of its policymaking officials, and practices so
persistent and widespread as to practically have the force of law.
Monell v. New York City Dept. of Social Servs., 436 U. S. 658, 691. A
local government’s decision not to train certain employees about their

