Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

SCALIA, J., concurring

municipal action and the deprivation of federal rights.”
Id., at 404. Thompson cannot meet that standard. The
withholding of evidence in his case was almost certainly
caused not by a failure to give prosecutors specific train
ing, but by miscreant prosecutor Gerry Deegan’s willful
suppression of evidence he believed to be exculpatory, in
an effort to railroad Thompson. According to Deegan’s
colleague Michael Riehlmann, in 1994 Deegan confessed to
him—in the same conversation in which Deegan revealed
he had only a few months to live—that he had “suppressed
blood evidence in the armed robbery trial of John Thomp
son that in some way exculpated the defendant.” App.
367; see also id., at 362 (“[Deegan] told me . . . that he had
failed to inform the defense of exculpatory information”). I
have no reason to disbelieve that account, particularly
since Riehlmann’s testimony hardly paints a flattering
picture of himself: Riehlmann kept silent about Deegan’s
misconduct for another five years, as a result of which he
incurred professional sanctions. See In re Riehlmann,
2004–0680 (La. 1/19/05), 891 So. 2d 1239.
And if
Riehlmann’s story is true, then the “moving force,” Bryan
Cty., supra, at 404 (internal quotation marks omitted),
behind the suppression of evidence was Deegan, not a
failure of continuing legal education.
4. The dissent suspends disbelief about this, insisting
that with proper Brady training, “surely at least one” of
the prosecutors in Thompson’s trial would have turned
over the lab report and blood swatch. Post, at 21. But
training must consist of more than mere broad encomiums
of Brady: We have made clear that “the identified defi
ciency in a city’s training program [must be] closely re
lated to the ultimate injury.” Canton, supra, at 391. So
even indulging the dissent’s assumption that Thompson’s
prosecutors failed to disclose the lab report in good faith—
in a way that could be prevented by training—what sort of

