16

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
Opinion of the Court

Canton. But failure-to-train liability is concerned with the
substance of the training, not the particular instructional
format. The statute does not provide plaintiffs or courts
carte blanche to micromanage local governments through
out the United States.
We do not assume that prosecutors will always make
correct Brady decisions or that guidance regarding specific
Brady questions would not assist prosecutors. But show
ing merely that additional training would have been
helpful in making difficult decisions does not establish
municipal liability. “[P]rov[ing] that an injury or accident
could have been avoided if an [employee] had had better or
more training, sufficient to equip him to avoid the particu
lar injury-causing conduct” will not suffice. Canton, su
pra, at 391. The possibility of single-incident liability that
the Court left open in Canton is not this case.10
2
The dissent rejects our holding that Canton’s hypothe
sized single-incident liability does not, as a legal matter,
encompass failure to train prosecutors in their Brady
obligation. It would instead apply the Canton hypotheti
cal to this case, and thus devotes almost all of its opinion
to explaining why the evidence supports liability under
that theory.11 But the dissent’s attempt to address our
——————
10 Thompson also argues that he proved deliberate indifference by
“direct evidence of policymaker fault” and so, presumably, did not need
to rely on circumstantial evidence at all. Brief for Respondent 37. In
support, Thompson contends that Connick created a “culture of indif
ference” in the district attorney’s office, id., at 38, as evidenced by
Connick’s own allegedly inadequate understanding of Brady, the office’s
unwritten Brady policy that was later incorporated into a 1987 hand
book, and an officewide “restrictive discovery policy,” Brief for Respon
dent 39–40. This argument is essentially an assertion that Connick’s
office had an unconstitutional policy or custom. The jury rejected this
claim, and Thompson does not challenge that finding.
11 The dissent spends considerable time finding new Brady violations

