Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

Second, Dubelier or Whittaker ordered the crime labora
tory to rush a pretrial test of the swatch. Tr. 952–954.
Whittaker received the lab report, addressed to his atten
tion, two days before trial commenced. Immediately
thereafter, he placed the lab report on Williams’ desk.
Record EX151, EX589. Although the lab report conclu
sively identified the perpetrator’s blood type, id., at
EX151, the District Attorney’s Office never revealed the
report to the defense.6
Third, Deegan checked the swatch out of the property
room on the morning of the first day of trial, but the
prosecution did not produce the swatch at trial. Id., at
EX43. Deegan did not return the swatch to the property
room after trial, and the swatch has never been found. Tr.
of Oral Arg. 37.
“[B]ased solely on the descriptions” provided by the
three victims, Record 683, the jury convicted Thompson of
attempted armed robbery. The court sentenced him to
49.5 years without possibility of parole—the maximum
available sentence.
D
Prosecutors continued to disregard Brady during the
——————
of the blood evidence, that the evidence had been tested, [or] that a
blood type was determined definitively from the swatch . . . .” Tr. 46.
Consistent with this stipulation, Thompson’s trial counsel testified that
he spoke to “[t]he clerk who maintain[ed] the evidence” and learned
that “[t]hey didn’t have any blood evidence.” Id., at 401. And the
District Court instructed the jury, with no objection from Connick, “that
the nonproduced blood evidence . . . violated [Thompson’s] constitu
tional rights as a matter of law.” Id., at 1095.
6 JUSTICE SCALIA questions petitioners’ concession that Brady was
violated when the prosecution failed to inform Thompson of the blood
evidence. He considers the evidence outside Brady because the prose
cution did not endeavor to test Thompson’s blood, and therefore avoided
knowing that the evidence was in fact exculpatory. Ante, at 6–7. Such
a “don’t ask, don’t tell” view of a prosecutor’s Brady obligations garners
no support from precedent. See also supra, at 6, n. 4; infra, at 21, n. 13.

