14

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
Opinion of the Court

3.8(d) (1984).8 An attorney who violates his or her ethical
obligations is subject to professional discipline, including
sanctions, suspension, and disbarment. See, e.g., LSBA,
Articles of Incorporation, Art. 15, §§5, 6 (1971); id., Art.
16, DR 1–102; ABA Model Rule of Prof. Conduct 8.4
(1984).
In light of this regime of legal training and professional
responsibility, recurring constitutional violations are not
the “obvious consequence” of failing to provide prosecutors
with formal in-house training about how to obey the law.
Bryan Cty., 520 U. S., at 409. Prosecutors are not only
equipped but are also ethically bound to know what Brady
entails and to perform legal research when they are uncer
tain. A district attorney is entitled to rely on prosecutors’
professional training and ethical obligations in the ab
——————
8 The

Louisiana State Bar Code of Professional Responsibility in
cluded a broad understanding of the prosecutor’s duty to disclose in
1985:
“With respect to evidence and witnesses, the prosecutor has responsi
bilities different from those of a lawyer in private practice: the prosecu
tor should make timely disclosure to the defense of available evidence,
known to him, that tends to negate the guilt of the accused, mitigate
the degree of the offense, or reduce the punishment. Further, a prose
cutor should not intentionally avoid pursuit of evidence merely because
he believes it will damage the prosecution’s case or aid the accused.”
LSBA, Articles of Incorporation, Art. 16, EC 7–13 (1971); see also ABA
Model Rule of Prof. Conduct 3.8(d) (1984) (“The prosecutor in a criminal
case shall . . . make timely disclosure to the defense of all evidence or
information known to the prosecutor that tends to negate the guilt of
the accused or mitigates the offense . . .”).
In addition to these ethical rules, the Louisiana Code of Criminal
Procedure, with which Louisiana prosecutors are no doubt familiar, in
1985 required prosecutors, upon order of the court, to permit inspection
of evidence “favorable to the defendant . . . which [is] material and
relevant to the issue of guilt or punishment,” La. Code Crim. Proc.
Ann., Art. 718 (West 1981) (added 1977), as well as “any results or
reports” of “scientific tests or experiments, made in connection with
or material to the particular case” if those reports are exculpatory or
intended for use at trial, id., Art. 719.

