Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

happen in the District Attorney’s Office, it was inevitable
that prosecutors would misapprehend Brady. Had Brady’s
importance been brought home to prosecutors, surely at
least one of the four officers who knew of the swatch and
lab report would have revealed their existence to defense
counsel and the court.14
4
Louisiana did not require continuing legal education at
the time of Thompson’s trials. Tr. 361. But cf. ante, at
12–13. Primary responsibility for keeping prosecutors au
courant with developments in the law, therefore, resided
in the District Attorney’s Office. Over the course of Con
nick’s tenure as District Attorney, the jury learned, the
Office’s chief of appeals circulated memoranda when ap
pellate courts issued important opinions. Tr. 751–754,
798.
The 1987 Office policy manual was a compilation of
memoranda on criminal law and practice circulated to
prosecutors from 1974, when Connick became District
Attorney, through 1987. Id., at 798. The manual con
tained four sentences, nothing more, on Brady.15 This
——————
type: “Under the law it qualifies as Brady material. Under Louisiana
law we must turn that over. Under Brady we must turn that over. I
[failed to disclose a crime lab report] one time as a prosecutor and I got
indicted by the U. S. Attorney over here for doing it.” Tr. 872. But cf.
ante, at 7 (SCALIA, J., concurring) (questioning how Connick could have
been on notice of the need to train prosecutors about the Brady viola
tions conceded in this case).
14 The Court can scarcely disagree with respect to Dubelier, Williams,
and Whittaker, for it acknowledges the “flagran[cy]” of Deegan’s con
duct, see ante, at 7, n. 5, and does not dispute that, pretrial, other
prosecutors knew of the existence of the swatch and lab report.
15 Section 5.25 of the manual, titled “Brady Material,” states in full:
“In most cases, in response to the request of defense attorneys, the
Judge orders the State to produce so called Brady material—that is,
information in the possession of the State which is exculpatory regard
ing the defendant. The duty to produce Brady material is ongoing and

