2

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

the District Attorney’s Office, including the District At
torney himself, misperceived Brady’s compass and there
fore inadequately attended to their disclosure obligations.
Throughout the pretrial and trial proceedings against
Thompson, the team of four engaged in prosecuting him
for armed robbery and murder hid from the defense and
the court exculpatory information Thompson requested
and had a constitutional right to receive. The prosecutors
did so despite multiple opportunities, spanning nearly two
decades, to set the record straight. Based on the prosecu
tors’ conduct relating to Thompson’s trials, a fact trier
could reasonably conclude that inattention to Brady was
standard operating procedure at the District Attorney’s
Office.
What happened here, the Court’s opinion obscures, was
no momentary oversight, no single incident of a lone offi
cer’s misconduct. Instead, the evidence demonstrated that
misperception and disregard of Brady’s disclosure re
quirements were pervasive in Orleans Parish. That evi
dence, I would hold, established persistent, deliberately
indifferent conduct for which the District Attorney’s Office
bears responsibility under §1983.
I dissent from the Court’s judgment mindful that Brady
violations, as this case illustrates, are not easily detected.
But for a chance discovery made by a defense team inves
tigator weeks before Thompson’s scheduled execution, the
evidence that led to his exoneration might have remained
under wraps. The prosecutorial concealment Thompson
encountered, however, is bound to be repeated unless
municipal agencies bear responsibility—made tangible by
§1983 liability—for adequately conveying what Brady
requires and for monitoring staff compliance. Failure to
train, this Court has said, can give rise to municipal liabil
ity under §1983 “where the failure . . . amounts to deliber
ate indifference to the rights of persons with whom the
[untrained employees] come into contact.” Canton v.

