Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

general Brady requirement that the State disclose to the
defense evidence in its possession that is favorable to
the accused. Prosecutors testified that office policy was to
turn crime lab reports and other scientific evidence over
to the defense. They also testified that, after the discovery
of the undisclosed crime lab report in 1999, prosecutors
disagreed about whether it had to be disclosed under
Brady absent knowledge of Thompson’s blood type.
The jury rejected Thompson’s claim that an unconstitu
tional office policy caused the Brady violation, but found
the district attorney’s office liable for failing to train the
prosecutors. The jury awarded Thompson $14 million in
damages, and the District Court added more than $1
million in attorney’s fees and costs.
After the verdict, Connick renewed his objection—which
he had raised on summary judgment—that he could not
have been deliberately indifferent to an obvious need for
more or different Brady training because there was no
evidence that he was aware of a pattern of similar Brady
violations. The District Court rejected this argument for
the reasons that it had given in the summary judgment
order. In that order, the court had concluded that a pat
tern of violations is not necessary to prove deliberate
indifference when the need for training is “so obvious.”
No. Civ. A. 03–2045 (ED La., Nov. 15, 2005), App. to Pet.
for Cert. 141a, 2005 WL 3541035, *13. Relying on Canton
v. Harris, 489 U. S. 378 (1989), the court had held that
Thompson could demonstrate deliberate indifference by
proving that “the DA’s office knew to a moral certainty
that assistan[t] [district attorneys] would acquire Brady
material, that without training it is not always obvious
what Brady requires, and that withholding Brady mate
rial will virtually always lead to a substantial violation of
constitutional rights.”4 App. to Pet. for Cert. 141a, 2005
——————
4 The

District Court rejected Connick’s proposed deliberate indiffer

