20

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

For example, in 1985 trial attorneys “sometimes . . . went
to Mr. Connick” with Brady questions, “and he would tell
them” how to proceed. Tr. 892. But Connick acknowl
edged that he had “stopped reading law books . . . and
looking at opinions” when he was first elected District
Attorney in 1974. Id., at 175–176.
As part of their training, prosecutors purportedly at
tended a pretrial conference with the Office’s chief of trials
before taking a case to trial. Connick intended the prac
tice to provide both training and accountability. But it
achieved neither aim in Thompson’s prosecutions, for
Dubelier and Williams, as senior prosecutors in the Office,
were free to take cases to trial without pretrying them,
and that is just how they proceeded in Thompson’s prose
cutions. Id., at 901–902; Record 685. But cf. ante, at 13
(“[T]rial chiefs oversaw the preparation of the cases.”).
Prosecutors confirmed that training in the District
Attorney’s Office, overall, was deficient. Soon after Con
nick retired, a survey of assistant district attorneys in the
Office revealed that more than half felt that they had not
received the training they needed to do their jobs. Tr. 178.
Thompson, it bears emphasis, is not complaining about
the absence of formal training sessions. Tr. of Oral Arg.
55. But cf. ante, at 15–16. His complaint does not demand
that Brady compliance be enforced in any particular way.
He asks only that Brady obligations be communicated
accurately and genuinely enforced.13 Because that did not
——————
13 To ward off Brady violations of the kind Connick conceded, for ex
ample, Connick could have communicated to Orleans Parish prosecu
tors, in no uncertain terms, that, “[i]f you have physical evidence that,
if tested, can establish the innocence of the person who is charged, you
have to turn it over.” Tr. of Oral Arg. 34; id., at 36 (“[I]f you have
evidence that can conclusively establish to a scientific certainty the
innocence of the person being charged, you have to turn it over . . . .”).
Or Connick could have told prosecutors what he told the jury when he
was asked whether a prosecutor must disclose a crime lab report to the
defense, even if the prosecutor does not know the defendant’s blood

