32

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

case is one such instance. Connick, who himself had been
indicted for suppression of evidence, created a tinderbox in
Orleans Parish in which Brady violations were nigh inevi
table. And when they did occur, Connick insisted there
was no need to change anything, and opposed efforts to
hold prosecutors accountable on the ground that doing so
would make his job more difficult.
A District Attorney aware of his office’s high turnover
rate, who recruits prosecutors fresh out of law school and
promotes them rapidly through the ranks, bears responsi
bility for ensuring that on-the-job training takes place. In
short, the buck stops with him.28 As the Court recognizes,
“the duty to produce Brady evidence to the defense” is
“[a]mong prosecutors’ unique ethical obligations.” Ante, at
13. The evidence in this case presents overwhelming
support for the conclusion that the Orleans Parish Office
slighted its responsibility to the profession and to the
State’s system of justice by providing no on-the-job Brady
training. Connick was not “entitled to rely on prosecutors’
professional training,” ante, at 14, for Connick himself
should have been the principal insurer of that training.
*
*
*
For the reasons stated, I would affirm the judgment of
the U. S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit. Like that
court and, before it, the District Court, I would uphold the
——————
had stopped untrained prosecutors from committing Brady violations,
but nevertheless changed the staffing on cases so that untrained
prosecutors worked without supervision.
28 If the majority reads this statement as an endorsement of respon
deat superior liability, ante, at 18, n. 12, then it entirely “misses [my]
point,” cf. ante, at 17. Canton recognized that deliberate indifference
liability and respondeat superior liability are not one and the same.
489 U. S., at 385, 388–389. Connick was directly responsible for the
Brady violations in Thompson’s prosecutions not because he hired
prosecutors who violated Brady, but because of his own deliberate
indifference.

