6

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

C
During pretrial proceedings in the armed robbery case,
Thompson filed a motion requesting access to all materials
and information “favorable to the defendant” and “mate
rial and relevant to the issue of guilt or punishment,” as
well as “any results or reports” of “scientific tests or ex
periments.” Id., at EX144, EX145. Prosecutorial re
sponses to this motion fell far short of Brady compliance.4
First, prosecutors blocked defense counsel’s inspection of
the pant leg swatch stained by the robber’s blood. Al
though Dubelier’s April 3 response stated, “Inspection to
be permitted,” id., at EX149, the swatch was signed out
from the property room at 10:05 a.m. the next day, and
was not returned until noon on April 10, the day before
trial, id., at EX43, EX670. Thompson’s attorney inspected
the evidence made available to him and found no blood
evidence. No one told defense counsel about the swatch
and its recent removal from the property room. Id., at
EX701–EX702; Tr. 400–402. But cf. ante, at 17, n. 11
(Thompson’s attorney had “access to the evidence locker
where the swatch was recorded as evidence.”).5
——————
4 Connick did not dispute that failure to disclose the swatch and the
crime lab report violated Brady. See Tr. 46, 1095. But cf. ante, at 4, 6
(limiting Connick’s concession, as Connick himself did not, to failure to
disclose the crime lab report).
In JUSTICE SCALIA’s contrary view, “[t]here was probably no Brady
violation at all,” or, if there was any violation of Thompson’s rights, it
“was surely on the very frontier of our Brady jurisprudence,” such that
“Connick could not possibly have been on notice” of the need to train.
Ante, at 7. Connick’s counsel, however, saw the matter differently.
“[A]ny reasonable prosecutor would have recognized blood evidence as
Brady material,” he said, indeed “the proper response” was “obvious to
all.” Record 1663, 1665.
5 The majority assails as “highly suspect” the suggestion that prose
cutors violated Brady by failing to disclose the blood-stained swatch.
See ante, at 17, n. 11. But the parties stipulated in Thompson’s §1983
action, and the jury was so informed, that, “[p]rior to the armed robbery
trial, Mr. Thompson and his attorneys were not advised of the existence

