4

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
SCALIA, J., concurring

liability for a Brady violation cannot be premised on a
single incident, but requires a pattern or practice of previ
ous violations. He pressed that argument at the summary
judgment stage but was rebuffed. At trial, when Connick
offered a jury instruction to the same effect, the trial judge
effectively told him to stop bringing up the subject:
“[Connick’s counsel]: Also, as part of that definition
in that same location, Your Honor, we would like to
include language that says that deliberate indiffer
ence to training requires a pattern of similar viola
tions and proof of deliberate indifference requires
more than a single isolated act.
“[Thompson’s counsel]: That’s not the law, Your
Honor.
“THE COURT: No, I’m not giving that. That was in
your motion for summary judgment that I denied.”
Tr. 1013.
Nothing more is required to preserve a claim of error. See
Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 51(d)(1)(B).4
3. But in any event, to recover from a municipality
under 42 U. S. C. §1983, a plaintiff must satisfy a “rigor
ous” standard of causation, Bryan Cty., 520 U. S., at 405;
he must “demonstrate a direct causal link between the
——————
4 The dissent’s contention that “[t]he instruction Connick proposed
resembled the charge given by the District Court,” post, at 25, n. 18,
disregards his requested instruction concerning the necessity of a
pattern of prior violations. It is meaningless to say that after “the court
rejected [Connick’s] categorical position,” as it did, he did not “assail the
District Court’s formulation of the deliberate indifference instruction,”
post, at 26, n. 18. The prior-pattern requirement was part of Connick’s
requested formulation of deliberate indifference: “To prove deliberate
indifference, a plaintiff must demonstrate ‘at least a pattern of similar
violations arising from training that is so clearly inadequate as to be
obviously likely to result in a constitutional violation.’ ” Record, Doc.
94, p. 18 (emphasis added).

