Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–1016
_________________

DANIEL COLEMAN, PETITIONER v. COURT OF

APPEALS OF MARYLAND ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT

[March 20, 2012]


JUSTICE GINSBURG, with whom JUSTICE BREYER joins,
and with whom JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR and JUSTICE KAGAN
join as to all but footnote 1, dissenting.
Section 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment provides: “No
State shall . . . deny to any person within its jurisdiction
the equal protection of the laws.” Section 5 grants Congress the “power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the
provisions of this article.” Congress’ §5 enforcement power
includes the authority to remedy and deter violations of
§1’s substantive guarantees by prohibiting conduct “not
itself forbidden by the Amendment’s text.” Kimel v. Florida Bd. of Regents, 528 U. S. 62, 81 (2000). “In other
words, Congress may enact so-called prophylactic legislation that proscribes facially constitutional conduct,
in order to prevent and deter unconstitutional conduct.”
Nevada Dept. of Human Resources v. Hibbs, 538 U. S. 721,
727–728 (2003).
The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA or
Act) entitles eligible employees to 12 weeks of job-secured
leave during any 12-month period: (A) to care for a newborn son or daughter; (B) to care for a newly adopted son
or daughter; (C) to care for a spouse, child, or parent with
a serious health condition; or (D) because the employee
has a serious health condition that makes her unable
to perform the functions of her position. 29 U. S. C.


2

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

§2612(a)(1).
Even accepting this Court’s view of the scope of Congress’ power under §5 of the Fourteenth Amendment, I
would hold that the self-care provision, §2612(a)(1)(D),
validly enforces the right to be free from gender discrimination in the workplace.1
I
Section 5 legislation “must be targeted at conduct transgressing the Fourteenth Amendment’s substantive provisions,” ante, at 5 (internal quotation marks omitted),
“[a]nd ‘[t]here must be a congruence and proportionality
between the injury to be prevented or remedied and the
means adopted to that end.’ ” Ibid. (quoting City of Boerne
v. Flores, 521 U. S. 507, 520 (1997)). The first step of the
now-familiar Boerne inquiry calls for identification of the
constitutional right Congress sought to enforce. See, e.g.,
Tennessee v. Lane, 541 U. S. 509, 522 (2004). The FMLA’s
self-care provision, Maryland asserts, trains not on the
right to be free from gender discrimination, but on an
“equal protection right to be free from irrational state
employment discrimination based on a medical condition.”
Brief for Respondents 14. The plurality agrees, concluding
that the self-care provision reveals “a concern for discrimination on the basis of illness, not sex.” Ante, at 7. In so
declaring, the plurality undervalues the language, pur——————
1I

remain of the view that Congress can abrogate state sovereign
immunity pursuant to its Article I Commerce Clause power. See
Seminole Tribe of Fla. v. Florida, 517 U. S. 44, 100 (1996) (Souter, J.,
dissenting). Beyond debate, 29 U. S. C. §2612(a)(1)(D) is valid Commerce Clause legislation. See infra, at 21. I also share the view that
Congress can abrogate state immunity pursuant to §5 of the Fourteenth Amendment where Congress could reasonably conclude that
legislation “constitutes an appropriate way to enforce [a] basic equal
protection requirement.” Board of Trustees of Univ. of Ala. v. Garrett,
531 U. S. 356, 377 (2001) (BREYER, J., dissenting) (internal quotation
marks omitted).


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

pose, and history of the FMLA, and the self-care provision’s important role in the statutory scheme. As well, the
plurality underplays the main theme of our decision in
Hibbs: “The FMLA aims to protect the right to be free
from gender-based discrimination in the workplace.” 538
U. S., at 728.
I begin with the text of the statute, which repeatedly
emphasizes gender discrimination. One of the FMLA’s
stated purposes is to “entitle employees to take reasonable
leave,” 29 U. S. C. §2601(b)(2), “in a manner that, consistent with the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment, minimizes the potential for employment discrimination on the basis of sex by ensuring generally
that leave is available for eligible medical reasons (including maternity-related disability) and for compelling family
reasons, on a gender-neutral basis.” §2601(b)(4). Another
identified aim is “to promote the goal of equal employment
opportunity for women and men, pursuant to [the Equal
Protection Clause].” §2601(b)(5). “[E]mployment standards that apply to one gender only,” Congress expressly
found, “have serious potential for encouraging employers
to discriminate against employees and applicants for
employment who are of that gender.” §2601(a)(6).
The FMLA’s purpose and legislative history reinforce
the conclusion that the FMLA, in its entirety, is directed
at sex discrimination. Indeed, the FMLA was originally
envisioned as a way to guarantee—without singling out
women or pregnancy—that pregnant women would not
lose their jobs when they gave birth. The self-care provision achieves that aim.
A brief history is in order. In his 1982 congressional
campaign, then-candidate Howard Berman pledged to
introduce legislation similar to the California law challenged in California Fed. Sav. & Loan Assn. v. Guerra,
479 U. S. 272 (1987). S. Wisensale, Family Leave Policy:
The Political Economy of Work and Family in America 134


4

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

(2001) (hereinafter Wisensale). California’s law, enacted
in 1978, made it unlawful for an employer to refuse to
grant female employees disabled by pregnancy or childbirth up to four months’ unpaid, job-protected leave. See
1978 Cal. Stats. ch. 1321, §1, now codified at Cal. Govt.
Code Ann. §12945(a)(1) (West Supp. 2012).
The California law sharply divided women’s rights advocates. “Equal-treatment” feminists asserted it violated
the Pregnancy Discrimination Act’s (PDA) commitment
to treating pregnancy the same as other disabilities.2 It
did so by requiring leave only for disability caused by
pregnancy and childbirth, thereby treating pregnancy as
sui generis. See Brief for American Civil Liberties Union
et al. as Amici Curiae in California Fed., O. T. 1985,
No. 85–494, pp. 5–10. “Equal-opportunity” feminists disagreed, urging that the California law was consistent with
the PDA because it remedied the discriminatory burden
that inadequate leave policies placed on a woman’s right
to procreate. See Brief for Coalition for Reproductive
Equality in the Workplace et al. as Amici Curiae in id.,
at 2–6. See also Williams, Equality’s Riddle: Pregnancy
and the Equal Treatment/Special Treatment Debate, 13
N. Y. U. Rev. L. & Soc. Change 325, 326–328 (1984–1985)
(hereinafter Williams) (discussing disagreement).
While California Fed. moved through the lower federal
courts, equal-treatment feminists began work on a genderneutral leave model, which eventually became the FMLA.
——————
2 Enacted as an addition to the section defining terms used in Title
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Pregnancy Discrimination Act of
1978 (PDA) provides: “The terms ‘because of sex’ or ‘on the basis of sex’
include, but are not limited to, because of or on the basis of pregnancy,
childbirth, or related medical conditions; and women affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions shall be treated the
same for all employment-related purposes, including receipt of benefits
under fringe benefit programs, as other persons not so affected but
similar in their ability or inability to work . . . .” 92 Stat. 2076, 42
U. S. C. §2000e(k).


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

See Ross, Legal Aspects of Parental Leave, in Parental
Leave and Child Care 97 (J. Hyde & M. Essex eds. 1991)
(hereinafter Ross). Then-Congressman Berman met with
the Women’s Legal Defense Fund’s Donna Lenhoff, a
drafter of the first FMLA bill. Id., at 114–115, n. 27;
Wisensale 136.3 They agreed that any national bill would
focus not only on pregnancy, but on equal treatment for all
workers. Ross 114–115, n. 27. See also Kazmier v. Widmann, 225 F. 3d 519, 547 (CA5 2000) (Dennis, J., dissenting) (“Perceiving that enacting the PDA had not achieved
the intended result of preventing discrimination against
either women or men in the granting of leave time in that
the States felt it necessary to affirmatively grant pregnancy leave to women and not men, in 1985 Congress
began considering the issue of family and medical leave.”).
Though this Court, in California Fed., eventually upheld
California’s pregnancy-only leave policy as not preempted
by the PDA, equal-treatment feminists continued to believe that viewing pregnancy as sui generis perpetuated
widespread discrimination against women.4 They there——————
3 Lenhoff

advanced The Parental and Disability Act of 1985, introduced by Rep. Patricia Schroeder. See S. Wisensale, Family Leave
Policy: The Political Economy of Work and Family in America 136–138
(2001). She was later named Vice Chair of the Commission on Leave,
created by the FMLA to study family and medical leave policies. See 29
U. S. C. §§2631–2632; U. S. Commission on Family and Medical Leave,
A Workable Balance: Report to Congress on Family and Medical Leave
Policies 210 (Apr. 30, 1996).
4 For example, in addition to mandating pregnancy leave, the California statute allowed employers to discriminate against pregnant workers. Employers could refuse to select a pregnant woman for a training
program if she would not finish the program at least three months
before giving birth. See 1978 Cal. Stats. ch. 1321, §1. The law limited
pregnancy disability leave to six weeks, §1, and provided that women
were to receive paid disability benefits for only three weeks after
childbirth, §2, even if a particular woman remained disabled beyond
the three-week period, and even if a man received paid disability
benefits throughout his disability. Finally, although it prohibited


6

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

fore maintained their commitment to gender-neutral
leave. See Joint Hearing on H. R. 925 before the Subcommittee on Civil Service and the Subcommittee on
Compensation and Employee Benefits of the House Committee on Post Office and Civil Service, 100th Cong., 1st
Sess., 36 (1987) (hereinafter 1987 House Hearing) (statement of Prof. Eleanor Holmes Norton, Georgetown University Law Center) (“[If California Fed.] becomes the
model, employers will provide something for women affected by pregnancy that they are not required to provide
for other employees. This gives fodder to those who seek
to discriminate against women in employment. . . . In the
[California Fed.] case, I would have preferred the interpretation urged by the [equal-treatment feminists].”).
Congress agreed. See infra, at 14–15. Adhering to
equal-treatment feminists’ aim, the self-care provision, 29
U. S. C. §2612(a)(1)(D), prescribes comprehensive leave for
women disabled during pregnancy or while recuperating
from childbirth—without singling out pregnancy or childbirth. See S. Rep. No. 101–77, p. 32 (1989) (A “significant
benefit of the temporary medical leave provided by this
legislation is the form of protection it offers women workers who bear children. Because the bill treats all employees who are temporarily unable to work due to serious
health conditions in the same fashion, it does not create
the risk of discrimination against pregnant women posed
by legislation which provides job protection only for
pregnancy-related disability. Legislation solely protecting
——————
employers from refusing to promote a woman because of pregnancy, it
did not forbid refusing to hire a woman on that basis. See §1. See also
Brief for National Organization for Women et al. as Amici Curiae in
California Fed. Sav. & Loan Assn. v. Guerra, O. T. 1985, No. 85–494,
pp. 14–15. These provisions were all expressly made inapplicable to
employers covered by Title VII, “[i]n the event Congress enacts legislation amending Title VII . . . to prohibit sex discrimination on the basis
of pregnancy,” namely, the PDA. See 1978 Cal. Stats. ch. 1321, §4.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

pregnant women gives employers an economic incentive to
discriminate against women in hiring policies; legislation
helping all workers equally does not have this effect.”). In
view of this history, it is impossible to conclude that “nothing in particular about self-care leave . . . connects it to
gender discrimination.” Ante, at 10.
II

A

Boerne next asks “whether Congress had evidence of
a pattern of constitutional violations on the part of the
States.” Hibbs, 538 U. S., at 729. See also Boerne, 521
U. S., at 530–532. Beyond question, Congress had evidence of a well-documented pattern of workplace discrimination against pregnant women. Section 2612(a)(1)(D)
can therefore “be understood as responsive to, or designed
to prevent, unconstitutional behavior.” Id., at 532.
Although the PDA proscribed blatant discrimination on
the basis of pregnancy, see 42 U. S. C. §§2000e(k), 2000e–
2, supra, at 4, n. 2, the Act is fairly described as a necessary, but not a sufficient measure. FMLA hearings
conducted between 1986 and 1993 included illustrative testimony from women fired after becoming pregnant or giving
birth. For example, Beverly Wilkenson was granted seven
weeks of leave upon the birth of her child. On the eve of
her return to work, a superior informed her that her job
had been eliminated. He stated: “Beverly, the best thing
for you to do is stay home and take care of your baby and
collect your unemployment.” Hearing on H. R. 770 before
the Subcommittee on Labor-Management Relations of the
House Committee on Education and Labor, 101st Cong.,
1st Sess., 12 (1989) (hereinafter 1989 House Hearing)
(statement of Beverly Wilkenson). See also S. Rep. No.
102–68, p. 27 (1991) (hereinafter 1991 Senate Report)
(describing Ms. Wilkenson’s testimony). Similarly, Linda
Pillsbury was notified that she no longer had a job three


8

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

weeks after her daughter was born.5 Three secretaries at
the same workplace were also forced out of their jobs when
they returned to work within weeks of giving birth. See
Hearings on S. 249 before the Subcommittee on Children,
Family, Drugs and Alcoholism of the Senate Committee on
Labor and Human Resources, 100th Cong., 1st Sess., pt.
2, pp. 16, 23 (1987) (hereinafter 1987 Senate Hearings)
(statement of Linda Pillsbury).
These women’s experiences, Congress learned, were
hardly isolated incidents. A spokeswoman for the Mayor’s
Commission on Women’s Affairs in Chicago testified: “The
lack of uniform parental and medical leave policies in the
workplace has created an environment where discrimination is rampant. Very often we are contacted by women
workers who are at risk of losing their jobs or have lost
them because they are pregnant, [or have] given birth.”
Id., at 170 (statement of Peggy Montes). See also Joint
Hearing on The Parental and Medical Leave Act of 1986
before the Subcommittee on Labor-Management Relations
and the Subcommittee on Labor Standards of the House
Committee on Education and Labor, 99th Cong., 2d
Sess., 110, n. 18 (1986) (hereinafter 1986 House Hearing)
(statement of Women’s Legal Defense Fund) (“[W]omen
who are temporarily unable to work due to pregnancy,
child-birth, and related medical conditions such as morning sickness, threatened miscarriage, or complications
arising from childbirth, often lose their jobs because of
the inadequacy of their employers’ leave policies.”); 1991
Senate Report 28 (recording that an Atlanta-based job
counseling hotline received approximately 100 calls each
year from women who were fired, harassed, or forced out
of their jobs due to pregnancy or maternity-disability
——————
5 The medical recovery period for a normal childbirth is four to eight
weeks. See Nevada Dept. of Human Resources v. Hibbs, 538 U. S. 721,
731, n. 4 (2003).


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

leave); 139 Cong. Rec. 1826 (1993) (remarks of Sen. Edward Kennedy) (“[W]omen who are pregnant are discriminated against as a general rule in our society and have
difficulty retaining their jobs.”). As summarized by the
American Bar Association:
“Historically, denial or curtailment of women’s employment opportunities has been traceable directly to
the pervasive presumption that women are mothers
first, and workers second. This prevailing ideology
about women’s roles has in turn justified discrimination against women when they are mothers or mothersto-be.” 1989 House Hearing 248 (American Bar
Association Background Report). See also Hibbs, 538
U. S., at 736 (quoting same language).
“Many pregnant women have been fired when their employer refused to provide an adequate leave of absence,”
Congress had ample cause to conclude. See H. R. Rep. No.
99–699, pt. 2, p. 22 (1986). Pregnancy, Congress also
found, has a marked impact on women’s earnings. One
year after childbirth, mothers’ earnings fell to $1.40 per
hour less than those of women who had not given birth.
See 1991 Senate Report 28. See also 1989 House Hearing
356–357 (Report of 9to5, National Association of Working
Women (citing same study)).
Congress heard evidence tying this pattern of discrimination to the States. A 50-state survey by the Yale Bush
Center Infant Care Leave Project concluded that “[t]he
proportion and construction of leave policies available to
public sector employees differs little from those offered
private sector employees.” Hibbs, 538 U. S., at 730, n. 3
(quoting 1986 House Hearing 33 (statement of Meryl
Frank)). Roughly 28% of women employed in the public
sector did not receive eight weeks of job-protected medical
leave to recover from childbirth. See 1987 Senate Hearings, pt. 1, pp. 31, 35, 39 (statement of James T. Bond,


10

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

National Counsel of Jewish Women). A South Carolina
state legislator testified: “[I]n South Carolina, as well as in
other states . . . no unemployment compensation is paid
to a woman who is necessarily absent from her place of
employment because of pregnancy or maternity.” See id.,
pt. 2, p. 361 (statement of Rep. Irene Rudnick). According
to an employee of the State of Georgia, if state employees
took leave, it was held against them when they were
considered for promotions: “It is common practice for my
Department to compare the balance sheets of workers who
have and have not used [leave] benefits in determining
who should and should not be promoted.” Hearing on
H. R. 2 before the Subcommittee on Labor-Management
Relations of the House Committee on Education and
Labor, 102d Cong., 1st Sess., 36 (1991) (statement of
Robert E. Dawkins). See also id., at 33 (One type of leave
for Georgia state employees “boils down to whether your
supervisor wants you to come back or not.”). In short,
Congress had every reason to believe that a pattern of
workplace discrimination against pregnant women existed
in public-sector employment, just as it did in the private
sector.
B
“[A] state’s refusal to provide pregnancy leave to its
employees,” Maryland responds, is “not unconstitutional.”
Brief for Respondents 23 (citing Geduldig v. Aiello, 417
U. S. 484, 495 (1974)). Aiello’s footnote 20 proclaimed that
discrimination on the basis of pregnancy is not discrimination on the basis of sex. In my view, this case is a fit
occasion to revisit that conclusion. Footnote 20 reads:
“The dissenting opinion to the contrary, this case is
. . . a far cry from cases like Reed v. Reed, 404 U. S. 71
(1971), and Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U. S. 677
(1973), involving discrimination based upon gender as
such. The California insurance program does not


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

exclude anyone from benefit eligibility because of gender but merely removes one physical condition—
pregnancy—from the list of compensable disabilities. While it is true that only women can become
pregnant, it does not follow that every legislative
classification concerning pregnancy is a sex-based
classification . . . .
“The lack of identity between the excluded disability
and gender as such under this insurance program
becomes clear upon the most cursory analysis. The
program divides potential recipients into two groups—
pregnant women and nonpregnant persons. While the
first group is exclusively female, the second includes
members of both sexes. The fiscal and actuarial benefits of the program thus accrue to members of both
sexes.” 417 U. S., at 496, n. 20.
First, “[a]s an abstract statement,” it is “simply false”
that “a classification based on pregnancy is genderneutral.” Bray v. Alexandria Women’s Health Clinic, 506
U. S. 263, 327 (1993) (Stevens, J., dissenting). Rather,
discriminating on the basis of pregnancy “[b]y definition
. . . discriminates on account of sex; for it is the capacity
to become pregnant which primarily differentiates the female from the male.” General Elec. Co. v. Gilbert, 429
U. S. 125, 161–162 (1976) (Stevens, J., dissenting). See
also Issacharoff & Rosenblum, Women and the Workplace:
Accommodating the Demands of Pregnancy, 94 Colum.
L. Rev. 2154, 2180 (1994) (“[I]t is precisely because
pregnancy is a condition unique to women that the exclusion of pregnancy from disability coverage is a sex-based
classification . . . .”).
This reality is well illustrated by the facts of Aiello. The
California disability-insurance program at issue granted
disability benefits for virtually any conceivable work
disability, including those arising from cosmetic surgery,


12

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

skiing accidents, and alcoholism. See Brief for EEOC as
Amicus Curiae in Aiello, O. T. 1973, No. 73–640, p. 7. It
also compensated men for disabilities caused by ailments
and procedures that affected men alone: for example,
vasectomies, circumcision, and prostatectomies. See Brief
for American Civil Liberties Union et al. as Amici Curiae
in id., at 17–18. Only pregnancy was excluded from the
definition of disability. See Cal. Un. Ins. Code Ann. §2626
(West 1972); Aiello, 417 U. S., at 489. As Justice Brennan
insightfully concluded in dissent, “a limitation is imposed
upon the disabilities for which women workers may recover, while men receive full compensation for all disabilities suffered . . . . Such dissimilar treatment of men and
women, on the basis of physical characteristics inextricably
linked to one sex, inevitably constitutes sex discrimination.” Id., at 501.
Second, pregnancy provided a central justification for
the historic discrimination against women this Court
chronicled in Hibbs. See 538 U. S., at 729 (“[A] proper
discharge of [a woman’s] maternal functions—having in
view not merely her own health, but the well-being of the
race—justif[ies] legislation to protect her from the greed
as well as the passion of man.” (quoting Muller v. Oregon,
208 U. S. 412, 422 (1908); 2d and 3d alterations in Hibbs)).
See also Siegel, Employment Equality Under the Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978, 94 Yale L. J. 929, 942
(1985) (Pregnancy “is a biological difference central to the
definition of gender roles, one traditionally believed to
render women unfit for employment.”). Relatedly, discrimination against pregnant employees was often “based
not on the pregnancy itself but on predictions concerning
the future behavior of the pregnant woman when her child
was born or on views about what her behavior should be.”
Williams 355. See also S. Rep. No. 95–331, p. 3 (1977)
(“[T]he assumption that women will become pregnant and
leave the labor market is at the core of the sex stereotyp-


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

ing resulting in unfavorable disparate treatment of women
in the workplace.”).
In sum, childbearing is not only a biological function
unique to women. It is also inextricably intertwined with
employers’ “stereotypical views about women’s commitment to work and their value as employees.” Hibbs, 538
U. S., at 736. Because pregnancy discrimination is inevitably sex discrimination, and because discrimination
against women is tightly interwoven with society’s beliefs
about pregnancy and motherhood, I would hold that Aiello
was egregiously wrong to declare that discrimination on
the basis of pregnancy is not discrimination on the basis of
sex.
C
Boerne’s third step requires “ ‘a congruence and proportionality between the injury to be prevented or remedied
and the means adopted to that end.’ ” Ante, at 5 (quoting
521 U. S., at 520). Section 2612(a)(1)(D), I would conclude,
is an appropriate response to pervasive discriminatory
treatment of pregnant women. In separating self-care
leave for the physical disability following childbirth,
§2612(a)(1)(D), which affects only women, from familycare leave for parenting a newborn baby, §2612(a)(1)(A),
for which men and women are equally suited, Congress
could attack gender discrimination and challenge stereotypes of women as lone childrearers. Cf. Hibbs, 538 U. S.,
at 731 (States’ extended “maternity” leaves, far exceeding
a woman’s physical disability following childbirth, were
attributable “to the pervasive sex-role stereotype that
caring for family members is women’s work.”).
It would make scant sense to provide job-protected leave
for a woman to care for a newborn, but not for her recovery from delivery, a miscarriage, or the birth of a stillborn
baby. And allowing States to provide no pregnancydisability leave at all, given that only women can become


14

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

pregnant, would obviously “exclude far more women than
men from the workplace.” Id., at 738.
The plurality’s statement that Congress lacked “widespread evidence of sex discrimination . . . in the administration of sick leave,” ante, at 6, misses the point. So too
does the plurality’s observation that state employees likely
“could take leave for pregnancy-related illnesses”—
presumably severe morning sickness, toxemia, etc.—under
paid sick-leave plans, ante, at 7. Congress heard evidence
that existing sick-leave plans were inadequate to ensure
that women were not fired when they needed to take time
out to recover their strength and stamina after childbirth.
The self-care provision responds to that evidence by requiring employers to allow leave for “ongoing pregnancy,
miscarriages, . . . the need for prenatal care, childbirth,
and recovery from childbirth.” S. Rep. No. 103–3, p. 29
(1993).
That §2612(a)(1)(D) entitles all employees to up to 12
weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave for a serious health
condition, rather than singling out pregnancy or childbirth, does not mean that the provision lacks the requisite
congruence and proportionality to the identified constitutional violations. As earlier noted, supra, at 6–7, Congress
made plain its rationale for the prescription’s broader
compass: Congress sought to ward off the unconstitutional
discrimination it believed would attend a pregnancy-only
leave requirement. Under the caption “Equal protection
and non-discrimination,” Congress explained:
“The FMLA addresses the basic leave needs of all
employees. . . . This is an important principle reflected
in the bill.
“A law providing special protection to women . . . ,
in addition to being inequitable, runs the risk of causing discriminatory treatment. Employers might be
less inclined to hire women . . . . For example, legisla-


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

tion addressing the needs of pregnant women only
might encourage discriminatory hiring practices
against women of child bearing age. Legislation addressing the needs of all workers equally does not
have this effect. By addressing the serious leave
needs of all employees, the FMLA avoids providing
employers the temptation to discriminate [against
women].
.
.
.
.
.
“The legislation is [thus] based not only on the Commerce Clause, but also on the guarantees of equal protection . . . embodied in the Fourteenth Amendment.”
H. R. Rep. No. 102–135, pt. 1, pp. 27–28 (1991) (hereinafter 1991 House Report).
Congress’ concern was solidly grounded in workplace
realities. After this Court upheld California’s pregnancyonly leave policy in California Fed., Don Butler, President
of the Merchants and Manufacturers Association, one of
the plaintiffs in that case, told National Public Radio
reporter Nina Totenberg that, as a result of the decision,
“many employers will be prone to discriminate against
women in hiring and hire males instead.” 1987 House
Hearing 36. Totenberg replied, “But that is illegal, too”—
to which Butler responded, “Well, that is illegal, but try to
prove it.” Ibid.
Finally, as in Hibbs, it is important to note the moderate
cast of the FMLA, in particular, the considerable limitations Congress placed on §§2612(a)(1)(A)–(D)’s leave
requirement. See 538 U. S., at 738–739. FMLA leave is
unpaid. It is limited to employees who have worked
at least one year for the employer and at least 1,250
hours during the past year. §§2611(2)(A), 2612(c)(1).
High-ranking employees, including state elected officials
and their staffs, are not within the Act’s compass.
§§203(e)(2)(C), 2611(3). Employees must provide advance
notice of foreseeable leaves. §2612(e). Employers may


16

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

require a doctor’s certification of a serious health condition. §2613(a). And, if an employer violates the FMLA,
the employees’ recoverable damages are “strictly defined
and measured by actual monetary losses.” Hibbs, 538
U. S., at 740 (citing §§2617(a)(1)(A)(i)–(iii)). The self-care
provision, I would therefore hold, is congruent and proportional to the injury to be prevented.
III
But even if Aiello senselessly holds sway, and impedes
the conclusion that §2612(a)(1)(D) is an appropriate response to the States’ unconstitutional discrimination
against pregnant women,6 I would nevertheless conclude
that the FMLA is valid §5 legislation. For it is a meet
response to “the States’ record of unconstitutional partici——————
6 Notably,

the plurality does not cite or discuss Geduldig v. Aiello, 417
U. S. 484 (1974), perhaps embarrassed by that opinion’s widely criticized conclusion that discrimination based on pregnancy does not
involve “discrimination based upon gender as such,” id., at 496, n. 20.
See supra, at 10–13; E. Chemerinsky, Constitutional Law 759 (3d ed.
2006) (“It is hard to imagine a clearer sex-based distinction” than
the one at issue in Aiello); Kay, Equality and Difference: The Case of
Pregnancy, 1 Berkeley Women’s L. J. 1, 31 (1985) (“[Aiello] results in
unequal treatment of similarly situated women and men who have
engaged respectively in reproductive conduct [and wish to continue
working]. It should be overruled.”); Law, Rethinking Sex and the
Constitution, 132 U. Pa. L. Rev. 955, 983–984 (1984) (“Criticizing
[Aiello] has . . . become a cottage industry. Over two dozen law review
articles have condemned both the Court’s approach and the result. . . .
Even the principal scholarly defense of [Aiello] admits that the Court
was wrong in refusing to recognize that the classification was sex-based
. . . .”); Karst, The Supreme Court 1976 Term Foreword: Equal Citizenship under the Fourteenth Amendment, 91 Harv. L. Rev. 1, 54, n. 304
(1977) (“[T]he constitutional sport of [Aiello] and last Term’s even sillier
statutory counterpart, General Elec. Co. v. Gilbert, 429 U. S. 125 (1976),
with their Alice-in-Wonderland view of pregnancy as a sex-neutral
phenomenon, are good candidates for early retirement. These decisions
are textbook examples of the effects of underrepresentation on “legislative” insensitivity. Imagine what the presence of even one woman
Justice would have meant to the Court’s conferences.”).


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

pation in, and fostering of, gender-based discrimination
in the administration of [parental and family-care] leave
benefits.” Hibbs, 538 U. S., at 735. See also id., at 729–
731, and n. 5 (Congress adduced evidence “of a pattern of
constitutional violations on the part of the States” in
granting parental and family-care leave).
Requiring States to provide gender-neutral parental and
family-care leave alone, Congress was warned, would
promote precisely the type of workplace discrimination
Congress sought to reduce. The “pervasive sex-role stereotype that caring for family members is women’s work,” id.,
at 731, Congress heard, led employers to regard required
parental and family-care leave as a woman’s benefit.
Carol Ball, speaking on behalf of the U. S. Chamber of
Commerce, testified that she did not think “there are
going to be many men that take up . . . parental leave.”
See Hearing on S. 345 before the Subcommittee on Children, Family, Drugs, and Alcoholism of the Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources, 101st Cong., 1st
Sess., 39 (1989) (statement of Carol Ball). She frankly
admitted that she herself would choose to hire a man over
an equally qualified woman if parental leave was required
by law. Id., at 30.
Others similarly testified that mandating genderneutral parental leave would lead to discrimination
against women. A representative of the National Federal
of Independent Business stated: “Requiring employers to
provide parental leave benefits creates clear pressures for
subtle discrimination based on . . . sex. When choosing
between two equally qualified candidates, an employer
may be more likely to hire the candidate least likely to
take the leave. It is the wage levels and jobs of women of
childbearing years which are most at risk in such a situation.” Hearing on H. R. 1 before the Subcommittee on
Labor-Management Relations of the House Committee
on Education and Labor, 103d Cong., 1st Sess., 95 (1993).


18

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

See also 1989 House Hearing 169 (statement of Cynthia
Simpler, American Society for Personnel Administration)
(“Since working women will be viewed as the most likely
candidates for parental leave, hidden discrimination will
occur if this bill becomes law. Women of child-bearing age
will be viewed as risks, potentially disrupting operations
through an untimely leave.”).
Conversely—unlike perceptions surrounding who takes
parental and family-care leave—Congress was told that
men and women take medical leave approximately equally. According to one study, male workers missed an average of 4.9 days of work per year due to illness or injury;
female workers missed 5.1 days. See 1991 House Report,
pt. 1, p. 28. “[T]he incidence of serious medical conditions
that would be covered by medical leave under the bill,”
Congress determined, “is virtually the same for men and
women. Employers will find that women and men will
take medical leave with equal frequency.” Ibid. “[P]arental and medical leave,” Congress was thus alerted,
“are inseparable”:
“In the words of an old song, ‘You can’t have one without the other.’
.
.
.
.
.
“Adoption of parental leave protections without
medical leave would . . . encourage discrimination
against women of child-bearing age, who constitute
approximately 73 percent of all the women in the labor force.
“Employers would tend to hire men, who are much
less likely to claim [the parental leave] benefit. . . .
“Parental leave without medical leave would be the
modern version of protective labor laws.” 1986 House
Hearing 33–34 (Statement of Irene Natividad, National Women’s Political Caucus).
Congress therefore had good reason to conclude that the


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

19

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

self-care provision—which men no doubt would use—
would counter employers’ impressions that the FMLA
would otherwise install female leave. Providing for selfcare would thus reduce employers’ corresponding incentive
to discriminate against women in hiring and promotion.
In other words, “[t]he availability of self-care leave to men
serves to blunt the force of stereotypes of women as primary caregivers by increasing the odds that men and women
will invoke the FMLA’s leave provisions in near-equal
numbers.” See Brief for National Partnership for Women
& Families et al. as Amici Curiae 26. As Judge Lipez
explained:
“If Congress had drawn a line at leave for caring for
other family members, there is greater likelihood that
the FMLA would have been perceived as further reason to avoid granting employment opportunities to
women. Heretofore, women have provided most of the
child and elder care, and legislation that focused on
these duties could have had a deleterious impact because of the prevalent notion that women take more
advantage of such leave policies. The inclusion of personal medical leave in the scheme, unrelated to any
need to care for another person, undermines the assumption that women are the only ones taking leave
because men, presumably, are as likely as women to
get sick.” Laro v. New Hampshire, 259 F. 3d 1, 21
(CA1 2001) (dissenting opinion).
Senator Barbara Boxer advanced a similar point. Responding to assertions that the FMLA would lead employers to discriminate against women, Senator Boxer stated:
“[T]o say that women will not be hired by business is a
specious argument . . . . Men also get sick. They get
cancer. They get heart disease. They have ailments. And
this bill applies to men and women.” 139 Cong. Rec. 1697
(1993). See also 1987 Senate Hearings, pt. 2, p. 536 (“I


20

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

just think it’s wrong that there will be a perception that
this is something that only women will take and they are,
therefore, more expensive. Both men and women have
medical conditions . . . .” (statement of Prof. Susan Deller
Ross, Georgetown University Law Center)).
The plurality therefore gets it wrong in concluding that
“[o]nly supposition and conjecture support the contention
that the self-care provision is necessary to make the familycare provisions effective.” Ante, at 9. Self-care leave, I
would hold, is a key part of Congress’ endeavor to make it
feasible for women to work and have families. See 1991
Senate Report 25–26 (“This legislation is essential if the
nation is to address the dramatic changes that have occurred in the American workforce in recent years. . . . The
once-typical American family, where the father worked for
pay and the mother stayed at home with the children, is
vanishing. . . . Today, more than one-half of all mothers
with infants under one year of age work outside the home.
That figure has doubled since 1970 . . . . By the year 2000,
about three out of every four American children will have
mothers in the workforce.”). By reducing an employer’s
perceived incentive to avoid hiring women, §2612(a)(1)(D)
lessens the risk that the FMLA as a whole would give rise
to the very sex discrimination it was enacted to thwart.
The plurality offers no legitimate ground to dilute the
force of the Act.
IV
Two additional points. First, this Court reached a different conclusion than the one I reach here in Board of
Trustees of Univ. of Ala. v. Garrett, 531 U. S. 356 (2001),
and Kimel, 528 U. S. 62. In those cases, as we observed in
Hibbs, we reviewed statutes targeting disability and age
discrimination, respectively. Neither disability nor age is
a suspect classification under this Court’s Equal Protection Clause jurisprudence; States may discriminate on the


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

21

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

basis of disability or age as long as the classification is
rationally related to a legitimate state interest. See Garrett, 531 U. S., at 366–367; Kimel, 528 U. S., at 83–84.
Therefore, for the statutes to be responsive to or designed
to prevent unconstitutional discrimination, Congress
needed to rely on a pattern of irrational state discrimination on the basis of disability or age. See Garrett, 531
U. S., at 368; Kimel, 528 U. S., at 89. Here, however,
Congress homed in on gender discrimination, which triggers heightened review. See United States v. Virginia, 518
U. S. 515, 531 (1996) (“Parties who seek to defend genderbased government action must demonstrate an exceedingly persuasive justification for that action.” (internal quotation marks omitted)). “[I]t was [therefore] easier for
Congress to show a pattern of state constitutional violations.”
Hibbs, 538 U. S., at 736.
Finally, the plurality’s opinion does not authorize state
employers to violate the FMLA, although it does block
injured employees from suing for monetary relief. The
self-care provision remains valid Commerce Clause legislation, Maryland concedes, and consequently binds the
states, as well as the private sector. Tr. of Oral Arg. 25;
Brief for Respondents 32–33. An employee wrongly denied
self-care leave, Maryland also acknowledges, may, pursuant to Ex parte Young, 209 U. S. 123 (1908), seek injunctive relief against the responsible state official. See Brief
for Respondents 33. Moreover, the U. S. Department of
Labor may bring an action against a state for violating the
self-care provision and may recover monetary relief on an
employee’s behalf. 29 U. S. C. §§2617(b)(2)–(3), (d).
V
The plurality pays scant attention to the overarching
aim of the FMLA: to make it feasible for women to work
while sustaining family life. Over the course of eight
years, Congress considered the problem of workplace


22

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

discrimination against women, and devised the FMLA to
reduce sex-based inequalities in leave programs. Essential to its design, Congress assiduously avoided a legislative package that, overall, was or would be seen as geared
to women only. Congress thereby reduced employers’
incentives to prefer men over women, advanced women’s
economic opportunities, and laid the foundation for a more
egalitarian relationship at home and at work. The selfcare provision is a key part of that endeavor, and, in my
view, a valid exercise of congressional power under §5 of
the Fourteenth Amendment. I would therefore reverse the
judgment of the U. S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth
Circuit.

