Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–1016
_________________

DANIEL COLEMAN, PETITIONER v. COURT OF

APPEALS OF MARYLAND ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT

[March 20, 2012]


JUSTICE KENNEDY announced the judgment of the Court
and delivered an opinion, in which THE CHIEF JUSTICE,
JUSTICE THOMAS, and JUSTICE ALITO joined.
The question in this case is whether a state employee
is allowed to recover damages from the state entity that
employs him by invoking one of the provisions of a federal
statute that, in express terms, seeks to abrogate the
States’ immunity from suits for damages. The statute in
question is the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, 107
Stat. 6, 29 U. S. C. §2601 et seq. The provision at issue
requires employers, including state employers, to grant
unpaid leave for self care for a serious medical condition,
provided other statutory requisites are met, particularly
requirements that the total amount of annual leave taken
under all the Act’s provisions does not exceed a stated
maximum. §2612(a)(1)(d). In agreement with every Court
of Appeals to have addressed this question, this Court now
holds that suits against States under this provision are
barred by the States’ immunity as sovereigns in our federal system. See 626 F. 3d 187 (CA4 2010) (case below);
Nelson v. University of Tex., 535 F. 3d 318 (CA5 2008);


2

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

Miles v. Bellfontaine Habilitation Center, 481 F. 3d 1106
(CA8 2007) (per curiam); Toeller v. Wisconsin Dept. of
Corrections, 461 F. 3d 871 (CA7 2006); Touvell v. Ohio
Dept. of Mental Retardation & Developmental Disabilities,
422 F. 3d 392 (CA6 2005); Brockman v. Wyoming Dept. of
Family Servs., 342 F. 3d 1159 (CA10 2003); Laro v. New
Hampshire, 259 F. 3d 1 (CA1 2001).
I

A

The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA or
Act) entitles eligible employees to take up to 12 work
weeks of unpaid leave per year. An employee may take
leave under the FMLA for: (A) “the birth of a son or
daughter . . . in order to care for such son or daughter,” (B)
the adoption or foster-care placement of a child with the
employee, (C) the care of a “spouse . . . son, daughter, or
parent” with “a serious health condition,” and (D) the
employee’s own serious health condition when the condition interferes with the employee’s ability to perform at
work. 29 U. S. C. §2612(a)(1). The Act creates a private
right of action to seek both equitable relief and money
damages “against any employer (including a public agency) in any Federal or State court of competent jurisdiction.” §2617(a)(2). As noted, subparagraph (D) is at issue
here.
This Court considered subparagraph (C) in Nevada
Dept. of Human Resources v. Hibbs, 538 U. S. 721 (2003).
Subparagraph (C), like (A) and (B), grants leave for reasons related to family care, and those three provisions are
referred to here as the family-care provisions. Hibbs held
that Congress could subject the States to suit for violations of subparagraph (C), §2612(a)(1)(C). That holding
rested on evidence that States had family-leave policies
that differentiated on the basis of sex and that States
administered even neutral family-leave policies in ways


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

that discriminated on the basis of sex. See id., at 730–732.
Subparagraph (D), the self-care provision, was not at issue
in Hibbs.
B
Petitioner Daniel Coleman was employed by the Court
of Appeals of the State of Maryland. When Coleman
requested sick leave, he was informed he would be terminated if he did not resign. Coleman then sued the state
court in the United States District Court for the District of
Maryland, alleging, inter alia, that his employer violated
the FMLA by failing to provide him with self-care leave.
The District Court dismissed the suit on the basis that
the Maryland Court of Appeals, as an entity of a sovereign
State, was immune from the suit for damages. The parties
do not dispute the District Court’s ruling that the Maryland Court of Appeals is an entity or instrumentality of
the State for purposes of sovereign immunity. The District Court concluded the FMLA’s self-care provision did
not validly abrogate the State’s immunity from suit. App.
to Pet. for Cert. 15–20. The Court of Appeals for the
Fourth Circuit affirmed, reasoning that, unlike the familycare provision at issue in Hibbs, the self-care provision
was not directed at an identified pattern of gender-based
discrimination and was not congruent and proportional to
any pattern of sex-based discrimination on the part of
States. 626 F. 3d 187. Certiorari was granted. 564 U. S.
___ (2011).
II

A

A foundational premise of the federal system is that
States, as sovereigns, are immune from suits for damages,
save as they elect to waive that defense. See Kimel v.
Florida Bd. of Regents, 528 U. S. 62, 72–73 (2000); Alden
v. Maine, 527 U. S. 706 (1999). As an exception to this


4

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

principle, Congress may abrogate the States’ immunity
from suit pursuant to its powers under §5 of the Fourteenth Amendment. See, e.g., Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer, 427
U. S. 445 (1976).
Congress must “mak[e] its intention to abrogate unmistakably clear in the language of the statute.” Hibbs, 538
U. S., at 726. On this point the Act does express the clear
purpose to abrogate the States’ immunity. Ibid. (“The
clarity of Congress’ intent” to abrogate the States’ immunity from suits for damages under the FMLA “is not fairly
debatable”). Congress subjected any “public agency” to
suit under the FMLA, 29 U. S. C. §2617(a)(2), and a “public agency” is defined to include both “the government of
a State or political subdivision thereof ” and “any agency of
. . . a State, or a political subdivision of a State,” §§203(x),
2611(4)(A)(iii).
The question then becomes whether the self-care provision and its attempt to abrogate the States’ immunity are
a valid exercise of congressional power under §5 of the
Fourteenth Amendment. Section 5 grants Congress the
power “to enforce” the substantive guarantees of §1 of
the Amendment by “appropriate legislation.” The power
to enforce “ ‘includes the authority both to remedy and to
deter violation[s] of rights guaranteed’ ” by §1. See Board
of Trustees of Univ. of Ala. v. Garrett, 531 U. S. 356, 365
(2001) (quoting Kimel, supra, at 81). To ensure Congress’
enforcement powers under §5 remain enforcement powers,
as envisioned by the ratifiers of the Amendment, rather
than powers to redefine the substantive scope of §1, Congress “must tailor” legislation enacted under §5 “ ‘to remedy or prevent’ ” “conduct transgressing the Fourteenth
Amendment’s substantive provisions.” Florida Prepaid
Postsecondary Ed. Expense Bd. v. College Savings Bank,
527 U. S. 627, 639 (1999).
Whether a congressional Act passed under §5 can impose monetary liability upon States requires an assess-


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

ment of both the “ ‘evil’ or ‘wrong’ that Congress intended
to remedy,” ibid., and the means Congress adopted to
address that evil, see City of Boerne v. Flores, 521 U. S.
507, 520 (1997). Legislation enacted under §5 must be
targeted at “conduct transgressing the Fourteenth
Amendment’s substantive provisions.” Florida Prepaid,
supra, at 639; see Kimel, supra, at 88; City of Boerne,
521 U. S., at 525. And “[t]here must be a congruence
and proportionality between the injury to be prevented or
remedied and the means adopted to that end.” Id., at 520.
Under this analysis Hibbs permitted employees to recover damages from States for violations of subparagraph
(C). In enacting the FMLA, Congress relied upon evidence
of a well-documented pattern of sex-based discrimination
in family-leave policies. States had facially discriminatory
leave policies that granted longer periods of leave to women than to men. 538 U. S., at 730–731. States also administered facially neutral family-leave policies in genderbiased ways. Id., at 732. These practices reflected what
Congress found to be a “pervasive sex-role stereotype that
caring for family members is women’s work,” id., at 731,
a stereotype to which even this Court had succumbed in
earlier times, id., at 729. Faced with “the States’ record of
unconstitutional participation in, and fostering of, genderbased discrimination in the administration of leave benefits,” Hibbs concluded that requiring state employers to
give all employees the opportunity to take family-care
leave was “narrowly targeted at the faultline between
work and family—precisely where sex-based overgeneralization has been and remains strongest.” Id., at 735, 738.
B
The same cannot be said for requiring the States to give
all employees the opportunity to take self-care leave.
Petitioner advances three arguments for allowing employees to recover damages from States that violate the


6

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

FMLA’s self-care provision: The self-care provision standing alone addresses sex discrimination and sex stereotyping; the provision is a necessary adjunct to the family-care
provision sustained in Hibbs; and the provision eases the
burden on single parents. But what the family-care provisions have to support them, the self-care provision lacks,
namely evidence of a pattern of state constitutional violations accompanied by a remedy drawn in narrow terms to
address or prevent those violations.
1
Standing alone, the self-care provision is not a valid
abrogation of the States’ immunity from suit. When the
FMLA was enacted, “ninety-five percent of full-time stateand local-government employees were covered by paid sick
leave plans and ninety-six percent of such employees
likewise enjoyed short-term disability protection.” Brief
for States of Texas et al. as Amici Curiae 13–14 (hereinafter Texas Brief) (citing Bureau of Labor Statistics, U. S.
Dept. of Labor, Employee Benefits in State and Local
Governments 17–26 (1994) (hereinafter BLS Rept.)). The
evidence did not suggest States had facially discriminatory
self-care leave policies or that they administered neutral
self-care leave policies in a discriminatory way. And there
is scant evidence in the legislative history of a purported
stereotype harbored by employers that women take selfcare leave more often than men. Congress considered
evidence that “men and women are out on medical leave
approximately equally.” H. R. Rep. No. 101–28, pt. 1, p.
15 (1989) (hereinafter H. R. Rep.). Nothing in the record
shows employers formulated self-care leave policies based
on a contrary view.
Without widespread evidence of sex discrimination or
sex stereotyping in the administration of sick leave, it is
apparent that the congressional purpose in enacting the
self-care provision is unrelated to these supposed wrongs.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

The legislative history of the self-care provision reveals a
concern for the economic burdens on the employee and the
employee’s family resulting from illness-related job loss
and a concern for discrimination on the basis of illness, not
sex. See, e.g., S. Rep. No. 103–3, pp. 11–12 (1993); H. R.
Rep., at 23. In the findings pertinent to the self-care
provision, the statute makes no reference to any distinction on the basis of sex. See 29 U. S. C. §2601(a)(4)
(“[T]here is inadequate job security for employees who
have serious health conditions that prevent them from
working for temporary periods”). By contrast, with regard
to family care Congress invoked concerns related to gender. See §2601(a)(5) (“[D]ue to the nature of the roles of
men and women in our society, the primary responsibility
for family caretaking often falls on women, and such
responsibility affects the working lives of women more
than it affects the working lives of men”).
It is true the self-care provision offers some women a
benefit by allowing them to take leave for pregnancyrelated illnesses; but as a remedy, the provision is not
congruent and proportional to any identified constitutional
violations. At the time of the FMLA’s enactment, “ninetyfive percent” of state employees had paid sick-leave plans
at work, and “ninety-six percent” had short-term disability
protection. Texas Brief 13–14 (citing BLS Rept. 17–26).
State employees presumably could take leave for pregnancyrelated illnesses under these policies, and Congress did
not document any pattern of States excluding pregnancyrelated illnesses from sick-leave or disability-leave policies. “Congress . . . said nothing about the existence or
adequacy of state remedies.” Florida Prepaid, 527 U. S.,
at 644. It follows that abrogating the States’ immunity
from suits for damages for failure to give self-care leave is
not a congruent and proportional remedy if the existing
state leave policies would have sufficed.


8

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

2
As an alternative justification for the self-care provision,
it has been suggested that the provision is a necessary
adjunct to the family-care provisions. Petitioner argues
that employers may assume women are more likely to
take family-care leave than men and that the FMLA
therefore offers up to 12 weeks of leave for family care and
self care combined. According to petitioner, when the selfcare provision is coupled with the family-care provisions,
the self-care provision could reduce the difference in the
expected number of weeks of FMLA leave that different
employees take for different reasons.
The fact that self-care leave could have this effect does
not mean that it would. If, for example, women are expected to take 20 days of family-care leave per year and
men to take 10, and women and men are each expected to
take 5 days of self-care leave per year, the difference in the
expected number of days of leave and cost to the employer
remains the same regardless of the availability of self-care
leave. Congress made no findings, and received no specific
testimony, to suggest the availability of self-care leave
equalizes the expected amount of FMLA leave men and
women will take. Even if women take family-care leave
more often than men, men do not take self-care leave more
often than women; and there is little evidence that employers assume they do. See H. R. Rep., at 15. Petitioner
suggests that some women will be expected to take all 12
weeks of leave under the FMLA for family-care purposes,
and therefore that any amount of self-care leave taken by
men will diminish the difference in the amount of FMLA
leave taken by men and women. But there is little evidence to support petitioner’s assumption about the magnitude of women’s expected FMLA leave for family-care
purposes. And men are only expected to take five days of
sick leave per year, see ibid., so the self-care provision
diminishes the difference in expected leave time by a


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

maximum of five days. And that is only to the extent
women use all their available FMLA leave for family-care
reasons. Petitioner’s overly complicated argument about
how the self-care provision works in tandem with the
family-care provisions is unconvincing and in the end does
not comply with the clear requirements of City of Boerne.
In addition petitioner’s first defense of the self-care
provision contradicts his second defense of the provision.
In the first defense, the Court is told employers assume
women take more self-care leave than men. See Tr. of
Oral Arg. 10–12. In the second defense, the Court is told
the self-care provision provides an incentive to hire women
that will counteract the incentives created by the familycare provisions because employers assume women take
more family-care leave than men. But if the first defense
is correct, the second defense is wrong. In other words, if
employers assume women take self-care leave more often
than men (the first defense), a self-care provision will not
provide an incentive to hire women. To the contrary, the
self-care provision would provide an incentive to discriminate against women.
There is “little support in the record for the concerns
that supposedly animated” the self-care provision. Florida
Prepaid, supra, at 639. Only supposition and conjecture
support the contention that the self-care provision is
necessary to make the family-care provisions effective.
The evidence documented in support of the self-care provision is, to a large degree, unrelated to sex discrimination,
or to the administration of the family-care provisions. See
supra, at 7. Congress made no findings and did not cite
specific or detailed evidence to show how the self-care
provision is necessary to the family-care provisions or how
it reduces an employer’s incentives to discriminate against
women. And “Congress . . . said nothing about the existence or adequacy of state” sick-leave policies. Florida
Prepaid, supra, at 644; see Garrett, 531 U. S., at 373.


10

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

Under this Court’s precedents, more is required to subject unconsenting States to suits for damages, particularly
where, as here, it is for violations of a provision (the selfcare provision) that is a supposedly preventive step in aid
of already preventive provisions (the family-care provisions). See Florida Prepaid, 527 U. S., at 642 (“[T]he
legislative record still provides little support for the proposition that Congress sought to remedy a Fourteenth
Amendment violation in enacting the Patent Remedy
Act”); Kimel, 528 U. S., at 88 (“One means by which we
have made such a determination . . . is by examining the
legislative record containing the reasons for Congress’
action”).
The “few fleeting references” to how self-care leave is
inseparable from family-care leave fall short of what is
required for a valid abrogation of States’ immunity from
suits for damages. Florida Prepaid, supra, at 644. These
“isolated sentences clipped from floor debates” and testimony, Kimel, supra, at 89, are stated as conclusions,
unsupported by evidence or findings about how the selfcare provision interrelates to the family-care provisions to
counteract employers’ incentives to discriminate against
women. Congress must rely on more than abstract generalities to subject the States to suits for damages. Otherwise, Congress could choose to combat the purported
effects of the family-care provisions by allowing employees
to sue States that do not permit employees to take vacation time under the FMLA. There is nothing in particular
about self-care leave, as opposed to leave for any personal
reason, that connects it to gender discrimination. And
when the issue, as here, is whether subparagraph (D) can
abrogate a State’s immunity from damages, there is no
sufficient nexus, or indeed any demonstrated nexus, between self-care leave and gender discrimination by state
employers. Documented discrimination against women in
the general workplace is a persistent, unfortunate reality,


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

and, we must assume, a still prevalent wrong. An explicit
purpose of the Congress in adopting the FMLA was to
improve workplace conditions for women. See 29 U. S. C.
§§2601(b)(4), (5). But States may not be subject to suits
for damages based on violations of a comprehensive statute unless Congress has identified a specific pattern of
constitutional violations by state employers. See City of
Boerne, 521 U. S., at 532.
3
The petitioner’s last defense of the self-care provision is
that the provision helps single parents retain their jobs
when they become ill. This, however, does not explain
how the provision remedies or prevents constitutional
violations. The fact that most single parents happen to be
women, see, e.g., S. Rep. No. 103–3, at 7, demonstrates, at
most, that the self-care provision was directed at remedying employers’ neutral leave restrictions which have a
disparate effect on women. “Although disparate impact
may be relevant evidence of . . . discrimination . . . such
evidence alone is insufficient [to prove a constitutional
violation] even where the Fourteenth Amendment subjects
state action to strict scrutiny.” Garrett, supra, at 372–373;
see Tuan Anh Nguyen v. INS, 533 U. S. 53, 82–83 (2001)
(O’Connor, J., dissenting); Washington v. Davis, 426 U. S.
229, 239 (1976). To the extent, then, that the self-care
provision addresses neutral leave policies with a disparate
impact on women, it is not directed at a pattern of constitutional violations. Because, moreover, it is “unlikely that
many of the [neutral leave policies] . . . affected by” the
self-care provision are unconstitutional, “the scope of the
[self-care provision is] out of proportion to its supposed
remedial or preventive objectives.” Kimel, supra, at 82;
see City of Boerne, supra, at 519.
Of course, a State need not assert its Eleventh Amendment immunity from suits for damages. See, e.g., Sossa-


12

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

mon v. Texas, 563 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 5) (“A
State . . . may choose to waive its immunity in federal
court at its pleasure”). Discrimination against women is
contrary to the public policy of the State of Maryland, see,
e.g., Maryland’s Fair Employment Practices Act, Md. State
Govt. Code Ann. §20–606 (Lexis 2009), and the State has
conceded that the Act is good social policy, see Tr. of Oral
Arg. 35. If the State agrees with petitioner that damages
liability for violations of the self-care provision is necessary to combat discrimination against women, the State
may waive its immunity or create a parallel state law
cause of action.
*
*
*
As a consequence of our constitutional design, money
damages are the exception when sovereigns are defendants. See, e.g., Pennhurst State School and Hospital v.
Halderman, 451 U. S. 1, 29 (1981). Subjecting States to
suits for damages pursuant to §5 requires more than a
theory for why abrogating the States’ immunity aids in, or
advances, a stated congressional purpose. To abrogate the
States’ immunity from suits for damages under §5, Congress must identify a pattern of constitutional violations
and tailor a remedy congruent and proportional to the
documented violations. It failed to do so when it allowed
employees to sue States for violations of the FMLA’s selfcare provision. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is
affirmed.
It is so ordered.

