6

WILLIAMS v. HOBBS
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

above, which at the very least raises the possibility of a
deliberate decision by the State, the Court of Appeals
failed to consider the question at all.
Day also would require the Court of Appeals to “assure
itself” that Williams would not be “significantly prejudiced
by the delayed focus” on his entitlement to a federal evi
dentiary hearing. Id., at 210. Williams raised just this
point in the Court of Appeals, arguing that the State’s
untimely objection to the evidentiary hearing had “de
prived [him] of any opportunity to present facts that would
show his entitlement to a hearing under the applicable
standard.” Brief for Appellee/Cross-Appellant and Adden
dum in No. 07–1984 etc. (CA8), p. 8. This, too, the court
failed to address.
In fact, the Court of Appeals made no mention of—and
apparently gave no consideration to—any countervailing
interests weighing against review of the State’s untimely
§2254(e)(2) challenge. Such interests are certainly signifi
cant where, as here, the evidence at the hearing led the
District Court to conclude that a constitutional violation
had occurred and that a capital sentence must be set
aside. Indeed, the relevant interests to be considered
include not only interests of finality and comity (the singu
lar focus of the Court of Appeals), but also the interest of
remedying a “miscarriage of justice” that is evident after
“a full trial has been held in the district court.” Gran
berry, 481 U. S., at 135.
In my opinion, the interests of justice are poorly served
by a rule that allows a State to object to an evidentiary
hearing only after the hearing has been completed and the
State has lost. Cf. Puckett v. United States, 556 U. S. —,
— (2009) (slip op., at 5) (“[T]he contemporaneous-objection
rule prevents a litigant from ‘sandbagging’ the court—
remaining silent about his objection and belatedly raising
the error only if the case does not conclude in his favor”).
It is true, as the Court of Appeals emphasized, that the

