4

WILLIAMS v. HOBBS
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

appeal must “pu[t] the court on notice as to [its] concern,”
Beech Aircraft Corp. v. Rainey, 488 U. S. 153, 174 (1988).
Absolutely nothing in the State’s general statement—or
any other part of the record, for that matter—put the
District Court, or Williams, on notice that the State con
tested Williams’ entitlement to an evidentiary hearing.
Even if a State need not spell out its opposition to an
evidentiary hearing in precise terms, I cannot fathom how
this statement of a general principle of law—a principle
that is no less true even when a federal evidentiary hear
ing is proper—could suffice.
Indeed, rather than reveal an objection to the hearing,
the record indicates that the State affirmatively consented
to the hearing and sought to use the hearing to its own
strategic advantage. Williams made multiple straightfor
ward requests for an evidentiary hearing in no unclear
terms. And, the District Court clearly informed the State
of its intent to grant that request, giving the State every
opportunity to object that a hearing was improper because
Williams had “failed to develop the factual basis of [his]
claim” in state court, §2254(e)(2). Rather than protest, the
State requested that the court narrow the issues on which
evidence would be heard and that the hearing be resched
uled due to the unavailability of its own witness. The
State then relied on new evidence developed at the hearing
to contest the court’s prior conclusion, on the state-court
record, that defense counsel’s performance had been defi
cient. The State presented the same evidence on appeal,
although there it also argued—inconsistently and for the
very first time—that the hearing had been improper. I
simply cannot see how this record suggests anything other
than a deliberate strategy by the State to use the hearing
to fortify the record in support of the state-court decision
and to object to the hearing only if and when that strategy
failed.
Second, with respect to the Eighth Circuit’s alternative

