Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

prove prejudice “on the factual record he developed in
state court.” Id., at 863. Thus, although the District
Court found that the State never “object[ed] to [the court’s
decision] to conduct an evidentiary hearing” nor “argued
that [it] should not consider that evidence” in ruling on
Williams’ petition, 2007 WL 1100417, *2, n. 1; see also id.,
at *3, the Court of Appeals held that the State had in fact
objected to the hearing. In the alternative, the Court of
Appeals concluded that it would “exercise [its] discretion
to review the district court’s non-compliance with
§2254(e)(2)” even if the State had not objected. 576 F. 3d,
at 860.
To be sure, under §2254(e)(2), if a habeas petitioner “has
failed to develop the factual basis of a claim in State court
proceedings, the court shall not hold an evidentiary hear
ing on the claim” unless certain conditions are met. Had
the State invoked this section in the District Court, the
hearing may have been barred for the reasons given by the
Court of Appeals. But whether §2254(e)(2) barred the
hearing is a separate question from whether the State’s
§2254(e)(2) objection was properly before the Court of
Appeals in the first place. As to that threshold question,
neither of the holdings adopted by the court below with
stands scrutiny.
First, the Eighth Circuit’s conclusion that the State
objected in the District Court to the evidentiary hearing is
patently wrong. As proof of an objection, the Court of
Appeals found one sentence in the record where the State
asserted that a federal habeas court “is prevented from re
trying a state criminal case.” 576 F. 3d, at 860 (internal
quotation marks omitted). According to the Court of Ap
peals, this statement amounted to an objection to the
hearing because it “incorporated the fundamental purpose
behind the restrictions on evidentiary hearings in
§2254(e)(2).” Ibid. As a general matter, however, a party
wishing to raise an objection and preserve an issue for

