Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

STEVENS, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–475
_________________

MONSANTO COMPANY, ET AL., PETITIONERS v.

GEERTSON SEED FARMS ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[June 21, 2010] 


JUSTICE STEVENS, dissenting.
The Court does not dispute the District Court’s critical
findings of fact: First, Roundup Ready Alfalfa (RRA) can
contaminate other plants. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 38a,
54a, 62a. Second, even planting in a controlled setting
had led to contamination in some instances. See id., at
69a–70a. Third, the Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service (APHIS) has limited ability to monitor or enforce
limitations on planting. See id., at 70a. And fourth,
genetic contamination from RRA could decimate farmers’
livelihoods and the American alfalfa market for years to
come. See id., at 71a; see also id., at 29a–30a. Instead,
the majority faults the District Court for “enjoining
APHIS from partially deregulating RRA.” Ante, at 16.
In my view, the District Court may not have actually
ordered such relief, and we should not so readily assume
that it did. Regardless, the District Court did not abuse
its discretion when, after considering the voluminous
record and making the aforementioned findings, it issued
the order now before us.
I
To understand the District Court’s judgment, it is nec
essary to understand the background of this litigation.
Petitioner Monsanto Company (Monsanto) is a large cor


2

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

poration that has long produced a weed killer called
Roundup. After years of experimentation, Monsanto and
co-petitioner Forage Genetics International (FGI) geneti
cally engineered a mutation in the alfalfa genome that
makes the plant immune to Roundup. Monsanto and
FGI’s new product, RRA, is “the first crop that has been
engineered to resist a[n] herbicide” and that can transmit
the genetically engineered gene to other plants. See App.
to Pet. for Cert. 45a.
In 2004, in the midst of a deregulatory trend in the
agricultural sector, petitioners asked APHIS to deregulate
RRA, thereby allowing it to be sold and planted nation
wide. App. 101a. Rather than conducting a detailed
analysis and preparing an “environmental impact state
ment” (EIS), as required by the National Environmental
Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) for every “major Federal ac
tio[n] significantly affecting the quality of the human
environment,” 42 U. S. C. §4332(2)(C), APHIS merely
conducted an abbreviated “environmental assessment”
(EA). During the 6-month period in which APHIS allowed
public comment on its EA, the agency received 663 com
ments, 520 of which opposed deregulation. App. to Pet. for
Cert. 29a. Farmers and scientists opined that RRA could
contaminate alfalfa that has not been genetically modified,
destroying the American export market for alfalfa and,
potentially, contaminating other plants and breeding a
new type of pesticide-resistant weed. Id., at 29a–30a.
Despite substantial evidence that RRA genes could
transfer to other plants, APHIS issued a Finding of No
Significant Impact and agreed to deregulate RRA “uncon
ditionally,” ante, at 4. With no EIS to wait for and no
regulation blocking its path, petitioners began selling
RRA. Farmers and environmental groups swiftly brought
this lawsuit to challenge APHIS’s decision to deregulate,
raising claims under NEPA and other statutes.
The District Court carefully reviewed a long record and


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., dissenting

found that “APHIS’s reasons for concluding” that the risks
of genetic contamination are low were “not ‘convincing.’ ”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 38a. A review of APHIS’s internal
documents showed that individuals within the agency
warned that contamination might occur. APHIS rested its
decision to deregulate on its assertion that contamination
risk is “not significant because it is the organic and con
ventional farmers’ responsibility” to protect themselves
and the environment. Ibid. Yet the agency drew this
conclusion without having investigated whether such
farmers “can, in fact, protect their crops from contamina
tion.” Ibid. The District Court likewise found that
APHIS’s reasons for disregarding the risk of pesticide
resistant weeds were speculative and “not convincing.”
Id., at 46a. The agency had merely explained that if
weeds acquire roundup resistance, farmers can use “ ‘[a]l
ternative herbicides.’ ” Ibid. In light of the “acknowl
edged” risk of RRA gene transmission and the potential
“impact on the development of Roundup resistant weeds,”
the court concluded that there was a significant possibility
of serious environmental harm, and granted summary
judgment for the plaintiffs. Id., at 54a; see also id., at 45a.
At this point, the question of remedy arose. The parties
submitted proposed final judgments, and several corpora
tions with an interest in RRA, including Monsanto, sought
permission to intervene. The District Court granted their
motion and agreed “to give them the opportunity to pre
sent evidence to assist the court in fashioning the appro
priate scope of whatever relief is granted.” Id., at 54a
(internal quotation marks omitted).
While the District Court considered the proposed judg
ments, it issued a preliminary injunction. Ordinarily, the
court explained, the remedy for failure to conduct an EIS
is to vacate the permit that was unlawfully given—the
result of which, in this case, would be to prohibit any use
of RRA. See id., at 55a; see also id., at 65a. But this case


4

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

presented a special difficulty: Following APHIS’s unlawful
deregulation order, some farmers had begun planting
genetically modified RRA. Id., at 55a. In its preliminary
injunction, the District Court ordered that no new RRA
could be planted until APHIS completed the EIS or the
court determined that some other relief was appropriate.
But, so as to protect these farmers, the court declined to
prohibit them from “harvesting, using, or selling” any
crops they had already planted. Id., at 56a. And “to
minimize the harm to those growers who intend to immi
nently plant Roundup Ready alfalfa,” the court permitted
“[t]hose growers who intend to plant [RRA] in the next
three weeks and have already purchased the seed” to go
ahead and plant. Id., at 58a (emphasis deleted). Essen
tially, the court grandfathered in those farmers who had
relied, in good faith, on APHIS’s actions.
Before determining the scope of its final judgment, the
District Court invited the parties and intervenors to sub
mit “whatever additional evidence” they “wish[ed] to
provide,” and it scheduled additional oral argument. Id.,
at 58a–59a. The parties submitted “competing proposals
for permanent injunctive relief.” Id., at 60a. The plain
tiffs requested that no one—not even the grandfathered-in
farmers—be allowed to plant, grow, or harvest RRA until
the full EIS had been prepared. Id., at 64a. APHIS and
the intervenors instead sought a remedy that would “fa
cilitat[e] the continued and dramatic growth” of RRA: a
“partial deregulation” order that would permit planting
subject to certain conditions, such as specified minimum
distances between RRA and conventional alfalfa and
special cleaning requirements for equipment used on the
genetically modified crop. See id., at 60a–64a.
The court adopted a compromise. First, it declined to
adopt the APHIS-Monsanto proposal. APHIS itself had
acknowledged that “gene transmission could and had
occurred,” and that RRA “could result in the development


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., dissenting

of Roundup-resistant weeds.” Id., at 61a–62a. In light of
the substantial record evidence of these risks, the court
would not agree to a nationwide planting scheme “without
the benefit of the development of all the relevant data,” as
well as public comment about whether contamination
could be controlled. Id., at 68a. The “partial deregulation”
proposed by petitioners, the court noted, was really “de
regulation with certain conditions,” id., at 69a—which, for
the same reasons given in the court’s earlier order, re
quires an EIS, ibid. The court pointed out numerous
problems with the APHIS-Monsanto proposal. Neither
APHIS nor Monsanto had provided “evidence that sug
gests whether, and to what extent, the proposed interim
conditions” would actually “be followed,” and comparable
conditions had failed to prevent contamination in certain
limited settings. Id., at 69a–70a. APHIS, moreover,
conceded that “it does not have the resources to inspect”
the RRA that had already been planted, and so could not
possibly be expected “to adequately monitor the more than
one million acres of [RRA] intervenors estimate [would] be
planted” under their proposal. Ibid. That was especially
problematic because any plan to limit contamination
depended on rules about harvesting, and farmers were
unlikely to follow those rules. Id., at 71a. “APHIS ha[d]
still not made any inquiry” into numerous factual concerns
raised by the court in its summary judgment order issued
several months earlier. Id., at 70a.
Next, the court rejected the plaintiffs’ proposed remedy
of “enjoin[ing] the harvesting and sale of already planted”
RRA. Id., at 76a. Although any planting or harvesting of
RRA poses a contamination risk, the court reasoned that
the equities were different for those farmers who had
already invested time and money planting RRA in good
faith reliance on APHIS’s deregulation order. And small
amounts of harvesting could be more easily monitored.
Rather than force the farmers to tear up their crops, the


6

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

court imposed a variety of conditions on the crops’ han
dling and distribution. Id., at 77a.
As to all other RRA, however, the court sided with the
plaintiffs and enjoined planting during the pendency of
the EIS. Balancing the equities, the court explained that
the risk of harm was great. “[C]ontamination cannot be
undone; it will destroy the crops of those farmers who do
not sell genetically modified alfalfa.” Id., at 71a. And
because those crops “cannot be replanted for two to four
years,” that loss will be even greater. Ibid. On the other
side of the balance, the court recognized that some farmers
may wish to switch to genetically modified alfalfa immedi
ately, and some companies like Monsanto want to start
selling it to them just as fast. But, the court noted, RRA is
a small percentage of those companies’ overall business;
unsold seed can be stored; and the companies “ ‘have [no]
cause to claim surprise’ ” as to any loss of anticipated
revenue, as they “were aware of plaintiffs’ lawsuit” and
“nonetheless chose to market” RRA. Id., at 72a.
Thus, the District Court stated that it would “vacat[e]
the June 2005 deregulation decision”; “enjoi[n] the plant
ing of [RRA] in the United States after March 30, 2007,”
the date of the decision, “pending the government’s com
pletion of the EIS and decision on the deregulation peti
tion”; and impose “conditions on the handling and identifi
cation of already-planted [RRA].” Id., at 79a. On the
same day, the court issued its judgment. In relevant part,
the judgment states:
“The federal defendants’ June 14, 2005 Determination
of Nonregulated Status for [RRA] is VACATED. Be
fore granting Monsanto’s deregulation petition, even
in part, the federal defendants shall prepare an [EIS].
Until the federal defendants prepare the EIS and de
cide the deregulation petition, no [RRA] may be
planted. . . . [RRA already] planted before March 30,


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

STEVENS, J., dissenting

2007 may be grown, harvested and sold subject to the
following conditions.” Id., at 108a–109a.
II
Before proceeding to address the Court’s opinion on its
own terms, it is important to note that I have reservations
about the validity of those terms. The Court today rests
not only the bulk of its analysis but also the primary basis
for our jurisdiction on the premise that the District Court
enjoined APHIS from partially deregulating RRA in any
sense. See ante, at 9–11, 16–23.1 That is a permissible,
but not necessarily correct, reading of the District Court’s
judgment.
So far as I can tell, until petitioners’ reply brief, neither
petitioners nor the Government submitted to us that the
District Court had exceeded its authority in this manner.
And, indeed, the Government had not raised this issue in
any court at all. Petitioners did not raise the issue in any
of their three questions presented or in the body of their
petition for a writ or certiorari. And they did not raise the
issue in their opening briefs to this Court. Only after
respondents alleged that Monsanto’s injury would not be
redressed by vacating the injunction, insofar as RRA
would still be a regulated article, did petitioners bring the
issue to the Court’s attention. Explaining why they have a
redressable injury, petitioners alleged that the District
Court’s order prevents APHIS from “implement[ing] an[y]
——————
1 See also ante, at 19–20 (“[T]he District Court barred the agency
from pursuing any deregulation—no matter how limited the geographic
area in which planting of RRA would be allowed, how great the isola
tion distances mandated between RRA fields and fields for growing
non-genetically-engineered alfalfa, how stringent the regulations
governing harvesting and distribution, how robust the enforcement
mechanisms available at the time of the decision, and—consequently—
no matter how small the risk that the planting authorized under such
conditions would adversely affect the environment in general and
respondents in particular” (emphasis deleted)).


8

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

interim solution allowing continued planting.” Reply Brief
for Petitioners 5. APHIS, the party that the Court says
was wrongly “barred . . . from pursuing any deregulation,”
even “in accordance with the procedures established by
law,” ante, at 19, did not complain about this aspect of the
District Court’s order even in its reply brief.
Thus, notwithstanding that petitioners “adequately
preserved their objection that the vacated deregulation
decision should have been replaced by APHIS’s proposed
injunction,” ante, at 8 (emphasis added), the key legal
premise on which the Court decides this case was never
adequately presented. Of course, this is not standard—or
sound—judicial practice. See Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmi
chael, 526 U. S. 137, 159 (1999) (STEVENS, J., concurring
in part and dissenting in part). Today’s decision illus
trates why, for it is quite unclear whether the Court’s
premise is correct, and the Court has put itself in the
position of deciding legal issues without the aid of briefing.
In my view, the District Court’s judgment can fairly be
read to address only (1) total deregulation orders of the
kind that spawned this lawsuit, and (2) the particular
partial deregulation order proposed to the court by APHIS.
This interpretation of the judgment is more consistent
with the District Court’s accompanying opinion, which
concluded by stating that the court “will enter a final
judgment” “ordering the government to prepare an EIS
before [the court] makes a decision on Monsanto’s deregu
lation petition.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 79a. The language
of that opinion does not appear to “ba[r] the agency from
pursuing any deregulation—no matter how limited,” ante,
at 19 (emphasis deleted). This interpretation is also more
consistent with APHIS’s own decision not to contest what,
according to the Court, was an unprecedented infringe
ment on the agency’s statutory authority.
To be sure, the District Court’s judgment is somewhat
opaque. But it is troubling that we may be asserting


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

STEVENS, J., dissenting

jurisdiction and deciding a highly factbound case based on
nothing more than a misunderstanding. It is also trou
bling that we may be making law without adequate brief
ing on the critical questions we are passing upon. I would
not be surprised if on remand the District Court merely
clarified its order.
III
Even assuming that the majority has correctly inter
preted the District Court’s judgment, I do not agree that
we should reverse the District Court.
At the outset, it is important to observe that when a
district court is faced with an unlawful agency action, a
set of parties who have relied on that action, and a prayer
for relief to avoid irreparable harm, the court is operating
under its powers of equity. In such a case, a court’s func
tion is “to do equity and to mould each decree to the neces
sities of the particular case.” Hecht Co. v. Bowles, 321
U. S. 321, 329 (1944). “Flexibility” and “practicality” are
the touchtones of these remedial determinations, as “the
public interest,” “private needs,” and “competing private
claims” must all be weighed and reconciled against the
background of the court’s own limitations and its particu
lar familiarity with the case. Id., at 329–330.2
When a district court takes on the equitable role of
adjusting legal obligations, we review the remedy it crafts
——————
2 See

also, e.g., Railroad Comm’n of Tex. v. Pullman Co., 312 U. S.
496, 500 (1941) (“The history of equity jurisdiction is the history of
regard for public consequences. . . . There have been as many and as
variegated applications of this supple principle as the situations that
have brought it into play”); Seymour v. Freer, 8 Wall. 202, 218 (1869)
(“[A] court of equity ha[s] unquestionable authority to apply its flexible
and comprehensive jurisdiction in such manner as might be necessary
to the right administration of justice between the parties”). Indeed, the
very “ground of this jurisdiction” is a court’s “ability to give a more
complete and perfect remedy.” 2 J. Story, Equity Jurisprudence §924,
p. 225 (M. Bigelow ed. 13th ed. 1886).


10

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

for abuse of discretion. “[D]eference,” we have explained,
“is the hallmark of abuse-of-discretion review.” General
Elec. Co. v. Joiner, 522 U. S. 136, 143 (1997). Although
equitable remedies are “not left to a trial court’s ‘inclina
tion,’ ” they are left to the court’s “ ‘judgment.’ ” Albemarle
Paper Co. v. Moody, 422 U. S. 405, 416 (1975) (quoting
United States v. Burr, 25 F. Cas. 30, 35 (No. 14,692d) (CC
Va. 1807) (Marshall, C. J.)). The principles set forth in
applicable federal statutes may inform that judgment.
See United States v. Oakland Cannabis Buyers’ Coopera
tive, 532 U. S. 483, 497 (2001) (“[A] court sitting in equity
cannot ignore the judgment of Congress, deliberately
expressed in legislation” (internal quotation marks omit
ted)). And historically, courts have had particularly broad
equitable power—and thus particularly broad discretion—
to remedy public nuisances and other “ ‘purprestures upon
public rights and properties,’ ” Mugler v. Kansas, 123 U. S.
623, 672 (1887),3 which include environmental harms.4
In my view, the District Court did not “unreasonably
exercis[e]” its discretion, Bennett v. Bennett, 208 U. S. 505,
512 (1908), even if it did categorically prohibit partial
deregulation pending completion of the EIS. Rather, the
District Court’s judgment can be understood as either of
two reasonable exercises of its equitable powers.
Equitable Application of Administrative Law
First, the District Court’s decision can be understood as
an equitable application of administrative law. Faced
with two different deregulation proposals, the District
Court appears to have vacated the deregulation that had
already occurred, made clear that NEPA requires an EIS
——————
3 See Steelworkers v. United States, 361 U. S. 39, 60–61 (1959) (per
curiam) (reviewing history of injunctions to prevent public nuisances).
4 See, e.g., Georgia v. Tennessee Copper Co., 206 U. S. 230 (1907) (air
pollution); Arizona Copper Co. v. Gillespie, 230 U. S. 46, 56–57 (1913)
(water pollution).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

STEVENS, J., dissenting

for any future deregulation of RRA, and partially stayed
the vacatur to the extent it affects farmers who had al
ready planted RRA.5
Under NEPA, an agency must prepare an EIS for “every
. . . major Federal actio[n] significantly affecting the qual
ity of the human environment.” 42 U. S. C. §4332(2)(C).
Recall that the District Court had found, on the basis of
substantial evidence, that planting RRA can cause genetic
contamination of other crops, planting in controlled set
tings had led to contamination, APHIS is unable to moni
tor or enforce limitations on planting, and genetic con
tamination could decimate the American alfalfa market.
In light of that evidence, the court may well have con
cluded that any deregulation of RRA, even in a “limited
. . . geographic area” with “stringent . . . regulations gov
erning harvesting and distribution,”6 ante, at 19–20, re
——————
5 See Reply Brief for Federal Respondents 3. There is an ongoing
debate about the role of equitable adjustments in administrative law.
See, e.g., Levin, Vacation at Sea: Judicial Remedies and Equitable
Discretion in Administrative Law, 53 Duke L. J. 291 (2003). The
parties to this appeal and the majority assume that the District Court’s
remedy was crafted under its equity powers, and I will do the same.
6 One of the many matters not briefed in this case is how limited a
partial deregulation can be. It is not clear whether the sort of ex
tremely limited “partial deregulations” envisioned by the Court, see
ante, at 19–23, in which RRA is “deregulated” in one small geographic
area pursuant to stringent restrictions, could be achieved only through
“partial deregulation” actions, or whether they could also (or exclu
sively) be achieved through a more case-specific permit process. Under
the applicable regulations, a regulated article may still be used subject
to a permitting process. See 7 CFR §§340.0, 340.4 (2010). These
permits “prescribe confinement conditions and standard operating
procedures . . . to maintain confinement of the genetically engineered
organism.” Introduction of Organisms and Products Altered or Pro
duced Through Genetic Engineering, 72 Fed. Reg. 39021, 39022 (2007)
(hereinafter Introduction).
Ordinarily, “[o]nce an article has been deregulated, APHIS does not
place any restrictions or requirements on its use.” Id., at 39023. As of
2007, APHIS had never—not once—granted partial approval of a


12

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

quires an EIS under NEPA. See generally D. Mandelker,
NEPA Law and Litigation §§8:33–8:48 (2d ed. 2009) (de
scribing when an EIS is required); cf. Marsh v. Oregon
Natural Resources Council, 490 U. S. 360, 371 (1989)
(NEPA embodies “sweeping commitment” to environ
mental safety and principle that “the agency will not act
on incomplete information, only to regret its decision after
it is too late to correct”). Indeed, it appears that any de
regulation of a genetically modified, herbicide-resistant
crop that can transfer its genes to other organisms and
cannot effectively be monitored easily fits the criteria for
when an EIS is required.7 That is especially so when, as
in this case, the environmental threat is novel. See Winter
v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 555 U. S. ___,
___ (2008) (slip op., at 13) (EIS is more important when
party “is conducting a new type of activity with completely
unknown effects on the environment”).8
——————
petition for nonregulated status. USDA, Introduction of Genetically
Engineered Organisms, Draft Environmental Impact Statement, July
2007, p. 11, online at http://www.aphis.usda.gov/brs/pdf/complete_
eis.pdf (as visited June 18, 2010, and available in Clerk of Court’s
case file). In 2007, APHIS began contemplating a “new system” to
allow for the release and use of genetically modified organisms, for
“special cases” in which there are risks “that could be mitigated with
conditions to ensure safe commercial use.” Introduction 39024 (em
phasis added).
7 See, e.g., 40 CFR §1508.8 (2009) (determination whether an EIS is
required turns on both “[d]irect effects” and “[i]ndirect effects,” and
“include[s] those resulting from actions which may have both beneficial
and detrimental effects even if on balance the agency believes that the
effect will be beneficial”); §1508.27(b)(4) (determination whether an EIS
is required turns on “[t]he degree to which the effects on the quality of
the human environment are likely to be highly controversial”);
§1508.27(b)(5) (determination whether an EIS is required turns on
“[t]he degree to which the possible effects on the quality of the human
environment are highly uncertain or involve unique or unknown
risks”).
8 The Court posits a hypothetical in which APHIS deregulates RRA
limited to a remote area in which alfalfa is not grown, and issues an


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

STEVENS, J., dissenting

Moreover, given that APHIS had already been ordered
to conduct an EIS on deregulation of RRA, the court could
have reasonably feared that partial deregulation would
undermine the agency’s eventual decision. Courts con
fronted with NEPA violations regularly adopt interim
measures to maintain the status quo, particularly if allow
ing agency action to go forward risks foreclosing alterna
tive courses of action that the agency might have adopted
following completion of an EIS. See D. Mandelker, NEPA
Law and Litigation §4:61. The applicable regulations, to
which the District Court owed deference,9 provide that
during the preparation of an EIS, “no action concerning
the [agency’s] proposal shall be taken which would . . .
[h]ave an adverse environmental impact” or “[l]imit the
choice of reasonable alternatives.” 40 CFR §1506.1(a)
(2009). As exemplified by the problem of what to do with
farmers who had already purchased or planted RRA prior
to the District Court’s judgment, even minimal deregula
tion can limit future regulatory options. “Courts must
remember that in many cases allowing an agency to pro
ceed makes a mockery of the EIS process, converting it
——————
accompanying order “mandating isolation distances so great as to
eliminate any appreciable risk of gene flow to the crops of conventional
farmers who might someday choose to plant in the surrounding area.”
Ante, at 21. At the outset, it is important to note the difference be
tween a plausible hypothetical and a piece of fiction. At least as of
2007, APHIS had never granted partial approval of a petition for
nonregulated status. See n. 6, supra. And I doubt that it would choose
to deregulate genetically modified alfalfa in a place where the growing
conditions and sales networks for the product are so poor that no
farmer already plants it. Moreover, the notion that this imagined
deregulation would pose virtually no environmental risk ignores one of
the District Court’s critical findings of fact: APHIS has very limited
capacity to monitor its own restrictions. The agency could place all
manner of constraints on its deregulation orders; they will have no
effect unless they are enforced.
9 See Marsh v. Oregon Natural Resources Council, 490 U. S. 360, 372
(1989).


14

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

from analysis to rationalization.” Herrmann, Injunctions
for NEPA Violations: Balancing the Equities, 59 U. Chi.
L. Rev. 1263, 1289 (1992); see also see 40 CFR §1502.5
(EIS should be implemented in manner assuring it “will
not be used to rationalize or justify decisions already
made”).
Although the majority does not dispute that the District
Court could have reasonably concluded that NEPA re
quires an EIS for even partial deregulation of RRA, it
suggests that any such conclusion would have been in
compatible with the court’s decision to permit limited
harvesting by farmers who had already planted RRA. See
ante, at 20.10 I do not see the “inconsisten[cy].” Ibid.
NEPA does not apply to actions by federal courts. See 40
CFR §1508.12. Exercising its equitable discretion to
balance the interests of the parties and the public, the
District Court would have been well within its rights to
find that NEPA requires an EIS before the agency grants
“Monsanto’s deregulation petition, even in part,” App. to
Pet. for Cert. 108a, yet also to find that a partial stay of
the vacatur was appropriate to protect the interests of
those farmers who had already acted in good-faith reliance
on APHIS.
Similarly, I do not agree that the District Court’s ruling
was “premature” because APHIS had not yet effected any
partial deregulations, ante, at 19. Although it is “for the
agency to decide whether and to what extent” it will pur
sue deregulation, ante, at 17, the court’s application of
NEPA to APHIS’s regulation of RRA might have con
trolled any deregulation during the pendency of the EIS.
Petitioners and APHIS had already come back to the court
——————
10 The Court states that the order permitted both harvesting and
planting. But the court’s final judgment permitted only sale and
harvesting of RRA planted before March 30, 2007, more than a month
before the judgment. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 109a; see also id., at
79a.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

STEVENS, J., dissenting

with a proposed partial deregulation order which, the
court explained, was incompatible with its determination
that there is a substantial risk of gene spreading and that
APHIS lacks monitoring capacity. That same concern
would apply to any partial deregulation order. The court
therefore had good reason to make it clear, upfront, that
the parties should not continue to expend resources pro
posing such orders, instead of just moving ahead with an
EIS. Cf. Railroad Comm’n of Tex. v. Pullman Co., 312
U. S. 496, 500 (1941) (“The resources of equity are equal to
an adjustment that will avoid the waste of a tentative
decision”). Indeed, it was APHIS itself that “sought to
‘streamline’ ” the process. Ante, at 18.
Injunctive Relief
Second, the District Court’s judgment can be understood
as a reasonable response to the nature of the risks posed
by RRA. Separate and apart from NEPA’s requirement of
an EIS, these risks were sufficiently serious, in my view,
that the court’s injunction was a permissible exercise of its
equitable authority.
The District Court found that gene transfer can and
does occur, and that if it were to spread through open land
the environmental and economic consequences would be
devastating. Cf. Amoco Production Co. v. Gambell, 480
U. S. 531, 545 (1987) (“Environmental injury, by its na
ture, can seldom be adequately remedied by money dam
ages and is often permanent or at least of long duration,
i.e., irreparable”). Although “a mere possibility of a future
nuisance will not support an injunction,” courts have
never required proof “that the nuisance will occur”; rather,
“it is sufficient . . . that the risk of its happening is greater
than a reasonable man would incur.” 5 J. Pomeroy, A
Treatise on Equity Jurisprudence and Equitable Reme
dies, §1937 (§523), p. 4398 (2d ed. 1919). Once gene trans
fer occurred in American fields, it “would be difficult—if


16

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

not impossible—to reverse the harm.” Hollingsworth v.
Perry, 558 U. S. __, __ (2010) (per curiam) (slip op., at 12).
Additional considerations support the District Court’s
judgment. It was clear to the court that APHIS had only
limited capacity to monitor planted RRA, and some RRA
had already been planted. The marginal threat posed by
additional planting was therefore significant. Injunctive
remedies are meant to achieve a “nice adjustment and
reconciliation between the competing claims” of injury by
“mould[ing] each decree to the necessities of the case.”
Weinberger v. Romero-Barcelo, 456 U. S. 305, 312 (1982)
(internal quotation marks omitted). Under these circum
stances, it was not unreasonable for the court to conclude
that the most equitable solution was to allocate the lim
ited amount of potentially safe RRA to the farmers who
had already planted that crop.11
The Court suggests that the injunction was nonetheless
too sweeping because “a partial deregulation need not
cause respondents any injury at all . . . if the scope of the
partial deregulation is sufficiently limited, the risk of gene
flow to their crops could be virtually nonexistent.” Ante, at
21. The Court appears to reach this conclusion by citing
one particular study (in a voluminous record), rather than
any findings of fact.12 Even assuming that this study is
——————
11 As explained previously, I do not see the court’s broad injunction as
“inconsistent,” ante, at 20, with its decision that farmers who had
already planted RRA could harvest their crop. The equities are differ
ent for farmers who relied on the agency than for companies like
Monstanto that developed an organism knowing it might be regulated;
and APHIS could monitor only a limited amount of RRA.
12 The Court also hypothesizes a set of growing conditions that would
isolate RRA from the plaintiffs in this case, even if not from other
farmers. See ante, at 21–22. As already explained, these hypotheticals
are rather unrealistic. See n. 8, supra. And, given that the plaintiffs
include environmental organizations as well as farmer and consumer
associations, it is hard to see how APHIS could so carefully isolate and
protect their interests. In any event, because APHIS concedes that it


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

STEVENS, J., dissenting

correct, the Court ignores the District Court’s findings
that gene flow is likely and that APHIS has little ability to
monitor any conditions imposed on a partial deregulation.
Limits on planting or harvesting may operate fine in a
laboratory setting, but the District Court concluded that
many limits will not be followed and cannot be enforced in
the real world.13
Against that background, it was perfectly reasonable to
wait for an EIS. APHIS and petitioners argued to the
District Court that partial deregulation could be safely
implemented, they submitted evidence intended to show
that planting restrictions would prevent the spread of the
newly engineered gene, and they contested “virtually
every factual issue relating to possible environmental
harm.” Geertson Seed Farms v. Johanns, 570 F. 3d 1130,
1135 (CA9 2009). But lacking “the benefit of the develop
ment of all the relevant data,” App. to Pet. for Cert. 68a,
the District Court did not find APHIS’s and petitioners’
assertions to be convincing. I cannot say that I would
have found otherwise. It was reasonable for the court to
conclude that planting could not go forward until more
——————
cannot monitor such limits, rules that protect these or any other parties
may be merely hortatory in practice. Moreover, although we have not
squarely addressed the issue, in my view “[t]here is no general re
quirement that an injunction affect only the parties in the suit.”
Bresgal v. Brock, 843 F. 2d 1163, 1169 (CA9 1987). To limit an injunc
tion against a federal agency to the named plaintiffs “would only
encourage numerous other” regulated entities “to file additional law
suits in this and other federal jurisdictions.” Livestock Marketing Assn.
v. United States Dept. of Agriculture, 207 F. Supp. 2d 992, 1007 (SD
2002), aff’d, 335 F. 3d 711, 726 (CA8 2003).
13 The majority notes that the District Court acknowledged, at a hear
ing several months before it issued the judgment, that a simple but
slightly overinclusive remedy may be preferable to an elaborate set of
planting conditions. See ante, at 22, n. 6. Quite right. As the District
Court said to APHIS’s lawyer at that hearing, if the agency issues an
elaborate set of precautions, “I don’t know how you even start to enforce
it.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 190a–191a.


18

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

complete study, presented in an EIS, showed that
the known problem of gene flow could, in reality, be
prevented.14
The District Court’s decision that more study was
needed to assess whether limits on deregulation could
prevent environmental damage is further reinforced by
the statutory context in which the issue arose. A court’s
equitable discretion must be guided by “recognized, de
fined public policy.” Meredith v. Winter Haven, 320 U. S.
228, 235 (1943); see also Hecht Co. v. Bowles, 321 U. S.
321, 331 (1944) (explaining that when a court evaluates an
agency’s decision against the background of a federal
statute, the court’s discretion “must be exercised in light of
the large objectives of the Act”). Congress recognized in
NEPA that complex environmental cases often require
exceptionally sophisticated scientific determinations, and
that agency decisions should not be made on the basis of
“incomplete information.” Marsh v. Oregon Natural Re
sources Council, 490 U. S. 360, 371 (1989). Congress also
recognized that agencies cannot fully weigh the conse
quences of these decisions without obtaining public com
ments through an EIS. See Robertson v. Methow Valley
Citizens Council, 490 U. S. 332, 350 (1989).15 While a
court may not presume that a NEPA violation requires an
injunction, it may take into account the principles embod
——————
14 I suspect that if APHIS and petitioners had come back to the court
with more convincing evidence prior to completing an EIS, and moved
to modify the court’s order, the court would have done so. Indeed, the
District Court showed a willingness to recalibrate its order when it
amended its judgment just a few months after the judgment’s issuance
in light of APHIS’s submission that certain requirements were imprac
tical. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 111a–114a.
15 Accordingly, while “NEPA itself does not mandate particular re
sults,” it does mandate a particular process and embodies the principle
that federal agencies should “carefully conside[r] detailed information”
before incurring potential environmental harm. Robertson, 490 U. S.,
at 350, 349.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

STEVENS, J., dissenting

ied in the statute in considering whether an injunction
would be appropriate. This District Court had before it
strong evidence that gene transmission was likely to occur
and that limits on growing could not be enforced. It also
had a large amount of highly detailed evidence about
whether growing restrictions, even if enforced, can prevent
transmission. That evidence called into question the
agency’s own claims regarding the risks posed by partial
deregulation. In enjoining partial deregulation until it
had the benefit of an EIS to help parse the evidence, the
court acted with exactly the sort of caution that Congress
endorsed in NEPA.
Finally, it bears mention that the District Court’s ex
perience with the case may have given it grounds for
skepticism about the representations made by APHIS and
petitioners. Sometimes “one judicial actor is better posi
tioned than another to decide the issue in question.”
Miller v. Fenton, 474 U. S. 104, 114 (1985). A “district
court may have insights not conveyed by the record.”
Pierce v. Underwood, 487 U. S. 552, 560 (1988). In this
case, the agency had attempted to deregulate RRA without
an EIS in spite of ample evidence of potential environ
mental harms. And when the court made clear that the
agency had violated NEPA, the agency responded by
seeking to “ ‘streamline’ ” the process, ante, at 18, submit
ting a deregulation proposal with Monsanto that suffered
from some of the same legal and empirical holes as its
initial plan to deregulate. Against that background, the
court may have felt it especially prudent to wait for an EIS
before concluding that APHIS could manage RRA’s threat
to the environment.
*
*
*
The District Court in this case was put in an “unenvi
able position.” Ibid. In front of it was strong evidence
that RRA poses a serious threat to the environment and to


20

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
STEVENS, J., dissenting

American business, and that limits on RRA deregulation
might not be followed or enforced—and that even if they
were, the newly engineered gene might nevertheless
spread to other crops. Confronted with those disconcert
ing submissions, with APHIS’s unlawful deregulation
decision, with a group of farmers who had staked their
livelihoods on APHIS’s decision, and with a federal statute
that prizes informed decisionmaking on matters that
seriously affect the environment, the court did the best it
could. In my view, the District Court was well within its
discretion to order the remedy that the Court now re
verses. Accordingly, I respectfully dissent.

