Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash­
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–475
_________________

MONSANTO COMPANY, ET AL., PETITIONERS v.

GEERTSON SEED FARMS ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[June 21, 2010] 


JUSTICE ALITO delivered the opinion of the Court.
This case arises out of a decision by the Animal and
Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) to deregulate a
variety of genetically engineered alfalfa. The District
Court held that APHIS violated the National Environ­
mental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA), 83 Stat. 852, 42
U. S. C. §4321 et seq., by issuing its deregulation deci­
sion without first completing a detailed assessment of
the environmental consequences of its proposed course of
action. To remedy that violation, the District Court
vacated the agency’s decision completely deregulating
the alfalfa variety in question; ordered APHIS not to act
on the deregulation petition in whole or in part until it
had completed a detailed environmental review; and
enjoined almost all future planting of the genetically
engineered alfalfa pending the completion of that review.
The Court of Appeals affirmed the District Court’s entry
of permanent injunctive relief. The main issue now in
dispute concerns the breadth of that relief. For the
reasons set forth below, we reverse and remand for
further proceedings.


2

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

I

A

The Plant Protection Act (PPA), 114 Stat. 438, 7 U. S. C.
§7701 et seq., provides that the Secretary of the Depart­
ment of Agriculture (USDA) may issue regulations “to
prevent the introduction of plant pests into the United
States or the dissemination of plant pests within the
United States.” §7711(a). The Secretary has delegated
that authority to APHIS, a division of the USDA. 7 CFR
§§2.22(a), 2.80(a)(36) (2010). Acting pursuant to that
delegation, APHIS has promulgated regulations governing
“the introduction of organisms and products altered or
produced through genetic engineering that are plant pests
or are believed to be plant pests.” See §340.0(a)(2) and
n. 1. Under those regulations, certain genetically engi­
neered plants are presumed to be “plant pests”—and thus
“regulated articles” under the PPA—until APHIS deter­
mines otherwise. See ibid.; §§340.1, 340.2, 340.6; see also
App. 183. However, any person may petition APHIS for a
determination that a regulated article does not present a
plant pest risk and therefore should not be subject to the
applicable regulations. 7 U. S. C. §7711(c)(2); 7 CFR
§340.6. APHIS may grant such a petition in whole or in
part. §340.6(d)(3).
In deciding whether to grant nonregulated status to a
genetically engineered plant variety, APHIS must comply
with NEPA, which requires federal agencies “to the fullest
extent possible” to prepare an environmental impact
statement (EIS) for “every recommendation or report on
proposals for legislation and other major Federal actio[n]
significantly affecting the quality of the human environ­
ment.”
42 U. S. C. §4332(2)(C).
The statutory text
“speaks solely in terms of proposed actions; it does not
require an agency to consider the possible environmental
impacts of less imminent actions when preparing the
impact statement on proposed actions.” Kleppe v. Sierra


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

Club, 427 U. S. 390, 410, n. 20 (1976).
An agency need not complete an EIS for a particular
proposal if it finds, on the basis of a shorter “environ­
mental assessment” (EA), that the proposed action will not
have a significant impact on the environment. 40 CFR
§§1508.9(a), 1508.13 (2009). Even if a particular agency
proposal requires an EIS, applicable regulations allow the
agency to take at least some action in furtherance of that
proposal while the EIS is being prepared. See §1506.1(a)
(“no action concerning the proposal shall be taken which
would: (1) Have an adverse environmental impact; or (2)
Limit the choice of reasonable alternatives”); §1506.1(c)
(“While work on a required program environmental impact
statement is in progress and the action is not covered by
an existing program statement, agencies shall not under­
take in the interim any major Federal action covered by
the program which may significantly affect the quality of
the human environment unless such action” satisfies
certain requirements).
B
This case involves Roundup Ready Alfalfa (RRA), a kind
of alfalfa crop that has been genetically engineered to be
tolerant of glyphosate, the active ingredient of the herbi­
cide Roundup. Petitioner Monsanto Company (Monsanto)
owns the intellectual property rights to RRA. Monsanto
licenses those rights to co-petitioner Forage Genetics
International (FGI), which is the exclusive developer of
RRA seed.
APHIS initially classified RRA as a regulated article,
but in 2004 petitioners sought nonregulated status for two
strains of RRA. In response, APHIS prepared a draft EA
assessing the likely environmental impact of the requested
deregulation. It then published a notice in the Federal
Register advising the public of the deregulation petition
and soliciting public comments on its draft EA. After


4

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

considering the hundreds of public comments that it re­
ceived, APHIS issued a Finding of No Significant Impact
and decided to deregulate RRA unconditionally and with­
out preparing an EIS. Prior to this decision, APHIS had
authorized almost 300 field trials of RRA conducted over a
period of eight years. App. 348.
Approximately eight months after APHIS granted RRA
nonregulated status, respondents (two conventional alfalfa
seed farms and environmental groups concerned with food
safety) filed this action against the Secretary of Agricul­
ture and certain other officials in Federal District Court,
challenging APHIS’s decision to completely deregulate
RRA. Their complaint alleged violations of NEPA, the
Endangered Species Act of 1973 (ESA), 87 Stat. 884, 16
U. S. C. §1531 et seq., and the PPA. Respondents did not
seek preliminary injunctive relief pending resolution of
those claims. Hence, RRA enjoyed nonregulated status for
approximately two years. During that period, more than
3,000 farmers in 48 States planted an estimated 220,000
acres of RRA. App. 350.
In resolving respondents’ NEPA claim, the District
Court accepted APHIS’s determination that RRA does not
have any harmful health effects on humans or livestock.
App. to Pet. for Cert. 43a; accord, id., at 45a. Neverthe­
less, the District Court held that APHIS violated NEPA by
deregulating RRA without first preparing an EIS. In
particular, the court found that APHIS’s EA failed to
answer substantial questions concerning two broad conse­
quences of its proposed action: first, the extent to which
complete deregulation would lead to the transmission of
the gene conferring glyphosate tolerance from RRA to
organic and conventional alfalfa; and, second, the extent to
which the introduction of RRA would contribute to the
development of Roundup-resistant weeds. Id., at 52a. In
light of its determination that the deregulation decision
ran afoul of NEPA, the District Court dismissed without


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

prejudice respondents’ claims under the ESA and PPA.
After these rulings, the District Court granted petition­
ers permission to intervene in the remedial phase of the
lawsuit. The court then asked the parties to submit pro­
posed judgments embodying their preferred means of
remedying the NEPA violation. APHIS’s proposed judg­
ment would have ordered the agency to prepare an EIS,
vacated the agency’s deregulation decision, and replaced
that decision with the terms of the judgment itself. Id., at
184a (proposed judgment providing that “[the federal]
defendants’ [June 14,] 2005 Determination of Nonregu­
lated Status for Alfalfa Genetically Engineered for Toler­
ance to the Herbicide Glyphosate is hereby vacated and
replaced by the terms of this judgment” (emphasis added)).
The terms of the proposed judgment, in turn, would have
permitted the continued planting of RRA pending comple­
tion of the EIS, subject to six restrictions. Those restric­
tions included, among other things, mandatory isolation
distances between RRA and non-genetically-engineered
alfalfa fields in order to mitigate the risk of gene flow;
mandatory harvesting conditions; a requirement that
planting and harvesting equipment that had been in
contact with RRA be cleaned prior to any use with conven­
tional or organic alfalfa; identification and handling re­
quirements for RRA seed; and a requirement that all RRA
seed producers and hay growers be under contract with
either Monsanto or FGI and that their contracts require
compliance with the other limitations set out in the pro­
posed judgment.
The District Court rejected APHIS’s proposed judgment.
In its preliminary injunction, the District Court prohibited
almost all future planting of RRA pending APHIS’s com­
pletion of the required EIS. But in order to minimize the
harm to farmers who had relied on APHIS’s deregulation
decision, the court expressly allowed those who had al­
ready purchased RRA to plant their seeds until March 30,


6

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

2007. Id., at 58a. In its subsequently entered permanent
injunction and judgment, the court (1) vacated APHIS’s
deregulation decision; (2) ordered APHIS to prepare an
EIS before it made any decision on Monsanto’s deregula­
tion petition; (3) enjoined the planting of any RRA in the
United States after March 30, 2007, pending APHIS’s
completion of the required EIS; and (4) imposed certain
conditions (suggested by APHIS) on the handling and
identification of already-planted RRA. Id., at 79a, 109a.
The District Court denied petitioners’ request for an evi­
dentiary hearing.
The Government, Monsanto, and FGI appealed, chal­
lenging the scope of the relief granted but not disputing
the existence of a NEPA violation. See Geertson Seed
Farms v. Johanns, 570 F. 3d 1130, 1136 (2009). A divided
panel of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit af­
firmed. Based on its review of the record, the panel first
concluded that the District Court had “recognized that an
injunction does not ‘automatically issue’ when a NEPA
violation is found” and had instead based its issuance of
injunctive relief on the four-factor test traditionally used
for that purpose. Id., at 1137. The panel held that the
District Court had not committed clear error in making
any of the subsidiary factual findings on which its assess­
ment of the four relevant factors was based. And the
panel rejected the claim that the District Court had not
given sufficient deference to APHIS’s expertise concerning
the likely effects of allowing continued planting of RRA on
a limited basis. In the panel’s view, APHIS’s proposed
interim measures would have perpetuated a system that
had been found by the District Court to have caused envi­
ronmental harm in the past. Id., at 1139. Hence, the
panel concluded that the District Court had not abused its
discretion “in choosing to reject APHIS’s proposed mitiga­
tion measures in favor of a broader injunction to prevent
more irreparable harm from occurring.” Ibid.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

The panel majority also rejected petitioners’ alternative
argument that the District Court had erred in declining to
hold an evidentiary hearing before entering its permanent
injunction. Writing in dissent, Judge N. Randy Smith
disagreed with that conclusion. In his view, the District
Court was required to conduct an evidentiary hearing
before issuing a permanent injunction unless the facts
were undisputed or the adverse party expressly waived its
right to such a hearing. Neither of those two exceptions,
he found, applied here.
We granted certiorari. 558 U. S. __ (2010).
II 

A

At the threshold, respondents contend that petitioners
lack standing to seek our review of the lower court rulings
at issue here. We disagree.
Standing under Article III of the Constitution requires
that an injury be concrete, particularized, and actual or
imminent; fairly traceable to the challenged action; and
redressable by a favorable ruling. Horne v. Flores, 557
U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 8). Petitioners here sat­
isfy all three criteria. Petitioners are injured by their
inability to sell or license RRA to prospective customers
until such time as APHIS completes the required EIS.
Because that injury is caused by the very remedial order
that petitioners challenge on appeal, it would be redressed
by a favorable ruling from this Court.
Respondents do not dispute that petitioners would have
standing to contest the District Court’s permanent injunc­
tion order if they had pursued a different litigation strat­
egy. Instead, respondents argue that the injury of which
petitioners complain is independently caused by a part of
the District Court’s order that petitioners failed to chal­
lenge, namely, the vacatur of APHIS’s deregulation deci­
sion. The practical consequence of the vacatur, respon­


8

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

dents contend, was to restore RRA to the status of a regu­
lated article; and, subject to certain exceptions not appli­
cable here, federal regulations ban the growth and sale of
regulated articles. Because petitioners did not specifically
challenge the District Court’s vacatur, respondents reason,
they lack standing to challenge a part of the District
Court’s order (i.e., the injunction) that does not cause
petitioners any injury not also caused by the vacatur. See
Brief for Respondents 19–20.
Respondents’ argument fails for two independent rea­
sons. First, although petitioners did not challenge the
vacatur directly, they adequately preserved their objection
that the vacated deregulation decision should have been
replaced by APHIS’s proposed injunction. Throughout the
remedial phase of this litigation, one of the main disputes
between the parties has been whether the District Court
was required to adopt APHIS’s proposed judgment. See,
e.g., Intervenor-Appellants’ Opening Brief in No. 07–16458
etc. (CA9), p. 59 (urging the Court of Appeals to “vacate
the district court’s judgment and remand this case to the
district court with instructions to enter APHIS’s proposed
relief”); Opening Brief of Federal Defendants-Appellants
in No. 16458 etc. (CA9), pp. 21, 46 (“The blanket injunc­
tion should be narrowed in accordance with APHIS’s
proposal”); see also Tr. of Oral Arg. 6, 25–27, 53–54. That
judgment would have replaced the vacated deregulation
decision with an order expressly allowing continued plant­
ing of RRA subject to certain limited conditions. App. to
Pet. for Cert. 184a (proposed judgment providing that
“[the federal] defendants’ 14 June 2005 Determination of
Nonregulated Status for Alfalfa Genetically Engineered
for Tolerance to the Herbicide Glyphosate is hereby va­
cated and replaced by the terms of this judgment” (empha­
sis added)). Accordingly, if the District Court had adopted
the agency’s suggested remedy, there would still be au­
thority for the continued planting of RRA, because there


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

would, in effect, be a new deregulation decision.1
Second, petitioners in any case have standing to chal­
lenge the part of the District Court’s order enjoining par­
tial deregulation. Respondents focus their standing ar­
gument on the part of the judgment enjoining the planting
of RRA, but the judgment also states that “[b]efore grant­
ing Monsanto’s deregulation petition, even in part, the
federal defendants shall prepare an environmental impact
statement.” Id., at 108a (emphasis added); see also id., at
79a (“The Court will enter a final judgment . . . ordering
the government to prepare an EIS before it makes a deci­
sion on Monsanto’s deregulation petition”). As respon­
dents concede, that part of the judgment goes beyond the
vacatur of APHIS’s deregulation decision. See Tr. of Oral
Arg. 37, 46.
At oral argument, respondents contended that the re­
triction on APHIS’s ability to effect a partial deregulation
of RRA does not cause petitioners “an actual or an immi­
nent harm.” Id., at 39–40. In order for a partial deregula­
tion to occur, respondents argued, the case would have to
be remanded to the agency, and APHIS would have to
prepare an EA “that may or may not come out in favor of a
partial deregulation.” Id., at 39. Because petitioners
cannot prove that those two events would happen, respon­
dents contended, the asserted harm caused by the District
Court’s partial deregulation ban is too speculative to
satisfy the actual or imminent injury requirement.
We reject this argument. If the injunction were lifted,
we do not see why the District Court would have to re­
mand the matter to the agency in order for APHIS to
effect a partial deregulation. And even if a remand were
——————
1 We

need not decide whether the District Court had the authority to
replace the vacated agency order with an injunction of its own making.
The question whether petitioners are entitled to the relief that they
seek goes to the merits, not to standing.


10

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

required, we perceive no basis on which the District Court
could decline to remand the matter to the agency so that it
could determine whether to pursue a partial deregulation
during the pendency of the EIS process.
Nor is any doubt as to whether APHIS would issue a
new EA in favor of a partial deregulation sufficient to
defeat petitioners’ standing. It is undisputed that peti­
tioners have submitted a deregulation petition and that a
partial deregulation of the kind embodied in the agency’s
proposed judgment would afford petitioners much of the
relief that they seek; it is also undisputed that, absent the
District Court’s order, APHIS could attempt to effect such
a partial deregulation pending its completion of the EIS.
See id., at 7–8, 25–27, 38. For purposes of resolving the
particular standing question before us, we need not decide
whether or to what extent a party challenging an injunc­
tion that bars an agency from granting certain relief must
show that the agency would be likely to afford such relief
if it were free to do so. In this case, as is clear from
APHIS’s proposed judgment and from its briefing
throughout the remedial phase of this litigation, the
agency takes the view that a partial deregulation reflect­
ing its proposed limitations is in the public interest. Thus,
there is more than a strong likelihood that APHIS would
partially deregulate RRA were it not for the District
Court’s injunction. The District Court’s elimination of
that likelihood is plainly sufficient to establish a constitu­
tionally cognizable injury. Moreover, as respondents
essentially conceded at oral argument, that injury would
be redressed by a favorable decision here, since “vacating
the current injunction . . . will allow [petitioners] to go
back to the agency, [to] seek a partial deregulation,” even
if the District Court’s vacatur of APHIS’s deregulation
decision is left intact. Id., at 38. We therefore hold that


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

petitioners have standing to seek this Court’s review.2
B
We next consider petitioners’ contention that respon­
dents lack standing to seek injunctive relief. See Daim
lerChrysler Corp. v. Cuno, 547 U. S. 332, 352 (2006) (“[A]
plaintiff must demonstrate standing separately for each
form of relief sought” (internal quotation marks omitted)).
Petitioners argue that respondents have failed to show
that any of the named respondents is likely to suffer a
constitutionally cognizable injury absent injunctive relief.
See Brief for Petitioners 40. We disagree.
Respondents include conventional alfalfa farmers.
Emphasizing “the undisputed concentration of alfalfa seed
farms,” the District Court found that those farmers had
“established a ‘reasonable probability’ that their organic
and conventional alfalfa crops will be infected with the
engineered gene” if RRA is completely deregulated. App.
to Pet. for Cert. 50a.3 A substantial risk of gene flow
——————
2 We do not rest “the primary basis for our jurisdiction on the premise
that the District Court enjoined APHIS from partially deregulating
RRA in any sense.” See post, at 7 (STEVENS, J., dissenting). Even if the
District Court’s order prohibiting a partial deregulation applies only to
“the particular partial deregulation order proposed to the court by
APHIS,” see post, at 8, petitioners would still have standing to chal­
lenge that aspect of the order.
3At least one of the respondents in this case specifically alleges that
he owns an alfalfa farm in a prominent seed-growing region and faces a
significant risk of contamination from RRA. See Record, Doc. 62, pp. 1–
2; id., ¶10, at 3–4 (Declaration of Phillip Geertson in Support of Plan­
tiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment) (“Since alfalfa is pollinated by
honey, bumble and leafcutter bees, the genetic contamination of the
Roundup Ready seed will rapidly spread through the seed growing
regions. Bees have a range of at least two to ten miles, and the alfalfa
seed farms are much more concentrated”). Other declarations in the
record provide further support for the District Court’s conclusion that
the deregulation of RRA poses a significant risk of contamination to
respondents’ crops. See, e.g., id., Doc. 53, ¶9, at 2 (Declaration of Jim
Munsch) (alleging risk of “significant contamination . . . due to the


12

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

injures respondents in several ways. For example, re­
spondents represent that, in order to continue marketing
their product to consumers who wish to buy non­
genetically-engineered alfalfa, respondents would have to
conduct testing to find out whether and to what extent
their crops have been contaminated. See, e.g., Record,
Doc. 62, p. 5 (Declaration of Phillip Geertson in Support of
Plantiffs’ Motion for Summary Judgment) (hereinafter
Geertson Declaration) (“Due to the high potential for
contamination, I will need to test my crops for the pres­
ence of genetically engineered alfalfa seed. This testing
will be a new cost to my seed business and we will have to
raise our seed prices to cover these costs, making our
prices less competitive”); id., Doc. 57, p. 4 (Declaration of
Patrick Trask in Support of Plantiff’s Motion for Summary
Judgment) (“To ensure that my seeds are pure, I will need
to test my crops and obtain certification that my seeds are
free of genetically engineered alfalfa”); see also Record,
Doc. 55, p. 2 (“There is zero tolerance for contaminated
seed in the organic market”). Respondents also allege that
the risk of gene flow will cause them to take certain meas­
ures to minimize the likelihood of potential contamination
and to ensure an adequate supply of non-genetically­
engineered alfalfa. See, e.g., Geertson Declaration 3 (not­
ing the “increased cost of alfalfa breeding due to potential
for genetic contamination”); id., at 6 (“Due to the threat of
contamination, I have begun contracting with growers
outside of the United States to ensure that I can supply
genetically pure, conventional alfalfa seed. Finding new
growers has already resulted in increased administrative
——————
compact geographic area of the prime alfalfa seed producing areas and
the fact that pollen is distributed by bees that have large natural range
of activity”); App. ¶8, p. 401 (Declaration of Marc Asumendi) (“Roundup
alfalfa seed fields are currently being planted in all the major alfalfa
seed production areas with little regard to contamination to non-GMO
seed production fields”).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

costs at my seed business”).
Such harms, which respondents will suffer even if their
crops are not actually infected with the Roundup ready
gene, are sufficiently concrete to satisfy the injury-in-fact
prong of the constitutional standing analysis. Those
harms are readily attributable to APHIS’s deregulation
decision, which, as the District Court found, gives rise to a
significant risk of gene flow to non-genetically-engineered
varieties of alfalfa. Finally, a judicial order prohibiting
the growth and sale of all or some genetically engineered
alfalfa would remedy respondents’ injuries by eliminating
or minimizing the risk of gene flow to conventional and
organic alfalfa crops. We therefore conclude that respon­
dents have constitutional standing to seek injunctive relief
from the complete deregulation order at issue here.
Petitioners appear to suggest that respondents fail to
satisfy the “zone of interests” test we have previously
articulated as a prudential standing requirement in cases
challenging agency compliance with particular statutes.
See Reply Brief for Petitioners 12 (arguing that protection
against the risk of commercial harm “is not an interest
that NEPA was enacted to address”); Bennett v. Spear, 520
U. S. 154, 162–163 (1997). That argument is unpersua­
sive because, as the District Court found, respondents’
injury has an environmental as well as an economic com­
ponent. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 49a. In its ruling on the
merits of respondents’ NEPA claim, the District Court
held that the risk that the RRA gene conferring gly­
phosate resistance will infect conventional and organic
alfalfa is a significant environmental effect within the
meaning of NEPA. Petitioners did not appeal that part of
the court’s ruling, and we have no occasion to revisit it
here. Respondents now seek injunctive relief in order to
avert the risk of gene flow to their crops—the very same
effect that the District Court determined to be a signifi­
cant environmental concern for purposes of NEPA. The


14

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

mere fact that respondents also seek to avoid certain
economic harms that are tied to the risk of gene flow does
not strip them of prudential standing.
In short, respondents have standing to seek injunctive
relief, and petitioners have standing to seek this Court’s
review of the Ninth Circuit’s judgment affirming the entry
of such relief. We therefore proceed to the merits of the
case.
III 

A

The District Court sought to remedy APHIS’s NEPA
violation in three ways: First, it vacated the agency’s
decision completely deregulating RRA; second, it enjoined
APHIS from deregulating RRA, in whole or in part, pend­
ing completion of the mandated EIS; and third, it entered
a nationwide injunction prohibiting almost all future
planting of RRA. Id., at 108a–110a. Because petitioners
and the Government do not argue otherwise, we assume
without deciding that the District Court acted lawfully in
vacating the deregulation decision. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 7
(“[T]he district court could have vacated the order in its
entirety and sent it back to the agency”); accord, id., at 15–
16. We therefore address only the latter two aspects of the
District Court’s judgment. Before doing so, however, we
provide a brief overview of the standard governing the
entry of injunctive relief.
B
“[A] plaintiff seeking a permanent injunction must
satisfy a four-factor test before a court may grant such
relief. A plaintiff must demonstrate: (1) that it has suf­
fered an irreparable injury; (2) that remedies available at
law, such as monetary damages, are inadequate to com­
pensate for that injury; (3) that, considering the balance of
hardships between the plaintiff and defendant, a remedy


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

in equity is warranted; and (4) that the public interest
would not be disserved by a permanent injunction.” eBay
Inc. v. MercExchange, L. L. C., 547 U. S. 388, 391 (2006).
The traditional four-factor test applies when a plaintiff
seeks a permanent injunction to remedy a NEPA violation.
See Winter v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 555
U. S. ___, ___ (2008) (slip op., at 21–23).
Petitioners argue that the lower courts in this case
proceeded on the erroneous assumption that an injunction
is generally the appropriate remedy for a NEPA violation.
In particular, petitioners note that the District Court cited
pre-Winter Ninth Circuit precedent for the proposition
that, in “ ‘the run of the mill NEPA case,’ ” an injunction
delaying the contemplated government project is proper
“ ‘until the NEPA violation is cured.’ ” App. to Pet. for
Cert. 65a (quoting Idaho Watersheds Project v. Hahn, 307
F. 3d 815, 833 (CA9 2002)); see also App. to Pet. for Cert.
55a (quoting same language in preliminary injunction
order). In addition, petitioners observe, the District Court
and the Court of Appeals in this case both stated that, “in
unusual circumstances, an injunction may be withheld, or,
more likely, limited in scope” in NEPA cases. Id., at 66a
(quoting National Parks & Conservation Assn. v. Babbitt,
241 F. 3d 722, 737, n. 18 (CA9 2001) (internal quotation
marks omitted)); 570 F. 3d, at 1137.
Insofar as the statements quoted above are intended to
guide the determination whether to grant injunctive relief,
they invert the proper mode of analysis. An injunction
should issue only if the traditional four-factor test is satis­
fied. See Winter, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 21–24). In
contrast, the statements quoted above appear to presume
that an injunction is the proper remedy for a NEPA viola­
tion except in unusual circumstances. No such thumb on
the scales is warranted. Nor, contrary to the reasoning of
the Court of Appeals, could any such error be cured by a
court’s perfunctory recognition that “an injunction does


16

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

not automatically issue” in NEPA cases. See 570 F. 3d, at
1137 (internal quotation marks omitted). It is not enough
for a court considering a request for injunctive relief to ask
whether there is a good reason why an injunction should
not issue; rather, a court must determine that an injunc­
tion should issue under the traditional four-factor test set
out above.
Notwithstanding the lower courts’ apparent reliance on
the incorrect standard set out in the pre-Winter Circuit
precedents quoted above, respondents argue that the
lower courts in fact applied the traditional four-factor test.
In their view, the statements that injunctive relief is
proper in the “run-of-the-mill” NEPA case, and that such
injunctions are granted except in “unusual circumstances,”
are descriptive rather than prescriptive. See Brief for
Respondents 28, n. 14. We need not decide whether re­
spondents’ characterization of the lower court opinions in
this case is sound. Even if it is, the injunctive relief
granted here cannot stand.
C
We first consider whether the District Court erred in
enjoining APHIS from partially deregulating RRA during
the pendency of the EIS process.4
The relevant part of the District Court’s judgment states
that, “[b]efore granting Monsanto’s deregulation petition,
——————
4 Petitioners

focus their challenge on the part of the District Court’s
order prohibiting the planting of RRA. As we explain below, however,
the broad injunction against planting cannot be valid if the injunction
against partial deregulation is improper. See infra, at 23; see also App.
to Pet. for Cert. 64a (District Court order recognizing that APHIS’s
proposed remedy “seek[s], in effect, a partial deregulation that permits
the continued expansion of the Roundup Ready alfalfa market subject
to certain conditions” (emphasis added)). The validity of the injunction
prohibiting partial deregulation is therefore properly before us. Like
the District Court, we use the term “partial deregulation” to refer to
any limited or conditional deregulation. See id., at 64a, 69a.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

even in part, the federal defendants shall prepare an
environmental impact statement.” App. to Pet. for Cert.
108a (emphasis added); see also id., at 79a (“The Court
will enter a final judgment . . . ordering the government to
prepare an EIS before it makes a decision on Monsanto’s
deregulation petition”). The plain text of the order prohib­
its any partial deregulation, not just the particular partial
deregulation embodied in APHIS’s proposed judgment.
We think it is quite clear that the District Court meant
just what it said. The related injunction against planting
states that “no [RRA] . . . may be planted” “[u]ntil the
federal defendants prepare the EIS and decide the deregu­
lation petition.” Id., at 108a (emphasis added). That
injunction, which appears in the very same judgment and
directly follows the injunction against granting Mon­
santo’s petition “even in part,” does not carve out an ex­
ception for planting subsequently authorized by a valid
partial deregulation decision.
In our view, none of the traditional four factors govern­
ing the entry of permanent injunctive relief supports the
District Court’s injunction prohibiting partial deregula­
tion. To see why that is so, it is helpful to understand how
the injunction prohibiting a partial deregulation fits into
the broader dispute between the parties.
Respondents in this case brought suit under the APA to
challenge a particular agency order: APHIS’s decision to
completely deregulate RRA. The District Court held that
the order in question was procedurally defective, and
APHIS decided not to appeal that determination. At that
point, it was for the agency to decide whether and to what
extent it would pursue a partial deregulation. If the
agency found, on the basis of a new EA, that a limited and
temporary deregulation satisfied applicable statutory and
regulatory requirements, it could proceed with such a
deregulation even if it had not yet finished the onerous
EIS required for complete deregulation. If and when the


18

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

agency were to issue a partial deregulation order, any
party aggrieved by that order could bring a separate suit
under the Administrative Procedure Act to challenge the
particular deregulation attempted. See 5 U. S. C. §702.
In this case, APHIS apparently sought to “streamline”
the proceedings by asking the District Court to craft a
remedy that, in effect, would have partially deregulated
RRA until such time as the agency had finalized the EIS
needed for a complete deregulation. See Tr. of Oral Arg.
16, 23–24; App. to Pet. for Cert. 69a. To justify that dispo­
sition, APHIS and petitioners submitted voluminous
documentary submissions in which they purported to show
that the risk of gene flow would be insignificant if the
District Court allowed limited planting and harvesting
subject to APHIS’s proposed conditions. Respondents, in
turn, submitted considerable evidence of their own that
seemed to cut the other way. This put the District Court
in an unenviable position. “The parties’ experts disagreed
over virtually every factual issue relating to possible
environmental harm, including the likelihood of genetic
contamination and why some contamination had already
occurred.” 570 F. 3d, at 1135.
The District Court may well have acted within its dis­
cretion in refusing to craft a judicial remedy that would
have authorized the continued planting and harvesting of
RRA while the EIS is being prepared. It does not follow,
however, that the District Court was within its rights in
enjoining APHIS from allowing such planting and harvest­
ing pursuant to the authority vested in the agency by law.
When the District Court entered its permanent injunction,
APHIS had not yet exercised its authority to partially
deregulate RRA. Until APHIS actually seeks to effect a
partial deregulation, any judicial review of such a decision
is premature.5
——————
5 NEPA

provides that an EIS must be “include[d] in every recommen­


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of the Court

Nor can the District Court’s injunction be justified as a
prophylactic measure needed to guard against the possi­
bility that the agency would seek to effect on its own the
particular partial deregulation scheme embodied in the
terms of APHIS’s proposed judgment. Even if the District
Court was not required to adopt that judgment, there was
no need to stop the agency from effecting a partial deregu­
lation in accordance with the procedures established by
law. Moreover, the terms of the District Court’s injunction
do not just enjoin the particular partial deregulation
embodied in APHIS’s proposed judgment. Instead, the
District Court barred the agency from pursuing any de­
regulation—no matter how limited the geographic area in
which planting of RRA would be allowed, how great the
isolation distances mandated between RRA fields and
fields for growing non-genetically-engineered alfalfa, how
stringent the regulations governing harvesting and distri­
bution, how robust the enforcement mechanisms available
——————
dation or report on proposals for legislation and other major Federal
actions significantly affecting the quality of the human environment.”
42 U. S. C. §4332(2)(C) (emphasis added); see also Kleppe v. Sierra
Club, 427 U. S. 390, 406 (1976) (“A court has no authority to depart
from the statutory language and . . . determine a point during the
germination process of a potential proposal at which an impact state­
ment should be prepared” (first emphasis added)). When a particular
agency proposal exists and requires the preparation of an EIS, NEPA
regulations allow the agency to take at least some action pertaining to
that proposal during the pendency of the EIS process. See 40 CFR
§§1506.1(a), (c) (2009). We do not express any view on the Govern­
ment’s contention that a limited deregulation of the kind embodied in
its proposed judgment would not require the prior preparation of an
EIS. See Brief for Federal Respondents 21–22 (citing §1506.1(a)); Tr. of
Oral Arg. 20 (“what we were proposing for the interim, that is allowing
continued planting subject to various protective measures, was funda­
mentally different from the action on which the EIS was being pre­
pared”). Because APHIS has not yet invoked the procedures necessary
to attempt a limited deregulation, any judicial consideration of such
issues is not warranted at this time.


20

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

at the time of the decision, and—consequently—no matter
how small the risk that the planting authorized under
such conditions would adversely affect the environment in
general and respondents in particular.
The order enjoining any partial deregulation was also
inconsistent with other aspects of the very same judgment.
In fashioning its remedy for the NEPA violation, the
District Court steered a “middle course” between more
extreme options on either end. See id., at 1136. On the
one hand, the District Court rejected APHIS’s proposal
(supported by petitioners) to allow continued planting and
harvesting of RRA subject to the agency’s proposed limita­
tions. On the other hand, the District Court did not bar
continued planting of RRA as a regulated article under
permit from APHIS, see App. to Pet. for Cert. 75a, and it
expressly allowed farmers to harvest and sell RRA planted
before March 30, 2007, id., at 76a–79a. If the District
Court was right to conclude that any partial deregulation,
no matter how limited, required the preparation of an EIS,
it is hard to see why the limited planting and harvesting
that the District Court allowed did not also require the
preparation of an EIS. Conversely, if the District Court
was right to conclude that the limited planting and har­
vesting it allowed did not require the preparation of an
EIS, then an appropriately limited partial deregulation
should likewise have been possible.
Based on the analysis set forth above, it is clear that the
order enjoining any deregulation whatsoever does not
satisfy the traditional four-factor test for granting perma­
nent injunctive relief. Most importantly, respondents
cannot show that they will suffer irreparable injury if
APHIS is allowed to proceed with any partial deregula­
tion, for at least two independent reasons.
First, if and when APHIS pursues a partial deregulation
that arguably runs afoul of NEPA, respondents may file a
new suit challenging such action and seeking appropriate


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of the Court

preliminary relief. See 5 U. S. C. §§702, 705. Accordingly,
a permanent injunction is not now needed to guard
against any present or imminent risk of likely irreparable
harm.
Second, a partial deregulation need not cause respon­
dents any injury at all, much less irreparable injury; if the
scope of the partial deregulation is sufficiently limited, the
risk of gene flow to their crops could be virtually nonexis­
tent. For example, suppose that APHIS deregulates RRA
only in a remote part of the country in which respondents
neither grow nor intend to grow non-genetically­
engineered alfalfa, and in which no conventional alfalfa
farms are currently located. Suppose further that APHIS
issues an accompanying administrative order mandating
isolation distances so great as to eliminate any apprecia­
ble risk of gene flow to the crops of conventional farmers
who might someday choose to plant in the surrounding
area. See, e.g., Brief in Opposition 9, n. 6 (quoting study
concluding “ ‘that in order for there to be zero tolerance of
any gene flow between a [RRA] seed field and a conven­
tional seed field, those fields would have to have a five­
mile isolation distance between them’ ”); see also Tr. of
Oral Arg. 15–16 (representation from the Solicitor General
that APHIS may impose conditions on the deregulation of
RRA via issuance of an administrative order). Finally,
suppose that APHIS concludes in a new EA that its lim­
ited deregulation would not pose a significant risk of gene
flow or harmful weed development, and that the agency
adopts a plan to police vigorously compliance with its
administrative order in the limited geographic area in
question. It is hard to see how respondents could show
that such a limited deregulation would cause them likely
irreparable injury. (Respondents in this case do not repre­
sent a class, so they could not seek to enjoin such an order
on the ground that it might cause harm to other parties.)
In any case, the District Court’s order prohibiting any


22

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

partial deregulation improperly relieves respondents of
their burden to make the requisite evidentiary showing.6
Of course, APHIS might ultimately choose not to par­
tially deregulate RRA during the pendency of the EIS, or
else to pursue the kind of partial deregulation embodied in
its proposed judgment rather than the very limited de­
regulation envisioned in the above hypothetical. Until
such time as the agency decides whether and how to exer­
cise its regulatory authority, however, the courts have no
cause to intervene. Indeed, the broad injunction entered
here essentially pre-empts the very procedure by which
the agency could determine, independently of the pending
EIS process for assessing the effects of a complete deregu­
lation, that a limited deregulation would not pose any
appreciable risk of environmental harm. See 40 CFR
§§1501.4, 1508.9(a) (2009).
In sum, we do not know whether and to what extent
APHIS would seek to effect a limited deregulation during
the pendency of the EIS process if it were free to do so; we
do know that the vacatur of APHIS’s deregulation decision
means that virtually no RRA can be grown or sold until
such time as a new deregulation decision is in place, and
we also know that any party aggrieved by a hypothetical
future deregulation decision will have ample opportunity
——————
6 The District Court itself appears to have recognized that its broad
injunction may not have been necessary to avert any injury to respon­
dents. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 191a (“It does complicate it to try to
fine-tune a particular remedy. So the simpler the remedy, the more
attractive it is from the Court’s point of view, because it appears to me
enforcement is easier. Understanding it is easier, and it may be, while
a blunt instrument, it may actually, for the short term, achieve its
result, achieve its purpose, even maybe it overachieves it. . . . Maybe a
lot of it is not necessary. I don’t know” (emphasis added)); see also ibid.
(“I don’t say you have to be greater than 1.6 miles, you have to be away
from the bees, you have be dah dah dah. That’s the farm business. I’m
not even in it”); id., at 192a (“I am not going to get into the isolation
distances”).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

Opinion of the Court

to challenge it, and to seek appropriate preliminary relief,
if and when such a decision is made. In light of these
particular circumstances, we hold that the District Court
did not properly exercise its discretion in enjoining a
partial deregulation of any kind pending APHIS’s prepa­
ration of an EIS. It follows that the Court of Appeals
erred in affirming that aspect of the District Court’s
judgment.
D
We now turn to petitioners’ claim that the District Court
erred in entering a nationwide injunction against planting
RRA. Petitioners argue that the District Court did not
apply the right test for determining whether to enter
permanent injunctive relief; that, even if the District
Court identified the operative legal standard, it erred as a
matter of law in applying that standard to the facts of this
case; and that the District Court was required to grant
petitioners an evidentiary hearing to resolve contested
issues of fact germane to the remedial dispute between the
parties. We agree that the District Court’s injunction
against planting went too far, but we come to that conclu­
sion for two independent reasons.
First, the impropriety of the District Court’s broad
injunction against planting flows from the impropriety of
its injunction against partial deregulation. If APHIS may
partially deregulate RRA before preparing a full-blown
EIS—a question that we need not and do not decide here—
farmers should be able to grow and sell RRA in accordance
with that agency determination. Because it was inappro­
priate for the District Court to foreclose even the possibil­
ity of a partial and temporary deregulation, it necessarily
follows that it was likewise inappropriate to enjoin any
and all parties from acting in accordance with the terms of
such a deregulation decision.
Second, respondents have represented to this Court that


24

MONSANTO CO. v. GEERTSON SEED FARMS
Opinion of the Court

the District Court’s injunction against planting does not
have any meaningful practical effect independent of its
vacatur. See Brief for Respondents 24; see also Tr. of Oral
Arg. 37 (“[T]he mistake that was made [by the District
Court] was in not appreciating . . . that the vacatur did
have [the] effect” of independently prohibiting the growth
and sale of almost all RRA). An injunction is a drastic and
extraordinary remedy, which should not be granted as a
matter of course. See, e.g., Weinberger v. Romero-Barcelo,
456 U. S. 305, 311–312 (1982). If a less drastic remedy
(such as partial or complete vacatur of APHIS’s deregula­
tion decision) was sufficient to redress respondents’ injury,
no recourse to the additional and extraordinary relief of an
injunction was warranted. See ibid.; see also Winter, 555
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 21–23).
E
In sum, the District Court abused its discretion in en­
joining APHIS from effecting a partial deregulation and in
prohibiting the possibility of planting in accordance with
the terms of such a deregulation. Given those errors, this
Court need not express any view on whether injunctive
relief of some kind was available to respondents on the
record before us. Nor does the Court address the question
whether the District Court was required to conduct an
evidentiary hearing before entering the relief at issue
here. The judgment of the Ninth Circuit is reversed, and
the case is remanded for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.
It is so ordered.
JUSTICE BREYER took no part in the consideration or
decision of this case.

