Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

cases on which the majority relies do not stand for this
proposition. In Reider, the Court found Carmack applica­
ble when the first domestic rail carrier issued a bill of
lading from New Orleans to Boston. Although we ob­
served in that opinion that there was no through bill of
lading from Buenos Aires to Boston, 339 U. S., at 117, we
did not say, and it is not a necessary corollary, that the
presence of such a bill of lading would have commanded a
different result. The observation is better read as indicat­
ing that no law other than Carmack could possibly have
applied in that case: Because “the shipment . . . could not
have moved an inch beyond New Orleans under the ocean
bill,” id., at 118, a new domestic bill of lading for domestic
transportation was required, and as to that transporta­
tion, we held, Carmack unquestionably applied.
For its part, Mexican Light held only that, where the
first rail carrier in the chain of transportation issued a bill
of lading, a subsequent bill of lading issued by a later rail
carrier was void because Carmack contemplates one
through bill of lading governing the entire journey by rail.
331 U. S., at 734. A subsequent bill of lading by a connect­
ing rail carrier, however, can be void under Carmack
without requiring the conclusion that an international
through bill of lading involving initial transportation by
ocean carrier would void a subsequent bill of lading issued
in the United States by the first rail carrier in the domes­
tic chain of transportation. Because the text of Carmack
expressly requires a bill of lading to be issued for property
“receive[d] for transportation under this part,” and Union
Pacific first received the property for rail transportation in
the United States, it should have issued a bill of lading.
Of course, its failure to do so did not affect its liability
under Carmack (or that of a subsequent connecting or
delivering carrier), as §11706(a) explicitly states.
Third, the majority errs in giving weight to the differ­
ence in scope between Carmack liability and the jurisdic­

