20

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

ing Carmack to domestic rail transportation of goods, even
where the goods originated overseas, in order to avoid
“immuniz[ing] from the beneficial provisions of the [Car­
mack] Amendment all shipments originating in a foreign
country when reshipped via the very transportation chain
with which the Amendment was most concerned”).
The Court’s suggestion that its interpretation best
comports with the goals of COGSA fares no better. The
Court is correct, ante, at 8, that Congress has permitted
parties contractually to extend COGSA, which, by its own
terms, applies only to the period “from the time when the
goods are loaded on to the time when they are discharged
from the ship.” §§1(e), 7, at 1178, 1180. But the Court
ignores that COGSA specifically contemplates that there
may be “other law” that mandatorily governs the inland
leg, and makes clear that contractual extension of COGSA
does not trump this law. §12, at 1180 (“Nothing in
[COGSA] shall be construed as superseding . . . any . . .
other law which would be applicable in the absence of
[COGSA], insofar as they relate to the duties, responsibili­
ties, and liabilities of the ship or carrier prior to the time
when the goods are loaded on or after the time they are
discharged from the ship”); see also Sturley, Freedom of
Contract and the Ironic Story of Section 7 of the Carriage
of Goods by Sea Act, 4 Benedict’s Mar. Bull. 201, 202
(2006) (“It is highly ironic to suggest that section 7 was
intended to facilitate the extension of COGSA [inland].
The unambiguous history demonstrates that section 7 was
specifically designed to accomplish exactly the opposite
result”). Notably, when it wants to do so, Congress knows
how to specify that a contractual extension of COGSA
supersedes other law: COGSA elsewhere defines a limited
circumstance—the carriage of goods by sea between ports
of the United States—in which a contractual extension of
COGSA has the force of law. §13, at 1180 (providing that
such bills of lading “shall be subjected hereto as fully as if

