Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

guage is murky, and Congress’ instruction that the 1978
recodification effected no substantive change provides no
meaningful guidance. The current text does not restrict
Carmack’s coverage to trade with adjacent foreign coun­
tries, and it makes no distinction between imports and
exports. Carmack’s ambiguous history cannot justify
reading such atextual limitations into the statute.11
C
The Court’s suggestion that its interpretation properly
effectuates the goals of Carmack and “attains the most
——————
11 The United States, as amicus in support of “K” Line and Union
Pacific, makes an effort to find such limitations in the current statutory
text. See Brief for United States 21; see also Reply Brief for Petitioner
in No. 08–1554, p. 10 (agreeing with the United States’ interpretation).
This argument is unpersuasive. The United States observes that
§11706(a)(3) describes the liability of “another rail carrier over whose
line or route the property is transported in the United States or from a
place in the United States to a place in an adjacent foreign country
when transported under a through bill of lading.” (Emphasis added.)
According to the United States, “[t]hat textual limitation, when read in
light of Carmack’s purpose, reflects Congress’s continued intent to
restrict Carmack to the carriage of goods between places in the United
States and for export to an adjacent foreign country.” Brief for United
States 21. As I have already explained, however, once a domestic rail
carrier first receives property for transportation within the United
States, regardless of where the property itself originated, Carmack
applies. Supra, at 3–6. Section 11706(a)(3) simply ensures that when a
connecting carrier that neither received the property in the United
States nor delivered it in the United States transports the property
from the United States to either Canada or Mexico, that connecting
carrier remains subject to Carmack liability during the part of the
transportation that is in the United States. Further, as I explain
below, see infra, at 18–20, Carmack’s purpose would be better effectu­
ated by applying its provisions inland as the default rule. In any event,
the “adjacent foreign country” provision in §11706(a)(3) has no bearing
on the rail transportation provided in these cases by Union Pacific as
“receiving rail carrier,” §11706(a), from California to four locations in
the American midwest. To this transportation, Carmack plainly
applies.

