Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Respondents—the owners of cargo that was allegedly
damaged during Union Pacific’s train derailment in Okla­
homa, ante, at 2–3—primarily contend that “K” Line
conducted rail operations by using containers to transport
the cargo from China to the United States in conjunction
with Union Pacific’s subsequent carriage of those same
containers. Brief for Respondents 82–83 (noting that the
statutory definition of “railroad” includes “ ‘intermodal
equipment used by or in connection with a railroad,’ ”
§10102(6)(A)). This interpretation goes too far. Read so
literally, the statute would render a truck a railroad sim­
ply because the truck transported containers during a
journey in which the containers also traveled by rail.
Such a reading would gut the separate provisions of the
ICA governing motor carriage in subtitle IV, part B of
Title 49. The ICA’s broad description of what the term
“railroad” “includes,” §10102(6), is better read as ensuring
that all services a rail carrier conducts are regulated
under the Act “to prevent overcharges and discriminations
from being made under the pretext of performing such
additional services.” Cleveland, C., C. & St. L. R. Co. v.
Dettlebach, 239 U. S. 588, 594 (1916).
At oral argument, respondents focused on a separate
argument, contending that “K” Line should be considered
a rail carrier because it conducts substantial rail opera­
tions at its depot facility in Long Beach, California. Tr. of
Oral Arg. 37 (describing transportation between Port of
Los Angeles, where “K” Line’s private chassis transport
the containers on the Port’s train tracks to the Los Ange­
les train depot, where the containers are loaded onto
Union Pacific trains for inland transportation). I agree
with the Board, however, that “ ‘ownership and operation
of private terminal facilities, including rail yards,’ ” is not
sufficient to bring a shipper within the definition of “ ‘a rail
carrier subject to [Board] jurisdiction’ ” where the “ ‘termi­
nal is maintained for [the ocean common carrier’s] exclu­

