Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Ante, at 13. To the contrary, an overseas ocean carrier
like “K” Line can still issue a through bill of lading govern­
ing the entire international trip to an American destina­
tion. That bill of lading reflects the ocean carrier’s agree­
ment with and obligations to the original shipper of the
cargo. As the ocean carrier has no independent Carmack
obligations of its own, the ocean carrier and the shipper
are free to select whatever liability terms they wish to
govern their relationship during the entire shipment. See
infra, at 20–21. Carmack simply requires an American
“receiving rail carrier” like Union Pacific to issue a bill of
lading to the party from whom it received the goods for
shipment—here, “K” Line. See Norfolk Southern R. Co. v.
James N. Kirby, Pty Ltd., 543 U. S. 14, 33 (2004) (“When
an intermediary contracts with a carrier to transport
goods, the cargo owner’s recovery against the carrier is
limited by the liability limitation to which the intermedi­
ary and carrier agreed”); Great Northern R. Co. v.
O’Connor, 232 U. S. 508, 514–515 (1914) (holding that a
railroad company is entitled to treat the intermediary
forwarder as the shipper). As to that bill of lading, Car­
mack provides the legal regime and defines the relation­
ship between the contracting parties (unless they have
agreed to contract out of Carmack, see infra, at 23–26).
The issuance of this second bill of lading, however, in no
way undermines the efficiency of the through bill of lading
between the ocean carrier and the original shipper, nor
does it require that those parties bind themselves to apply
Carmack to the inland leg.8
——————
8 The majority seems to find it troubling that my view “would require
two bills of lading.” Ante, at 13. But international shipments fre­
quently contain more than one bill of lading. See, e.g., Kirby, 543 U. S.,
at 30–33 (interpreting the parties’ obligations under two bills of lading,
one between a shipper and a freight forwarding company to which the
shipper originally delivered its goods, and one between the freight
forwarding company and the ocean carrier to which the freight for­

