12

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Opinion of the Court

Court of Appeals in the opinion now under review, could
be read to imply that Carmack applies only if a rail carrier
actually issued a separate domestic bill of lading. See,
e.g., Atladis, 458 F. 3d, at 1291–1294; American Road, 348
F. 3d, at 568; Shao, 986 F. 2d, at 703; Capitol Converting,
965 F. 2d, at 394. This may have led to some confusion.
The decisive question is not whether the rail carrier in fact
issued a Carmack bill but rather whether that carrier was
required to issue a bill by Carmack’s first sentence.
The above principles establish that for Carmack’s provi
sions to apply the journey must begin with a receiving rail
carrier, which would have to issue a Carmack-compliant
bill of lading. It follows that Carmack does not apply if
the property is received at an overseas location under a
through bill that covers the transport into an inland loca
tion in the United States. In such a case, there is no
receiving rail carrier that “receives” the property “for
[domestic rail] transportation,” §11706(a), and thus no
carrier that must issue a Carmack-compliant bill of lading.
The initial carrier in that instance receives the property at
the shipment’s point of origin for overseas multimodal
import transport, not for domestic rail transport. (Today’s
decision need not address the instance where goods are
received at a point in the United States for export. Nor is
it necessary to decide if Carmack applies to goods initially
received in Canada or Mexico, for import into the United
States. See infra, at 16.)
The present cases illustrate the operation of these prin
ciples. Carmack did not require “K” Line to issue bills of
lading because “K” Line was not a receiving rail carrier.
“K” Line obtained the cargo in China for overseas trans
port across an ocean and then to inland destinations in the
United States. “K” Line shipped this property under
COGSA-authorized through bills of lading. See supra, at
4–5. That “K” Line chose to use rail transport to complete
one segment of the journey under these “essentially mari

