Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

time” contracts, Kirby, 543 U. S., at 24, does not put “K”
Line within Carmack’s reach and thus does not require it
to issue Carmack bills of lading.
As for Union Pacific, it was also not a receiving rail
carrier under Carmack. The cargo owners conceded at
oral argument that, even under their theory, Union Pacific
was a mere delivering carrier, which did not have to issue
its own Carmack bill of lading. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 29, 39.
This was a necessary concession. A carrier does not be
come a receiving carrier simply by accepting goods for
further transport from another carrier in the middle of an
international shipment under a through bill. After all,
Union Pacific was not the “initial carrier” for the carriage.
Mexican Light, 331 U. S., at 733.
If a carrier like Union Pacific, which acts as a connect
ing or delivering carrier during an international through
shipment, was, counterintuitively, a receiving carrier
under Carmack, this would in effect outlaw through ship
ments under a single bill of lading. This is because a
carriage like the one in the present case would require two
bills of lading: one that the overseas carrier (here, “K”
Line) issues to the cargo owners under COGSA, and a
second one that the first domestic rail carrier (here, Union
Pacific) issues to the overseas carrier under Carmack.
Kirby noted “the popularity of ‘through’ bills of lading, in
which cargo owners can contract for transportation across
oceans and to inland destinations in a single transaction.”
543 U. S., at 25–26. The Court sees no reason to read
COGSA and Carmack to outlaw this efficient mode of
international shipping by requiring these journeys to have
multiple bills of lading. In addition, if Union Pacific had
to issue a Carmack bill of lading to “K” Line, it is unclear
whether the cargo owners (the parties Carmack is de
signed to protect) would be able to sue under the terms
governing that bill, especially in light of their different
through bill with “K” Line. These difficulties are reason

