Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of the Court

“so gravely difficult and inconvenient that [the plaintiff]
will for all practical purposes be deprived of his day in
court.” Id., at 18. The parties sensibly agreed that be
cause their bills were governed by Japanese law, Tokyo
would be the best venue for any suit relating to the cargo.
The cargo owners’ contrary policy arguments are un
availing. They assert that if Carmack does not apply, the
inland segment of international shipments will be “un
regulated.” Brief for Respondents 2, 21, 24, 64, 91. First,
any speculation that not applying Carmack to inland
segments of overseas shipments will cause severe prob
lems is refuted by that fact that Carmack even arguably
did not govern the inland portion of such shipments from
its enactment in 1906 until its nonsubstantive recodifica
tion in 1978. See supra, at 15–17. It is true that if the
cargo owners’ position were to prevail, the terms of
through bills of lading made in maritime commerce would
be more restricted in some circumstances. But that does
not mean that the Court’s holding leaves the field unregu
lated. Ocean-based through bills are governed by COGSA,
and ocean vessels like those operated by “K” Line are
overseen by the Federal Maritime Commission. Supra, at
4–5. Rail carriers like Union Pacific, furthermore, remain
subject to the STB’s regulation to the extent they operate
within the United States. See supra, at 13–14. It is nota
ble that although the STB has jurisdiction to regulate the
rates of such carriers, even when the carriage is not gov
erned by the Carmack Amendment, STB has exercised its
authority to exempt from certain regulations service pro
vided by a rail carrier “as part of a continuous intermodal
freight movement,” 49 CFR §1090.2 (2009), like the jour
ney at issue in these cases, see ibid. (exercising STB’s
deregulation authority under 49 U. S. C. §10502(f)).
Finally, the cargo owners miss the mark in relying on
the recent United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Carriage of Goods Wholly or Partly by Sea,

