6

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

less of where the property originated. Carmack then
applies to any other rail carrier subject to the Board’s
jurisdiction in the chain of transportation, no matter
whether the ultimate destination of the property is in the
United States or elsewhere, for the period the carrier is
traveling within the United States.
It seems to me plain that, under these broadly inclusive
provisions, Carmack governs rail carriers such as Union
Pacific for any transportation of cargo within the United
States, whether or not their domestic transportation is
part of a multimodal international shipment, and whether
or not they actually issued a domestic bill of lading. There
is no question that Union Pacific is a “rail carrier” that is
“subject to the jurisdiction of the Board.” §11706(a). It
“receive[d]” the cargo, ibid., in California for domestic
transportation to four different domestic inland loca­
tions—i.e., “between a place in . . . a State and a place in
. . . another State,” §10501(a)(2)(A)—while the shipment
itself was transported “between a place in . . . the United
States and a place in a foreign country,” §10501(a)(2)(F).
Union Pacific should have issued a bill of lading for the
cargo it received, but its failure to do so does not shield it
from liability, as §11706(a) makes clear. Carmack there­
fore provides the legal regime governing Union Pacific’s
rail transportation in these cases.
Carmack does not, however, govern ocean carriers such
as “K” Line, because such carriers are not “rail carrier[s]
providing transportation or service subject to the jurisdic­
tion of the Board.” §11706(a). The ICA defines a “rail
carrier” as “a person providing common carrier railroad
transportation for compensation.” §10102(5). To resolve
whether “K” Line meets this definition, I would apply the
STB’s well established test and ask whether it “conduct[s]
rail operations” and “ ‘hold[s] out’ that service to the pub­
lic.” Assoc. of P&C Dock Longshoremen v. Pittsburgh and
Conneaut Dock Co., 8 I. C. C. 2d 280, 290 (1992).

