18

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

consistency between Carmack and [the Carriage of Goods
by Sea Act (COGSA)],” ante, at 17, reflects its fundamental
misunderstanding of these statutes and the broader legal
context in which the international shipping industry
functions. As the mandatory default regime governing the
relationship between an American receiving rail carrier
and its direct contracting partner (here an overseas ocean
carrier), Carmack permits the shippers who contract for a
through bill of lading with the ocean carrier to receive the
benefit of Carmack through that once-removed relation­
ship. Such a legal regime is entirely consistent with
COGSA and industry practice.
As noted, the Court’s position as to Carmack rests on its
erroneous belief that the “receiving carrier” must receive
the goods at the point of the shipment’s origin. Ante, at
12–15. Because Carmack provides that suit against the
receiving rail carrier “may only be brought . . . in the
judicial district in which the point of origin is located,” 49
U. S. C. §11706(d)(2)(A)(i), and defines “judicial district” as
only a federal or state court, §11706(d)(2)(B), the Court
mistakenly concludes that were Carmack to apply to
inland transportation of international shipments, “there
would often be no venue in which to sue the receiving
carrier” because that carrier would have received the
goods in a foreign country where no federal or state court
exists. Ante, at 14–15, 17. Contrary to the Court’s sugges­
tion, however, the proper venue in which to sue a receiving
carrier under Carmack is the location in which the first
domestic rail carrier received the goods for domestic
transportation. Supra, at 4–5, 9.
Nor is it true that Carmack’s focus is on providing a
single through bill of lading for an entire shipment. Ante,
at 17. Carmack’s purpose in §11706 is to ensure that a
single bill of lading, with a single protective liability re­
gime, governs an entire shipment by rail carrier within

