14

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

B
In addition to misreading the text, the Court’s opinion
misapplies Carmack’s statutory history. The Court states
that no version of Carmack has ever applied to imports
originating overseas on a through bill of lading. Ante, at
15. The Court further asserts that, because Congress
stated that the 1978 recodification of the ICA effected no
“substantive change,” Carmack should be read consis­
tently with this historical practice. Ante, at 16. There are
three problems with this analysis.
First, if “Congress intended no substantive change” to
Carmack in the 1978 recodification, “that would mean only
that the present text is the best evidence of what the law
has always meant, and that the language of the prior
version cannot be relied upon to support a different read­
ing.” Keene Corp. v. United States, 508 U. S. 200, 221
(1993) (STEVENS, J., dissenting). Because the present text
of Carmack indicates that it applies to the domestic inland
rail transportation of a multimodal international ship­
ment, there is no reason to rely on Congress’ statement in
the recodification.
Second, there is no necessary conflict between the pre­
——————
warder delivered the shipper’s goods). The majority also suggests that
an original shipper might not be able to sue Union Pacific under the
terms of Union Pacific’s bill with “K” Line. Ante, at 13. In Kirby,
however, we took as a given that the shipper could sue the inland rail
carrier, even though the shipper was not a party to the rail carrier’s bill
of lading with an intermediary. Indeed, we held that in an action
against the rail carrier, the shipper was bound to the terms of the bill of
lading governing the rail carrier’s transportation, even though those
terms were less generous than the terms in the shipper’s through bill of
lading with the freight forwarder with which it originally contracted.
543 U. S., at 33–34. We observed that the shipper could sue the freight
forwarder to recover the difference. Id., at 35. In light of this analysis,
I see no reason to doubt a shipper’s ability to sue an American rail
carrier under Carmack, even though its bill of lading with an overseas
ocean carrier is not governed by Carmack.

