Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

country.” §§10501(a)(2)(A), (E), (F).
With the jurisdictional framework in mind, I return to
the final sentences of Carmack, §11706. The third sen­
tence clarifies that liability under Carmack is imposed
upon (1) “the receiving rail carrier” (which, under the first
sentence of §11706(a) and the definition of the Board’s
jurisdiction over domestic rail carriage in §10501(a), is the
rail carrier that first receives the property for transporta­
tion in the United States); (2) “the delivering rail carrier”
(which, under the last sentence of §11706(a) and the
Board’s jurisdiction over domestic rail carriage in
§10501(a), is the final rail carrier providing the long­
distance transportation “nearest the destination” in the
United States); and (3) “another rail carrier over whose
line or route the property is transported in the United
States or from a place in the United States to a place in an
adjacent foreign country when transported under a
through bill of lading.” §11706(a). This last phrase in
§11706(a)(3) serves two functions. It ensures that, where
the entire rail transportation is “[with]in the United
States,” any connecting rail carrier between the point at
which the goods were received and the point at which the
goods were delivered is liable under Carmack. It also
ensures that, where the final destination of the goods is in
Canada or Mexico, such that there is no domestic “deliver­
ing” carrier, a connecting carrier taking on the goods in
the United States will remain subject to Carmack as it
travels toward its foreign destination while still in the
United States. (As noted, the jurisdictional provision,
incorporated by reference in §11706(a), is limited to
“transportation in the United States,” §10501(a)(2).)
The language of Carmack thus announces an expansive
intent to provide the liability regime for rail carriage of
property within the United States. Once a first domestic
rail carrier subject to the Board’s jurisdiction receives
property in the United States, Carmack attaches, regard­

