10

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Opinion of the Court

domestic rail transport. Carmack thus requires the re
ceiving rail carrier—but not the delivering or connecting
rail carrier—to issue a bill of lading. As explained below,
ascertaining the shipment’s point of origin is critical to
deciding whether the shipment includes a receiving rail
carrier.
The conclusion that Carmack’s bill of lading require
ment only applies to the receiving rail carrier is dictated
by the text and is consistent with this Court’s precedent.
See St. Louis, I. M. & S. R. Co. v. Starbird, 243 U. S. 592,
604 (1917) (explaining that Carmack “requires the receiv
ing carrier to issue a through bill of lading”). A receiving
rail carrier is the initial carrier, which “receives” the
property for domestic rail transportation at the journey’s
point of origin. §11706(a). If Carmack’s bill of lading
requirement did not refer to the initial carrier, but rather
to any rail carrier that in the colloquial sense “received”
the property from another carrier, then every carrier
during the shipment would have to issue its own separate
bill. This would be altogether contrary to Carmack’s
purpose of making the receiving and delivering carriers
liable under a single, initial bill of lading for damage
caused by any carrier within a single course of shipment.
This Court’s decision in Mexican Light & Power Co. v.
Texas Mexican R. Co., 331 U. S. 731 (1947), supports the
conclusion that only the receiving rail carrier must issue a
Carmack bill of lading. There, a subsequent rail carrier in
an export shipment from the United States to Mexico
issued its own separate bill of lading at the U. S.-Mexico
border. The second bill differed from the through bill
issued by the “initial carrier,” id., at 733, (that is, the
receiving carrier) at the inland point of origin. The Court
held that Carmack, far from requiring nonreceiving carri
ers to issue their separate bills of lading, makes any sub
sequent bill “void” unless the “so-called second bill of
lading represents the initiation of a new shipment.” Id., at

