14

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Opinion of the Court

enough to reject this novel interpretation of Carmack,
which was neither urged by any party nor adopted by any
authority that has been called to this Court’s attention.
This would be a quite different case if, as in Reider, the
bills of lading for the overseas transport ended at this
country’s ports and the cargo owners then contracted with
Union Pacific to complete a new journey to an inland
destination in the United States. Under those circum
stances, Union Pacific would have been the receiving rail
carrier and would have been required to issue a separate
Carmack-compliant bill of lading to the cargo owners. See
Reider, 339 U. S., at 117 (“If the various parties dealing
with this shipment separated the carriage into distinct
portions by their contracts, it is not for courts judicially to
meld the portions into something they are not”).
The Court of Appeals interpreted Carmack as applying
to any domestic rail segment of an overseas shipment,
regardless of whether Carmack required a bill of lading.
The court rested on the assumption that “[STB]’s jurisdic
tion . . . is coextensive with Carmack’s coverage.” 557
F. 3d, at 992. Yet, as explained above, Carmack applies
only to shipments for which Carmack requires a bill of
lading; that is to say, to shipments that start with a car
rier that is both subject to the STB’s jurisdiction and
“receives [the property] for [domestic rail] transportation.”
The Court of Appeals ignored this “receive[d] . . . for trans
portation” limitation and so reached the wrong conclusion.
See, e.g., Reiter v. Sonotone Corp., 442 U. S. 330, 339
(1979) (courts are “obliged to give effect, if possible, to
every word Congress used”).
The Court of Appeals’ conclusion is also an awkward fit
with Carmack’s venue provisions. Under Carmack, a suit
against the “originating” (that is, receiving) rail carrier
that has not actually caused the damage to the goods “may
only be brought . . . in the judicial district in which the
point of origin is located.” §11706(d)(2)(A), (A)(i). Suit

