Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
ing rail carrier—to issue a bill of lading. This conclusion is consistent
with statute’s text and this Court’s precedent. See St. Louis, I. M. &
S. R. Co. v. Starbird, 243 U. S. 592, 595, 604. A receiving rail carrier
is the initial carrier, which “receives” the property for domestic rail
transportation at the journey’s point of origin. If the Carmack’s bill
of lading requirement referred not to the initial carrier, but to any
carrier “receiving” the property from another carrier, then every car
rier during the shipment would have to issue its own separate bill.
This would be contrary to Carmack’s purpose of making the receiving
and delivering carriers liable under a single, initial bill for damage
caused by any carrier within a single course of shipment. This con
clusion is consistent with Mexican Light & Power Co. v. Texas Mexi
can R. Co., 331 U. S. 731, where the Court held that a bill of lading
issued by a subsequent rail carrier when the “initial carrier” has is
sued a through bill is “void” unless it “represents the initiation of a
new shipment,” id., at 733–734. And Reider, supra, is not to the con
trary. There, absent a through bill of lading, the original journey
from Argentina terminated at the port of New Orleans, and the first
rail carrier in the United States was the receiving rail carrier for
Carmack purposes. Id., at 117. Carmack’s second sentence estab
lishes that it applies only to transport of property for which a receiv
ing carrier is required to issue a bill of lading, regardless of whether
that carrier actually issues such a bill. See §11706(a). Thus, Car
mack applies only if the journey begins with a receiving rail carrier
that had to issue a compliant bill of lading, not if the property is re
ceived at an overseas location under a through bill that covers trans
port into an inland location in this country. The initial carrier in that
instance receives the property at the shipment’s point of origin for
overseas multimodal import transport, not domestic rail transport.
Carmack did not require “K” Line to issue bills of lading because “K”
Line was not a receiving rail carrier. That it chose to use rail trans
port to complete one segment of the journey under its “essentially
maritime” contracts, Kirby, supra, at 24, does not put it within Car
mack’s reach. Union Pacific, which the cargo owners concede was a
mere delivering carrier that did not have to issue its own Carmack
bill of lading, was also not a receiving rail carrier under Carmack.
Because the Ninth Circuit ignored Carmack’s “receive[d] . . . for
transportation” limitation, it reached the wrong conclusion. Its con
clusion is also an awkward fit with Carmack’s venue provisions,
which presume that the receiving carrier obtains the property in a
judicial district within the United States. If “K” Line were a receiv
ing carrier in a case with a “point of origin” in China, there would be
no place under Carmack to sue “K” Line, since China is not within a
judicial district “of the United States or in a State Court.”

