10

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Pacific, which is unquestionably a “rail carrier” in the
normal sense of those words, is also the “receiving carrier”
subject to liability under Carmack.4 Our opinion in Reider
v. Thompson, 339 U. S. 113 (1950), further supports this
reading. There we explained that the test for Carmack
applicability “is not where the shipment originated, but
where the obligation of the carrier as receiving carrier
originated.” Id., at 117. Because Carmack applies to
domestic rail transport, and the domestic rail carrier’s
obligation in that case arose in New Orleans where the
rail carrier received the goods, it did not matter that the
shipment began overseas in Buenos Aires. Similarly, in
the instant cases, because Union Pacific’s obligations to
transport by rail originated in California, it does not mat­
ter that the shipment began overseas in China.5
Second, the majority errs in suggesting that the issu­
ance of an international through bill of lading precludes
the applicability of Carmack. Cf. ante, at 10–11, 13. The
——————
4 The

majority suggests that respondents “conceded” at oral argument
that Union Pacific was not a receiving carrier but only a delivering
carrier. Ante, at 13. Of course, this Court is not bound by a party’s
concession in our interpretation of a statute. See, e.g., Massachusetts v.
United States, 333 U. S. 611, 624–625 (1948).
5 Contrary to Union Pacific’s suggestion, Brief for Petitioner in 08–
1554, p. 33, its obligations did not originate in China. “K” Line’s bills of
lading, issued in China, “entitled [“K” Line] to sub-contract on any
terms . . . all duties whatsoever undertaken,” App. 145, and therefore
did not create any obligation on the part of Union Pacific in China. In
turn, the agreement between “K” Line and Union Pacific—which “K”
Line made “by and through its duly authorized agent and representa­
tive in the United States, ‘K’ Line AMERICA, Inc. . . ., a Michigan
corporation,” id., at 120—was a multiyear contract committing “K” Line
to “tender to [Union Pacific] not less than 95% of its Container traffic,”
ibid., but did not actually commit “K” Line to deliver any particular
piece of cargo to Union Pacific. As “K” Line explains, then, “the Agree­
ment [with Union Pacific] was a ‘requirements’ contract, which did not
become effective as to any particular container until ‘K’ Line delivered
it” to Union Pacific in California. Brief for Petitioners in No. 08–1553,
p. 12.

