Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

low[ing], to the maximum extent possible, competition and
the demand for services to establish reasonable rates for
transportation by rail” and “minimiz[ing] the need for
Federal regulatory control” of the railroad industry. §101,
id., at 1897. Consistent with these goals, 49 U. S. C.
§§10502 and 10709 provide two options for contracting
around the requirements of the ICA.
Section 10502(a) provides that when certain conditions
are met, the Board “shall exempt,” “to the maximum
extent consistent with this part,” “a person, class of per­
sons, or a transaction or service” from either a particular
provision of Part A of the ICA or the entirety of that Part.
Section 10502(f) specifies that “[t]he Board may exercise
its authority under this section to exempt transportation
that is provided by a rail carrier as part of a continuous
intermodal movement.” Acting pursuant to this authority,
the Board has broadly exempted such transportation
“from the requirements of [the ICA].” 49 CFR §1090.2
(2009). The authority to issue broad exemptions, however,
is not unlimited. Under 49 U. S. C. §10502(e), “[n]o ex­
emption order issued pursuant to this section shall oper­
ate to relieve any rail carrier from an obligation to provide
contractual terms for liability and claims which are consis­
tent with the provisions of [Carmack],” although, at the
same time, “[n]othing . . . shall prevent rail carriers from
offering alternative terms.” Section 10502(g) further
limits the Board from exempting rail carriers from their
obligations to comply with certain employee protections
under Part A of the ICA.
In turn, under §10709(a), “[o]ne or more rail carriers
providing transportation subject to the jurisdiction of the
Board . . . may enter into a contract with one or more
purchasers of rail services to provide specified services
under specified rates and conditions.” Having signed such
a contract, a rail carrier “shall have no duty in connection
with services provided under such contract other than

