12

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

tion of the Board. Ante, at 14. I agree with the majority
that Carmack’s reach is narrower than the Board’s juris­
diction. The Board’s jurisdiction extends over transporta­
tion by rail carrier “in the United States between a place
in . . . the United States and a place in a foreign country,”
§10501(a)(2)(F), which indicates that it does not matter
whether the movement of the transportation is from the
United States to the foreign country or from the foreign
country to the United States.6 In contrast, Carmack ap­
plies only when a rail carrier first receives property in the
United States, §11706(a), and therefore would not apply to
a rail carrier originating in Canada and delivering in the
United States without transferring the property to a
domestic rail carrier.7 As long as there is a receiving rail
carrier in the United States, however, Carmack attaches.
Because the property at issue in these cases was received
in the United States for domestic transportation by Union
Pacific, Carmack governs the rail carrier’s liability.
Finally, the majority misunderstands the role I believe
Carmack liability plays in international shipments to the
United States. My reading of the statute would not “out­
law through shipments under a single bill of lading.”
——————
6 The ICA’s jurisdictional provision uses the term “foreign country” to
describe the Board’s jurisdiction, §10501(a)(2)(F), while Carmack uses
the term “adjacent foreign country” to describe the liability of connect­
ing carriers, §11706(a)(3). I find the difference between these terms to
be of no moment. Section 10501 describes the Board’s jurisdiction over
rail carriers, and it is impossible to have connecting rail lines between
the United States and a foreign country that is not adjacent. This
reading is confirmed by §10501(a)(2)(E), which refers to the Board’s
jurisdiction over transportation by railroad “in the United States
between a place in . . . the United States and another place in the
United States and a foreign country.” No rail transportation between
two places in the United States that is interrupted by rail transporta­
tion through a foreign country could be through a foreign country that
is anything but adjacent.
7 This situation is consistent with historical agreements between the
ICC and its Canadian counterpart. See infra, at 14–15.

