Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

majority’s contrary reading of the statute reflects four
fundamental errors.
First, the majority reads the term “receiving rail carrier”
in §11706(a) too narrowly. There is simply no basis in the
text of the statute to support the majority’s conclusion
that Carmack applies only when the first rail carrier in
the chain of transportation accepted the cargo at the
shipment’s point of origin. Cf. ante, at 10, 12. The two
cases the majority cites for this proposition are inapposite,
as neither addresses an international, multimodal ship­
ment in which the first leg of the trip was by ocean.2 In
St. Louis, I. M. & S. R. Co. v. Starbird, 243 U. S. 592, 594
(1917), the entire shipment was by rail from Arkansas to
New York City. And in Mexican Light & Power Co. v.
Texas Mexican R. Co., 331 U. S. 731, 732 (1947), the entire
shipment was by rail from Pennsylvania to Mexico. Given
that the first rail carrier was in each case the carrier that
received the goods from the shipper and issued a through
bill of lading, it is unsurprising that the Court, applying
Carmack, described that carrier as the “initial carrier.”
243 U. S., at 595; 331 U. S., at 733. But nothing in these
cases, and nothing in Carmack itself, requires that the
“receiving carrier” take the goods from the shipper at the
shipment’s point of origin.3
Instead, these cases are compatible with my view that
the “receiving carrier” is any rail carrier that first receives
cargo for transportation in the United States. Union
——————
2 The additional cases the United States cites for this proposition
suffer from this same flaw. See Brief for United States as Amicus
Curiae 27–28; Tr. of Oral Arg. 20.
3 Carmack’s venue provision refers to the “receiving rail carrier” as
the “originating rail carrier” and states that the proper venue for a
lawsuit against this carrier is “the judicial district in which the point of
origin is located.” §11706(d)(2)(A)(i). Especially because the focus of
Carmack is on transportation by rail, the phrase “point of origin” in this
context is best read as referring to the point of origin of the “originating
rail carrier[’s]” transportation, not the point of origin of the shipment.

