4

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Damage of Ocean Cargo, 40 J. Mar. L. & Com. 1, 13 (2009)
(hereinafter Train Wrecks).
The first sentence of
§11706(a) sets forth the circumstances in which a receiv­
ing rail carrier must issue a bill of lading: when property
is first “receive[d]” for domestic transportation. This
sentence does not define the full scope of Carmack liabil­
ity, however, as the penultimate sentence of §11706(a)
makes the absence of a bill of lading ultimately immate­
rial to the question of Carmack liability. Instead, the
second sentence of §11706(a) establishes Carmack’s ex­
pansive scope, explaining which carriers are subject to
Carmack liability: not only the rail carrier that receives
the property, but also “any other carrier that delivers the
property and is providing transportation or service subject
to the jurisdiction of the Board under this part.” Criti­
cally, that a rail carrier’s provision of “transportation or
service subject to the jurisdiction of the Board” is the
criterion that establishes liability under Carmack demon­
strates that Carmack’s scope must be considered in tan­
dem with the provision describing the Board’s jurisdiction
over rail carriage.
Under that provision, the Board has authority “over
transportation by rail carrier,” either when that transpor­
tation is “only by railroad” or when it is “by railroad and
water, when the transportation is under common control,
management, or arrangement for a continuous carriage or
shipment.” §10501(a)(1). Board jurisdiction over trans­
portation by rail carrier “applies only to transportation in
the United States,” not to transportation abroad.
§10501(a)(2). Within the United States, however, Board
jurisdiction exists broadly whenever that transportation is
“between,” inter alia, “a place in . . . a State and a place in
the same or another State as part of the interstate rail
network,” “a place in . . . the United States and another
place in the United States through a foreign country,” or
“a place in . . . the United States and a place in a foreign

