(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. ET AL. v. REGAL-

BELOIT CORP. ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1553. Argued March 24, 2010—Decided June 21, 2010*
Respondents (cargo owners) delivered to petitioners in No. 08–1553
(“K” Line) goods for shipping from China to inland United States des
tinations. “K” Line issued them four through bills of lading, i.e., bills
of lading covering both the ocean and inland portions of transport in
a single document. As relevant here, the bills contain a “Himalaya
Clause,” which extends the bills’ defenses and liability limitations to
subcontractors; permit “K” Line to subcontract to complete the jour
ney; provide that the entire journey is governed by the Carriage of
Goods by Sea Act (COGSA), which regulates bills of lading issued by
ocean carriers engaged in foreign trade; and designate a Tokyo court
as the venue for any dispute. “K” Line arranged the journey, subcon
tracting with petitioner in No. 08–1554 (Union Pacific) for rail ship
ment in the United States. The cargo was shipped in “K” Line ves
sels to California and then loaded onto a Union Pacific train. A
derailment along the inland route allegedly destroyed the cargo. Ul
timately, the Federal District Court granted the motion of Union Pa
cific and “K” Line to dismiss the cargo owners’ suits against them
based on the parties’ Tokyo forum-selection clause. The Ninth Cir
cuit reversed, concluding that that clause was trumped by the Car
mack Amendment governing bills of lading issued by domestic rail
carriers, which applied to the inland portion of the shipment.
Held: Because the Carmack Amendment does not apply to a shipment
originating overseas under a single through bill of lading, the parties’
——————
* Together with No. 08–1554, Union Pacific Railroad Co. v. RegalBeloit Corp. et al., also on certiorari to the same Court.

