Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

subject hereto by the express provisions of [COGSA]”).
That Congress did not make the same provision for inland
travel is powerful evidence that it meant for Carmack to
remain the default regime on land governing the relation­
ship between an inland rail carrier and an overseas car­
rier with which it directly contracted.
The Court is also wrong that its interpretation avoids
the risk that two sets of rules will apply to the same ship­
ment at different times.13 Ante, at 17–18. Even under the
Court’s interpretation, two sets of rules may govern, be­
cause the parties need not extend COGSA to the inland
leg—they may agree on any terms they choose to cover
that transportation. §7, at 1180 (permitting the parties to
“ente[r] into any agreement . . . as to the responsibility and
liability of the carrier or the ship” for the period before the
goods are loaded on and after they are discharged from the
ship (emphasis added)); see also Train Wrecks 23
(“[C]arriers regularly include clauses in their bills of lad­
ing to limit their liability [for inland travel] in ways that
COGSA prohibits”); 1 T. Schoenbaum, Admiralty and
Maritime Law §10–4, p. 599–600 (4th ed. 2004) (describing
typical non-COGSA liability rules parties select for the
inland leg). In these cases, for example, “K” Line’s bills of
lading include certain terms governing the inland leg that
differ from the terms governing the ocean carriage. See,
e.g., App. 147 (providing different time frames within
which suit must be brought depending on whether the
actionable conduct “occurred during other than Water
Carriage”).
The Court relies heavily on Kirby as identifying the
relevant policy consideration in these cases, but it takes
——————
13 Nor

would my interpretation of the statute necessarily require that
two different regimes apply to each shipment, given the parties’ ability
to contract around Carmack as long as they follow appropriate proce­
dures, infra, at 25–27, and, if they so choose, select COGSA terms.

