2

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Syllabus
agreement to litigate these cases in Tokyo is binding. Pp. 4–21.
(a) COGSA, which “K” Line and Union Pacific contend governs
these cases, requires a carrier to issue to the cargo owner a bill con
taining specified terms. It does not limit the parties’ ability to adopt
forum-selection clauses. It only applies to shipments from United
States ports to foreign ports and vice versa, but permits parties to ex
tend certain of its terms “by contract” to cover “the entire period in
which [the goods] would be under [a carrier’s] responsibility, includ
ing [a] period of inland . . . transport.” Norfolk Southern R. Co. v.
James N. Kirby, Pty Ltd., 543 U. S. 14, 29. The Carmack Amend
ment, on which respondents rely, requires a domestic rail carrier that
“receives [property] for transportation under this part” to issue a bill
of lading. 49 U. S. C. §11706(a). “[T]his part” refers to the Surface
Transportation Board’s (STB’s) jurisdiction over domestic rail trans
portation. See §10501(b). Carmack assigns liability for damage on
the rail route to “receiving rail carrier[s]” and “delivering rail car
rier[s],” regardless of which carrier caused the damage. §11706(a).
Its purpose is to relieve cargo owners “of the burden of searching out
a particular negligent carrier from among the often numerous carri
ers handling an interstate shipment of goods.” Reider v. Thompson,
339 U. S. 113, 119. Thus, it constrains carriers’ ability to limit liabil
ity by contract, §11706(c), and limits the parties’ choice of venue to
federal and state courts. §11706(d)(1). Pp. 4–7.
(b) In Kirby, as in these cases, an ocean shipping company issued a
through bill of lading that extended COGSA’s terms to the inland
segment, and the property was damaged during the inland rail por
tion. This Court held that the through bill’s terms governed under
federal maritime law, notwithstanding contrary state laws, 543 U. S.,
at 23–27, explaining that “so long as a bill of lading requires substan
tial carriage of goods by sea, its purpose is to effectuate maritime
commerce,” id., at 27, and adding that “[a]pplying state law . . . would
undermine the uniformity of general maritime law,” id., at 28, and
defeat COGSA’s apparent purpose “to facilitate efficient contracting
in contracts for carriage by sea,” ibid. Here, as in Kirby, “K” Line is
sued through bills under COGSA, in maritime commerce, and ex
tended its terms to the journey’s inland domestic segment. Pp. 7–8.
(c) The Carmack Amendment’s text, history, and purposes make
clear that it does not require a different result. Pp. 8–21.
(1) Carmack divides the realm of rail carriers into receiving, de
livering, and connecting rail carriers. Its first sentence requires a
compliant bill of lading (1) if a rail carrier provid[es] transportation
or service subject to the [STB’s] jurisdiction” and (2) if that carrier
“receives” the property “for transportation . . . .” 11706(a). It thus
requires the receiving rail carrier—but not the delivering or connect

