18

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Opinion of the Court

occurs on land (Carmack). Rather than making claims by
cargo owners easier to resolve, a court would have to
decide where the damage occurred to determine which law
applied. As a practical matter, this requirement often
could not be met; for damage to the content of containers
can occur when the contents are damaged by rough han
dling, seepage, or theft, at some unknown point. See H.
Kindred & M. Brooks, Multimodal Transport Rules 143
(1997). Indeed, adopting the Court of Appeals’ approach
would seem to require rail carriers to open containers at
the port to check if damage has been done during the sea
voyage. This disruption would undermine international
container-based transport. The Court will not read Con
gress’ nonsubstantive recodification of Carmack in 1978 to
create such a drastic sea change in practice in this area.
Applying Carmack’s provisions to international import
shipping transport would also undermine the “purpose of
COGSA, to facilitate efficient contracting in contracts for
carriage by sea.” Kirby, supra, at 29. These cases provide
an apt illustration. The sophisticated cargo owners here
agreed to maritime bills of lading that applied to the
inland segment through the Himalaya Clause and author
ized “K” Line to subcontract for that inland segment “on
any terms whatsoever.” The cargo owners thus made the
decision to select “K” Line as a single company for their
through transportation needs, rather than contracting for
rail services themselves. The through bills provided the
liability and venue rules for the foreseeable event that the
cargo was damaged during carriage. Indeed, the cargo
owners obtained separate insurance to protect against any
excess loss. The forum-selection clause the parties agreed
upon is “an indispensable element in international trade,
commerce, and contracting” because it allows parties to
“agre[e] in advance on a forum acceptable” to them. The
Bremen v. Zapata Off-Shore Co., 407 U. S. 1, 13–14 (1972).
A clause of this kind is enforced unless it imposes a venue

