26

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

those duties specified by the terms of the contract.”
§10709(b). Once such a contract is made, that contract,
“and transportation under such contract, shall not be
subject to this part, and may not be subsequently chal­
lenged before the Board or in any court on the grounds
that such contract violates a provision of [Part A of the
ICA].” §10709(c)(1).
According to Union Pacific, §10502(e) limits only the
Board’s exemption ability; it does not place any affirma­
tive obligation on rail carriers to offer Carmack-compliant
terms. Rail carriers, Union Pacific contends, may opt out
of Carmack entirely simply by entering into a contract
under §10709, thus escaping any duty imposed by Part A
of the ICA. I disagree. I am persuaded by the Govern­
ment’s view that because the Board’s order in 49 CFR
§1090.2 exempted intermodal rail transportation from all
of Part A of the ICA, which includes 49 U. S. C. §10709,
“Union Pacific could not properly enter into a contract
under Section 10709 to relieve it of its obligations under
Section 10502(e).” Brief for United States 31. Those
obligations require “a rail carrier providing exempt trans­
portation [to] offer the shipper the option of contractual
terms for liability and claims consistent with Carmack,
presumably at a higher rate,” and they permit such a rail
carrier to “enter into a contract with different terms only if
the shipper does not select that option.” Id., at 30.
Observing that the Board’s exemption order relieves
intermodal rail transportation from the “requirements” of
Part A, Union Pacific contends that §10709 is not a re­
quirement but a privilege and therefore is not included
within the exemption. In clarifying its order, however, the
Board has described the exemption as one from “regula­
tion” under the ICA or “application” of that Act. See, e.g.,
Improvement of TOFC/COFC Regulations, 3 I. C. C. 2d, at
869–870. Especially in light of this clarification, there
seems little reason to ascribe significance to the Board’s

