10

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
BREYER, J., concurring

confronting witness); 3 W. Blackstone, Commentaries on
the Laws of England 373 (1768) (same). But the need for
cross-examination is considerably diminished when the
out-of-court statement was made by an accredited laboratory employee operating at a remove from the investigation in the ordinary course of professional work.
For one thing, as the hearsay exception itself reflects,
alternative features of such situations help to guarantee
its accuracy. An accredited laboratory must satisfy wellestablished professional guidelines that seek to ensure the
scientific reliability of the laboratory’s results. App. 59–
60, 74, 86–87; see Brief for National District Attorneys
Assn. et al. as Amici Curiae 25, n. 5 (hereinafter NDAA
Brief) (noting that the standards date back 30 years);
Giannelli, Regulating Crime Laboratories: The Impact of
DNA Evidence, 15 J. L. & Pol’y 59, 72–76 (2007). For
example, forensic DNA testing laboratories permitted to
access the FBI’s Combined DNA Index System must
adhere to standards governing, among other things, the
organization and management of the laboratory; education, training, and experience requirements for laboratory
personnel; the laboratory’s physical facilities and security
measures; control of physical evidence; validation of testing methodologies; procedures for analyzing samples,
including the reagents and controls that are used in the
testing process; equipment calibration and maintenance;
documentation of the process used to test each sample
handled by the laboratory; technical and administrative
review of every case file; proficiency testing of laboratory;
personnel; corrective action that addresses any discrepancies in proficiency tests and casework analysis; internal
and external audits of the laboratory; environmental
health and safety; and outsourcing of testing to vendor
laboratories. See Brief for New York County District
Attorney’s Office et al. as Amici Curiae 4, n. 4 (hereinafter
NY County DAO Brief); see also App. to NY County DAO

