4

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
KAGAN, J., dissenting

Roberts, 448 U. S. 56, 66 (1980). But in Crawford, we
concluded that our old approach was misguided. Drawing
on historical research about the Clause’s purposes, we
held that the prosecution may not admit “testimonial
statements of a witness who [does] not appear at trial
unless he [is] unavailable to testify, and the defendant . . .
had a prior opportunity for cross-examination.” 541 U. S.,
at 53–54. That holding has two aspects. First, the Confrontation Clause applies only to out-of-court statements
that are “testimonial.” Second, where the Clause applies,
it guarantees to a defendant just what its name suggests—the opportunity to cross-examine the person who
made the statement. See id., at 59.
A few years later, we made clear that Crawford’s rule
reaches forensic reports. In Melendez-Diaz v. Massachu­

setts, 557 U. S. 305 (2009), the Commonwealth introduced
a laboratory’s “ ‘certificates of analysis’ ” stating that a substance seized from the defendant was cocaine. Id., at
308. We held that the certificates fell within the Clause’s
“ ‘core class of testimonial statements’ ” because they had
a clear “evidentiary purpose”: They were “ ‘made under
circumstances which would lead an objective witness
reasonably to believe that [they] would be available for use
at a later trial.’ ” Id., at 310–311 (quoting Crawford, 541
U. S., at 51–52). Accordingly, we ruled, the defendant had
a right to cross-examine the analysts who had authored
them.
In reaching that conclusion, we rejected the
Commonwealth’s argument that the Confrontation Clause
should not apply because the statements resulted from
“ ‘neutral scientific testing,’ ” and so were presumptively
reliable. 557 U. S., at 318. The Clause, we noted,
commands that “ ‘reliability be assessed in a particular
manner’ ”—through “ ‘testing in the crucible of crossexamination.’ ” Id., at 317 (quoting Crawford, 541 U. S., at
61). Further, we doubted that the testing summarized
in the certificates was “as neutral or as reliable” as the

