6

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
BREYER, J., concurring

Lower courts and treatise writers have recognized the
problem. And they have come up with a variety of solutions. The New Wigmore, for example, lists several nonexclusive approaches to when testifying experts may rely
on testing results or reports by nontestifying experts (i.e.,
DNA technicians or analysts), including: (1) “the dominant
approach,” which is simply to determine the need to testify
by looking “the quality of the nontestifying expert’s report,
the testifying expert’s involvement in the process, and the
consequent ability of the testifying expert to use independent judgment and interpretive skill”; (2) permitting “a
substitute expert to testify about forensic science results
only when the first expert is unavailable” (irrespective of
the lack of opportunity to cross-examine the first expert,
cf. Crawford, supra, at 59); (3) permitting “a substitute
expert” to testify if “the original test was documented in a
thorough way that permits the substitute expert to evaluate, assess, and interpret it”; (4) permitting a DNA analyst
to introduce DNA test results at trial without having
“personally perform[ed] every specific aspect of each DNA
test in question, provided the analyst was present during
the critical stages of the test, is familiar with the process
and the laboratory protocol involved, reviews the results
in proximity to the test, and either initials or signs the
final report outlining the results”; (5) permitting the introduction of a crime laboratory DNA report without the
testimony of a technician where the “testing in its preliminary stages” only “requires the technician simply to
perform largely mechanical or ministerial tasks . . . absent
some reason to believe there was error or falsification”;
and (6) permitting introduction of the report without
requiring the technicians to testify where there is a showing of “genuine unavailability.” See D. Kaye, D. Bernstein, & J. Mnookin, The New Wigmore: Expert Evidence,
§§4.10.2, 4.10.3, pp. 202, 204, 206 (2d ed. 2010) (internal
quotation marks and footnote omitted); id., §4.11.6, at 24

