Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

29

Opinion of ALITO, J.

and witnesses by government officials ‘were sometimes
read in court in lieu of live testimony.’ ” Bryant, 562 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 6) (quoting Crawford, supra, at 43). The
Court has thus interpreted the Confrontation Clause as
prohibiting modern-day practices that are tantamount to
the abuses that gave rise to the recognition of the confrontation right. But any further expansion would strain the
constitutional text.
The abuses that the Court has identified as prompting
the adoption of the Confrontation Clause shared the following two characteristics: (a) they involved out-of-court
statements having the primary purpose of accusing a
targeted individual of engaging in criminal conduct and
(b) they involved formalized statements such as affidavits,
depositions, prior testimony, or confessions. In all but
one of the post-Crawford cases13 in which a Confrontation
Clause violation has been found, both of these characteristics were present. See Bullcoming, 564 U. S., at 308 (slip
op., at 3–4) (certified lab report having purpose of showing
that defendant’s blood-alcohol level exceeded legal limit);
Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S., at 308 (certified lab report
having purpose of showing that substance connected to
defendant contained cocaine); Crawford, supra, at 38
(custodial statement made after Miranda warnings that
shifted blame from declarant to accused).14 The one exception occurred in Hammon v. Indiana, 547 U. S. 813, 829–
832 (2006), which was decided together with Davis v.
Washington, but in Hammon and every other postCrawford case in which the Court has found a violation of
——————
13 Experience might yet show that the holdings in those cases should
be reconsidered for the reasons, among others, expressed in the dissents the decisions produced. Those decisions are not challenged in this
case and are to be deemed binding precedents, but they can and should
be distinguished on the facts here.
14 With respect to Crawford, see Davis, 547 U. S., at 840 (THOMAS, J.,
concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part).

