Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

KAGAN, J., dissenting

that manner, Lambatos became just like the surrogate
witness in Bullcoming—a person knowing nothing about
“the particular test and testing process,” but vouching for
them regardless. 564 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 12). We
have held that the Confrontation Clause requires something more.
The plurality also argues that Lambatos’s characterization of the Cellmark report did not violate the Confrontation Clause because the case “involve[d] a bench trial.”
Ante, at 19 (emphasis deleted). I welcome the plurality’s
concession that the Clause might forbid presenting Lambatos’s statement to a jury, see ante, at 18–19; it indicates
that the plurality realizes that her testimony went beyond
an “assumption.” But the presence of a judge does not
transform the constitutional question. In applying the
Confrontation Clause, we have never before considered
relevant the decisionmaker’s identity. See, e.g., Davis v.
——————
ern, streamlined way of answering hypothetical questions and therefore
raises no constitutional issue, see ante, at 2, 13–15; similarly, the
plurality contends that the difference between what Lambatos said and
what I would allow involves only “slightly revis[ing]” her testimony and
so can be of no consequence, see ante, at 18, n. 3. But the statement “if
X is true, then Y follows” differs materially—and constitutionally—
from the statement “Y is true because X is true (according to Z).” The
former statement is merely a logical proposition, whose validity the
defendant can contest by questioning the speaker. And then, assuming the prosecutor tries to prove the statement’s premise through some
other witness, the defendant can rebut that effort through crossexamination. By contrast, the latter statement as well contains a
factual allegation (that X is true), which the defendant can only effectively challenge by confronting the person who made it (Z). That is why
recognizing the difference between these two forms of testimony is not
to insist on an archaism or a formality, but to ensure, in line with the
Constitution, that defendants have the ability to confront their accusers. And if prosecutors can easily conform their conduct to that constitutional directive, as the plurality suggests, so much the better: I would
not have thought it a ground of complaint that the Confrontation
Clause, properly understood, manages to protect defendants without
overly burdening the State.

