10

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

‘[t]he seal of th[e] sample was received intact and broken
in the laboratory,’ that ‘the statements in [the analyst’s
block of the report] are correct,’ and that he had ‘followed
the procedures set out on the reverse of th[e] report.’ ”
Ibid.
The dissent insists that the Bullcoming report and
Cellmark’s report are equally formal, separated only by
such “minutia” as the fact that Cellmark’s report “is not
labeled a ‘certificate.’ ” Post, at 22–23 (opinion of KAGAN,
J.). To the contrary, what distinguishes the two is that
Cellmark’s report, in substance, certifies nothing. See supra, at 9. That distinction is constitutionally significant
because the scope of the confrontation right is properly
limited to extrajudicial statements similar in solemnity to
the Marian examination practices that the Confrontation
Clause was designed to prevent. See Davis, supra, at 835–
836 (opinion of THOMAS, J.). By certifying the truth of the
analyst’s representations, the unsworn Bullcoming report
bore “a ‘striking resemblance,’ ” 547 U. S., at 837 (quoting Crawford, 541 U. S., at 52), to the Marian practice in
which magistrates examined witnesses, typically on oath,
and “certif[ied] the results to the court.” Id., at 44. And,
in Melendez-Diaz, we observed that “ ‘certificates’ are
functionally identical to live, in-court testimony, doing
precisely what a witness does on direct examination.” 557
U. S., at 310–311. Cellmark’s report is marked by no such
indicia of solemnity.
Contrary to the dissent’s suggestion, acknowledging
that the Confrontation Clause is implicated only by formalized statements that are characterized by solemnity
will not result in a prosecutorial conspiracy to elude confrontation by using only informal extrajudicial statements
against an accused. As I have previously noted, the Confrontation Clause reaches bad-faith attempts to evade the
formalized process. See supra, at 9, n. 5 (quoting Davis,
547 U. S., at 838). Moreover, the prosecution’s use of

