14

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
KAGAN, J., dissenting

Washington, 547 U. S. 813 (2006). And this case would
be a poor place to begin. Lambatos’s description of the
Cellmark report was offered for its truth because that is
all such “basis evidence” can be offered for; as described
earlier, the only way the factfinder could consider whether
that statement supported her opinion (that the DNA on
L. J.’s swabs came from Williams) was by assessing the
statement’s truth. See supra, at 9–12. That is so, as a
simple matter of logic, whether the factfinder is a judge or
a jury. And thus, in either case, admission of the statement, without the opportunity to cross-examine, violates
the Confrontation Clause. See ante, at 3–4, n. 1 (opinion
of THOMAS, J.).
In saying that much, I do not doubt that a judge typically will do better than a jury in excluding such inadmissible evidence from his decisionmaking process. Perhaps
the judge did so here; perhaps, as the plurality thinks, he understood that he could not consider Lambatos’s representation about the Cellmark report, and found that other,
“circumstantial evidence” established “the source of the
sample that Cellmark tested” and “the reliability of the
Cellmark profile.” See ante, at 22–23. Some indications
are to the contrary: In delivering his verdict, the judge
never referred to the circumstantial evidence the plurality
marshals, but instead focused only on Lambatos’s testimony. See 4 Record JJJ151 (calling Lambatos “the best
DNA witness I have ever heard” and referring to Williams
as “the guy whose DNA, according to the evidence from
the experts, is in the semen recovered from the victim’s
vagina”). But I take the plurality’s point that when read
“[i]n context” the judge’s statements might be “best understood” as meaning something other than what they appear
to say. See ante, at 20, n. 6. Still, that point suggests only
that the admission of Lambatos’s statement was harmless—that the judge managed to put it out of mind. After
all, whether a factfinder is confused by an error is a sepa-

