Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

23

KAGAN, J., dissenting

To see the point, start with precedent, because the
Court rejected this same kind of argument, as applied to
this same kind of document, at around this same time
just last year. In Bullcoming, the State asserted that
the forensic report at issue was nontestimonial because—
unlike the report in Melendez-Diaz—it was not sworn
before a notary public. We responded that applying the
Confrontation Clause only to a sworn forensic report
“would make the right to confrontation easily erasable”—
next time, the laboratory could file the selfsame report
without the oath. 564 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 15). We
then held, as noted earlier, that “[i]n all material respects,” the forensic report in Bullcoming matched the one
in Melendez-Diaz. 564 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 15); see
supra, at 5. First, a law enforcement officer provided
evidence to a state laboratory assisting in police investigations. See 564 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 15). Second, the
analyst tested the evidence and “prepared a certificate
concerning the result[s].” Ibid. Third, the certificate was
“formalized in a signed document . . . headed a ‘report.’ ”
Ibid. (some internal quotation marks omitted). That was
enough.
Now compare that checklist of “material” features to the
report in this case. The only differences are that Cellmark
is a private laboratory under contract with the State
(which no one thinks relevant), and that the report is not
labeled a “certificate.” That amounts to (maybe) a nickel’s
worth of difference: The similarities in form, function, and
purpose dwarf the distinctions. See supra, at 5–6. Each
report is an official and signed record of laboratory test
results, meant to establish a certain set of facts in legal
proceedings. Neither looks any more “formal” than the
other; neither is any more formal than the other. See ibid.
The variances are no more (probably less) than would be
found if you compared different law schools’ transcripts
or different companies’ cash flow statements or different

