2

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
Opinion of ALITO, J.

ted as business records, stating that, according to the
records, vaginal swabs taken from the victim were sent to
and received back from Cellmark. The expert made no
other statement that was offered for the purpose of identifying the sample of biological material used in deriving
the profile or for the purpose of establishing how Cellmark
handled or tested the sample. Nor did the expert vouch
for the accuracy of the profile that Cellmark produced.
Nevertheless, petitioner contends that the expert’s testimony violated the Confrontation Clause as interpreted in
Crawford.
Petitioner’s main argument is that the expert went
astray when she referred to the DNA profile provided by
Cellmark as having been produced from semen found on
the victim’s vaginal swabs. But both the Illinois Appellate
Court and the Illinois Supreme Court found that this
statement was not admitted for the truth of the matter
asserted, and it is settled that the Confrontation Clause
does not bar the admission of such statements. See id., at
59–60, n. 9 (citing Tennessee v. Street, 471 U. S. 409
(1985)). For more than 200 years, the law of evidence has
permitted the sort of testimony that was given by the expert in this case. Under settled evidence law, an expert
may express an opinion that is based on facts that the
expert assumes, but does not know, to be true. It is then
up to the party who calls the expert to introduce other
evidence establishing the facts assumed by the expert.
While it was once the practice for an expert who based
an opinion on assumed facts to testify in the form of an answer to a hypothetical question, modern practice does not
demand this formality and, in appropriate cases, permits
an expert to explain the facts on which his or her opinion
is based without testifying to the truth of those facts. See
Fed. Rule Evid. 703. That is precisely what occurred in
this case, and we should not lightly “swee[p] away an
accepted rule governing the admission of scientific evi-

