Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

18th centuries were also advised by practice manuals to
take the ex parte examination of a witness even if his evidence was “weak” or the witness was “unable to inform
any material thing against” an accused. J. Beattie, Crime
and the Courts in England: 1660–1800, p. 272 (1986)
(internal quotation marks omitted). Thus, neither law nor
practice limited ex parte examinations to those witnesses
who made “inherently inculpatory” statements.
This requirement also makes little sense. A statement
that is not facially inculpatory may turn out to be highly
probative of a defendant’s guilt when considered with
other evidence. Recognizing this point, we previously
rejected the view that a witness is not subject to confrontation if his testimony is “inculpatory only when taken
together with other evidence.” Melendez-Diaz, supra, at
313. I see no justification for reviving that discredited
approach, and the plurality offers none.6
*
*
*
Respondent and its amici have emphasized the economic and logistical burdens that would be visited upon States
should every analyst who reports DNA results be required
to testify at trial. See, e.g., ante, at 32 (citing brief stating
that some crime labs use up to 12 technicians when testing a DNA sample). These burdens are largely the product of a primary purpose test that reaches out-of-court
statements well beyond the historical scope of the Confrontation Clause and thus sweeps in a broad range of
sources on which modern experts regularly rely. The
——————
6 The plurality states that its test “will not prejudice any defendant
who really wishes to probe the reliability” of out-of-court statements
introduced in his case because the person or persons who made the
statements “may always be subpoenaed by the defense and questioned
at trial.” Ante, at 4. Melendez-Diaz rejected this reasoning as well,
holding that the defendant’s subpoena power “is no substitute for the
right of confrontation.” 557 U. S., at 324.

