2

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
KAGAN, J., dissenting

Our Constitution contains a mechanism for catching
such errors—the Sixth Amendment’s Confrontation
Clause. That Clause, and the Court’s recent cases interpreting it, require that testimony against a criminal defendant be subject to cross-examination. And that command applies with full force to forensic evidence of the
kind involved in both the Kocak case and this one. In two
decisions issued in the last three years, this Court held
that if a prosecutor wants to introduce the results of forensic testing into evidence, he must afford the defendant
an opportunity to cross-examine an analyst responsible for
the test. Forensic evidence is reliable only when properly
produced, and the Confrontation Clause prescribes a particular method for determining whether that has happened. The Kocak incident illustrates how the Clause is
designed to work: Once confronted, the analyst discovered
and disclosed the error she had made. That error would
probably not have come to light if the prosecutor had
merely admitted the report into evidence or asked a third
party to present its findings. Hence the genius of an 18thcentury device as applied to 21st-century evidence: Crossexamination of the analyst is especially likely to reveal
whether vials have been switched, samples contaminated,
tests incompetently run, or results inaccurately recorded.
Under our Confrontation Clause precedents, this is
an open-and-shut case. The State of Illinois prosecuted
Sandy Williams for rape based in part on a DNA profile
created in Cellmark’s laboratory. Yet the State did not
give Williams a chance to question the analyst who produced that evidence. Instead, the prosecution introduced
the results of Cellmark’s testing through an expert witness who had no idea how they were generated. That
approach—no less (perhaps more) than the confrontationfree methods of presenting forensic evidence we have
formerly banned—deprived Williams of his Sixth Amendment right to “confron[t] . . . the witnesses against him.”

