Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of ALITO, J.

an expert is allowed to disclose the facts on which the
expert’s opinion is based even if the expert is not competent to testify to those underlying facts. She further argued that any deficiency in the foundation for the expert’s
opinion “[d]oesn’t go to the admissibility of [that] testimony,” but instead “goes to the weight of the testimony.”
App. 91.
The trial judge agreed with the prosecution and stated
that “the issue is . . . what weight do you give the test, not
do you exclude it.” Id., at 94. Accordingly, the judge
stated that he would not exclude Lambatos’ testimony,
which was “based on her own independent testing of the
data received from [Cellmark].” Id., at 94–95 (alteration
in original).
The trial court found petitioner guilty of the charges
against him. The state court of appeals affirmed in relevant part, concluding that Lambatos’ testimony did not
violate petitioner’s confrontation rights because the Cellmark report was not offered into evidence to prove the truth
of the matter it asserted. See 385 Ill. App. 3d, at 369,
895 N. E. 2d, at 969–970 (“Cellmark’s report was not
offered for the truth of the matter asserted; rather, it was
offered to provide a basis for Lambatos’ opinion”) The
Supreme Court of Illinois also affirmed. 238 Ill. 2d 125,
939 N. E. 2d 268 (2010). Under state law, the court noted,
the Cellmark report could not be used as substantive
evidence. When Lambatos referenced the report during
her direct examination, she did so “for the limited purpose
of explaining the basis for [her expert opinion],” not for the
purpose of showing “the truth of the matter asserted” by
——————
“The facts or data in the particular case upon which an expert bases
an opinion or inference may be those perceived by or made known to
the expert at or before the hearing. If of a type reasonably relied
upon by experts in the particular field in forming opinions or inferences
upon the subject, the facts or data need not be admissible in
evidence.”

