32

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
Opinion of ALITO, J.

their work will be. In some cases, a DNA profile may
provide powerful incriminating evidence against a person
who is identified either before or after the profile is completed. But in others, the primary effect of the profile is
to exonerate a suspect who has been charged or is under
investigation. The technicians who prepare a DNA profile
generally have no way of knowing whether it will turn out
to be incriminating or exonerating—or both.
It is also significant that in many labs, numerous technicians work on each DNA profile. See Brief for New York
County District Attorney’s Office et al. as Amici Curiae 6
(New York lab uses at least 12 technicians for each case);
People v. Johnson, 389 Ill. App. 3d 618, 627, 906 N. E. 2d
70, 79 (2009) (“[A]pproximately 10 Cellmark analysts were
involved in the laboratory work in this case”). When the
work of a lab is divided up in such a way, it is likely that
the sole purpose of each technician is simply to perform
his or her task in accordance with accepted procedures.
Finally, the knowledge that defects in a DNA profile
may often be detected from the profile itself provides a
further safeguard. In this case, for example, Lambatos
testified that she would have been able to tell from the
profile if the sample used by Cellmark had been degraded
prior to testing. As noted above, moreover, there is no real
chance that “sample contamination, sample switching,
mislabeling, [or] fraud” could have led Cellmark to produce a DNA profile that falsely matched petitioner. Post,
at 21 (KAGAN, J., dissenting). At the time of the testing,
petitioner had not yet been identified as a suspect, and
there is no suggestion that anyone at Cellmark had a
sample of his DNA to swap in by malice or mistake. And
given the complexity of the DNA molecule, it is inconceivable that shoddy lab work would somehow produce a DNA
profile that just so happened to have the precise genetic
makeup of petitioner, who just so happened to be picked
out of a lineup by the victim. The prospect is beyond

