Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

BREYER, J., concurring

knowledge of the fact upon Cellmark’s report. And the
defendant Williams had no opportunity to cross-examine
the individual or individuals who produced that report.
In its first conclusion, the plurality explains why it finds
that admission of Lambatos’ testimony nonetheless did not
violate the Confrontation Clause. That Clause concerns
out-of-court statements admitted for their truth. Ante,
at 15–16. Lambatos’ testimony did not introduce the
Cellmark report (which other circumstantial evidence
supported) for its truth. Ante, at 16–21. Rather, Lambatos used the Cellmark report only to indicate the underlying factual information upon which she based her
independent expert opinion. Ibid. Under well-established
principles of evidence, experts may rely on otherwise
inadmissible out-of-court statements as a basis for forming
an expert opinion if they are of a kind that experts in the
field normally rely upon. See Fed. Rule Evid. 703; Ill.
Rule Evid. 703. Nor need the prosecution enter those outof-court statements into evidence for their truth. That,
the Illinois courts held, is just what took place here. Ante,
at 9–10.
The dissent would abandon this well-established rule.
It would not permit Lambatos to offer an expert opinion
in reliance on the Cellmark report unless the prosecution
also produces one or more experts who wrote or otherwise
produced the report. I am willing to accept the dissent’s
characterization of the present rule as artificial, see post,
at 15–17 (opinion of KAGAN, J.), but I am not certain that
the dissent has produced a workable alternative, see
Bullcoming, supra, at ___ (KENNEDY, J., dissenting) (slip
op., at 7) (expressing similar view).
Once one abandons the traditional rule, there would
seem often to be no logical stopping place between requiring the prosecution to call as a witness one of the laboratory experts who worked on the matter and requiring the
prosecution to call all of the laboratory experts who did so.

