4

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

ment about whether this information is true.” D. Kaye, D.
Bernstein, & J. Mnookin, The New Wigmore: A Treatise
on Evidence: Expert Evidence §4.10.1, p. 196 (2d ed. 2011)
(hereinafter Kaye). “If the jury believes that the basis
evidence is true, it will likely also believe that the expert’s
reliance is justified; inversely, if the jury doubts the accuracy or validity of the basis evidence, it will be skeptical of
the expert’s conclusions.” Ibid.1
Contrary to the plurality’s suggestion, this commonsense conclusion is not undermined by any longstanding historical practice exempting expert basis testimony
from the rigors of the Confrontation Clause. Prior to the
adoption of the Federal Rules of Evidence in 1975, an
expert could render an opinion based only on facts that the
expert had personally perceived or facts that the expert
learned at trial, either by listening to the testimony of
other witnesses or through a hypothetical question based
on facts in evidence. See Advisory Committee’s Notes on
Fed. Rule Evid. 703, 28 U. S. C. App., p. 361; 29 C. Wright
& V. Gold, Federal Practice and Procedure §6271,
pp. 300–301 (1997) (hereinafter Wright); 1 K. Broun et al.,
McCormick on Evidence §14, p. 86 (6th ed. 2006) (hereinafter Broun); Kaye §4.6, at 156–157. In those situations,
there was little danger that the expert would rely on
testimonial hearsay that was not subject to confrontation
because the expert and the witnesses on whom he relied
were present at trial. It was not until 1975 that the uni——————
1 The plurality relies heavily on the fact that this case involved a
bench trial, emphasizing that a judge sitting as factfinder is presumed—more so than a jury—to “understand the limited reason for the
disclosure” of basis testimony and to “not rely on that information for
any improper purpose.” Ante, at 15. Even accepting that presumption,
the point is not that the factfinder is unable to understand the restricted
purpose for basis testimony. Instead, the point is that the purportedly “limited reason” for such testimony—to aid the factfinder in
evaluating the expert’s opinion—necessarily entails an evaluation of
whether the basis testimony is true.

