Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

Crawford, 541 U. S., at 50–51 (rejecting the view that the
Confrontation Clause applies only to in-court testimony).
Historical practice confirms that a declarant could
become a “witnes[s]” before the accused’s identity was
known. As previously noted, the confrontation right was
a response to ex parte examinations of witnesses in 16thcentury England. Such examinations often occurred after
an accused was arrested or bound over for trial, but some
examinations occurred while the accused remained “unknown or fugitive.” J. Langbein, Prosecuting Crime in the
Renaissance 90 (1974) (describing examples, including the
deposition of a victim who was swindled out of 20 shillings
by a “ ‘cunning man’ ”); see also 1 J. Stephen, A History of
the Criminal Law of England 217–218 (1883) (describing the sworn examinations of witnesses by coroners, who
were charged with investigating suspicious deaths by
asking local citizens if they knew “who [was] culpable
either of the act or of the force” (internal quotation marks
omitted)).
There is also little logical justification for the plurality’s
rule. The plurality characterizes Cellmark’s report as a
statement elicited by police and made by Cellmark not “to
accuse petitioner or to create evidence for use at trial,” but
rather to resolve the ongoing emergency posed by “a dangerous rapist who was still at large.” Ante, at 31. But, as
I have explained, that distinction is unworkable in light of
the mixed purposes that often underlie statements to the
police. See supra, at 12. The difficulty is only compounded by the plurality’s attempt to merge the purposes of both
the police and the declarant. See ante, at 29; Bryant,
supra, at ___–___ (majority opinion) (slip op., at 20–23).
But if one purpose must prevail, here it should surely be
the evidentiary one, whether viewed from the perspective
of the police, Cellmark, or both. The police confirmed the
presence of semen on L. J.’s vaginal swabs on February 15,
2000, placed the swabs in a freezer, and waited until

