Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

informal statements comes at a price. As the dissent
recognizes, such statements are “less reliable” than formalized statements, post, at 24, and therefore less persuasive to the factfinder. Cf. post, at 21–22, n. 6 (arguing that
prosecutors are unlikely to “forgo DNA evidence in favor of
less reliable eyewitness testimony” simply because the
defendant is entitled to confront the DNA analyst). But,
even assuming that the dissent accurately predicts an
upswing in the use of “less reliable” informal statements,
that result does not “turn the Confrontation Clause upside
down.” Post, at 24. The Confrontation Clause does not
require that evidence be reliable, Crawford, supra, at 61,
but that the reliability of a specific “class of testimonial
statements”—formalized statements bearing indicia of
solemnity—be assessed through cross-examination. See
Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S., at 309–310.
B
Rather than apply the foregoing principles, the plurality
invokes its “primary purpose” test. The original formulation of that test asked whether the primary purpose of an
extrajudicial statement was “to establish or prove past
events potentially relevant to later criminal prosecution.”
Davis, supra, at 822. I agree that, for a statement to be
testimonial within the meaning of the Confrontation
Clause, the declarant must primarily intend to establish
some fact with the understanding that his statement may
be used in a criminal prosecution. See Bryant, 562 U. S.,
at ___ (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (slip op., at 2–3). But this
necessary criterion is not sufficient, for it sweeps into the
ambit of the Confrontation Clause statements that lack
formality and solemnity and is thus “disconnected from
history.” Davis, supra, at 838–842 (opinion concurring in
judgment in part and dissenting in part); Bryant, supra, at
___ (opinion concurring in judgment) (slip op., at 1). In
addition, a primary purpose inquiry divorced from solem-

