Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of ALITO, J.

dence.” Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts, 557 U. S. 305,
330 (2009) (KENNEDY, J., dissenting).
We now conclude that this form of expert testimony does
not violate the Confrontation Clause because that provision has no application to out-of-court statements that
are not offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted.
When an expert testifies for the prosecution in a criminal
case, the defendant has the opportunity to cross-examine
the expert about any statements that are offered for their
truth. Out-of-court statements that are related by the
expert solely for the purpose of explaining the assumptions on which that opinion rests are not offered for their
truth and thus fall outside the scope of the Confrontation
Clause. Applying this rule to the present case, we conclude that the expert’s testimony did not violate the Sixth
Amendment.
As a second, independent basis for our decision, we also
conclude that even if the report produced by Cellmark had
been admitted into evidence, there would have been no
Confrontation Clause violation. The Cellmark report is
very different from the sort of extrajudicial statements,
such as affidavits, depositions, prior testimony, and confessions, that the Confrontation Clause was originally
understood to reach. The report was produced before any
suspect was identified. The report was sought not for the
purpose of obtaining evidence to be used against petitioner,
who was not even under suspicion at the time, but for
the purpose of finding a rapist who was on the loose. And
the profile that Cellmark provided was not inherently
inculpatory. On the contrary, a DNA profile is evidence
that tends to exculpate all but one of the more than 7
billion people in the world today. The use of DNA evidence to exonerate persons who have been wrongfully
accused or convicted is well known. If DNA profiles could
not be introduced without calling the technicians who
participated in the preparation of the profile, economic

