Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Syllabus
concurring in judgment). Pp. 1–16.
(a) There was no plausible reason for the introduction of Cellmark’s
statements other than to establish their truth. Pp. 1–8.
(1) Illinois Rule of Evidence 703 permits an expert to base his
opinion on facts about which he lacks personal knowledge and to disclose those facts to the trier of fact. Under Illinois law, such facts are
not admitted for their truth, but only to explain the basis of the expert’s opinion. See People v. Pasch, 152 Ill. 2d 133. But state evidence rules do not trump a defendant’s constitutional right to confrontation. This Court ensures that an out-of-court statement was
introduced for a “legitimate, nonhearsay purpose” before relying on
the not-for-its-truth rationale to dismiss the Confrontation Clause’s
application. See Tennessee v. Street, 471 U. S. 409, 417. Statements
introduced to explain the basis of an expert’s opinion are not introduced for a plausible nonhearsay purpose because, to use the basis
testimony in evaluating the expert’s opinion, the factfinder must consider the truth of the basis testimony. This commonsense conclusion
is not undermined by any historical practice exempting expert basis
testimony from the rigors of the Confrontation Clause. Before the
Federal Rules of Evidence were adopted in 1975, an expert could render an opinion based only on facts that the expert had personally perceived or learned at trial. In 1975, that universe of facts was expanded to include facts that the expert learned out of court by means
other than his own perception. The disclosure of such facts raises
Confrontation Clause concerns. Pp. 2–5.
(2) Those concerns are fully applicable here. In concluding that
petitioner’s DNA profile matched the profile derived from L. J.’s
swabs, Lambatos relied on Cellmark’s out-of-court statements that
its profile was in fact derived from those swabs, rather than from
some other source. Thus, the validity of Lambatos’ opinion ultimately turned on the truth of Cellmark’s statements. Pp. 5–7.
(b) These statements, however, were not “testimonial” for purposes
of the Confrontation Clause, which “applies to ‘witnesses’ against the
accused—in other words, those who ‘bear testimony.’ ” Crawford v.
Washington, 541 U. S. 36, 51. “ ‘Testimony,’ ” in turn, is “ ‘[a] solemn
declaration or affirmation made for the purpose of establishing or
proving some fact.’ ” Ibid. In light of its text, the Confrontation
Clause regulates only the use of statements bearing “indicia of solemnity.” Davis v. Washington, 547 U. S. 813, 836–837, 840 (opinion
of THOMAS, J.). This test comports with history because solemnity
marked the practices that the Confrontation Clause was designed to
eliminate, namely, the ex parte examination of witnesses under English bail and committal statutes. See id., at 835. Accordingly, the
Clause reaches “formalized testimonial materials,” such as deposi-

