Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

for purposes of the Confrontation Clause); see also Ohio v.
Roberts, 448 U. S. 56, 76 (1980) (recognizing that Barber
“explored the issue of constitutional unavailability” (emphasis added)). Likewise, we have held that limiting instructions may be insufficient in some circumstances to
protect against violations of the Confrontation Clause.
See Bruton v. United States, 391 U. S. 123 (1968).
Of particular importance here, we have made sure that
an out-of-court statement was introduced for a “legitimate,
nonhearsay purpose” before relying on the not-for-its-truth
rationale to dismiss the application of the Confrontation
Clause. See Street, 471 U. S., at 417 (emphasis added). In
Street, the defendant testified that he gave a false confession because police coerced him into parroting his accomplice’s confession. Id., at 411. On rebuttal, the prosecution introduced the accomplice’s confession to demonstrate
to the jury the ways in which the two confessions differed.
Id., at 411–412. Finding no Confrontation Clause problem, this Court held that the accomplice’s out-of-court
confession was not introduced for its truth, but only to
impeach the defendant’s version of events. Id., at 413–
414. Although the Court noted that the confession was
not hearsay “under traditional rules of evidence,” id., at
413, the Court did not accept that nonhearsay label at face
value. Instead, the Court thoroughly examined the use of
the out-of-court confession and the efficacy of a limiting
instruction before concluding that the Confrontation
Clause was satisfied “[i]n this context.” Id., at 417.
Unlike the confession in Street, statements introduced
to explain the basis of an expert’s opinion are not introduced for a plausible nonhearsay purpose. There is no
meaningful distinction between disclosing an out-of-court
statement so that the factfinder may evaluate the expert’s
opinion and disclosing that statement for its truth. “To
use the inadmissible information in evaluating the expert’s testimony, the jury must make a preliminary judg-

