Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of ALITO, J.

The substance was found to contain: Cocaine.” 557 U. S.,
at 308 (internal quotation marks omitted).
The Court held that the admission of these certificates,
which were executed under oath before a notary, violated
the Sixth Amendment. They were created for “the sole
purpose of providing evidence against a defendant,” id.,
at 323, and were “ ‘quite plainly affidavits,’ ” id., at 330
(THOMAS, J., concurring). The Court emphasized that the
introduction of the report to prove the nature of the substance found in the defendant’s possession was tantamount to “live, in-court testimony” on that critical fact and
that the certificates did “precisely what a witness does on
direct examination.” Id., at 311 (internal quotation marks
omitted). There was no doubt that the certificates were
used to prove the truth of the matter they asserted. Under state law, “the sole purpose of the affidavits was to
provide prima facie evidence of the composition, quality,
and the net weight of the analyzed substance.” Ibid.
(internal quotation marks omitted and emphasis deleted).
On these facts, the Court said, it was clear that the certificates were “testimonial statements” that could not be
introduced unless their authors were subjected to the “ ‘crucible of cross-examination.’ ” Id., at 311, 317 (quoting
Crawford, supra, at 61).
In Bullcoming, we held that another scientific report
could not be used as substantive evidence against the defendant unless the analyst who prepared and certified
the report was subject to confrontation. The defendant in
that case had been convicted of driving while intoxicated.
At trial, the court admitted into evidence a forensic report
certifying that a sample of the defendant’s blood had an
alcohol concentration of 0.21 grams per hundred milliliters, well above the legal limit. Instead of calling the
analyst who signed and certified the forensic report, the
prosecution called another analyst who had not performed
or observed the actual analysis, but was only familiar with

