Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

KAGAN, J., dissenting

rate question from whether an error has occurred. So the
plurality’s argument does not answer the only question
this case presents: whether a constitutional violation
happened when Lambatos recited the Cellmark report’s
findings.3
At bottom, the plurality’s not-for-the-truth rationale is a
simple abdication to state-law labels. Although the utility
of the Cellmark statement that Lambatos repeated logically depended on its truth, the plurality thinks this case
decided by an Illinois rule holding that the facts underlying an expert’s opinion are not admitted for that purpose.
See ante, at 14–18; People v. Pasch, 152 Ill. 2d 133, 175–
177, 604 N. E. 2d 294, 311 (1992). But we do not typically
allow state law to define federal constitutional requirements. And needless to say (or perhaps not), the Confron——————
3 The plurality asserts (without citation) that I am “reach[ing] the
truly remarkable conclusion that the wording of Lambatos’ testimony
confused the trial judge,” ante, at 19, and then spends three pages
explaining why that conclusion is wrong, see ante, at 19–21. But the
plurality is responding to an argument of its own imagining, because I
reach no such conclusion. As I just stated, the trial judge might well
have ignored Lambatos’s statement about the Cellmark report and
relied on other evidence to conclude that “the Cellmark profile was
derived from the sample taken from the victim,” ante, at 19. All I am
saying is that the admission of that statement violated the Confrontation Clause even if the judge ultimately put it aside, because it came
into evidence for nothing other than its truth. See supra, at 9–12.
Similarly, the plurality claims (still without citation) that I think the
other evidence about the Cellmark report insufficient, see ante, at 21.
But once again, the plurality must be reading someone else’s opinion. I
express no view on sufficiency of the evidence because it is irrelevant to
the Confrontation Clause issue we took this case to decide. It is the
plurality that wrongly links the two, spending another five pages
trumpeting the strength of the Cellmark report, see ante, at 22–24, 32–
33. But the plurality cannot properly decide whether a Confrontation
Clause violation occurred at Williams’s trial by determining that
Williams was guilty. The American criminal justice system works the
opposite way: determining guilt by holding trials in accord with constitutional requirements.

