Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

21

KAGAN, J., dissenting

profile,” ante, at 32; and “defects in a DNA profile may
often be detected from the profile itself,” ibid. See also
ante, at 10–14 (opinion of BREYER, J.). But once again:
Been there, done that. In Melendez-Diaz, this Court rejected identical arguments, noting extensive documentation of “[s]erious deficiencies . . . in the forensic evidence
used in criminal trials.” 557 U. S., at 319; see supra, at 4–
5; see also Bullcoming, 564 U. S., at ___, n. 1 (slip op., at 4,
n. 1) (citing similar errors in laboratory analysis); Brief for
Public Defender Service for the District of Columbia et al.
as Amici Curiae 13 (discussing “[s]ystemic problems,” such
as sample contamination, sample switching, mislabeling,
and fraud, at “ ‘flagship’ DNA labs”). Scientific testing is
“technical,” to be sure, ante, at 1 (opinion of BREYER, J.);
but it is only as reliable as the people who perform it.
That is why a defendant may wish to ask the analyst a
variety of questions: How much experience do you have?
Have you ever made mistakes in the past? Did you test
the right sample? Use the right procedures? Contaminate
the sample in any way? Indeed, as scientific evidence
plays a larger and larger role in criminal prosecutions,
those inquiries will often be the most important in the
case.6
——————
6 Both

the plurality and JUSTICE BREYER warn that if we require analysts to testify, we will encourage prosecutors to forgo DNA evidence in
favor of less reliable eyewitness testimony and so “increase the risk of
convicting the innocent.” Ante, at 13 (BREYER, J., concurring); see ante,
at 3–4 (plurality opinion). Neither opinion provides any evidence, even
by way of anecdote, for that view, and I doubt any exists. DNA evidence is usually the prosecutor’s most powerful weapon, and a prosecutor is unlikely to relinquish it just because he must bring the right
analyst to the stand. Consider what Lambatos told the factfinder here:
The DNA in L. J.’s vaginal swabs matched Williams’s DNA and would
match only “1 in 8.7 quadrillion black, 1 in 390 quadrillion white, or
1 in 109 quadrillion Hispanic unrelated individuals.” App. 56–57. No
eyewitness testimony could replace that evidence. I note as well that
the Innocence Network—a group particularly knowledgeable about the

