(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF ILLINOIS
No. 10–8505. Argued December 6, 2011—Decided June 18, 2012
At petitioner’s bench trial for rape, Sandra Lambatos, a forensic specialist at the Illinois State Police lab, testified that she matched a
DNA profile produced by an outside laboratory, Cellmark, to a profile
the state lab produced using a sample of petitioner’s blood. She testified that Cellmark was an accredited laboratory and that business
records showed that vaginal swabs taken from the victim, L. J., were
sent to Cellmark and returned. She offered no other statement for
the purpose of identifying the sample used for Cellmark’s profile or
establishing how Cellmark handled or tested the sample. Nor did
she vouch for the accuracy of Cellmark’s profile. The defense moved
to exclude, on Confrontation Clause grounds, Lambatos’ testimony
insofar as it implicated events at Cellmark, but the prosecution said
that petitioner’s confrontation rights were satisfied because he had
the opportunity to cross-examine the expert who had testified as to
the match. The prosecutor argued that Illinois Rule of Evidence 703
permitted an expert to disclose facts on which the expert’s opinion is
based even if the expert is not competent to testify to those underlying facts, and that any deficiency went to the weight of the evidence,
not its admissibility. The trial court admitted the evidence and found
petitioner guilty. Both the Illinois Court of Appeals and the State
Supreme Court affirmed, concluding that Lambatos’ testimony did
not violate petitioner’s confrontation rights because Cellmark’s report
was not offered into evidence to prove the truth of the matter
asserted.
Held: The judgment is affirmed.
238 Ill. 2d 125, 939 N. E. 2d 268, affirmed.
JUSTICE ALITO, joined by THE CHIEF JUSTICE, JUSTICE KENNEDY, and
JUSTICE BREYER, concluded that the form of expert testimony given in
this case does not violate the Confrontation Clause. Pp. 10–33.

