Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

“ ‘formalized testimonial materials,’ ” such as depositions,
affidavits, and prior testimony, or statements resulting
from “ ‘formalized dialogue,’ ” such as custodial interrogation. Bryant, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 2); see also Davis,
supra, at 836–837.5
Applying these principles, I conclude that Cellmark’s
report is not a statement by a “witnes[s]” within the meaning of the Confrontation Clause. The Cellmark report
lacks the solemnity of an affidavit or deposition, for it is
neither a sworn nor a certified declaration of fact. Nowhere does the report attest that its statements accurately
reflect the DNA testing processes used or the results obtained. See Report of Laboratory Examination, Lodging
of Petitioner. The report is signed by two “reviewers,” but
they neither purport to have performed the DNA testing
nor certify the accuracy of those who did. See ibid. And,
although the report was produced at the request of law
enforcement, it was not the product of any sort of formalized dialogue resembling custodial interrogation.
The Cellmark report is distinguishable from the laboratory reports that we determined were testimonial in
Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S. 305, and in Bullcoming v. New
Mexico, 564 U. S. ___ (2011). In Melendez-Diaz, the reports in question were “sworn to before a notary public
by [the] analysts” who tested a substance for cocaine. 557
U. S., at 308. In Bullcoming, the report, though unsworn,
included a “Certificate of Analyst” signed by the forensic
analyst who tested the defendant’s blood sample. 564
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 3). The analyst “affirmed that
——————
5 In addition, I have stated that, because the Confrontation Clause
“sought to regulate prosecutorial abuse occurring through use of
ex parte statements,” it “also reaches the use of technically informal
statements when used to evade the formalized process.” Davis, 547
U. S., at 838 (opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in
part). But, in this case, there is no indication that Cellmark’s statements were offered “in order to evade confrontation.” Id., at 840.

