Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

KAGAN, J., dissenting

Consider a prosaic example not involving scientific experts. An eyewitness tells a police officer investigating
an assault that the perpetrator had an unusual, starshaped birthmark over his left eye. The officer arrests a
person bearing that birthmark (let’s call him Starr) for
committing the offense. And at trial, the officer takes the
stand and recounts just what the eyewitness told him.
Presumably the plurality would agree that such testimony
violates the Confrontation Clause unless the eyewitness is
unavailable and the defendant had a prior opportunity to
cross-examine him. Now ask whether anything changes if
the officer couches his testimony in the following way: “I
concluded that Starr was the assailant because a reliable
eyewitness told me that the assailant had a star-shaped
birthmark and, look, Starr has one just like that.” Surely
that framing would make no constitutional difference,
even though the eyewitness’s statement now explains the
basis for the officer’s conclusion. It remains the case that
the prosecution is attempting to introduce a testimonial
statement that has no relevance to the proceedings apart
from its truth—and that the defendant cannot crossexamine the person who made it. Allowing the admission
of this evidence would end-run the Confrontation Clause,
and make a parody of its strictures.
And that example, when dressed in scientific clothing, is
no different from this case. The Cellmark report identified
the rapist as having a particular DNA profile (think of
it as the quintessential birthmark). The Confrontation
Clause prevented the State from introducing that report
into evidence except by calling to the stand the person who
prepared it. See Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S., at 310–311;
Bullcoming, 564 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 2). So the State
tried another route—introducing the substance of the report as part and parcel of an expert witness’s conclusion.
In effect, Lambatos testified (like the police officer above):
“I concluded that Williams was the rapist because Cell-

