12

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
KAGAN, J., dissenting

mark, an accredited and trustworthy laboratory, says
that the rapist has a particular DNA profile and, look,
Williams has an identical one.” And here too, that form
of testimony should change nothing. The use of the
Cellmark statement remained bound up with its truth,
and the statement came into evidence without any opportunity for Williams to cross-examine the person who made
it. So if the plurality were right, the State would have a
ready method to bypass the Constitution (as much as in
my hypothetical case); a wink and a nod, and the Confrontation Clause would not pose a bar to forensic evidence.
The plurality tries to make plausible its not-for-thetruth rationale by rewriting Lambatos’s testimony about
the Cellmark report. According to the plurality, Lambatos
merely “assumed” that Cellmark’s DNA profile came from
L. J.’s vaginal swabs, accepting for the sake of argument
the prosecutor’s premise. Ante, at 18. But that is incorrect. Nothing in Lambatos’s testimony indicates that she
was making an assumption or considering a hypothesis.
To the contrary, Lambatos affirmed, without qualification,
that the Cellmark report showed a “male DNA profile
found in semen from the vaginal swabs of [L. J.].” App.
56. Had she done otherwise, this case would be different.
There was nothing wrong with Lambatos’s testifying that
two DNA profiles—the one shown in the Cellmark report
and the one derived from Williams’s blood—matched each
other; that was a straightforward application of Lambatos’s expertise. Similarly, Lambatos could have added
that if the Cellmark report resulted from scientifically
sound testing of L. J.’s vaginal swab, then it would link
Williams to the assault. What Lambatos could not do was
what she did: indicate that the Cellmark report was produced in this way by saying that L. J.’s vaginal swab
contained DNA matching Williams’s.2 By testifying in
——————
2 The

plurality suggests that Lambatos’s testimony is merely a mod-

