26

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
Opinion of ALITO, J.

Cellmark report was not introduced into evidence. An
expert witness referred to the report not to prove the truth
of the matter asserted in the report, i.e., that the report
contained an accurate profile of the perpetrator’s DNA,
but only to establish that the report contained a DNA
profile that matched the DNA profile deduced from petitioner’s blood. Thus, just as in Street, the report was not to
be considered for its truth but only for the “distinctive and
limited purpose” of seeing whether it matched something
else. 471 U. S., at 417. The relevance of the match was
then established by independent circumstantial evidence
showing that the Cellmark report was based on a forensic
sample taken from the scene of the crime.
Our conclusion will not open the door for the kind of
abuses suggested by some of petitioner’s amici and the
dissent. See post, at 10–11; Brief for Richard D. Friedman
as Amicus Curiae 20–21. In the hypothetical situations
posited, an expert expresses an opinion based on factual
premises not supported by any admissible evidence, and
may also reveal the out-of-court statements on which the
expert relied.11 There are at least four safeguards to
——————
11 Both JUSTICE THOMAS and JUSTICE KAGAN quote statements in D.
Kaye, D. Bernstein, & J. Mnookin, The New Wigmore: Expert Evidence
§4.10.1, pp. 196–197 (2d ed. 2011) (hereinafter New Wigmore), that are
critical of the theory that an expert, without violating the Confrontation Clause, may express an opinion that is based on testimonial
hearsay and may, in some circumstances, disclose that testimonial
hearsay to the trier of fact. The principal basis for this criticism seems
to be the fear that juries, even if given limiting instructions, will view
the disclosed hearsay as evidence of the truth of the matter asserted.
See id., at 196, n. 36 (referring reader to the more detailed discussion in
Mnookin, Expert Evidence and the Confrontation Clause After Crawford v. Washington, 15 J. L. & Pol’y 791 (2007)); New Wigmore 197,
and n. 39 (citing jury cases); Mnookin, supra, at 802–804, 811–813.
This argument plainly has no application in a case like this one, in
which a judge sits as the trier of fact. In the 2012 Supplement of The
New Wigmore, the authors discuss the present case and criticize the
reasoning of the Illinois courts as follows:

