22

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
Opinion of ALITO, J.

As to legal relevance, the question before us is whether
petitioner’s Sixth Amendment confrontation right was
violated, not whether the State offered sufficient foundational evidence to support the admission of Lambatos’
opinion about the DNA match. In order to prove these
underlying facts, the prosecution relied on circumstantial
evidence, and the Illinois courts found that this evidence
was sufficient to satisfy state-law requirements regarding
proof of foundational facts. See 385 Ill. App. 3d, at 366–
368, 895 N. E. 2d, at 967–968; 238 Ill. 2d, at 138, 939 N. E.
2d, at 275. We cannot review that interpretation and
application of Illinois law. Thus, even if the record did not
contain any evidence that could rationally support a finding that Cellmark produced a scientifically reliable DNA
profile based on L. J.’s vaginal swab, that would not establish a Confrontation Clause violation. If there were no
proof that Cellmark produced an accurate profile based on
that sample, Lambatos’ testimony regarding the match
would be irrelevant, but the Confrontation Clause, as
interpreted in Crawford, does not bar the admission of
irrelevant evidence, only testimonial statements by declarants who are not subject to cross-examination.8
It is not correct, however, that the trial record lacks
admissible evidence with respect to the source of the sample that Cellmark tested or the reliability of the Cellmark profile. As to the source of the sample, the State
offered conventional chain-of-custody evidence, namely,
the testimony of the physician who obtained the vaginal
swabs, the testimony of the police employees who handled
and kept custody of that evidence until it was sent to
——————
8 Applying the Due Process Clause, we have held that a federal court
may determine whether a rational trier of fact could have found the
existence of all the elements needed for conviction for a state offense.
Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U. S. 307, 314 (1979), but petitioner has not
raised a due process claim. And in any event, L. J.’s identification of
petitioner as her assailant would be sufficient to defeat any such claim.

