Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

KAGAN, J., dissenting

the underlying facts from Cellmark’s report” not for their
truth, but “for the limited purpose of explaining the basis
for her [expert] opinion,” so that the factfinder could assess that opinion’s value. 238 Ill. 2d 125, 150, 939 N. E.
2d 268, 282 (2010). The plurality wraps itself in that
holding, similarly asserting that Lambatos’s recitation of
Cellmark’s findings, when viewed through the prism of
state evidence law, was not introduced to establish “the
truth of any . . . matter concerning [the] Cellmark” report.
Ante, at 16; see ante, at 2, 24–25. But five Justices agree,
in two opinions reciting the same reasons, that this
argument has no merit: Lambatos’s statements about
Cellmark’s report went to its truth, and the State could
not rely on her status as an expert to circumvent the
Confrontation Clause’s requirements. See ante, at 2–8
(opinion of THOMAS, J.).
To see why, start with the kind of case Crawford had in
mind. In acknowledging the not-for-the-truth carveout
from the Clause, the Court cited Tennessee v. Street as
exemplary. See Crawford, 541 U. S., at 59–60, n. 9.
There, Street claimed that his stationhouse confession of
murder was a sham: A police officer, he charged, had read
aloud his alleged accomplice’s confession and forced him to
repeat it. To help rebut that defense, the State introduced
the other confession into the record, so the jury could see
how it differed from Street’s. This Court rejected Street’s
Confrontation Clause claim because the State had offered
the out-of-court statement not to prove “the truth of
[the accomplice’s] assertions” about the murder, but only to
disprove Street’s claim of how the police elicited his confession. Street, 471 U. S., at 413. Otherwise said, the
truth of the admitted statement was utterly immaterial;
the only thing that mattered was that the statement
(whether true or false) varied from Street’s.
The situation could not be more different when a witness, expert or otherwise, repeats an out-of-court state-

