4

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
Syllabus
cepted for their truth, and that an expert’s opinion is only as good as
the independent evidence establishing its underlying premises.
Fourth, if the prosecution cannot muster independent admissible evidence to prove foundational facts, the expert’s testimony cannot be
given weight by the trier of fact. Pp. 25–27.
(e) Even if Cellmark’s report had been introduced for its truth,
there would have been no Confrontation Clause violation. The
Clause refers to testimony by “witnesses against” an accused, prohibiting modern-day practices that are tantamount to the abuses that
gave rise to the confrontation right, namely, (a) out-of-court statements having the primary purpose of accusing a targeted individual
of engaging in criminal conduct, and (b) formalized statements such
as affidavits, depositions, prior testimony, or confessions. These
characteristics were present in every post-Crawford case in which a
Confrontation Clause violation has been found, except for Hammon v.
Indiana, 547 U. S. 813. But, even in Hammon, the particular statement, elicited during police interrogation, had the primary purpose of
accusing a targeted individual. A person who makes a statement to
resolve an ongoing emergency is not like a trial witness because the
declarant’s purpose is to bring an end to an ongoing threat. Michigan
v. Bryant, 562 U. S. ___, ___. Such a statement’s admissibility “is the
concern of . . . rules of evidence, not the Confrontation Clause. ” Id.,
___–___ . The forensic reports in Melendez-Diaz and Bullcoming ran
afoul of the Confrontation Clause because they were the equivalent of
affidavits made for the purpose of proving a particular criminal defendant’s guilt. But the Cellmark report’s primary purpose was to
catch a dangerous rapist who was still at large, not to obtain evidence
for use against petitioner, who was neither in custody nor under suspicion at that time. Nor could anyone at Cellmark possibly know
that the profile would inculpate petitioner. There was thus no “prospect of fabrication” and no incentive to produce anything other than
a scientifically sound and reliable profile. Bryant, supra, at ___, ___.
Lab technicians producing a DNA profile generally have no way of
knowing whether it will turn out to be incriminating, exonerating, or
both. And with numerous technicians working on a profile, it is likely that each technician’s sole purpose is to perform a task in accordance with accepted procedures. The knowledge that defects in a DNA
profile may be detected from the profile itself provides a further safeguard. Pp. 28–33.
JUSTICE THOMAS concluded that the disclosure of Cellmark’s out-ofcourt statements through Lambatos’ expert testimony did not violate
the Confrontation Clause solely because Cellmark’s statements
lacked the requisite “formality and solemnity” to be considered “ ‘testimonial,’ ” see Michigan v. Bryant, 562 U. S. ___, ___ (THOMAS, J.,

