6

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

It is no answer to say that other nonhearsay evidence
established the basis of the expert’s opinion. Here, Lambatos disclosed Cellmark’s statements that it generated a
male DNA profile from L. J.’s swabs, but other evidence
showed that L. J.’s swabs contained semen and that the
swabs were shipped to and received from Cellmark. Ante,
at 5–6. That evidence did not render Cellmark’s statements superfluous. Of course, evidence that Cellmark
received L. J.’s swabs and later produced a DNA profile is
some indication that Cellmark in fact generated the profile
from those swabs, rather than from some other source (or
from no source at all). Cf. Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts, 557 U. S. 305, 319 (2009) (citing brief that describes
“cases of documented ‘drylabbing’ where forensic analysts
report results of tests that were never performed,” including DNA tests). But the only direct evidence to that effect
was Cellmark’s statement, which Lambatos relayed to the
factfinder. In any event, the factfinder’s ability to rely on
other evidence to evaluate an expert’s opinion does not
alter the conclusion that basis testimony is admitted for
its truth. The existence of other evidence corroborating
the basis testimony may render any Confrontation Clause
violation harmless, but it does not change the purpose of
such testimony and thereby place it outside of the reach of
the Confrontation Clause.4 I would thus conclude that
——————
that Lambatos conveyed went well beyond what was necessary to
explain why she performed the search. Lambatos did not merely
disclose that she received a DNA profile from Cellmark. Rather, she
further disclosed Cellmark’s statements that the profile was “male” and
that it was “found in semen from the vaginal swabs of [L. J.].” App. 56.
Those facts had nothing to do with her decision to conduct a search.
They were introduced for their truth.
4 The plurality concludes that the Confrontation Clause would not
be implicated here “even if the record did not contain any [other] evidence that could rationally support a finding that Cellmark produced a
scientifically reliable DNA profile based on L. J.’s vaginal swab.” Ante,
at 22. But, far from establishing a “legitimate” nonhearsay purpose for

