16

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
KAGAN, J., dissenting

tation Clause is a constitutional rule like any other. As
JUSTICE THOMAS observes, even before Crawford, we did
not allow the Clause’s scope to be “dictated by state or
federal evidentiary rules.” See ante, at 2. Indeed, in
Street, we independently reviewed whether an out-of-court
statement was introduced for its truth—the very question
at issue in this case. See 471 U. S., at 413–416. And in
Crawford, we still more firmly disconnected the Confrontation Clause inquiry from state evidence law, by overruling an approach that looked in part to whether an outof-court statement fell within a “ ‘firmly rooted hearsay
exception.’ ” 541 U. S., at 60 (quoting Roberts, 448 U. S., at
66). That decision made clear that the Confrontation
Clause’s protections are not coterminous with rules of
evidence. So the plurality’s state-law-first approach would
be an about-face.
Still worse, that approach would allow prosecutors to do
through subterfuge and indirection what we previously
have held the Confrontation Clause prohibits. Imagine
for a moment a poorly trained, incompetent, or dishonest
laboratory analyst. (The analyst in Bullcoming, placed on
unpaid leave for unknown reasons, might qualify.) Under
our precedents, the prosecutor cannot avoid exposing that
analyst to cross-examination simply by introducing his
report. See Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S., at 311. Nor can the
prosecutor escape that fate by offering the results through
the testimony of another analyst from the laboratory. See
Bullcoming, 564 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 2). But under
the plurality’s approach, the prosecutor could choose the
analyst-witness of his dreams (as the judge here said, “the
best DNA witness I have ever heard”), offer her as an
expert (she knows nothing about the test, but boasts impressive degrees), and have her provide testimony identical to the best the actual tester might have given (“the
DNA extracted from the vaginal swabs matched Sandy
Williams’s”)—all so long as a state evidence rule says that

