6

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
KAGAN, J., dissenting

rial respects.” 564 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 15). Once
again, the report was made to establish “ ‘some fact’ in a
criminal proceeding”—here, the identity of L. J.’s attacker.
Id., at ___ (slip op., at 14) (quoting Melendez-Diaz, 557
U. S., at 310); see infra, at 20. And once again, it details
the results of forensic testing on evidence gathered by the
police. Viewed side-by-side with the Bullcoming report,
the Cellmark analysis has a comparable title; similarly
describes the relevant samples, test methodology, and
results; and likewise includes the signatures of laboratory
officials. Compare Cellmark Diagnostics Report of Laboratory Examination (Feb. 15, 2001), Lodging of Petitioner
with App. in Bullcoming v. New Mexico, O. T. 2010, No.
09–10876, pp. 62–65. So under this Court’s prior analysis,
the substance of the report could come into evidence only
if Williams had a chance to cross-examine the responsible
analyst.
But that is not what happened. Instead, the prosecutor
used Sandra Lambatos—a state-employed scientist who
had not participated in the testing—as the conduit for this
piece of evidence. Lambatos came to the stand after two
other state analysts testified about forensic tests they had
performed. One recounted how she had developed a DNA
profile of Sandy Williams from a blood sample drawn after
his arrest. And another told how he had confirmed the
presence of (unidentified) semen on the vaginal swabs
taken from L. J. All this was by the book: Williams had
an opportunity to cross-examine both witnesses about the
tests they had run. But of course, the State still needed to
supply the missing link—it had to show that DNA found
in the semen on L. J.’s vaginal swabs matched Williams’s
DNA. To fill that gap, the prosecutor could have called the
analyst from Cellmark to testify about the DNA profile she
had produced from the swabs. But instead, the State
called Lambatos as an expert witness and had her testify
that the semen on those swabs contained Sandy Wil-

