24

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
Opinion of ALITO, J.

was not in any way dependent on the origin of the samples
from which the profiles were derived. Of course, Lambatos’ opinion would have lacked probative value if the prosecution had not introduced other evidence to establish the
provenance of the profiles, but that has nothing to do with
the truth of her testimony.
The dissent is similarly mistaken in its contention that
the Cellmark report “was offered for its truth because that
is all such ‘basis evidence’ can be offered for.” Post, at 13;
see also post, at 3 (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment)
(“[S]tatements introduced to explain the basis of an expert’s
opinion are not introduced for a plausible nonhearsay
purpose”). This view is directly contrary to the current
version of Rule 703 of the Federal Rules of Evidence,
which this Court approved and sent to Congress in 2000.
Under that Rule, “basis evidence” that is not admissible
for its truth may be disclosed even in a jury trial under
appropriate circumstances. The purpose for allowing this
disclosure is that it may “assis[t] the jury to evaluate
the expert’s opinion.” Advisory Committee’s 2000 Notes on
Fed. Rule Evid. 703, 28 U. S. C. App., p. 361. The Rule
703 approach, which was controversial when adopted,10 is
based on the idea that the disclosure of basis evidence can
help the factfinder understand the expert’s thought process and determine what weight to give to the expert’s
opinion. For example, if the factfinder were to suspect
that the expert relied on factual premises with no support
in the record, or that the expert drew an unwarranted
inference from the premises on which the expert relied,
then the probativeness or credibility of the expert’s opinion would be seriously undermined. The purpose of disclosing the facts on which the expert relied is to allay
these fears—to show that the expert’s reasoning was not
illogical, and that the weight of the expert’s opinion does
——————
10 See

Advisory Committee’s 2000 Notes on Rule 703, at 361.

