Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

19

KAGAN, J., dissenting

history of the Confrontation Clause. See ante, at 14–15
(opinion concurring in judgment). And it has no basis in
our precedents. We have previously asked whether a
statement was made for the primary purpose of establishing “past events potentially relevant to later criminal
prosecution”—in other words, for the purpose of providing
evidence. Davis, 547 U. S., at 822; see also Bullcoming,
564 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 14); Bryant, 562 U. S., at ___,
___ (slip op., at 14, 29); Melendez-Diaz, 557 U. S., at 310–
311; Crawford, 541 U. S., at 51–52. None of our cases has
ever suggested that, in addition, the statement must be
meant to accuse a previously identified individual; indeed,
in Melendez-Diaz, we rejected a related argument that
laboratory “analysts are not subject to confrontation because they are not ‘accusatory’ witnesses.” 557 U. S., at
313.
Nor does the plurality give any good reason for adopting
an “accusation” test. The plurality apparently agrees with
JUSTICE BREYER that prior to a suspect’s identification,
it will be “unlikely that a particular researcher has a
defendant-related motive to behave dishonestly.” Ante, at 12
(BREYER, J., concurring); see ante, at 31–32 (plurality
opinion). But surely the typical problem with laboratory
analyses—and the typical focus of cross-examination—has
to do with careless or incompetent work, rather than with
personal vendettas. And as to that predominant concern,
it makes not a whit of difference whether, at the time of
the laboratory test, the police already have a suspect.5
——————
5 Neither

can the plurality gain any purchase from the idea that a
DNA profile is not “inherently inculpatory” because it “tends to exculpate all but one of the more than 7 billion people in the world today.”
Ante, at 3; see ante, at 32. All evidence shares this feature: the more
inculpatory it is of a single person, the more exculpatory it is of the rest
of the world. The one is but the flipside of the other. But no one has
ever before suggested that this logical corollary provides a reason to
ignore the Constitution’s efforts to ensure the reliability of evidence.

