Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

23

Opinion of ALITO, J.

Cellmark, and the shipping manifests, which provided
evidence that the swabs were sent to Cellmark and then
returned to the ISP lab. In addition, as already discussed,
the match between the Cellmark profile and petitioner’s
profile was itself telling confirmation that the Cellmark
profile was deduced from the semen on the vaginal swabs.
This match also provided strong circumstantial evidence
regarding the reliability of Cellmark’s work. Assuming (for
the reasons discussed above) that the Cellmark profile
was based on the semen on the vaginal swabs, how could
shoddy or dishonest work in the Cellmark lab9 have resulted in the production of a DNA profile that just so
happened to match petitioner’s? If the semen found on the
vaginal swabs was not petitioner’s and thus had an entirely different DNA profile, how could sloppy work in the
Cellmark lab have transformed that entirely different
profile into one that matched petitioner’s? And without
access to any other sample of petitioner’s DNA (and recall
that petitioner was not even under suspicion at this time),
how could a dishonest lab technician have substituted petitioner’s DNA profile? Under the circumstances of this
case, it was surely permissible for the trier of fact to infer
that the odds of any of this were exceedingly low.
This analysis reveals that much of the dissent’s argument rests on a very clear error. The dissent argues that
Lambatos’ testimony could be “true” only if the predicate
facts asserted in the Cellmark report were true, and therefore Lambatos’ reference to the report must have been
used for the purpose of proving the truth of those facts.
See post, at 10–11. But the truth of Lambatos’ testimony,
properly understood, was not dependent on the truth of
any predicate facts. Lambatos testified that two DNA
profiles matched. The correctness of this expert opinion,
which the defense was able to test on cross-examination,
——————
9 See

post, at 18 (KAGAN, J., dissenting).

