2

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
Syllabus
(a) Before Crawford v. Washington, 541 U. S. 36, this Court took
the view that the Confrontation Clause did not bar the admission of
out-of-court statements that fell within a firmly rooted exception to
the hearsay rule. In Crawford, the Court held that such statements
could be “admitted only where the declarant is unavailable, and only
where the defendant has had a prior opportunity to cross-examine.”
Id., at 59. In both Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts, 557 U. S. 305,
and Bullcoming v. New Mexico, 564 U. S. ___, two of the many cases
that have arisen from Crawford, this Court ruled that scientific reports could not be used as substantive evidence against a defendant
unless the analyst who prepared and certified the report was subject
to confrontation. In each case, the report at issue “contain[ed] a testimonial certification, made in order to prove a fact at a criminal
trial.” 564 U. S., at ___–___. Here, in contrast, the question is the
constitutionality of allowing an expert witness to discuss others’
testimonial statements if those statements are not themselves admitted as evidence. Pp. 10–13.
(b) An expert witness may voice an opinion based on facts concerning the events at issue even if the expert lacks first-hand knowledge
of those facts. A long tradition in American courts permits an expert
to testify in the form of a “hypothetical question,” where the expert
assumes the truth of factual predicates and then offers testimony
based on those assumptions. See Forsyth v. Doolittle, 120 U. S. 73,
77. Modern evidence rules dispense with the need for hypothetical
questions and permit an expert to base an opinion on facts “made
known to the expert at or before the hearing,” though such reliance
does not constitute admissible evidence of the underlying information. Ill. Rule Evid. 703; Fed. Rule Evid. 703. Both Illinois and
Federal Rules bar an expert from disclosing the inadmissible evidence in jury trials but not in bench trials. This is important because
Crawford, while departing from prior Confrontation Clause precedent
in other respects, reaffirmed the proposition that the Clause “does
not bar the use of testimonial statements for purposes other than establishing the truth of the matter asserted.” 541 U. S., at 59, n. 9.
Pp. 13–16.
(c) For Confrontation Clause purposes, the references to Cellmark
in the trial record either were not hearsay or were not offered for the
truth of the matter asserted. Pp. 16–27.
(1) Petitioner’s confrontation right was not violated when Lambatos answered “yes” to a question about whether there was a match
between the DNA profile “found in semen from the vaginal swabs of
[L. J.]” and the one identified as petitioner’s. Under Illinois law, this
putatively offending phrase was not admissible for the purpose of
proving the truth of the matter asserted—i.e., that the matching

