28

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
Opinion of ALITO, J.

IV 

A

Even if the Cellmark report had been introduced for its
truth, we would nevertheless conclude that there was no
Confrontation Clause violation. The Confrontation Clause
refers to testimony by “witnesses against” an accused.
Both the noted evidence scholar James Henry Wigmore
and Justice Harlan interpreted the Clause in a strictly
literal sense as referring solely to persons who testify in
court, but we have not adopted this narrow view. It has
been said that “[t]he difficulty with the Wigmore-Harlan
view in its purest form is its tension with much of the
apparent history surrounding the evolution of the right of
confrontation at common law.” White v. Illinois, 502 U. S.
346, 360 (1992) (THOMAS, J., concurring). “[T]he principal
evil at which the Confrontation Clause was directed,” the
Court concluded in Crawford, “was the civil-law mode of
criminal procedure, and particularly its use of ex parte
examinations as evidence against the accused.” 541 U. S.,
at 50. “[I]n England, pretrial examinations of suspects
——————
realized while testifying at a pretrial hearing that there was an error in
the lab’s report and that the DNA profile attributed to the accused was
actually that of the victim. The lesson of this cautionary tale is nothing
more than the truism that it is possible for an apparently incriminating
DNA profile to be mistakenly attributed to an accused. But requiring
that the lab analyst or analysts who produced the DNA profile be called
as prosecution witnesses is neither sufficient nor necessary to prevent
such errors. Since samples may be mixed up or contaminated at many
points along the way from a crime scene to the lab, calling one or more
lab analysts will not necessarily catch all such mistakes. For example,
a mistake might be made by a clerical employee responsible for receiving shipments of samples and then providing them to the lab’s technicians. What is needed is for the trier of fact to make sure that the
evidence, whether direct or circumstantial, rules out the possibility of
such mistakes at every step along the way. And in the usual course of
authentication, defense counsel will have access to sufficient information to inquire into, question, or challenge the procedures used by a
laboratory if this seems to be a prudent and productive strategy.

