6

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
Opinion of ALITO, J.

DNA profiles from forensic samples such as blood and
semen. She then described how these DNA profiles could
be matched to an individual based on the individual’s
unique genetic code. In making a comparison between two
DNA profiles, Lambatos stated, it is a “commonly accepted”
practice within the scientific community for “one DNA
expert to rely on the records of another DNA expert.” App.
51. Lambatos also testified that Cellmark was an “accredited crime lab” and that, in her experience, the ISP lab
routinely sent evidence samples via Federal Express to
Cellmark for DNA testing in order to expedite the testing
process and to “reduce [the lab’s] backlog.” Id., at 49–50.
To keep track of evidence samples and preserve the chain
of custody, Lambatos stated, she and other analysts relied
on sealed shipping containers and labeled shipping manifests, and she added that experts in her field regularly
relied on such protocols. Id., at 50–51.
Lambatos was shown shipping manifests that were
admitted into evidence as business records, and she explained what they indicated, namely, that the ISP lab had
sent L. J.’s vaginal swabs to Cellmark, and that Cellmark
had sent them back, along with a deduced male DNA
profile. Id., at 52–55. The prosecutor asked Lambatos
whether there was “a computer match” between “the male
DNA profile found in semen from the vaginal swabs of
[L. J.]” and “[the] male DNA profile that had been identified” from petitioner’s blood sample. Id., at 55.
The defense attorney objected to this question for “lack
of foundation,” arguing that the prosecution had offered
“no evidence with regard to any testing that’s been done to
generate a DNA profile by another lab to be testified to by
this witness.” Ibid.
The prosecutor responded: “I‘m not getting at what
another lab did.” Id., at 56. Rather, she said, she was
simply asking Lambatos about “her own testing based on
[DNA] information” that she had received from Cellmark.

