12

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

nity is unworkable in practice. Davis, supra, at 839; Bryant, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 1). Statements to police are
often made both to resolve an ongoing emergency and to
establish facts about a crime for potential prosecution.
The primary purpose test gives courts no principled way to
assign primacy to one of those purposes. Davis, supra, at
839. The solemnity requirement is not only true to the
text and history of the Confrontation Clause, but goes a
long way toward resolving that practical difficulty. If a
statement bears the formality and solemnity necessary to
come within the scope of the Clause, it is highly unlikely
that the statement was primarily made to end an ongoing
emergency.
The shortcomings of the original primary purpose test
pale in comparison, however, to those plaguing the reformulated version that the plurality suggests today. The
new primary purpose test asks whether an out-of-court
statement has “the primary purpose of accusing a targeted
individual of engaging in criminal conduct.” Ante, at 29.
That test lacks any grounding in constitutional text, in
history, or in logic.
The new test first requires that an out-of-court statement be made “for the purpose of proving the guilt of
a particular criminal defendant.” Ante, at 30 (emphasis
added). Under this formulation, statements made “before
any suspect was identified” are beyond the scope of the
Confrontation Clause. See ante, at 3. There is no textual
justification, however, for limiting the confrontation right
to statements made after the accused’s identity became
known. To be sure, the Sixth Amendment right to confrontation attaches “[i]n . . . criminal prosecutions,” at
which time the accused has been identified and apprehended. But the text of the Confrontation Clause does not
constrain the time at which one becomes a “witnes[s].”
Indeed, we have previously held that a declarant may
become a “witnes[s]” before the accused’s prosecution. See

