18

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
KAGAN, J., dissenting

(2011) (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment) (slip op., at
2)). But we just last year treated as testimonial a forensic
report prepared by a “modern, accredited laboratory”;
indeed, we declared that the report at issue “fell within
the core class of testimonial statements” implicating the
Confrontation Clause. Bullcoming, 564 U. S., at ___ (slip
op., at 16) (internal quotation marks omitted); see Brief for
New Mexico Department of Health, Scientific Laboratory
Division as Amicus Curiae in Bullcoming, O. T. 2010, No.
09–10786, p. 1 (discussing accreditation). And although
the plurality is close, it is not quite ready (or able) to
dispense with that decision. See ante, at 29, n. 13 (“Experience might yet show that the holdings in [Bullcoming
and other post-Crawford] cases should be reconsidered”).
So the plurality must explain: What could support a distinction between the laboratory analysis there and the
DNA test in this case?4
As its first stab, the plurality states that the Cellmark
report was “not prepared for the primary purpose of accusing a targeted individual.” Ante, at 31. Where that test
comes from is anyone’s guess. JUSTICE THOMAS rightly
shows that it derives neither from the text nor from the
——————
4 JUSTICE BREYER does not attempt to distinguish our precedents,
opting simply to adhere to “the dissenting view set forth in MelendezDiaz and Bullcoming.” See ante, at 8 (concurring opinion). He principally worries that under those cases, a State will have to call to the
witness stand “[s]ix to twelve or more technicians” who have worked on
a report. See ante, at 5; see also ante, at 3, 16–18. But none of our
cases—including this one—has presented the question of how many
analysts must testify about a given report. (That may suggest that in
most cases a lead analyst is readily identifiable.) The problem in the
cases—again, including this one—is that no analyst came forward to
testify. In the event that some future case presents the multipletechnician issue, the Court can focus on “the broader ‘limits’ question”
that troubles JUSTICE BREYER, ante, at 7. But the mere existence of
that question is no reason to wrongly decide the case before us—which,
it bears repeating, involved the testimony of not twelve or six or three
or one, but zero Cellmark analysts.

