20

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
Opinion of ALITO, J.

the Illinois Appellate Court and the Illinois Supreme
Court viewed the record in this way, and we see no ground
for disagreement.6
Second, it is extraordinarily unlikely that any trial
judge would be confused in the way that the dissent posits.
That Lambatos was not competent to testify to the chain
of custody of the sample taken from the victim was a point
that any trial judge or attorney would immediately understand. Lambatos, after all, had absolutely nothing to do
with the collection of the sample from the victim, its subsequent handling or preservation by the police in Illinois,
or its shipment to and receipt by Cellmark. No trial judge
would take Lambatos’ testimony as furnishing “the missing link” in the State’s evidence regarding the identity of
the sample that Cellmark tested. See post, at 6 (opinion of
KAGAN, J.).
Third, the admissible evidence left little room for argument that the sample tested by Cellmark came from any
source other than the victim’s vaginal swabs.7 This is so
——————
6 The dissent finds evidence of the trial judge’s confusion in his
statement that petitioner is “ ‘the guy whose DNA, according to the
evidence from the experts, is in the semen recovered from the victim’s
vagina.’ ” Post, at 14 (emphasis added). The dissent interprets the
phrase “according to the evidence from the experts” as a reference to
what one expert, Lambatos, said about the origin of the sample that
Cellmark tested. In context, however, the judge’s statement is best
understood as attributing to Lambatos nothing more than the conclusion that there was a match between the two DNA profiles that were
compared. The foundational facts, that one of the profiles came from
the defendant and that the other came from “ ‘the semen recovered from
the victim’s vagina,’ ” were established not by expert testimony but by
ordinary chain-of-custody evidence.
7 Our point is not that admissible evidence regarding the identity of
the sample that Cellmark tested excuses the admission of testimonial
hearsay on this matter. Compare post, at 5–6 (THOMAS, J., concurring
in judgment), with post, at 14 (KAGAN, J., dissenting). Rather, our point
is that, because there was substantial (albeit circumstantial) evidence
on this matter, there is no reason to infer that the trier of fact must

