12

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
BREYER, J., concurring

event all parties had received the correctly labeled underlying laboratory data, see Clarke, Commentary, id., at
1201).
For another thing, the fact that the laboratory testing
takes place behind a veil of ignorance makes it unlikely
that a particular researcher has a defendant-related motive to behave dishonestly, say, to misrepresent a step in
an analysis or otherwise to misreport testing results. Cf.
Michigan v. Bryant, 562 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at
14) (discussing the “prospect of fabrication” as a factor in
whether the Confrontation Clause requires statements
“to be subject to the crucible of cross-examination”). The
laboratory here, for example, did not know whether its
test results might help to incriminate a particular defendant. Ante, at 32–33; cf. Melendez-Diaz, supra, at 310–311;
Bullcoming, 564 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 14).
Further, the statements at issue, like those of many
laboratory analysts, do not easily fit within the linguistic
scope of the term “testimonial statement” as we have used
that term in our earlier cases. As the plurality notes, in
every post-Crawford case in which the Court has found a
Confrontation Clause violation, the statement at issue had
the primary purpose of accusing a targeted individual.
Ante, at 29–31; see, e.g., Davis v. Washington, 547 U. S.
813, 822 (2006) (“primary purpose . . . is to establish or
prove past events potentially relevant to later criminal
prosecution”); Bryant, supra, at ___–___ (slip op., at 11–12)
(“primary purpose of creating an out-of-court substitute
for trial testimony”). The declarant was essentially an
adverse witness making an accusatory, testimonial statement—implicating the core concerns of the Lord Cobhamtype affidavits. But here the DNA report sought, not to
accuse petitioner, but instead to generate objectively a
profile of a then-unknown suspect’s DNA from the semen
he left in committing the crime. See ante, at 31–33.
Finally, to bar admission of the out-of-court records at

