Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

19

Opinion of ALITO, J.

gone to the jury.
This case, however, involves a bench trial and we must
assume that the trial judge understood that the portion of
Lambatos’ testimony to which the dissent objects was not
admissible to prove the truth of the matter asserted.4 The
dissent, on the other hand, reaches the truly remarkable
conclusion that the wording of Lambatos’ testimony confused the trial judge. Were it not for that wording, the
argument goes, the judge might have found that the prosecution failed to introduce sufficient admissible evidence
to show that the Cellmark profile was derived from the
sample taken from the victim, and the judge might have
disregarded the DNA evidence. This argument reflects a
profound lack of respect for the acumen of the trial judge.5
To begin, the dissent’s argument finds no support in the
trial record. After defense counsel objected to Lambatos’
testimony, the prosecutor made clear that she was asking
Lambatos only about “her own testing based on [DNA]
information” that she had received from Cellmark. App.
56. Recognizing that Lambatos’ testimony would carry
weight only if the underlying premises could be established, the judge noted that “the issue is . . . what weight
do you give the test [performed by Lambatos], not do you
exclude it.” Id., at 94. This echoes the old statement in
Beckwith that an expert’s opinion based on disputed premises “might not go for much; but still it [is] admissible
evidence.” 1 Camp., at 117, 170 Eng. Rep., at 897. Both
——————
4 We do not suggest that the Confrontation Clause applies differently
depending on the identity of the factfinder. Cf. post, at 14–15 (opinion
of KAGAN, J.). Instead, our point is that the identity of the factfinder
makes a big difference in evaluating the likelihood that the factfinder
mistakenly based its decision on inadmissible evidence.
5 See post, at 14 (opinion of KAGAN, J.) (“I do not doubt that a judge
typically will do better than a jury in excluding such inadmissible
evidence from his decisionmaking process. Perhaps the judge did so
here” (emphasis added)).

