14

WILLIAMS v. ILLINOIS
THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment

November 28, 2000, to ship them to Cellmark. App. 30–
34, 51–52. Cellmark, in turn, did not send its report to
the police until April 3, 2001, id., at 54, over a year
after L. J.’s rape. Given this timeline, it strains credulity
to assert that the police and Cellmark were primarily
concerned with the exigencies of an ongoing emergency,
rather than with producing evidence in the ordinary course.
In addition to requiring that an out-of-court statement
“targe[t]” a particular accused, the plurality’s new primary
purpose test also considers whether the statement is so
“inherently inculpatory,” ante, at 3, that the declarant
should have known that his statement would incriminate
the accused. In this case, the plurality asserts that “[t]he
technicians who prepare a DNA profile generally have no
way of knowing whether it will turn out to be incriminating or exonerating—or both,” ante, at 32, and thus “no one
at Cellmark could have possibly known that the profile
that it produced would turn out to inculpate petitioner,”
ante, at 31.
Again, there is no textual justification for this limitation
on the scope of the Confrontation Clause. In MelendezDiaz, we held that “[t]he text of the [Sixth] Amendment
contemplates two classes of witnesses—those against the
defendant and those in his favor.” 557 U. S., at 313–314.
We emphasized that “there is not a third category of witnesses, helpful to the prosecution, but somehow immune
from confrontation.” Id., at 314. Thus, the distinction
between those who make “inherently inculpatory” statements and those who make other statements that are
merely “helpful to the prosecution” has no foundation in
the text of the Amendment.
It is also contrary to history. The 16th-century Marian
statutes instructed magistrates to transcribe any information by witnesses that “ ‘shall be material to prove the
felony.’ ” See, e.g., 1 Stephen, supra, at 219 (quoting 1 & 2
Phil. & Mary, ch. 13 (1554)). Magistrates in the 17th and

