Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–846
_________________

UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. TOHONO O’ODHAM
NATION
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT

[April 26, 2011] 


JUSTICE GINSBURG, dissenting. 

I dissent from the Court’s immoderate reading of 28

U. S. C. §1500 and would affirm the Federal Circuit’s
judgment.
According to the Court, the Court of Federal Claims
(CFC) lacks subject-matter jurisdiction over the Tohono
O’odham Nation’s (Nation) claim because the Tribe was
simultaneously pursuing in the D. C. District Court an
action with “a common factual basis.” Ante, at 1. It mat
ters not, the Court holds, that to gain complete relief, the
Nation had to launch two suits, for neither of the two
courts whose jurisdiction the Tribe invoked could alone
provide full redress. See ante, at 8–9.
The Court concludes that “claim” or “cause of action,”
terms the Court considers synonymous as used in §1500,*
——————
* “ ‘Cause of action,’ ” the Court simultaneously states, “is the more
technical term.” Ante, at 5. If “more technical” means more precise,
clear or certain, the Court is incorrect. See United States v. Memphis
Cotton Oil Co., 288 U. S. 62, 67–68 (1933) (“A ‘cause of action’ may
mean one thing for one purpose and something different for another.”).
In its discourse on the term, the Court has fallen into an old error; the
drafters of the Federal Rules endeavored to “eliminate the unfortunate
rigidity and confusion surrounding the words ‘cause of action.’ ” 5 C.
Wright & A. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure §1216, p. 207 (3d
ed. 2004). Today’s invocation of a supposed particular or exact meaning
for the phrase risks reviving that confusion.


2

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

see ante, at 5, refers to “operative facts,” and not to the
remedies a plaintiff seeks. See ante, at 4. Section 1500
speaks of “the time when the cause of action . . . arose,” a
time antedating the commencement of suit. The Court
infers, therefore, that a “claim” or “cause of action” is
discrete from a pleading’s request for relief. See ante, at 4.
In fact, however, entitlement to relief is essential to the
existence of a claim or cause of action, which arises when a
person suffers a harm capable of judicial redress. See 2 J.
Story, Equity Jurisprudence §1521a, p. 741 (8th ed. 1861)
(“[T]he cause of action . . . arises when . . . the party has a
right to apply to a court . . . for relief.”).
A plaintiff may not, §1500 instructs, petition both the
CFC and a district court, invoking in each a distinct legal
theory appropriate to the forum, but seeking redress for a
single injury. When Congress bars a plaintiff from obtain
ing complete relief in one suit, however, and does not call
for an election of remedies, Congress is most sensibly read
to have comprehended that the operative facts give rise to
two discrete claims. Casman v. United States, 135 Ct. Cl.
647 (1956), as JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR spells out, see ante, at
5, is the paradigm case. There, a discharged federal em
ployee, complaining of wrongful termination, sought rein
statement in a district-court action and backpay in the
Court of Claims. Section 1500 does not stand in the way,
the Court of Claims held in Casman, when the plaintiff
suffered two distinct injuries, for which she seeks discrete
forms of relief within the exclusive competence of different
courts. See 135 Ct. Cl., at 649–650 (claim for backpay
“entirely different” from claim for reinstatement). The
Federal Circuit, in my view, rightly adhered to Casman in
Loveladies Harbor, Inc. v. United States, 27 F. 3d 1545
(1994) (en banc), and rightly did so in this case.
While I agree with much of JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s opin
ion concurring in the judgment, I do not agree with her
conclusion that §1500 bars the Nation’s CFC action.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR joins the Court’s judgment (although
not the Court’s reasoning) because the “Tohono O’odham
Nation seeks in the [CFC] . . . some of the same relief on
the same facts as it does in its pending District Court
action.” Ante, at 1 (emphasis added). But to the extent
that “the Nation’s two actions seek overlapping relief,”
ibid., a disposition less harsh would be in order. Ordinar
ily, when a plaintiff’s allegations and demands for relief
are excessive, her complaint is not instantly dismissed on
that account. Instead, she may seek leave to trim her
pleading, permission a court “should freely give . . . when
justice so requires.” Rule 15(a)(2) (CFC 2010). Cf. Rule
54(c) (CFC 2010) (judgment, other than default, need not
conform to demand for relief, but “should grant the relief
to which each party is entitled”).
As JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR and the Nation recognize, to
avoid both duplication and the running of the statute of
limitations, the CFC suit could be stayed while the com
panion District Court action proceeds. See ante, at 11;
Brief for Respondent 35. That is a common practice when
a prior action is pending. See Pennsylvania R. Co. v.
United States, 363 U. S. 202, 204–206 (1960) (instructing
Court of Claims to stay pending proceedings to enable
litigant to obtain District Court review of relevant agency
order); Creppel v. United States, 41 F. 3d 627, 633 (CA
Fed. 1994) (“[T]he Court of Federal Claims may stay a
takings action pending completion of a related action in a
district court.”).
Why is this Court not positioned to direct the CFC to
disregard requests for relief simultaneously sought in a
district-court action, or at least to recognize that an
amended CFC complaint could save the case? I see no
impediment to either course, in §1500 or any other law or
rule.

