Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–846
_________________

UNITED STATES, PETITIONER v. TOHONO O’ODHAM
NATION
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT

[April 26, 2011] 


JUSTICE KENNEDY delivered the opinion of the Court.
The Tohono O’odham Nation is an Indian Tribe with
federal recognition. The Nation’s main reservation is in
the Sonoran desert of southern Arizona. Counting this
and other reservation lands, the Nation’s landholdings are
approximately 3 million acres.
The Nation brought two actions based on the same
alleged violations of fiduciary duty with respect to the
Nation’s lands and other assets. One action was filed
against federal officials in district court and the other
against the United States in the Court of Federal Claims
(CFC). The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit held
that the CFC suit was not barred by the rule that the CFC
lacks jurisdiction over an action “for or in respect to” a
claim that is also the subject of an action pending in an
other court. 28 U. S. C. §1500. The question presented is
whether a common factual basis like the one apparent in
the Nation’s suits suffices to bar jurisdiction under §1500.
I
The case turns on the relationship between the two suits
the Nation filed. The first suit was filed in the United


2

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
Opinion of the Court

States District Court for the District of Columbia against
federal officials responsible for managing tribal assets
held in trust by the Federal Government. The complaint
alleged various violations of fiduciary duty with respect to
those assets. The Nation claimed, for example, that the
officials failed to provide an accurate accounting of trust
property; to refrain from self-dealing; or to use reasonable
skill in investing trust assets. The complaint requested
equitable relief, including an accounting.
The next day the Nation filed the instant action against
the United States in the CFC. The CFC complaint de
scribed the same trust assets and the same fiduciary
duties that were the subject of the District Court com
plaint. And it alleged almost identical violations of fiduci
ary duty, for which it requested money damages. The CFC
case was dismissed under §1500 for want of jurisdiction.
A divided panel of the Court of Appeals for the Federal
Circuit reversed. 559 F. 3d 1284 (2009). Two suits are for
or in respect to the same claim, it reasoned, only if they
share operative facts and also seek overlapping relief.
Finding no overlap in the relief requested, the court held
that the two suits at issue were not for or in respect to the
same claim.
This Court granted certiorari. 559 U. S. ___ (2010).
II
Since 1868, Congress has restricted the jurisdiction of
the CFC and its predecessors when related actions are
pending elsewhere. Section 1500, identical in most re
spects to the original statute, provides:
“The United States Court of Federal Claims shall
not have jurisdiction of any claim for or in respect to
which the plaintiff or his assignee has pending in any
other court any suit or process against the United
States or any person who, at the time when the cause


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

of action alleged in such suit or process arose, was, in
respect thereto, acting or professing to act, directly or
indirectly under the authority of the United States.”
The rule is more straightforward than its complex wording
suggests. The CFC has no jurisdiction over a claim if the
plaintiff has another suit for or in respect to that claim
pending against the United States or its agents.
The question to be resolved is what it means for two
suits to be “for or in respect to” the same claim. Keene
Corp. v. United States, 508 U. S. 200 (1993), provided a
partial answer. It held that two suits are for or in respect
to the same claim when they are “based on substantially
the same operative facts . . . , at least if there [is] some
overlap in the relief requested.” Id., at 212. The Keene
case did not decide whether the jurisdictional bar also
operates if the suits are based on the same operative facts
but do not seek overlapping relief. Still, Keene narrows
the permissible constructions of “for or in respect to” a
claim to one of two interpretations. Either it requires
substantial factual and some remedial overlap, or it re
quires substantial factual overlap without more.
Congress first enacted the jurisdictional bar now codi
fied in §1500 to curb duplicate lawsuits brought by resi
dents of the Confederacy following the Civil War. The
so-called “cotton claimants”—named for their suits to
recover for cotton taken by the Federal Government—sued
the United States in the Court of Claims under the Aban
doned Property Collection Act, 12 Stat. 820, while at the
same time suing federal officials in other courts, seeking
relief under tort law for the same alleged actions. See
Keene, supra, at 206–207; Schwartz, Section 1500 of the
Judicial Code and Duplicate Suits Against the Govern
ment and Its Agents, 55 Geo. L. J. 573, 574–580 (1967).
Although the rule embodied in §1500 originated long ago,
Congress reenacted the statute at various times, most


4

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
Opinion of the Court

recently in 1948. See Act of June 25, 1948, 62 Stat. 942;
Keene, 508 U. S., at 206–207.
The text of §1500 reflects a robust response to the prob
lem first presented by the cotton claimants. It bars juris
diction in the CFC not only if the plaintiff sues on an
identical claim elsewhere—a suit “for” the same claim—
but also if the plaintiff’s other action is related although
not identical—a suit “in respect to” the same claim. The
phrase “in respect to” does not resolve all doubt as to the
scope of the jurisdictional bar, but “it does make it clear
that Congress did not intend the statute to be rendered
useless by a narrow concept of identity.” Id., at 213. It
suggests a broad prohibition, regardless of whether
“claim” carries a special or limited meaning. Cf. United
States v. Jones, 131 U. S. 1 (1889) (“claim” in the Little
Tucker Act refers only to requests for money).
Of the two constructions of “for or in respect to” the
same claim that Keene permits—one based on facts alone
and the other on factual plus remedial overlap—the for
mer is the more reasonable interpretation in light of the
statute’s use of a similar phrase in a way consistent only
with factual overlap. The CFC bar applies even where the
other action is not against the Government but instead
against a “person who, at the time when the cause of
action alleged in such suit or process arose, was, in respect
thereto, acting or professing to act, directly or indirectly
under the authority of the United States.” The statute
refers to a person who acts under color of federal law in
respect to a cause of action at the time it arose. But at
that time, the person could not act in respect to the relief
requested, for no complaint was yet filed. This use of the
phrase “in respect to a cause of action” must refer to op
erative facts and not whatever remedies an aggrieved
party might later request. A person acts under color of
federal law in respect to a cause of action by claiming or
wielding federal authority in the relevant factual context.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

Although the two phrases are not identical—one is in
respect to a claim, the other a cause of action—they are
almost so, and there is reason to think that both phrases
refer to facts alone and not to relief. As the Keene Court
explained, “the term ‘claim’ is used here synonymously
with ‘cause of action.’ ” 508 U. S., at 210. And if either of
the two phrases were to include both operative facts and a
specific remedy, it would be the one that uses the term
“cause of action” rather than “claim.” “Cause of action” is
the more technical term, while “claim” is often used in a
commonsense way to mean a right or demand. Here, for
the reasons stated in the preceding paragraph, “in respect
to a cause of action” refers simply to facts without regard
to judicial remedies. So, if the phrase with the more tech
nical of the two terms does not embrace the concept of
remedy, it is reasonable to conclude that neither phrase
does. Even if the terms “claim” or “cause of action” include
the request for relief, the phrase “for or in respect to” gives
the statutory bar a broader scope.
Reading the statute to require only factual and not also
remedial overlap makes sense in light of the unique reme
dial powers of the CFC. The CFC is the only judicial
forum for most non-tort requests for significant monetary
relief against the United States. See 28 U. S. C. §1491
(2006 ed. and Supp. III); §1346(a)(2) (2006 ed.). Unlike
the district courts, however, the CFC has no general power
to provide equitable relief against the Government or its
officers. Compare United States v. King, 395 U. S. 1, 2–3
(1969), with 5 U. S. C. §702; see also United States v.
Alire, 6 Wall. 573, 575 (1868) (“[T]he only judgments
which the Court of Claims are authorized to render
against the government . . . are judgments for money
found due from the government to the petitioner”). The
distinct jurisdiction of the CFC makes overlapping relief
the exception and distinct relief the norm. For that rea
son, a statute aimed at precluding suits in the CFC that


6

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
Opinion of the Court

duplicate suits elsewhere would be unlikely to require
remedial overlap.
Remedial overlap between CFC actions and those in
other courts was even more unusual when §1500’s rule
was first enacted in 1868. At that time the CFC had a
more limited jurisdiction than it does now, for the Tucker
Act’s general waiver of sovereign immunity for non-tort
claims for monetary relief had not yet been enacted. See
24 Stat. 505. And while the district courts can today
adjudicate suits against the United States for money
damages under the Little Tucker Act, 28 U. S. C.
§1346(a)(2), and the Federal Tort Claims Act §1346(b), in
1868 the United States could only be sued in the Court of
Claims. United States v. Mitchell, 463 U. S. 206, 212–214
(1983); G. Sisk, Litigation with the Federal Government
§4.02(a)(1) (4th ed. 2006). Because the kinds of suits and
forms of relief available against the United States were
few and constrained, remedial overlap between CFC suits
and those in other courts was even less common then than
now. If the statute were to require remedial as well as
factual overlap, it would have had very limited application
in 1868 despite its broad language that bars not only
identical but also related claims. The rule in §1500 effects
a significant jurisdictional limitation, and Congress reen
acted it even as changes in the structure of the courts
made suits on the same facts more likely to arise. Doing
so reaffirmed the force of the bar and thus the commit
ment to curtailing redundant litigation.
The panel of the Court of Appeals could not identify
“any purpose that §1500 serves today,” 559 F. 3d, at 1292,
in large part because it was bound by Circuit precedent
that left the statute without meaningful force. For exam
ple, the panel cited Tecon Engineers, Inc. v. United States,
170 Ct. Cl. 389, 343 F. 2d 943 (1965), which held that
§1500 does not prohibit two identical suits from proceed
ing so long as the action in the CFC, or at that time the


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

Court of Claims, is filed first. The Tecon holding is not
presented in this case because the CFC action here was
filed after the District Court suit.
Still, the Court of Appeals was wrong to allow its prece
dent to suppress the statute’s aims. Courts should not
render statutes nugatory through construction. In fact the
statute’s purpose is clear from its origins with the cotton
claimants—the need to save the Government from bur
dens of redundant litigation—and that purpose is no less
significant today. The conclusion that two suits are for or
in respect to the same claim when they are based on sub
stantially the same operative facts allows the statute to
achieve its aim. Keene, supra, at 206. Developing a fac
tual record is responsible for much of the cost of litigation.
Discovery is a conspicuous example, and the preparation
and examination of witnesses at trial is another. The form
of relief requested matters less, except insofar as it affects
what facts parties must prove. An interpretation of §1500
focused on the facts rather than the relief a party seeks
preserves the provision as it was meant to function, and it
keeps the provision from becoming a mere pleading rule,
to be circumvented by carving up a single transaction into
overlapping pieces seeking different relief. Cf. Casman v.
United States, 135 Ct. Cl. 647 (1956) (CFC had jurisdiction
notwithstanding common facts in district court suit be
cause the plaintiff sought different relief in each forum).
Concentrating on operative facts is also consistent with
the doctrine of claim preclusion, or res judicata, which
bars “repetitious suits involving the same cause of action”
once “a court of competent jurisdiction has entered a final
judgment on the merits.” Commissioner v. Sunnen, 333
U. S. 591, 597 (1948). The jurisdictional bar in §1500 was
enacted in part to address the problem that judgments in
suits against officers were not preclusive in suits against
the United States. Matson Nav. Co. v. United States, 284
U. S. 352, 355–356 (1932). So it is no surprise that the


8

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
Opinion of the Court

statute would operate in similar fashion. The now
accepted test in preclusion law for determining whether
two suits involve the same claim or cause of action de
pends on factual overlap, barring “claims arising from the
same transaction.” Kremer v. Chemical Constr. Corp., 456
U. S. 461, 482, n. 22 (1982); see also Restatement (Second)
of Judgments §24 (1980). The transactional test is of
course much younger than the rule embodied in §1500, but
even in the 19th century it was not uncommon to identify
a claim for preclusion purposes based on facts rather than
relief. See J. Wells, Res Adjudicata and Stare Decisis
§241, p. 208 (1878) (“The true distinction between de
mands or rights of action which are single and entire, and
those which are several and distinct, is, that the former
immediately arise out of one and the same act or contract,
and the latter out of different acts or contracts” (internal
quotation marks omitted)); 2 H. Black, Law of Judgments
§726, p. 866 (1891) (The test for identity is: “Would the
same evidence support and establish both the present and
the former cause of action?”). Reading §1500 to depend on
the underlying facts and not also on the relief requested
gives effect to the principles of preclusion law embodied in
the statute.
There is no merit to the Nation’s assertion that the
interpretation adopted here cannot prevail because it is
unjust, forcing plaintiffs to choose between partial reme
dies available in different courts. The hardship in this
case is far from clear. The Nation could have filed in the
CFC alone and if successful obtained monetary relief to
compensate for any losses caused by the Government’s
breach of duty. It also seems likely that Indian tribes in
the Nation’s position could go to district court first without
losing the chance to later file in the CFC, for Congress has
provided in every appropriations Act for the Department
of Interior since 1990 that the statute of limitations on
Indian trust mismanagement claims shall not run until


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

the affected tribe has been given an appropriate account
ing. See, e.g., 123 Stat. 2922; 104 Stat. 1930.
Even were some hardship to be shown, considerations of
policy divorced from the statute’s text and purpose could
not override its meaning. Although Congress has permit
ted claims against the United States for monetary relief in
the CFC, that relief is available by grace and not by right.
See Beers v. Arkansas, 20 How. 527, 529 (1858) (“[A]s this
permission is altogether voluntary on the part of the
sovereignty, it follows that it may prescribe the terms and
conditions on which it consents to be sued, and the man
ner in which the suit shall be conducted”). If indeed the
statute leads to incomplete relief, and if plaintiffs like the
Nation are dissatisfied, they are free to direct their com
plaints to Congress. This Court “enjoy[s] no ‘liberty to add
an exception . . . to remove apparent hardship.’ ” Keene,
508 U. S., at 217–218 (quoting Corona Coal Co. v. United
States, 263 U. S. 537, 540 (1924)).
Keene reserved the question whether common facts are
sufficient to bar a CFC action where a similar case is
pending elsewhere. To continue to reserve the question
would force the CFC to engage in an unnecessary and
complicated remedial inquiry, and it would increase the
expense and duration of litigation. The question thus
demands an answer, and the answer is yes. Two suits are
for or in respect to the same claim, precluding jurisdiction
in the CFC, if they are based on substantially the same
operative facts, regardless of the relief sought in each suit.
III
The remaining question is whether the Nation’s two
suits have sufficient factual overlap to trigger the jurisdic
tional bar. The CFC dismissed the action here in part
because it concluded that the facts in the Nation’s two
suits were, “for all practical purposes, identical.” 79 Fed.
Cl. 645, 656 (2007). It was correct to do so.


10

UNITED STATES v. TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
Opinion of the Court

The two actions both allege that the United States holds
the same assets in trust for the Nation’s benefit. They
describe almost identical breaches of fiduciary duty—that
the United States engaged in self-dealing and imprudent
investment, and failed to provide an accurate accounting
of the assets held in trust, for example. Indeed, it appears
that the Nation could have filed two identical complaints,
save the caption and prayer for relief, without changing
either suit in any significant respect.
Under §1500, the substantial overlap in operative facts
between the Nation’s District Court and CFC suits pre
cludes jurisdiction in the CFC. The Court of Appeals erred
when it concluded otherwise.
IV
The holding here precludes the CFC from exercising
jurisdiction over the Nation’s suit while the District Court
case is pending. Should the Nation choose to dismiss the
latter action, or upon that action’s completion, the Nation
is free to file suit again in the CFC if the statute of limita
tions is no bar. In the meantime, and in light of the sub
stantial overlap in operative facts between them, the two
suits are “for or in respect to” the same claim under §1500,
and the CFC case must be dismissed. The contrary judg
ment of the Court of Appeals is reversed, and the case is
remanded for further proceedings consistent with this
opinion.
It is so ordered.
JUSTICE KAGAN took no part in the consideration or
decision of this case.

