Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

KAGAN, J., dissenting

fisc and on those who contribute to it. Regardless of which
mechanism the State uses, taxpayers have an identical
stake in ensuring that the State’s exercise of its taxing
and spending power complies with the Constitution.7
Here, the mechanism Arizona has selected is a dollar
for-dollar tax credit to aid school tuition organizations.
Each year come April 15, the State tells Arizonans: Either
pay the full amount of your tax liability to the State, or
subtract up to $500 from your tax bill by contributing that
sum to an STO. See Winn I, 542 U. S., at 95. To claim the
credit, an individual makes a notation on her tax return
and splits her tax payment into two checks, one made out
to the State and the other to the STO. As this Court
recognized in Winn I, the STO payment is therefore “cost
less” to the individual, ibid.; it comes out of what she
otherwise would be legally obligated to pay the State—
hence, out of public resources. And STOs capitalize on
this aspect of the tax credit for all it is worth—which is
quite a lot. To drum up support, STOs highlight that
“donations” are made not with an individual’s own, but
with other people’s—i.e., taxpayers’—money. One STO
advertises that “[w]ith Arizona’s scholarship tax credit,
you can send children to our community’s [religious] day
schools and it won’t cost you a dime!” Brief for Respon
dents 13 (internal quotation marks and emphasis omit
ted). Another urges potential donors to “imagine giving [to
charity] with someone else’s money. . . . Stop Imagining,
——————
7 The majority indicates that some persons could challenge these
hypothetical government actions based on individualized injury, sepa
rate and apart from taxpayer status. See ante, at 1–2, 17–18. That is
quite right; indeed, some parents or children likely have standing to
challenge the Arizona tax credit on such grounds. But this possibility
does not detract from the point made here. The purpose of these
illustrations is to show that if taxpayer status is the thing alleged to
confer standing, it should do so irrespective of the form of the govern
ment subsidy.

