Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

KAGAN, J., dissenting

claim sought to be adjudicated,” ibid., could not be any
tighter: As noted when this Court previously addressed a
different issue in this lawsuit, the Plaintiffs invoke the
Establishment Clause to challenge “an integral part of the
State’s tax statute” that “is reflected on state tax forms”
and that “is part of the calculus necessary to determine
tax liability.” Hibbs v. Winn, 542 U. S. 88, 119 (2004)
(Winn I) (KENNEDY, J., dissenting) (emphasis added).
Finding standing here is merely a matter of applying
Flast. I would therefore affirm the Court of Appeals’
determination (not questioned even by the eight judges
who called for rehearing en banc on the merits) that the
Plaintiffs can pursue their claim in federal court.
II
The majority reaches a contrary decision by distinguish
ing between two methods of financing religion: A taxpayer
has standing to challenge state subsidies to religion, the
Court announces, when the mechanism used is an appro
priation, but not when the mechanism is a targeted tax
break, otherwise called a “tax expenditure.”1 In the for
mer case, but not in the latter, the Court declares, the
taxpayer suffers cognizable injury. Ante, at 14–15.
——————
1 “Tax expenditures” are monetary subsidies the government bestows
on particular individuals or organizations by granting them preferen
tial tax treatment. The co-chairmen of the National Commission on
Fiscal Responsibility and Reform recently referred to these tax breaks
as “the various deductions, credits and loopholes that are just spending
by another name.” Washington Post, Feb. 20, 2011, p. A19, col. 3; see
also 2 U. S. C. §622(3) (defining “tax expenditures,” for purposes of the
Federal Government’s budgetary process, as “those revenue losses
attributable to provisions of the . . . tax laws which allow a special
exclusion, exemption, or deduction from gross income or which provide
a special credit, a preferential rate of tax, or a deferral of tax liability”);
S. Surrey & P. McDaniel, Tax Expenditures 3 (1985) (explaining that
tax expenditures “represent government spending for favored activities
or groups, effected through the tax system rather than through direct
grants, loans, or other forms of government assistance”).

