20 ARIZONA CHRISTIAN SCHOOL TUITION ORGANIZATION v.
WINN
KAGAN, J., dissenting

Indeed, the majority’s new conception of injury is at
odds not merely with Flast, but also (if ironically) with our
cases precluding taxpayer standing generally. See supra,
at 3; ante, at 6–10. Today’s majority insists that legisla
tion challenged under the Establishment Clause must
“extrac[t] and spen[d] a conscientious dissenter’s funds.”
Ante, at 15. But we have rejected taxpayer standing in
other contexts because each taxpayer’s share of treasury
funds is “minute and indeterminable.” Frothingham, 262
U. S., at 487. No taxpayer can point to an expenditure (by
cash grant or otherwise) and say that her own tax dollars
are in the mix; in fact, they almost surely are not. “[I]t is,”
as we have noted, “a complete fiction to argue that an
unconstitutional . . . expenditure causes an individual . . .
taxpayer any measurable economic harm.” Hein, 551
U. S., at 593 (plurality opinion). That is as true in Estab
lishment Clause cases as in any others. Taxpayers have
standing in these cases despite their foreseeable failure to
show that the alleged constitutional violation involves
their own tax dollars, not because the State has used their
particular funds.
And something still deeper is wrong with the majority’s
“extract and spend” requirement: It does not measure
what matters under the Establishment Clause. Let us
indulge the Court’s fiction that a taxpayer’s
“.000000000001 penny” is somehow involved in an ordi
nary appropriation of public funds for religious activity
(thus supposedly distinguishing it from a tax expenditure).
Still, consider the following example: Imagine the Internal
Revenue Service places a checkbox on tax returns asking
filers if they object to the government using their taxes to
aid religion. If the government keeps “yes” money sepa
rate from “no” money and subsidizes religious activities
only from the nonobjectors’ account, the majority’s analy
sis suggests that no taxpayer would have standing to
allege a violation of the Establishment Clause. The funds

