18 ARIZONA CHRISTIAN SCHOOL TUITION ORGANIZATION v.
WINN
KAGAN, J., dissenting

the support of any one establishment, may force him to
conform to any other establishment in all cases whatso
ever.’ ” 392 U. S., at 103 (quoting 2 Writings of James
Madison 183, 186 (G. Hunt ed. 1901)); see ante, at 12–14.
And that is all the majority can come up with.
But as indicated earlier, everything of import in Flast
cuts against the majority’s position. Here is how Flast
stated its holding: “[W]e hold that a taxpayer will have
standing consistent with Article III to invoke federal
judicial power when he alleges that congressional action
under the taxing and spending clause is in derogation of”
the Establishment Clause. 392 U. S., at 105–106. Noth
ing in that straightforward sentence supports the idea
that a taxpayer can challenge only legislative action that
disburses his particular contribution to the state treasury.
And here is how Flast primarily justified its holding:
“[O]ne of the specific evils feared by those who drafted the
Establishment Clause and fought for its adoption was that
the taxing and spending power would be used to favor one
religion over another or to support religion in general.”
Id., at 103. That evil arises even if the specific dollars that
the government uses do not come from citizens who object
to the preference. Likewise, the two-part nexus test,
which is the heart of Flast’s doctrinal analysis, contains no
hint of an extraction requirement. See supra, at 4. And
finally, James Madison provides no comfort to today’s
majority. He referred to “three pence” exactly because it
was, even in 1785, a meaningless sum of money; then, as
today, the core injury of a religious establishment had
naught to do with any given individual’s out-of-pocket loss.
See infra, at 21–23 (further discussing Madison’s views).
So the majority is left with nothing, save for three words
Flast used to describe the particular facts in that case: In
not a single non-trivial respect could the Flast Court
recognize its handiwork in the majority’s depiction.
The injury to taxpayers that Flast perceived arose

