2

ARIZONA CHRISTIAN SCHOOL TUITION ORGANIZATION v.
WINN
Syllabus
complained of”; and a conclusion that it is “‘likely,’ as opposed to
merely ‘speculative,’ that the injury will be ‘redressed by a favorable
decision.’ ” Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U. S. 555, 560–561.
Pp. 4–6.
(b) In general, the mere fact that someone is a taxpayer does not
provide standing to seek relief in federal court. The typical assertion
of taxpayer standing rests on unjustifiable economic and political
speculation. See Frothingham v. Mellon, 262 U. S. 447; Doremus v.
Board of Ed. of Hawthorne, 342 U. S. 429. When a government ex
pends resources or declines to impose a tax, its budget does not nec
essarily suffer. Even assuming the State’s coffers are depleted, find
ing injury would require a court to speculate “that elected officials
will increase a taxpayer-plaintiff’s tax bill to make up a deficit.”
DaimlerChrysler Corp. v. Cuno, 547 U. S. 332, 344. And to find re
dressability a court must assume that, were the taxpayers’ remedy
allowed, “legislators [would] pass along the supposed increased reve
nue in the form of tax reductions.” Ibid. These conclusions apply to
the present cases. The costs of education may be a significant portion
of Arizona’s annual budget, but the tax credit, by facilitating the op
eration of both religious and secular private schools, could relieve the
burden on public schools and provide cost savings to the State. Even
if the tax credit had an adverse effect on Arizona’s budget, problems
would remain. To find a particular injury in fact would require
speculation that Arizona lawmakers react to revenue shortfalls by in
creasing respondents’ tax liability. A causation finding would depend
on the additional assumption that any tax increase would be trace
able to the STO tax credit. And respondents have not established
that an injunction against the credit’s application would prompt Ari
zona legislators to “pass along [any] increased revenue [as] tax reduc
tions.” Ibid. Pp. 6–10.
(c) Respondents’ suit does not fall within the narrow exception to
the rule against taxpayer standing established in Flast v. Cohen, su
pra. There, federal taxpayers had standing to mount an Establish
ment Clause challenge to a federal statute providing General Treas
ury funds to support, inter alia, textbook purchases for religious
schools. To have standing under Flast, taxpayers must show (1) a
“logical link” between the plaintiff’s taxpayer status “and the type of
legislative enactment attacked,” and (2) “a nexus” between such tax
payer status and “the precise nature of the constitutional infringe
ment alleged.” 392 U. S., at 102. Considering the two requirements
together, Flast explained that individuals suffer a particular injury
when, in violation of the Establishment Clause and by means of “the
taxing and spending power,” their property is transferred through
the Government’s Treasury to a sectarian entity. Id., at 105–106.

