Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
“The taxpayer’s allegation in such cases would be that his tax money
is being extracted and spent in violation of specific constitutional protections against such abuses of legislative power.” Id., at 106. The
STO tax credit does not visit the injury identified in Flast. When the
Government spends funds from the General Treasury, dissenting
taxpayers know that they have been made to contribute to an establishment in violation of conscience. In contrast, a tax credit allows
dissenting taxpayers to use their own funds in accordance with their
own consciences. Here, the STO tax credit does not “extrac[t] and
spen[d]” a conscientious dissenter’s funds in service of an establishment, 392 U. S., at 106, or “ ‘force a citizen to contribute’ ” to a sectarian organization, id., at 103. Rather, taxpayers are free to pay their
own tax bills without contributing to an STO, to contribute to a religious or secular STO of their choice, or to contribute to other charitable organizations. Because the STO tax credit is not tantamount to a
religious tax, respondents have not alleged an injury for standing
purposes. Furthermore, respondents cannot satisfy the requirements
of causation and redressability. When the government collects and
spends taxpayer money, governmental choices are responsible for the
transfer of wealth; the resulting subsidy of religious activity is, under
Flast, traceable to the government’s expenditures; and an injunction
against those expenditures would address taxpayer-plaintiffs’ objections of conscience. Here, by contrast, contributions result from the
decisions of private taxpayers regarding their own funds. Private
citizens create private STOs; STOs choose beneficiary schools; and
taxpayers then contribute to STOs. Any injury the objectors may suffer are not fairly traceable to the government. And, while an injunction most likely would reduce contributions to STOs, that remedy
would not affect noncontributing taxpayers or their tax payments.
Pp. 10–16.
(d) Respondents’ contrary position—that Arizonans benefiting from
the tax credit in effect are paying their state income tax to STOs—
assumes that all income is government property, even if it has not
come into the tax collector’s hands. That premise finds no basis in
standing jurisprudence. This Court has sometimes reached the merits
in Establishment Clause cases involving tax benefits as opposed to
governmental expenditures. See Mueller v. Allen, 463 U. S. 388;
Committee for Public Ed. & Religious Liberty v. Nyquist, 413 U. S. 756;
Hunt v. McNair, 413 U. S. 734; Walz v. Tax Comm’n of City of New
York, 397 U. S. 664. But those cases did not mention standing and so
do not stand for the proposition that no jurisdictional defects existed.
Moreover, it is far from clear that any nonbinding sub silentio standing
determinations in those cases depended on Flast, as there are other
ways of establishing standing in Establishment Clause cases involving
tax benefits. Pp. 16–18.

