Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

KAGAN, J., dissenting

whenever the legislature used its taxing-and-spending
power to channel tax dollars to religious activities. In that
and subsequent cases (including the five in this Court
involving tax expenditures), a taxpayer pleaded the requi
site harm by stating that public resources were funding
religion; the tracing of particular dollars (whether by the
Solicitor General’s “electronic tag” or other means) did not
enter into the question. See DaimlerChrysler Corp., 547
U. S., at 348 (describing how the Flast Court’s under
standing of the Establishment Clause’s history led the
Court to view the alleged “injury” as the expenditure of
“ ‘tax money’ in aid of religion” (quoting Flast, 392 U. S., at
106)). And for all the reasons already given, that standard
is met regardless whether the funding is provided via cash
grant or tax expenditure. See supra, at 11–16. Taxpayers
pick up the cost of the subsidy in either form. See ibid. So
taxpayers have an interest in preventing the use of either
mechanism to infringe religious neutrality.10
——————
10 On

this traditional view of the harm to taxpayers arising from state
financing of religion, the Plaintiffs here can satisfy not only Article III’s
injury requirement, but also its causation and redressability require
ments. The majority’s contrary position, ante, at 15–16, stems from its
miscasting of the injury involved; once that harm is stated correctly, all
the rest follows. To wit: The Plaintiffs allege they suffer injury when
the State funnels public resources to religious organizations through
the tax credit. Arizona, they claim, has caused this injury by enacting
legislation that establishes the credit. And an injunction limiting the
credit’s operation would redress the harm by preventing the allegedly
unlawful diversion of tax revenues. The Plaintiffs need not, as the
majority insists, show that this remedy would “affect . . . their tax
payments,” ante, at 16, any more than the taxpayer in Flast had to
establish that her tax burden would decrease absent the Government’s
funding of religious schools. As we have previously recognized, when
taxpayers object to the spending of tax money in violation of the Estab
lishment Clause (whether through tax credits or appropriations), “an
injunction against the spending would . . . redress [their] injury, regard
less of whether lawmakers would dispose of the savings in a way that
would benefit the taxpayer-plaintiffs personally.” DaimlerChrysler
Corp. v. Cuno, 547 U. S. 332, 348–349 (2006).

