(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ARIZONA CHRISTIAN SCHOOL TUITION ORGANIZATION v. WINN ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–987.

Argued November 3, 2010—Decided April 4, 2011*

Respondents, Arizona taxpayers, sued petitioner Director of the State
Department of Revenue, challenging Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §43–1089
on Establishment Clause grounds. The Arizona law gives tax credits
for contributions to school tuition organizations, or STOs, which then
use the contributions to provide scholarships to students attending
private schools, including religious schools. Petitioner Arizona Chris
tian School Tuition Organization and others later intervened. The
District Court dismissed the suit for failure to state a claim. Revers
ing, the Ninth Circuit held that respondents had standing as taxpay
ers under Flast v. Cohen, 392 U. S. 83, and had stated an Establish
ment Clause claim.
Held: Because respondents challenge a tax credit as opposed to a gov
ernmental expenditure, they lack Article III standing under Flast v.
Cohen, supra. Pp. 4–19.
(a) Article III vests in the Federal Judiciary the “Power” to resolve
“Cases” and “Controversies.” That language limits the Federal Judi
ciary to the traditional role of Anglo-American courts: redressing in
juries resulting from a specific legal dispute. To obtain a ruling on
the merits in federal court a plaintiff must assert more than just the
“generalized interest of all citizens in constitutional governance.”
Schlesinger v. Reservists Comm. to Stop the War, 418 U. S. 208, 217.
Instead the plaintiff must establish standing, which requires “an ‘in
jury in fact’”; “a causal connection between the injury and the conduct
——————
* Together with No. 09–991, Garriott, Director, Arizona Department
of Revenue v. Winn et al., also on certiorari to the same court.

