12 ARIZONA CHRISTIAN SCHOOL TUITION ORGANIZATION v.
WINN
KAGAN, J., dissenting

deed, we would think the less of our countrymen if they
failed to see through this cynical proposal.
And what ordinary people would appreciate, this Court’s
case law also recognizes—that targeted tax breaks are
often “economically and functionally indistinguishable
from a direct monetary subsidy.” Rosenberger v. Rector
and Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515 U. S. 819, 859 (1995)
(THOMAS, J., concurring). Tax credits, deductions, and
exemptions provided to an individual or organization have
“much the same effect as a cash grant to the [recipient] of
the amount of tax it would have to pay” absent the tax
break. Regan v. Taxation With Representation of Wash.,
461 U. S. 540, 544 (1983). “Our opinions,” therefore, “have
long recognized . . . the reality that [tax expenditures] are
a form of subsidy that is administered through the tax
system.” Arkansas Writers’ Project, Inc. v. Ragland, 481
U. S. 221, 236 (1987) (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (internal
quotation marks omitted). Or again: Tax breaks “can be
viewed as a form of government spending,” Camps New
found/Owatonna, Inc. v. Town of Harrison, 520 U. S. 564,
589–590, n. 22 (1997), even assuming the diverted tax
funds do not pass through the public treasury. And once
more: Both special tax benefits and cash grants “repre
sen[t] a charge made upon the state,” Nyquist, 413 U. S.,
at 790–791 (internal quotation marks omitted); both de
plete funds in the government’s coffers by transferring
money to select recipients.6
——————
6 The majority observes that special tax benefits may in fact “in
creas[e] government revenues” by “spur[ring] economic activity.” Ante,
at 8 (internal quotation marks omitted). That may be so in the long
run (although the only non-speculative effect is to immediately dimin
ish funds in the public treasury). But as the majority acknowledges,
ibid., this possibility holds just as true for appropriations; that is why
we (optimistically) refer to some government outlays as “investments.”
The insight therefore cannot help the majority distinguish between tax
expenditures and appropriations.

