Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

KAGAN, J., dissenting

For just this reason, government budgeting rules rou
tinely insist on calculation of tax subsidies, in addition to
appropriations. The President must provide information
on the estimated cost of tax expenditures in the budget
he submits to Congress each year. See 31 U. S. C.
§1105(a)(16); n. 1, supra. Similarly, congressional budget
committees must report to all Members on the level of
tax expenditures in the federal budget. See 2 U. S. C.
§632(e)(2)(E). Many States—including Arizona—likewise
compute the impact of targeted tax breaks on the public
treasury, in recognition that these measures are just
spending under a different name, see n. 1, supra. The
Arizona Department of Revenue must issue an annual
report “detailing the approximate costs in lost revenue for
all state tax expenditures.” Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §42–
1005(A)(4) (West 2006). The most recent report notes the
significance of this accounting in the budget process. It
explains that “the fiscal impact of implementing” targeted
tax breaks, including the STO credit challenged here, is
“similar to a direct expenditure of state funds.” Arizona
Dept. of Revenue, Revenue Impact of Arizona’s Tax Ex
penditures FY 2009/10, p. 1 (preliminary Nov. 15, 2010);
see also Surrey, Tax Incentives as a Device for Implement
ing Government Policy: A Comparison with Direct Gov
ernment Expenditures, 83 Harv. L. Rev. 705, 717 (1970)
(“A dollar is a dollar—both for the person who receives it
and the government that pays it, whether the dollar comes
with a tax credit label or a direct expenditure label”).
And because these financing mechanisms result in the
same bottom line, taxpayers challenging them can allege
the same harm. Our prior cases have often recognized the
cost that targeted tax breaks impose on taxpayers gener
ally. “When the Government grants exemptions or allows
deductions” to some, we have observed, “all taxpayers are
affected; the very fact of the exemption or deduction . . .
means that other taxpayers can be said to be indirect and

