Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

“narrow exception” to “the general rule against taxpayer
standing.” Bowen v. Kendrick, 487 U. S. 589, 618 (1988).
At issue in Flast was the standing of federal taxpayers
to object, on First Amendment grounds, to a congressional
statute that allowed expenditures of federal funds from
the General Treasury to support, among other programs,
“instruction in reading, arithmetic, and other subjects in
religious schools, and to purchase textbooks and other
instructional materials for use in such schools.” 392 U. S.,
at 85–86. Flast held that taxpayers have standing when
two conditions are met.
The first condition is that there must be a “logical link”
between the plaintiff’s taxpayer status “and the type of
legislative enactment attacked.” Id., at 102. This condi­
tion was not satisfied in Doremus because the statute
challenged in that case—providing for the recitation of
Bible passages in public schools—involved at most an
“incidental expenditure of tax funds.” Flast, 392 U. S., at
102. In Flast, by contrast, the allegation was that the
Federal Government violated the Establishment Clause in
the exercise of its legislative authority both to collect and
spend tax dollars. Id., at 103. In the decades since Flast,
the Court has been careful to enforce this requirement.
See Hein, 551 U. S. 587 (no standing under Flast to chal­
lenge federal executive actions funded by general appro­
priations); Valley Forge, 454 U. S. 464 (no standing under
Flast to challenge an agency’s decision to transfer a parcel
of federal property pursuant to the Property Clause).
The second condition for standing under Flast is that
there must be “a nexus” between the plaintiff’s taxpayer
status and “the precise nature of the constitutional in­
fringement alleged.” 392 U. S., at 102. This condition was
deemed satisfied in Flast based on the allegation that
Government funds had been spent on an outlay for relig­
ion in contravention of the Establishment Clause. Id., at
85–86. In Frothingham, by contrast, the claim was that

