4

ARIZONA CHRISTIAN SCHOOL TUITION ORGANIZATION v.
WINN
Opinion of the Court

contributions to religious STOs. The District Court dis­
missed respondents’ suit as jurisdictionally barred by the
Tax Injunction Act, 28 U. S. C. §1341. The Court of Ap­
peals reversed. This Court agreed with the Court of
Appeals and affirmed. Hibbs v. Winn, 542 U. S. 88 (2004).
On remand, the Arizona Christian School Tuition Or­
ganization and other interested parties intervened. The
District Court once more dismissed respondents’ suit, this
time for failure to state a claim. Once again, the Court of
Appeals reversed. It held that respondents had standing
under Flast v. Cohen, supra. 562 F. 3d 1002 (CA9 2009).
Reaching the merits, the Court of Appeals ruled that
respondents had stated a claim that §43–1089 violated the
Establishment Clause of the First Amendment. The full
Court of Appeals denied en banc review, with eight judges
dissenting. 586 F. 3d 649 (CA9 2009). This Court granted
certiorari. 560 U. S. __ (2010).
II
The concept and operation of the separation of powers
in our National Government have their principal founda­
tion in the first three Articles of the Constitution. Under
Article III, the Federal Judiciary is vested with the
“Power” to resolve not questions and issues but “Cases” or
“Controversies.” This language restricts the federal judi­
cial power “to the traditional role of the Anglo-American
courts.” Summers v. Earth Island Institute, 555 U. S. 488,
___ (2009) (slip op., at 4). In the English legal tradition,
the need to redress an injury resulting from a specific
dispute taught the efficacy of judicial resolution and gave
legitimacy to judicial decrees. The importance of resolving
specific cases was visible, for example, in the incremental
approach of the common law and in equity’s consideration
of exceptional circumstances. The Framers paid heed to
these lessons. See U. S. Const., Art. III, § 2 (“The judicial
Power shall extend to all Cases, in Law and Equity . . . ”).

