14 ARIZONA CHRISTIAN SCHOOL TUITION ORGANIZATION v.
WINN
Opinion of the Court

was thus informed by “the specific evils” identified in the
public arguments of “those who drafted the Establishment
Clause and fought for its adoption.” Id., at 103–104; see
also Feldman, Intellectual Origins of the Establishment
Clause, 77 N. Y. U. L. Rev. 346, 351 (2002) (“[T]he Fram­
ers’ generation worried that conscience would be violated
if citizens were required to pay taxes to support religious
institutions with whose beliefs they disagreed”); McCon­
nell, Coercion: The Lost Element of Establishment, 27
Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 933, 936–939 (1986).
Respondents contend that these principles demonstrate
their standing to challenge the STO tax credit. In their
view the tax credit is, for Flast purposes, best understood
as a governmental expenditure. That is incorrect.
It is easy to see that tax credits and governmental ex­
penditures can have similar economic consequences, at
least for beneficiaries whose tax liability is sufficiently
large to take full advantage of the credit. Yet tax credits
and governmental expenditures do not both implicate
individual taxpayers in sectarian activities. A dissenter
whose tax dollars are “extracted and spent” knows that he
has in some small measure been made to contribute to an
establishment in violation of conscience. Flast, supra, at
106. In that instance the taxpayer’s direct and particular
connection with the establishment does not depend on
economic speculation or political conjecture. The connec­
tion would exist even if the conscientious dissenter’s tax
liability were unaffected or reduced. See DaimlerChrysler,
supra, at 348–349. When the government declines to
impose a tax, by contrast, there is no such connection
between dissenting taxpayer and alleged establishment.
Any financial injury remains speculative. See supra, at 6–
10. And awarding some citizens a tax credit allows other
citizens to retain control over their own funds in accor­
dance with their own consciences.
The distinction between governmental expenditures and

