Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

KAGAN, J., dissenting

cognizable harm if but only if her particular tax dollars
wind up in a religious organization’s coffers. See also Tr.
of Oral Arg. 4 (Solicitor General proposing that the “key
point” was: “If you placed an electronic tag to track and
monitor each cent that the [Plaintiffs] pay in tax,” none
goes to religious STOs). And no taxpayer can make this
showing, the Court concludes, if the government subsi
dizes religion through tax credits, deductions, or exemp
tions (rather than through appropriations).9
The majority purports to rely on Flast to support this
new “extraction” requirement. It plucks the three words
“extrac[t] and spen[d]” from the midst of the Flast opinion,
and suggests that they severely constrict the decision’s
scope. Ante, at 15 (quoting 392 U. S., at 106). And it notes
that Flast partly relied on James Madison’s famed argu
ment in the Memorial and Remonstrance Against Reli
gious Assessments: “ ‘[T]he same authority which can force
a citizen to contribute three pence only of his property for
——————
9 Even taken on its own terms, the majority’s reasoning does not jus
tify the conclusion that the Plaintiffs lack standing. Arizona’s tuition
tax-credit program in fact necessitates the direct expenditure of funds
from the state treasury. After all, the statute establishing the initiative
requires the Arizona Department of Revenue to certify STOs, maintain
an STO registry, make the registry available to the public on request
and post it on a website, collect annual reports filed by STOs, and send
written notice to STOs that have failed to comply with statutory re
quirements. Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §§43–1502(A)–(C), 43–1506 (West
Supp. 2010). Presumably all these activities cost money, which comes
from the state treasury. Thus, on the majority’s own theory, the
government has “extract[ed] and spen[t]” the Plaintiffs’ (along with
other taxpayers’) dollars to implement the challenged program, and the
Plaintiffs should have standing. (The majority, after all, makes clear
that nothing in its analysis hinges on the size or proportion of the
Plaintiffs’ contribution. Ante, at 13.) But applying the majority’s
theory in this way reveals the hollowness at its core. Can anyone
believe that the Plaintiffs have suffered injury through the costs
involved in administering the program, but not through the far greater
costs of granting the tax expenditure in the first place?

