2

ARIZONA CHRISTIAN SCHOOL TUITION ORGANIZATION v.
WINN
KAGAN, J., dissenting

over four decades, this Court and others have exercised
jurisdiction to decide taxpayer-initiated challenges not
materially different from this one. Not every suit has
succeeded on the merits, or should have. But every tax
payer-plaintiff has had her day in court to contest the
government’s financing of religious activity.
Today, the Court breaks from this precedent by refusing
to hear taxpayers’ claims that the government has uncon
stitutionally subsidized religion through its tax system.
These litigants lack standing, the majority holds, because
the funding of religion they challenge comes from a tax
credit, rather than an appropriation. A tax credit, the
Court asserts, does not injure objecting taxpayers, because
it “does not extract and spend [their] funds in service of an
establishment.” Ante, at 15 (internal quotation marks and
alterations omitted).
This novel distinction in standing law between appro
priations and tax expenditures has as little basis in prin
ciple as it has in our precedent. Cash grants and targeted
tax breaks are means of accomplishing the same govern
ment objective—to provide financial support to select
individuals or organizations. Taxpayers who oppose state
aid of religion have equal reason to protest whether that
aid flows from the one form of subsidy or the other. Either
way, the government has financed the religious activity.
And so either way, taxpayers should be able to challenge
the subsidy.
Still worse, the Court’s arbitrary distinction threatens to
eliminate all occasions for a taxpayer to contest the gov
ernment’s monetary support of religion. Precisely because
appropriations and tax breaks can achieve identical objec
tives, the government can easily substitute one for the
other. Today’s opinion thus enables the government to
end-run Flast’s guarantee of access to the Judiciary. From
now on, the government need follow just one simple rule—
subsidize through the tax system—to preclude taxpayer

