6

ARIZONA CHRISTIAN SCHOOL TUITION ORGANIZATION v.
WINN
KAGAN, J., dissenting

But this distinction finds no support in case law, and
just as little in reason. In the decades since Flast, no
court—not one—has differentiated between appropriations
and tax expenditures in deciding whether litigants have
standing. Over and over again, courts (including this one)
have faced Establishment Clause challenges to tax credits,
deductions, and exemptions; over and over again, these
courts have reached the merits of these claims. And that
is for a simple reason: Taxpayers experience the same
injury for standing purposes whether government subsidi
zation of religion takes the form of a cash grant or a tax
measure. The only rationale the majority offers for its
newfound distinction—that grants, but not tax expendi
tures, somehow come from a complaining taxpayer’s own
wallet—cannot bear the weight the Court places on it. If
Flast is still good law—and the majority today says noth
ing to the contrary—then the Plaintiffs should be able to
pursue their claim on the merits.
A
Until today, this Court has never so much as hinted that
litigants in the same shoes as the Plaintiffs lack standing
under Flast. To the contrary: We have faced the identical
situation five times—including in a prior incarnation of
this very case!—and we have five times resolved the suit
without questioning the plaintiffs’ standing. Lower fed
eral courts have followed our example and handled the
matter in the same way. I count 14 separate cases (involv
ing 20 appellate and district courts) that adjudicated
taxpayer challenges to tax expenditures alleged to violate
the Establishment Clause.2 I suspect I have missed a few.
——————
2 See Johnson v. Economic Development Corporation of Cty. of Oak
land, 241 F. 3d 501 (CA6 2001), aff’g 64 F. Supp. 2d 657 (ED Mich.
1999); Steele v. Industrial Development Bd. of Metropolitan Govt.
Nashville, 301 F. 3d 401 (CA6 2002), rev’g 117 F. Supp. 2d 693 (MD
Tenn. 2000); Christie v. United States, 31 Fed. Appx. 571 (CA9 2002),

