Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

23

KAGAN, J., dissenting

In this respect, the Virginia Assessment is just like the
Arizona tax credit. Although both funnel tax funds to
religious organizations (and so saddle all taxpayers with
the cost), neither forces any given taxpayer to pay for the
subsidy out of her pocket. Madison thought that feature of
the Assessment insufficient to save it. By relying on the
selfsame aspect of the Arizona scheme to deny the Plain
tiffs’ claim of injury, the majority betrays Madison’s vision.
III
Today’s decision devastates taxpayer standing in Estab
lishment Clause cases. The government, after all, often
uses tax expenditures to subsidize favored persons and
activities. Still more, the government almost always has
this option. Appropriations and tax subsidies are readily
interchangeable; what is a cash grant today can be a tax
break tomorrow. The Court’s opinion thus offers a road
map—more truly, just a one-step instruction—to any
government that wishes to insulate its financing of reli
gious activity from legal challenge. Structure the funding
as a tax expenditure, and Flast will not stand in the way.
No taxpayer will have standing to object. However bla
tantly the government may violate the Establishment
Clause, taxpayers cannot gain access to the federal courts.
And by ravaging Flast in this way, today’s decision
damages one of this Nation’s defining constitutional com
mitments. “Congress shall make no law respecting an
establishment of religion”—ten simple words that have
stood for over 200 years as a foundation stone of American
religious liberty. Ten words that this Court has long
understood, as James Madison did, to limit (though by no
—————— 

(1995); Adams & Emmerich, Heritage of Religious Liberty, 137 U. Pa. 

L. Rev. 1559, 1573 (1989); Laycock, “Nonpreferential” Aid to Religion: A
False Claim About Original Intent, 27 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 875, 897,
and n. 108 (1985–1986); L. Pfeffer, Church State and Freedom 110 (rev.
ed. 1967).

