16 ARIZONA CHRISTIAN SCHOOL TUITION ORGANIZATION v.
WINN
Opinion of the Court

private taxpayers regarding their own funds. Private
citizens create private STOs; STOs choose beneficiary
schools; and taxpayers then contribute to STOs. While the
State, at the outset, affords the opportunity to create and
contribute to an STO, the tax credit system is imple­
mented by private action and with no state intervention.
Objecting taxpayers know that their fellow citizens, not
the State, decide to contribute and in fact make the con­
tribution. These considerations prevent any injury the
objectors may suffer from being fairly traceable to the
government. And while an injunction against application
of the tax credit most likely would reduce contributions to
STOs, that remedy would not affect noncontributing tax­
payers or their tax payments. As a result, any injury
suffered by respondents would not be remedied by an
injunction limiting the tax credit’s operation.
Resisting this conclusion, respondents suggest that
Arizonans who benefit from §43–1089 tax credits in effect
are paying their state income tax to STOs. In respon­
dents’ view, tax credits give rise to standing even if tax
deductions do not, since only the former yield a dollar-for­
dollar reduction in final tax liability. See Brief for Re­
spondent Winn et al. 5–6; Tr. of Oral Arg. 35–36. But
what matters under Flast is whether sectarian STOs
receive government funds drawn from general tax reve­
nues, so that moneys have been extracted from a citizen
and handed to a religious institution in violation of the
citizen’s conscience. Under that inquiry, respondents’
argument fails. Like contributions that lead to charitable
tax deductions, contributions yielding STO tax credits are
not owed to the State and, in fact, pass directly from tax­
payers to private organizations. Respondents’ contrary
position assumes that income should be treated as if it
were government property even if it has not come into the
tax collector’s hands. That premise finds no basis in
standing jurisprudence. Private bank accounts cannot be

