Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

KAGAN, J., dissenting

used, after all, would not have been “extracted from a
citizen and handed to a religious institution in violation of
the citizen’s conscience.” Ante, at 16. But this Court has
never indicated that States may insulate subsidies to
religious organizations from legal challenge by eliciting
the consent of some taxpayers. And the Court has of
course been right not to take this approach. Taxpayers
incur the same harm, and should have the same ability to
bring suit, whether the government stores tax funds in
one bank account or two. None of the principles underly
ing the Establishment Clause suggests otherwise.
James Madison, whom the Court again rightly labels
“the leading architect of the religion clauses,” ante, at 13
(quoting Flast, 392 U. S., at 103; internal quotation marks
omitted), had something important to say about the mat
ter of “extraction.” As the majority notes, Madison’s Me
morial and Remonstrance criticized a tax levy proposed in
Virginia to aid teachers of the Christian religion. Ante, at
12–13. But Madison’s passionate opposition to that pro
posal informs this case in a manner different than the
majority suggests. The Virginia tax in fact would not have
extracted any monies (not even “three pence”) from unwill
ing citizens, as the Court now requires. The plan allowed
conscientious objectors to opt out of subsidizing religion by
contributing their assessment to an alternative fund for
the construction and maintenance of county schools.11 See
——————
11 The

opt-out provision described county schools as “seminaries of
learning.” A Bill for Establishing A Provision for Teachers of the
Christian Religion, reprinted in Everson v. Board of Ed. of Ewing, 330
U. S. 1, 74 (1947) (supplemental appendix to dissent of Rutledge, J.). In
1785, that phrase had no particular religious connotation: It “meant
schools for general education, not schools for the training of ministers.”
Berg & Laycock, Mistakes in Locke v. Davey and the Future of State
Payments for Services Provided by Religious Institutions, 40 Tulsa
L. Rev. 227, 244, n. 113 (2004); see also, e.g., 2 S. Johnson, Dictionary of
the English Language 1741 (1773) (“seminary” means “place of educa
tion, from whence scholars are transplanted into life”).

