4

ARIZONA CHRISTIAN SCHOOL TUITION ORGANIZATION v.
WINN
KAGAN, J., dissenting

Establishment Clause. The Plaintiffs have standing if
their suit meets Flast’s requirements—and it does so
under any fair reading of that decision.
Taxpayers have standing, Flast held, when they allege
that a statute enacted pursuant to the legislature’s taxing
and spending power violates the Establishment Clause.
392 U. S., at 105–106. In this situation, the Court ex
plained, a plaintiff can establish a two-part nexus “be
tween the [taxpayer] status asserted and the claim sought
to be adjudicated.” Id., at 102. First, by challenging
legislative action taken under the taxing and spending
clause, the taxpayer shows “a logical link between [her]
status and the type of . . . enactment attacked.” Ibid.
Second, by invoking the Establishment Clause—a specific
limitation on the legislature’s taxing and spending
power—the taxpayer demonstrates “a nexus between [her]
status and the precise nature of the constitutional in
fringement alleged.” Ibid. Because of these connections,
Flast held, taxpayers alleging that the government is
using tax proceeds to aid religion have “the necessary
stake . . . in the outcome of the litigation to satisfy Article
III.” Ibid. They are “proper and appropriate part[ies]”—
indeed, often the only possible parties—to seek judicial
enforcement of the Constitution’s guarantee of religious
neutrality. Ibid.
That simple restatement of the Flast standard should be
enough to establish that the Plaintiffs have standing.
They attack a provision of the Arizona tax code that the
legislature enacted pursuant to the State Constitution’s
taxing and spending clause (Flast nexus, part 1). And
they allege that this provision violates the Establishment
Clause (Flast nexus, part 2). By satisfying both of Flast’s
conditions, the Plaintiffs have demonstrated their “stake
as taxpayers” in enforcing constitutional restraints on the
provision of aid to STOs. Ibid. Indeed, the connection in
this case between “the [taxpayer] status asserted and the

