Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

tax credits refutes respondents’ assertion of standing.
When Arizona taxpayers choose to contribute to STOs,
they spend their own money, not money the State has
collected from respondents or from other taxpayers. Ari­
zona’s §43–1089 does not “extrac[t] and spen[d]” a consci­
entious dissenter’s funds in service of an establishment,
Flast, 392 U. S., at 106, or “ ‘force a citizen to contribute
three pence only of his property’ ” to a sectarian organiza­
tion, id., at 103 (quoting 2 Writings of James Madison,
supra, at 186). On the contrary, respondents and other
Arizona taxpayers remain free to pay their own tax bills,
without contributing to an STO. Respondents are likewise
able to contribute to an STO of their choice, either reli­
gious or secular. And respondents also have the option of
contributing to other charitable organizations, in which
case respondents may become eligible for a tax deduction
or a different tax credit. See, e.g., Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann.
§43–1088 (West Supp. 2010). The STO tax credit is not
tantamount to a religious tax or to a tithe and does not
visit the injury identified in Flast. It follows that respon­
dents have neither alleged an injury for standing purposes
under general rules nor met the Flast exception. Finding
standing under these circumstances would be more than
the extension of Flast “to the limits of its logic.” Hein, 551
U. S., at 615 (plurality opinion). It would be a departure
from Flast’s stated rationale.
Furthermore, respondents cannot satisfy the require­
ments of causation and redressability. When the govern­
ment collects and spends taxpayer money, governmental
choices are responsible for the transfer of wealth. In that
case a resulting subsidy of religious activity is, for pur­
poses of Flast, traceable to the government’s expenditures.
And an injunction against those expenditures would ad­
dress the objections of conscience raised by taxpayer­
plaintiffs. See DaimlerChrysler, 547 U. S., at 344. Here,
by contrast, contributions result from the decisions of

