14 ARIZONA CHRISTIAN SCHOOL TUITION ORGANIZATION v.
WINN
KAGAN, J., dissenting

vicarious ‘donors.’ ” Bob Jones Univ. v. United States, 461
U. S. 574, 591 (1983). And again: “Every tax exemption
constitutes a subsidy that affects nonqualifying taxpayers,
forcing them to” bear its cost. Texas Monthly, Inc. v.
Bullock, 489 U. S. 1, 14 (1989) (plurality opinion). Indeed,
we have specifically compared the harm arising from a tax
subsidy with that arising from a cash grant, and declared
those injuries equivalent because both kinds of support
deplete the public fisc. “In either case,” we stated, “the
alleged injury is based on the asserted effect of the alleg
edly illegal activity on public revenues, to which the tax
payer contributes.” DaimlerChrysler Corp. v. Cuno, 547
U. S. 332, 344 (2006). This taxpayer injury of course fails
to establish standing in the mine-run case, whatever form
the state aid takes. See, e.g., id., at 343–344; ante, at 6–
10; supra, at 3. But the key is this: Whenever taxpayers
have standing under Flast to challenge an appropriation,
they should also have standing to contest a tax expendi
ture. Their access to the federal courts should not depend
on which type of financial subsidy the State has offered.
Consider some further examples of the point, but this
time concerning state funding of religion. Suppose a State
desires to reward Jews—by, say, $500 per year—for their
religious devotion. Should the nature of taxpayers’ con
cern vary if the State allows Jews to claim the aid on their
tax returns, in lieu of receiving an annual stipend? Or
assume a State wishes to subsidize the ownership of cruci
fixes. It could purchase the religious symbols in bulk and
distribute them to all takers. Or it could mail a reim
bursement check to any individual who buys her own and
submits a receipt for the purchase. Or it could authorize
that person to claim a tax credit equal to the price she
paid. Now, really—do taxpayers have less reason to com
plain if the State selects the last of these three options?
The Court today says they do, but that is wrong. The
effect of each form of subsidy is the same, on the public

