Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

allowed, “legislators will pass along the supposed in­
creased revenue in the form of tax reductions.” Ibid. It
would be “pure speculation” to conclude that an injunction
against a government expenditure or tax benefit “would
result in any actual tax relief” for a taxpayer-plaintiff.
ASARCO Inc. v. Kadish, 490 U. S. 605, 614 (1989) (opinion
of KENNEDY, J.).
These well-established principles apply to the present
cases. Respondents may be right that Arizona’s STO tax
credits have an estimated annual value of over $50 mil­
lion. See Brief for Respondent Winn et al. 42; see also
Arizona Dept. of Revenue, Revenue Impact of Arizona’s
Tax Expenditures FY 2009/10, p. 48 (preliminary Nov. 15,
2010) (reporting the total estimated “value” of STO tax
credits claimed over a 1-year period). The education of its
young people is, of course, one of the State’s principal
missions and responsibilities; and the consequent costs
will make up a significant portion of the state budget.
That, however, is just the beginning of the analysis.
By helping students obtain scholarships to private
schools, both religious and secular, the STO program
might relieve the burden placed on Arizona’s public
schools. The result could be an immediate and permanent
cost savings for the State. See Brief for Petitioner Arizona
Christian School Tuition Organization 31 (discussing
studies indicating that the STO program may on net save
the State money); see also Mueller v. Allen, 463 U. S. 388,
395 (1983) (“By educating a substantial number of stu­
dents [private] schools relieve public schools of a corre­
spondingly great burden—to the benefit of all taxpayers”).
Underscoring the potential financial benefits of the STO
program, the average value of an STO scholarship may be
far less than the average cost of educating an Arizona
public school student. See Brief for Petitioner Garriott 38.
Because it encourages scholarships for attendance at
private schools, the STO tax credit may not cause the

