12 ARIZONA CHRISTIAN SCHOOL TUITION ORGANIZATION v.
WINN
Opinion of the Court

Congress had exceeded its constitutional authority with­
out regard to any specific prohibition. 392 U. S., at 104–
105. Confirming that Flast turned on the unique features
of Establishment Clause violations, this Court has “de­
clined to lower the taxpayer standing bar in suits alleging
violations of any constitutional provision apart from the
Establishment Clause.” Hein, supra, at 609 (plurality
opinion); see also Richardson, 418 U. S. 166 (Statement
and Account Clause); Schlesinger, 418 U. S. 208 (Incom­
patibility Clause).
After stating the two conditions for taxpayer standing,
Flast considered them together, explaining that individu­
als suffer a particular injury for standing purposes when,
in violation of the Establishment Clause and by means of
“the taxing and spending power,” their property is trans­
ferred through the Government’s Treasury to a sectarian
entity. 392 U. S., at 105–106. As Flast put it: “The tax­
payer’s allegation in such cases would be that his tax
money is being extracted and spent in violation of specific
constitutional protections against such abuses of legisla­
tive power.” Id., at 106. Flast thus “understood the ‘in­
jury’ alleged in Establishment Clause challenges to federal
spending to be the very ‘extract[ion] and spen[ding]’ of ‘tax
money’ in aid of religion alleged by a plaintiff.” DaimlerChrysler, 547 U. S., at 348 (quoting Flast, 392 U. S., at
106)). “Such an injury,” Flast continued, is unlike “gener­
alized grievances about the conduct of government” and so
is “appropriate for judicial redress.” Id., at 106.
Flast found support for its finding of personal injury in
“the history of the Establishment Clause,” particularly
James Madison’s Memorial and Remonstrance Against
Religious Assessments. DaimlerChrysler, supra, at 348.
In 1785, the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Virginia considered a “tax levy to support teachers of the
Christian religion.” Flast, supra, at 104, n. 24; see A Bill
Establishing A Provision for Teachers of the Christian

