2

ALABAMA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Syllabus
ject.
In June 1999, Florida and Tennessee filed a complaint with the
Commission seeking monetary sanctions against North Carolina. In
July 1999, North Carolina exercised its right under Article 7(G) to
withdraw from the Compact. In December 1999, the Commission
concluded that North Carolina had failed to fulfill its obligations un
der the Compact and adopted a sanctions resolution demanding that
the State repay approximately $80 million in addition to other mone
tary penalties. North Carolina did not comply.
In 2003, this Court granted Alabama, Florida, Tennessee, Virginia,
and the Commission (Plaintiffs) leave to file a bill of complaint
against North Carolina under this Court’s original jurisdiction, U. S.
Const., Art. II, §2, cl. 2; 28 U. S. C. §1251(a). The complaint sets
forth claims of violation of Plaintiffs’ rights under the Compact
(Count I), breach of contract (Count II), unjust enrichment (Count
III), promissory estoppel (Count IV), and money had and received
(Count V), and requests monetary and other relief, including a decla
ration that North Carolina is subject to sanctions and that the Com
mission’s sanctions resolution is valid and enforceable.
The Court assigned the case to a Special Master, who has con
ducted proceedings and has filed two reports. The Preliminary Re
port recommends denying without prejudice North Carolina’s motion
to dismiss the Commission’s claims on sovereign immunity grounds;
denying Plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment on Count I, which
sought enforcement of the Commission’s sanctions resolution; grant
ing North Carolina’s cross-motion to dismiss Count I and other por
tions of the complaint seeking such enforcement; and denying North
Carolina’s motion to dismiss the claims in Counts II–V. The Master’s
Second Report recommended denying Plaintiff’s motion for summary
judgment and granting North Carolina’s motion for summary judg
ment on Count II; and denying North Carolina’s motion for summary
judgment on Plaintiffs’ remaining claims in Counts III–V. The par
ties filed a total of nine exceptions to the Master’s Reports.

Held:
1. Plaintiffs’ seven exceptions are overruled. Pp. 7–21.
(a) The terms of the Compact do not authorize the Commission to
impose monetary sanctions against North Carolina. The Court’s con
clusion is confirmed by a comparison of the Compact’s terms with
three other interstate compacts concerning low-level radioactive
waste storage approved by Congress contemporaneously with the
Compact, all of which expressly authorize their commissions to im
pose monetary sanctions against their party States. Pp. 7–9.
(b) Plaintiffs’ exception that North Carolina could not avoid
monetary sanctions by withdrawing from the Compact is moot, be

