(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ALABAMA ET AL. v. NORTH CAROLINA
ON EXCEPTIONS TO THE PRELIMINARY AND SECOND REPORTS
OF THE SPECIAL MASTER
No. 132, Orig. Argued January 11, 2010—Decided June 1, 2010
In 1986, Congress granted its consent to the Southeast Interstate LowLevel Radioactive Waste Management Compact (Compact), which
was entered into by Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, North
Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia. The Compact is
administered by a Commission, which was required, inter alia, to
“identif[y] a host State for the development of a [new] regional
disposal facility,” and to “seek to ensure that such facility is licensed
and ready to operate . . . no . . . later than 1991.” Art. 4(E)(6), 99
Stat. 1875. The Commission designated North Carolina as a host
State in 1986, thereby obligating North Carolina to take “appropriate
steps to ensure that an application for a license to construct and op
erate a [low-level radioactive waste storage facility] is filed with and
issued by the appropriate authority.” Art. 5(C), id., at 1877.
In 1988, North Carolina asked the Commission for assistance with
the costs of licensing and building a facility. The Commission
adopted a resolution declaring it “appropriate and necessary” to pro
vide financial assistance, and ultimately paid almost $80 million to
North Carolina from 1988 through 1997. North Carolina also ex
pended $34 million of its own funds. Yet by the mid 1990s, North
Carolina was still many years—and many tens of millions of dol
lars—away from obtaining a license.
In 1997, the Commission notified North Carolina that absent a
plan for funding the remaining licensing steps, it would not disburse
additional funds to North Carolina. North Carolina responded that it
could not continue without additional funding. After the parties
failed to agree on a long-term financing plan, in December 1997 the
Commission ceased its financial assistance to North Carolina, and
North Carolina subsequently began an orderly shutdown of its pro

