Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of BREYER, J.

siting, building, and operating a facility] be borne by the
waste generators” who use it); Brief for Plaintiffs in Sur­
reply to North Carolina’s Reply 1, n. 1 (noting that a dis­
posal facility in South Carolina collected over $47 million
in fees in 2008).
Of course, as the majority notes, South Carolina’s with­
drawal from the Compact could have affected North Caro­
lina’s ability to “recoup” its “construction costs.” Ante, at
18. But, as far as I am aware, North Carolina did not
seriously seek to amend the Compact when South Caro­
lina departed (even though the State had sought and
obtained an amendment previously, see ante, at 20, n. 4;
Brief for North Carolina in Reply to Exceptions By Plain­
tiffs to Reports of the Special Master 27), nor has it argued
to this Court that South Carolina’s departure voided its
contractual obligations. Indeed, there is evidence in the
record indicating that, even after South Carolina left the
Compact, North Carolina continued to believe that the
operation of a waste disposal facility presented a substan­
tial financial opportunity. App. 255, 266 (Attachment to
Letter from John H. MacMillan, Executive Director, North
Carolina Low-Level Radioactive Waste Management
Authority, to Richard S. Hodes, M. D., Chairman, South­
east Compact Commission (Dec. 13, 1996) (enclosing a
business plan identifying $600 million in cost savings that
could provide a “substantial return” on the “investment
needed to put the North Carolina facility into operation”)).
I thus cannot conclude, as the majority does, that the
Compact’s rotational design, as I understand it, is “fool­
ish.” Ante, at 18. Rather, the Compact’s structure repre­
sents what, in my view, was a understandable decision by
the contracting States, all of whom needed a waste dis­
posal facility, to bind themselves together so that each
would take a turn “bear[ing] the cost of building” the
necessary facility. Preliminary Report of Special Master
21 (citing Art. 4(K), 99 Stat. 1876–1877); see Brief for

