Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
cause the Compact does not permit the Commission to impose mone
tary sanctions in any event. The Court deems their exception that
North Carolina forfeited its right to object to a monetary penalty by
failing to participate at the sanctions hearing both abandoned and
meritless. P. 10.
(c) Because the express terms of the Compact do not make the
Commission the “sole arbiter” of disputes arising under the Compact,
Texas v. New Mexico, 462 U. S. 554, 569–570, the Court is not bound
by the Commission’s conclusion that North Carolina breached its ob
ligations under the Compact. Nor does the Court apply deferential
administrative-law standards of review to the Commission’s conclu
sion, but instead exercises its independent judgment as to both fact
and law in executing its role as the “exclusive” arbiter of controver
sies between the States, 28 U. S. C. §1251(a). Pp. 10–12.
(d) North Carolina did not breach its contractual obligation to
take “appropriate steps” toward the issuance of a license. Pp. 12–19.
(1) The Compact requires North Carolina to take only those li
censing steps that are “appropriate.” The parties’ course of perform
ance establishes that it was not appropriate for North Carolina to
proceed with the very expensive licensing process without external
financial assistance. Nothing in the Compact’s text or structure re
quires North Carolina to cover all licensing and building costs on its
own. Plaintiffs’ assertion that it was understood that the host State
would bear the up-front licensing and construction costs, but recoup
those costs through its regional monopoly on radioactive waste dis
posal, is not reflected in the Compact. Pp. 13–18.
(2) Plaintiffs’ alternative argument that North Carolina repu
diated its obligation to take appropriate steps when it announced it
would take no further steps to obtain a license fails for the same rea
sons their breach theory fails. Pp. 18–19.
(e) North Carolina did not breach an implied duty of good faith
and fair dealing when it withdrew from the Compact. The Compact
by its terms imposes no limitation on North Carolina’s right to exer
cise its statutory right under Article 7(G) to withdraw from the Com
pact. A comparison between the Compact and other contemporane
ously enacted compacts confirms the absence of a good-faith
limitation in the Compact. Pp. 19–21.
2. North Carolina’s two exceptions are overruled. Pp. 21–26.
(a) It was reasonable for the Special Master to deny without
prejudice North Carolina’s motion for summary judgment on the mer
its of Plaintiffs’ equitable claims in Counts III–V. The Special Master
concluded that those claims require further briefing, argument, and,
possibly, discovery. The Court approves of the Special Master’s rea
sonable exercise of his discretion to manage the proceedings. Pp. 21–

