Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010) 


13

Opinion of the Court 


1

Plaintiffs claim North Carolina breached the Compact in
December 1997, when (as it admits) it ceased all efforts
toward obtaining a license. At that point, in their view,
North Carolina was no longer “tak[ing] appropriate steps
to ensure that an application for a license to construct and
operate a [low-level radioactive waste storage facility] is
filed with and issued by the appropriate authority,” Art.
5(C), 99 Stat. 1877. North Carolina says that once the
Commission ceased providing financial assistance on
December 1, and once it became clear there was insuffi­
cient funding to complete the licensing phase, there were
no more “appropriate” steps to take. The Special Master
concluded that the phrase “appropriate steps” in Article
5(C) was ambiguous, and that the parties’ course of per­
formance established that North Carolina was not re­
quired to take steps toward obtaining a license once it was
made to bear the remaining financial burden of the licens­
ing phase. Second Report 10–24, 35–36. Plaintiffs take
exception to that conclusion.
Article 5(C) does not require North Carolina to take any
and all steps to license a regional-disposal facility; only
those that are “appropriate.” Plaintiffs contend that this
requires North Carolina to take the steps set forth in the
regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission govern­
ing the filing and disposition of applications for licenses to
operate radioactive waste disposal facilities, 10 CFR pt. 61
(1997). Those regulations set forth some, but certainly not
all, of the “steps” the State would have to take to obtain a
license. But Article 5(C) does not incorporate the regula­
tions by reference, much less describe them as the appro
priate steps.
We could accept Plaintiffs’ contention if “appropriate”
meant “necessary” (the steps set forth in the regulation
are assuredly necessary to obtaining a license). But it
does not. Whether a particular step is “appropriate”—

