20

ALABAMA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

We have never held that an interstate compact approved
by Congress includes an implied duty of good faith and
fair dealing. Of course “[e]very contract imposes upon
each party a duty of good faith and fair dealing in its
performance and enforcement.” Restatement §205. But
an interstate compact is not just a contract; it is a federal
statute enacted by Congress. If courts were authorized to
add a fairness requirement to the implementation of
federal statutes, judges would be potent lawmakers in­
deed. We do not—we cannot—add provisions to a federal
statute. See, e.g., Connecticut Nat. Bank v. Germain, 503
U. S. 249, 254 (1992). And in that regard a statute which
is a valid interstate compact is no different. Texas v. New
Mexico, 462 U. S., at 564, 565. We are especially reluctant
to read absent terms into an interstate compact given the
federalism and separation-of-powers concerns that would
arise were we to rewrite an agreement among sovereign
States, to which the political branches consented. As we
have said before, we will not “ ‘order relief inconsistent
with [the] express terms’ ” of a compact, “no matter what
the equities of the circumstances might otherwise invite.”
New Jersey v. New York, 523 U. S., at 811 (quoting Texas
v. New Mexico, supra, at 564).
The Compact imposes no limitation on North Carolina’s
exercise of its statutory right to withdraw. Under Article
7(G), which governed North Carolina’s withdrawal,4 “any
party [S]tate may withdraw from the compact by enacting
a law repealing the compact.” 99 Stat. 1879. There is no
restriction upon a party State’s enactment of such a law,
——————
4 After North Carolina was designated as a host State, the Compact
was amended to add Article 7(H), which restricted the ability of a party
State to withdraw to within 30 days after a second regional-disposal
facility opened. Southeast Interstate Low-Level Radioactive Waste
Compact Amendments Consent Act of 1989, Pub. L. 101–171, §2, 103
Stat. 1289. That provision did not apply when North Carolina with­
drew, because its facility had not been opened.

