4

ALABAMA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

responded that the State was not prepared to assume a
greater portion of the project’s costs, and would not be able
to proceed without continued Commission funding.
Shortly thereafter the Commission adopted a resolution
declaring that it was willing and able to provide additional
funds, but calling on North Carolina to work with it to
develop long-term funding sources for the facility. From
FY 1996 through FY 1998, the Commission provided
North Carolina approximately an additional $12.27 mil­
lion in financial assistance. North Carolina, for its part,
continued to provide its own funds toward licensing activi­
ties—another $6 million during the same time period.
In August 1997, the Commission notified North Caro­
lina that absent a plan for funding the remaining steps of
the licensing phase, it would not disburse additional funds
to North Carolina after November 30, 1997. North Caro­
lina responded that it would not be able to continue with­
out additional guarantees of external funding. On Decem­
ber 1, 1997, the parties having failed to agree upon a long­
term financing plan, the Commission ceased financial
assistance to North Carolina. By then it had provided
almost $80 million.
On December 19, 1997, North Carolina informed the
Commission it would commence an orderly shutdown of its
licensing project, and since that date has taken no further
steps toward obtaining a license for the facility. But it did
continue to fund the Authority for several more years, in
the hope that the project would resume upon the restora­
tion of external financial assistance. North Carolina
maintained the proposed facility site, preserved the work
it had completed to date, and retained the Authority’s
books and records. It also participated in discussions with
the Commission, generators of low-level radioactive waste,
and other stakeholders regarding options to resolve the
financing shortfall. From FY 1988 through FY 2000,
North Carolina had expended almost $34 million toward

