4

ALABAMA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Syllabus
22.

(b) Under Arizona v. California, 460 U. S. 605, 614, the Commis
sion’s claims are not barred by sovereign immunity so long as the
Commission asserts the same claims and seeks the same relief as the
plaintiff States. Nothing in the Court’s subsequent cases suggests
that Arizona v. California has been implicitly overruled, and North
Carolina does not ask the Court to overrule that decision. At least
with respect to Counts I and II, the Commission’s claims under those
Compact-related Counts are wholly derivative of the plaintiff States’
claims. The summary judgment disallowing the claims in Counts I
and II on their merits renders the sovereign immunity question with
regard to any relief the Commission alone might have on those claims
moot. Counts III–V are on a different footing. The Special Master
concluded that further factual and legal development was necessary
to determine whether the Commission’s claims under these Counts
were identical to those of the plaintiff States. The Special Master’s
case-management decision was reasonable. Pp. 22–26.
Exceptions to Special Master’s Reports overruled, and Master’s recom
mendations adopted; North Carolina’s motions to dismiss Count I
and for summary judgment on Count II granted; Plaintiffs’ motions
for judgment on Counts I and II denied; and North Carolina’s mo
tions to dismiss the Commission’s claims on sovereign immunity
grounds and for summary judgment on Counts III–V denied without
prejudice.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which STEVENS,
GINSBURG, and ALITO, JJ., joined, in which ROBERTS, C. J., joined in all
but Parts II–D and III–B, in which KENNEDY and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined in all but Part II–E, in which THOMAS, J., joined in all but Part
III–B, and in which BREYER, J., joined in all but Parts II–C, II–D, and
II–E. KENNEDY, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring
in the judgment, in which SOTOMAYOR, J., joined. ROBERTS, C. J., filed
an opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part, in which THOMAS,
J., joined. BREYER, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and dissent
ing in part, in which ROBERTS, C. J., joined.

