22

ALABAMA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

Second Report 41. A threshold question for all claims in
those Counts, for example, is whether they “belong to the
Commission, the Plaintiff States, or both.” Ibid. Perhaps
the States can bring them in their capacity as parens
patriae, but as the Special Master noted “the parties have
not adequately briefed this issue, and its resolution in this
case is unclear.” Id., at 42–43.
We think it was reasonable for the Special Master to
defer ruling. We granted the Special Master discretion to
“direct subsequent proceedings” and “to submit such re­
ports as he may deem appropriate.” 540 U. S., at 1014.
He could have deferred filing any report until full factual
discovery had been completed and all of the legal issues,
many of which are novel and challenging, had been fully
briefed, considered, and decided. Instead, he concluded
that our immediate resolution of Counts I and II would
facilitate the efficient disposition of the case; and in agree­
ing to hear exceptions to his Preliminary Report and
Second Report we implicitly agreed. His deferral of ruling
on the merits of Counts III–V is part and parcel of the
same case management, and we find no reason to upset it.
B
North Carolina takes exception to the Special Master’s
recommendation in his Preliminary Report to deny with­
out prejudice its motion to dismiss the Commission’s
claims on the ground that they are barred by the Eleventh
Amendment to the Constitution and by structural princi­
ples of state sovereign immunity. The Special Master
assumed for the sake of argument that a State possesses
sovereign immunity against a claim brought by an entity,
like the Commission, created by an interstate compact,5
——————
5 We

have held that an entity created through a valid exercise of the
Interstate Compact Clause is not entitled to immunity from suit under
the Eleventh Amendment, see Hess v. Port Authority Trans-Hudson
Corporation, 513 U. S. 30 (1994), but we have not decided whether such

