2

ALABAMA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

nal quotation marks omitted); see also Cuyler v. Adams,
449 U. S. 433, 438 (1981) (“[C]ongressional consent trans
forms an interstate compact . . . into a law of the United
States”).
From this principle, however, it simply does not follow
that a law’s nature and origin as a compact must be dis
missed as irrelevant. Like a treaty, a compact represents
an agreement between parties. See New Jersey, supra, at
831 (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (“[T]he Compact here is of
course a treaty”). The Court’s duty in interpreting a com
pact involves ascertaining the intent of the parties. See
Sullivan v. Kidd, 254 U. S. 433, 439 (1921) (“[T]reaties are
to be interpreted upon the principles which govern the
interpretation of contracts . . . with a view to making
effective the purposes of the high contracting parties”);
Wright v. Henkel, 190 U. S. 40, 57 (1903) (“Treaties must
receive a fair interpretation, according to the intention of
the contracting parties”). Carrying out this duty may lead
the Court to consult sources that might differ from those
normally reviewed when an ordinary federal statute is at
issue. That much is surely implicit in the Court’s refer
ence to contract law principles elsewhere in its opinion in
the instant case. See, e.g., ante, at 14 (“[T]he parties’
course of performance under the Compact is highly signifi
cant”); ibid. (citing the Restatement); id., at 18–19 (same);
see also New Jersey, supra, at 830–831 (SCALIA, J., dis
senting) (construing a compact in light of “hornbook con
tracts law that the practical construction of an ambiguous
agreement revealed by later conduct of the parties is good
indication of its meaning”).
That said, it is quite correct to hold here that the rea
sonable expectations of the contracting States, as mani
fested in the Compact, do not reveal an intent to limit
North Carolina’s power of withdrawal. For purposes of
rejecting this argument, it is sufficient to note—as the
Court does—that the Compact permits any State to with

