18

ALABAMA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

would, moreover, have been a foolish understanding, since
the regional monopoly to recoup construction costs would
not be a monopoly if South Carolina withdrew and contin­
ued to operate its facility—which is exactly what hap­
pened in 1995.3 Even leaving aside the principle, dis­
cussed infra, at 21, that implied obligations are not to be
read into interstate compacts, JUSTICE BREYER’s intuition
fails to reflect the reality of what was implied.
2
Plaintiffs take exception to the Special Master’s rejec­
tion of their alternative argument that North Carolina
repudiated the Compact when it announced it would not
take further steps toward obtaining a license. They argue
that North Carolina’s announcement that it was shutting
down the project constituted a refusal to tender any fur­
ther performance under the contract.
Plaintiffs’ repudiation theory fails for the same reasons
their breach theory fails. A repudiation occurs when an
obligor either informs an obligee “that the obligor will
——————
ble with the proposition that North Carolina did not have to provide all
funding for licensing the facility, and that it would be “inappropriate” to
proceed toward obtaining a license for a facility that would never be
needed or built.
3 South Carolina’s withdrawal from the Compact not only “could”
affect North Carolina’s ability to recoup its facility costs, as JUSTICE
BREYER grudgingly concedes, post, at 5; it unquestionably would. With
a regional competitor in the Barnwell facility and declining demand for
waste disposal facilities due to technological and other factors, App.
261, 263–264, North Carolina would receive significantly lower reve­
nues from its facility, id., at 261–262, 265. The document attached to a
1996 letter from North Carolina to the Commission trumpeting “$600
million in cost savings” that would come from a new facility, post, at 5,
proves precisely the opposite of what JUSTICE BREYER thinks. The cost
savings were to accrue “to all generators” of waste, App. 266 (emphasis
added)—that is, those who would use North Carolina’s facility. Those
savings would come, of course, from lower costs for waste disposal,
which means that North Carolina would be charging lower rates than
the Barnwell facility (and thus receiving lower revenues).

