16

ALABAMA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

to “secur[e] a license,” post, at 2, but only to take “appro­
priate steps” to obtain one, Art. 5(C), 99 Stat. 1877. And
nothing in the terms of the Compact required North Caro­
lina either to provide “adequate funding” for or to “beg[i]n
construction” on a regional facility, post, at 2. Other con­
temporaneously enacted interstate compacts expressly
provide that the host State is “responsible for the timely
development” of a regional facility, Central Midwest Com­
pact, Art. VI(f), 99 Stat. 1887; Midwest Compact,
Art. VI(e), id., at 1898, or “shall . . . [c]ause a regional
facility to be developed on a timely basis,” Rocky Mountain
Low-Level Radioactive Waste Compact, Art. III(d)(i), id.,
at 1903–1904. But the compact here before us has no such
provision, and the contrast is telling.1 Texas v. New Mex
ico, 462 U. S., at 565. Moreover, the Commission’s state­
ments described in the preceding paragraph, that it would
be imprudent to commit additional resources “ ‘if a source
of funds is not established soon for the ultimate comple­
tion of the project,’ ” or “ ‘if funds will not be available to
complete the project,’ ” surely suggest that North Carolina
is not committed to the funding by contract.
JUSTICE BREYER asserts, post, at 4–5, that the rotating­
——————
1 The Compact provides only that the host State is “responsible for
the availability . . . of their regional facilities in accordance with”
Article 5(B). Art. 3(C), 99 Stat. 1873–1874. The latter section makes
clear that responsibility for “availability” does not mean that the host
State will fund construction of the facility, but that it will keep it open
and not impose unreasonable restrictions on its use. JUSTICE BREYER is
correct that the Compact says the Commission is not “responsible” for
the costs of “the creation” of a regional facility. Art. 4(K)(1), id., at
1876. But what is important here is that it does not say that the host
State is responsible—which (if it were true) would almost certainly
have been joined with saying who was not responsible. What JUSTICE
BREYER overlooks is the possibility that no one is responsible, and the
licensing and construction of the facility is meant to depend upon
voluntary funding by interested parties, such as the party States, the
Commission, and low-level radioactive waste generators.

