Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

Opinion of the Court

other allegations of the complaint, be thought to be $80
million payable to each of the four plaintiff States and the
Commission.
North Carolina argues, however, that summary judg­
ment in its favor is appropriate because it is clear that the
Commission, and not the plaintiff States, provided $80
million to North Carolina—wherefore, as a matter of law,
only the Commission can claim entitlement to $80 million,
either as a measure of damages for breach of the Compact
under Counts I and II of the bill of complaint, see Re­
statement §370, Comment a, and §373, or under the un­
just enrichment, promissory estoppel, and money-had-and­
received theories of recovery in Counts III, IV, and V, see,
e.g., Restatement of Restitution §1, Comment a (1936).
And, it contends, a stand-alone suit by the Commission is
barred by sovereign immunity.
With regard to Counts I and II, at least, we disagree.
The Commission’s claims under those Compact-related
Counts are wholly derivative of the States’ claims. See
Arizona v. California, supra, at 614. The Commission is
“a legal entity separate and distinct from” the States that
are parties to the Compact. Art. 4(M)(1), 99 Stat. 1877.
Since it is not a party it has neither a contractual right to
performance by the party States nor enforceable statutory
rights under Article 5 of the Compact, see Bennett v.
Spear, 520 U. S. 154, 162–163 (1997). The Compact does,
however, authorize the Commission to “act or appear on
behalf of any party [S]tate or [S]tates . . . as an intervenor
or party in interest before . . . any court of law,” Art.
4(E)(10), 99 Stat. 1875, and it is obviously in this capacity
that the Commission seeks to vindicate the plaintiff
States’ statutory and contractual rights in Counts I and II.
Its Count I and Count II claims therefore rise or fall with
the claims of the States. While the Commission may not
bring them in a stand-alone action under this Court’s
original jurisdiction, see §1251(a), it may assert them in

