14

ALABAMA v. NORTH CAROLINA
Opinion of the Court

“[s]pecially suitable; fit; proper,” Webster’s Second 133—
could depend upon many factors other than its mere in­
dispensability to obtaining a license. It would not be
appropriate, for example, to take a step whose cost greatly
exceeded whatever benefits the license would confer, or if
it was highly uncertain the license would ever issue.
In determining whether, in terminating its efforts to
obtain a license, North Carolina failed to take what the
parties considered “appropriate” steps, the parties’ course
of performance under the Compact is highly significant.
See, e.g., New Jersey v. New York, 523 U. S. 767, 830–831
(1998) (SCALIA, J., dissenting); Restatement (Second) of
Contracts §§202(4), 203 (1979) (hereinafter Restatement).
That firmly establishes that North Carolina was not ex­
pected to go it alone—to proceed with the very expensive
licensing process without any external financial assis­
tance. The history of the Compact consists entirely of
shared financial burdens. From the beginning, North
Carolina made clear that it required financial assistance
to do the extensive work required for obtaining a license.
The Commission promptly declared it was “appropriate
and necessary” to assist North Carolina with the costs.
App. 63. It provided the vast majority of funding for li­
censing-related activities—$80 million, compared to North
Carolina’s $34 million. The Commission repeatedly noted
the necessity (and propriety) of providing financial assis­
tance to North Carolina, and reiterated its dedication to
sharing the substantial financial burdens of the licensing
phase. See, e.g., id., at 63, 71, 145. There is nothing to
support the proposition that the other States had an obli­
gation under the Compact to share the licensing costs
through the Commission; but we doubt that they did so
out of love for the Tarheel State. They did it, we think,
because that was their understanding of how the Compact
was supposed to work. One must take the Commission at
its word, that it was “appropriate” to share the cost—

