Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

which suggests that it would not have been appropriate to
make North Carolina proceed on its own.
Nor was North Carolina required after December 19,
1997, to continue to expend its own funds at the same
level it had previously (which Plaintiffs concede had satis­
fied North Carolina’s obligation to take “appropriate
steps”). Once the Commission refused to provide any
further financial assistance, North Carolina would have
had to assume an unlimited financial commitment to cover
all remaining licensing costs. Even if it maintained its
prior rate of appropriations going forward, it would not
have come close to covering the at least $34 million needed
for the last steps of the licensing phase. And since the
income from the South Carolina facility had been termi­
nated, there was no apparent prospect of funding for the
construction phase (expected to cost at least $75 million).
In connection with its August 1997 refusal to provide
further assistance, the Commission itself had said, “[I]t
will be imprudent to continue to deplete Commission
resources for this purpose if a source of funds is not estab­
lished soon for the ultimate completion of the project.” Id.,
at 306, 307; Joint Supp. Fact Brief App. 36, 37. And in
March 1998, the Commission “strongly” reiterated that “it
would be imprudent to spend additional funds for licens­
ing activities if funds will not be available to complete the
project.” Id., at 59. What was imprudent for the Commis­
sion would surely have been imprudent (and hence inap­
propriate) for North Carolina as well. The State would
have wasted millions of its taxpayers’ dollars on what
seemed to be a futile effort.
JUSTICE BREYER would uphold Plaintiffs’ challenge on
this point. He believes that the Compact obligated North
Carolina to fund and complete the licensing and construc­
tion of a nuclear waste facility. Post, at 2, 4–6 (opinion
concurring in part and dissenting in part). In fact, how­
ever, North Carolina was not even contractually required

