Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

host requirement in the Compact, see Art. 5(A), 99 Stat.
1873, necessarily implies that North Carolina is solely
responsible for the licensing and construction costs of its
facility. But all that requirement entails is that a party
State “shall not be designated” as a host State for a second
time before “each [other] party [S]tate” has taken a turn.
Ibid. It can perfectly well envision that the States will
take turns in bearing the lead responsibility for getting
the facility licensed, supervising its construction, and
operating the facility on its soil. In fact, that is just what
its text suggests, since it describes the responsibility that
is to be rotated as the host State’s “obligation . . . to have a
regional facility operated within its borders.” Ibid. Not to
construct it, or pay for its construction, but to “have [it]
operated within its borders.” As noted above, other con­
temporaneously enacted compacts do spell out the obliga­
tion of the host State to construct the facility. Still others
at least provide that the host State will recoup its costs
through disposal fees—which arguably suggests that the
host State is to bear the costs. See, e.g., Central Compact,
Art. III(d),
99
Stat.
1865;
Northeast
Compact,
Art. III(c)(2), id., at 1913. The compact before us here
does not even contain that arguable suggestion.
What it comes down to, then, is JUSTICE BREYER’s intui­
tion that the whole point of the Compact was that each
designated host State would bear the up-front costs of
licensing and construction, but would eventually recoup
those costs through its regional monopoly on the disposal
of low-level radioactive waste. Post, at 5–6. He can cite no
provision in the Compact which reflects such an under­
standing, and the behavior of the parties contradicts it.2 It
——————
2 The course-of-dealing evidence that JUSTICE BREYER identifies, post,
at 6–7, is not probative. The Commission’s statements that it is not
legally responsible for costs and that at some point Commission funds
will no longer be available, and North Carolina’s assurances that it will
keep its commitments and honor its obligations, are perfectly compati­

