(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. ET AL. v. REGAL-

BELOIT CORP. ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1553. Argued March 24, 2010—Decided June 21, 2010*
Respondents (cargo owners) delivered to petitioners in No. 08–1553
(“K” Line) goods for shipping from China to inland United States des
tinations. “K” Line issued them four through bills of lading, i.e., bills
of lading covering both the ocean and inland portions of transport in
a single document. As relevant here, the bills contain a “Himalaya
Clause,” which extends the bills’ defenses and liability limitations to
subcontractors; permit “K” Line to subcontract to complete the jour
ney; provide that the entire journey is governed by the Carriage of
Goods by Sea Act (COGSA), which regulates bills of lading issued by
ocean carriers engaged in foreign trade; and designate a Tokyo court
as the venue for any dispute. “K” Line arranged the journey, subcon
tracting with petitioner in No. 08–1554 (Union Pacific) for rail ship
ment in the United States. The cargo was shipped in “K” Line ves
sels to California and then loaded onto a Union Pacific train. A
derailment along the inland route allegedly destroyed the cargo. Ul
timately, the Federal District Court granted the motion of Union Pa
cific and “K” Line to dismiss the cargo owners’ suits against them
based on the parties’ Tokyo forum-selection clause. The Ninth Cir
cuit reversed, concluding that that clause was trumped by the Car
mack Amendment governing bills of lading issued by domestic rail
carriers, which applied to the inland portion of the shipment.
Held: Because the Carmack Amendment does not apply to a shipment
originating overseas under a single through bill of lading, the parties’
——————
* Together with No. 08–1554, Union Pacific Railroad Co. v. RegalBeloit Corp. et al., also on certiorari to the same Court.


2

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Syllabus
agreement to litigate these cases in Tokyo is binding. Pp. 4–21.
(a) COGSA, which “K” Line and Union Pacific contend governs
these cases, requires a carrier to issue to the cargo owner a bill con
taining specified terms. It does not limit the parties’ ability to adopt
forum-selection clauses. It only applies to shipments from United
States ports to foreign ports and vice versa, but permits parties to ex
tend certain of its terms “by contract” to cover “the entire period in
which [the goods] would be under [a carrier’s] responsibility, includ
ing [a] period of inland . . . transport.” Norfolk Southern R. Co. v.
James N. Kirby, Pty Ltd., 543 U. S. 14, 29. The Carmack Amend
ment, on which respondents rely, requires a domestic rail carrier that
“receives [property] for transportation under this part” to issue a bill
of lading. 49 U. S. C. §11706(a). “[T]his part” refers to the Surface
Transportation Board’s (STB’s) jurisdiction over domestic rail trans
portation. See §10501(b). Carmack assigns liability for damage on
the rail route to “receiving rail carrier[s]” and “delivering rail car
rier[s],” regardless of which carrier caused the damage. §11706(a).
Its purpose is to relieve cargo owners “of the burden of searching out
a particular negligent carrier from among the often numerous carri
ers handling an interstate shipment of goods.” Reider v. Thompson,
339 U. S. 113, 119. Thus, it constrains carriers’ ability to limit liabil
ity by contract, §11706(c), and limits the parties’ choice of venue to
federal and state courts. §11706(d)(1). Pp. 4–7.
(b) In Kirby, as in these cases, an ocean shipping company issued a
through bill of lading that extended COGSA’s terms to the inland
segment, and the property was damaged during the inland rail por
tion. This Court held that the through bill’s terms governed under
federal maritime law, notwithstanding contrary state laws, 543 U. S.,
at 23–27, explaining that “so long as a bill of lading requires substan
tial carriage of goods by sea, its purpose is to effectuate maritime
commerce,” id., at 27, and adding that “[a]pplying state law . . . would
undermine the uniformity of general maritime law,” id., at 28, and
defeat COGSA’s apparent purpose “to facilitate efficient contracting
in contracts for carriage by sea,” ibid. Here, as in Kirby, “K” Line is
sued through bills under COGSA, in maritime commerce, and ex
tended its terms to the journey’s inland domestic segment. Pp. 7–8.
(c) The Carmack Amendment’s text, history, and purposes make
clear that it does not require a different result. Pp. 8–21.
(1) Carmack divides the realm of rail carriers into receiving, de
livering, and connecting rail carriers. Its first sentence requires a
compliant bill of lading (1) if a rail carrier provid[es] transportation
or service subject to the [STB’s] jurisdiction” and (2) if that carrier
“receives” the property “for transportation . . . .” 11706(a). It thus
requires the receiving rail carrier—but not the delivering or connect


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
ing rail carrier—to issue a bill of lading. This conclusion is consistent
with statute’s text and this Court’s precedent. See St. Louis, I. M. &
S. R. Co. v. Starbird, 243 U. S. 592, 595, 604. A receiving rail carrier
is the initial carrier, which “receives” the property for domestic rail
transportation at the journey’s point of origin. If the Carmack’s bill
of lading requirement referred not to the initial carrier, but to any
carrier “receiving” the property from another carrier, then every car
rier during the shipment would have to issue its own separate bill.
This would be contrary to Carmack’s purpose of making the receiving
and delivering carriers liable under a single, initial bill for damage
caused by any carrier within a single course of shipment. This con
clusion is consistent with Mexican Light & Power Co. v. Texas Mexi
can R. Co., 331 U. S. 731, where the Court held that a bill of lading
issued by a subsequent rail carrier when the “initial carrier” has is
sued a through bill is “void” unless it “represents the initiation of a
new shipment,” id., at 733–734. And Reider, supra, is not to the con
trary. There, absent a through bill of lading, the original journey
from Argentina terminated at the port of New Orleans, and the first
rail carrier in the United States was the receiving rail carrier for
Carmack purposes. Id., at 117. Carmack’s second sentence estab
lishes that it applies only to transport of property for which a receiv
ing carrier is required to issue a bill of lading, regardless of whether
that carrier actually issues such a bill. See §11706(a). Thus, Car
mack applies only if the journey begins with a receiving rail carrier
that had to issue a compliant bill of lading, not if the property is re
ceived at an overseas location under a through bill that covers trans
port into an inland location in this country. The initial carrier in that
instance receives the property at the shipment’s point of origin for
overseas multimodal import transport, not domestic rail transport.
Carmack did not require “K” Line to issue bills of lading because “K”
Line was not a receiving rail carrier. That it chose to use rail trans
port to complete one segment of the journey under its “essentially
maritime” contracts, Kirby, supra, at 24, does not put it within Car
mack’s reach. Union Pacific, which the cargo owners concede was a
mere delivering carrier that did not have to issue its own Carmack
bill of lading, was also not a receiving rail carrier under Carmack.
Because the Ninth Circuit ignored Carmack’s “receive[d] . . . for
transportation” limitation, it reached the wrong conclusion. Its con
clusion is also an awkward fit with Carmack’s venue provisions,
which presume that the receiving carrier obtains the property in a
judicial district within the United States. If “K” Line were a receiv
ing carrier in a case with a “point of origin” in China, there would be
no place under Carmack to sue “K” Line, since China is not within a
judicial district “of the United States or in a State Court.”


4

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Syllabus
§11706(d)(1). Pp. 8–15.
(2) Carmack’s statutory history supports this conclusion. None of
its legislative versions—the original 1906 statute or the amended
1915, 1978, or 1995 ones—have applied to the inland domestic rail
segment of an import shipment from overseas under a through bill.
Pp. 15–17.
(3) This interpretation also attains the most consistency between
Carmack and COGSA. Applying Carmack to the inland segment of
an international carriage originating overseas under a through bill
would undermine Carmack’s purposes, which are premised on the
view that a shipment has a single bill of lading and any damage is
the responsibility of both receiving and delivering carriers. Under
the Ninth Circuit’s interpretation, there might be no venue in which
to sue the receiving carrier. That interpretation would also under
mine COGSA and international, container-based multimodal trans
port: COGSA’s liability and venue rules would apply when cargo is
damaged at sea and Carmack’s rules almost always would apply
when the damage occurs on land. Moreover, applying Carmack to in
ternational import shipping transport would undermine COGSA’s
purpose “to facilitate efficient contracting in contracts for carriage by
sea.” Kirby, supra, at 29. The cargo owners’ contrary policy argu
ments are unavailing. Pp. 17–20.

557 F. 3d 985, reversed and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, THOMAS, BREYER, and ALITO, JJ., joined. SOTOMAYOR,
J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which STEVENS and GINSBURG, JJ.,
joined.

