Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

Nos. 08–1553 and 08–1554
_________________

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD., ET AL.,
PETITIONERS
08–1553
v.
REGAL-BELOIT CORPORATION ET AL.
UNION PACIFIC RAILROAD COMPANY, PETITIONER
08–1554
v.
REGAL-BELOIT CORPORATION ET AL.
ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
[June 21, 2010]

JUSTICE KENNEDY delivered the opinion of the Court.
These cases concern through bills of lading covering
cargo for the entire course of shipment, beginning in a
foreign, overseas country and continuing to a final, inland
destination in the United States. The voyage here in
cluded ocean transit followed by transfer to a rail carrier
in this country. The Court addressed similar factual
circumstances in Norfolk Southern R. Co. v. James N.
Kirby, Pty Ltd., 543 U. S. 14 (2004). In that case the
terms of a through bill were controlled by federal maritime
law and by a federal statute known as the Carriage of
Goods by Sea Act (COGSA), note following 46 U. S. C.
§30701. Kirby held that bill of lading provisions permissi
ble under COGSA can be invoked by a domestic rail car
rier, despite contrary state law.


2

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Opinion of the Court

The instant cases present a question neither raised nor
addressed in Kirby. It is whether the terms of a through
bill of lading issued abroad by an ocean carrier can apply
to the domestic part of the import’s journey by a rail car
rier, despite prohibitions or limitations in another federal
statute. That statute is known as the Carmack Amend
ment and it governs the terms of bills of lading issued by
domestic rail carriers. 49 U. S. C. §11706(a).
I
Respondents Regal-Beloit Corporation, Victory Fire
works, Inc., PICC Property & Casualty Company Ltd., and
Royal & Sun Alliance Insurance Company Ltd. are cargo
owners or insurance firms that paid losses to cargo owners
and succeeded to their rights, all referred to as “cargo
owners.” To ship their goods from China to inland desti
nations in the Midwestern United States, the cargo own
ers delivered the goods in China to petitioners in No. 08–
1553, Kawasaki Kisen Kaisha, Ltd., and its agent “K” Line
America, Inc., both referred to as “K” Line. All agree the
relevant contract terms governing the shipment are con
tained in four through bills of lading “K” Line issued to the
cargo owners. The bills of lading covered the entire course
of shipment.
The bills required “K” Line to arrange delivery of the
goods from China to their final destinations in the United
States, by any mode of transportation of “K” Line’s choos
ing. A bill of lading “records that a carrier has received
goods from the party that wishes to ship them, states the
terms of carriage, and serves as evidence of the contract
for carriage.” Kirby, 543 U. S., at 18–19. A through bill
of lading covers both the ocean and inland portions of the
transport in a single document. Id., at 25–26.
“K” Line’s through bills contain five relevant provisions.
First, they include a so-called “Himalaya Clause,” which
extends the bills’ defenses and limitations on liability to


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

parties that sign subcontracts to perform services contem
plated by the bills. See id., at 20, and n. 2. Second, the
bills permit “K” Line “to sub-contract on any terms what
soever” for the completion of the journey. App. 145.
Third, the bills provide that COGSA’s terms govern the
entire journey. Fourth, the bills require that any dispute
will be governed by Japanese law. Fifth, the bills state
that any action relating to the carriage must be brought in
“Tokyo District Court in Japan.” Id., at 144. The forum
selection provision in the last clause gives rise to the
dispute here.
“K” Line, pursuant to the bills of lading, arranged for
the entire journey. It subcontracted with petitioner in No.
08–1554, Union Pacific Railroad Company, for rail ship
ment in the United States. The goods were to be shipped
in a “K” Line vessel to a port in Long Beach, California,
and then transferred to Union Pacific for rail carriage to
the final destinations.
In March and April 2005, the cargo owners brought four
different container shipments to “K” Line vessels in Chi
nese ports. All parties seem to assume that “K” Line
safely transported the cargo across the Pacific Ocean to
California. The containers were then loaded onto a Union
Pacific train and that train, or some other train operated
by Union Pacific, derailed in Tyrone, Oklahoma, allegedly
destroying the cargo.
The cargo owners filed four separate lawsuits in the
Superior Court of California, County of Los Angeles. The
suit named “K” Line and Union Pacific as defendants.
Union Pacific removed the suits to the United States
District Court for the Central District of California. Union
Pacific and “K” Line then moved to dismiss based on the
parties’ Tokyo forum-selection clause. The District Court
granted the motion to dismiss. It decided that the forum
selection clause was reasonable and applied to Union
Pacific pursuant to the Himalaya Clause in “K” Line’s bills


4

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Opinion of the Court

of lading. 462 F. Supp. 2d 1098, 1102–1103 (2006).
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Cir
cuit reversed and remanded. 557 F. 3d 985 (2009). The
court concluded that the Carmack Amendment applied to
the inland portion of an international shipment under a
through bill of lading and thus trumped the parties’ fo
rum-selection clause. Id., at 994–995. The court noted
that this view was consistent with the position taken by
the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, see id., at 994
(citing Sompo Japan Ins. Co. of Am. v. Union Pacific R.
Co., 456 F. 3d 54 (2006)), but inconsistent with the views
of the Courts of Appeals for the Fourth, Sixth, Seventh,
and Eleventh Circuits, see 557 F. 3d, at 994 (citing Shao v.
Link Cargo (Taiwan) Ltd., 986 F. 2d 700 (CA4 1993);
American Road Serv. Co. v. Consolidated Rail Corp., 348
F. 3d 565 (CA6 2003); Capitol Converting Equip., Inc. v.
LEP Transp., Inc., 965 F. 2d 391 (CA7 1992); Altadis USA,
Inc. ex rel. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Co. v. Sea Star Line, LLC,
458 F. 3d 1288 (CA11 2006)). This Court granted certio
rari to address whether Carmack applies to the inland
segment of an overseas import shipment under a through
bill of lading. 558 U. S. ___ (2009).
II 

A

Before turning to Carmack, a brief description of
COGSA is in order; for “K” Line’s and Union Pacific’s
primary contention is that COGSA, not Carmack, controls.
COGSA governs the terms of bills of lading issued by
ocean carriers engaged in foreign trade. 49 Stat. 1207, as
amended, note following 46 U. S. C. §30701, p. 1178. It
requires each carrier to issue to the cargo owner a bill that
contains certain terms. §3(3)–(8), at 1178–1179. Although
COGSA imposes some limitations on the parties’ authority
to adjust liability, it does not limit the parties’ ability to
adopt forum-selection clauses. See Vimar Seguros y


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

Reaseguros, S. A. v. M/V Sky Reefer, 515 U. S. 528, 537–
539 (1995). By its terms, COGSA only applies to ship
ments from United States ports to ports of foreign coun
tries and vice versa. §§1(e), 13, at 1178, 1180. The stat
ute, however, allows parties “the option of extending
[certain COGSA terms] by contract” to cover “the entire
period in which [the goods] would be under [a carrier’s]
responsibility, including [a] period of . . . inland transport.”
Kirby, 543 U. S., at 29 (citing COGSA §7, at 1180). Ocean
carriers, who often must issue COGSA bills of lading, are
regulated by the Federal Maritime Commission (Maritime
Commission), which is responsible for oversight over
“common carriage of goods by water in . . . foreign com
merce.” 46 U. S. C. §40101(1).
B
The next statute to consider is the Carmack Amend
ment, §7, 34 Stat. 595, which governs the terms of bills of
lading issued by domestic rail carriers. Carmack was first
enacted in 1906 as an amendment to the Interstate Com
merce Act, 24 Stat. 379. The Carmack Amendment has
been altered and recodified over the last century. It now
provides, in relevant part, as follows:
“(a) A rail carrier providing transportation or service
subject to the jurisdiction of the [Surface Transporta
tion Board (STB)] under this part shall issue a receipt
or bill of lading for property it receives for transporta
tion under this part. That rail carrier and any other
carrier that delivers the property and is providing
transportation or service subject to the jurisdiction of
the [STB] under this part are liable to the person enti
tled to recover under the receipt or bill of lading. The
liability imposed under this subsection is for the ac
tual loss or injury to the property caused by—
“(1) the receiving rail carrier;


6

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Opinion of the Court

“(2) the delivering rail carrier; or
“(3) another rail carrier over whose line or route
the property is transported in the United States or
from a place in the United States to a place in an
adjacent foreign country when transported under a
through bill of lading.
“Failure to issue a receipt or bill of lading does not af
fect the liability of a rail carrier.” 49 U. S. C. §11706;
see also §14706(a) (motor carriers).
The Carmack Amendment thus requires a rail carrier
that “receives [property] for transportation under this
part” to issue a bill of lading. §11706(a). The provision
“this part” refers to is the STB’s jurisdiction over rail
transportation within the United States. See §10501
(2006 ed. and Supp. II). The STB is the successor to the
Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC). The STB has
“exclusive” jurisdiction to regulate “transportation by rail
carriers” between places in the United States as well as
between a place “in the United States and a place in a
foreign country.” §10501(a)(2)(F), (b) (2006 ed.). Regu
lated rail carriers must provide transportation subject to
STB rail carrier jurisdiction “on reasonable request,”
§11101(a), at reasonable rates,
§§10702, 10707(b),
11101(a), (e).
In cases where it applies, Carmack imposes upon “re
ceiving rail carrier[s]” and “delivering rail carrier[s]”
liability for damage caused during the rail route under the
bill of lading, regardless of which carrier caused the dam
age. §11706(a). Carmack’s purpose is to relieve cargo
owners “of the burden of searching out a particular negli
gent carrier from among the often numerous carriers
handling an interstate shipment of goods.” Reider v.
Thompson, 339 U. S. 113, 119 (1950). To help achieve this
goal, Carmack constrains carriers’ ability to limit liability
by contract. §11706(c).


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

Carmack also limits the parties’ ability to choose the
venue of their suit:
“(d)(1) A civil action under this section may be
brought in a district court of the United States or in a
State court.
“(2)(A) A civil action under this section may only be
brought—
“(i) against the originating rail carrier, in the judi
cial district in which the point of origin is located;
“(ii) against the delivering rail carrier, in the judi
cial district in which the principal place of business
of the person bringing the action is located if the de
livering carrier operates a railroad or a route
through such judicial district, or in the judicial dis
trict in which the point of destination is located; and
“(iii) against the carrier alleged to have caused the
loss or damage, in the judicial district in which such
loss or damage is alleged to have occurred.” §11706.
For purposes of these cases, it can be assumed that if
Carmack’s terms apply to the bills of lading here, the
cargo owners would have a substantial argument that the
Tokyo forum-selection clause in the bills is pre-empted by
Carmack’s venue provisions. The parties argue about
whether they may contract out of Carmack’s venue provi
sions and other requirements, see §§10502, 10709; but in
light of the disposition and ruling to follow, those matters
need not be discussed or further explored.
III
In Kirby, an ocean shipping company issued a through
bill of lading, agreeing to deliver cargo from Australia to
Alabama. Like the through bills in the present cases, the
Kirby bill extended COGSA’s terms to the inland segment
under a Himalaya Clause. There, as here, the property


8

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Opinion of the Court

was damaged by a domestic rail carrier during the inland
rail portion. 543 U. S., at 19–20.
Kirby held that the through bill’s terms governed under
federal maritime law, notwithstanding contrary state
laws. Id., at 23–27. Kirby explained that “so long as a bill
of lading requires substantial carriage of goods by sea, its
purpose is to effectuate maritime commerce.” Id., at 27.
The Court added that “[a]pplying state law to cases like
this one would undermine the uniformity of general mari
time law.” Id., at 28. “Confusion and inefficiency will
inevitably result if more than one body of law governs a
given contract’s meaning.” Id., at 29. The Court noted
that its conclusion “reinforce[d] the liability regime Con
gress established in COGSA,” and explained that COGSA
allows parties to extend its terms to an inland portion of a
journey under a through bill of lading. Ibid. Finally, the
Court concluded that a contrary holding would defeat “the
apparent purpose of COGSA, to facilitate efficient con
tracting in contracts for carriage by sea.” Ibid.
Much of what the Court said in Kirby applies to the
present cases. “K” Line issued the through bills under
COGSA, in maritime commerce. Congress considered
such international through bills and decided to permit
parties to extend COGSA’s terms to the inland domestic
segment of the journey. The cargo owners and “K” Line
did exactly that in these cases, agreeing in the through
bills to require that any suit be brought in Tokyo.
IV
The cargo owners argue that the Carmack Amendment,
which has its own venue provisions and was not discussed
in Kirby, requires a different result. In particular they
argue that Carmack applies to the domestic inland seg
ment of the carriage here, so the Tokyo forum-selection
clause is inapplicable. For the reasons set forth below,
this contention must be rejected. Instructed by the text,


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

history, and purposes of Carmack, the Court now holds
that the amendment does not apply to a shipment origi
nating overseas under a single through bill of lading. As
in Kirby, the terms of the bill govern the parties’ rights.
A
The text of the statute charts the analytic course. Car
mack divides the realm of rail carriers into three parts:
(1) receiving rail carriers; (2) delivering rail carriers; and
(3) connecting rail carriers. A “receiving rail carrier” is
one that “provid[es] transportation or service . . . for prop
erty it receives for transportation under this part.”
§11706(a); see §11706(a)(1). The provision “this part”
refers to is the STB’s jurisdiction over rail transportation
within the United States. See §10501. A “delivering rail
carrier” “delivers the property and is providing transporta
tion or service subject to the jurisdiction of the [STB]
under this part.” §11706(a); see §11706(a)(2). A connect
ing rail carrier is “another rail carrier over whose line or
route the property is transported in the United States or
from a place in the United States to a place in an adjacent
foreign country when transported under a through bill of
lading.” §11706(a)(3).
A rail carrier’s obligation to issue a Carmack-compliant
bill of lading is determined by Carmack’s first sentence:
“A rail carrier providing transportation or service sub
ject to the jurisdiction of the [STB] under this part
shall issue a receipt or bill of lading for property it re
ceives for transportation under this part.” §11706(a).
This critical first sentence requires a Carmack-compliant
bill of lading if two conditions are satisfied. First, the rail
carrier must “provid[e] transportation or service subject to
the jurisdiction of the [STB].” Second, that carrier must
“receiv[e]” the property “for transportation under this
part,” where “this part” is the STB’s jurisdiction over


10

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Opinion of the Court

domestic rail transport. Carmack thus requires the re
ceiving rail carrier—but not the delivering or connecting
rail carrier—to issue a bill of lading. As explained below,
ascertaining the shipment’s point of origin is critical to
deciding whether the shipment includes a receiving rail
carrier.
The conclusion that Carmack’s bill of lading require
ment only applies to the receiving rail carrier is dictated
by the text and is consistent with this Court’s precedent.
See St. Louis, I. M. & S. R. Co. v. Starbird, 243 U. S. 592,
604 (1917) (explaining that Carmack “requires the receiv
ing carrier to issue a through bill of lading”). A receiving
rail carrier is the initial carrier, which “receives” the
property for domestic rail transportation at the journey’s
point of origin. §11706(a). If Carmack’s bill of lading
requirement did not refer to the initial carrier, but rather
to any rail carrier that in the colloquial sense “received”
the property from another carrier, then every carrier
during the shipment would have to issue its own separate
bill. This would be altogether contrary to Carmack’s
purpose of making the receiving and delivering carriers
liable under a single, initial bill of lading for damage
caused by any carrier within a single course of shipment.
This Court’s decision in Mexican Light & Power Co. v.
Texas Mexican R. Co., 331 U. S. 731 (1947), supports the
conclusion that only the receiving rail carrier must issue a
Carmack bill of lading. There, a subsequent rail carrier in
an export shipment from the United States to Mexico
issued its own separate bill of lading at the U. S.-Mexico
border. The second bill differed from the through bill
issued by the “initial carrier,” id., at 733, (that is, the
receiving carrier) at the inland point of origin. The Court
held that Carmack, far from requiring nonreceiving carri
ers to issue their separate bills of lading, makes any sub
sequent bill “void” unless the “so-called second bill of
lading represents the initiation of a new shipment.” Id., at


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

734.
The Court’s decision in Reider v. Thompson, 339 U. S.
113, is not to the contrary. That case involved goods
originating in Argentina, bound for an inland location in
the United States. The Court in Reider determined that
because there was no through bill of lading, the original
journey from Argentina terminated at the port of New
Orleans. Thus, the first rail carrier in the United States
was the receiving rail carrier and had to issue a Carmack
bill of lading. Id., at 117. And because that carrier had to
issue a separate bill of lading, it was not liable for damage
done during the ocean-based portion of the shipment. Id.,
at 118–119. Notably, neither Mexican Light nor Reider
addressed the situation in the present cases, where the
shipment originates overseas under a through bill of lad
ing. And, for this reason, neither case discussed COGSA.
The Carmack Amendment’s second sentence establishes
when Carmack liability applies:
“[The receiving rail carrier referred to in the first sen
tence] and any other carrier that delivers the property
and is providing transportation or service subject to
the jurisdiction of the [STB] under this part are liable
to the person entitled to recover under the receipt or
bill of lading.” §11706(a)
Thus, the receiving and delivering rail carriers are subject
to liability only when damage is done to this “property,”
that is to say, to property for which Carmack’s first sen
tence requires the receiving rail carrier to issue a bill of
lading. Ibid. Put another way, Carmack applies only to
transport of property for which Carmack requires a receiv
ing carrier to issue a bill of lading, regardless of whether
that carrier erroneously fails to issue such a bill. See ibid.
(“Failure to issue a receipt or bill of lading does not affect
the liability of a rail carrier”). The language in some of the
Courts of Appeals’ decisions, which were rejected by the


12

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Opinion of the Court

Court of Appeals in the opinion now under review, could
be read to imply that Carmack applies only if a rail carrier
actually issued a separate domestic bill of lading. See,
e.g., Atladis, 458 F. 3d, at 1291–1294; American Road, 348
F. 3d, at 568; Shao, 986 F. 2d, at 703; Capitol Converting,
965 F. 2d, at 394. This may have led to some confusion.
The decisive question is not whether the rail carrier in fact
issued a Carmack bill but rather whether that carrier was
required to issue a bill by Carmack’s first sentence.
The above principles establish that for Carmack’s provi
sions to apply the journey must begin with a receiving rail
carrier, which would have to issue a Carmack-compliant
bill of lading. It follows that Carmack does not apply if
the property is received at an overseas location under a
through bill that covers the transport into an inland loca
tion in the United States. In such a case, there is no
receiving rail carrier that “receives” the property “for
[domestic rail] transportation,” §11706(a), and thus no
carrier that must issue a Carmack-compliant bill of lading.
The initial carrier in that instance receives the property at
the shipment’s point of origin for overseas multimodal
import transport, not for domestic rail transport. (Today’s
decision need not address the instance where goods are
received at a point in the United States for export. Nor is
it necessary to decide if Carmack applies to goods initially
received in Canada or Mexico, for import into the United
States. See infra, at 16.)
The present cases illustrate the operation of these prin
ciples. Carmack did not require “K” Line to issue bills of
lading because “K” Line was not a receiving rail carrier.
“K” Line obtained the cargo in China for overseas trans
port across an ocean and then to inland destinations in the
United States. “K” Line shipped this property under
COGSA-authorized through bills of lading. See supra, at
4–5. That “K” Line chose to use rail transport to complete
one segment of the journey under these “essentially mari


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

time” contracts, Kirby, 543 U. S., at 24, does not put “K”
Line within Carmack’s reach and thus does not require it
to issue Carmack bills of lading.
As for Union Pacific, it was also not a receiving rail
carrier under Carmack. The cargo owners conceded at
oral argument that, even under their theory, Union Pacific
was a mere delivering carrier, which did not have to issue
its own Carmack bill of lading. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 29, 39.
This was a necessary concession. A carrier does not be
come a receiving carrier simply by accepting goods for
further transport from another carrier in the middle of an
international shipment under a through bill. After all,
Union Pacific was not the “initial carrier” for the carriage.
Mexican Light, 331 U. S., at 733.
If a carrier like Union Pacific, which acts as a connect
ing or delivering carrier during an international through
shipment, was, counterintuitively, a receiving carrier
under Carmack, this would in effect outlaw through ship
ments under a single bill of lading. This is because a
carriage like the one in the present case would require two
bills of lading: one that the overseas carrier (here, “K”
Line) issues to the cargo owners under COGSA, and a
second one that the first domestic rail carrier (here, Union
Pacific) issues to the overseas carrier under Carmack.
Kirby noted “the popularity of ‘through’ bills of lading, in
which cargo owners can contract for transportation across
oceans and to inland destinations in a single transaction.”
543 U. S., at 25–26. The Court sees no reason to read
COGSA and Carmack to outlaw this efficient mode of
international shipping by requiring these journeys to have
multiple bills of lading. In addition, if Union Pacific had
to issue a Carmack bill of lading to “K” Line, it is unclear
whether the cargo owners (the parties Carmack is de
signed to protect) would be able to sue under the terms
governing that bill, especially in light of their different
through bill with “K” Line. These difficulties are reason


14

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Opinion of the Court

enough to reject this novel interpretation of Carmack,
which was neither urged by any party nor adopted by any
authority that has been called to this Court’s attention.
This would be a quite different case if, as in Reider, the
bills of lading for the overseas transport ended at this
country’s ports and the cargo owners then contracted with
Union Pacific to complete a new journey to an inland
destination in the United States. Under those circum
stances, Union Pacific would have been the receiving rail
carrier and would have been required to issue a separate
Carmack-compliant bill of lading to the cargo owners. See
Reider, 339 U. S., at 117 (“If the various parties dealing
with this shipment separated the carriage into distinct
portions by their contracts, it is not for courts judicially to
meld the portions into something they are not”).
The Court of Appeals interpreted Carmack as applying
to any domestic rail segment of an overseas shipment,
regardless of whether Carmack required a bill of lading.
The court rested on the assumption that “[STB]’s jurisdic
tion . . . is coextensive with Carmack’s coverage.” 557
F. 3d, at 992. Yet, as explained above, Carmack applies
only to shipments for which Carmack requires a bill of
lading; that is to say, to shipments that start with a car
rier that is both subject to the STB’s jurisdiction and
“receives [the property] for [domestic rail] transportation.”
The Court of Appeals ignored this “receive[d] . . . for trans
portation” limitation and so reached the wrong conclusion.
See, e.g., Reiter v. Sonotone Corp., 442 U. S. 330, 339
(1979) (courts are “obliged to give effect, if possible, to
every word Congress used”).
The Court of Appeals’ conclusion is also an awkward fit
with Carmack’s venue provisions. Under Carmack, a suit
against the “originating” (that is, receiving) rail carrier
that has not actually caused the damage to the goods “may
only be brought . . . in the judicial district in which the
point of origin is located.” §11706(d)(2)(A), (A)(i). Suit


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

against either a delivering carrier or any carrier that
caused the damage, by contrast, may be brought in vari
ous other districts. See §11706(d)(2)(B), (C). “[J]udicial
district” refers to “district court of the United States or in
a State Court.” §11706(d)(1). Carmack’s venue provisions
presume that the receiving carrier obtains the property in
a judicial district within the United States. Here, the
journey’s “point of origin” was China, so Carmack’s venue
provisions reinforce the interpretation that Carmack does
not apply to this carriage.
Indeed, if “K” Line were a receiving carrier in a case
where the journey’s “point of origin” was China, there
would be no place under Carmack to sue “K” Line, since
China is not within a judicial district “of the United States
or in a State court.” Ibid. Carmack’s original premise is
that the receiving carrier is liable for damage caused by
the other carriers in the delivery chain. This premise
would be defeated if there were no venue in which to sue
the receiving rail carrier, as opposed to suing a different
carrier under one of Carmack’s other venue provisions and
then naming the receiving carrier as a codefendant. The
far more likely conclusion is that “K” Line is not a receiv
ing rail carrier at all under Carmack, and thus Carmack,
including its venue provisions, does not apply to property
shipped under “K” Line’s through bills. True, if the sole
question were one of venue, suit could still be brought
against the carrier that caused the damage or the deliver
ing carrier. But the issue need not be explored here, for,
as the Court holds, Carmack is inapplicable in these cases.
B
Carmack’s statutory history supports the conclusion
that it does not apply to a shipment originating overseas
under a through bill. None of Carmack’s legislative ver
sions have applied to the inland domestic rail segment of
an import shipment from overseas under a through bill.


16

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Opinion of the Court

Congress enacted Carmack in 1906, as an amendment
to the Interstate Commerce Act. At that time, the amend
ment’s provisions applied only to “property for transporta
tion from a point in one State to a point in another State.”
§7, 34 Stat. 595. Congress amended Carmack in 1915, §1,
38 Stat. 1197, and the relevant language remained un
changed until Carmack was recodified in 1978. Under the
pre-1978 language, Carmack’s bill of lading provisions
applied not only to wholly domestic rail transport but also
to cargo “receive[d] . . . for transportation” “from any point
in the United States to a point in an adjacent foreign
country.” 49 U. S. C. §20(11) (1976 ed.).
Even if there could be some argument that the Carmack
Amendment before 1978 applied to imports from Canada
and Mexico because the phrase “from . . . to” could also
mean “between,” cf. Reider, supra, at 118 (explicitly not
deciding this issue), the Court is unaware of any authority
holding that the Carmack Amendment before 1978 applied
to cargo originating from nonadjacent overseas countries
under a through bill. See, e.g., In re The Cummins
Amendment, 33 I. C. C. 682, 693 (1915); Brief for Respon
dents 8 (effectively conceding this point).
In 1978, Congress adopted the Carmack Amendment in
largely its current form. §1, 92 Stat. 1337. Congress in
the statute itself stated that it was recodifying Carmack
and instructed that this recodification “may not be con
strued as making a substantive change in the la[w].”
§3(a), id., at 1466; see Burlington Northern R. Co. v. Okla
homa Tax Comm’n, 481 U. S. 454, 457, n. 1 (1987). By
interpreting the current version of the Carmack Amend
ment to cover cargo originating overseas, the Court of
Appeals disregarded this direction and dramatically ex
panded Carmack’s scope beyond its historical coverage.
Finally, in 1995, Congress reenacted Carmack. But that
reenactment evidenced no intent to affect the substantive
change that Court of Appeals’ decision would entail. See


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

§102(a), 109 Stat. 847–849. There is no claim that the
1995 statute altered Carmack’s text in any manner rele
vant here, as that reenactment merely indented subsec
tions of Carmack for readability. Cf. United States v.
O’Brien, 560 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 14)
(“[C]urrent legislative drafting guidelines . . . advise draft
ers to break lengthy statutory provisions into separate
subsections that can be read more easily”).
C
Where the text permits, congressional enactments
should be construed to be consistent with one another.
And the interpretation of Carmack the Court now adopts
attains the most consistency between Carmack and
COGSA. First, applying Carmack to the inland segment
of an international carriage originating overseas under a
through bill would undermine Carmack’s purposes. Car
mack is premised on the view that the shipment has a
single bill of lading and any damage during the journey is
the responsibility of both the receiving and the delivering
carrier. See supra, at 6. Yet, under the Court of Appeals’
interpretation of Carmack, there would often be no venue
in which to sue the receiving carrier. See supra, at 14–15.
Applying two different bill of lading regimes to the same
through shipment would undermine COGSA and interna
tional, container-based multimodal transport. As Kirby
explained, “[t]he international transportation industry
‘clearly has moved into a new era—the age of multimo
dalism, door-to-door transport based on efficient use of all
available modes of transportation by air, water, and
land.’ ” 543 U. S., at 25 (quoting 1 T. Schoenbaum, Admi
ralty and Maritime Law 589 (4th ed. 2004)). If Carmack
applied to an inland segment of a shipment from overseas
under a through bill, then one set of liability and venue
rules would apply when cargo is damaged at sea (COGSA)
and another almost always would apply when the damage


18

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Opinion of the Court

occurs on land (Carmack). Rather than making claims by
cargo owners easier to resolve, a court would have to
decide where the damage occurred to determine which law
applied. As a practical matter, this requirement often
could not be met; for damage to the content of containers
can occur when the contents are damaged by rough han
dling, seepage, or theft, at some unknown point. See H.
Kindred & M. Brooks, Multimodal Transport Rules 143
(1997). Indeed, adopting the Court of Appeals’ approach
would seem to require rail carriers to open containers at
the port to check if damage has been done during the sea
voyage. This disruption would undermine international
container-based transport. The Court will not read Con
gress’ nonsubstantive recodification of Carmack in 1978 to
create such a drastic sea change in practice in this area.
Applying Carmack’s provisions to international import
shipping transport would also undermine the “purpose of
COGSA, to facilitate efficient contracting in contracts for
carriage by sea.” Kirby, supra, at 29. These cases provide
an apt illustration. The sophisticated cargo owners here
agreed to maritime bills of lading that applied to the
inland segment through the Himalaya Clause and author
ized “K” Line to subcontract for that inland segment “on
any terms whatsoever.” The cargo owners thus made the
decision to select “K” Line as a single company for their
through transportation needs, rather than contracting for
rail services themselves. The through bills provided the
liability and venue rules for the foreseeable event that the
cargo was damaged during carriage. Indeed, the cargo
owners obtained separate insurance to protect against any
excess loss. The forum-selection clause the parties agreed
upon is “an indispensable element in international trade,
commerce, and contracting” because it allows parties to
“agre[e] in advance on a forum acceptable” to them. The
Bremen v. Zapata Off-Shore Co., 407 U. S. 1, 13–14 (1972).
A clause of this kind is enforced unless it imposes a venue


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of the Court

“so gravely difficult and inconvenient that [the plaintiff]
will for all practical purposes be deprived of his day in
court.” Id., at 18. The parties sensibly agreed that be
cause their bills were governed by Japanese law, Tokyo
would be the best venue for any suit relating to the cargo.
The cargo owners’ contrary policy arguments are un
availing. They assert that if Carmack does not apply, the
inland segment of international shipments will be “un
regulated.” Brief for Respondents 2, 21, 24, 64, 91. First,
any speculation that not applying Carmack to inland
segments of overseas shipments will cause severe prob
lems is refuted by that fact that Carmack even arguably
did not govern the inland portion of such shipments from
its enactment in 1906 until its nonsubstantive recodifica
tion in 1978. See supra, at 15–17. It is true that if the
cargo owners’ position were to prevail, the terms of
through bills of lading made in maritime commerce would
be more restricted in some circumstances. But that does
not mean that the Court’s holding leaves the field unregu
lated. Ocean-based through bills are governed by COGSA,
and ocean vessels like those operated by “K” Line are
overseen by the Federal Maritime Commission. Supra, at
4–5. Rail carriers like Union Pacific, furthermore, remain
subject to the STB’s regulation to the extent they operate
within the United States. See supra, at 13–14. It is nota
ble that although the STB has jurisdiction to regulate the
rates of such carriers, even when the carriage is not gov
erned by the Carmack Amendment, STB has exercised its
authority to exempt from certain regulations service pro
vided by a rail carrier “as part of a continuous intermodal
freight movement,” 49 CFR §1090.2 (2009), like the jour
ney at issue in these cases, see ibid. (exercising STB’s
deregulation authority under 49 U. S. C. §10502(f)).
Finally, the cargo owners miss the mark in relying on
the recent United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Carriage of Goods Wholly or Partly by Sea,


20

KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD. v. REGAL-BELOIT CORP.
Opinion of the Court

which has yet to be “ratified by the President with the
advice and consent of the Senate.” Brief for United States
as Amicus Curiae 11. These so-called “Rotterdam Rules”
would explicitly allow the inland leg of an international
shipment to be governed by a different legal regime than
the ocean leg, under some circumstances. See G. A. Res.
63/122, art. 26, U. N. Doc. A/RES/63/122 (Dec. 11, 2008).

Nothing in the Rotterdam Rules, however, requires every
country to mandate a different regime to govern the inland
rail leg of an international through shipment; and, as ex
plained above, Congress, by enacting COGSA, has opted for
allowing shipments governed by a single through bill. And
if the objection is that today’s decision will undermine the
results of these international negotiations in some way,
that concern is met by the fact that the United States
Government has urged the result the Court adopts today.
See Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 13–29.
Congress has decided to allow parties engaged in inter
national maritime commerce to structure their contracts,
to a large extent, as they see fit. It has not imposed Car
mack’s regime, textually and historically limited to the
carriage of goods received for domestic rail transport, onto
what are “essentially maritime” contracts. Kirby, 543
U. S., at 24.
V
“K” Line received the goods in China, under through
bills for shipment into the United States. “K” Line was
thus not a receiving rail carrier under Carmack and was
not required to issue bills of lading under that Amend
ment. Union Pacific is also not a receiving carrier for this
carriage and was thus not required to issue Carmack
compliant bills. Because the journey included no receiving
rail carrier that had to issue bills of lading under Car
mack, Carmack does not apply. The parties’ agreement to
litigate these cases in Tokyo is binding. The cargo owners


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of the Court

must abide by the contracts they made.
*
*
*
The judgment of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth
Circuit is reversed, and the cases are remanded for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

