2

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Syllabus
teenth Amendment incorporates the Second Amendment right, rec
ognized in Heller, to keep and bear arms for the purpose of self
defense. Pp. 5–9, 11–19, 19–33.
(a) Petitioners base their case on two submissions. Primarily, they
argue that the right to keep and bear arms is protected by the Privi
leges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and that
the Slaughter-House Cases’ narrow interpretation of the Clause
should now be rejected. As a secondary argument, they contend that
the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause incorporates the
Second Amendment right. Chicago and Oak Park (municipal respon
dents) maintain that a right set out in the Bill of Rights applies to
the States only when it is an indispensable attribute of any “ ‘civi
lized’ ” legal system. If it is possible to imagine a civilized country
that does not recognize the right, municipal respondents assert, that
right is not protected by due process. And since there are civilized
countries that ban or strictly regulate the private possession of hand
guns, they maintain that due process does not preclude such meas
ures. Pp. 4–5.
(b) The Bill of Rights, including the Second Amendment, originally
applied only to the Federal Government, not to the States, see, e.g.,
Barron ex rel. Tiernan v. Mayor of Baltimore, 7 Pet. 243, 247, but the
constitutional Amendments adopted in the Civil War’s aftermath
fundamentally altered the federal system. Four years after the adop
tion of the Fourteenth Amendment, this Court held in the SlaughterHouse Cases, that the Privileges or Immunities Clause protects only
those rights “which owe their existence to the Federal government,
its National character, its Constitution, or its laws,” 16 Wall., at 79,
and that the fundamental rights predating the creation of the Fed
eral Government were not protected by the Clause, id., at 76. Under
this narrow reading, the Court held that the Privileges or Immunities
Clause protects only very limited rights. Id., at 79–80. Subse
quently, the Court held that the Second Amendment applies only to
the Federal Government in Cruikshank, 92 U. S. 542, Presser, 116
U. S. 252, and Miller, 153 U. S. 535, the decisions on which the Sev
enth Circuit relied in this case. Pp. 5–9.
(c) Whether the Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms
applies to the States is considered in light of the Court’s precedents
applying the Bill of Rights’ protections to the States. Pp. 11–19.
(1) In the late 19th century, the Court began to hold that the Due
Process Clause prohibits the States from infringing Bill of Rights pro
tections. See, e.g., Hurtado v. California, 110 U. S. 516. Five fea
tures of the approach taken during the ensuing era are noted. First,
the Court viewed the due process question as entirely separate from
the question whether a right was a privilege or immunity of national

