Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

and possess property of every kind,” “the benefit of the
writ of habeas corpus,” and the right of access to “the
courts of the state,” among others.6 Corfield, supra, at
551−552.
Notably, Justice Washington did not indicate whether
Article IV, §2 required States to recognize these funda
mental rights in their own citizens and thus in sojourning
citizens alike, or whether the Clause simply prohibited the
States from discriminating against sojourning citizens
with respect to whatever fundamental rights state law
happened to recognize. On this question, the weight of
legal authorities at the time of Reconstruction indicated
that Article IV, §2 prohibited States from discriminating
against sojourning citizens when recognizing fundamental
rights, but did not require States to recognize those rights
and did not prescribe their content. The highest courts of
several States adopted this view, see, e.g., Livingston v.
Van Ingen, 9 Johns. 507, 561 (N. Y. Sup. Ct. 1812) (Yates,
J.); id., at 577 (Kent, J.); Campbell v. Morris, 3 H. & McH.
535, 553−554 (Md. Gen. Ct. 1797) (Chase, J.), as did sev
eral influential treatise-writers, see T. Cooley, A Treatise
——————
6 Justice Washington’s complete list was as follows:
“Protection by the government; the enjoyment of life and liberty, with
the right to acquire and possess property of every kind, and to pursue
and obtain happiness and safety; subject nevertheless to such re
straints as the government may justly prescribe for the general good of
the whole. The right of a citizen of one state to pass through, or to
reside in any other state, for purposes of trade, agriculture, professional
pursuits, or otherwise; to claim the benefit of the writ of habeas corpus;
to institute and maintain actions of any kind in the courts of the state;
to take, hold and dispose of property, either real or personal; and an
exemption from higher taxes or impositions than are paid by the other
citizens of the state; may be mentioned as some of the particular
privileges and immunities of citizens, which are clearly embraced by
the general description of privileges deemed to be fundamental: to
which may be added, the elective franchise, as regulated and estab
lished by the laws or constitution of the state in which it is to be exer
cised.” 6 Fed. Cas., at 551−552.

