20

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

inconsistent with Chicago’s law; and the majority would
almost certainly strike down that law. Cf. Heller, 554
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 57–64) (striking down the District
of Columbia’s handgun ban).
Thus, the specific question before us is not whether
there are references to the right to bear arms for self
defense throughout this Nation’s history—of course there
are—or even whether the Court should incorporate a
simple constitutional requirement that firearms regula
tions not unreasonably burden the right to keep and bear
arms, but rather whether there is a consensus that so
substantial a private self-defense right as the one de
scribed in Heller applies to the States. See, e.g., Glucks
berg, supra, at 721 (requiring “a careful description” of the
right at issue when deciding whether it is “deeply rooted
in this Nation’s history and tradition” (internal quotation
marks omitted)). On this question, the reader will have to
make up his or her own mind about the historical record
that I describe in part below. In my view, that record is
insufficient to say that the right to bear arms for private
self-defense, as explicated by Heller, is fundamental in the
sense relevant to the incorporation inquiry. As the evi
dence below shows, States and localities have consistently
enacted firearms regulations, including regulations simi
lar to those at issue here, throughout our Nation’s history.
Courts have repeatedly upheld such regulations. And it is,
at the very least, possible, and perhaps likely, that incor
poration will impose on every, or nearly every, State a
different right to bear arms than they currently recog
nize—a right that threatens to destabilize settled state
legal principles. Cf. 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 57–64)
(rejecting an “ ‘interest-balancing’ approach” similar to
that employed by the States).
I thus cannot find a historical consensus with respect to
whether the right described by Heller is “fundamental” as
our incorporation cases use that term. Nor can I find

