Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

SCALIA, J., concurring

“firearms have a fundamentally ambivalent relationship
to liberty,” since sometimes they are used to cause (or
sometimes accidentally produce) injury to others. Post, at
35. The source of the rule that only nonambivalent liber­
ties deserve Due Process protection is never explained—
proof that judges applying JUSTICE STEVENS’ approach can
add new elements to the test as they see fit. The criterion,
moreover, is inherently manipulable. Surely JUSTICE
STEVENS does not mean that the Clause covers only rights
that have zero harmful effect on anyone. Otherwise even
the First Amendment is out. Maybe what he means is
that the right to keep and bear arms imposes too great a
risk to others’ physical well-being. But as the plurality
explains, ante, at 35–36, other rights we have already held
incorporated pose similarly substantial risks to public
safety. In all events, JUSTICE STEVENS supplies neither a
standard for how severe the impairment on others’ liberty
must be for a right to be disqualified, nor (of course) any
method of measuring the severity.
JUSTICE STEVENS next suggests that the Second
Amendment right is not fundamental because it is “differ­
ent in kind” from other rights we have recognized. Post, at
37. In one respect, of course, the right to keep and bear
arms is different from some other rights we have held the
Clause protects and he would recognize: It is deeply
grounded in our nation’s history and tradition. But
JUSTICE STEVENS has a different distinction in mind:
Even though he does “not doubt for a moment that many
Americans . . . see [firearms] as critical to their way of life
as well as to their security,” he pronounces that owning a
handgun is not “critical to leading a life of autonomy,
dignity, or political equality.”6 Post, at 37–38. Who says?
——————
6 JUSTICE STEVENS goes a step farther still, suggesting that the right
to keep and bear arms is not protected by the “liberty clause” because it
is not really a liberty at all, but a “property right.” Post, at 38. Never

