Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

49

STEVENS, J., dissenting

Nor will the Court’s intervention bring any clarity to
this enormously complex area of law. Quite to the con­
trary, today’s decision invites an avalanche of litigation
that could mire the federal courts in fine-grained determi­
nations about which state and local regulations comport
with the Heller right—the precise contours of which are
far from pellucid—under a standard of review we have not
even established. See post, at 12–15. The plurality’s
“assuranc[e]” that “incorporation does not imperil every
law regulating firearms,” ante, at 40, provides only modest
comfort. For it is also an admission of just how many
different types of regulations are potentially implicated by
today’s ruling, and of just how ad hoc the Court’s initial
attempt to draw distinctions among them was in Heller.
The practical significance of the proposition that “the
Second Amendment right is fully applicable to the States,”
ante, at 1 (majority opinion), remains to be worked out by
this Court over many, many years.
Furthermore, and critically, the Court’s imposition of a
national standard is still more unwise because the elected
branches have shown themselves to be perfectly capable of
safeguarding the interest in keeping and bearing arms.
The strength of a liberty claim must be assessed in con­
nection with its status in the democratic process. And in
this case, no one disputes “that opponents of [gun] control
have considerable political power and do not seem to be at
a systematic disadvantage in the democratic process,” or
that “the widespread commitment to an individual right to
own guns . . . operates as a safeguard against excessive or
——————
pluralistic society, there will almost never be such uniformity of opin­
ion. But to the extent that popular consensus is relevant, I do not agree
with the Court that the amicus brief filed in this case by numerous
state attorneys general constitutes evidence thereof. Ante, at 42–43. It
is puzzling that so many state lawmakers have asked us to limit their
option to regulate a dangerous item. Cf. post, at 9–10.

