Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

27

Opinion of the Court

guaranteed the “full and equal benefit of all laws and
proceedings for the security of person and property, as is
enjoyed by white citizens.” Ibid. This language was vir
tually identical to language in §14 of the Freedmen’s
Bureau Act, 14 Stat. 176–177 (“the right . . . to have full
and equal benefit of all laws and proceedings concerning
personal liberty, personal security, and the acquisition,
enjoyment, and disposition of estate, real and personal”).
And as noted, the latter provision went on to explain that
one of the “laws and proceedings concerning personal
liberty, personal security, and the acquisition, enjoyment,
and disposition of estate, real and personal” was “the
constitutional right to bear arms.” Ibid. Representative
Bingham believed that the Civil Rights Act protected the
same rights as enumerated in the Freedmen’s Bureau bill,
which of course explicitly mentioned the right to keep and
bear arms. 39th Cong. Globe 1292. The unavoidable
conclusion is that the Civil Rights Act, like the Freedmen’s
Bureau Act, aimed to protect “the constitutional right to
bear arms” and not simply to prohibit discrimination. See
also Amar, Bill of Rights 264–265 (noting that one of the
“core purposes of the Civil Rights Act of 1866 and of the
Fourteenth Amendment was to redress the grievances” of
freedmen who had been stripped of their arms and to
“affirm the full and equal right of every citizen to self
defense”).
Congress, however, ultimately deemed these legislative
——————
of the Federal Government, that the ‘reconstructed’ State authorities of
Mississippi were allowed to rob and disarm our veteran soldiers and
arm the rebels fresh from the field of treasonable strife. Sir, the dis
armed loyalists of Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana are powerless
to-day, and oppressed by the pardoned and encouraged rebels of those
States. They appeal to the American Congress for protection. In
response to this appeal I shall vote for every just measure of protection,
for I do not intend to be among the treacherous violators of the solemn
pledge of the nation.” Id., at 1838–1839.

