40

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

rights-bearers do not actually threaten the physical safety
of any other person.38 Firearms may be used to kill an­
other person. If a legislature’s response to dangerous
weapons ends up impinging upon the liberty of any indi­
viduals in pursuit of the greater good, it invariably does so
on the basis of more than the majority’s “ ‘own moral
code,’ ” Lawrence, 539 U. S., at 571 (quoting Casey, 505
U. S., at 850). While specific policies may of course be
misguided, gun control is an area in which it “is quite
wrong . . . to assume that regulation and liberty occupy
mutually exclusive zones—that as one expands, the other
must contract.” Stevens, 41 U. Miami L. Rev., at 280.
Third, the experience of other advanced democracies,
including those that share our British heritage, undercuts
the notion that an expansive right to keep and bear arms
is intrinsic to ordered liberty. Many of these countries
place restrictions on the possession, use, and carriage of
firearms far more onerous than the restrictions found in
this Nation. See Municipal Respondents’ Brief 21–23
(discussing laws of England, Canada, Australia, Japan,
Denmark, Finland, Luxembourg, and New Zealand). That
the United States is an international outlier in the per­
missiveness of its approach to guns does not suggest that
our laws are bad laws. It does suggest that this Court
may not need to assume responsibility for making our
laws still more permissive.
Admittedly, these other countries differ from ours in
many relevant respects, including their problems with
violent crime and the traditional role that firearms have
played in their societies. But they are not so different
from the United States that we ought to dismiss their
experience entirely. Cf. ante, at 34–35 (plurality opinion);
ante, at 10–11 (opinion of SCALIA, J.). The fact that our
——————
38 Cf. Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, 505 U. S. 833,
913–914 (1992) (STEVENS, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).

