Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

31

STEVENS, J., dissenting

generally has a lesser basis for regulating private as com­
pared to public acts, and firearms kept inside the home
generally pose a lesser threat to public welfare as com­
pared to firearms taken outside. The historical case for
regulation is likewise stronger outside the home, as many
States have for many years imposed stricter, and less
controversial, restrictions on the carriage of arms than on
their domestic possession. See, e.g., id., at ___ (slip op., at
54) (noting that “the majority of the 19th-century courts to
consider the question held that prohibitions on carrying
concealed weapons were lawful under the Second Amend­
ment or state analogues”); English v. State, 35 Tex. 473,
478–479 (1871) (observing that “almost, if not every one of
the States of this Union have [a prohibition on the carry­
ing of deadly weapons] upon their statute books,” and
lambasting claims of a right to carry such weapons as
“little short of ridiculous”); Miller, Guns as Smut: Defend­
ing the Home-Bound Second Amendment, 109 Colum.
L. Rev. 1278, 1321–1336 (2009).
It is significant, as well, that a rule limiting the federal
constitutional right to keep and bear arms to the home
would be less intrusive on state prerogatives and easier to
administer. Having unleashed in Heller a tsunami of legal
uncertainty, and thus litigation,30 and now on the cusp of
imposing a national rule on the States in this area for the
first time in United States history, the Court could at least
moderate the confusion, upheaval, and burden on the
States by adopting a rule that is clearly and tightly
——————
30 See

Municipal Respondents’ Brief 20, n. 11 (stating that at least
156 Second Amendment challenges were brought in time between
Heller’s issuance and brief’s filing); Brady Center Brief 3 (stating that
over 190 Second Amendment challenges were brought in first 18
months since Heller); Brief for Villages of Winnetka and Skokie, Illi­
nois, et al. as Amici Curiae 15 (stating that, in wake of Heller, munici­
palities have “repealed longstanding handgun laws to avoid costly
litigation”).

