10

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

tionalism in Heller, 122 Harv. L. Rev. 191, 201–246 (2008).
(Numerous sources supporting arguments and data in
Part II–B can be found in the Appendix, infra.)
Moreover, there is no reason here to believe that incor
poration of the private self-defense right will further any
other or broader constitutional objective. We are aware of
no argument that gun-control regulations target or are
passed with the purpose of targeting “discrete and insular
minorities.” Carolene Products Co., supra, at 153, n. 4;
see, e.g., ante, at 49–51 (STEVENS, J., dissenting). Nor will
incorporation help to assure equal respect for individuals.
Unlike the First Amendment’s rights of free speech, free
press, assembly, and petition, the private self-defense
right does not comprise a necessary part of the democratic
process that the Constitution seeks to establish. See, e.g.,
Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357, 377 (1927) (Brandeis,
J., concurring). Unlike the First Amendment’s religious
protections, the Fourth Amendment’s protection against
unreasonable searches and seizures, the Fifth and Sixth
Amendments’ insistence upon fair criminal procedure, and
the Eighth Amendment’s protection against cruel and
unusual punishments, the private self-defense right does
not significantly seek to protect individuals who might
otherwise suffer unfair or inhumane treatment at the
hands of a majority. Unlike the protections offered by
many of these same Amendments, it does not involve
matters as to which judges possess a comparative exper
tise, by virtue of their close familiarity with the justice
system and its operation. And, unlike the Fifth Amend
ment’s insistence on just compensation, it does not involve
a matter where a majority might unfairly seize for itself
property belonging to a minority.
Finally, incorporation of the right will work a significant
disruption in the constitutional allocation of decisionmak
ing authority, thereby interfering with the Constitution’s
ability to further its objectives.

