Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

47

STEVENS, J., dissenting

so heavy a toll in terms of state sovereignty.
Finally, even apart from the States’ long history of
firearms regulation and its location at the core of their
police powers, this is a quintessential area in which feder­
alism ought to be allowed to flourish without this Court’s
meddling. Whether or not we can assert a plausible con­
stitutional basis for intervening, there are powerful rea­
sons why we should not do so.
Across the Nation, States and localities vary signifi­
cantly in the patterns and problems of gun violence they
face, as well as in the traditions and cultures of lawful gun
use they claim. Cf. post, at 16–17. The city of Chicago, for
example, faces a pressing challenge in combating criminal
street gangs. Most rural areas do not. The city of Chicago
has a high population density, which increases the poten­
tial for a gunman to inflict mass terror and casualties.
Most rural areas do not.45 The city of Chicago offers little
in the way of hunting opportunities. Residents of rural
communities are, one presumes, much more likely to stock
the dinner table with game they have personally felled.
Given that relevant background conditions diverge so
much across jurisdictions, the Court ought to pay particu­
lar heed to state and local legislatures’ “right to experi­
ment.” New State Ice, 285 U. S., at 311 (Brandeis, J.,
dissenting). So long as the regulatory measures they have
chosen are not “arbitrary, capricious, or unreasonable,” we
should be allowing them to “try novel social and economic”
policies. Ibid. It “is more in keeping . . . with our status
as a court in a federal system,” under these circumstances,
“to avoid imposing a single solution . . . from the top
down.” Smith v. Robbins, 528 U. S. 259, 275 (2000).
——————
45 Cf. Heller, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 19) (BREYER, J., dissenting)
(detailing evidence showing that a “disproportionate amount of violent
and property crimes occur in urban areas, and urban criminals are
more likely than other offenders to use a firearm during the commis­
sion of a violent crime”).

