20

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

the guise of judicial modesty.
No, the liberty safeguarded by the Fourteenth Amend­
ment is not merely preservative in nature but rather is a
“dynamic concept.” Stevens, The Bill of Rights: A Century
of Progress, 59 U. Chi. L. Rev. 13, 38 (1972). Its dyna­
mism provides a central means through which the Fram­
ers enabled the Constitution to “endure for ages to come,”
McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 415 (1819), a cen­
tral example of how they “wisely spoke in general lan­
guage and left to succeeding generations the task of apply­
ing that language to the unceasingly changing
environment in which they would live,” Rehnquist, The
Notion of a Living Constitution, 54 Tex. L. Rev. 693, 694
(1976). “The task of giving concrete meaning to the term
‘liberty,’ ” I have elsewhere explained at some length, “was
a part of the work assigned to future generations.” Ste­
vens, The Third Branch of Liberty, 41 U. Miami L. Rev.
277, 291 (1986).21 The judge who would outsource the
interpretation of “liberty” to historical sentiment has
turned his back on a task the Constitution assigned to him
and drained the document of its intended vitality.22
——————
21 JUSTICE

KENNEDY has made the point movingly:
“Had those who drew and ratified the Due Process Clauses of the
Fifth Amendment or the Fourteenth Amendment known the compo­
nents of liberty in its manifold possibilities, they might have been more
specific. They did not presume to have this insight. They knew times
can blind us to certain truths and later generations can see that laws
once thought necessary and proper in fact serve only to oppress. As the
Constitution endures, persons in every generation can invoke its
principles in their own search for greater freedom.” Lawrence, 539
U. S., at 578–579.
22 Contrary to JUSTICE SCALIA’s suggestion, I emphatically do not
believe that “only we judges” can interpret the Fourteenth Amendment,
ante, at 4, or any other constitutional provision. All Americans can; all
Americans should. I emphatically do believe that we judges must
exercise—indeed, cannot help but exercise—our own reasoned judg­
ment in so doing. JUSTICE SCALIA and I are on common ground in
maintaining that courts should be “guided by what the American

