Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

53

STEVENS, J., dissenting

yardstick can measure which of us was correct, either with
respect to the materials we chose to privilege or the in­
sights we gleaned from them.
The malleability and elusiveness of history increase
exponentially when we move from a pure question of
original meaning, as in Heller, to JUSTICE SCALIA’s theory
of substantive due process. At least with the former sort
of question, the judge can focus on a single legal provision;
the temporal scope of the inquiry is (or should be) rela­
tively bounded; and there is substantial agreement on
what sorts of authorities merit consideration.
With
JUSTICE SCALIA’s approach to substantive due process,
these guideposts all fall away. The judge must canvas the
entire landscape of American law as it has evolved
through time, and perhaps older laws as well, see, e.g.,
Lawrence, 539 U. S., at 596 (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (dis­
cussing “ ‘ancient roots’ ” of proscriptions against sodomy
(quoting Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U. S. 186, 192 (1986)),
pursuant to a standard (deeply rootedness) that has never
been defined. In conducting this rudderless, panoramic
tour of American legal history, the judge has more than
ample opportunity to “look over the heads of the crowd
and pick out [his] friends,” Roper v. Simmons, 543 U. S.
551, 617 (2005) (SCALIA, J., dissenting).
My point is not to criticize judges’ use of history in
general or to suggest that it always generates indetermi­
nate answers; I have already emphasized that historical
study can discipline as well as enrich substantive due
process analysis.
My point is simply that JUSTICE
SCALIA’s defense of his method, which holds out objectivity
and restraint as its cardinal—and, it seems, only—virtues,
is unsatisfying on its own terms. For a limitless number
of subjective judgments may be smuggled into his histori­
cal analysis. Worse, they may be buried in the analysis.
At least with my approach, the judge’s cards are laid on
the table for all to see, and to critique. The judge must

