16

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

right: the assurance that they would be afforded the
“privileges and immunities” of citizenship in any of the
several States in the Union to which they might travel.
What were the “Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in
the several States”? That question was answered perhaps
most famously by Justice Bushrod Washington sitting as
Circuit Justice in Corfield v. Coryell, 6 F. Cas. 546,
551−552 (No. 3,230) (CC ED Pa. 1825). In that case, a
Pennsylvania citizen claimed that a New Jersey law pro
hibiting nonresidents from harvesting oysters from the
State’s waters violated Article IV, §2 because it deprived
him, as an out-of-state citizen, of a right New Jersey
availed to its own citizens. Id., at 550. Justice Washing
ton rejected that argument, refusing to “accede to the
proposition” that Article IV, §2 entitled “citizens of the
several states . . . to participate in all the rights which
belong exclusively to the citizens of any other particular
state.” Id., at 552 (emphasis added). In his view, Article
IV, §2 did not guarantee equal access to all public benefits
a State might choose to make available to its citizens. See
id., at 552. Instead, it applied only to those rights “which
are, in their nature, fundamental; which belong, of right,
to the citizens of all free governments.” Id., at 551 (em
phasis added). Other courts generally agreed with this
principle. See, e.g., Abbott v. Bayley, 23 Mass. 89, 92–93
(1827) (noting that the “privileges and immunities” of
citizens in the several States protected by Article IV, §2
are “qualified and not absolute” because they do not grant
a traveling citizen the right of “suffrage or of eligibility to
office” in the State to which he travels).
When describing those “fundamental” rights, Justice
Washington thought it “would perhaps be more tedious
than difficult to enumerate” them all, but suggested that
they could “be all comprehended under” a broad list of
“general heads,” such as “[p]rotection by the government,”
“the enjoyment of life and liberty, with the right to acquire

