Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

STEVENS, J., dissenting

us indisputably concerns such an interest, the answer
cannot be found in a granular inspection of state constitu­
tions or congressional debates.
More fundamentally, a rigid historical methodology is
unfaithful to the Constitution’s command. For if it were
really the case that the Fourteenth Amendment’s guaran­
tee of liberty embraces only those rights “so rooted in our
history, tradition, and practice as to require special protec­
tion,” Glucksberg, 521 U. S., at 721, n. 17, then the guar­
antee would serve little function, save to ratify those
rights that state actors have already been according the
most extensive protection.19 Cf. Duncan, 391 U. S., at 183
(Harlan, J., dissenting) (critiquing “circular[ity]” of his­
toricized test for incorporation). That approach is unfaith­
ful to the expansive principle Americans laid down when
they ratified the Fourteenth Amendment and to the level
of generality they chose when they crafted its language; it
promises an objectivity it cannot deliver and masks the
value judgments that pervade any analysis of what cus­
toms, defined in what manner, are sufficiently “ ‘rooted’ ”;
it countenances the most revolting injustices in the name
of continuity,20 for we must never forget that not only
slavery but also the subjugation of women and other rank
forms of discrimination are part of our history; and it
effaces this Court’s distinctive role in saying what the law
is, leaving the development and safekeeping of liberty to
majoritarian political processes. It is judicial abdication in
——————
19 I do not mean to denigrate this function, or to imply that only “new
rights”—whatever one takes that term to mean—ought to “get in” the
substantive due process door. Ante, at 5 (SCALIA, J., concurring).
20 See Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U. S. 186, 199 (1986) (Blackmun, J.,
dissenting) (“Like Justice Holmes, I believe that ‘[i]t is revolting to have
no better reason for a rule of law than that so it was laid down in the
time of Henry IV. It is still more revolting if the grounds upon which it
was laid down have vanished long since, and the rule simply persists
from blind imitation of the past’ ” (quoting Holmes, The Path of the
Law, 10 Harv. L. Rev. 457, 469 (1897))).

