Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

45

STEVENS, J., dissenting

struction-era laws); Winkler, Scrutinizing the Second
Amendment, 105 Mich. L. Rev. 683, 711–712, 716–726
(2007) (reviewing 20th-century laws); see generally post,
at 21–31.42 After the 1860’s just as before, the state courts
almost uniformly upheld these measures: Apart from
making clear that all regulations had to be constructed
and applied in a nondiscriminatory manner, the Four­
teenth Amendment hardly made a dent. And let us not
forget that this Court did not recognize any non-militia­
related interests under the Second Amendment until two
Terms ago, in Heller. Petitioners do not dispute the city of
Chicago’s observation that “[n]o other substantive Bill of
Rights protection has been regulated nearly as intru­
sively” as the right to keep and bear arms. Municipal
Respondents’ Brief 25.43
This history of intrusive regulation is not surprising
given that the very text of the Second Amendment calls
out for regulation,44 and the ability to respond to the social
——————
42 I

am unclear what the plurality means when it refers to “the pau­
city of precedent sustaining bans comparable to those at issue here.”
Ante, at 39. There is only one ban at issue here—the city of Chicago’s
handgun prohibition—and the municipal respondents cite far more
than “one case,” ibid., from the post-Reconstruction period. See Mu­
nicipal Respondents’ Brief 24–30. The evidence adduced by respon­
dents and their amici easily establishes their contentions that the
“consensus in States that recognize a firearms right is that arms
possession, even in the home, is . . . subject to interest-balancing,” id.,
at 24; and that the practice of “[b]anning weapons routinely used for
self-defense,” when deemed “necessary for the public welfare,” “has
ample historical pedigree,” id., at 28. Petitioners do not even try to
challenge these contentions.
43 I agree with JUSTICE SCALIA that a history of regulation hardly
proves a right is not “of fundamental character.” Ante, at 12. An
unbroken history of extremely intensive, carefully considered regula­
tion does, however, tend to suggest that it is not.
44 The Heller majority asserted that “the adjective ‘well-regulated’ ” in
the Second Amendment’s preamble “implies nothing more than the
imposition of proper discipline and training.” 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op.,
at 23). It is far from clear that this assertion is correct. See, e.g., U. S.

