Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

33

STEVENS, J., dissenting

But that is not the case before us. Petitioners have not
asked that we establish a constitutional right to individual
self-defense; neither their pleadings in the District Court
nor their filings in this Court make any such request. Nor
do petitioners contend that the city of Chicago—which,
recall, allows its residents to keep most rifles and shot­
guns, and to keep them loaded—has unduly burdened any
such right. What petitioners have asked is that we “incor­
porate” the Second Amendment and thereby establish a
constitutional entitlement, enforceable against the States,
to keep a handgun in the home.
Of course, owning a handgun may be useful for practic­
ing self-defense. But the right to take a certain type of
action is analytically distinct from the right to acquire and
utilize specific instrumentalities in furtherance of that
action. And while some might favor handguns, it is not
——————
government tyranny, it is only when the state has failed to interfere
with (violent) private conduct that self-help becomes potentially neces­
sary. Moreover, it was a basic tenet of founding-era political philosophy
that, in entering civil society and gaining “the advantages of mutual
commerce” and the protections of the rule of law, one had to relinquish,
to a significant degree, “that wild and savage liberty” one possessed in
the state of nature. 1 W. Blackstone, Commentaries *125; see also, e.g.,
J. Locke, Second Treatise of Civil Government §128, pp. 63–64 (J.
Gough ed. 1947) (in state of nature man has power “to do whatever he
thinks fit for the preservation of himself and others,” but this “he gives
up when he joins in a . . . particular political society”); Green v. Biddle,
8 Wheat. 1, 63 (1823) (“It is a trite maxim, that man gives up a part of
his natural liberty when he enters into civil society, as the price of the
blessings of that state: and it may be said, with truth, that this liberty
is well exchanged for the advantages which flow from law and justice”).
Some strains of founding-era thought took a very narrow view of the
right to armed self-defense. See, e.g., Brief of Historians on Early
American Legal, Constitutional, and Pennsylvania History as Amici
Curiae 6–13 (discussing Whig and Quaker theories). Just because
there may be a natural or common-law right to some measure of self­
defense, it hardly follows that States may not place substantial restric­
tions on its exercise or that this Court should recognize a constitutional
right to the same.

