8

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

ises”); post, at 22 (STEVENS, J., dissenting) (warning that
there is no “all-purpose, top-down, totalizing theory of
‘liberty’ ” protected by the Due Process Clause). But any
serious argument over the scope of the Due Process Clause
must acknowledge that neither its text nor its history
suggests that it protects the many substantive rights this
Court’s cases now claim it does.
I cannot accept a theory of constitutional interpretation
that rests on such tenuous footing. This Court’s substan
tive due process framework fails to account for both the
text of the Fourteenth Amendment and the history that
led to its adoption, filling that gap with a jurisprudence
devoid of a guiding principle. I believe the original mean
ing of the Fourteenth Amendment offers a superior alter
native, and that a return to that meaning would allow this
Court to enforce the rights the Fourteenth Amendment is
designed to protect with greater clarity and predictability
than the substantive due process framework has so far
managed.
I acknowledge the volume of precedents that have been
built upon the substantive due process framework, and I
further acknowledge the importance of stare decisis to the
stability of our Nation’s legal system. But stare decisis is
only an “adjunct” of our duty as judges to decide by our
best lights what the Constitution means. Planned Par
enthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, 505 U. S. 833, 963
(1992) (Rehnquist, C. J., concurring in judgment in part
and dissenting in part). It is not “an inexorable com
mand.” Lawrence, supra, at 577. Moreover, as judges, we
interpret the Constitution one case or controversy at a
time. The question presented in this case is not whether
our entire Fourteenth Amendment jurisprudence must be
preserved or revised, but only whether, and to what ex
tent, a particular clause in the Constitution protects the
particular right at issue here. With the inquiry appropri
ately narrowed, I believe this case presents an opportunity

