4

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
SCALIA, J., concurring

Fourteenth Amendment covers by “outsourc[ing]” the job
to “historical sentiment,” post, at 20—that is, by being
guided by what the American people throughout our his­
tory have thought. It is only we judges, exercising our
“own reasoned judgment,” post, at 15, who can be en­
trusted with deciding the Due Process Clause’s scope—
which rights serve the Amendment’s “central values,” post,
at 23—which basically means picking the rights we want
to protect and discarding those we do not.
B
JUSTICE STEVENS resists this description, insisting that
his approach provides plenty of “guideposts” and “con­
straints” to keep courts from “injecting excessive subjectiv­
ity” into the process.3 Post, at 21. Plenty indeed—and
that alone is a problem. The ability of omnidirectional
guideposts to constrain is inversely proportional to their
number. But even individually, each lodestar or limitation
he lists either is incapable of restraining judicial whimsy
or cannot be squared with the precedents he seeks to
preserve.
He begins with a brief nod to history, post, at 21, but as
——————
3 JUSTICE BREYER is not worried by that prospect. His interpretive
approach applied to incorporation of the Second Amendment includes
consideration of such factors as “the extent to which incorporation will
further other, perhaps more basic, constitutional aims; and the extent
to which incorporation will advance or hinder the Constitution’s struc­
tural aims”; whether recognizing a particular right will “further the
Constitution’s effort to ensure that the government treats each individ­
ual with equal respect” or will “help maintain the democratic form of
government”; whether it is “inconsistent . . . with the Constitution’s
efforts to create governmental institutions well suited to the carrying
out of its constitutional promises”; whether it fits with “the Framers’
basic reason for believing the Court ought to have the power of judicial
review”; courts’ comparative advantage in answering empirical ques­
tions that may be involved in applying the right; and whether there is a
“strong offsetting justification” for removing a decision from the democ­
ratic process. Post, at 7, 11–17 (dissenting opinion).

