Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

of Article IV, both of which refer to state citizenship.5
(Emphasis added.) Second, the Court stated that a con
trary reading would “radically chang[e] the whole theory
of the relations of the State and Federal governments to
each other and of both these governments to the people,”
and the Court refused to conclude that such a change had
been made “in the absence of language which expresses
such a purpose too clearly to admit of doubt.” Id., at 78.
Finding the phrase “privileges or immunities of citizens of
the United States” lacking by this high standard, the
Court reasoned that the phrase must mean something
more limited.
Under the Court’s narrow reading, the Privileges or
Immunities Clause protects such things as the right
“to come to the seat of government to assert any claim
[a citizen] may have upon that government, to trans
act any business he may have with it, to seek its pro
tection, to share its offices, to engage in administering
its functions . . . [and to] become a citizen of any State
of the Union by a bonâ fide residence therein, with the
same rights as other citizens of that State.” Id., at
79–80 (internal quotation marks omitted).
Finding no constitutional protection against state intru
sion of the kind envisioned by the Louisiana statute, the
Court upheld the statute. Four Justices dissented. Jus
tice Field, joined by Chief Justice Chase and Justices
Swayne and Bradley, criticized the majority for reducing
the Fourteenth Amendment’s Privileges or Immunities
——————
5 The first sentence of the Fourteenth Amendment makes “[a]ll per
sons born or naturalized in the United States and subject to the juris
diction thereof . . . citizens of the United States and of the State wherein
they reside.” (Emphasis added.) The Privileges and Immunities Clause
of Article IV provides that “[t]he Citizens of each State shall be entitled
to all Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in the several States.”
(Emphasis added.)

