32

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of the Court

clear terms of the Freedmen’s Bureau Act of 1866, which
acknowledged the existence of the right to bear arms. If
that law had used language such as “the equal benefit of
laws concerning the bearing of arms,” it would be possible
to interpret it as simply a prohibition of racial discrimina
tion. But §14 speaks of and protects “the constitutional
right to bear arms,” an unmistakable reference to the
right protected by the Second Amendment. And it pro
tects the “full and equal benefit” of this right in the States.
14 Stat. 176–177. It would have been nonsensical for
Congress to guarantee the full and equal benefit of a
constitutional right that does not exist.
Third, if the 39th Congress had outlawed only those
laws that discriminate on the basis of race or previous
condition of servitude, African Americans in the South
would likely have remained vulnerable to attack by many
of their worst abusers: the state militia and state peace
officers. In the years immediately following the Civil War,
a law banning the possession of guns by all private citi
zens would have been nondiscriminatory only in the for
mal sense. Any such law—like the Chicago and Oak Park
ordinances challenged here—presumably would have
permitted the possession of guns by those acting under the
authority of the State and would thus have left firearms in
the hands of the militia and local peace officers. And as
the Report of the Joint Committee on Reconstruction
revealed, see supra, at 24–25, those groups were widely
involved in harassing blacks in the South.
Fourth, municipal respondents’ purely antidiscrimina
tion theory of the Fourteenth Amendment disregards the
plight of whites in the South who opposed the Black
Codes. If the 39th Congress and the ratifying public had
simply prohibited racial discrimination with respect to the
bearing of arms, opponents of the Black Codes would have
been left without the means of self-defense—as had aboli
tionists in Kansas in the 1850’s.

