48

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

See Cruikshank, 92 U. S., at 548–549, 551–553. I must,
therefore, consider whether stare decisis requires reten
tion of those precedents. As mentioned at the outset, my
inquiry is limited to the right at issue here. Thus, I do not
endeavor to decide in this case whether, or to what extent,
the Privileges or Immunities Clause applies any other
rights enumerated in the Constitution against the
States.20 Nor do I suggest that the stare decisis considera
tions surrounding the application of the right to keep and
bear arms against the States would be the same as those
surrounding another right protected by the Privileges or
Immunities Clause. I consider stare decisis only as it
applies to the question presented here.
A
This inquiry begins with the Slaughter-House Cases.
There, this Court upheld a Louisiana statute granting a
monopoly on livestock butchering in and around the city of
New Orleans to a newly incorporated company. 16 Wall.
36. Butchers excluded by the monopoly sued, claiming
that the statute violated the Privileges or Immunities
Clause because it interfered with their right to pursue and
“exercise their trade.” Id., at 60. This Court rejected the
butchers’ claim, holding that their asserted right was not a
——————
20 I

note, however, that I see no reason to assume that the constitu
tionally enumerated rights protected by the Privileges or Immunities
Clause should consist of all the rights recognized in the Bill of Rights
and no others. Constitutional provisions outside the Bill of Rights
protect individual rights, see, e.g., Art. I, §9, cl. 2 (granting the “Privi
lege of the Writ of Habeas Corpus”), and there is no obvious evidence
that the Framers of the Privileges or Immunities Clause meant to
exclude them. In addition, certain Bill of Rights provisions prevent
federal interference in state affairs and are not readily construed as
protecting rights that belong to individuals. The Ninth and Tenth
Amendments are obvious examples, as is the First Amendment’s
Establishment Clause, which “does not purport to protect individual
rights.” Elk Grove Unified School Dist. v. Newdow, 542 U. S. 1, 50
(2004) (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment); see Amar 179–180.

