Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

41

STEVENS, J., dissenting

oldest allies have almost uniformly found it appropriate to
regulate firearms extensively tends to weaken petitioners’
submission that the right to possess a gun of one’s choos­
ing is fundamental to a life of liberty. While the “Ameri­
can perspective” must always be our focus, ante, at 37, 44
(plurality opinion), it is silly—indeed, arrogant—to think
we have nothing to learn about liberty from the billions of
people beyond our borders.
Fourth, the Second Amendment differs in kind from the
Amendments that surround it, with the consequence that
its inclusion in the Bill of Rights is not merely unhelpful
but positively harmful to petitioners’ claim. Generally, the
inclusion of a liberty interest in the Bill of Rights points
toward the conclusion that it is of fundamental significance
and ought to be enforceable against the States. But the
Second Amendment plays a peculiar role within the Bill, as
announced by its peculiar opening clause.39 Even accept­
ing the Heller Court’s view that the Amendment protects
an individual right to keep and bear arms disconnected
from militia service, it remains undeniable that “the pur­
pose for which the right was codified” was “to prevent
elimination of the militia.” Heller, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip
op., at 26); see also United States v. Miller, 307 U. S. 174,
178 (1939) (Second Amendment was enacted “[w]ith obvi­
ous purpose to assure the continuation and render possible
the effectiveness of [militia] forces”). It was the States, not
private persons, on whose immediate behalf the Second
Amendment was adopted. Notwithstanding the Heller
Court’s efforts to write the Second Amendment’s preamble
out of the Constitution, the Amendment still serves the
structural function of protecting the States from en­
croachment by an overreaching Federal Government.
——————
39 The Second Amendment provides: “A well regulated Militia, being
necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep
and bear Arms, shall not be infringed.”

