Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

27

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

That draft was met with objections, which the Times
covered extensively. A front-page article hailed the “Clear
and Forcible Speech” by Representative Robert Hale
against the draft, explaining—and endorsing—Hale’s view
that Bingham’s proposal would “confer upon Congress all
the rights and power of legislation now reserved to the
States” and would “in effect utterly obliterate State rights
and State authority over their own internal affairs.”12
N. Y. Times, Feb. 28, 1866, p. 1.
Critically, Hale did not object to the draft insofar as it
purported to protect constitutional liberties against state
interference. Indeed, Hale stated that he believed (incor
rectly in light of Barron) that individual rights enumer
ated in the Constitution were already enforceable against
the States. See 39th Cong. Globe 1064 (“I have, somehow
or other, gone along with the impression that there is that
sort of protection thrown over us in some way, whether
with or without the sanction of a judicial decision that we
are so protected”); see N. Y. Times, Feb. 28, 1866, at 1.
Hale’s misperception was not uncommon among members
of the Reconstruction generation. See infra, at 38–40. But
that is secondary to the point that the Times’ coverage of
——————
“The Congress shall have power to make all laws which shall be neces
sary and proper to secure to the citizens of each State all privileges and
immunities of citizens in the several States, and to all persons in the
several States equal protection in the rights of life, liberty, and prop
erty.” 39th Cong. Globe 1088.
12 In a separate front-page article on the same day, the paper ex
pounded upon Hale’s arguments in even further detail, while omitting
Bingham’s chief rebuttals. N. Y. Times, Feb. 28, 1866, p. 1. The
unbalanced nature of The New York Times’ coverage is unsurprising.
As scholars have noted, “[m]ost papers” during the time of Reconstruc
tion “had a frank partisan slant . . . and the Times was no exception.”
Wildenthal 1559. In 1866, the paper “was still defending” President
Johnson’s resistance to Republican reform measures, as exemplified by
the fact that it “supported Johnson’s veto of the Civil Rights Act of
1866.” Ibid.

