10

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
SCALIA, J., concurring

Deciding what is essential to an enlightened, liberty-filled
life is an inherently political, moral judgment—the an­
tithesis of an objective approach that reaches conclusions
by applying neutral rules to verifiable evidence.7
No determination of what rights the Constitution of the
United States covers would be complete, of course, without
a survey of what other countries do. Post, at 40–41. When
it comes to guns, JUSTICE STEVENS explains, our Nation is
already an outlier among “advanced democracies”; not
even our “oldest allies” protect as robust a right as we do,
and we should not widen the gap. Ibid. Never mind that
he explains neither which countries qualify as “advanced
democracies” nor why others are irrelevant. For there is
an even clearer indication that this criterion lets judges
pick which rights States must respect and those they can
ignore: As the plurality shows, ante, at 34–35, and nn. 28–
29, this follow-the-foreign-crowd requirement would fore­
——————
mind that the right to bear arms sounds mighty like a liberty; and
never mind that the “liberty clause” is really a Due Process Clause
which explicitly protects “property,” see United States v. Carlton, 512
U. S. 26, 41–42 (1994) (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment). JUSTICE
STEVENS’ theory cannot explain why the Takings Clause, which unques­
tionably protects property, has been incorporated, see Chicago, B. & Q.
R. Co. v. Chicago, 166 U. S. 226, 241 (1897), in a decision he appears to
accept, post, at 14, n. 14.
7 As JUSTICE STEVENS notes, see post, at 51–52, I accept as a matter of
stare decisis the requirement that to be fundamental for purposes of the
Due Process Clause, a right must be “implicit in the concept of ordered
liberty,” Lawrence, supra, at 593, n. 3 (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (internal
quotation marks omitted). But that inquiry provides infinitely less
scope for judicial invention when conducted under the Court’s ap­
proach, since the field of candidates is immensely narrowed by the prior
requirement that a right be rooted in this country’s traditions. JUSTICE
STEVENS, on the other hand, is free to scan the universe for rights that
he thinks “implicit in the concept, etc.” The point JUSTICE STEVENS
makes here is merely one example of his demand that an historical
approach to the Constitution prove itself, not merely much better than
his in restraining judicial invention, but utterly perfect in doing so. See
Part III, infra.

