44

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

hysterics.” K. Stampp, The Era of Reconstruction, 1865–
1877, p. 104 (1965) (hereinafter Era of Reconstruction).
As the Court explains, this fear led to “systematic ef
forts” in the “old Confederacy” to disarm the more than
180,000 freedmen who had served in the Union Army, as
well as other free blacks. See ante, at 23. Some States
formally prohibited blacks from possessing firearms. Ante,
at 23–24 (quoting 1865 Miss. Laws p. 165, §1, reprinted in
1 Fleming 289). Others enacted legislation prohibiting
blacks from carrying firearms without a license, a restric
tion not imposed on whites. See, e.g., La. Statute of 1865,
reprinted in id., at 280. Additionally, “[t]hroughout the
South, armed parties, often consisting of ex-Confederate
soldiers serving in the state militias, forcibly took firearms
from newly freed slaves.” Ante, at 24.
As the Court makes crystal clear, if the Fourteenth
Amendment “had outlawed only those laws that discrimi
nate on the basis of race or previous condition of servitude,
African-Americans in the South would likely have re
mained vulnerable to attack by many of their worst abus
ers: the state militia and state peace officers.” Ante, at 32.
In the years following the Civil War, a law banning fire
arm possession outright “would have been nondiscrimina
tory only in the formal sense,” for it would have “left fire
arms in the hands of the militia and local peace officers.”
Ibid.
Evidence suggests that the public understood this at the
time the Fourteenth Amendment was ratified. The pub
licly circulated Report of the Joint Committee on Recon
struction extensively detailed these abuses, see ante, at
23–24 (collecting examples), and statements by citizens
indicate that they looked to the Committee to provide a
federal solution to this problem, see, e.g., 39th Cong. Globe
337 (remarks of Rep. Sumner) (introducing “a memorial
from the colored citizens of the State of South Carolina”
asking for, inter alia, “constitutional protection in keeping

