Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

BREYER, J., dissenting

It is thus unsurprising that States and local communi
ties have historically differed about the need for gun regu
lation as well as about its proper level. Nor is it surpris
ing that “primarily, and historically,” the law has treated
the exercise of police powers, including gun control, as
“matter[s] of local concern.” Medtronic, 518 U. S., at 475
(internal quotation marks omitted).
Fourth, although incorporation of any right removes
decisions from the democratic process, the incorporation of
this particular right does so without strong offsetting
justification—as the example of Oak Park’s handgun ban
helps to show. See Oak Park, Ill., Municipal Code, §27–2–
1 (1995). Oak Park decided to ban handguns in 1983,
after a local attorney was shot to death with a handgun
that his assailant had smuggled into a courtroom in a
blanket. Brief for Oak Park Citizens Committee for
Handgun Control as Amicus Curiae 1, 21 (hereinafter Oak
Park Brief). A citizens committee spent months gathering
information about handguns. Id., at 21. It secured 6,000
signatures from community residents in support of a ban.
Id., at 21–22. And the village board enacted a ban into
law. Id., at 22.
Subsequently, at the urging of ban opponents the Board
held a community referendum on the matter. Ibid. The
citizens committee argued strongly in favor of the ban.
Id., at 22–23. It pointed out that most guns owned in Oak
Park were handguns and that handguns were misused
more often than citizens used them in self-defense. Id., at
23. The ban opponents argued just as strongly to the
contrary. Ibid. The public decided to keep the ban by a
vote of 8,031 to 6,368. Ibid. And since that time, Oak
Park now tells us, crime has decreased and the community
has seen no accidental handgun deaths. Id., at 2.
Given the empirical and local value-laden nature of the
questions that lie at the heart of the issue, why, in a Na
tion whose Constitution foresees democratic decisionmak

