Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

BREYER, J., dissenting

view, this is the historical equivalent of a claim that water
runs uphill. See Part I, supra. But, taking it as valid, the
Framers’ basic reasons for including language in the Con
stitution would nonetheless seem more pertinent (in decid
ing about the contemporary importance of a right) than
the particular scope 17th- or 18th-century listeners would
have then assigned to the words they used. And examina
tion of the Framers’ motivation tells us they did not think
the private armed self-defense right was of paramount
importance. See Amar, The Bill of Rights as a Constitu
tion, 100 Yale L. J. 1131, 1164 (1991) (“[T]o see the [Sec
ond] Amendment as primarily concerned with an individ
ual right to hunt, or protect one’s home,” would be “like
viewing the heart of the speech and assembly clauses as
the right of persons to meet to play bridge”); see also, e.g.,
Rakove, The Second Amendment: The Highest Stage of
Originalism, 76 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 103, 127–128 (2000);
Brief for Historians on Early American Legal, Constitu
tional, and Pennsylvania History as Amici Curiae 22–33.
Further, there is no popular consensus that the private
self-defense right described in Heller is fundamental. The
plurality suggests that two amici briefs filed in the case
show such a consensus, see ante, at 42–43, but, of course,
numerous amici briefs have been filed opposing incorpora
tion as well. Moreover, every State regulates firearms
extensively, and public opinion is sharply divided on the
appropriate level of regulation. Much of this disagreement
rests upon empirical considerations. One side believes the
right essential to protect the lives of those attacked in the
home; the other side believes it essential to regulate the
right in order to protect the lives of others attacked with
guns. It seems unlikely that definitive evidence will de
velop one way or the other. And the appropriate level of
firearm regulation has thus long been, and continues to
be, a hotly contested matter of political debate. See, e.g.,
Siegel, Dead or Alive: Originalism as Popular Constitu

