4

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Syllabus
U. S. 145, 149, or, as the Court has said in a related context, whether
it is “deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition,” Washing
ton v. Glucksberg, 521 U. S. 702, 721. Heller points unmistakably to
the answer. Self-defense is a basic right, recognized by many legal
systems from ancient times to the present, and the Heller Court held
that individual self-defense is “the central component” of the Second
Amendment right. 554 U. S., at ___, ___. Explaining that “the need
for defense of self, family, and property is most acute” in the home,
ibid., the Court found that this right applies to handguns because
they are “the most preferred firearm in the nation to ‘keep’ and use
for protection of one’s home and family,” id., at ___, ___–___. It thus
concluded that citizens must be permitted “to use [handguns] for the
core lawful purpose of self-defense.” Id., at ___. Heller also clarifies
that this right is “deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradi
tions,” Glucksberg, supra, at 721. Heller explored the right’s origins
in English law and noted the esteem with which the right was re
garded during the colonial era and at the time of the ratification of
the Bill of Rights. This is powerful evidence that the right was re
garded as fundamental in the sense relevant here. That understand
ing persisted in the years immediately following the Bill of Rights’
ratification and is confirmed by the state constitutions of that era,
which protected the right to keep and bear arms. Pp. 19–22.
(2) A survey of the contemporaneous history also demonstrates
clearly that the Fourteenth Amendment’s Framers and ratifiers
counted the right to keep and bear arms among those fundamental
rights necessary to the Nation’s system of ordered liberty. Pp. 22–33.
(i) By the 1850’s, the fear that the National Government would
disarm the universal militia had largely faded, but the right to keep
and bear arms was highly valued for self-defense. Abolitionist au
thors wrote in support of the right, and attempts to disarm “FreeSoilers” in “Bloody Kansas,” met with outrage that the constitutional
right to keep and bear arms had been taken from the people. After
the Civil War, the Southern States engaged in systematic efforts to
disarm and injure African Americans, see Heller, supra, at ___.
These injustices prompted the 39th Congress to pass the Freedmen’s
Bureau Act of 1866 and the Civil Rights Act of 1866 to protect the
right to keep and bear arms. Congress, however, ultimately deemed
these legislative remedies insufficient, and approved the Fourteenth
Amendment. Today, it is generally accepted that that Amendment
was understood to provide a constitutional basis for protecting the
rights set out in the Civil Rights Act. See General Building Contrac
tors Assn., Inc. v. Pennsylvania, 458 U. S. 375, 389. In Congressional
debates on the proposed Amendment, its legislative proponents in the
39th Congress referred to the right to keep and bear arms as a fun

