Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

53

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

turning the convictions of militia members responsible for
the brutal Colfax Massacre. See supra, at 4–5. Cruik
shank is not a precedent entitled to any respect. The flaws
in its interpretation of the Privileges or Immunities
Clause are made evident by the preceding evidence of its
original meaning, and I would reject the holding on that
basis alone. But, the consequences of Cruikshank warrant
mention as well.
Cruikshank’s holding that blacks could look only to state
governments for protection of their right to keep and bear
arms enabled private forces, often with the assistance of
local governments, to subjugate the newly freed slaves and
their descendants through a wave of private violence
designed to drive blacks from the voting booth and force
them into peonage, an effective return to slavery. Without
federal enforcement of the inalienable right to keep and
bear arms, these militias and mobs were tragically suc
cessful in waging a campaign of terror against the very
people the Fourteenth Amendment had just made citizens.
Take, for example, the Hamburg Massacre of 1876.
There, a white citizen militia sought out and murdered a
troop of black militiamen for no other reason than that
they had dared to conduct a celebratory Fourth of July
parade through their mostly black town. The white mili
tia commander, “Pitchfork” Ben Tillman, later described
this massacre with pride: “[T]he leading white men of
Edgefield” had decided “to seize the first opportunity that
the negroes might offer them to provoke a riot and teach
the negroes a lesson by having the whites demonstrate
their superiority by killing as many of them as was justifi
able.” S. Kantrowitz, Ben Tillman & the Reconstruction of
White Supremacy 67 (2000) (ellipsis, brackets, and inter
nal quotation marks omitted). None of the perpetrators of
the Hamburg murders was ever brought to justice.22
——————
22 Tillman

went on to a long career as South Carolina’s Governor and,

