Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

BREYER, J., dissenting

gun semi-automatic? Where are different kinds of weap
ons likely needed? Does time-of-day matter? Does the
presence of a child in the house matter? Does the pres
ence of a convicted felon in the house matter? Do police
need special rules permitting patdowns designed to find
guns? When do registration requirements become severe
to the point that they amount to an unconstitutional ban?
Who can possess guns and of what kind? Aliens? Prior
drug offenders? Prior alcohol abusers? How would the
right interact with a state or local government’s ability to
take special measures during, say, national security emer
gencies? As the questions suggest, state and local gun
regulation can become highly complex, and these “are only
a few uncertainties that quickly come to mind.” Caperton
v. A. T. Massey Coal Co., 556 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting) (slip op., at 10).
The difficulty of finding answers to these questions is
exceeded only by the importance of doing so. Firearms
cause well over 60,000 deaths and injuries in the United
States each year. Those who live in urban areas, police
officers, women, and children, all may be particularly at
risk. And gun regulation may save their lives. Some
experts have calculated, for example, that Chicago’s hand
gun ban has saved several hundred lives, perhaps close to
1,000, since it was enacted in 1983. Other experts argue
that stringent gun regulations “can help protect police
officers operating on the front lines against gun violence,”
have reduced homicide rates in Washington, D. C., and
Baltimore, and have helped to lower New York’s crime and
homicide rates.
At the same time, the opponents of regulation cast doubt
on these studies. And who is right? Finding out may
require interpreting studies that are only indirectly re
lated to a particular regulatory statute, say one banning
handguns in the home. Suppose studies find more acci
dents and suicides where there is a handgun in the home

