Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

37

STEVENS, J., dissenting

v. United States ex rel. Watson, ante, at ___ (slip op., at 11)
(dissenting opinion). The same holds true for the hand­
gun. The power a man has in the state of nature “of doing
whatsoever he thought fit for the preservation of himself
and the rest of mankind, he gives up,” to a significant
extent, “to be regulated by laws made by the society.”
J. Locke, Second Treatise of Civil Government §129, p. 64
(J. Gough ed. 1947).
Limiting the federal constitutional right to keep and
bear arms to the home complicates the analysis but does
not dislodge this conclusion. Even though the Court has
long afforded special solicitude for the privacy of the home,
we have never understood that principle to “infring[e]
upon” the authority of the States to proscribe certain
inherently dangerous items, for “[i]n such cases, compel­
ling reasons may exist for overriding the right of the indi­
vidual to possess those materials.” Stanley, 394 U. S., at
568, n. 11. And, of course, guns that start out in the home
may not stay in the home. Even if the government has a
weaker basis for restricting domestic possession of fire­
arms as compared to public carriage—and even if a blan­
ket, statewide prohibition on domestic possession might
therefore be unconstitutional—the line between the two is
a porous one. A state or local legislature may determine
that a prophylactic ban on an especially portable weapon
is necessary to police that line.
Second, the right to possess a firearm of one’s choosing
is different in kind from the liberty interests we have
recognized under the Due Process Clause. Despite the
plethora of substantive due process cases that have been
decided in the post-Lochner century, I have found none
that holds, states, or even suggests that the term “liberty”
encompasses either the common-law right of self-defense
or a right to keep and bear arms. I do not doubt for a
moment that many Americans feel deeply passionate
about firearms, and see them as critical to their way of life

