32

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

bounded in scope.
In their briefs to this Court, several amici have sought
to bolster petitioners’ claim still further by invoking a
right to individual self-defense.31 As petitioners note, the
Heller majority discussed this subject extensively and
remarked that “[t]he inherent right of self-defense has
been central to the Second Amendment right.” 554 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 56). And it is true that if a State were
to try to deprive its residents of any reasonable means of
defending themselves from imminent physical threats, or
to deny persons any ability to assert self-defense in re­
sponse to criminal prosecution, that might pose a signifi­
cant constitutional problem. The argument that there is a
substantive due process right to be spared such untenable
dilemmas is a serious one.32
——————
31 See,

e.g., Brief for Professors of Philosophy, Criminology, Law, and
Other Fields as Amici Curiae; Brief for International Law Enforcement
Educators and Trainers Association et al. as Amici Curiae 29–45; Brief
for 34 California District Attorneys et al. as Amici Curiae 12–31.
32 The argument that this Court should establish any such right,
however, faces steep hurdles. All 50 States already recognize self­
defense as a defense to criminal prosecution, see 2 P. Robinson, Crimi­
nal Law Defenses §132, p. 96 (1984 and Supp. 2009), so this is hardly
an interest to which the democratic process has been insensitive. And
the States have always diverged on how exactly to implement this
interest, so there is wide variety across the Nation in the types and
amounts of force that may be used, the necessity of retreat, the rights of
aggressors, the availability of the “castle doctrine,” and so forth. See
Brief for Oak Park Citizens Committee for Handgun Control as Amicus
Curiae 9–21; Brief for American Cities et al. as Amici Curiae 17–19; 2
W. LaFave, Substantive Criminal Law §10.4, pp. 142–160 (2d ed. 2003).
Such variation is presumed to be a healthy part of our federalist
system, as the States and localities select different rules in light of
different priorities, customs, and conditions.
As a historical and theoretical matter, moreover, the legal status of
self-defense is far more complicated than it might first appear. We
have generally understood Fourteenth Amendment “liberty” as some­
thing one holds against direct state interference, whereas a personal
right of self-defense runs primarily against other individuals; absent

