22

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

The most basic is that we have eschewed attempts to
provide any all-purpose, top-down, totalizing theory of
“liberty.”24 That project is bound to end in failure or
worse. The Framers did not express a clear understand­
ing of the term to guide us, and the now-repudiated
Lochner line of cases attests to the dangers of judicial
overconfidence in using substantive due process to ad­
vance a broad theory of the right or the good. See, e.g.,
Lochner v. New York, 198 U. S. 45 (1905). In its most
durable precedents, the Court “has not attempted to define
with exactness the liberty . . . guaranteed” by the Four­
teenth Amendment. Meyer, 262 U. S., at 399; see also,
e.g., Bolling, 347 U. S, at 499. By its very nature, the
meaning of liberty cannot be “reduced to any formula; its
content cannot be determined by reference to any code.”
Poe, 367 U. S., at 542 (Harlan, J., dissenting).
Yet while “the ‘liberty’ specially protected by the Four­
teenth Amendment” is “perhaps not capable of being fully
clarified,” Glucksberg, 521 U. S., at 722, it is capable of
being refined and delimited. We have insisted that only
certain types of especially significant personal interests
may qualify for especially heightened protection. Ever
since “the deviant economic due process cases [were]
repudiated,” id., at 761 (Souter, J., concurring in judg­
——————
is that the text of the [Due Process] Clause warrants providing only
protections of process rather than protections of substance,” “it is
striking that even those Justices who are most theoretically opposed to
substantive due process, like Scalia and Rehnquist, are also nonethe­
less enthusiastic about applying the equal protection component of the
Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the federal govern­
ment.” Ibid. (citing Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Peña, 515 U. S. 200,
213–231 (1995)).
24 That one eschews a comprehensive theory of liberty does not, pace
JUSTICE SCALIA, mean that one lacks “a coherent theory of the Due
Process Clause,” ante, at 5. It means that one lacks the hubris to adopt
a rigid, context-independent definition of a constitutional guarantee
that was deliberately framed in open-ended terms.

