48

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

It is all the more unwise for this Court to limit experi­
mentation in an area “where the best solution is far from
clear.” United States v. Lopez, 514 U. S. 549, 581 (1995)
(KENNEDY, J., concurring). Few issues of public policy are
subject to such intensive and rapidly developing empirical
controversy as gun control. See Heller, 554 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 20–25) (BREYER, J., dissenting). Chicago’s
handgun ban, in itself, has divided researchers. Compare
Brief for Professors of Criminal Justice as Amici Curiae
(arguing that ordinance has been effective at reducing gun
violence), with Brief for International Law Enforcement
Educators and Trainers Association et al. as Amici Curiae
17–26 (arguing that ordinance has been a failure).46 Of
course, on some matters the Constitution requires that we
ignore such pragmatic considerations. But the Constitu­
tion’s text, history, and structure are not so clear on the
matter before us—as evidenced by the groundbreaking
nature of today’s fractured decision—and this Court lacks
both the technical capacity and the localized expertise to
assess “the wisdom, need, and propriety” of most gun­
control measures. Griswold, 381 U. S., at 482.47
——————
46 The fact that Chicago’s handgun murder rate may have “actually
increased since the ban was enacted,” ante, at 2 (majority opinion),
means virtually nothing in itself. Countless factors unrelated to the
policy may have contributed to that trend. Without a sophisticated
regression analysis, we cannot even begin to speculate as to the efficacy
or effects of the handgun ban. Even with such an analysis, we could
never be certain as to the determinants of the city’s murder rate.
47 In some sense, it is no doubt true that the “best” solution is elusive
for many “serious social problems.” Ante, at 12 (opinion of SCALIA, J.).
Yet few social problems have raised such heated empirical controversy
as the problem of gun violence. And few, if any, of the liberty interests
we have recognized under the Due Process Clause have raised as many
complications for judicial oversight as the interest that is recognized
today. See post, at 11–16.
I agree with the plurality that for a right to be eligible for substantive
due process recognition, there need not be “a ‘popular consensus’ that
the right is fundamental.” Ante, at 42. In our remarkably diverse,

