36

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

all murders nationwide.35
Hence, in evaluating an asserted right to be free from
particular gun-control regulations, liberty is on both sides
of the equation. Guns may be useful for self-defense, as
well as for hunting and sport, but they also have a unique
potential to facilitate death and destruction and thereby to
destabilize ordered liberty. Your interest in keeping and
bearing a certain firearm may diminish my interest in
being and feeling safe from armed violence. And while
granting you the right to own a handgun might make you
safer on any given day—assuming the handgun’s marginal
contribution to self-defense outweighs its marginal contri­
bution to the risk of accident, suicide, and criminal mis­
chief—it may make you and the community you live in
less safe overall, owing to the increased number of hand­
guns in circulation. It is at least reasonable for a democ­
ratically elected legislature to take such concerns into
account in considering what sorts of regulations would
best serve the public welfare.
The practical impact of various gun-control measures
may be highly controversial, but this basic insight should
not be. The idea that deadly weapons pose a distinctive
threat to the social order—and that reasonable restric­
tions on their usage therefore impose an acceptable bur­
den on one’s personal liberty—is as old as the Republic.
As THE CHIEF JUSTICE observed just the other day, it is a
foundational premise of modern government that the
State holds a monopoly on legitimate violence: “A basic
step in organizing a civilized society is to take [the] sword
out of private hands and turn it over to an organized
government, acting on behalf of all the people.” Robertson
——————
35 Bogus, Gun Control and America’s Cities: Public Policy and Poli­
tics, 1 Albany Govt. L. Rev. 440, 447 (2008) (drawing on FBI data); see
also Heller, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 18–19) (BREYER, J., dissenting)
(providing additional statistics on handgun violence); Municipal Re­
spondents’ Brief 13–14 (same).

