Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

SCALIA, J., concurring

close rights that we have held (and JUSTICE STEVENS
accepts) are incorporated, but that other “advanced” na­
tions do not recognize—from the exclusionary rule to the
Establishment Clause.
A judge applying JUSTICE
STEVENS’ approach must either throw all of those rights
overboard or, as cases JUSTICE STEVENS approves have
done in considering unenumerated rights, simply ignore
foreign law when it undermines the desired conclusion,
see, e.g., Casey, 505 U. S. 833 (making no mention of
foreign law).
JUSTICE STEVENS also argues that since the right to
keep and bear arms was codified for the purpose of “pre­
vent[ing] elimination of the militia,” it should be viewed as
“ ‘a federalism provision’ ” logically incapable of incorpora­
tion. Post, at 41–42 (quoting Elk Grove Unified School
Dist. v. Newdow, 542 U. S. 1, 45 (2004) (THOMAS, J., con­
curring in judgment); some internal quotation marks
omitted). This criterion, too, evidently applies only when
judges want it to. The opinion JUSTICE STEVENS quotes
for the “federalism provision” principle, JUSTICE THOMAS’s
concurrence in Newdow, argued that incorporation of the
Establishment Clause “makes little sense” because that
Clause was originally understood as a limit on congres­
sional interference with state establishments of religion.
Id., at 49–51. JUSTICE STEVENS, of course, has no problem
with applying the Establishment Clause to the States.
See, e.g., id., at 8, n. 4 (opinion for the Court by STEVENS,
J.) (acknowledging that the Establishment Clause
“appl[ies] to the States by incorporation into the Four­
teenth Amendment”). While he insists that Clause is not a
“federalism provision,” post, at 42, n. 40, he does not ex­
plain why it is not, but the right to keep and bear arms is
(even though only the latter refers to a “right of the peo­
ple”). The “federalism” argument prevents the incorpora­
tion of only certain rights.
JUSTICE STEVENS next argues that even if the right to

