Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

41

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

b
In the contentious years leading up to the Civil War,
those who sought to retain the institution of slavery found
that to do so, it was necessary to eliminate more and more
of the basic liberties of slaves, free blacks, and white
abolitionists. Congressman Tobias Plants explained that
slaveholders “could not hold [slaves] safely where dissent
was permitted,” so they decided that “all dissent must be
suppressed by the strong hand of power.” 39th Cong.
Globe 1013. The measures they used were ruthless, re
pressed virtually every right recognized in the Constitu
tion, and demonstrated that preventing only discrimina
tory state firearms restrictions would have been a hollow
assurance for liberty. Public reaction indicates that the
American people understood this point.
The overarching goal of pro-slavery forces was to repress
the spread of abolitionist thought and the concomitant
risk of a slave rebellion. Indeed, it is difficult to overstate
the extent to which fear of a slave uprising gripped slave
holders and dictated the acts of Southern legislatures.
Slaves and free blacks represented a substantial percent
age of the population and posed a severe threat to South
ern order if they were not kept in their place. According to
the 1860 Census, slaves represented one quarter or more
of the population in 11 of the 15 slave States, nearly half
the population in Alabama, Florida, Georgia, and Louisi
ana, and more than 50% of the population in Mississippi
and South Carolina. Statistics of the United States (In
cluding Mortality, Property, &c.,) in 1860, The Eighth
Census 336−350 (1866).
The Southern fear of slave rebellion was not unfounded.
Although there were others, two particularly notable slave
uprisings heavily influenced slaveholders in the South. In
1822, a group of free blacks and slaves led by Denmark
Vesey planned a rebellion in which they would slay their
masters and flee to Haiti. H. Aptheker, American Negro

