Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

STEVENS, J., dissenting

ultimately redounds to the benefit of all Americans. New
State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, 285 U. S. 262, 311 (1932)
(Brandeis, J., dissenting). The costs of federal courts’
imposing a uniform national standard may be especially
high when the relevant regulatory interests vary signifi­
cantly across localities, and when the ruling implicates the
States’ core police powers.
Furthermore, there is a real risk that, by demanding the
provisions of the Bill of Rights apply identically to the
States, federal courts will cause those provisions to “be
watered down in the needless pursuit of uniformity.”
Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U. S. 145, 182, n. 21 (1968)
(Harlan, J., dissenting). When one legal standard must
prevail across dozens of jurisdictions with disparate needs
and customs, courts will often settle on a relaxed stan­
dard. This watering-down risk is particularly acute when
we move beyond the narrow realm of criminal procedure
and into the relatively vast domain of substantive rights.
So long as the requirements of fundamental fairness are
always and everywhere respected, it is not clear that
greater liberty results from the jot-for-jot application of a
provision of the Bill of Rights to the States. Indeed, it is
far from clear that proponents of an individual right to
keep and bear arms ought to celebrate today’s decision.13
——————
13 The vast majority of States already recognize a right to keep and
bear arms in their own constitutions, see Volokh, State Constitutional
Rights to Keep and Bear Arms, 11 Tex. Rev. L. & Pol. 191 (2006)
(cataloguing provisions); Brief for Petitioners 69 (observing that
“[t]hese Second Amendment analogs are effective and consequential”),
but the States vary widely in their regulatory schemes, their traditions
and cultures of firearm use, and their problems relating to gun vio­
lence. If federal and state courts must harmonize their review of gun­
control laws under the Second Amendment, the resulting jurisprudence
may prove significantly more deferential to those laws than the status
quo ante. Once it has been established that a single legal standard
must govern nationwide, federal courts will face a profound pressure to
reconcile that standard with the diverse interests of the States and

