38

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

as well as to their security. Nevertheless, it does not
appear to be the case that the ability to own a handgun, or
any particular type of firearm, is critical to leading a life of
autonomy, dignity, or political equality: The marketplace
offers many tools for self-defense, even if they are imper­
fect substitutes, and neither petitioners nor their amici
make such a contention. Petitioners’ claim is not the kind
of substantive interest, accordingly, on which a uniform,
judicially enforced national standard is presumptively
appropriate.36
Indeed, in some respects the substantive right at issue
may be better viewed as a property right. Petitioners wish
to acquire certain types of firearms, or to keep certain
firearms they have previously acquired. Interests in the
possession of chattels have traditionally been viewed as
property interests subject to definition and regulation by
the States. Cf. Stop the Beach Renourishment, Inc. v.
Florida Dept. of Environmental Protection, 560 U. S. ___,
___ (2010) (slip op., at 1) (opinion of SCALIA, J.) (“Gener­
ally speaking, state law defines property interests”).
——————
36 JUSTICE

SCALIA worries that there is no “objective” way to decide
what is essential to a “liberty-filled” existence: Better, then, to ignore
such messy considerations as how an interest actually affects people’s
lives. Ante, at 10. Both the constitutional text and our cases use the
term “liberty,” however, and liberty is not a purely objective concept.
Substantive due process analysis does not require any “political”
judgment, ibid. It does require some amount of practical and norma­
tive judgment. The only way to assess what is essential to fulfilling the
Constitution’s guarantee of “liberty,” in the present day, is to provide
reasons that apply to the present day. I have provided many; JUSTICE
SCALIA and the Court have provided virtually none.
JUSTICE SCALIA also misstates my argument when he refers to “the
right to keep and bear arms,” without qualification. Ante, at 9. That is
what the Second Amendment protects against Federal Government
infringement. I have taken pains to show why the Fourteenth Amend­
ment liberty interest asserted by petitioners—the interest in keeping a
firearm of one’s choosing in the home—is not necessarily coextensive
with the Second Amendment right.

