14

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
SCALIA, J., concurring

difficult; it sometimes requires resolving threshold ques­
tions, and making nuanced judgments about which evi­
dence to consult and how to interpret it.
I will stipulate to that.9 But the question to be decided
is not whether the historically focused method is a perfect
means of restraining aristocratic judicial Constitution­
writing; but whether it is the best means available in an
imperfect world. Or indeed, even more narrowly than
that: whether it is demonstrably much better than what
JUSTICE STEVENS proposes. I think it beyond all serious
dispute that it is much less subjective, and intrudes much
less upon the democratic process. It is less subjective
because it depends upon a body of evidence susceptible of
reasoned analysis rather than a variety of vague ethico­
political First Principles whose combined conclusion can
be found to point in any direction the judges favor. In the
most controversial matters brought before this Court—for
example, the constitutionality of prohibiting abortion,
assisted suicide, or homosexual sodomy, or the constitu­
tionality of the death penalty—any historical methodology,
under any plausible standard of proof, would lead to the
same conclusion.10 Moreover, the methodological differ­
ences that divide historians, and the varying interpretive
——————
commitments of the American people” (and that is unclear, see post, at
48–49, n. 47), it is hard to see how it shows fidelity to them that he
disapproves a different subset of old cases than the Court does.
9 That is not to say that every historical question on which there is
room for debate is indeterminate, or that every question on which
historians disagree is equally balanced. Cf. post, at 52–53. For exam­
ple, the historical analysis of the principal dissent in Heller is as valid
as the Court’s only in a two-dimensional world that conflates length
and depth.
10 By the way, JUSTICE STEVENS greatly magnifies the difficulty of an
historical approach by suggesting that it was my burden in Lawrence to
show the “ancient roots of proscriptions against sodomy,” post, at 53
(internal quotation marks omitted). Au contraire, it was his burden (in
the opinion he joined) to show the ancient roots of the right of sodomy.

