26

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of the Court

gress concluded that legislative action was necessary. Its
efforts to safeguard the right to keep and bear arms
demonstrate that the right was still recognized to be
fundamental.
The most explicit evidence of Congress’ aim appears in
§14 of the Freedmen’s Bureau Act of 1866, which provided
that “the right . . . to have full and equal benefit of all laws
and proceedings concerning personal liberty, personal
security, and the acquisition, enjoyment, and disposition of
estate, real and personal, including the constitutional
right to bear arms, shall be secured to and enjoyed by all
the citizens . . . without respect to race or color, or previ
ous condition of slavery.” 14 Stat. 176–177 (emphasis
added).22 Section 14 thus explicitly guaranteed that “all
the citizens,” black and white, would have “the constitu
tional right to bear arms.”
The Civil Rights Act of 1866, 14 Stat. 27, which was
considered at the same time as the Freedmen’s Bureau
Act, similarly sought to protect the right of all citizens to
keep and bear arms.23 Section 1 of the Civil Rights Act
——————
cally interfered with.” Joint Committee on Reconstruction, H. R. Rep.
No. 30, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., pt. 3, p. 140 (1866).
22 The Freedmen’s Bureau bill was amended to include an express
reference to the right to keep and bear arms, see 39th Cong. Globe 654
(Rep. Thomas Eliot), even though at least some Members believed that
the unamended version alone would have protected the right, see id., at
743 (Sen. Lyman Trumbull).
23 There can be do doubt that the principal proponents of the Civil
Rights Act of 1866 meant to end the disarmament of African Americans
in the South. In introducing the bill, Senator Trumbull described its
purpose as securing to blacks the “privileges which are essential to
freemen.” Id., at 474. He then pointed to the previously described
Mississippi law that “prohibit[ed] any negro or mulatto from having
fire-arms” and explained that the bill would “destroy” such laws. Ibid.
Similarly, Representative Sidney Clarke cited disarmament of freed
men in Alabama and Mississippi as a reason to support the Civil Rights
Act and to continue to deny Alabama and Mississippi representation in
Congress: “I regret, sir, that justice compels me to say, to the disgrace

