Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

of the Federal Convention of 1787, p. 212 (M. Farrand ed.
1911) (remarks of Luther Martin) (“[S]lavery is inconsis
tent with the genius of republicanism, and has a tendency
to destroy those principles on which it is supported, as it
lessens the sense of the equal rights of mankind” (empha
sis deleted)); A. Lincoln, Speech at Peoria, Ill. (Oct. 16,
1854), reprinted in 2 The Collected Works of Abraham
Lincoln 266 (R. Basler ed. 1953) (“[N]o man is good enough
to govern another man, without that other’s consent. I say
this is the leading principle—the sheet anchor of American
republicanism. . . . Now the relation of masters and slaves
is, pro tanto, a total violation of this principle”).
After the war, a series of constitutional amendments
were adopted to repair the Nation from the damage slav
ery had caused. The provision at issue here, §1 of the
Fourteenth Amendment, significantly altered our system
of government. The first sentence of that section provides
that “[a]ll persons born or naturalized in the United States
and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the
United States and of the State wherein they reside.” This
unambiguously overruled this Court’s contrary holding in
Dred Scott v. Sandford, 19 How. 393 (1857), that the
Constitution did not recognize black Americans as citizens
of the United States or their own State. Id., at 405–406.
The meaning of §1’s next sentence has divided this
Court for many years. That sentence begins with the
command that “[n]o State shall make or enforce any law
which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citi
zens of the United States.” On its face, this appears to
grant the persons just made United States citizens a
certain collection of rights—i.e., privileges or immunities—
attributable to that status.
This Court’s precedents accept that point, but define the
relevant collection of rights quite narrowly.
In the
Slaughter-House Cases, 16 Wall. 36 (1873), decided just
five years after the Fourteenth Amendment’s adoption, the

