22

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Daniel Webster was among the leading proponents of
the antislavery position. In his “Memorial to Congress,”
Webster argued that “[t]he rights, advantages and immu
nities here spoken of [in the Cession Act] must . . . be such
as are recognized or communicated by the Constitution of
the United States,” not the “rights, advantages and im
munities, derived exclusively from the State governments
. . . .” D. Webster, A Memorial to the Congress of the
United States on the Subject of Restraining the Increase of
Slavery in New States to be Admitted into the Union 15
(Dec. 15, 1819) (emphasis added). “The obvious meaning”
of the Act, in Webster’s view, was that “the rights derived
under the federal Constitution shall be enjoyed by the
inhabitants of [the territory].” Id., at 15–16 (emphasis
added). In other words, Webster articulated a distinction
between the rights of United States citizenship and the
rights of state citizenship, and argued that the former
included those rights “recognized or communicated by the
Constitution.” Since the right to hold slaves was not
mentioned in the Constitution, it was not a right of federal
citizenship.
Webster and his allies ultimately lost the debate over
slavery in Missouri and the territory was admitted as a
slave State as part of the now-famous Missouri Compro
mise. Missouri Enabling Act of March 6, 1820, ch. 22, §8,
3 Stat. 548. But their arguments continued to inform
public understanding of the privileges and immunities of
——————
tion in the House of the Representatives 16 (1820), as published in
pamphlet form and reprinted in 22 Moore Pamphlets, p. 16 (“If the
right to hold slaves is a federal right and attached merely to citizenship
of the United States, [then slavery] could maintain itself against state
authority, and on this principle the owner might take his slaves into
any state he pleased, in defiance of the state laws, but this would be
contrary to the constitution”); see also Lash, The Origins of the Privi
leges or Immunities Clause, Part I: “Privileges and Immunities” as an
Antebellum Term of Art, 98 Geo. L. J. 1241, 1288–1290 (2010) (collect
ing other examples).

