Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

STEVENS, J., dissenting

ment), our doctrine has steered away from “laws that
touch economic problems, business affairs, or social condi­
tions,” Griswold, 381 U. S., at 482, and has instead cen­
tered on “matters relating to marriage, procreation, con­
traception, family relationships, and child rearing and
education,” Paul v. Davis, 424 U. S. 693, 713 (1976).
These categories are not exclusive. Government action
that shocks the conscience, pointlessly infringes settled
expectations, trespasses into sensitive private realms or
life choices without adequate justification, perpetrates
gross injustice, or simply lacks a rational basis will always
be vulnerable to judicial invalidation. Nor does the fact
that an asserted right falls within one of these categories
end the inquiry. More fundamental rights may receive
more robust judicial protection, but the strength of the
individual’s liberty interests and the State’s regulatory
interests must always be assessed and compared. No
right is absolute.
Rather than seek a categorical understanding of the
liberty clause, our precedents have thus elucidated a
conceptual core. The clause safeguards, most basically,
“the ability independently to define one’s identity,” Roberts
v. United States Jaycees, 468 U. S. 609, 619 (1984), “the
individual’s right to make certain unusually important
decisions that will affect his own, or his family’s, destiny,”
Fitzgerald, 523 F. 2d, at 719, and the right to be respected
as a human being. Self-determination, bodily integrity,
freedom of conscience, intimate relationships, political
equality, dignity and respect—these are the central values
we have found implicit in the concept of ordered liberty.
Another key constraint on substantive due process
analysis is respect for the democratic process. If a particu­
lar liberty interest is already being given careful consid­
eration in, and subjected to ongoing calibration by, the
States, judicial enforcement may not be appropriate.
When the Court declined to establish a general right to

