Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

“liberty of the person both in its spatial and in its more
transcendent dimensions”). Using the latter approach, the
Court has determined that the Due Process Clause applies
rights against the States that are not mentioned in the
Constitution at all, even without seriously arguing that
the Clause was originally understood to protect such
rights. See, e.g., Lochner v. New York, 198 U. S. 45 (1905);
Roe v. Wade, 410 U. S. 113 (1973); Lawrence, supra.
All of this is a legal fiction. The notion that a constitu
tional provision that guarantees only “process” before a
person is deprived of life, liberty, or property could define
the substance of those rights strains credulity for even the
most casual user of words. Moreover, this fiction is a
particularly dangerous one. The one theme that links the
Court’s substantive due process precedents together is
their lack of a guiding principle to distinguish “fundamen
tal” rights that warrant protection from nonfundamental
rights that do not. Today’s decision illustrates the point.
Replaying a debate that has endured from the inception of
the Court’s substantive due process jurisprudence, the
dissents laud the “flexibility” in this Court’s substantive
due process doctrine, post, at 14 (STEVENS, J., dissenting);
see post, at 6–8 (BREYER, J., dissenting), while the plural
ity makes yet another effort to impose principled re
straints on its exercise, see ante, at 33–41. But neither
side argues that the meaning they attribute to the Due
Process Clause was consistent with public understanding
at the time of its ratification.
To be sure, the plurality’s effort to cabin the exercise of
judicial discretion under the Due Process Clause by focus
ing its inquiry on those rights deeply rooted in American
history and tradition invites less opportunity for abuse
than the alternatives. See post, at 7 (BREYER, J., dissent
ing) (arguing that rights should be incorporated against
the States through the Due Process Clause if they are
“well-suited to the carrying out of . . . constitutional prom

