Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

BREYER, J., dissenting

the Framers had something different in mind than what
Blackstone himself meant. Compare Heller, supra, at ___
(slip op., at 21–22) with English Historians’ Brief 28–40.
The historians concede that at least one historian takes a
different position, see id., at 7, but the Court, they imply,
would lose a poll taken among professional historians of
this period, say, by a vote of 8 to 1.
If history, and history alone, is what matters, why
would the Court not now reconsider Heller in light of these
more recently published historical views? See Leegin
Creative Leather Products, Inc. v. PSKS, Inc., 551 U. S.
877, 923–924 (2007) (BREYER, J., dissenting) (noting that
stare decisis interests are at their lowest with respect to
recent and erroneous constitutional decisions that create
unworkable legal regimes); Citizens United v. Federal
Election Comm’n, 558 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 47)
(listing similar factors); see also Wallace v. Jaffree, 472
U. S. 38, 99 (1985) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting) (“[S]tare
decisis may bind courts as to matters of law, but it cannot
bind them as to matters of history”). At the least, where
Heller’s historical foundations are so uncertain, why ex
tend its applicability?
My aim in referring to this history is to illustrate the
reefs and shoals that lie in wait for those nonexpert judges
who place virtually determinative weight upon historical
considerations. In my own view, the Court should not look
to history alone but to other factors as well—above all, in
cases where the history is so unclear that the experts
themselves strongly disagree. It should, for example,
consider the basic values that underlie a constitutional
provision and their contemporary significance. And it
should examine as well the relevant consequences and
practical justifications that might, or might not, warrant
removing an important question from the democratic
decisionmaking process. See ante, at 16–20 (STEVENS, J.,
dissenting) (discussing shortcomings of an exclusively

