Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

BREYER, J., dissenting

mental concern of the Reconstruction Congress was the
eradication of discrimination, not the provision of a new
substantive right to bear arms free from reasonable state
police power regulation. See, e.g., Brief for Municipal
Respondents 62–69 (discussing congressional record evi
dence that Reconstruction Congress was concerned about
discrimination). Indeed, why would those who wrote the
Fourteenth Amendment have wanted to give such a right
to Southerners who had so recently waged war against the
North, and who continued to disarm and oppress recently
freed African-American citizens? Cf. Act of Mar. 2, 1867,
§6, 14 Stat. 487 (disbanding Southern militias because
they were, inter alia, disarming the freedmen).
Second, firearms regulation in the later part of the 19th
century was common. The majority is correct that the
Freedmen’s Bureau points to a right to bear arms, and it
stands to reason, as the majority points out, that “[i]t
would have been nonsensical for Congress to guarantee
the . . . equal benefit of a . . . right that does not exist.”
Ante, at 32. But the majority points to no evidence that
there existed during this period a fundamental right to
bear arms for private self-defense immune to the reason
able exercise of the state police power. See Emberton, The
Limits of Incorporation: Violence, Gun Rights, and Gun
Regulation in the Reconstruction South, 17 Stan. L. &
Pol’y Rev. 615, 621–622 (2006) (noting that history shows
that “nineteenth-century Americans” were “not opposed to
the idea that the state should be able to control the use of
firearms”).
To the contrary, in the latter half of the 19th century, a
number of state constitutions adopted or amended after
the Civil War explicitly recognized the legislature’s gen
eral ability to limit the right to bear arms. See Tex.
Const., Art. I, §13 (1869) (protecting “the right to keep and
bear arms,” “under such regulations as the legislature
may prescribe”); Idaho Const., Art. I, §11 (1889) (“The

