42

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO 

Opinion of the Court 

Opinion of ALITO, J.

B

JUSTICE BREYER’s dissent makes several points to which
we briefly respond. To begin, while there is certainly room
for disagreement about Heller’s analysis of the history of
the right to keep and bear arms, nothing written since
Heller persuades us to reopen the question there decided.
Few other questions of original meaning have been as
thoroughly explored.
JUSTICE BREYER’s conclusion that the Fourteenth
Amendment does not incorporate the right to keep and
bear arms appears to rest primarily on four factors: First,
“there is no popular consensus” that the right is funda
mental, post, at 9; second, the right does not protect mi
norities or persons neglected by those holding political
power, post, at 10; third, incorporation of the Second
Amendment right would “amount to a significant incur
sion on a traditional and important area of state concern,
altering the constitutional relationship between the States
and the Federal Government” and preventing local varia
tions, post, at 11; and fourth, determining the scope of the
Second Amendment right in cases involving state and
local laws will force judges to answer difficult empirical
questions regarding matters that are outside their area of
expertise, post, at 11–16. Even if we believed that these
factors were relevant to the incorporation inquiry, none of
these factors undermines the case for incorporation of the
right to keep and bear arms for self-defense.
First, we have never held that a provision of the Bill of
Rights applies to the States only if there is a “popular
consensus” that the right is fundamental, and we see no
basis for such a rule. But in this case, as it turns out,
there is evidence of such a consensus. An amicus brief
submitted by 58 Members of the Senate and 251 Members
of the House of Representatives urges us to hold that the
right to keep and bear arms is fundamental. See Brief for
Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison et al. as Amici Curiae 4.

