Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

55

STEVENS, J., dissenting

tional claim for that matter), it makes perfect sense to give
history significant weight: JUSTICE SCALIA’s position is
closer to my own than he apparently feels comfortable
acknowledging. But it makes little sense to give history
dispositive weight in every case. And it makes especially
little sense to answer questions like whether the right to
bear arms is “fundamental” by focusing only on the past,
given that both the practical significance and the public
understandings of such a right often change as society
changes. What if the evidence had shown that, whereas at
one time firearm possession contributed substantially to
personal liberty and safety, nowadays it contributes noth­
ing, or even tends to undermine them? Would it still have
been reasonable to constitutionalize the right?
The concern runs still deeper. Not only can historical
views be less than completely clear or informative, but
they can also be wrong. Some notions that many Ameri­
cans deeply believed to be true, at one time, turned out not
to be true. Some practices that many Americans believed
to be consistent with the Constitution’s guarantees of
liberty and equality, at one time, turned out to be incon­
sistent with them. The fact that we have a written Con­
stitution does not consign this Nation to a static legal
existence. Although we should always “pa[y] a decent
regard to the opinions of former times,” it “is not the glory
of the people of America” to have “suffered a blind venera­
tion for antiquity.” The Federalist No. 14, p. 99, 104 (C.
Rossiter ed. 1961) (J. Madison). It is not the role of federal
judges to be amateur historians. And it is not fidelity to
the Constitution to ignore its use of deliberately capacious
language, in an effort to transform foundational legal
commitments into narrow rules of decision.
As for “the democratic process,” ante, at 14, 15, a
method that looks exclusively to history can easily do more
harm than good. Just consider this case. The net result of
JUSTICE SCALIA’s supposedly objective analysis is to vest

