20

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

the citizens of the United States” (emphasis added)).7
Commentators of the time explained that the rights and
immunities of “citizens of the United States” recognized in
these treaties “undoubtedly mean[t] those privileges that
are common to all citizens of this republic.” Marcus, An
Examination of the Expediency and Constitutionality of
Prohibiting Slavery in the State of Missouri 17 (1819). It
is therefore altogether unsurprising that several of these
treaties identify liberties enumerated in the Constitution
as privileges and immunities common to all United States
citizens.
For example, the Louisiana Cession Act of 1803, which
codified a treaty between the United States and France
culminating in the Louisiana Purchase, provided that
“The inhabitants of the ceded territory shall be incor
porated in the Union of the United States, and admit
ted as soon as possible, according to the principles of
the Federal constitution, to the enjoyments of all the
rights, advantages and immunities of citizens of the
United States; and in the mean time they shall be
maintained and protected in the free enjoyment of
their liberty, property and the religion which they pro
fess.” Treaty Between the United States of America
——————
7 See

also Treaty Between the United States of America and the Ot
tawa Indians of Blanchard’s Fork and Roche De Boeuf, June 24, 1862,
12 Stat. 1237 (“The Ottawa Indians of the United Bands of Blanchard’s
Fork and of Roche de Boeuf, having become sufficiently advanced in
civilization, and being desirous of becoming citizens of the United
States . . . [after five years from the ratification of this treaty] shall be
deemed and declared to be citizens of the United States, to all intents
and purposes, and shall be entitled to all the rights, privileges, and
immunities of such citizens” (emphasis added)); Treaty Between the
United States of America and Different Tribes of Sioux Indians, Art. VI,
April 29, 1868, 15 Stat. 637 (“[A]ny Indian or Indians receiving a patent
for land under the foregoing provisions, shall thereby and from thence
forth become and be a citizen of the United States, and be entitled to all
the privileges and immunities of such citizens” (emphasis added)).

