Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

27

STEVENS, J., dissenting

still be situations in which the latter “is entitled to consti­
tutional protection.”
Glucksberg, 521 U. S., at 742
(STEVENS, J., concurring in judgments).
As this discussion reflects, to acknowledge that the task
of construing the liberty clause requires judgment is not to
say that it is a license for unbridled judicial lawmaking.
To the contrary, only an honest reckoning with our discre­
tion allows for honest argumentation and meaningful
accountability.
IV
The question in this case, then, is not whether the Sec­
ond Amendment right to keep and bear arms (whatever
that right’s precise contours) applies to the States because
the Amendment has been incorporated into the Four­
teenth Amendment. It has not been. The question,
rather, is whether the particular right asserted by peti­
tioners applies to the States because of the Fourteenth
Amendment itself, standing on its own bottom. And to
answer that question, we need to determine, first, the
nature of the right that has been asserted and, second,
whether that right is an aspect of Fourteenth Amendment
“liberty.” Even accepting the Court’s holding in Heller, it
remains entirely possible that the right to keep and bear
arms identified in that opinion is not judicially enforceable
against the States, or that only part of the right is so
enforceable.26 It is likewise possible for the Court to find
——————
26 In District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U. S. ___, ___ (slip op., at 22),
the Court concluded, over my dissent, that the Second Amendment
confers “an individual right to keep and bear arms” disconnected from
militia service. If that conclusion were wrong, then petitioners’ “incor­
poration” claim clearly would fail, as they would hold no right against
the Federal Government to be free from regulations such as the ones
they challenge. Cf. post, at 8. I do not understand petitioners or any of
their amici to dispute this point. Yet even if Heller had never been
decided—indeed, even if the Second Amendment did not exist—we
would still have an obligation to address petitioners’ Fourteenth

