14

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

than where there is a long gun in the home or no gun at
all? To what extent do such studies justify a ban? What if
opponents of the ban put forth counter studies?
In answering such questions judges cannot simply refer
to judicial homilies, such as Blackstone’s 18th-century
perception that a man’s home is his castle. See 4 Black
stone 223. Nor can the plurality so simply reject, by mere
assertion, the fact that “incorporation will require judges
to assess the costs and benefits of firearms restrictions.”
Ante, at 44. How can the Court assess the strength of the
government’s regulatory interests without addressing
issues of empirical fact? How can the Court determine if a
regulation is appropriately tailored without considering its
impact? And how can the Court determine if there are
less restrictive alternatives without considering what will
happen if those alternatives are implemented?
Perhaps the Court could lessen the difficulty of the
mission it has created for itself by adopting a jurispruden
tial approach similar to the many state courts that admin
ister a state constitutional right to bear arms. See infra,
at 19–20 (describing state approaches). But the Court has
not yet done so. Cf. Heller, 544 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
57–64) (rejecting an “ ‘interest-balancing’ approach” simi
lar to that employed by the States); ante, at 44 (plurality
opinion). Rather, the Court has haphazardly created a few
simple rules, such as that it will not touch “prohibitions on
the possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill,”
“laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive
places such as schools and government buildings,” or “laws
imposing conditions and qualifications on the commercial
sale of arms.” Heller, 544 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 54–55);
Ante, at 39 (plurality opinion). But why these rules and
not others? Does the Court know that these regulations
are justified by some special gun-related risk of death? In
fact, the Court does not know. It has simply invented
rules that sound sensible without being able to explain

