Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

and the French Republic, Art. III, Apr. 30, 1803, 8
Stat. 202, T. S. No. 86 (emphasis added).8
The Louisiana Cession Act reveals even more about the
privileges and immunities of United States citizenship
because it provoked an extensive public debate on the
meaning of that term. In 1820, when the Missouri Terri
tory (which the United States acquired through the Ces
sion Act) sought to enter the Union as a new State, a
debate ensued over whether to prohibit slavery within
Missouri as a condition of its admission. Some congress
men argued that prohibiting slavery in Missouri would
deprive its inhabitants of the “privileges and immunities”
they had been promised by the Cession Act. See, e.g., 35
Annals of Cong. 1083 (1855) (remarks of Kentucky Rep.
Hardin). But those who opposed slavery in Missouri
argued that the right to hold slaves was merely a matter
of state property law, not one of the privileges and immu
nities of United States citizenship guaranteed by the Act.9
——————
8 Subsequent treaties contained similar guarantees that the inhabi
tants of the newly acquired territories would enjoy the freedom to
exercise certain constitutional rights. See Treaty of Peace, Friendship,
Limits, and Settlement with the Republic of Mexico, Art. IX, Feb. 2,
1848, 9 Stat. 930, T. S. No. 207 (cession of Texas) (declaring that
inhabitants of the Territory were entitled “to the enjoyment of all the
rights of citizens of the United States, according to the principles of the
constitution; and in the mean time shall be maintained and protected
in the free enjoyment of their liberty and property, and secured in the
free exercise of their religion without restriction”); Treaty concerning
the Cession of the Russian Possessions in North America by his Maj
esty the Emperor of all the Russians to the United States of America,
Art. III, Mar. 30, 1867, 15 Stat. 542, T. S. No. 301 (June 20, 1867)
(cession of Alaska) (“The inhabitants of the ceded territory, . . . if they
should prefer to remain in the ceded territory, they, with the exception
of uncivilized native tribes, shall be admitted to the enjoyment of all
the rights, advantages, and immunities of citizens of the United States,
and shall be maintained and protected in the free enjoyment of their
liberty, property, and religion”).
9 See, e.g., Speech of Mr. Joseph Hemphill (Pa.) on the Missouri Ques

