26

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
BREYER, J., dissenting

people have the right to bear arms . . .; but the Legislature
shall regulate the exercise of this right by law”); Utah
Const., Art. I, §6 (1896) (same). And numerous other state
constitutional provisions adopted during this period ex
plicitly granted the legislature various types of regulatory
power over firearms. See Brief for Thirty-Four Profes
sional Historians et al. as Amici Curiae 14–15 (hereinafter
Legal Historians’ Brief).
Moreover, four States largely banned the possession of
all nonmilitary handguns during this period. See 1879
Tenn. Pub. Acts ch. 186, §1 (prohibiting citizens from
carrying “publicly or privately, any . . . belt or pocket
pistol, revolver, or any kind of pistol, except the army or
navy pistol, usually used in warfare, which shall be car
ried openly in the hand”); 1876 Wyo. Comp. Laws ch. 52,
§1 (forbidding “concealed or ope[n]” bearing of “any fire
arm or other deadly weapon, within the limits of any city,
town or village”); Ark. Act of Apr. 1, 1881, ch. 96, §1 (pro
hibiting the “wear[ing] or carry[ng]” of “any pistol . . .
except such pistols as are used in the army or navy,”
except while traveling or at home); Tex. Act of Apr. 12,
1871, ch. 34 (prohibiting the carrying of pistols unless
there are “immediate and pressing” reasonable grounds to
fear “immediate and pressing” attack or for militia ser
vice). Fifteen States banned the concealed carry of pistols
and other deadly weapons. See Legal Historians’ Brief 16,
n. 14. And individual municipalities enacted stringent
gun controls, often in response to local conditions—Dodge
City, Kansas, for example, joined many western cattle
towns in banning the carrying of pistols and other danger
ous weapons in response to violence accompanying west
ern cattle drives. See Brief for Municipal Respondents 30
(citing Dodge City, Kan., Ordinance No. 16, §XI (Sept. 22,
1876)); D. Courtwright, The Cowboy Subculture, in Guns
in America: A Reader 96 (J. Dizard et al. eds. 1999) (dis
cussing how Western cattle towns required cowboys to

