Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

BREYER, J., dissenting

are not always helpful. Depending upon context, early
historical sources may mean to refer to a militia-based
right—a matter of considerable importance 200 years
ago—which has, as the majority points out, “largely faded
as a popular concern.” Ante, at 22. There is no reason to
believe that matters of such little contemporary impor
tance should play a significant role in answering the
incorporation question. See Apodaca, 406 U. S., at 410
(incorporation “inquiry must focus upon the function
served” by the right in question in “contemporary soci
ety”); Wolf v. Colorado, 338 U. S. 25, 27 (1949) (incorpora
tion must take into account “the movements of a free
society” and “the gradual and empiric process of inclusion
and exclusion” (internal quotation marks omitted)); cf.
U. S. Const., Art. I, §910 (prohibiting federal officeholders
from accepting a “Title, of any kind whatever, from [a]
foreign State”—presumably a matter of considerable
importance 200 years ago).
That said, I can find much in the historical record that
shows that some Americans in some places at certain
times thought it important to keep and bear arms for
private self-defense. For instance, the reader will see that
many States have constitutional provisions protecting gun
possession. But, as far as I can tell, those provisions
typically do no more than guarantee that a gun regulation
will be a reasonable police power regulation. See Winkler,
Scrutinizing the Second Amendment, 105 Mich. L. Rev.
683, 686, 716–717 (2007) (the “courts of every state to
consider the question apply a deferential ‘reasonable
regulation’ standard”) (hereinafter Winkler, Scrutinizing);
see also id., at 716–717 (explaining the difference between
that standard and ordinary rational-basis review). It is
thus altogether unclear whether such provisions would
prohibit cities such as Chicago from enacting laws, such as
the law before us, banning handguns. See id., at 723. The
majority, however, would incorporate a right that is likely

