Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

As tensions between England and the Colonies in
creased, the colonists adopted protest resolutions reassert
ing their claim to the inalienable rights of Englishmen.
Again, they used the terms “privileges” and “immunities”
to describe these rights. As the Massachusetts Resolves
declared:
“Resolved, That there are certain essential Rights of
the British Constitution of Government, which are
founded in the Law of God and Nature, and are the
common Rights of Mankind—Therefore. . . . .
“Resolved, That no Man can justly take the Property
of another without his Consent: And that upon this
original Principle the Right of Representation . . . is
evidently founded. . . . Resolved, That this inherent
Right, together with all other, essential Rights, Liber
ties, Privileges and Immunities of the People of Great
Britain, have been fully confirmed to them by Magna
Charta.” The Massachusetts Resolves (Oct. 29, 1765),
reprinted in Prologue to Revolution: Sources and
Documents on the Stamp Act Crisis, 1764−1766, p. 56
(E. Morgan ed. 1959) (some emphasis added).4
——————
3220 (“[A]ll and every the subjects of us . . . shall have and enjoye all
libertyes and immunityes of ffree and naturall subjects within any the
dominions of us, our heires, or successours, . . . as if they, and every of
them, were borne within the realme of England”); Charter of Ga.
(1732), in 2 id., at 765, 773 (“[A]ll and every the persons which shall
happen to be born within the said province . . . shall have and enjoy all
liberties, franchises and immunities of free denizens and natural born
subjects, within any of our dominions, to all intents and purposes, as if
abiding and born within this our kingdom of Great-Britain”).
4 See also, e.g., A. Howard, The Road from Runnymede: Magna Carta
and Constitutionalism in America 174 (1968) (quoting 1774 Georgia
resolution declaring that the colony’s inhabitants were entitled to “ ‘the
same rights, privileges, and immunities with their fellow-subjects in
Great Britain’ ” (emphasis in original)); The Virginia Resolves, The
Resolutions as Printed in the Journal of the House of Burgesses,
reprinted in Prologue to Revolution: Sources and Documents on the

