36

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

United States. Amdt. 14, §1 (emphasis added). The very
same phrase opens Article I, §10 of the Constitution,
which prohibits the States from “pass[ing] any Bill of
Attainder” or “ex post facto Law,” among other things.
Article I, §10 is one of the few constitutional provisions
that limits state authority. In Barron, when Chief Justice
Marshall interpreted the Bill of Rights as lacking “plain
and intelligible language” restricting state power to in
fringe upon individual liberties, he pointed to Article I, §10
as an example of text that would have accomplished that
task. 7 Pet., at 250. Indeed, Chief Justice Marshall would
later describe Article I, §10 as “a bill of rights for the
people of each state.” Fletcher v. Peck, 6 Cranch 87, 138
(1810). Thus, the fact that the Privileges or Immunities
Clause uses the command “[n]o State shall”—which Arti
cle IV, §2 does not—strongly suggests that the former
imposes a greater restriction on state power than the
latter.
This interpretation is strengthened when one considers
that the Privileges or Immunities Clause uses the verb
“abridge,” rather than “discriminate,” to describe the limit
it imposes on state authority. The Webster’s dictionary in
use at the time of Reconstruction defines the word
“abridge” to mean “[t]o deprive; to cut off; . . . as, to
abridge one of his rights.” Webster, An American Diction
ary of the English Language, at 6. The Clause is thus best
understood to impose a limitation on state power to in
fringe upon pre-existing substantive rights. It raises no
indication that the Framers of the Clause used the word
“abridge” to prohibit only discrimination.
This most natural textual reading is underscored by a
well-publicized revision to the Fourteenth Amendment
that the Reconstruction Congress rejected. After several
Southern States refused to ratify the Amendment, Presi
dent Johnson met with their Governors to draft a com
promise. N. Y. Times, Feb. 5, 1867, p. 5. Their proposal

