Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

(1967) (same). And, indeed, neither of the parties before
us in this case has asked us to employ the majority’s his
tory-constrained approach. See Brief for Petitioners 67–69
(arguing for incorporation based on trends in contempo
rary support for the right); Brief for Respondents City of
Chicago et al. 23–31 (hereinafter Municipal Respondents)
(looking to current state practices with respect to the
right).
I thus think it proper, above all where history provides
no clear answer, to look to other factors in considering
whether a right is sufficiently “fundamental” to remove it
from the political process in every State. I would include
among those factors the nature of the right; any contem
porary disagreement about whether the right is funda
mental; the extent to which incorporation will further
other, perhaps more basic, constitutional aims; and the
extent to which incorporation will advance or hinder the
Constitution’s structural aims, including its division of
powers among different governmental institutions (and
the people as well). Is incorporation needed, for example,
to further the Constitution’s effort to ensure that the
government treats each individual with equal respect?
Will it help maintain the democratic form of government
that the Constitution foresees? In a word, will incorpora
tion prove consistent, or inconsistent, with the Constitu
tion’s efforts to create governmental institutions well
suited to the carrying out of its constitutional promises?
Finally, I would take account of the Framers’ basic
reason for believing the Court ought to have the power of
judicial review. Alexander Hamilton feared granting that
power to Congress alone, for he feared that Congress,
acting as judges, would not overturn as unconstitutional a
popular statute that it had recently enacted, as legislators.
The Federalist No. 78, p. 405 (G. Carey & J. McClellan
eds. 2001) (A. Hamilton) (“This independence of the judges
is equally requisite to guard the constitution and the

