50

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

unjustified gun control laws.”48
Sunstein, Second
Amendment Minimalism: Heller as Griswold, 122 Harv.
L. Rev. 246, 260 (2008). Indeed, there is a good deal of
evidence to suggest that, if anything, American lawmakers
tend to underregulate guns, relative to the policy views
expressed by majorities in opinion polls. See K. Goss,
Disarmed: The Missing Movement for Gun Control in
America 6 (2006). If a particular State or locality has
enacted some “improvident” gun-control measures, as
petitioners believe Chicago has done, there is no apparent
reason to infer that the mistake will not “eventually be
rectified by the democratic process.” Vance v. Bradley, 440
U. S. 93, 97 (1979).
This is not a case, then, that involves a “special condi­
tion” that “may call for a correspondingly more searching
judicial inquiry.” Carolene Products, 304 U. S., at 153,
n. 4. Neither petitioners nor those most zealously commit­
ted to their views represent a group or a claim that is
liable to receive unfair treatment at the hands of the
majority. On the contrary, petitioners’ views are sup­
ported by powerful participants in the legislative process.
Petitioners have given us no reason to believe that the
interest in keeping and bearing arms entails any special
need for judicial lawmaking, or that federal judges are
more qualified to craft appropriate rules than the people’s
elected representatives. Having failed to show why their
asserted interest is intrinsic to the concept of ordered
liberty or vulnerable to maltreatment in the political
arena, they have failed to show why “the word liberty in
the Fourteenth Amendment” should be “held to prevent
the natural outcome of a dominant opinion” about how to
——————
48 Likewise,

no one contends that those interested in personal self­
defense—every American, presumably—face any particular disadvan­
tage in the political process. All 50 States recognize self-defense as a
defense to criminal prosecution. See n. 32, supra.

