6

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
SCALIA, J., concurring

to evaluate. He describes as “an important tool for guiding
judicial discretion” “sensitivity to the interaction between
the intrinsic aspects of liberty and the practical realities of
contemporary society.” Post, at 24. I cannot say whether
that sensitivity will really guide judges because I have no
idea what it is. Is it some sixth sense instilled in judges
when they ascend to the bench? Or does it mean judges
are more constrained when they agonize about the cosmic
conflict between liberty and its potentially harmful conse­
quences? Attempting to give the concept more precision,
JUSTICE STEVENS explains that “sensitivity is an aspect of
a deeper principle: the need to approach our work with
humility and caution.” Ibid. Both traits are undeniably
admirable, though what relation they bear to sensitivity is
a mystery. But it makes no difference, for the first case
JUSTICE STEVENS cites in support, see ibid., Casey, 505
U. S., at 849, dispels any illusion that he has a meaningful
form of judicial modesty in mind.
JUSTICE STEVENS offers no examples to illustrate the
next constraint: stare decisis, post, at 25. But his view of it
is surely not very confining, since he holds out as a “ca­
nonical” exemplar of the proper approach, see post, at 16,
54, Lawrence, which overruled a case decided a mere 17
years earlier, Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U. S. 186 (1986),
see 539 U. S., at 578 (it “was not correct when it was
decided, and it is not correct today”). Moreover, JUSTICE
STEVENS would apply that constraint unevenly: He appar­
ently approves those Warren Court cases that adopted jot­
for-jot incorporation of procedural protections for criminal
defendants, post, at 11, but would abandon those Warren
Court rulings that undercut his approach to substantive
rights, on the basis that we have “cut back” on cases from
that era before, post, at 12.
JUSTICE STEVENS also relies on the requirement of a
“careful description of the asserted fundamental liberty
interest” to limit judicial discretion. Post, at 25 (internal

