Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

43

STEVENS, J., dissenting

and Union sympathizers in the South enjoyed the right to
possess firearms, it was motivated by antidiscrimination
and equality concerns rather than arms-bearing concerns
per se;41 that many contemporaneous courts and commen­
tators did not understand the Fourteenth Amendment to
have had an “incorporating” effect; and that the States
heavily regulated the right to keep and bear arms both
before and after the Amendment’s passage. The Court’s
narrative largely elides these facts. The complications
they raise show why even the most dogged historical
inquiry into the “fundamentality” of the Second Amend­
ment right (or any other) necessarily entails judicial
judgment—and therefore judicial discretion—every step of
the way.
I accept that the evolution in Americans’ understanding
of the Second Amendment may help shed light on the
question whether a right to keep and bear arms is com­
prised within Fourteenth Amendment “liberty.” But the
reasons that motivated the Framers to protect the ability
of militiamen to keep muskets available for military use
when our Nation was in its infancy, or that motivated the
Reconstruction Congress to extend full citizenship to the
freedmen in the wake of the Civil War, have only a limited
bearing on the question that confronts the homeowner in a
crime-infested metropolis today. The many episodes of
——————
41 See post, at 24–25; Municipal Respondents’ Brief 62–69; Brief for
34 Professional Historians and Legal Historians as Amici Curiae 22–
26; Rosenthal, Second Amendment Plumbing After Heller: Of Stan­
dards of Scrutiny, Incorporation, Well-Regulated Militias, and Criminal
Street Gangs, 41 Urb. Law. 1, 73–75 (2009). The plurality insists that
the Reconstruction-era evidence shows the right to bear arms was
regarded as “a substantive guarantee, not a prohibition that could be
ignored so long as the States legislated in an evenhanded manner.”
Ante, at 33. That may be so, but it does not resolve the question
whether the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause was origi­
nally understood to encompass a right to keep and bear arms, or
whether it ought to be so construed now.

