Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

39

STEVENS, J., dissenting

Under that tradition, Chicago’s ordinance is unexcep­
tional.37
The liberty interest asserted by petitioners is also dis­
similar from those we have recognized in its capacity to
undermine the security of others. To be sure, some of the
Bill of Rights’ procedural guarantees may place “restric­
tions on law enforcement” that have “controversial public
safety implications.” Ante, at 36 (plurality opinion); see
also ante, at 9 (opinion of SCALIA, J.). But those implica­
tions are generally quite attenuated. A defendant’s invo­
cation of his right to remain silent, to confront a witness,
or to exclude certain evidence cannot directly cause any
threat. The defendant’s liberty interest is constrained by
(and is itself a constraint on) the adjudicatory process.
The link between handgun ownership and public safety is
much tighter. The handgun is itself a tool for crime; the
handgun’s bullets are the violence.
Similarly, it is undeniable that some may take profound
offense at a remark made by the soapbox speaker, the
practices of another religion, or a gay couple’s choice to
have intimate relations. But that offense is moral, psycho­
logical, or theological in nature; the actions taken by the
——————
37 It has not escaped my attention that the Due Process Clause refers
to “property” as well as “liberty.” Cf. ante, at 2, n. 1, 9–10, n. 6 (opinion
of SCALIA, J.). Indeed, in Moore v. East Cleveland, 431 U. S. 494 (1977)
(plurality opinion), I alone viewed “the critical question” as “whether
East Cleveland’s housing ordinance [was] a permissible restriction on
appellant’s right to use her own property as she sees fit,” id., at 513
(opinion concurring in judgment). In that case, unlike in this case, the
asserted property right was coextensive with a right to organize one’s
family life, and I could find “no precedent” for the ordinance at issue,
which “exclude[d] any of an owner’s relatives from the group of persons
who may occupy his residence on a permanent basis.” Id., at 520. I am
open to property claims under the Fourteenth Amendment. This case
just involves a weak one. And ever since the Court “incorporated” the
more specific property protections of the Takings Clause in 1897, see
Chicago, B. & Q. R. Co., 166 U. S. 226, substantive due process doctrine
has focused on liberty.

