Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

STEVENS, J., dissenting

to rely on more than history).16
The Court’s flight from Palko leaves its analysis, careful
and scholarly though it is, much too narrow to provide a
satisfying answer to this case. The Court hinges its entire
decision on one mode of intellectual history, culling se­
lected pronouncements and enactments from the 18th and
19th centuries to ascertain what Americans thought about
firearms. Relying on Duncan and Glucksberg, the plural­
ity suggests that only interests that have proved “funda­
mental from an American perspective,” ante, at 37, 44, or
“ ‘deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition,’ ”
ante, at 19 (quoting Glucksberg, 521 U. S., at 721), to the
Court’s satisfaction, may qualify for incorporation into the
Fourteenth Amendment. To the extent the Court’s opin­
ion could be read to imply that the historical pedigree of a
right is the exclusive or dispositive determinant of its
status under the Due Process Clause, the opinion is seri­
ously mistaken.
A rigid historical test is inappropriate in this case, most
basically, because our substantive due process doctrine
has never evaluated substantive rights in purely, or even
predominantly, historical terms. When the Court applied
many of the procedural guarantees in the Bill of Rights to
the States in the 1960’s, it often asked whether the guar­
antee in question was “fundamental in the context of the
criminal processes maintained by the American States.”17
——————
16 I

acknowledge that some have read the Court’s opinion in Glucks­
berg as an attempt to move substantive due process analysis, for all
purposes, toward an exclusively historical methodology—and thereby to
debilitate the doctrine. If that were ever Glucksberg’s aspiration,
Lawrence plainly renounced it. As between Glucksberg and Lawrence, I
have little doubt which will prove the more enduring precedent.
17 The Court almost never asked whether the guarantee in question
was deeply rooted in founding-era practice. See Brief for Respondent
City of Chicago et al. 31, n. 17 (hereinafter Municipal Respondents’
Brief) (noting that only two opinions extensively discussed such his­
tory).

