4

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

Court interpreted this text, now known as the Privileges
or Immunities Clause, for the first time. In a closely
divided decision, the Court drew a sharp distinction be
tween the privileges and immunities of state citizenship
and those of federal citizenship, and held that the Privi
leges or Immunities Clause protected only the latter cate
gory of rights from state abridgment. Id., at 78. The
Court defined that category to include only those rights
“which owe their existence to the Federal government, its
National character, its Constitution, or its laws.” Id., at
79. This arguably left open the possibility that certain
individual rights enumerated in the Constitution could be
considered privileges or immunities of federal citizenship.
See ibid. (listing “[t]he right to peaceably assemble” and
“the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus” as rights poten
tially protected by the Privileges or Immunities Clause).
But the Court soon rejected that proposition, interpreting
the Privileges or Immunities Clause even more narrowly
in its later cases.
Chief among those cases is United States v. Cruikshank,
92 U. S. 542 (1876). There, the Court held that members
of a white militia who had brutally murdered as many as
165 black Louisianians congregating outside a courthouse
had not deprived the victims of their privileges as Ameri
can citizens to peaceably assemble or to keep and bear
arms. Ibid.; see L. Keith, The Colfax Massacre 109 (2008).
According to the Court, the right to peaceably assemble
codified in the First Amendment was not a privilege of
United States citizenship because “[t]he right . . . existed
long before the adoption of the Constitution.” 92 U. S., at
551 (emphasis added). Similarly, the Court held that the
right to keep and bear arms was not a privilege of United
States citizenship because it was not “in any manner
dependent upon that instrument for its existence.” Id., at
553. In other words, the reason the Framers codified the
right to bear arms in the Second Amendment—its nature

