Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

35

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

C
The next question is whether the Privileges or Immuni
ties Clause merely prohibits States from discriminating
among citizens if they recognize the Second Amendment’s
right to keep and bear arms, or whether the Clause re
quires States to recognize the right. The municipal re
spondents, Chicago and Oak Park, argue for the former
interpretation. They contend that the Second Amend
ment, as applied to the States through the Fourteenth,
authorizes a State to impose an outright ban on handgun
possession such as the ones at issue here so long as a State
applies it to all citizens equally.15 The Court explains why
this antidiscrimination-only reading of §1 as a whole is
“implausible.” Ante, at 31 (citing Brief for Municipal
Respondents 64). I agree, but because I think it is the
Privileges or Immunities Clause that applies this right to
the States, I must explain why this Clause in particular
protects against more than just state discrimination, and
in fact establishes a minimum baseline of rights for all
American citizens.
1
I begin, again, with the text. The Privileges or Immuni
ties Clause opens with the command that “No State shall”
abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the
——————
15 The municipal respondents and JUSTICE BREYER’s dissent raise a
most unusual argument that §1 prohibits discriminatory laws affecting
only the right to keep and bear arms, but offers substantive protection
to other rights enumerated in the Constitution, such as the freedom of
speech. See post, at 24. Others, however, have made the more compre
hensive—and internally consistent—argument that §1 bars discrimina
tion alone and does not afford protection to any substantive rights. See,
e.g., R. Berger, Government By Judiciary: The Transformation of the
Fourteenth Amendment (1997). I address the coverage of the Privi
leges or Immunities Clause only as it applies to the Second Amendment
right presented here, but I do so with the understanding that my
conclusion may have implications for the broader argument.

