14

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of the Court

tween the Bill of Rights and §1 of the Fourteenth Amend
ment was championed by Justice Black. This theory held
that §1 of the Fourteenth Amendment totally incorporated
all of the provisions of the Bill of Rights. See, e.g.,
Adamson, supra, at 71–72 (Black, J., dissenting); Duncan,
supra, at 166 (Black, J., concurring). As Justice Black
noted, the chief congressional proponents of the Four
teenth Amendment espoused the view that the Amend
ment made the Bill of Rights applicable to the States and,
in so doing, overruled this Court’s decision in Barron.9
Adamson, 332 U. S., at 72 (dissenting opinion).10 None
——————
9 Senator Jacob Howard, who spoke on behalf of the Joint Committee
on Reconstruction and sponsored the Amendment in the Senate, stated
that the Amendment protected all of “the personal rights guarantied
and secured by the first eight amendments of the Constitution.” Cong.
Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 2765 (1866) (hereinafter 39th Cong.
Globe). Representative John Bingham, the principal author of the text
of §1, said that the Amendment would “arm the Congress . . . with the
power to enforce the bill of rights as it stands in the Constitution
today.” Id., at 1088; see also id., at 1089–1090; A. Amar, The Bill of
Rights: Creation and Reconstruction 183 (1998) (hereinafter Amar, Bill
of Rights). After ratification of the Amendment, Bingham maintained
the view that the rights guaranteed by §1 of the Fourteenth Amend
ment “are chiefly defined in the first eight amendments to the Consti
tution of the United States.” Cong. Globe, 42d Cong., 1st Sess., App. 84
(1871). Finally, Representative Thaddeus Stevens, the political leader
of the House and acting chairman of the Joint Committee on Recon
struction, stated during the debates on the Amendment that “the
Constitution limits only the action of Congress, and is not a limitation
on the States. This amendment supplies that defect, and allows Con
gress to correct the unjust legislation of the States.” 39th Cong. Globe
2459; see also M. Curtis, No State Shall Abridge: The Fourteenth
Amendment and the Bill of Rights 112 (1986) (counting at least 30
statements during the debates in Congress interpreting §1 to incorpo
rate the Bill of Rights); Brief for Constitutional Law Professors as
Amici Curiae 20 (collecting authorities and stating that “[n]ot a single
senator or representative disputed [the incorporationist] understand
ing” of the Fourteenth Amendment).
10 The municipal respondents and some of their amici dispute the
significance of these statements. They contend that the phrase “privi

