8

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
SCALIA, J., concurring

having them draft their opinions in longhand.4
II
If JUSTICE STEVENS’ account of the constraints of his
approach did not demonstrate that they do not exist, his
application of that approach to the case before us leaves no
doubt. He offers several reasons for concluding that the
Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms is not
fundamental enough to be applied against the States.5
None is persuasive, but more pertinent to my purpose,
each is either intrinsically indeterminate, would preclude
incorporation of rights we have already held incorporated,
or both. His approach therefore does nothing to stop a
judge from arriving at any conclusion he sets out to reach.
JUSTICE STEVENS begins with the odd assertion that
——————
4 After

defending the careful-description criterion, JUSTICE STEVENS
quickly retreats and cautions courts not to apply it too stringently.
Post, at 26. Describing a right too specifically risks robbing it of its
“universal valence and a moral force it might otherwise have,” ibid.,
and “loads the dice against its recognition,” post, at 26, n. 25 (internal
quotation marks omitted). That must be avoided, since it endangers
rights JUSTICE STEVENS does like. See ibid. (discussing Lawrence v.
Texas, 539 U. S. 558 (2003)). To make sure those rights get in, we must
leave leeway in our description, so that a right that has not itself been
recognized as fundamental can ride the coattails of one that has been.
5 JUSTICE STEVENS claims that I mischaracterize his argument by
referring to the Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms,
instead of “the interest in keeping a firearm of one’s choosing in the
home,” the right he says petitioners assert. Post, at 38, n. 36. But it is
precisely the “Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms” that
petitioners argue is incorporated by the Due Process Clause. See, e.g.,
Pet. for Cert. i. Under JUSTICE STEVENS’ own approach, that should end
the matter. See post, at 26 (“[W]e must pay close attention to the
precise liberty interest the litigants have asked us to vindicate”). In
any event, the demise of watered-down incorporation, see ante, at 17–
19, means that we no longer subdivide Bill of Rights guarantees into
their theoretical components, only some of which apply to the States.
The First Amendment freedom of speech is incorporated—not the
freedom to speak on Fridays, or to speak about philosophy.

