34

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

clear that they are a superior weapon for lawful self­
defense, and nothing in petitioners’ argument turns on
that being the case. The notion that a right of self-defense
implies an auxiliary right to own a certain type of firearm
presupposes not only controversial judgments about the
strength and scope of the (posited) self-defense right, but
also controversial assumptions about the likely effects
of making that type of firearm more broadly available. It
is a very long way from the proposition that the Four­
teenth Amendment protects a basic individual right of
self-defense to the conclusion that a city may not ban
handguns.33
In short, while the utility of firearms, and handguns in
particular, to the defense of hearth and home is certainly
relevant to an assessment of petitioners’ asserted right,
there is no freestanding self-defense claim in this case.
The question we must decide is whether the interest in
keeping in the home a firearm of one’s choosing—a hand­
gun, for petitioners—is one that is “comprised within the
term liberty” in the Fourteenth Amendment. Whitney, 274
U. S., at 373 (Brandeis, J., concurring).
——————
33 The Second Amendment right identified in Heller is likewise clearly
distinct from a right to protect oneself. In my view, the Court badly
misconstrued the Second Amendment in linking it to the value of
personal self-defense above and beyond the functioning of the state
militias; as enacted, the Second Amendment was concerned with
tyrants and invaders, and paradigmatically with the federal military,
not with criminals and intruders. But even still, the Court made clear
that self-defense plays a limited role in determining the scope and
substance of the Amendment’s guarantee. The Court struck down the
District of Columbia’s handgun ban not because of the utility of hand­
guns for lawful self-defense, but rather because of their popularity for
that purpose. See 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 57–58). And the Court’s
common-use gloss on the Second Amendment right, see id., at ___ (slip
op., at 55), as well as its discussion of permissible limitations on the
right, id., at ___ (slip op., at 54–55), had little to do with self-defense.

