Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

49

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

privilege or immunity of American citizenship, but one
governed by the States alone. The Court held that the
Privileges or Immunities Clause protected only rights of
federal citizenship—those “which owe their existence to
the Federal government, its National character, its Con
stitution, or its laws,” id., at 79—and did not protect any
of the rights of state citizenship, id., at 74. In other
words, the Court defined the two sets of rights as mutually
exclusive.
After separating these two sets of rights, the Court
defined the rights of state citizenship as “embrac[ing]
nearly every civil right for the establishment and protec
tion of which organized government is instituted”—that is,
all those rights listed in Corfield. 16 Wall., at 76 (refer
ring to “those rights” that “Judge Washington” described).
That left very few rights of federal citizenship for the
Privileges or Immunities Clause to protect. The Court
suggested a handful of possibilities, such as the “right of
free access to [federal] seaports,” protection of the Federal
Government while traveling “on the high seas,” and even
two rights listed in the Constitution. Id., at 79 (noting
“[t]he right to peaceably assemble” and “the privilege of
the writ of habeas corpus”); see supra, at 4. But its deci
sion to interpret the rights of state and federal citizenship
as mutually exclusive led the Court in future cases to
conclude that constitutionally enumerated rights were
excluded from the Privileges or Immunities Clause’s scope.
See Cruikshank, supra.
I reject that understanding. There was no reason to
interpret the Privileges or Immunities Clause as putting
the Court to the extreme choice of interpreting the “privi
leges and immunities” of federal citizenship to mean ei
ther all those rights listed in Corfield, or almost no rights
at all. 16 Wall., at 76. The record is scant that the public
understood the Clause to make the Federal Government
“a perpetual censor upon all legislation of the States” as

