Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

SCALIA, J., concurring

destroy any prospect of prompt justice, see, e.g., Wong v.
Belmontes, 558 U. S. ___ (2009) (per curiam) (reversing
grant of habeas relief for sentencing on a crime committed
in 1981). The obviousness of the optimal answer is in the
eye of the beholder. The implication of JUSTICE STEVENS’
call for abstention is that if We The Court conclude that
They The People’s answers to a problem are silly, we are
free to “interven[e],” post, at 47, but if we too are uncertain
of the right answer, or merely think the States may be on
to something, we can loosen the leash.
A second reason JUSTICE STEVENS says we should ab­
stain is that the States have shown they are “capable” of
protecting the right at issue, and if anything have pro­
tected it too much. Post, at 49. That reflects an assump­
tion that judges can distinguish between a proper democ­
ratic decision to leave things alone (which we should
honor), and a case of democratic market failure (which we
should step in to correct). I would not—and no judge
should—presume to have that sort of omniscience, which
seems to me far more “arrogant,” post, at 41, than confin­
ing courts’ focus to our own national heritage.
III
JUSTICE STEVENS’ response to this concurrence, post, at
51–56, makes the usual rejoinder of “living Constitution”
advocates to the criticism that it empowers judges to
eliminate or expand what the people have prescribed: The
traditional, historically focused method, he says, reposes
discretion in judges as well.8 Historical analysis can be
——————
8 JUSTICE

STEVENS also asserts that his approach is “more faithful to
this Nation’s constitutional history” and to “the values and commit­
ments of the American people, as they stand today,” post, at 54. But
what he asserts to be the proof of this is that his approach aligns (no
surprise) with those cases he approves (and dubs “canonical,” ibid.).
Cases he disfavors are discarded as “hardly bind[ing]” “excesses,” post,
at 12, or less “enduring,” post, at 17, n. 16. Not proven. Moreover,
whatever relevance JUSTICE STEVENS ascribes to current “values and

