28

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

this debate over §1’s meaning suggests public awareness
of its main contours—i.e., that §1 would, at a minimum,
enforce constitutionally enumerated rights of United
States citizens against the States.
Bingham’s draft was tabled for several months. In the
interim, he delivered a second well-publicized speech,
again arguing that a constitutional amendment was re
quired to give Congress the power to enforce the Bill of
Rights against the States. That speech was printed in
pamphlet form, see Speech of Hon. John A. Bingham, of
Ohio, on the Civil Rights Bill, Mar. 9, 1866 (Cong. Globe);
see 39th Cong. Globe 1837 (remarks of Rep. Lawrence)
(noting that the speech was “extensively published”), and
the New York Times covered the speech on its front page.
Thirty-Ninth Congress, N. Y. Times, Mar. 10, 1866, p. 1.
By the time the debates on the Fourteenth Amendment
resumed, Bingham had amended his draft of §1 to include
the text of the Privileges or Immunities Clause that was
ultimately adopted. Senator Jacob Howard introduced the
new draft on the floor of the Senate in the third speech
relevant here. Howard explained that the Constitution
recognized “a mass of privileges, immunities, and rights,
some of them secured by the second section of the fourth
article of the Constitution, . . . some by the first eight
amendments of the Constitution,” and that “there is no
power given in the Constitution to enforce and to carry out
any of these guarantees” against the States. 39th Cong.
Globe 2765. Howard then stated that “the great object” of
§1 was to “restrain the power of the States and compel
them at all times to respect these great fundamental
guarantees.” Id., at 2766. Section 1, he indicated, im
posed “a general prohibition upon all the States, as such,
from abridging the privileges and immunities of the citi
zens of the United States.” Id., at 2765.
In describing these rights, Howard explained that they
included “the privileges and immunities spoken of” in

