12

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
SCALIA, J., concurring

keep and bear arms is “deeply rooted in some important
senses,” the roots of States’ efforts to regulate guns run
just as deep. Post, at 44 (internal quotation marks omit­
ted). But this too is true of other rights we have held
incorporated. No fundamental right—not even the First
Amendment—is absolute. The traditional restrictions go
to show the scope of the right, not its lack of fundamental
character. At least that is what they show (JUSTICE
STEVENS would agree) for other rights. Once again, prin­
ciples are applied selectively.
JUSTICE STEVENS’ final reason for rejecting incorpora­
tion of the Second Amendment reveals, more clearly than
any of the others, the game that is afoot. Assuming that
there is a “plausible constitutional basis” for holding that
the right to keep and bear arms is incorporated, he asserts
that we ought not to do so for prudential reasons. Post, at
47. Even if we had the authority to withhold rights that
are within the Constitution’s command (and we assuredly
do not), two of the reasons JUSTICE STEVENS gives for
abstention show just how much power he would hand to
judges. The States’ “right to experiment” with solutions to
the problem of gun violence, he says, is at its apex here
because “the best solution is far from clear.” Post, at 47–
48 (internal quotation marks omitted). That is true of
most serious social problems—whether, for example, “the
best solution” for rampant crime is to admit confessions
unless they are affirmatively shown to have been coerced,
but see Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U. S. 436, 444–445
(1966), or to permit jurors to impose the death penalty
without a requirement that they be free to consider “any
relevant mitigating factor,” see Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455
U. S. 104, 112 (1982), which in turn leads to the conclusion
that defense counsel has provided inadequate defense if he
has not conducted a “reasonable investigation” into poten­
tially mitigating factors, see, e.g., Wiggins v. Smith, 539
U. S. 510, 534 (2003), inquiry into which question tends to

