44

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

brutal violence against African-Americans that blight our
Nation’s history, see ante, at 23–29 (majority opinion);
ante, at 41–44, 53–55 (THOMAS, J., concurring in part and
concurring in judgment), do not suggest that every Ameri­
can must be allowed to own whatever type of firearm he or
she desires—just that no group of Americans should be
systematically and discriminatorily disarmed and left to
the mercy of racial terrorists. And the fact that some
Americans may have thought or hoped that the Four­
teenth Amendment would nationalize the Second Amend­
ment hardly suffices to justify the conclusion that it did.
Fifth, although it may be true that Americans’ interest
in firearm possession and state-law recognition of that
interest are “deeply rooted” in some important senses,
ante, at 19 (internal quotation marks omitted), it is
equally true that the States have a long and unbroken
history of regulating firearms. The idea that States may
place substantial restrictions on the right to keep and bear
arms short of complete disarmament is, in fact, far more
entrenched than the notion that the Federal Constitution
protects any such right. Federalism is a far “older and
more deeply rooted tradition than is a right to carry,” or to
own, “any particular kind of weapon.” 567 F. 3d 856, 860
(CA7 2009) (Easterbrook, C. J.).
From the early days of the Republic, through the Recon­
struction era, to the present day, States and municipali­
ties have placed extensive licensing requirements on
firearm acquisition, restricted the public carriage of weap­
ons, and banned altogether the possession of especially
dangerous weapons, including handguns. See Heller, 554
U. S., at ___ (BREYER, J., dissenting) (slip op., at 4–7)
(reviewing colonial laws); Cornell & DeDino, A Well Regu­
lated Right: The Early American Origins of Gun Control,
73 Fordham L. Rev. 487, 502–516 (2004) (reviewing preCivil War laws); Brief for 34 Professional Historians and
Legal Historians as Amici Curiae 4–22 (reviewing Recon­

