52

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

rooted in American tradition, “but it must also be implicit
in the concept of ordered liberty.” Lawrence, 539 U. S., at
593, n. 3 (dissenting opinion) (internal quotation marks
omitted). Applying the latter, Palko-derived half of that
test requires precisely the sort of reasoned judgment—the
same multifaceted evaluation of the right’s contours and
consequences—that JUSTICE SCALIA mocks in his concur­
rence today.
So does applying the first half. It is hardly a novel
insight that history is not an objective science, and that its
use can therefore “point in any direction the judges favor,”
ante, at 14 (opinion of SCALIA, J.). Yet 21 years after the
point was brought to his attention by Justice Brennan,
JUSTICE SCALIA remains “oblivious to the fact that [the
concept of ‘tradition’] can be as malleable and elusive as
‘liberty’ itself.” Michael H., 491 U. S., at 137 (dissenting
opinion). Even when historical analysis is focused on a
discrete proposition, such as the original public meaning of
the Second Amendment, the evidence often points in
different directions. The historian must choose which
pieces to credit and which to discount, and then must try
to assemble them into a coherent whole. In Heller,
JUSTICE SCALIA preferred to rely on sources created much
earlier and later in time than the Second Amendment
itself, see, e.g., 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 4–5) (consult­
ing late 19th-century treatises to ascertain how Americans
would have read the Amendment’s preamble in 1791); I
focused more closely on sources contemporaneous with the
Amendment’s drafting and ratification.49 No mechanical
——————
49 See Heller, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 27) (STEVENS, J., dissent­
ing) (“Although it gives short shrift to the drafting history of the Second
Amendment, the Court dwells at length on four other sources: the 17th­
century English Bill of Rights; Blackstone’s Commentaries on the Laws
of England; postenactment commentary on the Second Amendment;
and post-Civil War legislative history”); see also post, at 2–5 (discussing
professional historians’ criticisms of Heller).

