Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

47

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

little protection if §1 left each State to decide which privi
leges or immunities of United States citizenship it would
protect. As Frederick Douglass explained before §1’s
adoption, “the Legislatures of the South can take from him
the right to keep and bear arms, as they can—they would
not allow a negro to walk with a cane where I came from,
they would not allow five of them to assemble together.”
In What New Skin Will the Old Snake Come Forth? An
Address Delivered in New York, New York, May 10, 1865,
reprinted in 4 The Frederick Douglass Papers 79, 83–84
(J. Blassingame & J. McKivigan eds., 1991) (footnote
omitted). “Notwithstanding the provision in the Constitu
tion of the United States, that the right to keep and bear
arms shall not be abridged,” Douglass explained that “the
black man has never had the right either to keep or bear
arms.” Id., at 84. Absent a constitutional amendment to
enforce that right against the States, he insisted that “the
work of the Abolitionists [wa]s not finished.” Ibid.
This history confirms what the text of the Privileges or
Immunities Clause most naturally suggests: Consistent
with its command that “[n]o State shall . . . abridge” the
rights of United States citizens, the Clause establishes a
minimum baseline of federal rights, and the constitutional
right to keep and bear arms plainly was among them.19
III
My conclusion is contrary to this Court’s precedents,
which hold that the Second Amendment right to keep and
bear arms is not a privilege of United States citizenship.
——————
19 I

conclude that the right to keep and bear arms applies to the
States through the Privileges or Immunities Clause, which recognizes
the rights of United States “citizens.” The plurality concludes that the
right applies to the States through the Due Process Clause, which
covers all “person[s].” Because this case does not involve a claim
brought by a noncitizen, I express no view on the difference, if any,
between my conclusion and the plurality’s with respect to the extent to
which the States may regulate firearm possession by noncitizens.

