14

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

II
So far, I have explained that substantive due process
analysis generally requires us to consider the term “lib­
erty” in the Fourteenth Amendment, and that this inquiry
may be informed by but does not depend upon the content
of the Bill of Rights. How should a court go about the
analysis, then? Our precedents have established, not an
exact methodology, but rather a framework for decision­
making. In this respect, too, the Court’s narrative fails to
capture the continuity and flexibility in our doctrine.
The basic inquiry was described by Justice Cardozo
more than 70 years ago. When confronted with a substan­
tive due process claim, we must ask whether the allegedly
unlawful practice violates values “implicit in the concept
of ordered liberty.” Palko v. Connecticut, 302 U. S. 319,
325 (1937).14 If the practice in question lacks any “oppres­
sive and arbitrary” character, if judicial enforcement of the
asserted right would not materially contribute to “a fair
and enlightened system of justice,” then the claim is un­
—————— 

their long history of regulating in this sensitive area. Cf. Williams, 399 

U. S., at 129–130 (Harlan, J., concurring in result) (noting “ ‘backlash’ ”
potential of jot-for-jot incorporation); Grant, Felix Frankfurter: A
Dissenting Opinion, 12 UCLA L. Rev. 1013, 1038 (1965) (“If the Court
will not reduce the requirements of the fourteenth amendment below
the federal gloss that now overlays the Bill of Rights, then it will have
to reduce that gloss to the point where the states can live with it”).
Amici argue persuasively that, post-“incorporation,” federal courts will
have little choice but to fix a highly flexible standard of review if they
are to avoid leaving federalism and the separation of powers—not to
mention gun policy—in shambles. See Brief for Brady Center to
Prevent Gun Violence et al. as Amici Curiae (hereinafter Brady Center
Brief).
14 Justice Cardozo’s test itself built upon an older line of decisions.
See, e.g., Chicago, B. & Q. R. Co. v. Chicago, 166 U. S. 226, 237 (1897)
(discussing “limitations on [state] power, which grow out of the essen­
tial nature of all free governments [and] implied reservations of indi­
vidual rights, . . . and which are respected by all governments entitled
to the name” (internal quotation marks omitted)).

