40

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
Opinion of the Court
Opinion of ALITO, J.

of firearms in sensitive places such as schools and gov
ernment buildings, or laws imposing conditions and quali
fications on the commercial sale of arms.” Id., at ___–___
(slip op., at 54–55). We repeat those assurances here.
Despite municipal respondents’ doomsday proclamations,
incorporation does not imperil every law regulating
firearms.
Municipal respondents argue, finally, that the right to
keep and bear arms is unique among the rights set out in
the first eight Amendments “because the reason for codify
ing the Second Amendment (to protect the militia) differs
from the purpose (primarily, to use firearms to engage in
self-defense) that is claimed to make the right implicit in
the concept of ordered liberty.” Brief for Municipal Re
spondents 36–37. Municipal respondents suggest that the
Second Amendment right differs from the rights hereto
fore incorporated because the latter were “valued for
[their] own sake.” Id., at 33. But we have never previ
ously suggested that incorporation of a right turns on
whether it has intrinsic as opposed to instrumental value,
and quite a few of the rights previously held to be incorpo
rated—for example the right to counsel and the right to
confront and subpoena witnesses—are clearly instrumen
tal by any measure. Moreover, this contention repackages
one of the chief arguments that we rejected in Heller, i.e.,
that the scope of the Second Amendment right is defined
by the immediate threat that led to the inclusion of that
right in the Bill of Rights. In Heller, we recognized that
the codification of this right was prompted by fear that the
Federal Government would disarm and thus disable the
militias, but we rejected the suggestion that the right was
valued only as a means of preserving the militias. 554
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 26). On the contrary, we stressed
that the right was also valued because the possession of
firearms was thought to be essential for self-defense. As
we put it, self-defense was “the central component of the

