Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

29

STEVENS, J., dissenting

arms-bearing right, one that would travel with the indi­
vidual to an extent into public places, as “in case of con­
frontation.” 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 19). But the
Heller plaintiff sought only dispensation to keep an oper­
able firearm in his home for lawful self-defense, see id., at
___ (slip op., at 2, and n. 2), and the Court’s opinion was
bookended by reminders that its holding was limited to
that one issue, id., at ___, ___ (slip op., at 1, 64); accord,
ante, at 44 (plurality opinion). The distinction between
the liberty right these petitioners have asserted and the
Second Amendment right identified in Heller is therefore
evanescent. Both are rooted to the home. Moreover, even
if both rights have the logical potential to extend further,
upon “future evaluation,” Heller, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op.,
at 63), it is incumbent upon us, as federal judges contem­
plating a novel rule that would bind all 50 States, to pro­
ceed cautiously and to decide only what must be decided.
Understood as a plea to keep their preferred type of
firearm in the home, petitioners’ argument has real
force.28 The decision to keep a loaded handgun in the
house is often motivated by the desire to protect life, lib­
erty, and property. It is comparable, in some ways, to
decisions about the education and upbringing of one’s
children. For it is the kind of decision that may have
profound consequences for every member of the family,
and for the world beyond. In considering whether to keep
a handgun, heads of households must ask themselves
whether the desired safety benefits outweigh the risks of
deliberate or accidental misuse that may result in death or
serious injury, not only to residents of the home but to
——————
28 To the extent that petitioners contend the city of Chicago’s registra­
tion requirements for firearm possessors also, and separately, violate
the Constitution, that claim borders on the frivolous. Petitioners make
no effort to demonstrate that the requirements are unreasonable or
that they impose a severe burden on the underlying right they have
asserted.

