42

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

The Second Amendment, in other words, “is a federal­
ism provision,” Elk Grove Unified School Dist. v. Newdow,
542 U. S. 1, 45 (2004) (THOMAS, J., concurring in judg­
ment). It is directed at preserving the autonomy of the
sovereign States, and its logic therefore “resists” incorpo­
ration by a federal court against the States. Ibid. No one
suggests that the Tenth Amendment, which provides that
powers not given to the Federal Government remain with
“the States,” applies to the States; such a reading would
border on incoherent, given that the Tenth Amendment
exists (in significant part) to safeguard the vitality of state
governance. The Second Amendment is no different.40
The Court is surely correct that Americans’ conceptions
of the Second Amendment right evolved over time in a
more individualistic direction; that Members of the Recon­
struction Congress were urgently concerned about the
safety of the newly freed slaves; and that some Members
believed that, following ratification of the Fourteenth
Amendment, the Second Amendment would apply to the
States. But it is a giant leap from these data points to the
conclusion that the Fourteenth Amendment “incorporated”
the Second Amendment as a matter of original meaning or
postenactment interpretation. Consider, for example, that
the text of the Fourteenth Amendment says nothing about
the Second Amendment or firearms; that there is substan­
tial evidence to suggest that, when the Reconstruction
Congress enacted measures to ensure newly freed slaves
——————
40 Contrary to JUSTICE SCALIA’s suggestion, this point is perfectly
compatible with my opinion for the Court in Elk Grove Unified School
Dist. v. Newdow, 542 U. S. 1 (2004). Cf. ante, at 11. Like the Court
itself, I have never agreed with JUSTICE THOMAS’ view that the Estab­
lishment Clause is a federalism provision. But I agree with his under­
lying logic: If a clause in the Bill of Rights exists to safeguard federal­
ism interests, then it makes little sense to “incorporate” it. JUSTICE
SCALIA’s further suggestion that I ought to have revisited the Estab­
lishment Clause debate in this opinion, ibid., is simply bizarre.

