Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., dissenting

burden is severe for those who seek radical change in such
an established body of constitutional doctrine.3 Moreover,
the suggestion that invigorating the Privileges or Immuni­
ties Clause will reduce judicial discretion, see Reply Brief
for Petitioners 22, n. 8, 26; Tr. of Oral Arg. 64–65, strikes
me as implausible, if not exactly backwards. “For the very
reason that it has so long remained a clean slate, a revital­
ized Privileges or Immunities Clause holds special hazards
for judges who are mindful that their proper task is not to
write their personal views of appropriate public policy into
the Constitution.”4
I further agree with the plurality that there are weighty
arguments supporting petitioners’ second submission,
insofar as it concerns the possession of firearms for lawful
self-defense in the home. But these arguments are less
compelling than the plurality suggests; they are much less
compelling when applied outside the home; and their
validity does not depend on the Court’s holding in Heller.
For that holding sheds no light on the meaning of the Due
Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Our deci­
sions construing that Clause to render various procedural
guarantees in the Bill of Rights enforceable against the
——————
3 It is no secret that the desire to “displace” major “portions of our
equal protection and substantive due process jurisprudence” animates
some of the passion that attends this interpretive issue. Saenz, 526
U. S., at 528 (THOMAS, J., dissenting).
4 Wilkinson, The Fourteenth Amendment Privileges or Immunities
Clause, 12 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol’y 43, 52 (1989). Judge Wilkinson’s
point is broader than the privileges or immunities debate. As he
observes, “there may be more structure imposed by provisions subject
to generations of elaboration and refinement than by a provision in its
pristine state. The fortuities of uneven constitutional development
must be respected, not cast aside in the illusion of reordering the
landscape anew.” Id., at 51–52; see also Washington v. Glucksberg, 521
U. S. 702, 759, n. 6 (1997) (Souter, J., concurring in judgment) (ac­
knowledging that, “[t]o a degree,” the Slaughter-House “decision may
have led the Court to look to the Due Process Clause as a source of
substantive rights”).

