12

MCDONALD v. CHICAGO
STEVENS, J., dissenting

fairness, some procedures should be the same in state and
federal courts: The need for certainty and uniformity is
more pressing, and the margin for error slimmer, when
criminal justice is at issue. That principle has little rele­
vance to the question whether a nonprocedural rule set
forth in the Bill of Rights qualifies as an aspect of the lib­
erty protected by the Fourteenth Amendment.
Notwithstanding some overheated dicta in Malloy, 378
U. S., at 10–11, it is therefore an overstatement to say
that the Court has “abandoned,” ante, at 16, 17 (majority
opinion), 39 (plurality opinion), a “two-track approach to
incorporation,” ante, at 37 (plurality opinion). The Court
moved away from that approach in the area of criminal
procedure. But the Second Amendment differs in funda­
mental respects from its neighboring provisions in the Bill
of Rights, as I shall explain in Part V, infra; and if some
1960’s opinions purported to establish a general method of
incorporation, that hardly binds us in this case. The Court
has not hesitated to cut back on perceived Warren Court
excesses in more areas than I can count.
I do not mean to deny that there can be significant
practical, as well as esthetic, benefits from treating rights
symmetrically with regard to the State and Federal Gov­
ernments. Jot-for-jot incorporation of a provision may
entail greater protection of the right at issue and therefore
greater freedom for those who hold it; jot-for-jot incorpora­
tion may also yield greater clarity about the contours of
the legal rule. See Johnson v. Louisiana, 406 U. S. 356,
384–388 (1972) (Douglas, J., dissenting); Pointer, 380
U. S., at 413–414 (Goldberg, J., concurring). In a federal­
ist system such as ours, however, this approach can carry
substantial costs. When a federal court insists that state
and local authorities follow its dictates on a matter not
critical to personal liberty or procedural justice, the latter
may be prevented from engaging in the kind of beneficent
“experimentation in things social and economic” that

