4

MONTANA v. WYOMING
SCALIA, J., dissenting

nondepletive uses do not confer appropriative rights. See
ibid. That is highly unlikely, for two reasons. First, rely
ing on a subtle distinction between depletion and diversion
would be one of the clumsiest ways imaginable to accom
plish that simple goal, if it was not already accomplished
by other provisions of the Compact. One would instead
have expected the Compact simply to exclude the disfa
vored uses from the “usefu[l] . . . activities of man,”
Art. II(H), 65 Stat. 665, which confer appropriative rights.
Cf. Mont. Code Ann. §85–2–102(4) (2009) (listing types of
beneficial uses). Second, and even more conclusively,
hydroelectric generation, water wheels, and mill races—
the allegedly disfavored uses Wyoming and the United
States offer up to explain the word “depleted”—are already
excluded from appropriative rights (and probably from any
need for appropriative rights) by the Compact’s definition
of diversion: “the taking or removing of water from the
Yellowstone River or any tributary thereof when the water
so taken or removed is not returned directly into the
channel of the Yellowstone River or of the tributary from
which it is taken.” Art. II(G), 65 Stat. 665. The modifying
clause seems specifically designed to exclude hydroelectric
dams, water wheels and mill races, which, when they
divert water from the Yellowstone or its tributaries, “re
tur[n it] directly into the channel . . . from which it is
taken.”
The Court objects to my interpretation because the word
“depleted” lacks the “clarity” necessary to “drastically
redefine the term ‘beneficial use’ from its longstanding
meaning,” ante, at 17. According to the Court, “[t]he
amount of water put to ‘beneficial use’ has never been
defined by net water consumption.” Ibid. Before making
this statement, the Court has spent some 10 pages, ante,
at 7–16, conducting a “sensitive . . . inquiry [that] counsels
caution”; into a field (state water law) where the answer of
this Court is not conclusive and hence not ipso facto cor

