(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MONTANA v. WYOMING ET AL.
ON EXCEPTION TO REPORT OF SPECIAL MASTER
No. 137, Orig. Argued January 10, 2011—Decided May 2, 2011
Article V(A) of the Yellowstone River Compact ratified by Montana,
Wyoming, and North Dakota provides: “Appropriative rights to the
beneficial uses of the water of the Yellowstone River System existing
in each signatory State as of January 1, 1950, shall continue to be en
joyed in accordance with the laws governing the acquisition and use
of water under the doctrine of appropriation.” 65 Stat. 666. Montana
filed a bill of complaint, alleging that Wyoming breached Article V(A)
by allowing its upstream pre-1950 water users to switch from flood to
sprinkler irrigation, which increases crop consumption of water and
decreases the volume of runoff and seepage returning to the river
system. Thus, even if Wyoming’s pre-1950 users divert the same
quantity of water as before, less water reaches downstream users in
Montana. Concluding that the Compact permits more efficient irri
gation systems so long as the conserved water is used to irrigate the
same acreage watered in 1950, the Special Master found that Mon
tana’s increased-efficiency allegation failed to state a claim. Montana
has filed an exception.
Held: Because Article V(A) of the Compact incorporates the ordinary
doctrine of appropriation without significant qualification, and be
cause in Wyoming and Montana that doctrine allows appropriators to
improve their irrigation systems, even to the detriment of down
stream appropriators, Montana’s increased-efficiency allegation fails
to state a claim for breach of the Compact under Article V(A). Pp. 4–
19.
(a) Background appropriation law principles do not support Mon
tana’s position. The doctrine of appropriation provides that rights to
water for irrigation are perfected and enforced in order of seniority,
starting with the first person to divert water from a natural stream
and apply it to a “beneficial use.” Once perfected, that water right is

