Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

rect (“it is not this Court’s role to guide”); resulting in the
Court’s best guess concerning “an unclear area of appro
priation doctrine”; answering a question which “ ‘[n]o
western state court [not even a lower court] appears to
have conclusively answered.’ ” Ante, at 7–8, and n. 5. The
Court calls that hitherto unanswered question “the law of
return flows,” ante, at 7, but it can more accurately be
described as the question whether the volume of water to
which an appropriator acquires rights is the entire volume
diverted for a beneficial use, or rather only the volume
depleted by the beneficial use. Which is to say that “bene
ficial use” has never had the “longstanding meaning” the
Court posits. If it has in the past been assumed to refer to
all water diverted from the stream rather than all water
depleted from the stream, that is only because the issue of
which of the two it means has never arisen. I find it quite
extraordinary that the Court should expend such heroic
efforts (imagine how many cases had to be read!) answer
ing a state water-law question that no court of any West
ern State has ever answered—a question that would cross
a Rabbi’s eyes—when the text in front of us provides
the clear answer insofar as this Compact is concerned:
“depleted.”
The Court suggests that if the Compact’s authors
wanted to break from (what it considers) the common law,
they should have defined beneficial use as the “volume by
which the water supply . . . is depleted.” Ante, at 18 (in
ternal quotation marks omitted). That objection seems to
me to have little force when the Court cannot explain what
work “depleted” is supposed to do other than indicate
precisely the same concept more concisely. And the
Court’s helpful drafting tip proves that speaking with
greater clarity is not so easy. Following the Court’s advice
would make nonsense of Article V(B) of the Compact.
That provision allocates a fixed percentage “of the unused
and unappropriated water” of various tributaries to each

