8

MONTANA v. WYOMING
Opinion of the Court

stream and the conserved water is used on the same acre­
age for the same agricultural purpose as before. We agree
with the Special Master.5
1
First, although the no-injury rule prevents appropria­
tors from making certain water-right changes that would
harm other appropriators, a change in irrigation methods
does not appear to run afoul of that rule in Montana and
Wyoming. See id., at 69. Because each new appropriator
is entitled to the stream as it exists when he finds it, the
general rule is that “if a change in these conditions is
made by [a senior] appropriator, which interferes with the
flow of the water to the material injury of [the junior
appropriator’s] rights, he may justly complain.” 2 Kinney
§803, at 1404.
But the no-injury rule is not absolute; it generally con­
cerns changes in the location of the diversion and the
place or purpose of use. Quigley v. McIntosh, 110 Mont.
——————
5 The lack of clarity in this area of water law highlights the sensitive
nature of our inquiry and counsels caution. Our original jurisdiction
over cases between States brings us this dispute between Montana and
Wyoming about the meaning of their congressionally approved Yellow­
stone River Compact. See U. S. Const., Art. III, §2, cl. 2; 28 U. S. C.
§1251(a). Yet, because the Compact references and the parties direct
us to principles of appropriation doctrine, we find ourselves immersed
in state water law. See n. 4, supra. Our assessment of the scope of
these water rights is merely a federal court’s description of state law.
The highest court of each State, of course, remains “the final arbiter
of what is state law.” West v. American Telephone & Telegraph Co., 311
U. S. 223, 236 (1940). We recognize that appropriation doctrine contin­
ues to evolve, and there are reasonable policy arguments in favor of
both States’ positions here. But it is not this Court’s role to guide the
development of state water regulation. See id., at 237 (“[I]t is the duty
of [federal courts] in every case to ascertain from all the available data
what the state law is and apply it rather than to prescribe a different
rule, however superior it may appear from the viewpoint of ‘general
law’ ”). Our decision is not intended to restrict the States’ determina­
tion of their respective appropriation doctrines.

