Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

added, however, that Bower’s right was subject always to
the Big Horn Canal’s right: “No appropriator can compel
any other appropriator to continue the waste of water
which benefits the former.” Id., at 101, 307 P. 2d, at 601.
Importantly, the court noted that “[i]f the senior appro­
priator by a different method of irrigation can so utilize
his water that it is all consumed in transpiration and
consumptive use and no waste water returns by seepage
or percolation to the river, no other appropriator can
complain.” Ibid.
Finally, in Fuss v. Franks, 610 P. 2d 17 (Wyo. 1980),
water was seeping from Fuss’ property and into a pit in a
public right of way. Franks was the first to appropriate
the water from the pit. The court upheld Franks’ appro­
priation right because the water had already escaped from
Fuss’ property. The court said that the “owner of land
upon which seepage or waste water rises has the right to
use and reuse—capture and recapture—such waste wa­
ters,” but only before the water escapes his land, and “for
use only upon the land for which the water forming the
seepage was originally appropriated.” Id., at 20 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Fuss thus had no superior
right to the water that had left his property, and espe­
cially not for reuse on other lands.
The law in Montana is similar. The Montana Supreme
Court has explained that “the general rule . . . is that the
owner of the right to use the water—his private property
while in his possession,—may collect it, recapture it, be­
fore it leaves his possession.” Rock Creek Ditch & Flume
Co. v. Miller, 93 Mont. 248, 268, 17 P. 2d 1074, 1080
(1933); see also A. Stone, Montana Water Law 66 (1994)
(noting that, according to the “early cases,” while “the
water is still seeping and running off one’s own land, the
landowner is free to recapture and further use it”).
The right of recapture discussed in these authorities is
broad. As the Special Master recognized, the “language of

