Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

river’s channel.
This interpretation, and only this interpretation, gives
meaning to the definition’s use of the word “depleted.” I
cannot write off as an accident the choice of this word
rather than the word consistently used elsewhere in the
Compact: “diverted.” See Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain, 542
U. S. 692, 711, n. 9 (2004). The Compact’s authors knew
how to use “diverted” and “diversion” when they wanted
to. Those two words appear repeatedly in other provisions
of the Compact, see Arts. II(G); V(B), (C); VII(A), (C), (D),
65 Stat. 665–668; and the Compact defines them in the
sentence immediately preceding the definition of “benefi
cial use.” See Art. II(G), id., at 665. But the Compact’s
authors chose to define beneficial use in terms of deple
tion—the first and only time the Compact uses any deriva
tive of the word “deplete.” It is in my view a clear indica
tion that the Compact intends to break from the common
law’s focus on diversion.
The Court reduces the Compact’s deliberate use of “de
pleted” to an inconsequential slip of the pen. According to
today’s majority, Article II(H) speaks only to the types of
uses that confer appropriative rights. “Nothing in the
language,” it says, “suggests that ‘beneficial use’ means a
measure of the amount of water depleted.” Ante, at 17.
This is incomprehensible. On the Court’s own interpreta
tion “beneficial use” not only defines the types of uses that
confer appropriative rights, but also determines the vol
ume of water to which the rights attach—viz., only that
volume put to one of the specified types of uses. The only
question before us is whether “beneficial use” measures
the volume diverted or the volume depleted—and the
language of the Compact makes that clear.
The Court provides no plausible explanation for use of
the word “depleted” instead of “diverted.” Its best effort
is the suggestion that the word was used to ensure that
hydroelectric power generation and other disfavored,

