2

MONTANA v. WYOMING
Syllabus
senior to any later appropriators’ rights and may be fulfilled entirely
before the junior appropriators get any water. However, junior ap
propriators do acquire rights to the stream basically as it exists when
they find it. Under this no-injury rule, junior users may, subject to
the fulfillment of the senior users’ existing rights, prevent senior us
ers from enlarging their rights to the junior users’ detriment. Here,
the question is whether a switch to more efficient irrigation with less
return flow is within Wyoming’s pre-1950 users’ existing appropriat
ive rights or is an improper enlargement of that right. Although the
law of return flows is an unclear area of appropriation doctrine, the
Special Master correctly concluded that Wyoming’s pre-1950 users
may switch to sprinkler irrigation. Pp. 4–16.
(1) A change in irrigation methods does not appear to run afoul of
the no-injury rule in Montana and Wyoming, which generally con
cerns changes in the location of the diversion and the place or pur
pose of use. Thus, an appropriator may increase his consumption by
changing to a more water-intensive crop so long as he makes no
change in acreage irrigated or amount of water diverted. Ordinary,
day-to-day operational changes or repairs also do not violate the rule.
Consumption can even be increased by adding farm acreage, if that
was part of the plan from the start, and diligently pursued through
the years. Irrigation system improvements seem to be the same sort
of changes. This view is consistent with the fact that by 1950 both
States had statutes regulating certain changes to water rights, but
neither required farmers to take official action before adjusting irri
gation methods. Cases in both States frequently describe the no
injury rule as applying to changes in point of diversion, purpose of
use, and place of use. The abundance of litigation over such
changes—and the absence of any litigation over the sort of change at
issue here—strongly implies that irrigation efficiency improvements
were considered within the scope of the original appropriative right.
Pp. 8–10.
(2) The doctrine of recapture—which permits an appropriator
who has diverted water for irrigation to recapture and reuse his own
runoff and seepage before it escapes his control or his property—also
supports treating irrigation efficiency improvements as within the
original appropriative right. Montana and Wyoming cases appear to
apply this basic doctrine without any qualification based on whether
the return flow would re-enter the original stream or not. By using
sprinklers instead of flood irrigation, Wyoming’s pre-1950 water us
ers effectively recapture water. The sprinklers reduce loss from
seepage and runoff and are simply different mechanisms for increas
ing the volume of water available to crops without changing the
amount of diversion. Pp. 10–15.

