Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
(3) This conclusion is consistent with the view of water law
scholars who have considered the question presented in this case.
Pp. 15–16.
(b) Also unpersuasive is Montana’s argument that, if background
appropriation law principles do not support its position, Article V(A)’s
“beneficial use” definition nonetheless restricts the scope of pre-1950
appropriative rights to the net volume of water that was actually be
ing consumed in 1950. Pp. 16–19.
(1) “Beneficial use” is “that use by which the water supply of a
drainage basin is depleted when usefully employed by the activities
of man.” 65 Stat. 665. Montana contends that the term means the
amount of depletion, and thus any activity increasing Wyoming’s pre
1950 depletions beyond pre-1950 levels exceeds Article V(A)’s scope.
Pp. 16–17.
(2) Nothing in the Compact’s definition suggests such an inter
pretation. A plain reading indicates that “beneficial use” is a type of
use that depletes the water supply. This view is supported by the
circumstances in the signatory States when the Compact was
drafted. At that time, Wyoming had a statutory preference for irriga
tion, a depletive use, over power generation, a nondepletive use. It
thus it makes sense for the Compact to protect irrigation uses that
were legislatively favored and represented the predominant use of
the Yellowstone River system. Montana’s reading, by contrast, would
drastically redefine the term. The amount of water put to “beneficial
use” has never been defined by net water consumption. In irrigation,
that amount has always included a measure of necessary loss, e.g.,
runoff or evaporation. If the Compact’s definition were meant to
drastically redefine “beneficial use,” this Court would expect far more
clarity. Moreover, if the Compact effected a dramatic reframing of
ordinary appropriation principles, the rest of Article V(A), which ex
pressly states that “the laws governing the acquisition and use of wa
ter under the doctrine of appropriation” control, would make little
sense. Pp. 17–18.
(3) If Article V(A) were intended to guarantee Montana a set
quantity of water, it could have done so plainly, as done in other
compacts, e.g., the Colorado River Compact of 1922. Pp. 18–19.
Exception overruled.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined. SCALIA, J., filed a dissenting opinion. KAGAN, J., took no part in
the consideration or decision of the case.

