Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

rest goes to Montana. Id., at 666–667.
In February 2008, we granted Montana leave to file a
bill of complaint against Wyoming for breach of the Com­
pact. 552 U. S. 1175. Montana alleged that Wyoming had
breached the Compact by consuming more than its share
of the Tongue and Powder Rivers. Bill of Complaint 3,
¶8. Specifically, Montana claimed that Wyoming was ap­
propriating water for a number of new, post-1950 uses:
irrigating new acreage; building new storage facilities;
conducting new groundwater pumping; and increasing con­
sumption on existing agricultural acreage.1 Id., at 3–4,
¶¶ 9–12. According to Montana’s complaint, the Compact
did not permit Wyoming to use water for any of these
practices as long as Montana’s pre-1950 users’ rights
remained unfulfilled. Id., at 3, ¶8.
In response, Wyoming filed a motion to dismiss the
complaint. We appointed a Special Master and referred
the motion to him. 555 U. S. __ (2008). After briefing and
argument, the Special Master recommended that we deny
Wyoming’s motion, because at least some of Montana’s
allegations state a claim for relief. The Special Master
found that “Article V of the Compact protects pre-1950
appropriations in Montana from new surface and ground­
water diversions in Wyoming, whether for direct use or for
storage, that prevent adequate water from reaching Mon­
tana to satisfy those pre-1950 appropriations.” Report 14–
15. But the Special Master agreed with Wyoming that
Montana’s allegations regarding “efficiency improvements
——————
1 Montana

has since clarified that increased consumption on existing
acreage refers to the use of more efficient irrigation systems. The
“efficiency” of irrigation for our purposes refers to the amount of
wastewater that is lost, for example, to evaporation, seepage, runoff, or
deep percolation. Some of the lost water returns to the river and is
later available for downstream users. A more efficient irrigation
system loses less water; thus, though it may draw the same volume of
water from the river, net water consumption is increased.

