Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

1950 users of their full water rights.
The question, therefore, is whether Article V(A) allows
Wyoming’s pre-1950 water users—diverting the same
quantity of water for the same irrigation purpose and
acreage as before 1950—to increase their consumption of
water by improving their irrigation systems even if it
reduces the flow of water to Montana’s pre-1950 users.
Montana makes two basic arguments: that background
principles of appropriation law, to the extent they are
incorporated into the Compact, do not allow such an in­
crease in consumption; and that even if they do, the terms
of the Compact amended those principles in Montana’s
favor. The Special Master rejected these arguments, and
so do we.
A
Because Article V(A) of the Compact protects
“[a]ppropriative rights to the beneficial uses of [water]” as
of 1950 “in accordance with the laws governing the acquisition and use of water under the doctrine of appro­
priation,” we begin with an overview of appropriation
doctrine.4 As the Special Master explained, if “[a]p­
propriation law clearly proscribe[s] increases in consump­
tion on existing acreage to the detriment of downstream
appropriators, the Compact arguably would prohibit
Wyoming from allowing its appropriators to make
——————
4 As

with all contracts, we interpret the Compact according to the
intent of the parties, here the signatory States. We thus look primarily
to the doctrine of appropriation in Wyoming and Montana, but, like the
States, we also look to Western water law more generally and authori­
ties from before and after 1950. The States appear to have assumed
that the doctrine has not changed in a way directly relevant here. We
therefore do not decide whether Article V(A) intended to freeze appro­
priation law as it stood in 1949, or whether it incorporates the evolution
of the doctrine over time, allowing Compact-protected rights to grow or
shrink accordingly. We resolve the matter of Montana’s exception
without prejudice to that issue. See Report 39–40.

