4

MONTANA v. WYOMING
Opinion of the Court

by pre-1950 appropriators in Wyoming” do not state a
claim for relief. Id., at 15. The States did not object to
most of the Special Master’s findings, and we have issued
orders accordingly. See 562 U. S. __ (2010); 562 U. S. __
(2010). Montana has filed an exception to the Special
Master’s rejection of its increased-efficiency allegation. It
is this exception that is before us.2
II
Article V(A) of the Compact states that “[a]ppropriative
rights to the beneficial uses of [water] . . . existing in each
signatory State as of January 1, 1950, shall continue to be
enjoyed in accordance with the laws governing the acquisi­
tion and use of water under the doctrine of appropriation.”
Montana claims that its pre-1950 appropriators’ rights are
not “continu[ing] to be enjoyed” because upstream pre­
1950 appropriators in Wyoming have increased their
consumption by switching from flood to sprinkler irriga­
tion. Montana alleges that sprinkler systems increase
crop consumption of water and decrease the volume of
runoff and seepage that returns to the Tongue and Powder
rivers by 25% or more.3 See Montana’s Exception and
Brief 3 (hereinafter Brief for Montana). As a result, even
if Wyoming’s pre-1950 water users divert the same quan­
tity of water as before, less water reaches Montana. Ac­
cording to Montana, Article V(A) prohibits Wyoming from
allowing this practice when it deprives Montana’s pre­
——————
2 Montana also raised an exception to the Special Master’s finding
that if Montana can remedy the shortage of water to its pre-1950 users
by curtailing its post-1950 uses without “prejudic[ing] Montana’s other
rights under the Compact,” then an intrastate remedy is “the appropri­
ate solution.” Report 15. We recommitted this exception to the Special
Master. 562 U. S. __ (2010).
3 For purposes of resolving Wyoming’s motion to dismiss, we take as
true Montana’s allegation that the new sprinkler systems actually
reduce return flow to the rivers. Wyoming has not conceded that this is
true. See Wyoming’s Reply to Montana’s Exception 35, n. 6.

