6

THOMPSON v. NORTH AMERICAN STAINLESS, LP
Opinion of the Court

109 (1979), though the holdings of those cases are com­
patible with the “zone of interests” limitation that we
discuss below. In any event, it is Title VII rather than
Title VIII that is before us here, and as to that we are
surely not bound by the Trafficante dictum.
We now find that this dictum was ill-considered, and we
decline to follow it. If any person injured in the Article III
sense by a Title VII violation could sue, absurd conse­
quences would follow. For example, a shareholder would
be able to sue a company for firing a valuable employee for
racially discriminatory reasons, so long as he could show
that the value of his stock decreased as a consequence. At
oral argument Thompson acknowledged that such a suit
would not lie, Tr. of Oral Arg. 5–6. We agree, and there­
fore conclude that the term “aggrieved” must be construed
more narrowly than the outer boundaries of Article III.
At the other extreme from the position that “person
aggrieved” means anyone with Article III standing, NAS
argues that it is a term of art that refers only to the em­
ployee who engaged in the protected activity. We know of
no other context in which the words carry this artificially
narrow meaning, and if that is what Congress intended it
would more naturally have said “person claiming to have
been discriminated against” rather than “person claiming
to be aggrieved.” We see no basis in text or prior practice
for limiting the latter phrase to the person who was the
subject of unlawful retaliation. Moreover, such a reading
contradicts the very holding of Trafficante, which was that
residents of an apartment complex were “person[s] ag­
grieved” by discrimination against prospective tenants.
We see no reason why the same phrase in Title VII should
be given a narrower meaning.
In our view there is a common usage of the term “person
aggrieved” that avoids the extremity of equating it with
Article III and yet is fully consistent with our application
of the term in Trafficante. The Administrative Procedure

