Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

VII’s antiretaliation provision with its substantive antidis­
crimination provision. Title VII prohibits discrimination
on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, and national origin
“ ‘with respect to . . . compensation, terms, conditions, or
privileges of employment,’ ” and discriminatory practices
that would “ ‘deprive any individual of employment oppor­
tunities or otherwise adversely affect his status as an
employee.’ ” Id., at 62 (quoting 42 U. S. C. §2000e–2(a)
(emphasis deleted)). In contrast, Title VII’s antiretaliation
provision prohibits an employer from “ ‘discriminat[ing]
against any of his employees’ ” for engaging in protected
conduct, without specifying the employer acts that are
prohibited. 548 U. S., at 62 (quoting §2000e–3(a) (empha­
sis deleted)). Based on this textual distinction and our
understanding of the antiretaliation provision’s purpose,
we held that “the antiretaliation provision, unlike the
substantive provision, is not limited to discriminatory
actions that affect the terms and conditions of employ­
ment.” Id., at 64. Rather, Title VII’s antiretaliation pro­
vision prohibits any employer action that “well might have
dissuaded a reasonable worker from making or supporting
a charge of discrimination.” Id., at 68 (internal quotation
marks omitted).
We think it obvious that a reasonable worker might be
dissuaded from engaging in protected activity if she knew
that her fiancé would be fired. Indeed, NAS does not
dispute that Thompson’s firing meets the standard set
forth in Burlington. Tr. of Oral Arg. 30. NAS raises the
concern, however, that prohibiting reprisals against third
parties will lead to difficult line-drawing problems con­
cerning the types of relationships entitled to protection.
Perhaps retaliating against an employee by firing his
fiancée would dissuade the employee from engaging in
protected activity, but what about firing an employee’s
girlfriend, close friend, or trusted co-worker? Applying the
Burlington standard to third-party reprisals, NAS argues,

