Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

Act, 5 U. S. C. §551 et seq., authorizes suit to challenge a
federal agency by any “person . . . adversely affected or
aggrieved . . . within the meaning of a relevant statute.”
§702. We have held that this language establishes a
regime under which a plaintiff may not sue unless he
“falls within the ‘zone of interests’ sought to be protected
by the statutory provision whose violation forms the legal
basis for his complaint.” Lujan v. National Wildlife Fed
eration, 497 U. S. 871, 883 (1990). We have described the
“zone of interests” test as denying a right of review “if
the plaintiff’s interests are so marginally related to or in­
consistent with the purposes implicit in the statute that it
cannot reasonably be assumed that Congress intended to
permit the suit.” Clarke v. Securities Industry Assn., 479
U. S. 388, 399–400 (1987). We hold that the term “ag­
grieved” in Title VII incorporates this test, enabling suit
by any plaintiff with an interest “arguably [sought] to be
protected by the statutes,” National Credit Union Admin.
v. First Nat. Bank & Trust Co., 522 U. S. 479, 495 (1998)
(internal quotation marks omitted), while excluding plain­
tiffs who might technically be injured in an Article III
sense but whose interests are unrelated to the statutory
prohibitions in Title VII.
Applying that test here, we conclude that Thompson
falls within the zone of interests protected by Title VII.
Thompson was an employee of NAS, and the purpose of
Title VII is to protect employees from their employers’
unlawful actions. Moreover, accepting the facts as alleged,
Thompson is not an accidental victim of the retaliation—
collateral damage, so to speak, of the employer’s unlawful
act. To the contrary, injuring him was the employer’s
intended means of harming Regalado. Hurting him was
the unlawful act by which the employer punished her. In
those circumstances, we think Thompson well within the
zone of interests sought to be protected by Title VII. He is
a person aggrieved with standing to sue.

