2

THOMPSON v. NORTH AMERICAN STAINLESS, LP
Syllabus
(a) For Title VII standing purposes, the term “person aggrieved”
must be construed more narrowly than the outer boundaries of Arti­
cle III. Dictum in Trafficante v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 409 U. S.
205, suggesting that Title VII’s aggrievement requirement reaches as
far as Article III permits, is too expansive and the Court declines to
follow it. At the other extreme, limiting “person aggrieved” to the
person who was the subject of unlawful retaliation is an artificially
narrow reading. A common usage of the term “person aggrieved”
avoids both of these extremes. The Administrative Procedure Act,
which authorizes suit to challenge a federal agency by any “person
. . . adversely affected or aggrieved . . . within the meaning of a rele­
vant statute,” 5 U. S. C. §702, establishes a regime under which a
plaintiff may not sue unless he “falls within the ‘zone of interests’
sought to be protected by the statutory provision whose violation
forms the legal basis for his complaint,” Lujan v. National Wildlife
Federation, 497 U. S. 871, 883. Title VII’s term “aggrieved” incorpo­
rates that test, enabling suit by any plaintiff with an interest “ ‘ar­
guably [sought] to be protected’ by the statutes,” National Credit Un
ion Admin. v. First Nat. Bank & Trust Co., 522 U. S. 479, 495, while
excluding plaintiffs who might technically be injured in an Article III
sense but whose interests are unrelated to Title VII’s statutory pro­
hibitions. Pp. 4–7.
(b) Applying that test here, Thompson falls within the zone of in­
terests protected by Title VII. He was an employee of NAS, and Title
VII’s purpose is to protect employees from their employers’ unlawful
actions. Moreover, accepting the facts as alleged, Thompson is not an
accidental victim of the retaliation. Hurting him was the unlawful
act by which NAS punished Regalado. Thus, Thompson is a person
aggrieved with standing to sue under Title VII. P. 7.

567 F. 3d 804, reversed and remanded.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which all other
Members joined, except KAGAN, J., who took no part in the considera­
tion or decision of the case. GINSBURG, J., filed a concurring opinion, in
which BREYER, J., joined.

