(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

LEVIN, TAX COMMISSIONER OF OHIO v. COMMERCE
ENERGY, INC., ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–223.

Argued March 22, 2010—Decided June 1, 2010

Historically, all Ohio natural gas consumers purchased gas from a local
distribution company (LDC), the public utility serving their geo
graphic area. Today, however, consumers in Ohio’s major metropoli
tan areas can alternatively contract with independent marketers
(IMs) that compete with LDCs for retail sales of natural gas. Re
spondents, mainly IMs offering to sell natural gas to Ohio consumers,
sued petitioner Ohio Tax Commissioner (Commissioner) in federal
court, alleging discriminatory taxation of IMs and their patrons in
violation of the Commerce and Equal Protection Clauses. They
sought declaratory and injunctive relief invalidating three tax ex
emptions Ohio grants exclusively to LDCs. The court initially held
that respondents’ suit was not blocked by the Tax Injunction Act
(TIA), which prohibits lower federal courts from restraining “the as
sessment, levy or collection of any tax under State law where a plain,
speedy and efficient remedy may be had in the courts of such State,”
28 U. S. C. §1341. Nevertheless, the court dismissed the suit based
on the more embracive comity doctrine, which restrains federal
courts from entertaining claims that risk disrupting state tax ad
ministration, see Fair Assessment in Real Estate Assn., Inc. v.
McNary, 454 U. S. 100. The Sixth Circuit agreed with the District
Court’s TIA holding, but reversed the court’s comity ruling, and re
manded for adjudication of the merits. A footnote in Hibbs v. Winn,
542 U. S. 88, 107, n. 9, the Court of Appeals believed, foreclosed an
expansive reading of this Court’s comity precedents. The footnote
stated that the Court “has relied upon ‘principles of comity’ to pre
clude original federal-court jurisdiction only when plaintiffs have
sought district-court aid in order to arrest or countermand state tax


2

LEVIN v. COMMERCE ENERGY, INC.
Syllabus
collection.” Respondents challenged only a few limited exemptions,
the Sixth Circuit observed, therefore their success on the merits
would not significantly intrude upon Ohio’s administration of its tax
system.

Held: Under the comity doctrine, a taxpayer’s complaint of allegedly
discriminatory state taxation, even when framed as a request to in
crease a competitor’s tax burden, must proceed originally in state
court. Pp. 5–17.
(a) The comity doctrine reflects a proper respect for the States and
their institutions. E.g., Fair Assessment, 454 U. S., at 112. Comity’s
constraint has particular force when lower federal courts are asked to
pass on the constitutionality of state taxation of commercial activity.
States rely chiefly on taxation to fund their governments’ operations,
therefore their tax-enforcement methods should not be interfered
with absent strong cause. See Dows v. Chicago, 11 Wall. 108, 110.
The TIA was enacted specifically to constrain the issuance of federal
injunctions in state-tax cases, see Fair Assessment, 454 U. S., at 129,
and is best understood as but a partial codification of the federal re
luctance to interfere with state taxation, National Private Truck
Council, Inc. v. Oklahoma Tax Comm’n, 515 U. S. 582, 590. Pp. 5–8.
(b) Hibbs does not restrict comity’s compass. Plaintiffs in Hibbs
were Arizona taxpayers who challenged, as violative of the Estab
lishment Clause, a tax credit that allegedly served to support paro
chial schools. Their federal-court suit for declaratory and injunctive
relief did not implicate in any way their own tax liability, and the re
lief they sought would not deplete the State’s treasury. Rejecting
Arizona’s plea that the TIA barred the suit, the Court found that the
case was “not rationally distinguishable” from pathmarking civil
rights controversies in which federal courts had entertained chal
lenges to state tax credits without conceiving of the TIA as a jurisdic
tional barrier. 542 U. S., at 93–94, 110–112. The Court also dis
patched Arizona’s comity argument in the footnote that moved the
Sixth Circuit here to reverse the District Court’s comity-based dis
missal. Id., at 107, n. 9. Neither Hibbs nor any other decision of this
Court, however, has considered the comity doctrine’s application to
cases of the kind presented here. Pp. 8–10.
(c) Respondents contend that state action “selects [them] out for
discriminatory treatment by subjecting [them] to taxes not imposed
on others of the same class.” Hillsborough v. Cromwell, 326 U. S.
620, 623. When economic legislation does not employ classifications
subject to heightened scrutiny or impinge on fundamental rights,
courts generally view constitutional challenges with the skepticism
due respect for legislative choices demands. See, e.g., Hodel v. Indi
ana, 452 U. S. 314, 331–332. And “in taxation, even more than in


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
other fields, legislatures possess the greatest freedom in classifica
tion.” Madden v. Kentucky, 309 U. S. 83, 88. Of key importance,
when unlawful discrimination infects tax classifications or other leg
islative prescriptions, the Constitution simply calls for equal treat
ment. How equality is accomplished—by extension or invalidation of
the unequally distributed benefit or burden, or some other measure—
is a matter on which the Constitution is silent. See, e.g., Heckler v.
Mathews, 465 U. S. 728, 740. On finding unlawful discrimination,
courts may attempt, within the bounds of their institutional compe
tence, to implement what the legislature would have willed had it
been apprised of the constitutional infirmity. E.g., id., at 739, n. 5.
With the State’s legislative prerogative firmly in mind, this Court,
upon finding impermissible discrimination in a State’s tax measure,
generally remands the case, leaving the interim remedial choice to
state courts. See, e.g., McKesson Corp. v. Division of Alcoholic Bever
ages and Tobacco, Fla. Dept. of Business Regulation, 496 U. S. 18,
39–40. If lower federal courts were to consider the merits of suits al
leging uneven state tax burdens, however, recourse to state court for
the interim remedial determination would be unavailable, for federal
tribunals lack authority to remand to state court an action initiated
in federal court. Federal judges, moreover, are bound by the TIA,
which generally precludes relief that would diminish state revenues,
even if such relief is the remedy least disruptive of the state legisla
ture’s design. These limitations on the remedial competence of lower
federal courts counsel that they refrain from taking up cases of this
genre, so long as state courts are equipped fairly to adjudicate them.
Pp. 10–13.
(d) Comity considerations warrant dismissal of respondents’ suit.
If Ohio’s scheme is unconstitutional, the Ohio courts are better posi
tioned to determine—unless and until the Ohio Legislature weighs
in—how to comply with the mandate of equal treatment. See Davis
v. Michigan Dept. of Treasury, 489 U. S. 803, 817–818. The unelabo
rated comity footnote in Hibbs does not counsel otherwise. Hardly a
run-of-the-mine tax case, Hibbs was essentially an attack on the allo
cation of state resources for allegedly unconstitutional purposes.
Plaintiffs there were third parties whose own tax liability was not a
relevant factor. Here, by contrast, the very premise of respondents’
suit is that they are taxed differently from LDCs. The Hibbs footnote
is most sensibly read to affirm that, just as that case was a poor fit
under the TIA, so it was a poor fit for comity. Respondents’ argu
ment that this case is fit for federal-court adjudication because of the
simplicity of the relief sought is unavailing. Even if their claims had
merit, respondents would not be entitled to their preferred remedy.
In Hibbs, however, if the District Court found the Arizona tax credit


4

LEVIN v. COMMERCE ENERGY, INC.
Syllabus
impermissible under the Establishment Clause, only one remedy
would redress the plaintiffs’ grievance: invalidation of the tax credit
at issue. Pp. 13–15.
(e) In sum, a confluence of factors in this case, absent in Hibbs,
leads to the conclusion that the comity doctrine controls here. First,
respondents seek federal-court review of commercial matters over
which Ohio enjoys wide regulatory latitude; their suit does not in
volve any fundamental right or classification that attracts heightened
judicial scrutiny. Second, while respondents portray themselves as
third-party challengers to an allegedly unconstitutional tax scheme,
they are in fact seeking federal-court aid in an endeavor to improve
their competitive position. Third, the Ohio courts are better posi
tioned than their federal counterparts to correct any violation be
cause they are more familiar with state legislative preferences and
because the TIA does not constrain their remedial options. Individu
ally, these considerations may not compel forbearance by federal dis
trict courts; in combination, however, they demand deference to the
state adjudicative process. Pp. 15–16.
(f) The Sixth Circuit’s concern that application of the comity doc
trine here would render the TIA effectively superfluous overlooks
Congress’ aim, in enacting the TIA, to secure the comity doctrine
against diminishment. Comity, moreover, is a prudential doctrine.
“If the State voluntarily chooses to submit to a federal forum, princi
ples of comity do not demand that the federal court force the case
back into the State’s own system.” Ohio Bureau of Employment
Servs. v. Hodory, 431 U. S. 471, 480. P. 16.
(g) In light of the foregoing, the Court need not decide whether the
TIA would itself block this suit. Pp. 16–17.

554 F. 3d 1094, reversed and remanded.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and STEVENS, KENNEDY, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.
KENNEDY, J., filed a concurring opinion. THOMAS, J., filed an opinion
concurring in the judgment, in which SCALIA, J., joined. ALITO, J., filed
an opinion concurring in the judgment.

