6

SALAZAR v. RAMAH NAVAJO CHAPTER
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

funding for both “inherent federal functions” and contract
support costs. Accordingly, funding for one could be used
for the other, without violating the cap. Here, by contrast,
the statutes capped funding for contract support costs
specifically. Thus, once the Secretary exhausted those
funds, he could not reprogram other funds—such as
funds for “inherent federal functions”—to pay the costs.
With the caps in place, moreover, the “reduction” clause, as
explained above, rendered unavailable the only possible
source of funds left: funds already allocated for other
contract support costs. Unlike in Cherokee Nation, therefore, there were no unrestricted funds to pay the costs at
issue in this case. The Court’s quotation from Cherokee
Nation concerning “when an ‘ “unrestricted appropriation
is sufficient to fund the contract,” ’ ” ante, at 12 (emphasis
added) (quoting Cherokee Nation, supra, at 641), is accordingly beside the point.
The Court also relies on Ferris v. United States, 27 Ct.
Cl. 542 (1892). That case involved a government contract
to dredge the Delaware River. When work under the
contract stopped because funds from the relevant appropriation had been exhausted, a contractor sued the Government for breach of contract, and the Court of Claims
held that he was entitled to recover lost profits. As the
court explained, “[a] contractor who is one of several persons to be paid out of an appropriation is not chargeable
with knowledge of its administration, nor can his legal
rights be affected or impaired by its maladministration or
by its diversion, whether legal or illegal, to other objects.”
Id., at 546. That principle, however, cannot “dictate the
result in this case.” Ante, at 8. The statute in Ferris
appropriated an amount “[f]or improving [the] Delaware
River,” which prevented spending for that purpose beyond
the specified amount. 20 Stat. 364. But in that case, all
funds appropriated for that purpose were equally available to all contractors. Here that is not true; §450j–1(b)

