16

SALAZAR v. RAMAH NAVAJO CHAPTER
Opinion of the Court

however. GAO Redbook, p. 6–18. “[I]t is settled that
contractors paid from a general appropriation are not
barred from recovering for breach of contract even though
the appropriation is exhausted,” but that “under a specific
line-item appropriation, the answer is different.” Ibid.10
The different results “follo[w] logically from the old maxim
that ignorance of the law is no excuse.” Ibid. “If Congress
appropriates a specific dollar amount for a particular
contract, that amount is specified in the appropriation act
and the contractor is deemed to know it.” Ibid. This case
is far different. Hundreds of tribes entered into thousands
of independent contracts, each for amounts well within the
lump sum appropriated by Congress to pay contract support costs. Here, where each Tribe’s “contract is but one
activity under a larger appropriation, it is not reasonable
to expect [each] contractor to know how much of that
appropriation remain[ed] available for it at any given
time.” Ibid.; see also Ferris, 27 Ct. Cl., at 546.
Finally, the Government argues that legislative history
suggests that Congress approved of the distribution of
available funds on a uniform, pro rata basis. But “a fundamental principle of appropriations law is that where
Congress merely appropriates lump-sum amounts without
statutorily restricting what can be done with those funds,
a clear inference arises that it does not intend to impose
legally binding restrictions.” Lincoln, 508 U. S., at 192
(internal quotation marks omitted). “[I]ndicia in commit——————
10 Of course, “[t]he terms ‘lump-sum’ and ‘line-item’ are relative concepts.” GAO Redbook, p. 6–165. For example, an appropriation for
building two ships “could be viewed as a line-item appropriation in
relation to the broader ‘Shipbuilding and Conversion’ category, but it
was also a lump-sum appropriation in relation to the two specific
vessels included.” Ibid. So long as a contractor does not seek payment
beyond the amount Congress made legally available for a given purpose, “[t]his factual distinction does not affect the legal principle.” Ibid.
See also In re Newport News Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Co., 55 Comp.
Gen. 812 (1976).

