2

SALAZAR v. RAMAH NAVAJO CHAPTER
Syllabus
the agency’s competing fiscal priorities. Because Congress appropriated sufficient legally unrestricted funds to pay the contracts, however, the Court held that the Government was obligated to pay those
costs in full absent “something special about the promises,” id., at
637–638.
That conclusion followed directly from well-established principles
of Government contracting law: When a Government contractor is
one of several persons to be paid out of a larger appropriation sufficient in itself to pay the contractor, the Government is responsible to
the contractor for the full amount due under the contract, even if the
agency exhausts the appropriation in service of other permissible
ends. See Ferris v. United States, 27 Ct. Cl. 542, 546. That is so
“even if an agency’s total lump-sum appropriation is insufficient to
pay all” of its contracts. Cherokee Nation, 543 U. S., at 637. This
principle safeguards both the expectations of Government contractors
and the long-term fiscal interests of the United States. Contractors
need not keep track of agencies’ shifting priorities and competing obligations; rather, they may trust that the Government will honor its
contractual promises. And the rule furthers “the Government’s own
long-run interest as a reliable contracting partner in the myriad
workaday transaction of its agencies.” United States v. Winstar
Corp., 518 U. S. 839, 883. Pp. 5–8.
(b) The principles underlying Cherokee Nation and Ferris control
here. Once “Congress has appropriated sufficient legally unrestricted
funds to pay the contracts at issue, the Government normally cannot
back out of a promise on grounds of ‘insufficient appropriations,’ even
if the contract uses language such as ‘subject to the availability of
appropriations,’ and even if an agency’s total lump-sum appropriation
is insufficient to pay all the contracts the agency has made.” Cherokee Nation, 543 U. S., at 637. That condition is satisfied here, because Congress made sufficient funds available to pay any individual
contractor in full. Pp. 8−10.
(c) The Government attempts to distinguish Ferris and Cherokee
Nation on the ground that they involved unrestricted, lump-sum appropriations, while Congress here appropriated “not to exceed” a certain amount for contract support costs. The effect of the appropriations in each case, however, was identical: the agency remained free
to allocate funds among multiple contractors, so long as the contracts
served the purpose Congress identified. The “not to exceed” language
still has legal effect; it prevents the Secretary from reprogramming
other funds to pay contract support costs, thereby protecting funds
that Congress envisioned for other Bureau of Indian Affairs programs.
Section 450j–1(b), which specifies that the Secretary is not required

