Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

promised, in light of the “reduction” clause in §450j–1(b).
The Government argued that the clause “makes nonbinding a promise to pay one tribe’s costs where doing so would
require funds that the Government would otherwise devote to ‘programs, projects, or activities serving . . . another tribe.’ ” Id., at 641 (quoting §450j–1(b)).
We ruled against the Government, but not because of
any disagreement with its reading of the “reduction”
clause. The basis for our decision was instead that “the
relevant congressional appropriations contained other
unrestricted funds, small in amount but sufficient to pay
the claims at issue.” 543 U. S., at 641 (emphasis altered).
Those funds were allocated for “ ‘inherent federal functions,’ such as the cost of running the Indian Health Service’s central Washington office.” Id., at 641–642. They
were not restricted by the “reduction” clause, because they
were not funds for “ ‘programs, projects, or activities serving . . . another tribe.’ ” Id., at 641 (quoting §450j–1(b)).
Nor were they restricted by the pertinent appropriations
statutes, which, as noted, contained no relevant limiting
language. See ibid. We therefore held that those funds—
which we described as “unrestricted” throughout our
opinion, id., at 641, 642, 643, 647—were available to pay
the disputed contract support costs.
As even the Tribes concede, Cherokee Nation does not
control this case. Tr. of Oral Arg. 39 (“I don’t think this
case is controlled by Cherokee” (counsel for the Tribes)).
The reason is not that the appropriations statutes in this
case contained “not to exceed” caps while those in Cherokee Nation did not. The Court is correct that appropriating an amount “for” a particular purpose has the same
effect as providing that appropriations for that purpose
are “not to exceed” that amount. Ante, at 11. What makes
this case different is where Congress drew the line. In
Cherokee Nation, the statutes capped funding for “expenses
necessary to carry out” the Act, a category that included

