Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

appropriation is insufficient to pay all the contracts the
agency has made.” Cherokee Nation, 543 U. S., at 637.
In such cases, “[t]he United States are as much bound by
their contracts as are individuals.” Lynch v. United
States, 292 U. S. 571, 580 (1934) (internal quotation
marks omitted). Although the agency itself cannot disburse funds beyond those appropriated to it, the Government’s “valid obligations will remain enforceable in the
courts.” GAO Redbook, p. 6–17.
This principle safeguards both the expectations of Government contractors and the long-term fiscal interests of
the United States. For contractors, the Ferris rule reflects
that when “a contract is but one activity under a larger
appropriation, it is not reasonable to expect the contractor
to know how much of that appropriation remains available
for it at any given time.” GAO Redbook, p. 6–18. Contractors are responsible for knowing the size of the pie, not
how the agency elects to slice it. Thus, so long as Congress appropriates adequate funds to cover a prospective
contract, contractors need not keep track of agencies’
shifting priorities and competing obligations; rather, they
may trust that the Government will honor its contractual
promises. Dougherty, 18 Ct. Cl., at 503. In such cases, if
——————
provement of the Delaware River below Bridesburg, Pennsylvania. Act
of Mar. 3, 1879, ch. 181, 20 Stat. 364. The Government contracted with
Ferris for $37,000 to dredge the river. Halfway through Ferris’ performance of his contract, the United States Army Corps of Engineers ran
out of money to pay Ferris, having used $17,000 of the appropriation to
pay for other improvements. Nonetheless, the Court of Claims found
that Ferris could recover for the balance of his contract. As the court
explained, the appropriation “merely impose[d] limitations upon the
Government’s own agents; . . . its insufficiency [did] not pay the Government’s debts, nor cancel its obligations, nor defeat the rights of
other parties.” 27 Ct. Cl., at 546; see also Dougherty, 18 Ct. Cl., at 503
(rejecting Government’s argument that a contractor could not recover
upon similar facts because the “appropriation had, at the time of the
purchase, been covered by other contracts”).

