2

SALAZAR v. RAMAH NAVAJO CHAPTER
Opinion of the Court

“maximum Indian participation in the direction of educational as well as other Federal services to Indian communities so as to render such services more responsive to the
needs and desires of those communities.” 25 U. S. C.
§450a(a). To that end, the Act directs the Secretary of the
Interior, “upon the request of any Indian tribe . . . to enter
into a self-determination contract . . . to plan, conduct, and
administer” health, education, economic, and social programs that the Secretary otherwise would have administered. §450f(a)(1).
As originally enacted, ISDA required the Government to
provide contracting tribes with an amount of funds equivalent to those that the Secretary “would have otherwise provided for his direct operation of the programs.”
§106(h), 88 Stat. 2211. It soon became apparent that this
secretarial amount failed to account for the full costs to
tribes of providing services. Because of “concern with
Government’s past failure adequately to reimburse tribes’
indirect administrative costs,” Cherokee Nation of Okla. v.
Leavitt, 543 U. S. 631, 639 (2005), Congress amended
ISDA to require the Secretary to contract to pay the “full
amount” of “contract support costs” related to each selfdetermination contract, §§450j–1(a)(2), (g).1 The Act also
provides, however, that “[n]otwithstanding any other
provision in [ISDA], the provision of funds under [ISDA] is
subject to the availability of appropriations.” §450j–1(b).
Congress included a model contract in ISDA and di——————
1 As defined by ISDA, contract support costs “shall consist of an
amount for the reasonable costs for activities which must be carried on
by a tribal organization as a contractor to ensure compliance with the
terms of the contract and prudent management, but which . . . (A)
normally are not carried on by the respective Secretary in his direct
operation of the program; or (B) are provided by the Secretary in
support of the contracted program from resources other than those
under contract.” §450j–1(a)(2). Such costs include overhead administrative costs, as well as expenses such as federally mandated audits
and liability insurance. See Cherokee Nation of Okla., 543 U. S., at 635.

