Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

principles generally applicable to ISDA. See id., at 637–
646. We also found no evidence that Congress intended
that “the tribe should bear the risk that a total lump-sum
appropriation (though sufficient to cover its own contracts)
will not prove sufficient to pay all similar contracts.” Id.,
at 638 (citing Brief for Federal Parties 23–25). The dissent’s reading, by contrast, would impose precisely that
regime. See post, at 4–5.
The better reading of §450j–1(b) accords with ordinary
Government contracting principles. As we explained, supra, at 9, the clause underscores the Secretary’s discretion to allocate funds among tribes, but does not alter the
Government’s legal obligation when the agency fails to
pay. That reading gives full effect to the clause’s text,
which addresses the “amount of funds provided,” and
specifies that the Secretary is not required to reduce funding for one tribe to make “funds available” to another.
450j–1(b). Indeed, even the Government acknowledges
the clause governs the Secretary’s discretion to distribute
funds. See Brief for Petitioners 52 (pursuant to §450j–
1(b), the Secretary was not obligated to pay tribes’ “contract support costs on a first-come, first-served basis, but
had the authority to distribute the available money among
all tribal contractors in an equitable fashion”).
At minimum, the fact that we, the court below, the
——————
could have allocated the funds to [a] tribe is irrelevant. What matters
is what the Secretary does, and once he allocates the funds to one tribe,
they are not available to another”). We are not persuaded that §450j–
1(b) was intended to enact that radical departure from ordinary Government contracting principles. Indeed, Congress has spoken clearly
and directly when limiting the Government’s total contractual liability
to an amount appropriated in similar schemes; that it did not do so
here further counsels against the dissent’s reading. See, e.g., 25
U. S. C. §2008(j)(2) (“[i]f the total amount of funds necessary to provide
grants to tribes . . . for a fiscal year exceeds the amount of funds appropriated . . . , the Secretary shall reduce the amount of each grant
[pro rata]”).

