4

SALAZAR v. RAMAH NAVAJO CHAPTER
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

tribe at the expense of another.” Ante, at 9. But as explained above, the clause does more than that: It also
establishes that when the Secretary does allocate funds to
one tribe at the expense of another, the latter tribe has no
right to those funds—the funds are not “available” to it.
The fact that the Secretary could have allocated the funds
to the other tribe is irrelevant. What matters is what the
Secretary actually does, and once he allocates the funds to
one tribe, they are not “available” to another.
The Court rejects this reading of the “reduction” clause,
on the ground that it would constitute a “radical departure
from ordinary Government contracting principles.” Ante,
at 13, n. 6. But the fact that the clause operates as a
constraint on the “availability of appropriations” is evident
not only from its text, which speaks in terms of “funds
available,” but also from its placement in the statute,
immediately following the “subject to the availability”
clause. Under the Court’s view, by contrast, the “reduction” clause merely “underscores the Secretary’s discretion
to allocate funds among tribes.” Ante, at 13. There is,
however, no reason to suppose that Congress enacted the
provision simply to confirm this “ordinary” rule. Ibid. We
generally try to avoid reading statutes to be so “insignificant.” TRW Inc. v. Andrews, 534 U. S. 19, 31 (2001)
(internal quotation marks omitted).
The Court maintains that its holding is compelled by
our decision in Cherokee Nation of Okla. v. Leavitt, 543
U. S. 631 (2005). Ante, at 8. Like respondents here, the
tribes in Cherokee Nation sued the Government for unpaid
contract support costs under the Act. Congress had appropriated certain sums to the Indian Health Service “[f]or
expenses necessary to carry out” the Act, e.g., 108 Stat.
2527–2528, but—unlike in this case—those appropriations
“contained no relevant statutory restriction,” 543 U. S., at
637. The Government in Cherokee Nation contended that
it was not obligated to pay the contract support costs as

