6

SALAZAR v. RAMAH NAVAJO CHAPTER
Opinion of the Court

entitled to payment even if the agency has allocated
the funds to another purpose or assumes other obligations
that exhaust the funds.’ ” Id., at 641. It followed, therefore, that absent “something special about the promises at
issue,” the Government was obligated to pay the Tribes’
contract support costs in full. Id., at 638.
We held that the mere fact that ISDA self-determination
contracts are made “subject to the availability of appropriations” did not warrant a special rule. Id., at 643 (internal
quotation marks omitted). That commonplace provision,
we explained, is ordinarily satisfied so long as Congress
appropriates adequate legally unrestricted funds to pay
the contracts at issue. See ibid. Because Congress made
sufficient funds legally available to the agency to pay the
Tribes’ contracts, it did not matter that the BIA had allocated some of those funds to serve other purposes, such
that the remainder was insufficient to pay the Tribes in
full. Rather, we agreed with the Tribes that “as long as
Congress has appropriated sufficient legally unrestricted
funds to pay the contracts at issue,” the Government’s
promise to pay was binding. Id., at 637–638.
Our conclusion in Cherokee Nation followed directly
from well-established principles of Government contracting law. When a Government contractor is one of several
persons to be paid out of a larger appropriation sufficient
in itself to pay the contractor, it has long been the rule
that the Government is responsible to the contractor for
the full amount due under the contract, even if the agency
exhausts the appropriation in service of other permissible
ends. See Ferris v. United States, 27 Ct. Cl. 542, 546
(1892); Dougherty v. United States, 18 Ct. Cl. 496, 503
(1883); see also 2 GAO, Principles of Federal Appropriations Law, p. 6–17 (2d ed. 1992) (hereinafter GAO
Redbook).3 That is so “even if an agency’s total lump-sum
——————
3 In

Ferris, for instance, Congress appropriated $45,000 for the im-

