Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

necessary to meet a contractual obligation. See 1 GAO
Redbook, p. 2–26 (2d ed. 1991). But the “reduction” clause
in §450j–1(b) expressly provides that the Secretary is “not
required” to engage in such reprogramming to make one
tribe’s funds “available to another tribe.” It follows that
appropriations allocated for “programs, projects, or activities serving a tribe” are not “available” to another tribe,
unless the Secretary reallocates them. Contrary to the
Court’s suggestion, ante, at 13–14, the Government shares
this view that the “reduction” clause “specifically relieves
the Secretary of any obligation to make funds available to
one contractor by reducing payments to others.” Brief for
Petitioners 51 (citing Arctic Slope Native Assn., Ltd. v.
Sebelius, 629 F. 3d 1296, 1304 (CA Fed. 2010), cert. pending, No. 11–83 (filed July 18, 2011)).
Given these express restrictions established by Congress—which no one doubts are valid—I cannot agree with
the Court’s conclusion that appropriations were “available” to pay the Tribes’ contract support costs in full.
Once the Secretary had allocated all the funds appropriated
for contract support costs, no other funds could be used
for that purpose without violating the “not to exceed” restrictions in the relevant appropriations statutes. The
Court agrees. Ante, at 11–12. That leaves only one other
possible source of funds to pay the disputed costs in this
case: funds appropriated for contract support costs, but
allocated to pay such costs incurred by other tribes. Those
funds were not “available” either, however, because they
were “funding for programs, projects, or activities serving
a tribe,” and the Secretary was not required to reduce
such funding “to make funds available to another tribe.”
§450j–1(b).
In reaching a contrary conclusion, the Court fails to
appreciate the full significance of the “reduction” clause in
§450j–1(b). As construed by the Court, that clause merely
confirms that the Secretary “may allocate funds to one

