Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
to reduce funding for one tribe’s programs to make funds available to
another tribe, does not warrant a different result. Consistent with
ordinary Government contracting principles, that language merely
underscores the Secretary’s discretion to allocate funds among tribes.
It does not alter the Government’s legal obligation when the Secretary fails to pay.
The Government’s remaining counterarguments are unpersuasive.
First, it suggests that the Secretary could violate the Anti-Deficiency
Act, which prevents federal officers from making or authorizing an
expenditure or obligation exceeding an amount available in an appropriation. That Act applies only to government officials, however,
and does not affect the rights of citizens contracting with the Government. Second, the Government argues that permitting respondents to recover from the Judgment Fund would circumvent Congress’
intent to cap total expenditures for contract support costs. But ISDA
expressly provides that tribal contractors may sue for “money damages” under the Contract Disputes Act, and any ensuing judgments
are payable from the Judgment Fund. See Cherokee Nation, 543
U. S., at 642. Third, the Government invokes cases in which courts
have rejected contractors’ attempts to recover for amounts beyond the
maximum appropriated by Congress for a particular purpose. See,
e.g., Sutton v. United States, 256 U. S. 575. However, Sutton involved a specific line-item appropriation for an amount beyond which
the sole contractor could not recover. This case involves several contractors, each of whom contracted within the lump-sum amount Congress appropriated for all contractors. Unlike the sole contractor in
Sutton, they cannot reasonably be expected to know how much remained available of Congress’ lump-sum appropriation. Finally, the
Government claims that legislative history suggests that Congress
approved of pro rata distribution, but “indicia in committee reports
and other legislative history as to how funds should or are expected
to be spent do not establish any legal requirement on the agency.”
Lincoln v. Vigil, 508 U. S. 182, 192. Pp. 11−17.
(d) This case is the product of two decisions in some tension: Congress required the Secretary to accept every qualifying ISDA contract, promising “full” funding for all contract support costs, but then
appropriated insufficient funds to pay in full each tribal contractor.
Responsibility for the resolution of that situation, however, is committed to Congress. Pp. 17−18.
644 F. 3d 1054, affirmed.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which SCALIA,
KENNEDY, THOMAS, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. ROBERTS, C. J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, BREYER, and ALITO, JJ., joined.

