10

SALAZAR v. RAMAH NAVAJO CHAPTER
Opinion of the Court

lump-sum appropriation (though sufficient to cover its
own contracts) will not prove sufficient to pay all similar
contracts.” Cherokee Nation, 543 U. S., at 638. Rather,
the tribal contractors were entitled to rely on the Government’s promise to pay because they were “not chargeable
with knowledge” of the BIA’s administration of Congress’
appropriation, “nor [could their] legal rights be affected or
impaired by its maladministration or by its diversion.”
Ferris, 27 Ct. Cl., at 546.
As in Cherokee Nation, we decline the Government’s
invitation to ascribe “special, rather than ordinary” meaning to the fact that ISDA makes contracts “subject to the
availability of appropriations.”5 543 U. S., at 644. Under
our previous interpretation of that language, that condition was satisfied here because Congress appropriated
adequate funds to pay in full any individual contractor. It
is important to afford that language a “uniform interpretation” in this and comparable statutes, “lest legal uncertainty undermine contractors’ confidence that they will be
paid, and in turn increase the cost to the Government of
purchasing goods and services.” Ibid. It would be particularly anomalous to read the statutory language differently
here. Contracts made under ISDA specify that “ ‘[e]ach
provision of the [ISDA] and each provision of this Contract
shall be liberally construed for the benefit of the Contractor. . . .’ ” §450l(c), (model agreement §1(a)(2)). The Government, in effect, must demonstrate that its reading is
clearly required by the statutory language. Accordingly,
the Government cannot back out of its contractual promise
to pay each Tribe’s full contract support costs.
——————
5 The Government’s reliance on this statutory language is particularly
curious because it suggests it is superfluous. See Brief for Petitioners
30–31 (it is “unnecessary” to specify that contracts are “subject to the
availability of appropriations” (internal quotation marks omitted));
see also Reply Brief for Petitioners 7 (“[A]ll government contracts are
contingent upon the appropriations provided by Congress”).

