12

SALAZAR v. RAMAH NAVAJO CHAPTER
Opinion of the Court

programs, including tribes that choose not to enter ISDA
contracts. But when an agency makes competing contractual commitments with legally available funds and then
fails to pay, it is the Government that must bear the fiscal
consequences, not the contractor.
B
The dissent attempts to distinguish this case from Cherokee Nation and Ferris on different grounds, relying on
§450j–1(b)’s proviso that “the Secretary is not required to
reduce funding for programs, projects, or activities serving a tribe to make funds available to another tribe.” In
the dissent’s view, that clause establishes that each dollar allocated by the Secretary reduces the amount of appropriations legally available to pay other contractors. In
effect, the dissent understands §450j–1(b) to make the
legal availability of appropriations turn on the Secretary’s
expenditures rather than the sum allocated by Congress.
That interpretation, which is inconsistent with ordinary
principles of Government contracting law, is improbable.
We have explained that Congress ordinarily controls the
availability of appropriations; the agency controls whether
to make funds from that appropriation available to pay a
contractor. See Cherokee Nation, 543 U. S., at 642–643.
The agency’s allocation choices do not affect the Government’s liability in the event of an underpayment. See id.,
at 641 (when an “ ‘unrestricted appropriation is sufficient
to fund the contract, the contractor is entitled to payment
even if the agency has allocated the funds to another purpose’ ”).6 In Cherokee Nation, we found those ordinary
——————
6 The dissent’s view notwithstanding, it is beyond question that Congress appropriated sufficient unrestricted funds to pay any contractor
in full. The dissent’s real argument is that §450j–1(b) reverses the
applicability of the Ferris rule to ISDA, so that the Secretary’s allocation of funds to one contractor reduces the legal availability of funds to
others. See post, at 4 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.) (“that the Secretary

