(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SALAZAR, SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR, ET AL. v. 

RAMAH NAVAJO CHAPTER ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE TENTH CIRCUIT
No. 11–551.

Argued April 18, 2012—Decided June 18, 2012

The Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (ISDA)
directs the Secretary of the Interior to enter into contracts with willing tribes under which they will provide services such as education
and law enforcement that the Federal Government otherwise would
have provided. It requires the Secretary to contract to pay the “full
amount” of “contract support costs,” 45 U. S. C. §§450j–1(a)(2), (g),
subject to the availability of appropriations, §450j–1(b). In the event
of a contractual breach, tribal contractors are entitled to seek money
damages under the Contract Disputes Act.
In Fiscal Years (FYs) 1994 to 2001, respondent Tribes contracted
with the Secretary to provide services. During each of those FYs,
Congress appropriated sufficient funds to pay any individual tribal
contractor’s contract support costs in full but did not appropriate
enough to pay all tribal contractors collectively. Unable to pay every
contractor in full, the Secretary paid the Tribes on a uniform,
pro rata basis. Respondents sued under the Contract Disputes Act
for breach of contract. The District Court granted the Government
summary judgment. The Tenth Circuit reversed, finding the Government liable to each contractor for the full contract amount.
Held: The Government must pay each Tribe’s contract support costs in
full. Pp. 5−18.
(a) In Cherokee Nation of Okla. v. Leavitt, 543 U. S. 631, this Court
considered the Government’s promise to pay contract support costs in
ISDA self-determination contracts that made the Government’s obligation “subject to the availability of appropriations,” id., at 634−637.
The Government contended that Congress appropriated inadequate
funds to fulfill its contractual obligations to the Tribes, while meeting

