Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

THOMAS, J., dissenting

ing to decide this important question summarily without
the benefit of full briefing and argument.
Second, I am also unwilling to join the Court in reading
the “ ‘alternatives to closure’ ” language it quotes from
Waller and Press Enterprise I as squarely foreclosing the
decision of the Supreme Court of Georgia. See ante, at 6.
The Court chides the Supreme Court of Georgia for “con
clud[ing], despite our explicit statements to the contrary,
that trial courts need not consider alternatives to closure
absent an opposing party’s proffer of some alternatives.”
Ante, at 5–6 (emphasis added). But neither Waller nor
Press-Enterprise I expressly holds that jury voir dire is
covered by the Sixth Amendment’s “[P]ublic [T]rial”
Clause. Accordingly, it is not obvious that the “alterna
tives to closure” language in those opinions governs this
case.
Even assuming the Court correctly extends Waller and
Press-Enterprise I to this (Sixth Amendment voir dire)
context, neither opinion “explicit[ly]” places on trial courts
the burden of sua sponte suggesting alternatives to closure
“absent an opposing party’s proffer of some alternatives.”
Ante, at 6. The statement that a “ ‘trial court must con
sider reasonable alternatives to closing the proceeding,’ ”
ibid. (quoting Waller, supra, at 48), does not definitively
establish who must suggest alternatives to closure that the
trial court must then consider, nor does it expressly ad
dress whether the trial court must suggest such alterna
tives in the absence of a proffer. I concede that the lan
guage can easily be read to imply the latter, and the Court
may well be right that a trial court violates the Sixth
Amendment if it closes the courtroom without sua sponte
considering reasonable alternatives to closure. But I
would not decide the issue summarily, and certainly would
—————— 

closure motion must an opponent of closure establish that reasonable

alternatives do exist?” Pet. for Cert. i. 


