Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Per Curiam

Without knowing the precise circumstances, some possi
bilities include reserving one or more rows for the public;
dividing the jury venire panel to reduce courtroom conges
tion; or instructing prospective jurors not to engage or
interact with audience members.
Petitioner also argues that, apart from failing to con
sider alternatives to closure, the trial court erred because
it did not even identify any overriding interest likely to be
prejudiced absent the closure of voir dire. There is some
merit to this complaint. The generic risk of jurors over
hearing prejudicial remarks, unsubstantiated by any
specific threat or incident, is inherent whenever members
of the public are present during the selection of jurors. If
broad concerns of this sort were sufficient to override a
defendant’s constitutional right to a public trial, a court
could exclude the public from jury selection almost as a
matter of course. As noted in the dissent below, “the
majority’s reasoning permits the closure of voir dire in
every criminal case conducted in this courtroom whenever
the trial judge decides, for whatever reason, that he or she
would prefer to fill the courtroom with potential jurors
rather than spectators.” 285 Ga., at 276, 674 S. E. 2d, at
913 (opinion of Sears, C. J.).
There are no doubt circumstances where a judge could
conclude that threats of improper communications with
jurors or safety concerns are concrete enough to warrant
closing voir dire. But in those cases, the particular inter
est, and threat to that interest, must “be articulated along
with findings specific enough that a reviewing court can
determine whether the closure order was properly en
tered.” Press-Enterprise I, supra, at 510; see also PressEnterprise Co. v. Superior Court of Cal., County of River
side, 478 U. S. 1, 15 (1986) (“The First Amendment right
of access cannot be overcome by the conclusory assertion
that publicity might deprive the defendant of [the right to
a fair trial]”).

