2

PRESLEY v. GEORGIA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

the statute in issue under identical circumstances).
The Court nevertheless concludes that Waller and PressEnterprise I—in combination—“well settl[e]” the “point.”
Ante, at 4. It admits that “[t]he extent to which the First
and Sixth Amendment public trial rights are coextensive
is an open question,” but, apparently extrapolating from
Press-Enterprise I, asserts that “there is no legitimate
reason, at least in the context of juror selection proceed
ings, to give one who asserts a First Amendment privilege
greater rights to insist on public proceedings than the
accused has.” Ante, at 4–5. But this conclusion decides by
implication an unstated premise: that jury voir dire is part
of the “public trial” that the Sixth Amendment guarantees.
As JUSTICE STEVENS recognized in Press-Enterprise I, that
case did not decide this issue. See 464 U. S., at 516 (con
curring opinion) (“If the defendant had advanced a claim
that his Sixth Amendment right to a public trial was
violated by the closure of the voir dire, it would be impor
tant to determine whether the selection of the jury was a
part of the ‘trial’ within the meaning of that Amendment”).
Until today, that question remained open; the majority
certainly cites no other case from this Court answering it.
Yet the Court does so here—even though the Supreme
Court of Georgia did not meaningfully consider that ques
tion, and petitioner does not ask us to do so.* I am unwill
——————
* In full, petitioner’s two questions presented state:
“I. This Court has established that the public cannot be expelled from a
courtroom unless the presence of the public creates a ‘substantial
probability’ of prejudice to an ‘overriding interest.’ But is some case
specific evidence required to meet this ‘substantial probability’ test, or
can generalized fears that would apply equally to nearly every trial
suffice?
“II. This Court has repeatedly held that a trial court must consider
reasonable alternatives to closing a proceeding before it can exclude the
public. But who bears the burden of suggesting such alternatives?
Must the proponent of closure establish that closure is necessary, in
that there are no reasonable alternatives available? Or to overcome a

