4

PRESLEY v. GEORGIA
Per Curiam

Sixth Amendment, for it is the accused who invoked his
right to a public trial. An initial question is whether the
right to a public trial in criminal cases extends to the jury
selection phase of trial, and in particular the voir dire of
prospective jurors. In the First Amendment context that
question was answered in Press-Enterprise I. Id., at 510.
The Court there held that the voir dire of prospective
jurors must be open to the public under the First Amend
ment. Later in the same Term as Press-Enterprise I, the
Court considered a Sixth Amendment case concerning
whether the public trial right extends to a pretrial hearing
on a motion to suppress certain evidence. Waller v. Geor
gia, 467 U. S. 39 (1984). The Waller Court relied heavily
upon Press-Enterprise I in finding that the Sixth Amend
ment right to a public trial extends beyond the actual
proof at trial. It ruled that the pretrial suppression hear
ing must be open to the public because “there can be little
doubt that the explicit Sixth Amendment right of the
accused is no less protective of a public trial than the
implicit First Amendment right of the press and public.”
467 U. S., at 46.
While Press-Enterprise I was heavily relied upon in
Waller, the jury selection issue in the former case was
resolved under the First, not the Sixth, Amendment.
Press-Enterprise I, supra, at 516 (STEVENS, J., concurring)
(“The constitutional protection for the right of access that
the Court upholds today is found in the First Amendment,
rather than the public trial provision of the Sixth” (foot
note omitted)). In the instant case, the question then
arises whether it is so well settled that the Sixth Amend
ment right extends to jury voir dire that this Court may
proceed by summary disposition.
The point is well settled under Press-Enterprise I and
Waller. The extent to which the First and Sixth Amend
ment public trial rights are coextensive is an open ques
tion, and it is not necessary here to speculate whether or

