14

MERCK & CO. v. REYNOLDS
Opinion of the Court

a private §10(b) action. Cf. Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae 12, n. 1 (suggesting that facts concerning a
plaintiff’s reliance, loss, and loss causation are not among
those that constitute “the violation” and therefore need not
be “discover[ed]” for a claim to accrue).
Second, Merck argues that, even if “discovery” requires
facts related to scienter, facts that tend to show a materi
ally false or misleading statement (or material omission)
are ordinarily sufficient to show scienter as well. See
Brief for Petitioners 22, 28–29. But we do not see how
that is so. We recognize that certain statements are such
that, to show them false is normally to show scienter as
well. It is unlikely, for example, that someone would
falsely say “I am not married” without being aware of the
fact that his statement is false. Where §10(b) is at issue,
however, the relation of factual falsity and state of mind is
more context specific. An incorrect prediction about a
firm’s future earnings, by itself, does not automatically tell
us whether the speaker deliberately lied or just made an
innocent (and therefore nonactionable) error. Hence, the
statute may require “discovery” of scienter-related facts
beyond the facts that show a statement (or omission) to be
materially false or misleading. Merck fears that this
requirement will give life to stale claims or subject defen
dants to liability for acts taken long ago. But Congress’
inclusion in the statute of an unqualified bar on actions
instituted “5 years after such violation,” §1658(b)(2), giv
ing defendants total repose after five years, should dimin
ish that fear. Cf. Lampf, 501 U. S., at 363 (holding compa
rable bar not subject to equitable tolling).
Third, Merck says that the limitations period began to
run prior to November 2001 because by that point the
plaintiffs were on “inquiry notice.” Merck uses the term
“inquiry notice” to refer to the point “at which a plaintiff
possesses a quantum of information sufficiently suggestive
of wrongdoing that he should conduct a further inquiry.”

