2

MERCK & CO. v. REYNOLDS
Syllabus
have “discover[ed] the facts constituting the violation”—whichever
comes first. In the statute of limitations context, “discovery” is often
used as a term of art in connection with the “discovery rule,” a doc
trine that delays accrual of a cause of action until the plaintiff has
“discovered” it. The rule arose in fraud cases but has been applied by
state and federal courts in other types of claims, and legislatures
have sometimes codified this rule. When “discovery” is written di
rectly into a statute, courts have typically interpreted the word to re
fer not only to actual discovery, but also to the hypothetical discovery
of facts a reasonably diligent plaintiff would know. Congress in
tended courts to interpret the word “discovery” in §1658(b)(1) simi
larly. That statute was enacted after this Court determined a gov
erning limitations period for private §10(b) actions, Lampf, Pleva,
Lipkind, Prupis & Petigrow v. Gilbertson, 501 U. S. 350, concluding
that such actions “must be commenced within one year after the dis
covery of the facts constituting the violation . . . ,” id., at 364 (empha
sis added). Since then, Courts of Appeals deciding the matter have
held that “discovery” occurs both when a plaintiff actually discovers
the facts and when a hypothetical reasonably diligent plaintiff would
have discovered them. In 2002, Congress repeated Lampf’s critical
language in enacting the present limitations statute. Normally,
when Congress enacts statutes, it is aware of relevant judicial prece
dent. See, e.g., Edelman v. Lynchburg College, 535 U. S. 106, 116–
117, and n. 13. Given the history and precedent surrounding the use
of “discovery” in the limitations context generally as well as in this
provision, the reasons for making this assumption are particularly
strong here. Merck’s claims are evaluated accordingly. Pp. 8–12.
2. In determining the time at which “discovery” occurs, terms such
as “inquiry notice” and “storm warnings” may be useful insofar as
they identify a time when the facts would have prompted a reasona
bly diligent plaintiff to begin investigating. But the limitations pe
riod does not begin to run until the plaintiff thereafter discovers or a
reasonably diligent plaintiff would have discovered “the facts consti
tuting the violation,” including scienter—irrespective of whether the
actual plaintiff undertook a reasonably diligent investigation.
Pp. 12–17.
(a) Contrary to Merck’s argument, facts showing scienter are
among those that “constitut[e] the violation.” Scienter is assuredly a
“fact.” In a §10(b) action, it refers to “a mental state embracing in
tent to deceive, manipulate, or defraud,” Ernst & Ernst v. Hochfelder,
425 U. S. 185, 194, n. 12, and “constitut[es]” an important and neces
sary element of a §10(b) “violation.” See Tellabs, Inc. v. Makor Issues
& Rights, Ltd., 551 U. S. 308, 319. Because the scienter element of
§10(b) fraud cases has special heightened pleading requirements, see

