16

MERCK & CO. v. REYNOLDS
Opinion of the Court

“discovery,” when a plaintiff would have begun investigat
ing, we cannot accept Merck’s argument.
As a fallback, Merck argues that even if the limitations
period does generally begin at “discovery,” it should none
theless run from the point of “inquiry notice” in one par
ticular situation, namely, where the actual plaintiff fails to
undertake an investigation once placed on “inquiry no
tice.” In such circumstances, Merck contends, the actual
plaintiff is not diligent, and the law should not “effectively
excuse a plaintiff’s failure to conduct a further investiga
tion” by placing that nondiligent plaintiff and a reasonably
diligent plaintiff “in the same position.” Brief for Petition
ers 48.
We cannot accept this argument for essentially the same
reason we reject “inquiry notice” as the standard gener
ally: We cannot reconcile it with the statute, which simply
provides that “discovery” is the event that triggers the 2
year limitations period—for all plaintiffs. Cf. United
States v. Mack, 295 U. S. 480, 489 (1935) (“Laches within
the term of the statute of limitations is no defense at
law”). Furthermore, the statute does not place all plain
tiffs “in the same position” no matter whether they inves
tigate when investigation is warranted. The limitations
period puts plaintiffs who fail to investigate once on “in
quiry notice” at a disadvantage because it lapses two years
after a reasonably diligent plaintiff would have discovered
the necessary facts. A plaintiff who fails entirely to inves
tigate or delays investigating may well not have discov
ered those facts by that time or, at least, may not have
found sufficient facts by that time to be able to file a §10(b)
complaint that satisfies the applicable heightened plead
ing standards. Cf. Young v. Lepone, 305 F. 3d 1, 9 (CA1
2002) (“[A] reasonably diligent investigation . . . may
consume as little as a few days or as much as a few years
to get to the bottom of the matter”).
Merck further contends that its proposed “inquiry no

