Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
15 U. S. C. §78u–4(b)(2), unless a §10(b) complaint sets forth facts show
ing that it is “at least as likely as” not that the defendant acted with the
relevant intent, the claim will fail. Tellabs, supra, at 328 (emphasis de
leted). It would frustrate the very purpose of the discovery rule codified in
§1658(b)(1) if the limitations period began to run regardless of whether a
plaintiff had “discover[ed]” any facts suggesting scienter. Pp. 12–14.
(b) The Court also rejects Merck’s argument that, even if “discov
ery” requires facts related to scienter, facts that tend to show a mate
rially false or misleading statement (or material omission) are ordi
narily sufficient to show scienter. Where §10(b) is at issue, the
relation of factual falsity and state of mind is more context specific.
For instance, an incorrect prediction about a firm’s future earnings,
by itself, does not automatically show whether the speaker deliber
ately lied or made an innocent error. Hence, “discovery” of additional
scienter-related facts may be required. The statute’s inclusion of an
unqualified bar on actions instituted “5 years after such violation,”
§1658(b)(2), should diminish Merck’s fear that this requirement will
give life to stale claims or subject defendants to liability for acts
taken long ago. P. 14.
(c) And the Court cannot accept Merck’s argument that the limi
tations period begins at “inquiry notice,” meaning the point where
the facts would lead a reasonably diligent plaintiff to investigate fur
ther, because that point is not necessarily the point at which the
plaintiff would already have “discover[ed]” facts showing scienter or
other “facts constituting the violation.” The statute says that the
plaintiff’s claim accrues only after the “discovery” of those latter
facts. It contains no indication that the limitations period can some
times begin before “discovery” can take place. Merck also argues that
determining when a hypothetical reasonably diligent plaintiff would
have “discover[ed]” the necessary facts is too complicated for judges
to undertake. But courts applying the traditional discovery rule have
long had to ask what a reasonably diligent plaintiff would have
known and done in myriad circumstances and already undertake this
kind of inquiry in securities fraud cases. Pp. 14–17.
3. Prior to November 6, 2001, the plaintiffs did not discover, and
Merck has not shown that a reasonably diligent plaintiff would have
discovered, “the facts constituting the violation.” The FDA’s Septem
ber 2001 warning letter shows little or nothing about the here
relevant scienter, i.e., whether Merck advanced the naproxen hy
pothesis with fraudulent intent. The FDA itself described the hy
pothesis as a “possible explanation” for the VIGOR results, faulting
Merck only for failing sufficiently to publicize the less favorable al
ternative, that Vioxx might be harmful. The products-liability com
plaints’ general statements about Merck’s state of mind show little

