18

MERCK & CO. v. REYNOLDS
Opinion of the Court

ber 6, 2001, the plaintiffs had discovered or should have
discovered “the facts constituting the violation.” In re
spect to scienter Merck primarily relies upon (1) the FDA’s
September 2001 warning letter, which said that Merck
had “ ‘minimized’ ” the VIGOR study’s “ ‘potentially serious
cardiovascular findings’ ” and (2) pleadings filed in prod
ucts-liability actions in September and October 2001
alleging that Merck had “ ‘omitted, suppressed, or con
cealed material facts concerning the dangers and risks
associated with Vioxx’ ” and “purposefully downplayed
and/or understated the serious nature of the risks associ
ated with Vioxx.” Brief for Petitioners 36–37 (quoting
App. 340, 893).
The FDA’s warning letter, however, shows little or
nothing about the here-relevant scienter, i.e., whether
Merck advanced the naproxen hypothesis with fraudulent
intent. See Part I–A(4), supra. The FDA itself described
the pro-Vioxx naproxen hypothesis as a “possible explana
tion” for the VIGOR results, faulting Merck only for failing
sufficiently to publicize the alternative less favorable to
Merck, that Vioxx might be harmful. App. 340.
The products-liability complaints’ statements about
Merck’s knowledge show little more. See Part I–A(3),
supra. Merck does not claim that these complaints con
tained any specific information suggesting the fraud al
leged here, i.e., that Merck knew the naproxen hypothesis
was false even as it promoted it. And, without providing
any reason to believe that the plaintiffs had special access
to information about Merck’s state of mind, the complaints
alleged only in general terms that Merck had concealed
information about Vioxx and “purposefully downplayed
and/or understated” the risks associated with Vioxx—the
same charge made in the FDA warning letter. App. 893.
In our view, neither these two circumstances nor any of
the other pre-November 2001 circumstances that we have
set forth in Part I–A, supra, whether viewed separately or

