(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

GOODYEAR DUNLOP TIRES OPERATIONS, S. A., 

ET AL. v. BROWN ET UX., CO-ADMINISTRATORS OF

THE ESTATE OF BROWN, ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE COURT OF APPEALS OF NORTH CAROLINA
No. 10–76. Argued January 11, 2011 —Decided June 27, 2011
Respondents, North Carolina residents whose sons died in a bus acci
dent outside Paris, France, filed a suit for wrongful-death damages in
North Carolina state court. Alleging that the accident was caused by
tire failure, they named as defendants Goodyear USA, an Ohio corpo
ration, and petitioners, three Goodyear USA subsidiaries, organized
and operating, respectively, in Luxembourg, Turkey, and France. Pe
titioners’ tires are manufactured primarily for European and Asian
markets and differ in size and construction from tires ordinarily sold
in the United States. Petitioners are not registered to do business in
North Carolina; have no place of business, employees, or bank ac
counts in the State; do not design, manufacture, or advertise their
products in the State; and do not solicit business in the State or sell
or ship tires to North Carolina customers. Even so, a small percent
age of their tires were distributed in North Carolina by other Good
year USA affiliates. The trial court denied petitioners’ motion to
dismiss the claims against them for want of personal jurisdiction.
The North Carolina Court of Appeals affirmed, concluding that the
North Carolina courts had general jurisdiction over petitioners,
whose tires had reached the State through “the stream of commerce.”
Held: Petitioners were not amenable to suit in North Carolina on
claims unrelated to any activity of petitioners in the forum State.
Pp. 6–14.
(a) The Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause sets the
outer boundaries of a state tribunal’s authority to proceed against a
defendant. The pathmarking decision of International Shoe Co. v.
Washington, 326 U. S. 310, provides that state courts may exercise


2

GOODYEAR DUNLOP TIRES OPERATIONS, S. A.
v. BROWN
Syllabus
personal jurisdiction over an out-of-state defendant who has “certain
minimum contacts with [the State] such that the maintenance of the
suit does not offend ‘traditional notions of fair play and substantial
justice.’ ” Id., at 316. Endeavoring to give specific content to the “fair
play and substantial justice” concept, the Court in International Shoe
classified cases involving out-of-state corporate defendants. First,
the Court recognized that jurisdiction could be asserted where the
corporation’s in-state activity is “continuous and systematic” and
gave rise to the episode-in-suit. Id., at 317. It also observed that the
commission of “single or occasional acts” in a State may be sufficient
to render a corporation answerable in that State with respect to those
acts, though not with respect to matters unrelated to the forum con
nections. Id., at 318. These two categories compose what is now
known as “specific jurisdiction.” Helicopteros Nacionales de Colom
bia, S. A. v. Hall, 466 U. S. 408, 414, n. 8. International Shoe distin
guished from cases that fit within the “specific jurisdiction” catego
ries, “instances in which the continuous corporate operations within a
state [are] so substantial and of such a nature as to justify suit
against it on causes of action arising from dealings entirely distinct
from those activities.” 326 U. S., at 318. Adjudicatory authority so
grounded is now called “general jurisdiction.” Helicopteros, 466 U. S.,
at 414, n. 9. Since International Shoe, this Court’s decisions have
elaborated primarily on circumstances that warrant the exercise of
specific jurisdiction. In only two decisions postdating International
Shoe has this Court considered whether an out-of-state corporate de
fendant’s in-state contacts were sufficiently “continuous and system
atic” to justify the exercise of general jurisdiction over claims unre
lated to those contacts: Perkins v. Benguet Consol. Mining Co., 342
U. S. 437; and Helicopteros, 466 U. S. 408. Pp. 6–9.
(b) Petitioners lack “the kind of continuous and systematic general
business contacts” necessary to allow North Carolina to entertain a
suit against them unrelated to anything that connects them to the
State. Helicopteros, 466 U. S., at 416. The stream-of-commerce cases
on which the North Carolina court relied relate to exercises of specific
jurisdiction in products liability actions, in which a nonresident de
fendant, acting outside the forum, places in the stream of commerce a
product that ultimately causes harm inside the forum. Many state
long-arm statutes authorize courts to exercise specific jurisdiction
over manufacturers when the events in suit, or some of them, oc
curred within the forum State. The North Carolina court’s stream-of
commerce analysis elided the essential difference between case
specific and general jurisdiction. Flow of a manufacturer’s products
into the forum may bolster an affiliation germane to specific jurisdic
tion, see, e.g., World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U. S.


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
286, 297; but ties serving to bolster the exercise of specific jurisdic
tion do not warrant a determination that, based on those ties, the fo
rum has general jurisdiction over a defendant. A corporation’s “con
tinuous activity of some sorts within a state,” International Shoe
instructed, “is not enough to support the demand that the corporation
be amenable to suits unrelated to that activity.” 326 U. S., at 318.
Measured against Helicopteros and Perkins, North Carolina is not
a forum in which it would be permissible to subject petitioners to
general jurisdiction. In the 1952 Perkins case, general jurisdiction
was appropriately exercised over a Philippine corporation sued in
Ohio, where the company’s affairs were overseen during World War
II. In Helicopteros, however, the survivors of U. S. citizens killed
when a helicopter owned by a Colombian corporation crashed in Peru
could not maintain wrongful-death actions against that corporation
in Texas, where the company’s contacts “consisted of sending its chief
executive officer to Houston for a contract-negotiation session; accept
ing into its New York bank account checks drawn on a Houston bank;
purchasing helicopters, equipment, and training services from [a
Texas enterprise]; and sending personnel to [Texas] for training.”
466 U. S., at 416. These links to Texas did not “constitute the kind of
continuous and systematic general business contacts . . . found to ex
ist in Perkins,” and were insufficient to support the exercise of juris
diction over a claim that neither “ ‘ar[o]se out of’ . . . no[r] related to”
the defendant’s activities in Texas. Id., at 415–416. This Court sees
no reason to differentiate from the ties to Texas held insufficient in
Helicopteros, the sales of petitioners’ tires sporadically made in North
Carolina through intermediaries. Pp. 9–13.
(c) Neither below nor in their brief in opposition to the petition for
certiorari did respondents urge disregard of petitioners’ discrete
status as subsidiaries and treatment of all Goodyear entities as a
“unitary business,” so that jurisdiction over the parent would draw in
the subsidiaries as well. Respondents have therefore forfeited this
contention. Pp. 13–14.
199 N. C. App. 50, 681 S. E. 2d 382, reversed.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

