8

REHBERG v. PAULK
Opinion of the Court

“common-law tradition of prosecutorial immunity . . .
developed much later than 1871”).
This adaptation of prosecutorial immunity accommodated the special needs of public, as opposed to private,
prosecutors. Because the daily function of a public prosecutor is to bring criminal charges, tort claims against public
prosecutors “could be expected with some frequency, for a
defendant often will transform his resentment at being
prosecuted into the ascription of improper and malicious
actions to the State’s advocate.” Imbler, 424 U. S., at 425.
Such “harassment by unfounded litigation would cause a
deflection of the prosecutor’s energies from his public
duties,” and would result in a severe interference with the
administration of an important public office. Id., at 423.
Constant vulnerability to vexatious litigation would give
rise to the “possibility that [the prosecutor] would shade
his decisions instead of exercising the independence of
judgment required by his public trust.” Ibid.
Thus, when the issue of prosecutorial immunity under §1983 reached this Court in Imbler, the Court did
not simply apply the scope of immunity recognized by
common-law courts as of 1871 but instead placed substantial reliance on post-1871 cases extending broad immunity
to public prosecutors sued for common-law torts.
While the Court has looked to the common law in determining the scope of the absolute immunity available
under §1983, the Court has not suggested that §1983
is simply a federalized amalgamation of pre-existing
common-law claims, an all-in-one federal claim encompassing the torts of assault, trespass, false arrest, defamation,
malicious prosecution, and more. The new federal claim
created by §1983 differs in important ways from those preexisting torts. It is broader in that it reaches constitutional and statutory violations that do not correspond to
any previously known tort. See Kalina, 522 U. S., at 123.
But it is narrower in that it applies only to tortfeasors who

