Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

The Briscoe Court rebuffed two arguments for distinguishing between law enforcement witnesses and lay
witnesses for immunity purposes: first, that absolute immunity is not needed for law enforcement witnesses because they are less likely to be intimidated by the threat
of suit and, second, that such witnesses should not be
shielded by absolute immunity because false testimony by
a police officer is likely to be more damaging than false
testimony by a lay witness. See ibid. The Court observed
that there are other factors not applicable to lay witnesses
that weigh in favor of extending absolute immunity to
police officer witnesses.
First, police officers testify with some frequency. Id., at
343. “Police officers testify in scores of cases every year,”
the Court noted, “and defendants often will transform
resentment at being convicted into allegations of perjury
by the State’s official witnesses.” Ibid. If police officer
witnesses were routinely forced to defend against claims
based on their testimony, their “ ‘energy and attention
would be diverted from the pressing duty of enforcing the
criminal law.’ ” Id., at 343–344 (quoting Imbler, 424 U. S.,
at 425).
Second, a police officer witness’ potential liability, if
conditioned on the exoneration of the accused, could influence decisions on appeal and collateral relief. 460 U. S., at
344. Needless to say, such decisions should not be influenced by the likelihood of a subsequent civil rights action.
But the possibility that a decision favorable to the accused
might subject a police officer witness to liability would
create the “ ‘risk of injecting extraneous concerns’ ” into
appellate review and postconviction proceedings. Ibid.
(quoting Imbler, supra, at 428, n. 27). In addition, law
enforcement witnesses face the possibility of sanctions not
applicable to lay witnesses, namely, loss of their jobs and
other employment-related sanctions.
For these reasons, we conclude that grand jury wit-

