Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

for maliciously procuring an unjust prosecution when it is
the prosecutor, who is shielded by absolute immunity, who
is actually responsible for the decision to prosecute. See
Albright v. Oliver, 510 U. S. 266, 279, n. 5 (1994)
(GINSBURG, J., concurring) (the prosecutor is the “principal
player in carrying out a prosecution”); see ibid. (“[T]he
star player is exonerated, but the supporting actor is
not”).3
Precisely because no grand jury witness has the power
to initiate a prosecution, petitioner is unable to provide a
workable standard for determining whether a particular
grand jury witness is a “complaining witness.” Here,
respondent was the only witness to testify in two of the
three grand jury sessions that resulted in indictments.
But where multiple witnesses testify before a grand jury,
identifying the “complaining witness” would often be
difficult. Petitioner suggests that a “complaining witness”
——————
3 Petitioner

says there is no reason to distinguish between a person
who goes to the police to swear out a criminal complaint and a person
who testifies to facts before a grand jury for the same purpose and with
the same effect. Brief for Petitioner 2, 23. But this is like saying that
a bicycle and an F-16 are the same thing. Even if the functions are
similar as a general matter, the entities are quite different. Grand
juries, by tradition, statute, and sometimes constitutional mandate,
have a status and entitlement to information that absolute immunity
furthers. See, e.g., Imbler v. Pachtman, 424 U. S. 409, 423, n. 20 (1976)
(“It is the functional comparability of their judgments to those of
the judge that has resulted in both grand jurors and prosecutors being referred to as ‘quasi-judicial’ officers, and their immunities being
termed ‘quasi-judicial’ as well”); see also United States v. Sells Engineering, Inc., 463 U. S. 418, 423 (1983) (“The grand jury has always
occupied a high place as an instrument of justice in our system of
criminal law—so much so that it is enshrined in the Constitution”).
Our holding today supports the functioning of the grand jury system.
The importance of the grand jury cannot be underestimated: In the
federal system and many States, see LaFave §15.1(d), a felony cannot
be charged without the consent of community representatives, a vital
protection from unwarranted prosecutions.

