2

REHBERG v. PAULK
Syllabus
but the Court’s precedents have not mechanically duplicated the precise scope of the absolute immunity the common law provided to protect those functions. For example, it was common in 1871 for cases to
be prosecuted by private parties, who did not enjoy absolute immunity from suit. But as the prosecutorial function was increasingly assumed by public officials, common-law courts held that public prosecutors, unlike their private predecessors, were absolutely immune
from the types of tort claims that an aggrieved or vengeful criminal
defendant was most likely to assert. This adaptation of prosecutorial
immunity accommodated the special needs of public, as opposed to
private, prosecutors. Thus, when the issue of prosecutorial immunity
under §1983 reached this Court in Imbler v. Pachtman, 424 U. S.
409, the Court did not simply apply the scope of immunity recognized
by common-law courts as of 1871 but instead relied substantially on
post-1871 cases extending broad immunity to public prosecutors sued
for common-law torts. Neither has the Court suggested that §1983 is
simply a federalized amalgamation of pre-existing common-law
claims. The new federal claim created by §1983 differs in important
ways from pre-existing common-law torts. Accordingly, both the
scope of the new tort and the scope of the absolute immunity available in §1983 actions differ in some respects from the common law.
Pp. 3―9.
(b) A trial witness sued under §1983 enjoys absolute immunity
from any claim based on his testimony. Briscoe v. LaHue, 460 U. S.
352. Without absolute immunity, the truth-seeking process would be
impaired as witnesses might be reluctant to testify, and even a witness who took the stand “might be inclined to shade his testimony in
favor of the potential plaintiff ” for “fear of subsequent liability.” Id.,
at 333. These factors apply with equal force to grand jury witnesses.
In both contexts, a witness’ fear of retaliatory litigation may deprive
the tribunal of critical evidence. And in neither context is the deterrent of potential civil liability needed to prevent false testimony because other sanctions, chiefly prosecution for perjury, provide a sufficient deterrent.
For the reasons identified in Briscoe, supra, at 342–344, there is no
reason to distinguish law enforcement witnesses from lay witnesses
in §1983 actions. And the rule that a grand jury witness has absolute
immunity from any §1983 claim based on the witness’ testimony may
not be circumvented by claiming that a grand jury witness conspired
to present false testimony, or by using evidence of the witness’ testimony to support any other §1983 claim concerning the initiation or
maintenance of a prosecution. Were it otherwise, a criminal defendant turned civil plaintiff could reframe a claim to attack the preparatory activity—such as a preliminary discussion in which the witness

