Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
relates the substance of his intended testimony—rather than the absolutely immune actions themselves. Pp. 9−12.
(c) Petitioner’s main argument is that under Malley v. Briggs, 475
U. S. 335, 340−341, and Kalina v. Fletcher, 522 U. S. 118, 131, grand
jury witnesses who are “complaining witnesses” are not entitled to
absolute immunity. But at the time §1983’s predecessor was enacted,
a “complaining witness” was a party who procured an arrest and initiated a criminal prosecution. A “complaining witness” might testify,
either before a grand jury or at trial, but testifying was not a necessary characteristic of a “complaining witness.” Thus, testifying,
whether before a grand jury or at trial, was not the distinctive function performed by a “complaining witness.” A “complaining witness”
cannot be held liable for perjurious trial testimony, see Briscoe, 460
U. S., at 326, and there is no more reason why a “complaining witness” should be subject to liability for testimony before a grand jury.
Once the distinctive function performed by a “complaining witness”
is understood, it is apparent that a law enforcement officer who testifies before a grand jury is not comparable to a “complaining witness”
because it is not the officer who makes the critical decision to press
criminal charges, but the prosecutor. It would be anomalous to permit a police officer testifying before a grand jury to be sued for maliciously procuring an unjust prosecution when it is the prosecutor,
who is shielded by absolute immunity, who is actually responsible for
the decision to initiate a prosecution. Petitioner also contends that
the deterrent effect of civil liability is more needed in grand jury proceedings because trial witnesses face cross-examination. But the
force of that argument is more than offset by the problem that allowing such civil actions would create—subversion of grand jury secrecy,
which is essential to the proper functioning of the grand jury system.
See United States v. Sells Engineering, Inc., 463 U. S. 418, 424. And
finally, contrary to petitioner’s suggestion, recognizing absolute immunity for grand jury witnesses does not create an insupportable distinction between States that use grand juries and States that permit
felony prosecutions to be brought by complaint or information. Most
States that do not require an indictment for felonies provide a preliminary hearing at which witnesses testify, and the lower courts have
held that preliminary hearing witnesses are protected by the same
immunity accorded grand jury witnesses. Pp. 12−18.
611 F. 3d 828, affirmed.
ALITO, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

