14

REHBERG v. PAULK
Opinion of the Court

complaining witness. It is clear—and petitioner does not
contend otherwise—that a complaining witness cannot
be held liable for perjurious trial testimony. Briscoe, 460
U. S., at 326. And there is no more reason why a complaining witness should be subject to liability for testimony before a grand jury.
Once the distinctive function performed by a “complaining witness” is understood, it is apparent that a law enforcement officer who testifies before a grand jury is not at
all comparable to a “complaining witness.” By testifying
before a grand jury, a law enforcement officer does not
perform the function of applying for an arrest warrant; nor
does such an officer make the critical decision to initiate a
prosecution. It is of course true that a detective or case
agent who has performed or supervised most of the investigative work in a case may serve as an important witness
in the grand jury proceeding and may very much want the
grand jury to return an indictment. But such a witness,
unlike a complaining witness at common law, does not
make the decision to press criminal charges.
Instead, it is almost always a prosecutor who is responsible for the decision to present a case to a grand jury, and
in many jurisdictions, even if an indictment is handed up,
a prosecution cannot proceed unless the prosecutor signs
the indictment.2 It would thus be anomalous to permit a
police officer who testifies before a grand jury to be sued
——————
2 The

federal courts have concluded uniformly that Rule 7(c) of the
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, providing that an indictment
“must be signed by an attorney for the government,” precludes federal
grand juries from issuing an indictment without the prosecutor’s
signature, signifying his or her approval. See 4 W. LaFave, J. Israel,
N. King, & O. Kerr, Criminal Procedure §15.1(d) (3d ed. 2007) (hereinafter LaFave). However, in some jurisdictions, the grand jury may
return an indictment and initiate a prosecution without the prosecutor’s signature, but such cases are rare. See 1 S. Beale, W. Bryson, J.
Felman, & M. Elston, Grand Jury Law and Practice, p. 4–76, and n. 2
(2d ed. 2001).

