2

PPL MONTANA, LLC v. MONTANA
Syllabus
mining whether a State acquired title to the riverbeds underlying
those segments at the time of statehood. Instead, the Montana court
declared the river stretches in question to be short interruptions of
navigability that were insufficient as a matter of law to find nonnavigability, since traffic had circumvented those stretches by portage.
Based on evidence of present-day, recreational use of the Madison
River, the court found that river navigable as a matter of law at the
time of statehood.

Held: The Montana Supreme Court’s ruling that Montana owns and
may charge for use of the riverbeds at issue was based on an infirm
legal understanding of this Court’s rules of navigability for title under the equal-footing doctrine. Pp. 10–26.
(a) The rule that the States, in their capacity as sovereigns, hold
“title in the soil of rivers really navigable,” Shively v. Bowlby, 152
U. S. 1, 31, has federal constitutional significance under the equalfooting doctrine. Pursuant to that doctrine, upon its date of statehood, a State gains title within its borders to the beds of waters then
navigable. It may allocate and govern those lands according to state
law subject only to the United States’ power “to control such waters
for purposes of navigation in interstate and foreign commerce.” United States v. Oregon, 295 U. S. 1, 14. The United States retains title
vested in it before statehood to land beneath waters not then navigable. To be navigable for purposes of title under the equal-footing doctrine, rivers must be “navigable in fact,” meaning “they are used, or
are susceptible of being used, . . . as highways for commerce, over
which trade and travel are or may be conducted in the customary
modes of trade and travel on water.” The Daniel Ball, 10 Wall. 557,
563. This formulation has been used to determine questions of waterbed title under the equal-footing doctrine. See United States v.
Utah, 283 U. S. 64, 76. Pp. 10–14.
(b) The Montana Supreme Court erred in its treatment of the question of river segments and portage. To determine riverbed title under
the equal-footing doctrine, this Court considers the river on a segment-by-segment basis to assess whether the segment of the river,
under which the riverbed in dispute lies, is navigable or not. See,
e.g., Utah, supra, at 77. The State Supreme Court erred in discounting this well-settled approach. A key justification for sovereign ownership of navigable riverbeds is that a contrary rule would allow private riverbed owners to erect improvements on the riverbeds that
could interfere with the public’s right to use the waters as a highway
for commerce. Because commerce could not have occurred on segments nonnavigable at the time of statehood, there is no reason to
deem those segments owned by the State under the equal-footing
doctrine. Practical considerations also support segmentation. Physi-

