20

PPL MONTANA, LLC v. MONTANA
Opinion of the Court

portions of the river. 20 Wall., at 445. Here, by contrast,
the question regards ownership of the bed under river
segments that the Montana Supreme Court, by calling
them “interruptions in the navigation,” 355 Mont., at 442,
229 P. 3d, at 449, acknowledges were nonnavigable. The
reasoning and the inquiry of The Montello does not control
the outcome where the quite different concerns of the
riverbed title context apply.
Having clarified that portages may defeat navigability
for title purposes, and do so with respect to the Great Falls
reach, the Court sees no evidence in the record that could
demonstrate that the Great Falls reach was navigable.
Montana does not dispute that overland portage was
necessary to traverse that reach. Indeed, the State admits
“the falls themselves were not passable by boat at state­
hood.” Brief for Respondent 10. And the trial court noted
the falls had never been navigated. App. to Pet. for
Cert. 137. Based on these statements, this Court now con­
cludes, contrary to the Montana Supreme Court’s decision,
that the 17-mile Great Falls reach, at least from the head
of the first waterfall to the foot of the last, is not navigable
for purposes of riverbed title under the equal-footing
doctrine.
This Court also determines, based on evidence in the
record, that there is a significant likelihood that some of
the other river stretches in dispute also fail the federal
test of navigability for the purpose of determining title.
For example, as to the disputed segment of the Clark Fork
River, the Montana Supreme Court incorrectly stated the
sole evidence for nonnavigability “consists of conclusory
statements . . . without any specific factual support.” 355
Mont., at 440, 229 P. 3d, at 448. In fact, PPL introduced a
report of the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers from 1891,
two years after Montana’s date of statehood, documenting
that the portion of the Clark Fork river between Missoula
and Lake Pend Oreille (which includes the location of

