Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

19

Opinion of the Court

reach and other stretches of the rivers in question, that
portages “are not sufficient to defeat a finding of navigabil­
ity.” 355 Mont., at 438, 229 P. 3d, at 446. In most cases,
they are, because they require transportation over land
rather than over the water. This is such a case, at least as
to the Great Falls reach.
In reaching its conclusion that the necessity of portage
does not undermine navigability, the Montana Supreme
Court misapplied this Court’s decision in The Montello, 20
Wall. 430. See 355 Mont., at 438, 229 P. 3d, at 446. The
consideration of portage in The Montello was for a differ­
ent purpose. The Court did not seek to determine whether
the river in question was navigable for title purposes but
instead whether it was navigable for purposes of deter­
mining whether boats upon it could be regulated by the
Federal Government. 20 Wall., at 439, 445. The primary
focus in The Montello was not upon navigability in fact
but upon whether the river was a “navigable water of the
United States.” Id., at 439, 443. The latter inquiry is
doctrinally distinct. It turns upon whether the river
“forms by itself, or by its connection with other waters, a
continued highway over which commerce is, or may be,
carried with other States or foreign countries in the cus­
tomary modes in which such commerce is conducted by
water.” Id., at 439 (citing The Daniel Ball, 10 Wall. 557).
It is language similar to “continued highway” that Mon­
tana urges the Court to import into the title context in lieu
of the Court’s established segmentation approach. Brief
for Respondent 42–43, n. 16.
The Montello reasonably concluded that the portages
required in that case did not prevent the river from being
part of a channel of interstate commerce. Portages con­
tinued that channel because goods could be successfully
transported interstate, in part upon the waters in ques­
tion. This provided sufficient basis to regulate steamboats
at places where those boats could and did, in fact, navigate

