OCTOBER TERM, 2011

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

PPL MONTANA, LLC v. MONTANA
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF MONTANA
No. 10–218.

Argued December 7, 2011—Decided February 22, 2012

Petitioner PPL Montana, LLC (PPL), owns and operates hydroelectric
facilities in Montana. Ten of its facilities are located on riverbeds
underlying segments of the Missouri, Madison, and Clark Fork Rivers. Five hydroelectric dams on the Upper Missouri River are along
the Great Falls reach, including on the three tallest waterfalls; and
PPL’s two other dams on that river are in canyons on the Stubbs Ferry stretch. These, together with two dams located in steep canyons
on the Madison River, are called the Missouri-Madison project. The
Thompson Falls project is a facility on the Clark Fork River. Both
projects are licensed by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
PPL’s facilities have existed for many decades, some for over a century. Until recently, Montana, though aware of the projects’ existence,
sought no rent for use of the riverbeds. Instead, the understanding of
PPL and the United States is that PPL has paid rents to the United
States. In 2003, parents of Montana schoolchildren filed a federal
suit, claiming that PPL’s facilities were on riverbeds that were state
owned and part of Montana’s school trust lands. The State joined the
suit and, for the first time, sought rents from PPL for its use of the
riverbeds. That case was dismissed, and PPL and other power companies filed a state-court suit, claiming that Montana was barred
from seeking compensation for PPL’s riverbed use. Montana counterclaimed, contending that under the equal-footing doctrine it owns
the riverbeds and can charge rent for their use. The trial court
granted Montana summary judgment as to navigability for purposes
of determining riverbed title and ordered PPL to pay Montana $41
million in rent for riverbed use between 2000 and 2007. The Montana Supreme Court affirmed. Adopting a liberal construction of the
navigability test, it discounted this Court’s approach of considering
the navigability of particular river segments for purposes of deter-

