16

PPL MONTANA, LLC v. MONTANA
Opinion of the Court

navigable riverbeds is that a contrary rule would allow
private riverbed owners to erect improvements on the
riverbeds that could interfere with the public’s right to use
the waters as a highway for commerce. While the Federal
Government and States retain regulatory power to protect
public navigation, allocation to the State of the beds un­
derlying navigable rivers reduces the possibility of conflict
between private and public interests. See Utah, supra, at
82–83; Packer, 137 U. S., at 667. By contrast, segments
that are nonnavigable at the time of statehood are those
over which commerce could not then occur. Thus, there is
no reason that these segments also should be deemed
owned by the State under the equal-footing doctrine.
Practical considerations also support segmentation.
Physical conditions that affect navigability often vary
significantly over the length of a river. This is particularly
true with longer rivers, which can traverse vastly different
terrain and the flow of which can be affected by varying
local climates. The Missouri River provides an excellent
example: Between its headwaters and mouth, it runs for
over 2,000 miles out of steep mountains, through canyons
and upon rocky beds, over waterfalls and rapids, and
across sandy plains, capturing runoff from snow melt and
farmland rains alike. These shifts in physical conditions
provide a means to determine appropriate start points and
end points for the segment in question. Topographical and
geographical indicators may assist. See, e.g., Utah, supra,
at 77–80 (gradient changes); Oklahoma, 258 U. S., at 589
(location of tributary providing additional flow).
A segment approach to riverbed title allocation under
the equal-footing doctrine is consistent with the manner in
which private parties seek to establish riverbed title. For
centuries, where title to the riverbed was not in the sover­
eign, the common-law rule for allocating riverbed title
among riparian landowners involved apportionment de­
fined both by segment (each landowner owns bed and soil

