4

PPL MONTANA, LLC v. MONTANA
Syllabus
“ ‘[were]’ ” used and if they “ ‘[were] susceptible of being used’ ” as
highways of commerce at the time of statehood. Id., at 76. Evidence
of recreational use and poststatehood evidence may bear on susceptibility of commercial use at the time of statehood. See id., at 82–83.
In order for present-day use to have a bearing on navigability at
statehood, (1) the watercraft must be meaningfully similar to those in
customary use for trade and travel at the time of statehood, and
(2) the river’s poststatehood condition may not be materially different
from its physical condition at statehood. The State Supreme Court
offered no indication that it made these necessary findings. Pp. 21–
24.
(d) Because this analysis is sufficient to require reversal here, the
Court declines to decide whether the State Supreme Court also erred
as to the burden of proof regarding navigability. P. 24.
(e) Montana’s suggestion that denying the State title to the disputed riverbeds will undermine the public trust doctrine—which concerns public access to the waters above those beds for navigation,
fishing, and other recreational uses—underscores its misapprehension of the equal-footing and public trust doctrines. Unlike the equalfooting doctrine, which is the constitutional foundation for the navigability rule of riverbed title, the scope of the public trust over waters
within the State’s borders is a matter of state law, subject to federal
regulatory power. Pp. 24–25.
(f) This Court does not reach the question whether, by virtue of
Montana’s sovereignty, neither laches nor estoppel could apply to bar
the State’s claim. Still, the reliance by PPL and its predecessors in title on the State’s long failure to assert title to the riverbeds is some
evidence supporting the conclusion that the river segments over
those beds were nonnavigable for purposes of the equal-footing doctrine. Pp. 25–26.

2010 MT 64, 355 Mont. 402, 229 P. 3d 421, reversed and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

