Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
cal conditions affecting navigability vary over the length of a river
and provide a means to determine appropriate start points and end
points for disputed segments. A segment approach is also consistent
with the manner in which private parties seek to establish riverbed
title. Montana cannot suggest that segmentation is inadministrable
when the state courts managed to apportion the underlying riverbeds
for purposes of determining their value and PPL’s corresponding
rents. The State Supreme Court’s view that the segment-by-segment
approach does not apply to short interruptions of navigability is not
supported by this Court’s Utah decision. Even if the law might find
some nonnavigable segments so minimal that they merit treatment
as part of a longer, navigable reach, it is doubtful that the segments
in this case would meet that standard. Applying its “short interruptions” approach, the State Supreme Court found the Great Falls
reach navigable because it could be managed by way of land route
portage, as done by Lewis and Clark. But a portage of even one day
would demonstrate the need to bypass a nonnavigable river segment.
Thus, the State Supreme Court was wrong to conclude, with respect
to the Great Falls reach and other disputed stretches, that portages
were insufficient to defeat a navigability finding. In most cases, they
are, because they require transportation over land rather than over
the water. This is the case at least as to the Great Falls reach. In
reaching a contrary conclusion, the State Supreme Court misapplied
The Montello, 20 Wall. 430. There, portage was considered in determining whether a river was part of a channel of interstate commerce
for federal regulatory purposes. The Montello does not control the
outcome where the quite different concerns of the riverbed title context apply. Portages may defeat navigability for title purposes, and
do so with respect to the Great Falls reach. Montana does not dispute that overland portage was necessary to traverse that reach, and
the trial court noted the waterfalls had never been navigated. The
Great Falls reach, at least from the head of the first waterfall to the
foot of the last, is not navigable for purposes of riverbed title under
the equal-footing doctrine. There is also a significant likelihood that
some of the other river stretches in dispute fail this federal navigability test. The ultimate decision as to these other disputed river
stretches is to be determined, in the first instance, by the Montana
courts on remand, which should assess the relevant evidence in light
of the principles discussed here. Pp. 14–21.
(c) The Montana Supreme Court further erred as a matter of law in
relying on evidence of present-day, primarily recreational use of the
Madison River. Navigability must be assessed as of the time of
statehood, and it concerns a river’s usefulness for “ ‘trade and travel.’ ” Utah, 283 U. S., at 75–76. River segments are navigable if they

