Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

23

Opinion of the Court

purposes must show: (1) the watercraft are meaningfully
similar to those in customary use for trade and travel
at the time of statehood; and (2) the river’s poststatehood
condition is not materially different from its physical condition at statehood. See also Oregon, supra, at 18 (finding that scientific and historical evidence showed that
the physical condition of particular water bodies had not
varied substantially since statehood in a way that might
affect navigation). If modern watercraft permit navigabil­
ity where the historical watercraft would not, or if the
river has changed in ways that substantially improve its
navigability, then the evidence of present-day use has
little or no bearing on navigability at statehood.
The Montana Supreme Court opinion offered no indica­
tion that it made these necessary findings. The court
concluded the evidence of present-day use of the Madison
was probative of its susceptibility of use at statehood, but
there is no apparent basis for its conclusion. 355 Mont., at
442–443, 438–439, 229 P. 3d, at 449, 446–447. The court
did not find the watercraft similar to those used at the
time of statehood, and the State’s evidence of present-day
use for recreational fishing did not indicate what types of
boats are now used. App. 46–48. Modern recreational
fishing boats, including inflatable rafts and lightweight
canoes or kayaks, may be able to navigate waters much
more shallow or with rockier beds than the boats custom­
arily used for trade and travel at statehood.
As to the river’s physical condition, the Montana Su­
preme Court did not assess with care PPL’s evidence
about changes to the river’s flow and the location and
pattern of its channel since statehood. The affidavit of
PPL’s expert in fluvial geomorphology—the study of river­
related landforms—at least suggests that as a result of
PPL’s dams, the river has become “less torrential” in high
flow periods and less shallow in low flow periods. App.
575–577 (Docket No. 170). Thus, the river may well be

