22

PPL MONTANA, LLC v. MONTANA
Opinion of the Court

pers, who may have dragged their boats in or alongside
the river despite its nonnavigability in order to avoid
getting lost, or to provide water for their horses and them­
selves, is not itself enough. See Oregon, 295 U. S., at
20–21 (evidence that “trappers appear to have waded or
walked” through the river, dragging their boats rather
than floating them, had “no bearing on navigability”).
True, river segments are navigable not only if they
“[were] used,” but also if they “[were] susceptible of being
used,” as highways of commerce at the time of statehood.
Utah, supra, at 76 (internal quotation marks omitted).
Evidence of recreational use, depending on its nature, may
bear upon susceptibility of commercial use at the time of
statehood. See Appalachian Elec. Power Co., 311 U. S., at
416 (“[P]ersonal or private use by boats demonstrates the
availability of the stream for the simpler types of commer­
cial navigation”); Utah, 283 U. S., at 82 (fact that actual
use has “been more of a private nature than of a public,
commercial sort . . . cannot be regarded as controlling”).
Similarly, poststatehood evidence, depending on its na­
ture, may show susceptibility of use at the time of state­
hood. See id., at 82–83 (“[E]xtensive and continued
[historical] use for commercial purposes” may be the “most
persuasive” form of evidence, but the “crucial question” is
the potential for such use at the time of statehood, rather
than “the mere manner or extent of actual use”).
Evidence of present-day use may be considered to the
extent it informs the historical determination whether the
river segment was susceptible of use for commercial navi­
gation at the time of statehood. For the susceptibility
analysis, it must be determined whether trade and travel
could have been conducted “in the customary modes of
trade and travel on water,” over the relevant river seg­
ment “in [its] natural and ordinary condition.” Id., at 76
(internal quotation marks omitted). At a minimum, there­
fore, the party seeking to use present-day evidence for title

