18

PPL MONTANA, LLC v. MONTANA
Opinion of the Court

resources . . . or diminish their value too drastically”). An
analysis of segmentation must be sensibly applied. A
comparison of the nonnavigable segment’s length to the
overall length of the stream, for instance, would be simply
irrelevant to the issue at hand.
A number of the segments at issue here are both dis­
crete, as defined by physical features characteristic of
navigability or nonnavigability, and substantial, as a
matter of administrability for title purposes. This is best
illustrated by the Great Falls reach, which is 17 miles long
and has distinct drops including five waterfalls and con­
tinuous rapids in between. There is plenty of reason to
doubt that reach’s navigability based on the presence of
the series of falls. There is also reason to think that title
to that segment of bed would not be worthless or inadmin­
istrable. Indeed, the State sought and was awarded rent
in the amount of $41 million for PPL’s various hydroelec­
tric facilities attached to the riverbeds, half of which are
along the Great Falls reach.
Applying its “short interruptions” approach, the Mon­
tana Supreme Court decided that the Great Falls reach
was navigable because it could be managed by way of land
route portage. 355 Mont., at 440, 442, 229 P. 3d, at 447,
449. The court noted in particular the portage of Lewis
and Clark’s expedition. Ibid. Yet that very portage re­
veals the problem with the Montana Supreme Court’s
analysis. Leaving behind their larger boats, Lewis and
Clark transported their supplies and some small canoes
about 18 miles over land, which took at least 11 days and
probably more. See Lewis and Clark Journals 126–152;
9 Journals of the Lewis & Clark Expedition 173; Dear
Brother 109. Even if portage were to take travelers only
one day, its significance is the same: it demonstrates the
need to bypass the river segment, all because that part of
the river is nonnavigable. Thus, the Montana Supreme
Court was wrong to state, with respect to the Great Falls

