Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–704
_________________

CURT MESSERSCHMIDT, ET AL., PETITIONERS v.

BRENDA MILLENDER, AS EXECUTOR OF THE

ESTATE OF AUGUSTA MILLENDER,

DECEASED, ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[February 22, 2012]


JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG
joins, dissenting.
The fundamental purpose of the Fourth Amendment’s
warrant clause is “to protect against all general searches.”
Go-Bart Importing Co. v. United States, 282 U. S. 344, 357
(1931). The Fourth Amendment was adopted specifically
in response to the Crown’s practice of using general warrants and writs of assistance to search “suspected places”
for evidence of smuggling, libel, or other crimes. Boyd v.
United States, 116 U. S. 616, 625–626 (1886). Early patriots railed against these practices as “the worst instrument
of arbitrary power” and John Adams later claimed that
“the child Independence was born” from colonists’ opposition to their use. Id., at 625 (internal quotation marks
omitted).
To prevent the issue of general warrants on “loose,
vague or doubtful bases of fact,” Go-Bart Importing Co.,
282 U. S., at 357, the Framers established the inviolable
principle that should resolve this case: “no Warrants shall
issue, but upon probable cause . . . and particularly describing the . . . things to be seized.” U. S. Const., Amdt. 4.
That is, the police must articulate an adequate reason to
search for specific items related to specific crimes.


2

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

In this case, police officers investigating a specific, nongang-related assault committed with a specific firearm (a
sawed-off shotgun) obtained a warrant to search for all
evidence related to “any Street Gang,” “[a]ny photographs
. . . which may depict evidence of criminal activity,” and
“any firearms.” App. 52. They did so for the asserted
reason that the search might lead to evidence related to
other gang members and other criminal activity, and that
other “[v]alid warrants commonly allow police to search
for ‘firearms and ammunition.’ ” See infra, at 8–9. That
kind of general warrant is antithetical to the Fourth
Amendment.
The Court nonetheless concludes that the officers are
entitled to qualified immunity because their conduct was
“objectively reasonable.” I could not disagree more. All
13 federal judges who previously considered this case
had little difficulty concluding that the police officers’
search for any gang-related material violated the Fourth
Amendment. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 28–29, 45, n. 7,
73, 94, 157–158. And a substantial majority agreed that
the police’s search for both gang-related material and all
firearms not only violated the Fourth Amendment, but
was objectively unreasonable. Like them, I believe that
any “reasonably well-trained officer in petitioner’s position
would have known that his affidavit failed to establish
probable cause.” Malley v. Briggs, 475 U. S. 335, 345
(1986).
The Court also hints that a police officer’s otherwise
unreasonable conduct may be excused by the approval of
a magistrate, or more disturbingly, another police officer.
Ante, at 16–18. That is inconsistent with our focus on the
objective reasonableness of an officer’s decision to submit
a warrant application to a magistrate, and we long ago
rejected it. See Malley, 475 U. S., at 345–346.
The Court’s analysis bears little relationship to the
record in this case, our precedents, or the purposes under-


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

lying qualified immunity analysis. For all these reasons,
I respectfully dissent.
I
The Court holds that a well-trained officer could have
reasonably concluded that there was probable cause to
search the Millenders’ residence for any evidence of affiliation with “any Street Gang,” and “all handguns, rifles, or
shotguns of any caliber, or any firearms capable of firing
ammunition.” App. 52.1 I cannot agree.
A
Most troubling is the Court’s determination that petitioners reasonably could have concluded that they had
probable cause to search for all evidence of any gang affiliation in the Millenders’ home. The Court reaches this
result only by way of an unprecedented, post hoc reconstruction of the crime that wholly ignores the police’s own
conclusions, as well as the undisputed facts presented to
the District Court.
The Court primarily theorizes that “[a] reasonable officer could certainly view Bowen’s attack as motivated
not by the souring of his romantic relationship with Kelly
but instead by a desire to prevent her from disclosing
details of his gang activity to the police.” Ante, at 13. The
majority therefore dismisses as “misleading” the Millenders’ characterization of the case as a “domestic dispute,”
insisting that Detective Messerschmidt could have reasonably thought that the crime was gang related. See
ante, at 13–14.2
——————
1 Not even the Court defends the warrant’s authorization to search for
“[a]ny photographs . . . which may depict evidence of criminal activity.”
2 The Court implies Detective Messerschmidt did not consider the
crime “solely . . . a domestic dispute” because he labeled it a “spousal
assault and an assault with a deadly weapon.” Ante, at 13 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Solely domestic disputes often involve gun
violence, however. See Sorenson & Weibe, Weapons in the Lives of


4

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

The police flatly rejected that hypothesis, however, concluding that the crime was a domestic dispute that was
not in any way gang related. Detective Messerschmidt’s
deposition is illustrative.
“Q: So as far as you knew, it was just sort of a spousalabuse-type case where the perpetrator happened to be
in a gang, right?
“A: Correct.
“Q: So you didn’t have any reason to believe that the
assault on Kelly was any sort of gang crime, did you?
“A: No.” Record in No. CV 05–2298 DDP (RZx) (CD
Cal.) (hereinafter Record), Doc. 51, (Exh. X), p. 120
(hereinafter Deposition).3
The “Crime Analysis” forms prepared by the police like——————
Battered Women, 94 Am. J. Pub. Health 1412, 1413 (2004) (noting
more than one-third of female domestic violence shelter residents in
California reported having been threatened or harmed with a firearm).
That was the case here. In any event, the Court’s reading of Detective
Messerschmidt’s affidavit is incompatible with his testimony that the
crime was “just sort of a spousal-abuse-type case,” not a “gang crime.”
See supra this page.
3 By suggesting that courts assessing qualified immunity should ignore police officers’ testimony about the information they possessed at
the time of the search, ante, at 14–15, n. 6, the Court misreads Harlow
v. Fitzgerald, 457 U. S. 800, 815–819 (1982), and Anderson v.
Creighton, 483 U. S. 635, 645 (1987). In Harlow, we adopted a qualified
immunity test focusing on an officer’s objective good faith, rather than
whether the officer searched “with the malicious intention to cause a
deprivation of constitutional rights or other injury.” 457 U. S., at 815.
As we have explained, “examination of the information possessed by the
searching officials . . . does not reintroduce into qualified immunity
analysis the inquiry into officials’ subjective intent that Harlow sought
to minimize.” Anderson, 483 U. S., at 641. It is therefore highly
relevant that Detective Messerschmidt testified that he lacked “any
reason” to consider the crime gang related, supra this page, and possessed no “information” that there were handguns in the Millenders’
home, infra, at 11. Courts cannot ignore information in crime analysis
forms, ballistic reports, or victim interviews by labeling such information “conclusions.”


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

wise identified Bowen as a “Mona Park Crip” gang member, but did not check off “gang-related” as a motive for the
attack. See App. 41, 44 (Crime Analysis Supplemental
Form–M. O. Factors). And the District Court noted it was
undisputed that Detective Messerschmidt “had no reason
to believe Bowen’s crime was a ‘gang’ crime.” App. to Pet.
for Cert. 115.4
The police’s conclusions matched the victim’s own account of the attack. Kelly asked police officers to help her
move out because Bowen “ha[d] a domestic violence on his
record,” had “hit [her] once or twice” already, had repeatedly threatened her “You’ll never leave me. I’ll kill you
if you leave me,” and she was “planning on breaking up”
with him. Record, Doc. 51 (Exh. C), pp. 5–6 (hereinafter
Kelly Interview). As Kelly described the confrontation, it
was only after she fled to her car in order to leave that
Bowen reemerged from their shared apartment with the
shotgun and told her “I’m gonna kill your ass right here if
you take off,” consistent with his prior threats. Id., at 7–8.
Every piece of information, therefore, accorded with Detective Messerschmidt’s conclusion: The crime was domestic
violence that was not gang related.5
——————
4 The Court is wrong to imply that courts should not consider “facts
outside the affidavit,” but within the officers’ possession, when assessing qualified immunity. Ante, at 10, n. 2. Our precedents make
clear that the objective reasonableness of an officer’s conduct is judged
“in light of clearly established law and the information the officers
possessed.” Wilson v. Layne, 526 U. S. 603, 615 (1999). If an officer
possesses information indicating that he lacks probable cause to search,
and that information was not presented to the neutral magistrate when
he approved the search, it is particularly likely that “a reasonably well
trained officer would have known that the search was illegal despite
the magistrate’s authorization.” United States v. Leon, 468 U. S. 897,
922, n. 23 (1984).
5 To support its theory that Bowen attacked Kelly to keep her silent
about his gang activity, the majority relies principally on its claim that
Bowen yelled, “ ‘I told you never to call the cops on me bitch!’ ” ante, at
2, citing it no less than five times. See, ante, at 11 (Bowen “attempt[ed]


6

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Unlike the Members of this Court, Detective Messerschmidt alone had 14 years of experience as a peace officer, “hundreds of hours of instruction on the dynamics of
gangs and gang trends,” received “specialized training in
the field of gang related crimes,” and had been “involved
in hundreds of gang related incidents, contacts, and or
arrests.” App. 53–54. The Court provides no justification
for sweeping aside the conclusions he reached on the basis
of his far greater expertise, let alone the facts found by the
District Court. We have repeatedly and recently warned
appellate courts, “far removed from the scene,” against
second-guessing the judgments made by the police or
reweighing the facts as they stood before the district court.
Ryburn v. Huff, 565 U. S. —, — (2012) (per curiam) (slip
op., at 6–8). The majority’s decision today is totally inconsistent with those principles.
Qualified immunity analysis does not direct courts to
play the role of crime scene investigators, second-guessing
police officers’ determinations as to whether a crime was
committed with a handgun or a shotgun, or whether vio——————
to murder” Kelly “on the asserted ground that she had ‘call[ed] the cops’
on him”); see also ante, at 1, 13. Bowen, however, never made that
statement. Though it appears in the warrant application, the words
are Messerschmidt’s—taken from his own inaccurate notes of Kelly’s
account of the crime. What Kelly actually said during her interview
was that as soon as the police deputies left, Bowen “came out of nowhere talking about, ‘Did you call the police on me? You called the
police on me,’ ” to which Kelly responded “no one called the police on
you . . . . [I]nstead of arguing and fighting with you I just want to get
my shit done.” Kelly Interview 7; compare ibid. with Record, Doc. 51
(Exh. B), p. 3 (Messerschmidt’s narrative of interview with Kelly). Only
after Kelly started to leave did Bowen exclaim “oh it’s like that. It’s
like that,” retrieve a gun, and threaten to shoot her if she left. Kelly
Interview 7–8. That Bowen was “ ‘angry,’ ” ante, at 14, n. 5, because she
had called the sheriff's department for assistance reflected exactly what
Kelly and the police expected at the outset—that Bowen “would give
her a hard time about moving out.” App. 38 (sheriff’s department
incident report).


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

lence was gang related or a domestic dispute. Indeed,
we have warned courts against asking “whether another
reasonable, or more reasonable, interpretation of the
events can be constructed five years after the fact.”
Hunter v. Bryant, 502 U. S. 224, 228 (1991) (per curiam).
The inquiry our precedents demand is not whether different conclusions might conceivably be drawn from the
crime scene. Rather, it is whether “a reasonably welltrained officer in petitioner’s position would have known
that his affidavit failed to establish probable cause.”
Malley, 475 U. S., at 345. The operative question in this
case, therefore, is whether—given that, as petitioners
comprehended, the crime itself was not gang related—a
reasonable officer nonetheless could have believed he had
probable cause to seek a warrant to search the suspect’s
residence for all evidence of affiliation not only with the
suspect’s street gang, but “any Street Gang.” He could
not.
The Court offers two secondary explanations for why a
search for gang-related items might have been justified,
but they are equally unpersuasive. First, the majority
suggests that such evidence hypothetically “might prove
helpful in impeaching Bowen or rebutting various defenses he could raise at trial.” Ante, at 15. That is a nonstarter. The Fourth Amendment does not permit the police
to search for evidence solely because it could be admissible
for impeachment or rebuttal purposes. If it did, the police
would be equally entitled to obtain warrants to rifle
through the papers of anyone reasonably suspected of a
crime for all evidence of his bad character, Fed. Rule Evid.
404(a)(2)(B)(i), or any evidence of any “crime, wrong, or
other act” that might prove the defendant’s “motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity,
absence of mistake, or lack of accident,” Fed. Rule Evid.
404(b)(2). Indeed, the majority’s rationale presumably
would authorize the police to search the residence of every


8

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

member of Bowen’s street gang for similar weapons—
which likewise “might [have] prove[d] helpful in impeaching Bowen or rebutting various defenses he could raise at
trial.” Ante, at 15. It has long been the case, however,
that such general searches, detached from probable cause,
are impermissible. See, e.g., Go-Bart Importing Co., 282
U. S., at 357. By their own admission, however, the officers were not searching for gang-related indicia to bolster
some hypothetical impeachment theory, but for other
reasons: because “photos sought re gang membership
could be linked with other gang members, evidencing
criminal activity as gang affiliation is an enhancement to
criminal charges.” App. 181; see also id., at 145. That
kind of fishing expedition for evidence of unidentified
criminal activity committed by unspecified persons was
the very evil the Fourth Amendment was intended to
prevent.
Finally, the Court concludes that “even if this were
merely a domestic dispute, a reasonable officer could still
conclude that gang paraphernalia found at the Millenders’
residence would aid in the prosecution of Bowen by, for
example, demonstrating Bowen’s connection to other
[unspecified] evidence found there.” Ante, at 15. That is
difficult to understand. The police were well aware before
obtaining a warrant that “other persons associated with
the home, the Millender family members, were active
Mona Park Crip gang members.” App. 28. Simply finding
gang-related paraphernalia, therefore, would have done
little to establish probable cause that particular evidence
found in the home was connected to Bowen, rather than
any of the several other active gang members who resided
full time at the Millender home.6 Moreover, it would have
——————
6 The Court suggests that even if gang-related evidence would be
inconclusive generally, evidence bearing Bowen’s particular gang moniker could have demonstrated Bowen’s connection to the residence.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

done nothing to establish that Bowen had committed the
non-gang-related crime specified in the warrant.7
B
The Court also errs by concluding that petitioners could
have reasonably concluded that they had probable cause
to search for all firearms. Notably absent from the Court’s
discussion is any acknowledgment of the actual basis for
petitioners’ search. The police officers searched for all
firearms not for the reasons hypothesized by the majority,
but because they determined that “[v]alid warrants commonly allow police to search for ‘firearms and ammunition,’ ” and that “[h]ere, any caliber of shotgun or receipts
would show possession of and/or purchase of guns.” Id., at
144, 180–181; see also Brief for Appellant in No. 07–55518
(CA9), p. 41 (hereinafter CA9 Brief). It is small wonder
that the District Court found these arguments “nonsensical and unpersuasive.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 157. It bears
repeating that the Founders adopted the Fourth Amendment to protect against searches for evidence of unspecified crimes. And merely possessing other firearms is not a
crime at all. See generally District of Columbia v. Heller,
554 U. S. 570 (2008).8
——————
But the warrant did not authorize a search for items bearing Bowen’s
moniker, but rather for items related to “any Street Gang,” including
countless street gangs of which Bowen was not a member. App. 52.
Even under the Court’s interpretation, therefore, the warrant was
hopelessly overbroad and invalid.
7 The police also could not search for gang-related evidence for its own
sake. Mere membership in a gang is not a crime under California law.
See People v. Gardeley, 14 Cal. 4th 605, 623, 927 P. 2d 713, 725 (1996).
8 Although the Court recites additional facts about Bowen’s background and arrest record, ante, at 2–3, none of these facts were disclosed to the magistrate. The police cannot rationalize a search post
hoc on the basis of information they failed to set forth in their warrant
application to a neutral magistrate. Rather, “[i]t is elementary that in
passing on the validity of a warrant, the reviewing court may consider
only information brought to the magistrate’s attention.” Aguilar v.


10

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

By justifying the officers’ actions on reasons of its own
invention, the Court ignores the reasons the officers actually gave, as well as the facts upon which this case was
decided below. The majority’s analysis—akin to a rationalbasis test—is thus far removed from what qualified
immunity analysis demands. Even if the police had
searched for the reasons the Court proposes, however, I
still would find it inappropriate to afford them qualified
immunity.
The Court correctly recognizes that to satisfy the Fourth
Amendment the police were required to demonstrate
probable cause that (1) other firearms could be found at
the Millenders’ residence; and (2) such weapons were
illegal or were “ ‘possess[ed] . . . with the intent to use
them as a means of committing a public offense.’ ” Ante, at
12 (quoting Cal. Penal Code Ann. §1524(a)(3) (West
2011)). The warrant failed to establish either.
The majority has little difficulty concluding that because
Bowen fired one firearm, it was reasonable for the police
to conclude not only that Bowen must have possessed
others, but that he must be storing these other weapons
at his 73-year-old former foster mother’s home.9 Again,
however, this is not what the police actually concluded, as
Detective Messerschmidt’s deposition makes clear.
“Q: Did you have any reason to believe there would be
——————
Texas, 378 U. S. 108, 109, n. 1 (1964); see also United States v. Jacobsen, 466 U. S. 109, 112 (1984). Likewise, a police officer cannot obtain
qualified immunity for searching pursuant to a warrant by relying
upon facts outside that warrant, as evinced by Malley’s focus on
“whether a reasonably well-trained officer in petitioner’s position would
have known that his affidavit failed to establish probable cause.”
Malley v. Briggs, 475 U. S. 335, 345 (1986) (emphasis added).
9 The majority ignores that Bowen retrieved the shotgun that he fired
from the apartment he shared with Kelly, not the Millenders’ home.
Kelly provided no indication that Bowen possessed other guns or that
he stored them at his former foster mother’s home.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

any automatic weapons in the house? 

“A: No.

“Q: Did you have any reason to believe there would be 

any hand guns in the house? 

“A: I wasn’t given information that there were.” Deposition 120.

Undaunted, the majority finds that a well-trained officer
could have concluded on this information that he had
probable cause to search for “[a]ll hand guns, . . . [a]ll
caliber of ammunition, miscellaneous gun parts, gun
cleaning kits, holsters which could hold or have held any
caliber handgun being sought,” and “[a]ny receipts or
paperwork, showing the purchase, ownership, or possession of the handguns being sought.” App. 52. That is
puzzling. If any aspect of the Fourth Amendment is clearly established, it is that the police cannot reasonably
search—even pursuant to a warrant—for items that they
do not have “any reason to believe” will be present. The
Court’s conclusion to the contrary simply reads the “probable cause” requirement out of the Fourth Amendment.
Even assuming that the police reasonably could have
concluded that Bowen possessed other guns and was
storing them at the Millenders’ home, I cannot agree that
the warrant provided probable cause to believe any weapon possessed in a home in which 10 persons regularly
lived—none of them the suspect in this case—was either
“contraband or evidence of a crime.” Ornelas v. United
States, 517 U. S. 690, 696 (1996). The warrant set forth no
specific facts or particularized explanation establishing
probable cause to believe that other guns found in the
home were connected to the crime specified in the warrant
or were otherwise illegal.10 While the Court hypothesizes
——————
10 Augusta Millender was a 73-year-old grandmother living in a dangerous part of Los Angeles. It would not have been unreasonable to
imagine that she validly possessed a weapon for self-defense, as turned


12

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

that the police could have searched for all firearms to
uncover evidence of yet unnamed crimes, ante, at 11–12,
the warrant specified that the police were investigating
one particular crime—“an assault with a deadly weapon.”
App. 55. And the police officers confirmed that their
search was targeted to find the gun related to “the crime
at issue.” CA9 Brief 42; see also App. 52 (obtaining authorization to search for “the item being sought and or
believed to be evidence in the case being investigated on
this warrant” (emphasis added)).
The police told the Ninth Circuit that they searched for
all firearms not because, as the majority hypothesizes,
“there would be additional illegal guns among others that
Bowen owned,” ante, at 11–12, but on the dubious theory
that “Kelly could have been mistaken in her description of
the gun.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 20–21. The Ninth Circuit
properly dismissed that argument as carrying “little
force.” Id., at 21. Its finding is unimpeachable, given that
Kelly presented the police with a photograph of Bowen
holding the specific gun used in the crime, and the police,
the victim, and a witness to the crime all identified the
gun as a sawed-off shotgun. See id., at 20, 21, 24, 28.
Finally, the majority suggests that the officers could
have reasonably believed that seizure of all firearms at the
Millenders’ residence was justified because those weapons
might be possessed by Bowen “ ‘with the intent to use
them as a means of committing a public offense.’ ” Ante, at
12. But the warrant specified that the police sought only
the shotgun used in this crime for that purpose. See App.
59 (statement of probable cause) (“Your Affiant also believes that the items sought will be in the possession of
Jerry Ray Bowen and the recovery of the weapon could be
invaluable in the successful prosecution of the suspect
involved in this case, and the curtailment of further
——————
out to be the case.


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

crimes being committed” (emphasis added)).
II
The Court also finds error in the Court of Appeals’
failure to find “pertinent” the fact that the officer sought
approval of his warrant from a magistrate.11 Ante, at 18.
Whether Detective Messerschmidt presented his warrant
application to a magistrate surely would be “pertinent” to
demonstrating his subjective good faith.12 But qualified
immunity does not turn on whether an officer is motivated
by good intentions or malice, but rather on the “objective
reasonableness of an official’s conduct.” Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U. S. 800, 818 (1982).
The majority asserts, without citation, that the magistrate’s approval is relevant to objective reasonableness.
That view, however, is expressly contradicted by our holding in Malley v. Briggs, 475 U. S. 335. There, we found
that a police officer is not “entitled to rely on the judgment
of a judicial officer in finding that probable cause exists
and hence issuing the warrant,” and explained that “[that]
view of objective reasonableness is at odds with our development of that concept in Harlow and [United States v.
Leon, 468 U. S. 897 (1984)].” Id., at 345. The appropriate
qualified immunity analysis, we held, was not whether an
——————
11 Under California law, magistrates are the officials responsible for
issuing search warrants. Cal. Penal Code Ann. §1523 (West 2011).
12 To be clear, no one suggests petitioners acted with malice or intended to be “misleading in omitting . . . facts,” ante, at 10, n. 2, that
illustrate why it would have been objectively unreasonable to search for
the reasons the Court proposes. It is hardly surprising, for instance,
that Detective Messerschmidt did not include in his affidavit further
facts affirming that the crime was not gang related, given that he did
not believe the crime was gang related and did not search for gangrelated material for that reason. See supra, at 7–8. The affidavit and
warrant were perfectly consistent with the officers’ stated reasons for
their search—just not with the Court’s own theories.


14

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

officer reasonably relied on a magistrate’s probable cause
determination, but rather “whether a reasonably welltrained officer in petitioner’s position would have known
that his affidavit failed to establish probable cause and
that he should not have applied for the warrant.” Ibid.
(emphasis added).13 In such a case, “the officer’s application for a warrant [would] not [be] objectively reasonable,
because it create[s] the unnecessary danger of an unlawful
arrest.” Ibid. When “no officer of reasonable competence
would have requested the warrant,” a “magistrate [who]
issues the warrant [makes] not just a reasonable mistake,
but an unacceptable error indicating gross incompetence
or neglect of duty.” Id., at 346, n. 9. In such cases, “[t]he
officer . . . cannot excuse his own default by pointing to the
greater incompetence of the magistrate.” Ibid.
In cases in which it would be not only wrong but unreasonable for any well-trained officer to seek a warrant,
allowing a magistrate’s approval to immunize the police
officer’s unreasonable action retrospectively makes little
sense. By motivating an officer “to reflect, before submitting a request for a warrant, upon whether he has a reasonable basis for believing that his affidavit establishes
probable cause,” we recognized that our qualified immunity precedents had the “desirable” effect of “reduc[ing] the
likelihood that the officer’s request for a warrant will be
premature,” leading to “a waste of judicial resources” or
“premature arrests.” Id., at 343. To the extent it proposes
to cut back upon Malley, the majority will promote the
opposite result—encouraging sloppy police work and exacerbating the risk that searches will not comport with
the requirements of the Fourth Amendment.
——————
13 Two

Justices wrote separately, disagreeing with the majority because they believed that “substantial weight should be accorded the
judge’s finding of probable cause.” Malley, 475 U. S., at 346 (Powell, J.,
joined by Rehnquist, C. J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).


Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

The Court also makes much of the fact that Detective
Messerschmidt sent his proposed warrant application to
two superior police officers and a district attorney for
review. Giving weight to that fact would turn the Fourth
Amendment on its head. This Court made clear in Malley
that a police officer acting unreasonably cannot obtain
qualified immunity on the basis of a neutral magistrate’s
approval. It would be passing strange, therefore, to immunize an officer’s conduct instead based upon the approval of other police officers and prosecutors.14 See Johnson v. United States, 333 U. S. 10, 14 (1948) (opinion of
Jackson, J.) (“When the right of privacy must reasonably
yield to the right of search is, as a rule, to be decided by a
judicial officer, not by a policeman or government enforcement agent”). The effect of the Court’s rule, however,
is to hold blameless the “plainly incompetent” action of the
police officer seeking a warrant because of the “plainly
incompetent” approval of his superiors and the district
attorney. See ante, at 16–18; see also ante, at 3–4 (opinion
of KAGAN, J.). Under the majority’s test, four wrongs
apparently make a right. I cannot agree, however, that
the “objective legal reasonableness of an official’s acts,”
Harlow, 457 U. S., at 819, turns on the number of police
officers or prosecutors who improperly sanction a search
that violates the Fourth Amendment.
III
Police officers perform a difficult and essential service to
society, frequently at substantial risk to their personal
——————
14 In the famous case of Wilkes v. Wood, Lofft 1, 98 Eng. Rep. 489
(C. P. 1763), one of the seminal events informing the Framers’ development
of the Fourth Amendment, the Undersecretary of State who searched
the home of John Wilkes pursuant to a general warrant was subjected
to monetary damages notwithstanding that his superior, Lord Halifax,
issued the warrant. See Boyd v. United States, 116 U. S. 616, 626
(1886).


16

MESSERSCHMIDT v. MILLENDER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

safety. And criminals like Bowen are not sympathetic
figures. But the Fourth Amendment “protects all, those
suspected or known to be offenders as well as the innocent.” Go-Bart Importing Co., 282 U. S., at 357. And this
Court long ago recognized that efforts “to bring the guilty
to punishment, praiseworthy as they are, are not to be
aided by the sacrifice of those great principles established
by years of endeavor and suffering which have resulted
in their embodiment in the fundamental law of the land.”
Weeks v. United States, 232 U. S. 383, 393 (1914).
Qualified immunity properly affords police officers protection so long as their conduct is objectively reasonable.
But it is not objectively reasonable for police investigating a specific, non-gang-related assault committed with
a particular firearm to search for all evidence related to
“any Street Gang,” “photographs . . . which may depict
evidence of criminal activity,” and all firearms. The Court
reaches a contrary result not because it thinks that these
police officers’ stated reasons for searching were objectively reasonable, but because it thinks different conclusions
might be drawn from the crime scene that reasonably
might have led different officers to search for different
reasons. That analysis, however, is far removed from
qualified immunity’s proper focus on whether petitioners
acted in an objectively reasonable manner.
Because petitioners did not, I would affirm the judgment
of the Court of Appeals.

