Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

comparatively expert in the statute’s subject matter. And
the language of the particular provision at issue here is
broad and general, suggesting that the agency’s expertise
is relevant in determining its application.
Finally, to allow a Supremacy Clause action to proceed
once the agency has reached a decision threatens potential
inconsistency or confusion. In these cases, for example,
the Ninth Circuit, in sustaining respondents’ challenges,
declined to give weight to the Federal Government’s interpretation of the federal statutory language. (That view
was expressed in an amicus curiae brief that the United
States submitted in prior litigation.) See Independent
Living Center of Southern Cal., Inc. v. Maxwell-Jolly, 572
F. 3d 644, 654 (CA9 2009) (referring to the United States’
certiorari-stage invitation brief in Belshe v. Orthopaedic
Hospital, 522 U. S. 1044 (1998) (denying writ of certiorari)). And the District Court decisions that underlie injunctions that now forbid California to implement its laws may
rest upon similar analysis.
But ordinarily review of agency action requires courts
to apply certain standards of deference to agency decisionmaking. See National Cable & Telecommunications
Assn. v. Brand X Internet Services, 545 U. S. 967 (2005)
(describing deference reviewing courts must show); Chevron U. S. A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council,
Inc., 467 U. S. 837 (1984) (same). And the parties have
not suggested reasons why courts should not now (in the
changed posture of these cases) apply those ordinary
standards of deference.
Nor have the parties suggested reasons why, once the
agency has taken final action, a court should reach a
different result in a case like this one, depending upon
whether the case proceeds in a Supremacy Clause action
rather than under the APA for review of an agency decision. Indeed, to permit a difference in result here would
subject the States to conflicting interpretations of federal

