8

DOUGLAS v. INDEPENDENT LIVING CENTER OF
SOUTHERN CAL., INC.
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting





at issue here is broad and general, suggesting that the
agency’s expertise is relevant”; and APA review would
provide “an authoritative judicial determination.” Ante, at
6–7. Allowing for both Supremacy Clause actions and
agency enforcement “threatens potential inconsistency or
confusion,” and imperils “the uniformity that Congress
intended by centralizing administration of the federal
program in the agency.” Ante, at 7–8; see Gonzaga, 536
U. S., at 291–293 (BREYER, J., concurring in judgment)
(explaining that Congress often means to preclude a private right of action in statutes where it employs an administrative enforcement scheme that achieves “expertise,
uniformity, widespread consultation, and resulting administrative guidance,” while “avoid[ing] the comparative risk
of inconsistent interpretations and misincentives that can
arise out of an occasional inappropriate application of the
statute in a private action for damages”).
The majority acknowledges, in light of all this, that the
Supremacy Clause challenge appears “at best redundant,”
and that “continuation of the action in that form would
seem to be inefficient.” Ante, at 8. Still, according to the
majority, the Court of Appeals on remand could determine
that the Supremacy Clause action may be brought but
then must abate “now that the agency has acted,” ibid.—
as everyone knew the agency would. A Court concerned
with “inefficien[cy]” should not find that result very palatable, and the majority cites no precedent for a cause of
action that fades away once a federal agency has acted.
Such a scenario would also create a bizarre rush to the
courthouse, as litigants seek to file and have their Supremacy Clause causes of action decided before the agency
has time to arrive at final agency action reviewable in
court.
Or perhaps the suits should continue in a different
“form,” by which I understand the Court to suggest that
they should morph into APA actions. The APA judicial

