4

DOUGLAS v. INDEPENDENT LIVING CENTER OF
SOUTHERN CAL., INC.
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting





that, in a conflict with state law, whatever Congress says
goes. See The Federalist, No. 33, p. 205 (C. Rossiter ed.
1961) (A. Hamilton) (the Supremacy Clause “only declares
a truth which flows immediately and necessarily from the
institution of a federal government”).
Thus, if Congress does not intend for a statute to supply
a cause of action for its enforcement, it makes no sense to
claim that the Supremacy Clause itself must provide one.
Saying that there is a private right of action under the
Supremacy Clause would substantively change the federal
rule established by Congress in the Medicaid Act. That is
not a proper role for the Supremacy Clause, which simply
ensures that the rule established by Congress controls.
Indeed, to say that there is a federal statutory right
enforceable under the Supremacy Clause, when there is no
such right under the pertinent statute itself, would effect
a complete end-run around this Court’s implied right of
action and 42 U. S. C. §1983 jurisprudence. We have emphasized that “where the text and structure of a statute
provide no indication that Congress intends to create
new individual rights, there is no basis for a private suit,
whether under §1983 or under an implied right of action.”
Gonzaga Univ. v. Doe, 536 U. S. 273, 286 (2002). This
body of law would serve no purpose if a plaintiff could
overcome the absence of a statutory right of action simply
by invoking a right of action under the Supremacy Clause
to the exact same effect. Cf. Astra USA, Inc. v. Santa
Clara County, 563 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 7)
(rejecting contention that contract incorporating statutory
terms could be enforced in private action when statute
itself could not be; “[t]he absence of a private right to
enforce the statutory ceiling price obligations would be
rendered meaningless if [contracting] entities could overcome that obstacle by suing to enforce the contract’s ceiling price obligations instead”).
The providers and beneficiaries argue, however, that the

