Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

pital et al. in No.10–283, p. 46 (“This case vividly illustrates why the [administrative] enforcement scheme . . .
cannot substitute for a constitutional preemption claim”).
No party—nor the United States as amicus curiae—
argued that any action by CMS would affect the answer to
the question we granted certiorari to review. See, e.g., Tr.
of Oral Arg. 53–54 (counsel for respondents) (arguing that,
“to be sure,” there would be a cause of action under the
Supremacy Clause even after the agency took action on
the challenged rates).
Once the CMS approvals were issued, this Court directed the parties to file supplemental briefs to address
“the effect, if any, of the [CMS approvals] on the proper
disposition of this case.” 565 U. S. ___ (2011). Again, no
one argued on supplemental briefing that the CMS approvals affected the answer to the question before this
Court. See, e.g., Supp. Letter Brief for Certain Respondents 6 (“The CMS findings do not directly resolve whether
the Constitution supports a right of action”); Supp. Letter
Brief for Petitioner 6 (agreeing that “if a preemption cause
of action may be stated here against the State, [CMS]
approval may affect its merits but not its existence”). It
seems odd, then, to claim that the parties have not had the
opportunity to fully address the impact of the agency
action on the question that we granted certiorari to review: whether the Ninth Circuit correctly recognized a
private cause of action under the Supremacy Clause to
enforce §30(A).
So what is the Court of Appeals to do on remand? It
could change its view and decide that there is no cause of
action directly under the Supremacy Clause to enforce
§30(A). The majority itself provides a compelling list of
reasons for such a result: “The Medicaid Act commits to
the federal agency the power to administer a federal program”; “the agency is comparatively expert in the statute’s
subject matter”; “the language of the particular provision

