6

DOUGLAS v. INDEPENDENT LIVING CENTER OF
SOUTHERN CAL., INC.
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting





*
*
*
The Court decides not to decide the question on which
we granted certiorari but instead to send the cases back to
the Court of Appeals, because of the recent action by CMS
approving California’s new reimbursement rates. But the
CMS approvals have no impact on the question before this
Court. If, as I believe, there is no private right of action
under the Supremacy Clause to enforce §30(A), that is the
end of the matter. If, on the other hand, the Court believes that there is such a cause of action, but that CMS’s
recent rate approvals may have an effect on that action
going forward, then the Court should say just that and
then remand to the Ninth Circuit for consideration of the
effect of the agency approvals.
I am not sure what a remand without answering the
preliminary question is meant to accomplish. The majority claims that the agency’s recent action “may change the
[lower courts’] answer” to the question whether the particular state rates violate §30(A). Ante, at 6. But that factspecific question is not the one before us; we chose not to
grant certiorari on the question whether California’s rates
complied with §30(A), limiting our grant to the cause of
action question. 562 U. S. ___ (2011).
The majority also asserts that the lower courts must
“decide whether these cases may proceed directly under
the Supremacy Clause now that the agency has acted.”
Ante, at 8. The majority contends that the parties have
not “fully argued this question.” Ibid. But the agency
proceedings that ultimately led to the CMS approvals
were well underway when this Court granted certiorari.
The parties debated the import of the parallel administrative proceedings in their initial briefs and at oral argument. See, e.g., Brief for Petitioner 28–29 (“Private
lawsuits . . . interfere with . . . CMS’s own enforcement
procedures,” as is “vividly demonstrated in the present
cases”); Brief for Respondents Santa Rosa Memorial Hos-

