2

DOUGLAS v. INDEPENDENT LIVING CENTER OF
SOUTHERN CAL., INC.
Syllabus





amendments to CMS. Before the agency finished its review, Medicaid providers and beneficiaries sought, in a series of cases, to enjoin
the rate reductions on the ground that they were pre-empted by federal Medicaid law. In seven decisions, the Ninth Circuit ultimately
affirmed or ordered preliminary injunctions preventing the State
from implementing its statutes. The court (1) held that the providers
and beneficiaries could bring a Supremacy Clause action; (2) essentially accepted their claim that the State did not show that its
amended plan would provide sufficient services; (3) held that the
amendments thus conflicted with §1396a(a)(30)(A); and (4) held that
the federal statute pre-empted the new state laws. In the meantime,
agency officials disapproved the amendments, and California sought
further administrative review. The cases were in this posture when
the Court granted certiorari to decide whether respondents could
mount a Supremacy Clause challenge. After oral argument, CMS
approved several of the State’s amendments, and the State withdrew
its requests for approval of the remainder.
Held: The judgments are vacated and the cases are remanded, thereby
permitting the parties to argue before the Ninth Circuit in the first
instance the question whether respondents may maintain Supremacy
Clause actions now that CMS has approved the state statutes. Pp.
5–8.
(a) CMS’ approval does not make these cases moot, but it does put
them in a different posture, since the federal agency charged with
administering Medicaid has now found that the rate reductions comply with federal law. That decision does not change the substantive
question whether California’s statutes are consistent with federal
law, but it may change the answer. It may also require respondents
to seek review of CMS’ determination under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) rather than in a Supremacy Clause action against
California. The APA would likely permit respondents to obtain an
authoritative judicial determination of the merits of their legal claim.
And their basic challenge now presents the kind of legal question ordinarily calling for APA review. The Medicaid Act commits to a federal agency the power to administer a federal program, and the agency has exercised that authority. As CMS is comparatively expert in
the statute’s subject matter, its decision carries weight. And
§1396a(a)(30)(A)’s broad and general language suggests that CMS’
expertise is relevant in determining the provision’s application. Finally, to allow a Supremacy Clause action to proceed once CMS has
reached a decision threatens potential inconsistency or confusion.
The Ninth Circuit declined to give weight to the Federal Government’s interpretation of the federal law, but courts are ordinarily required to apply deference standards to agency decisionmaking. The

