2

DOUGLAS v. INDEPENDENT LIVING CENTER OF
SOUTHERN CAL., INC.
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

lation; in exchange for federal funds a State agrees to
abide by specified rules in implementing the program.
One of those rules is set forth in §30(A) of the Act, which
requires States to meet particular criteria in establishing
Medicaid reimbursement rates for those providing services
under the Act. 42 U. S. C. §1396a(a)(30)(A). In 2008 and
2009, California enacted legislation reducing the rates at
which it would compensate some providers. Certain providers and individuals receiving Medicaid benefits thought
the new reimbursement rates did not comply with the
criteria set forth in §30(A). They sued the State to prevent
the new rates from going into effect.
But those plaintiffs faced a significant problem: Nothing
in the Medicaid Act allows providers or beneficiaries
(or anyone else, for that matter) to sue to enforce §30(A).
The Act instead vests responsibility for enforcement
with a federal agency, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (CMS). See, e.g., 42 U. S. C. §1316(a)(1). That is
settled law in the Ninth Circuit. See Sanchez v. Johnson,
416 F. 3d 1051, 1058–1062 (2005) (“[T]he flexible, administrative standards embodied in [§30(A)] do not reflect a
Congressional intent to provide a private remedy for their
violation”). And it is the law in virtually every other circuit as well. See, e.g., Long Term Care Pharmacy Alliance v. Ferguson, 362 F. 3d 50, 57–59 (CA1 2004) (holding
that it would be inconsistent with this Court’s precedent to
find that §30(A) creates rights enforceable by private
parties). The respondents have never argued the contrary.
Thus, as this case comes to us, the federal rule is that
Medicaid reimbursement rates must meet certain criteria,
but private parties have no statutory right to sue to enforce those requirements in court.
The providers and beneficiaries sought to overcome that
difficulty by arguing that they could proceed against the
State directly under the Supremacy Clause of the Constitution, even if they could not do so under the Act. They

