6

DOUGLAS v. INDEPENDENT LIVING CENTER OF
SOUTHERN CAL., INC.
Opinion of the Court 





For one thing, the providers and beneficiaries continue to
believe that the reductions violate the federal provision,
the agency’s view to the contrary notwithstanding. For
another, federal-court injunctions remain in place, forbidding California to implement the agency-approved rate
reductions. And, in light of the agency’s action, California
may well ask the lower courts to set those injunctions
aside.
While the cases are not moot, they are now in a different
posture. The federal agency charged with administering
the Medicaid program has determined that the challenged
rate reductions comply with federal law. That agency
decision does not change the underlying substantive question, namely whether California’s statutes are consistent
with a specific federal statutory provision (requiring that
reimbursement rates be “sufficient to enlist enough providers”). But it may change the answer. And it may
require respondents now to proceed by seeking review of
the agency determination under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 5 U. S. C. §701 et seq., rather than in an
action against California under the Supremacy Clause.
For one thing, the APA would likely permit respondents
to obtain an authoritative judicial determination of the
merits of their legal claim. The Act provides for judicial
review of final agency action. §704. It permits any person
adversely affected or aggrieved by agency action to obtain
judicial review of the lawfulness of that action. §702. And
it requires a reviewing court to set aside agency action
found to be “arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion,
or otherwise not in accordance with law.” §706(2)(A).
For another thing, respondents’ basic challenge now
presents the kind of legal question that ordinarily calls for
APA review. The Medicaid Act commits to the federal
agency the power to administer a federal program. And
here the agency has acted under this grant of authority.
That decision carries weight. After all, the agency is

