8

DOUGLAS v. INDEPENDENT LIVING CENTER OF

SOUTHERN CAL., INC.
Opinion of the Court 





law by several different courts (and the agency), thereby
threatening to defeat the uniformity that Congress intended by centralizing administration of the federal program in the agency and to make superfluous or to undermine traditional APA review. Cf. Astra USA, Inc. v. Santa
Clara County, 563 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 2)
(noting that the treatment of lawsuits that are “in substance one and the same” “must be the same, ‘[n]o matter
the clothing in which [plaintiffs] dress their claims’ ” (quoting Tenet v. Doe, 544 U. S. 1, 8 (2005)). If the two kinds of
actions should reach the same result, the Supremacy
Clause challenge is at best redundant. And to permit the
continuation of the action in that form would seem to be
inefficient, for the agency is not a participant in the pending litigation below, litigation that will decide whether the
agency-approved state rates violate the federal statute.
III
In the present posture of these cases, we do not address
whether the Ninth Circuit properly recognized a Supremacy Clause action to enforce this federal statute before the
agency took final action. To decide whether these cases
may proceed directly under the Supremacy Clause now
that the agency has acted, it will be necessary to take
account, in light of the proceedings that have already
taken place, of at least the matters we have set forth
above. It must be recognized, furthermore, that the parties have not fully argued this question. Thus, it may be
that not all of the considerations that may bear upon the
proper resolution of the issue have been presented in the
briefs to this Court or in the arguments addressed to and
considered by the Court of Appeals. Given the complexity
of these cases, rather than ordering reargument, we vacate the Ninth Circuit’s judgments and remand the cases,
thereby permitting the parties to argue the matter before
that Circuit in the first instance.
It is so ordered.

