Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

contended that the new state reimbursement rates were
inconsistent with the requirements of §30(A). The Supremacy Clause provides that a federal statute such as
§30(A) preempts contrary state law. Therefore, the providers and beneficiaries claimed, they could sue to enforce
the Supremacy Clause, which requires striking down the
state law and giving effect to §30(A). The Ninth Circuit
agreed with this argument and blocked the new state
reimbursement rates.
During briefing and argument in this case, the parties
have debated broad questions, such as whether and when
constitutional provisions as a general matter are directly
enforceable. It is not necessary to consider these larger
issues. It is not even necessary to decide whether the
Supremacy Clause can ever provide a private cause of
action. The question presented in the certiorari petitions
is narrow: “Whether Medicaid recipients and providers
may maintain a cause of action under the Supremacy
Clause to enforce [§30(A)] by asserting that the provision
preempts a state law reducing reimbursement rates.” To
decide this case, it is enough to conclude that the Supremacy Clause does not provide a cause of action to enforce
the requirements of §30(A) when Congress, in establishing
those requirements, elected not to provide such a cause of
action in the statute itself.
The Supremacy Clause operates differently than other
constitutional provisions. For example, if Congress says in
a law that certain provisions do not give rise to a taking
without just compensation, that obviously does not resolve
a claim under the Takings Clause that they do. The Supremacy Clause, on the other hand, is “not a source of any
federal rights.” Chapman v. Houston Welfare Rights
Organization, 441 U. S. 600, 613 (1979); accord, Dennis v.
Higgins, 498 U. S. 439, 450 (1991) (contrasting, in this
regard, the Supremacy Clause and the Commerce Clause).
The purpose of the Supremacy Clause is instead to ensure

