Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

BREYER, J., dissenting

would not, at a minimum, seriously chill not only the kind
of activities the plaintiffs raise before us, but also the
“independent advocacy” the Government purports to per
mit. And, as for the Government’s willingness to distin
guish independent advocacy from coordinated advocacy,
the former is more likely, not less likely, to confer legiti
macy than the latter. Thus, other things being equal, the
distinction “coordination” makes is arbitrary in respect to
furthering the statute’s purposes. And a rule of law that
finds the “legitimacy” argument adequate in respect to the
latter would have a hard time distinguishing a statute
that sought to attack the former.
Consider the majority’s development of the Govern
ment’s themes. First, the majority discusses the plaintiffs’
proposal to “ ‘train members of [the] PKK on how to use
humanitarian and international law to peacefully resolve
disputes.’ ” Ante, at 31–32 (quoting 552 F. 3d, at 921, n. 1).
The majority justifies the criminalization of this activity in
significant part on the ground that “peaceful negotia
tion[s]” might just “bu[y] time . . . , lulling opponents into
complacency.” Ante, at 32. And the PKK might use its
new information about “the structures of the international
legal system . . . to threaten, manipulate, and disrupt.”
Ibid.
What is one to say about these arguments—arguments
that would deny First Amendment protection to the peace
ful teaching of international human rights law on the
ground that a little knowledge about “the international
legal system” is too dangerous a thing; that an opponent’s
subsequent willingness to negotiate might be faked, so
let’s not teach him how to try? What might be said of
these claims by those who live, as we do, in a Nation com
mitted to the resolution of disputes through “deliberative
forces”? Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357, 375 (1927)
(Brandeis, J., concurring).
In my own view, the majority’s arguments stretch the

