Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

29

Opinion of the Court

gress’s assessment, is entitled to deference. This litigation
implicates sensitive and weighty interests of national
security and foreign affairs. The PKK and the LTTE have
committed terrorist acts against American citizens abroad,
and the material-support statute addresses acute foreign
policy concerns involving relationships with our Nation’s
allies. See id., at 128–133, 137. We have noted that “nei­
ther the Members of this Court nor most federal judges
begin the day with briefings that may describe new and
serious threats to our Nation and its people.” Boumediene
v. Bush, 553 U. S. 723, 797 (2008). It is vital in this con­
text “not to substitute . . . our own evaluation of evidence
for a reasonable evaluation by the Legislative Branch.”
Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U. S. 57, 68 (1981). See Wald,
468 U. S., at 242; Haig v. Agee, 453 U. S. 280, 292 (1981).
Our precedents, old and new, make clear that concerns
of national security and foreign relations do not warrant
abdication of the judicial role. We do not defer to the
Government’s reading of the First Amendment, even when
such interests are at stake. We are one with the dissent
that the Government’s “authority and expertise in these
matters do not automatically trump the Court’s own obli­
gation to secure the protection that the Constitution
grants to individuals.” Post, at 23. But when it comes to
collecting evidence and drawing factual inferences in this
area, “the lack of competence on the part of the courts is
marked,” Rostker, supra, at 65, and respect for the Gov­
ernment’s conclusions is appropriate.
One reason for that respect is that national security and
foreign policy concerns arise in connection with efforts to
confront evolving threats in an area where information
can be difficult to obtain and the impact of certain conduct
difficult to assess. The dissent slights these real con­
straints in demanding hard proof—with “detail,” “specific
facts,” and “specific evidence”—that plaintiffs’ proposed
activities will support terrorist attacks. See post, at 9, 16,

