Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

31

Opinion of the Court

holdings in this litigation, Congress added clarity to the
statute by providing narrowing definitions of the terms
“training,” “personnel,” and “expert advice or assistance,”
as well as an explanation of the knowledge required to
violate §2339B. Third, in effectuating its stated intent not
to abridge First Amendment rights, see §2339B(i), Con­
gress has also displayed a careful balancing of interests in
creating limited exceptions to the ban on material support.
The definition of material support, for example, excludes
medicine and religious materials. See §2339A(b)(1). In
this area perhaps more than any other, the Legislature’s
superior capacity for weighing competing interests means
that “we must be particularly careful not to substitute our
judgment of what is desirable for that of Congress.” Rost
ker, supra, at 68. Finally, and most importantly, Congress
has avoided any restriction on independent advocacy, or
indeed any activities not directed to, coordinated with, or
controlled by foreign terrorist groups.
At bottom, plaintiffs simply disagree with the consid­
ered judgment of Congress and the Executive that provid­
ing material support to a designated foreign terrorist
organization—even seemingly benign support—bolsters
the terrorist activities of that organization. That judg­
ment, however, is entitled to significant weight, and we
have persuasive evidence before us to sustain it. Given
the sensitive interests in national security and foreign
affairs at stake, the political branches have adequately
substantiated their determination that, to serve the Gov­
ernment’s interest in preventing terrorism, it was neces­
sary to prohibit providing material support in the form of
training, expert advice, personnel, and services to foreign
terrorist groups, even if the supporters meant to promote
only the groups’ nonviolent ends.
We turn to the particular speech plaintiffs propose to
undertake. First, plaintiffs propose to “train members of
[the] PKK on how to use humanitarian and international

