Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

33

Opinion of the Court

in political advocacy on behalf of Tamils who live in Sri
Lanka.” 552 F. 3d, at 921, n. 1. As explained above, su
pra, at 19–20, plaintiffs do not specify their expected level
of coordination with the PKK or LTTE or suggest what
exactly their “advocacy” would consist of. Plaintiffs’ pro­
posals are phrased at such a high level of generality that
they cannot prevail in this preenforcement challenge. See
supra, at 20; Grange, 552 U. S., at 454; Zemel, 381 U. S.,
at 20.
In responding to the foregoing, the dissent fails to ad­
dress the real dangers at stake. It instead considers only
the possible benefits of plaintiffs’ proposed activities in the
abstract. See post, at 13–15. The dissent seems unwilling
to entertain the prospect that training and advising a
designated foreign terrorist organization on how to take
advantage of international entities might benefit that
organization in a way that facilitates its terrorist activi­
ties. In the dissent’s world, such training is all to the
good. Congress and the Executive, however, have con­
cluded that we live in a different world: one in which the
designated foreign terrorist organizations “are so tainted
by their criminal conduct that any contribution to such an
organization facilitates that conduct.” AEDPA §301(a)(7).
One in which, for example, “the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees was forced to close a Kurdish
refugee camp in northern Iraq because the camp had come
under the control of the PKK, and the PKK had failed to
respect its ‘neutral and humanitarian nature.’ ” McKune
Affidavit, App. 135–136, ¶13. Training and advice on how
to work with the United Nations could readily have helped
the PKK in its efforts to use the United Nations camp as a
base for terrorist activities.
If only good can come from training our adversaries in
international dispute resolution, presumably it would
have been unconstitutional to prevent American citizens
from training the Japanese Government on using interna­

