Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

cessful vagueness claim under the Due Process Clause of
the Fifth Amendment for lack of notice. And he certainly
cannot do so based on the speech of others. Such a plain­
tiff may have a valid overbreadth claim under the First
Amendment, but our precedents make clear that a Fifth
Amendment vagueness challenge does not turn on
whether a law applies to a substantial amount of protected
expression. See Williams, supra, at 304; Hoffman Estates,
supra, at 494–495, 497. Otherwise the doctrines would be
substantially redundant.
Under a proper analysis, plaintiffs’ claims of vagueness
lack merit. Plaintiffs do not argue that the material­
support statute grants too much enforcement discretion to
the Government. We therefore address only whether the
statute “provide[s] a person of ordinary intelligence fair
notice of what is prohibited.” Williams, 553 U. S., at 304.
As a general matter, the statutory terms at issue here
are quite different from the sorts of terms that we have
previously declared to be vague. We have in the past
“struck down statutes that tied criminal culpability to
whether the defendant’s conduct was ‘annoying’ or ‘inde­
cent’—wholly subjective judgments without statutory
definitions, narrowing context, or settled legal meanings.”
Id., at 306; see also Papachristou v. Jacksonville, 405 U. S.
156, n. 1 (1972) (holding vague an ordinance that pun­
ished “vagrants,” defined to include “rogues and vaga­
bonds,” “persons who use juggling,” and “common night
walkers” (internal quotation marks omitted)). Applying
the statutory terms in this action—“training,” “expert
advice or assistance,” “service,” and “personnel”—does not
require similarly untethered, subjective judgments.
Congress also took care to add narrowing definitions to
the material-support statute over time. These definitions
increased the clarity of the statute’s terms.
See
§2339A(b)(2) (“ ‘training’ means instruction or teaching
designed to impart a specific skill, as opposed to general

