(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

HOLDER, ATTORNEY GENERAL, ET AL. v. HUMANI-

TARIAN LAW PROJECT ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1498. Argued February 23, 2010—Decided June 21, 2010*
It is a federal crime to “knowingly provid[e] material support or re
sources to a foreign terrorist organization.” 18 U. S. C. §2339B(a)(1).
The authority to designate an entity a “foreign terrorist organization”
rests with the Secretary of State, and is subject to judicial review.
“[T]he term ‘material support or resources’ means any property, tan
gible or intangible, or service, including currency or monetary in
struments or financial securities, financial services, lodging, training,
expert advice or assistance, safehouses, false documentation or iden
tification, communications equipment, facilities, weapons, lethal sub
stances, explosives, personnel (1 or more individuals who may be or
include oneself), and transportation, except medicine or religious ma
terials.” §2339A(b)(1). Over the years, §2339B and the definition of
“material support or resources” have been amended, inter alia, to
clarify that a violation requires knowledge of the foreign group’s des
ignation as a terrorist organization or its commission of terrorist acts,
§2339B(a)(1); and to define the terms “training,” §2339A(b)(2), “ex
pert advice or assistance,” §2339A(b)(3), and “personnel,” §2339B(h).
Among the entities the Secretary of State has designated “foreign
terrorist organization[s]” are the Partiya Karkeran Kurdistan (PKK)
and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), which aim to es
tablish independent states for, respectively, Kurds in Turkey and
Tamils in Sri Lanka. Although both groups engage in political and
humanitarian activities, each has also committed numerous terrorist
attacks, some of which have harmed American citizens. Claiming
——————
* Together with No. 09–89, Humanitarian Law Project et al. v.
Holder, Attorney General, et al., also on certiorari to the same court.

