Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of the Court

or impose any sanction on them for doing so.” Id., at 60.
Congress has not, therefore, sought to suppress ideas or
opinions in the form of “pure political speech.” Rather,
Congress has prohibited “material support,” which most
often does not take the form of speech at all. And when it
does, the statute is carefully drawn to cover only a narrow
category of speech to, under the direction of, or in coordi­
nation with foreign groups that the speaker knows to be
terrorist organizations.4
For its part, the Government takes the foregoing too far,
claiming that the only thing truly at issue in this litigation
is conduct, not speech. Section 2339B is directed at the
fact of plaintiffs’ interaction with the PKK and LTTE, the
Government contends, and only incidentally burdens their
expression. The Government argues that the proper
standard of review is therefore the one set out in United
States v. O’Brien, 391 U. S. 367 (1968). In that case, the
Court rejected a First Amendment challenge to a convic­
tion under a generally applicable prohibition on destroying
draft cards, even though O’Brien had burned his card in
protest against the draft. See id., at 370, 376, 382. In so
doing, we applied what we have since called “intermediate
scrutiny,” under which a “content-neutral regulation will
be sustained under the First Amendment if it advances
important governmental interests unrelated to the sup­
pression of free speech and does not burden substantially
more speech than necessary to further those interests.”
Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. v. FCC, 520 U. S. 180,
189 (1997) (citing O’Brien, supra, at 377).
The Government is wrong that the only thing actually at
——————
4 The dissent also analyzes the statute as if it prohibited “[p]eaceful
political advocacy” or “pure speech and association,” without more.
Post, at 9, 17. Section 2339B does not do that, and we do not address
the constitutionality of any such prohibitions. The dissent’s claim that
our decision is inconsistent with this Court’s cases analyzing those
sorts of restrictions, post, at 11–12, is accordingly unfounded.

