Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
constitutionally vague. The Ninth Circuit improperly merged plain
tiffs’ vagueness challenge with their First Amendment claims, hold
ing that “training,” “service,” and a portion of “expert advice or assis
tance” were impermissibly vague because they applied to protected
speech—regardless of whether those applications were clear. The
Court of Appeals also contravened the rule that “[a] plaintiff who en
gages in some conduct that is clearly proscribed cannot complain of
the vagueness of the law as applied to the conduct of others.” Hoff
man Estates v. Flipside, Hoffman Estates, Inc., 455 U. S. 489, 495.
The material-support statute, in its application to plaintiffs, “pro
vide[s] a person of ordinary intelligence fair notice of what is prohib
ited.” United States v. Williams, 553 U. S. 285, 304. The statutory
terms at issue here—“training,” “expert advice or assistance,” “ser
vice,” and “personnel”—are quite different from the sorts of terms,
like “ ‘annoying’ ” and “ ‘indecent,’ ” that the Court has struck down for
requiring “wholly subjective judgments without statutory definitions,
narrowing context, or settled legal meanings.” Id., at 306. Congress
has increased the clarity of §2339B’s terms by adding narrowing
definitions, and §2339B’s knowledge requirement further reduces any
potential for vagueness, see Hill v. Colorado, 530 U. S. 703, 732.
Although the statute may not be clear in every application, the dis
positive point is that its terms are clear in their application to plain
tiffs’ proposed conduct. Most of the activities in which plaintiffs seek
to engage readily fall within the scope of “training” and “expert ad
vice or assistance.” In fact, plaintiffs themselves have repeatedly
used those terms to describe their own proposed activities. Plaintiffs’
resort to hypothetical situations testing the limits of “training” and
“expert advice or assistance” is beside the point because this litiga
tion does not concern such situations. See Scales v. United States,
367 U. S. 203, 223. Gentile v. State Bar of Nev., 501 U. S. 1030,
1049–1051, distinguished. Plaintiffs’ further contention, that the
statute is vague in its application to the political advocacy they wish
to undertake, runs afoul of §2339B(h), which makes clear that “per
sonnel” does not cover advocacy by those acting entirely independ
ently of a foreign terrorist organization, and the ordinary meaning of
“service,” which refers to concerted activity, not independent advo
cacy. Context confirms that meaning: Independently advocating for a
cause is different from the prohibited act of providing a service “to a
foreign terrorist organization.” §2339B(a)(1).
Thus, any independent advocacy in which plaintiffs wish to engage
is not prohibited by §2339B. On the other hand, a person of ordinary
intelligence would understand the term “service” to cover advocacy
performed in coordination with, or at the direction of, a foreign ter
rorist organization. Plaintiffs argue that this construction of the

