32

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
Opinion of the Court

law to peacefully resolve disputes.” 552 F. 3d, at 921, n. 1.
Congress can, consistent with the First Amendment,
prohibit this direct training. It is wholly foreseeable that
the PKK could use the “specific skill[s]” that plaintiffs
propose to impart, §2339A(b)(2), as part of a broader
strategy to promote terrorism. The PKK could, for exam­
ple, pursue peaceful negotiation as a means of buying time
to recover from short-term setbacks, lulling opponents into
complacency, and ultimately preparing for renewed at­
tacks. See generally A. Marcus, Blood and Belief: The
PKK and the Kurdish Fight for Independence 286–295
(2007) (describing the PKK’s suspension of armed struggle
and subsequent return to violence). A foreign terrorist
organization introduced to the structures of the interna­
tional legal system might use the information to threaten,
manipulate, and disrupt. This possibility is real, not
remote.
Second, plaintiffs propose to “teach PKK members how
to petition various representative bodies such as the
United Nations for relief.” 552 F. 3d, at 921, n. 1. The
Government acts within First Amendment strictures in
banning this proposed speech because it teaches the or­
ganization how to acquire “relief,” which plaintiffs never
define with any specificity, and which could readily in­
clude monetary aid. See Brief for Plaintiffs 10–11, 16–17,
n. 10; App. 58–59, 80–81. Indeed, earlier in this litigation,
plaintiffs sought to teach the LTTE “to present claims for
tsunami-related aid to mediators and international bod­
ies,” 552 F. 3d, at 921, n. 1, which naturally included
monetary relief. Money is fungible, supra, at 26, and
Congress logically concluded that money a terrorist group
such as the PKK obtains using the techniques plaintiffs
propose to teach could be redirected to funding the group’s
violent activities.
Finally, plaintiffs propose to “engage in political advo­
cacy on behalf of Kurds who live in Turkey,” and “engage

