2

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
Syllabus
they wish to support those groups’ lawful, nonviolent activities, two
U. S. citizens and six domestic organizations (hereinafter plaintiffs)
initiated this constitutional challenge to the material-support stat
ute. The litigation has had a complicated 12-year history. Ulti
mately, the District Court partially enjoined the enforcement of the
material-support statute against plaintiffs. After the Ninth Circuit
affirmed, plaintiffs and the Government cross-petitioned for certio
rari. The Court granted both petitions.
As the litigation now stands, plaintiffs challenge §2339B’s prohibi
tion on providing four types of material support—“training,” “expert
advice or assistance,” “service,” and “personnel”—asserting violations
of the Fifth Amendment’s Due Process Clause on the ground that the
statutory terms are impermissibly vague, and violations of their First
Amendment rights to freedom of speech and association. They claim
that §2339B is invalid to the extent it prohibits them from engaging
in certain specified activities, including training PKK members to use
international law to resolve disputes peacefully; teaching PKK mem
bers to petition the United Nations and other representative bodies
for relief; and engaging in political advocacy on behalf of Kurds living
in Turkey and Tamils living in Sri Lanka.

Held: The material-support statute, §2339B, is constitutional as applied
to the particular forms of support that plaintiffs seek to provide to
foreign terrorist organizations. Pp. 8–36.
(a) This preenforcement challenge to §2339B is a justiciable Article
III case or controversy. Plaintiffs face “a credible threat of prosecu
tion” and “should not be required to await and undergo a criminal
prosecution as the sole means of seeking relief.” Babbitt v. Farm
Workers, 442 U. S. 289, 298. P. 10.
(b) The Court cannot avoid the constitutional issues in this litiga
tion by accepting plaintiffs’ argument that the material-support stat
ute, when applied to speech, should be interpreted to require proof
that a defendant intended to further a foreign terrorist organization’s
illegal activities. That reading is inconsistent with §2339B’s text,
which prohibits “knowingly” providing material support and demon
strates that Congress chose knowledge about the organization’s con
nection to terrorism, not specific intent to further its terrorist activi
ties, as the necessary mental state for a violation. Plaintiffs’ reading
is also untenable in light of the sections immediately surrounding
§2339B, which—unlike §2339B—do refer to intent to further terrorist
activity. See §§2339A(a), 2339C(a)(1). Finally, there is no textual
basis for plaintiffs’ argument that the same language in §2339B
should be read to require specific intent with regard to speech, but
not with regard to other forms of material support. Pp. 10–12.
(c) As applied to plaintiffs, the material-support statute is not un

