4

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
Syllabus
statute poses difficult questions of exactly how much direction or co
ordination is necessary for an activity to constitute a “service.” Be
cause plaintiffs have not provided any specific articulation of the de
gree to which they seek to coordinate their advocacy with the PKK
and the LTTE, however, they cannot prevail in their preenforcement
challenge. See Washington State Grange v. Washington State Repub
lican Party, 552 U. S. 442, 454. Pp. 13–20.
(d) As applied to plaintiffs, the material-support statute does not
violate the freedom of speech guaranteed by the First Amendment.
Pp. 20–34.
(1) Both plaintiffs and the Government take extreme positions on
this question. Plaintiffs claim that Congress has banned their pure
political speech. That claim is unfounded because, under the mate
rial-support statute, they may say anything they wish on any topic.
Section 2339B does not prohibit independent advocacy or member
ship in the PKK and LTTE. Rather, Congress has prohibited “mate
rial support,” which most often does not take the form of speech. And
when it does, the statute is carefully drawn to cover only a narrow
category of speech to, under the direction of, or in coordination with
foreign groups that the speaker knows to be terrorist organizations.
On the other hand, the Government errs in arguing that the only
thing actually at issue here is conduct, not speech, and that the cor
rect standard of review is intermediate scrutiny, as set out in United
States v. O’Brien, 391 U. S. 367, 377. That standard is not used to
review a content-based regulation of speech, and §2339B regulates
plaintiffs’ speech to the PKK and the LTTE on the basis of its con
tent. Even if the material-support statute generally functions as a
regulation of conduct, as applied to plaintiffs the conduct triggering
coverage under the statute consists of communicating a message.
Thus, the Court “must [apply] a more demanding standard” than the
one described in O’Brien. Texas v. Johnson, 491 U. S. 397, 403. Pp.
20–23.
(2) The parties agree that the Government’s interest in combat
ing terrorism is an urgent objective of the highest order, but plaintiffs
argue that this objective does not justify prohibiting their speech,
which they say will advance only the legitimate activities of the PKK
and LTTE. Whether foreign terrorist organizations meaningfully
segregate support of their legitimate activities from support of terror
ism is an empirical question. Congress rejected plaintiffs’ position on
that question when it enacted §2339B, finding that “foreign organiza
tions that engage in terrorist activity are so tainted by their criminal
conduct that any contribution to such an organization facilitates that
conduct.” §301(a), 110 Stat. 1247, note following §2339B. The record
confirms that Congress was justified in rejecting plaintiffs’ view. The

