8

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

tion. First, the Government says that the plaintiffs’ sup
port for these organizations is “fungible” in the same sense
as other forms of banned support. Being fungible, the
plaintiffs’ support could, for example, free up other re
sources, which the organization might put to terrorist
ends. Brief for Respondents in No. 09–89, pp. 54–56 (here
inafter Government Brief).
The proposition that the two very different kinds of
“support” are “fungible,” however, is not obviously true.
There is no obvious way in which undertaking advocacy
for political change through peaceful means or teaching
the PKK and LTTE, say, how to petition the United Na
tions for political change is fungible with other resources
that might be put to more sinister ends in the way that
donations of money, food, or computer training are fungi
ble. It is far from obvious that these advocacy activities
can themselves be redirected, or will free other resources
that can be directed, towards terrorist ends. Thus, we
must determine whether the Government has come for
ward with evidence to support its claim.
The Government has provided us with no empirical
information that might convincingly support this claim.
Instead, the Government cites only to evidence that Con
gress was concerned about the “fungible” nature in general
of resources, predominately money and material goods. It
points to a congressional finding that “foreign organiza
tions that engage in terrorist activity are so tainted by
their criminal conduct that any contribution to such an
organization facilitates that conduct.” §301(a)(7), 110
Stat. 1247, note following 18 U. S. C. §2339B (emphasis
added). It also points to a House Report’s statement that
“supply[ing] funds, goods, or services” would “hel[p] defray
the cost to the terrorist organization of running the osten
sibly legitimate activities,” and “in turn fre[e] an equal
sum that can then be spent on terrorist activities.” H. R.
Rep. No. 104–383, p. 81 (1995) (emphasis added). Finally,

