Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

BREYER, J., dissenting

the Government refers to a State Department official’s
affidavit describing how ostensibly charitable contribu
tions have either been “redirected” to terrorist ends or,
even if spent charitably, have “unencumber[ed] funds
raised from other sources for use in facilitating violent,
terrorist activities and gaining political support for these
activities.” Declaration of Kenneth R. McKune, App. 134,
136 (emphasis added).
The most one can say in the Government’s favor about
these statements is that they might be read as offering
highly general support for its argument. The statements
do not, however, explain in any detail how the plaintiffs’
political-advocacy-related activities might actually be
“fungible” and therefore capable of being diverted to ter
rorist use. Nor do they indicate that Congress itself was
concerned with “support” of this kind. The affidavit refers
to “funds,” “financing,” and “goods”—none of which en
compasses the plaintiffs’ activities. Ibid. The statutory
statement and the House Report use broad terms like
“contributions” and “services” that might be construed as
encompassing the plaintiffs’ activities. But in context,
those terms are more naturally understood as referring to
contributions of goods, money, or training and other ser
vices (say, computer programming) that could be diverted
to, or free funding for, terrorist ends. See infra, at 15–16.
Peaceful political advocacy does not obviously fall into
these categories. And the statute itself suggests that
Congress did not intend to curtail freedom of speech or
association. See §2339B(i) (“Nothing in this section shall
be construed or applied so as to abridge the exercise of
rights guaranteed under the First Amendment”); see also
infra, at 18–19.
Second, the Government says that the plaintiffs’ pro
posed activities will “bolste[r] a terrorist organization’s
efficacy and strength in a community” and “undermin[e]
this nation’s efforts to delegitimize and weaken those

