30

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
Opinion of the Court

23. That would be a dangerous requirement. In this
context, conclusions must often be based on informed
judgment rather than concrete evidence, and that reality
affects what we may reasonably insist on from the Gov­
ernment. The material-support statute is, on its face, a
preventive measure—it criminalizes not terrorist attacks
themselves, but aid that makes the attacks more likely to
occur. The Government, when seeking to prevent immi­
nent harms in the context of international affairs and
national security, is not required to conclusively link all
the pieces in the puzzle before we grant weight to its
empirical conclusions. See Zemel v. Rusk, 381 U. S., at 17
(“[B]ecause of the changeable and explosive nature of
contemporary international relations, . . . Congress . . .
must of necessity paint with a brush broader than that it
customarily wields in domestic areas”).
This context is different from that in decisions like
Cohen. In that case, the application of the statute turned
on the offensiveness of the speech at issue. Observing that
“one man’s vulgarity is another’s lyric,” we invalidated
Cohen’s conviction in part because we concluded that
“governmental officials cannot make principled distinc­
tions in this area.” 403 U. S., at 25. In this litigation, by
contrast, Congress and the Executive are uniquely posi­
tioned to make principled distinctions between activities
that will further terrorist conduct and undermine United
States foreign policy, and those that will not.
We also find it significant that Congress has been con­
scious of its own responsibility to consider how its actions
may implicate constitutional concerns. First, §2339B only
applies to designated foreign terrorist organizations.
There is, and always has been, a limited number of those
organizations designated by the Executive Branch, see,
e.g., 74 Fed. Reg. 29742 (2009); 62 Fed. Reg. 52650 (1997),
and any groups so designated may seek judicial review of
the designation. Second, in response to the lower courts’

