Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

BREYER, J., dissenting

Second, the majority discusses the plaintiffs’ proposal to
“ ‘teach PKK members how to petition various representa
tive bodies such as the United Nations for relief.’ ” Ante, at
32 (quoting 552 F. 3d, at 921, n. 1; emphasis added). The
majority’s only argument with respect to this proposal is
that the relief obtained “could readily include monetary
aid,” which the PKK might use to buy guns. Ante, at 32.
The majority misunderstands the word “relief.” In this
context, as the record makes clear, the word “relief” does
not refer to “money.” It refers to recognition under the
Geneva Conventions. See App. 57–58 (2003 Complaint);
id., at 79–80 (1998 Complaint); id., at 113 (Fertig Declara
tion); see also Tr. of Oral Arg. 63 (plaintiffs’ counsel deny
ing that plaintiffs seek to teach about obtaining relief in
the form of money).
Throughout, the majority emphasizes that it would
defer strongly to Congress’ “informed judgment.” See, e.g.,
ante, at 30. But here, there is no evidence that Congress
has made such a judgment regarding the specific activities
at issue in these cases. See infra, at 20–21. In any event,
“whenever the fundamental rights of free speech and
assembly are alleged to have been invaded, it must remain
open [for judicial determination] whether there actually
did exist at the time a clear danger; whether the danger, if
any, was imminent; and whether the evil apprehended
was one so substantial as to justify the stringent restric
tion interposed by the legislature.” Whitney, supra, at
378–379 (Brandeis, J., concurring). In such circum
stances, the “judicial function commands analysis of
whether the specific conduct charged falls within the
reach of the statute and if so whether the legislation is
consonant with the Constitution.” Landmark Communi
cations, Inc. v. Virginia, 435 U. S. 829, 844 (1978). Hence,
a legislative declaration “does not preclude enquiry into
the question whether, at the time and under the circum
stances, the conditions existed which are essential to

