Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

BREYER, J., dissenting

here, so supported, prohibits a lawyer hired by a desig
nated group from filing on behalf of that group an amicus
brief before the United Nations or even before this Court.
See Tr. of Oral Arg. 47–49, 53.
That fact is also reflected in the difficulty of drawing a
line designed to accept the legitimacy argument in some
instances but not in others. It is inordinately difficult to
distinguish when speech activity will and when it will not
initiate the chain of causation the Court suggests—a chain
that leads from peaceful advocacy to “legitimacy” to in
creased support for the group to an increased supply of
material goods that support its terrorist activities. Even
were we to find some such line of distinction, its applica
tion would seem so inherently uncertain that it would
often, perhaps always, “chill” protected speech beyond its
boundary. In short, the justification, put forward simply
in abstract terms and without limitation, must always, or
it will never, be sufficient. Given the nature of the plain
tiffs’ activities, “always” cannot possibly be the First
Amendment’s answer.
Regardless, the “legitimacy” justification itself is incon
sistent with critically important First Amendment case
law. Consider the cases involving the protection the First
Amendment offered those who joined the Communist
Party intending only to further its peaceful activities. In
those cases, this Court took account of congressional find
ings that the Communist Party not only advocated theo
retically but also sought to put into practice the overthrow
of our Government through force and violence. The Court
had previously accepted Congress’ determinations that the
American Communist Party was a “Communist action
organization” which (1) acted under the “control, direction,
and discipline” of the world Communist movement, a
movement that sought to employ “espionage, sabotage,
terrorism, and any other means deemed necessary, to
establish a Communist totalitarian dictatorship,” and (2)

