14

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
Opinion of the Court

stitutionally vague because they applied to protected
speech—regardless of whether those applications were
clear. The court stated that, even if persons of ordinary
intelligence understood the scope of the term “training,”
that term would “remai[n] impermissibly vague” because
it could “be read to encompass speech and advocacy pro­
tected by the First Amendment.” 552 F. 3d, at 929. It also
found “service” and a portion of “expert advice or assis­
tance” to be vague because those terms covered protected
speech. Id., at 929–930.
Further, in spite of its own statement that it was not
addressing a “facial vagueness challenge,” id., at 929, n. 6,
the Court of Appeals considered the statute’s application
to facts not before it. Specifically, the Ninth Circuit relied
on the Government’s statement that §2339B would bar
filing an amicus brief in support of a foreign terrorist
organization—which plaintiffs have not told us they wish
to do, and which the Ninth Circuit did not say plaintiffs
wished to do—to conclude that the statute barred pro­
tected advocacy and was therefore vague. See id., at 930.
By deciding how the statute applied in hypothetical cir­
cumstances, the Court of Appeals’ discussion of vagueness
seemed to incorporate elements of First Amendment
overbreadth doctrine. See id., at 929–930 (finding it “easy
to imagine” protected expression that would be barred by
§2339B (internal quotation marks omitted)); id., at 930
(referring to both vagueness and overbreadth).
In both of these respects, the Court of Appeals contra­
vened the rule that “[a] plaintiff who engages in some
conduct that is clearly proscribed cannot complain of the
vagueness of the law as applied to the conduct of others.”
Hoffman Estates, supra, at 495. That rule makes no ex­
ception for conduct in the form of speech. See Parker v.
Levy, 417 U. S. 733, 755–757 (1974). Thus, even to the
extent a heightened vagueness standard applies, a plain­
tiff whose speech is clearly proscribed cannot raise a suc­

