Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of the Court

the foreign group. We think a person of ordinary intelli­
gence would understand that independently advocating for
a cause is different from providing a service to a group
that is advocating for that cause.
Moreover, if independent activity in support of a terror­
ist group could be characterized as a “service,” the stat­
ute’s specific exclusion of independent activity in the
definition of “personnel” would not make sense. Congress
would not have prohibited under “service” what it specifi­
cally exempted from prohibition under “personnel.” The
other types of material support listed in the statute, in­
cluding “lodging,” “weapons,” “explosives,” and “transpor­
tation,” §2339A(b)(1), are not forms of support that could
be provided independently of a foreign terrorist organiza­
tion. We interpret “service” along the same lines. Thus,
any independent advocacy in which plaintiffs wish to
engage is not prohibited by §2339B. On the other hand, a
person of ordinary intelligence would understand the term
“service” to cover advocacy performed in coordination with,
or at the direction of, a foreign terrorist organization.
Plaintiffs argue that this construction of the statute
poses difficult questions of exactly how much direction or
coordination is necessary for an activity to constitute a
“service.” See Reply Brief for Petitioners in No. 09–89,
p. 14 (hereinafter Reply Brief for Plaintiffs) (“Would any
communication with any member be sufficient? With a
leader? Must the ‘relationship’ have any formal elements,
such as an employment or contractual relationship? What
about a relationship through an intermediary?”). The
problem with these questions is that they are entirely
hypothetical. Plaintiffs have not provided any specific
articulation of the degree to which they seek to coordinate
their advocacy with the PKK and the LTTE. They have
instead described the form of their intended advocacy only
in the most general terms. See, e.g., Brief for Plaintiffs
10–11 (plaintiffs “would like, among other things, to offer

