2

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
Opinion of the Court

groups, and that applying the material-support law to
prevent them from doing so violates the Constitution. In
particular, they claim that the statute is too vague, in
violation of the Fifth Amendment, and that it infringes
their rights to freedom of speech and association, in viola­
tion of the First Amendment. We conclude that the mate­
rial-support statute is constitutional as applied to the
particular activities plaintiffs have told us they wish to
pursue. We do not, however, address the resolution of
more difficult cases that may arise under the statute in
the future.
I
This litigation concerns 18 U. S. C. §2339B, which
makes it a federal crime to “knowingly provid[e] material
support or resources to a foreign terrorist organization.”1
Congress has amended the definition of “material support
or resources” periodically, but at present it is defined as
follows:
“[T]he term ‘material support or resources’ means any
property, tangible or intangible, or service, including
currency or monetary instruments or financial securi­
ties, financial services, lodging, training, expert advice
or assistance, safehouses, false documentation or
identification, communications equipment, facilities,
weapons, lethal substances, explosives, personnel (1
——————
1 In

full, 18 U. S. C. §2339B(a)(1) provides: “UNLAWFUL CONDUCT.—
Whoever knowingly provides material support or resources to a foreign
terrorist organization, or attempts or conspires to do so, shall be fined
under this title or imprisoned not more than 15 years, or both, and, if
the death of any person results, shall be imprisoned for any term of
years or for life. To violate this paragraph, a person must have knowl­
edge that the organization is a designated terrorist organization . . .,
that the organization has engaged or engages in terrorist activity . . .,
or that the organization has engaged or engages in terrorism . . . .” The
terms “terrorist activity” and “terrorism” are defined in 8 U. S. C.
§1182(a)(3)(B)(iii), and 22 U. S. C. §2656f(d)(2), respectively.

