18

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

could or would help further terrorism simply by helping to
legitimate the organization is not sufficient.
This reading of the statute protects those who engage in
pure speech and association ordinarily protected by the
First Amendment. But it does not protect that activity
where a defendant purposefully intends it to help terror
ism or where a defendant knows (or willfully blinds him
self to the fact) that the activity is significantly likely to
assist terrorism. Where the activity fits into these catego
ries of purposefully or knowingly supporting terrorist
ends, the act of providing material support to a known
terrorist organization bears a close enough relation to
terrorist acts that, in my view, it likely can be prohibited
notwithstanding any First Amendment interest.
Cf.
Brandenburg, 395 U. S. 444. At the same time, this read
ing does not require the Government to undertake the
difficult task of proving which, as between peaceful and
nonpeaceful purposes, a defendant specifically preferred;
knowledge is enough. See Bailey, supra, at 405 (defining
specific intent).
This reading is consistent with the statute’s text. The
statute prohibits “knowingly provid[ing] material support
or resources to a foreign terrorist organization.”
§2339B(a)(1) (emphasis added). Normally we read a crimi
nal statute as applying a mens rea requirement to all of
the subsequently listed elements of the crime. See FloresFigueroa v. United States, 556 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip
op., at 6–7). So read, the defendant would have to know or
intend (1) that he is providing support or resources, (2)
that he is providing that support to a foreign terrorist
organization, and (3) that he is providing support that is
material, meaning (4) that his support bears a significant
likelihood of furthering the organization’s terrorist ends.
This fourth requirement flows directly from the statute’s
use of the word “material.” That word can mean being of a
physical or worldly nature, but it also can mean “being of

