12

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

“endeavor[ed]” to bring about “the overthrow of existing
governments by . . . force if necessary.” Communist Party
of United States v. Subversive Activities Control Bd., 367
U. S. 1, 5–6 (1961) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Nonetheless, the Court held that the First Amendment
protected an American’s right to belong to that party—
despite whatever “legitimating” effect membership might
have had—as long as the person did not share the party’s
unlawful purposes. See, e.g., De Jonge, 299 U. S. 353;
Scales, 367 U. S., at 228–230; Elfbrandt v. Russell, 384
U. S. 11, 17 (1966); Keyishian v. Board of Regents of Univ.
of State of N. Y., 385 U. S. 589, 605–610 (1967); Robel, 389
U. S. 258 (holding that national security interests did not
justify overbroad criminal prohibition on members of
Communist-affiliated organizations working in any de
fense-related facility). As I have pointed out, those cases
draw further support from other cases permitting pure
advocacy of even the most unlawful activity—as long as
that advocacy is not “directed to inciting or producing
imminent lawless action and . . . likely to incite or produce
such action.” Brandenburg, 395 U. S., at 447. The Gov
ernment’s “legitimating” theory would seem to apply to
these cases with equal justifying force; and, if recognized,
it would have led this Court to conclusions other than
those it reached.
Nor can the Government overcome these considerations
simply by narrowing the covered activities to those that
involve coordinated, rather than independent, advocacy.
Conversations, discussions, or logistical arrangements
might well prove necessary to carry out the speech-related
activities here at issue (just as conversations and discus
sions are a necessary part of membership in any organiza
tion). The Government does not distinguish this kind of
“coordination” from any other. I am not aware of any form
of words that might be used to describe “coordination” that

