10

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

groups.” Government Brief 56 (emphasis added). In the
Court’s view, too, the Constitution permits application of
the statute to activities of the kind at issue in part because
those activities could provide a group that engages in
terrorism with “legitimacy.” Ante, at 25. The Court sug
gests that, armed with this greater “legitimacy,” these
organizations will more readily be able to obtain material
support of the kinds Congress plainly intended to ban—
money, arms, lodging, and the like. See ibid.
Yet the Government does not claim that the statute
forbids any speech “legitimating” a terrorist group.
Rather, it reads the statute as permitting (1) membership
in terrorist organizations, (2) “peaceably assembling with
members of the PKK and LTTE for lawful discussion,” or
(3) “independent advocacy” on behalf of these organiza
tions. Government Brief 66, 61, 13. The Court, too, em
phasizes that activities not “coordinated with” the terror
ist groups are not banned. See ante, at 21, 26, 31
(emphasis added). And it argues that speaking, writing,
and teaching aimed at furthering a terrorist organization’s
peaceful political ends could “mak[e] it easier for those
groups to persist, to recruit members, and to raise funds.”
Ante, at 25.
But this “legitimacy” justification cannot by itself war
rant suppression of political speech, advocacy, and asso
ciation. Speech, association, and related activities on
behalf of a group will often, perhaps always, help to le
gitimate that group. Thus, were the law to accept a “le
gitimating” effect, in and of itself and without qualifica
tion, as providing sufficient grounds for imposing such a
ban, the First Amendment battle would be lost in untold
instances where it should be won. Once one accepts this
argument, there is no natural stopping place. The argu
ment applies as strongly to “independent” as to “coordi
nated” advocacy. But see ante, at 26–27. That fact is
reflected in part in the Government’s claim that the ban

