18

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
Opinion of the Court

the Court: Counsel had reason to suppose that his particu­
lar statements to the press would not violate the rule, yet
he was disciplined nonetheless. See 501 U. S., at 1049–
1051. We did not suggest that counsel could escape disci­
pline on vagueness grounds if his own speech were plainly
prohibited.
Plaintiffs also contend that they want to engage in
“political advocacy” on behalf of Kurds living in Turkey
and Tamils living in Sri Lanka. 552 F. 3d, at 921, n. 1.
They are concerned that such advocacy might be regarded
as “material support” in the form of providing “personnel”
or “service[s],” and assert that the statute is unconstitu­
tionally vague because they cannot tell.
As for “personnel,” Congress enacted a limiting defini­
tion in IRTPA that answers plaintiffs’ vagueness concerns.
Providing material support that constitutes “personnel” is
defined as knowingly providing a person “to work under
that terrorist organization’s direction or control or to
organize, manage, supervise, or otherwise direct the op­
eration of that organization.” §2339B(h). The statute
makes clear that “personnel” does not cover independent
advocacy: “Individuals who act entirely independently of
the foreign terrorist organization to advance its goals or
objectives shall not be considered to be working under the
foreign terrorist organization’s direction and control.”
Ibid.
“[S]ervice” similarly refers to concerted activity, not
independent advocacy. See Webster’s Third New Interna­
tional Dictionary 2075 (1993) (defining “service” to mean
“the performance of work commanded or paid for by an­
other: a servant’s duty: attendance on a superior”; or “an
act done for the benefit or at the command of another”).
Context confirms that ordinary meaning here. The statute
prohibits providing a service “to a foreign terrorist organi­
zation.” §2339B(a)(1) (emphasis added). The use of the
word “to” indicates a connection between the service and

