Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Syllabus
PKK and the LTTE are deadly groups. It is not difficult to conclude,
as Congress did, that the taint of their violent activities is so great
that working in coordination with them or at their command legiti
mizes and furthers their terrorist means. Moreover, material sup
port meant to promote peaceable, lawful conduct can be diverted to
advance terrorism in multiple ways. The record shows that desig
nated foreign terrorist organizations do not maintain organizational
firewalls between social, political, and terrorist operations, or finan
cial firewalls between funds raised for humanitarian activities and
those used to carry out terrorist attacks. Providing material support
in any form would also undermine cooperative international efforts to
prevent terrorism and strain the United States’ relationships with its
allies, including those that are defending themselves against violent
insurgencies waged by foreign terrorist groups. Pp. 23–28.
(3) The Court does not rely exclusively on its own factual infer
ences drawn from the record evidence, but considers the Executive
Branch’s stated view that the experience and analysis of Government
agencies charged with combating terrorism strongly support Con
gress’s finding that all contributions to foreign terrorist organiza
tions—even those for seemingly benign purposes—further those
groups’ terrorist activities. That evaluation of the facts, like Con
gress’s assessment, is entitled to deference, given the sensitive na
tional security and foreign relations interests at stake. The Court
does not defer to the Government’s reading of the First Amendment.
But respect for the Government’s factual conclusions is appropriate
in light of the courts’ lack of expertise with respect to national secu
rity and foreign affairs, and the reality that efforts to confront terror
ist threats occur in an area where information can be difficult to ob
tain, the impact of certain conduct can be difficult to assess, and
conclusions must often be based on informed judgment rather than
concrete evidence. The Court also finds it significant that Congress
has been conscious of its own responsibility to consider how its ac
tions may implicate constitutional concerns. Most importantly, Con
gress has avoided any restriction on independent advocacy, or indeed
any activities not directed to, coordinated with, or controlled by for
eign terrorist groups. Given the sensitive interests in national secu
rity and foreign affairs at stake, the political branches have ade
quately substantiated their determination that prohibiting material
support in the form of training, expert advice, personnel, and services
to foreign terrorist groups serves the Government’s interest in pre
venting terrorism, even if those providing the support mean to pro
mote only the groups’ nonviolent ends.
As to the particular speech plaintiffs propose to undertake, it is
wholly foreseeable that directly training the PKK on how to use in

