Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

BREYER, J., dissenting

real importance or great consequence.” Webster’s Third
New International Dictionary 1392 (1961). Here, it must
mean the latter, for otherwise the statute, applying only to
physical aid, would not apply to speech at all. See also
§2339A(b)(1) (defining “ ‘material support or resources’ ” as
“any property, tangible or intangible” (emphasis added)).
And if the statute applies only to support that would likely
be of real importance or great consequence, it must have
importance or consequence in respect to the organization’s
terrorist activities. That is because support that is not
significantly likely to help terrorist activities, for purposes
of this statute, neither has “importance” nor is of “great
consequence.”
The statutory definition of “material support” poses no
problem. The statute defines “material support” through
reference to a list of terms, including those at issue here—
“training,” “expert advice or assistance,” “personnel,” and
“service.” §2339B(g)(4); §2339A(b)(1). Since these latter
terms all fall under the definition of the term “material
support,” these activities fall within the statute’s scope
only when they too are “material.” Cf. Stevens, 559 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 12) (citing Leocal v. Ashcroft, 543 U. S.
1, 11 (2004) (definitional phrase may take meaning from
the term to be defined)).
Thus, textually speaking, a statutory requirement that
the defendant knew the support was material can be read
to require the Government to show that the defendant
knew that the consequences of his acts had a significant
likelihood of furthering the organization’s terrorist, not
just its lawful, aims.
I need not decide whether this is the only possible read
ing of the statute in cases where “material support” takes
the form of “currency,” “property,” “monetary instru
ments,” “financial securities,” “financial services,” “lodg
ing,” “safehouses,” “false documentation or identification,”
“weapons,” “lethal substances,” or “explosives,” and the

