Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

27

Opinion of the Court

21.6
Providing foreign terrorist groups with material support
in any form also furthers terrorism by straining the
United States’ relationships with its allies and undermin­
ing cooperative efforts between nations to prevent terror­
ist attacks. We see no reason to question Congress’s find­
ing that “international cooperation is required for an
effective response to terrorism, as demonstrated by the
numerous multilateral conventions in force providing
universal prosecutive jurisdiction over persons involved in
a variety of terrorist acts, including hostage taking, mur­
der of an internationally protected person, and aircraft
piracy and sabotage.” AEDPA §301(a)(5), 110 Stat. 1247,
note following 18 U. S. C. §2339B (Findings and Purpose).
The material-support statute furthers this international
effort by prohibiting aid for foreign terrorist groups that
harm the United States’ partners abroad: “A number of
designated foreign terrorist organizations have attacked
moderate governments with which the United States has
vigorously endeavored to maintain close and friendly
relations,” and those attacks “threaten [the] social, eco­
nomic and political stability” of such governments.
McKune Affidavit, App. 137, ¶16. “[O]ther foreign terror­
ist organizations attack our NATO allies, thereby impli­
cating important and sensitive multilateral security ar­
rangements.” Ibid.
For example, the Republic of Turkey—a fellow member
of NATO—is defending itself against a violent insurgency
——————
6 The

dissent also contends that the particular sort of material sup­
port plaintiffs seek to provide cannot be diverted to terrorist activities,
in the same direct way as funds or goods. Post, at 8–9. This contention
misses the point. Both common sense and the evidence submitted by
the Government make clear that material support of a terrorist group’s
lawful activities facilitates the group’s ability to attract “funds,” “fi­
nancing,” and “goods” that will further its terrorist acts. See McKune
Affidavit, App. 134–136.

