14

HOLDER v. HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT
BREYER, J., dissenting

concept of “fungibility” beyond constitutional limits.
Neither Congress nor the Government advanced these
particular hypothetical claims. I am not aware of any case
in this Court—not Gitlow v. New York, 268 U. S. 652
(1925), not Schenck v. United States, 249 U. S. 47 (1919),
not Abrams, 250 U. S. 616, not the later Communist Party
cases decided during the heat of the Cold War—in which
the Court accepted anything like a claim that speech or
teaching might be criminalized lest it, e.g., buy negotiating
time for an opponent who would put that time to bad use.
Moreover, the risk that those who are taught will put
otherwise innocent speech or knowledge to bad use is
omnipresent, at least where that risk rests on little more
than (even informed) speculation. Hence to accept this
kind of argument without more and to apply it to the
teaching of a subject such as international human rights
law is to adopt a rule of law that, contrary to the Constitu
tion’s text and First Amendment precedent, would auto
matically forbid the teaching of any subject in a case
where national security interests conflict with the First
Amendment. The Constitution does not allow all such
conflicts to be decided in the Government’s favor.
The majority, as I have said, cannot limit the scope of its
arguments through its claim that the plaintiffs remain
free to engage in the protected activity as long as it is not
“coordinated.” That is because there is no practical way to
organize classes for a group (say, wishing to learn about
human rights law) without “coordination.” Nor can the
majority limit the scope of its argument by pointing to
some special limiting circumstance present here. That is
because the only evidence the majority offers to support its
general claim consists of a single reference to a book about
terrorism, which the Government did not mention, and
which apparently says no more than that at one time the
PKK suspended its armed struggle and then returned to
it.

