(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FIFTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–645.

Argued January 12, 2010—Decided May 17, 2010

After the Abbotts, a married couple, moved to Chile and separated, the
Chilean courts granted respondent wife daily care and control of their
minor son, A. J. A., while awarding petitioner husband visitation
rights. Mr. Abbott also had a ne exeat right to consent before Ms. Ab
bott could take A. J. A. out of the country under Chile Minors Law
16,618 (Minors Law 16,618), art. 49. When Ms. Abbott brought
A. J. A. to Texas without permission from Mr. Abbott or the Chilean
family court, Mr. Abbott filed this suit in the Federal District Court,
seeking an order requiring his son’s return to Chile under the Hague
Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
(Convention) and the implementing statute, the International Child
Abduction Remedies Act (ICARA), 42 U. S. C. §11601 et seq. Among
its provisions, the Convention seeks “to secure the prompt return of
children wrongfully removed or retained in any Contracting State,”
Art. 1; provides that such “removal or retention . . . is to be consid
ered wrongful where” “it is in breach of rights of custody attributed to
a person . . . under the law of the State in which the child was [there
tofore] habitually resident,” Art. 3(a), and where “those rights [had
been] actually exercised . . . or would have been so exercised but for
the removal or retention,” Art. 3(b); and defines “rights of custody” to
“include . . . the right to determine the child’s place of residence,” Art.
5(a). The District Court denied relief, holding that the father’s ne
exeat right did not constitute a “righ[t] of custody” under the Conven
tion and, thus, that the return remedy was not authorized. The Fifth
Circuit affirmed.
Held: A parent has a right of custody under the Convention by reason of
that parent’s ne exeat right. Pp. 4–17.
(a) The Convention applies because A. J. A. is under 16; he was a


2

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Syllabus
habitual resident of Chile; and both Chile and the United States are
contracting states. The ICARA instructs the state or federal court in
which a petition alleging international child abduction has been filed
to “decide the case in accordance with the Convention.” §§11603(b),
(d). P. 5.
(b) That A. J. A. was wrongfully removed from Chile in violation of
a “righ[t] of custody” is shown by the Convention’s text, by the U. S.
State Department’s views, by contracting states’ court decisions, and
by the Convention’s purposes. Pp. 5–18.
(1) Chilean law determines the content of Mr. Abbott’s right,
while the Convention’s text and structure resolve whether that right
is a “righ[t] of custody.” Minors Law 16,618, art. 49, provides that
“[o]nce the court has decreed” that one of the parents has visitation
rights, that parent’s “authorization” generally “shall also be required”
before the child may be taken out of the country. Because Mr. Abbott
has direct and regular visitation rights, it follows that he has a
ne exeat right under article 49. The Convention recognizes that cus
tody rights can be decreed jointly or alone, see Art. 3(a), and Mr. Ab
bott’s ne exeat right is best classified as a “joint right of custody,”
which the Convention defines to “include rights relating to the care of
the person of the child and, in particular, the right to determine the
child’s place of residence,” Art. 5(a). Mr. Abbott’s right to decide
A. J. A.’s country of residence allows him to “determine the child’s
place of residence,” especially given the Convention’s purpose to pre
vent wrongful removal across international borders. It also gives him
“rights relating to the care of the person of the child,” in that choos
ing A. J. A.’s residence country can determine the shape of his early
and adolescent years and his language, identity, and culture and tra
ditions. That a ne exeat right does not fit within traditional physical
custody notions is beside the point because the Convention’s defini
tion of “rights of custody” controls. This uniform, text-based ap
proach ensures international consistency in interpreting the Conven
tion, foreclosing courts from relying on local usage to undermine
recognition of custodial arrangements in other countries and under
other legal traditions. In any case, this country has adopted modern
conceptions of custody e.g., joint legal custody, that accord with the
Convention’s broad definition. Ms. Abbott mistakenly claims that a
ne exeat right cannot qualify as a right of custody because the Con
vention requires that any such right be capable of “exercis[e].” When
one parent removes a child without seeking the ne exeat holder’s con
sent, it is an instance where the right would have been “exercised but
for the removal or retention,” Art. 3(b). The Fifth Circuit’s conclusion
that a breach of a ne exeat right does not give rise to a return remedy
would render the Convention meaningless in many cases where it is


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
most needed. Any suggestion that a ne exeat right is a right of access
is atexual, as a ne exeat right is not even arguably a “right to take a
child for a limited period of time.” Art. 5(b). Ms. Abbott’s argument
that the ne exeat order in this case cannot create a right of custody is
not dispositive because Mr. Abbott asserts rights under Minors Law
16,618, which do not derive from the order. Pp. 6–11.
(2) This Court’s conclusion is strongly supported and informed by
the longstanding view of the State Department’s Office of Children’s
Issues, this country’s Convention enforcement entity, that ne exeat
rights are rights of custody. The Court owes deference to the Execu
tive Branch’s treaty interpretations. See Sumitomo Shoji America,
Inc. v. Avagliano, 457 U. S. 176, 185. There is no reason to doubt this
well-established canon here. The Executive, when dealing with deli
cate foreign relations matters like international child abductions,
possesses a great store of information on practical realities such as
the reactions from treaty partners to a particular treaty interpreta
tion and the impact that interpretation may have on the State De
partment’s ability to reclaim children abducted from this country.
Pp. 11–12.
(3) The Court’s view is also substantially informed by the views
of sister contracting states on the issue, see El Al Israel Airlines, Ltd.
v. Tsui Yuan Tseng, 525 U. S. 155, 176, particularly because the
ICARA directs that “uniform international interpretation” of the
Convention is part of its framework, see §11601(b)(3)(B). While the
Supreme Court of Canada has reached an arguably contrary view,
and French courts are divided, a review of the international law con
firms that courts and other legal authorities in England, Israel, Aus
tria, South Africa, Germany, Australia, and Scotland have accepted
the rule that ne exeat rights are rights of custody within the Conven
tion’s meaning. Scholars agree that there is an emerging interna
tional consensus on the matter. And the Convention’s history is fully
consistent with the conclusion that ne exeat rights are just one of the
many ways in which custody of children can be exercised. Pp. 12–16.
(4) The Court’s holding also accords with the Convention’s objects
and purposes. There is no reason to doubt the ability of other con
tracting states to carry out their duty to make decisions in the best
interests of the children. To interpret the Convention to permit an
abducting parent to avoid a return remedy, even when the other par
ent holds a ne exeat right, runs counter to the Convention’s purpose of
deterring child abductions to a country that provides a friendlier fo
rum. Denying such a remedy would legitimize the very action, re
moval of the child, that the Convention was designed to prevent,
while requiring return of the child in cases like this one helps deter
abductions and respects the Convention’s purpose to prevent harms


4

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Syllabus
to the child resulting from abductions. Pp. 16–18.
(c) While a parent possessing a ne exeat right has a right of custody
and may seek a return remedy, return will not automatically be or
dered if the abducting parent can establish the applicability of a Con
vention exception, such as “a grave risk that . . . return would expose
the child to . . . harm or [an] otherwise . . . intolerable situation,” or
the objection to removal by a child who has reached a sufficient “age
and degree of maturity” to state a preference, Art. 13(b). The proper
interpretation and application of exceptions may be addressed on re
mand. P. 18.

542 F. 3d 1081, reversed and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, GINSBURG, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. STEVENS, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which THOMAS and BREYER, JJ.,
joined.

