Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash­
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–645
_________________

TIMOTHY MARK CAMERON ABBOTT, PETITIONER v.
JACQUELYN VAYE ABBOTT
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE FIFTH CIRCUIT

[May 17, 2010] 


JUSTICE KENNEDY delivered the opinion of the Court.
This case presents, as it has from its inception in the
United States District Court, a question of interpretation
under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of In­
ternational Child Abduction (Convention), Oct. 24, 1980,
T. I. A. S. No. 11670, S. Treaty Doc. No. 99–11. The
United States is a contracting state to the Convention; and
Congress has implemented its provisions through the
International Child Abduction Remedies Act (ICARA), 102
Stat. 437, 42 U. S. C. §11601 et seq. The Convention
provides that a child abducted in violation of “rights of
custody” must be returned to the child’s country of habit­
ual residence, unless certain exceptions apply. Art. 1, S.
Treaty Doc. No. 99–11, at 7 (Treaty Doc.). The question is
whether a parent has a “righ[t] of custody” by reason of
that parent’s ne exeat right: the authority to consent before
the other parent may take the child to another country.
I
Timothy Abbott and Jacquelyn Vaye Abbott married in
England in 1992. He is a British citizen, and she is a
citizen of the United States. Mr. Abbott’s astronomy


2

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Opinion of the Court

profession took the couple to Hawaii, where their son
A. J. A. was born in 1995. The Abbotts moved to La
Serena, Chile, in 2002. There was marital discord, and
the parents separated in March 2003. The Chilean courts
granted the mother daily care and control of the child,
while awarding the father “direct and regular” visitation
rights, including visitation every other weekend and for
the whole month of February each year. App. 9.
Chilean law conferred upon Mr. Abbott what is com­
monly known as a ne exeat right: a right to consent before
Ms. Abbott could take A. J. A. out of Chile. See Minors
Law 16,618, art. 49 (Chile), App. to Pet. for Cert. 61a
(granting a ne exeat right to any parent with visitation
rights). In effect a ne exeat right imposes a duty on one
parent that is a right in the other. After Mr. Abbott ob­
tained a British passport for A. J. A., Ms. Abbott grew
concerned that Mr. Abbott would take the boy to Britain.
She sought and obtained a “ne exeat of the minor” order
from the Chilean family court, prohibiting the boy from
being taken out of Chile.
In August 2005, while proceedings before the Chilean
court were pending, the mother removed the boy from
Chile without permission from either the father or the
court. A private investigator located the mother and the
child in Texas. In February 2006, the mother filed for
divorce in Texas state court. Part of the relief she sought
was a modification of the father’s rights, including full
power in her to determine the boy’s place of residence and
an order limiting the father to supervised visitation in
Texas. This litigation remains pending.
Mr. Abbott brought an action in Texas state court,
asking for visitation rights and an order requiring Ms.
Abbott to show cause why the court should not allow Mr.
Abbott to return to Chile with A. J. A. In February 2006,
the court denied Mr. Abbott’s requested relief but granted
him “liberal periods of possession” of A. J. A. throughout


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

February 2006, provided Mr. Abbott remained in Texas.
App. 42.
In May 2006, Mr. Abbott filed the instant action in the
United States District Court for the Western District of
Texas. He sought an order requiring his son’s return to
Chile pursuant to the Convention and enforcement provi­
sions of the ICARA. In July 2007, after holding a bench
trial during which only Mr. Abbott testified, the District
Court denied relief. The court held that the father’s ne
exeat right did not constitute a right of custody under the
Convention and, as a result, that the return remedy was
not authorized. 495 F. Supp. 2d 635, 640.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
affirmed on the same rationale. The court held the father
possessed no rights of custody under the Convention be­
cause his ne exeat right was only “a veto right over his
son’s departure from Chile.” 542 F. 3d 1081, 1087 (2008).
The court expressed substantial agreement with the Court
of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Croll v. Croll, 229
F. 3d 133 (2000). Relying on American dictionary defini­
tions of “custody” and noting that ne exeat rights cannot be
“ ‘actually exercised’ ” within the meaning of the Conven­
tion, Croll held that ne exeat rights are not rights of cus­
tody. Id., at 138–141 (quoting Art. 3(b), Treaty Doc., at 7).
A dissenting opinion in Croll was filed by then-Judge
Sotomayor. The dissent maintained that a ne exeat right
is a right of custody because it “provides a parent with
decisionmaking authority regarding a child’s international
relocation.” 229 F. 3d, at 146.
The Courts of Appeals for the Fourth and Ninth Circuits
adopted the conclusion of the Croll majority. See Fawcett
v. McRoberts, 326 F. 3d 491, 500 (CA4 2003); Gonzalez v.
Gutierrez, 311 F. 3d 942, 949 (CA9 2002). The Court of
Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit has followed the reason­
ing of the Croll dissent. Furnes v. Reeves, 362 F. 3d 702,
720, n. 15 (2004). Certiorari was granted to resolve the


4

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Opinion of the Court

conflict. 557 U. S. ___ (2009).
II
The Convention was adopted in 1980 in response to the
problem of international child abductions during domestic
disputes. The Convention seeks “to secure the prompt
return of children wrongfully removed to or retained in
any Contracting State,” and “to ensure that rights of
custody and of access under the law of one Contracting
State are effectively respected in the other Contracting
States.” Art. 1, Treaty Doc., at 7.
The provisions of the Convention of most relevance at
the outset of this discussion are as follows:
“Article 3: The removal or the retention of the child is
to be considered wrongful where—
“a it is in breach of rights of custody attributed to a
person, an institution or any other body, either jointly
or alone, under the law of the State in which the child
was habitually resident immediately before the re­
moval or retention; and
“b at the time of removal or retention those rights
were actually exercised, either jointly or alone, or
would have been so exercised but for the removal or
retention.
.

.

.

.

.

“Article 5: For the purposes of this Convention—
“a ‘rights of custody’ shall include rights relating to
the care of the person of the child and, in particular,
the right to determine the child’s place of residence;
“b ‘rights of access’ shall include the right to take a
child for a limited period of time to a place other than
the child’s habitual residence.
.

.

.

.

.

“Article 12: Where a child has been wrongfully re­


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

moved or retained in terms of Article 3 . . . the author­
ity concerned shall order the return of the child
forthwith.” Id., at 7, 9.
The Convention’s central operating feature is the return
remedy. When a child under the age of 16 has been
wrongfully removed or retained, the country to which the
child has been brought must “order the return of the child
forthwith,” unless certain exceptions apply. See, e.g., Arts.
4, 12, ibid. A removal is “wrongful” where the child was
removed in violation of “rights of custody.” The Conven­
tion defines “rights of custody” to “include rights relating
to the care of the person of the child and, in particular, the
right to determine the child’s place of residence.” Art.
5(a), id., at 7. A return remedy does not alter the pre-ab­
duction allocation of custody rights but leaves custodial
decisions to the courts of the country of habitual residence.
Art. 19, id., at 11. The Convention also recognizes “rights
of access,” but offers no return remedy for a breach of
those rights. Arts. 5(b), 21, id., at 7, 11.
The United States has implemented the Convention
through the ICARA. The statute authorizes a person who
seeks a child’s return to file a petition in state or federal
court and instructs that the court “shall decide the case in
accordance with the Convention.” 42 U. S. C. §§11603(a),
(b), (d). If the child in question has been “wrongfully
removed or retained within the meaning of the Conven­
tion,” the child shall be “promptly returned,” unless an
exception is applicable. §11601(a)(4).
III
As the parties agree, the Convention applies to this
dispute. A. J. A. is under 16 years old; he was a habitual
resident of Chile; and both Chile and the United States
are contracting states. The question is whether A. J. A.
was “wrongfully removed” from Chile, in other words,
whether he was removed in violation of a right of custody.


6

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Opinion of the Court

This Court’s inquiry is shaped by the text of the Conven­
tion; the views of the United States Department of State;
decisions addressing the meaning of “rights of custody” in
courts of other contracting states; and the purposes of the
Convention. After considering these sources, the Court
determines that Mr. Abbott’s ne exeat right is a right of
custody under the Convention.
A
“The interpretation of a treaty, like the interpretation of
a statute, begins with its text.” Medellín v. Texas, 552
U. S. 491, 506 (2008). This Court consults Chilean law to
determine the content of Mr. Abbott’s right, while follow­
ing the Convention’s text and structure to decide whether
the right at issue is a “righ[t] of custody.”
Chilean law granted Mr. Abbott a joint right to decide
his child’s country of residence, otherwise known as a
ne exeat right. Minors Law 16,618, art. 49 (Chile), App. to
Pet. for Cert. 61a, 62a, provides that “[o]nce the court has
decreed” that one of the parents has visitation rights, that
parent’s “authorization . . . shall also be required” before
the child may be taken out of the country, subject to court
override only where authorization “cannot be granted or is
denied without good reason.” Mr. Abbott has “direct and
regular” visitation rights and it follows from Chilean law,
that he has a shared right to determine his son’s country
of residence under this provision. App. 9. To support the
conclusion that Mr. Abbott’s right under Chilean law gives
him a joint right to decide his son’s country of residence, it
is notable that a Chilean agency has explained that Mi­
nors Law 16,618 is a “right to authorize the minors’ exit”
from Chile and that this provision means that neither
parent can “unilaterally” “establish the [child’s] place of
residence.” Letter from Paula Strap Camus, Director
General, Corporation of Judicial Assistance of the Region
Metropolitana, to National Center for Missing and Ex­


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

ploited Children (Jan. 17, 2006), App. to Pet. for Cert. in
Villegas Duran v. Arribada Beaumont, No. 08–775, pp.
35a–37a, cert. pending.
The Convention recognizes that custody rights can be
decreed jointly or alone, see Art. 3(a), Treaty Doc., at 7;
and Mr. Abbott’s joint right to determine his son’s country
of residence is best classified as a joint right of custody, as
the Convention defines that term. The Convention defines
“rights of custody” to “include rights relating to the care of
the person of the child and, in particular, the right to
determine the child’s place of residence.” Art. 5(a), ibid.
Mr. Abbott’s ne exeat right gives him both the joint “right
to determine the child’s place of residence” and joint
“rights relating to the care of the person of the child.”
Mr. Abbott’s joint right to decide A. J. A.’s country of
residence allows him to “determine the child’s place of
residence.” The phrase “place of residence” encompasses
the child’s country of residence, especially in light of the
Convention’s explicit purpose to prevent wrongful removal
across international borders. See Convention Preamble,
Treaty Doc., at 7. And even if “place of residence” refers
only to the child’s street address within a country, a
ne exeat right still entitles Mr. Abbott to “determine” that
place. “[D]etermine” can mean “[t]o fix conclusively or
authoritatively,” Webster’s New International Dictionary
711 (2d ed. 1954) (2d definition), but it can also mean “[t]o
set bounds or limits to,” ibid. (1st definition), which is
what Mr. Abbott’s ne exeat right allows by ensuring that
A. J. A. cannot live at any street addresses outside of
Chile. It follows that the Convention’s protection of a
parent’s custodial “right to determine the child’s place of
residence” includes a ne exeat right.
Mr. Abbott’s joint right to determine A. J. A.’s country of
residence also gives him “rights relating to the care of the
person of the child.” Art. 5(a), Treaty Doc., at 7. Few
decisions are as significant as the language the child


8

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Opinion of the Court

speaks, the identity he finds, or the culture and traditions
she will come to absorb. These factors, so essential to self­
definition, are linked in an inextricable way to the child’s
country of residence. One need only consider the different
childhoods an adolescent will experience if he or she grows
up in the United States, Chile, Germany, or North Korea,
to understand how choosing a child’s country of residence
is a right “relating to the care of the person of the child.”
The Court of Appeals described Mr. Abbott’s right to take
part in making this decision as a mere “veto,” 542 F. 3d, at
1087; but even by that truncated description, the father
has an essential role in deciding the boy’s country of resi­
dence. For example, Mr. Abbott could condition his con­
sent to a change in country on A. J. A.’s moving to a city
outside Chile where Mr. Abbott could obtain an astronomy
position, thus allowing the father to have continued con­
tact with the boy.
That a ne exeat right does not fit within traditional
notions of physical custody is beside the point. The Con­
vention defines “rights of custody,” and it is that definition
that a court must consult. This uniform, text-based ap­
proach ensures international consistency in interpreting
the Convention. It forecloses courts from relying on defi­
nitions of custody confined by local law usage, definitions
that may undermine recognition of custodial arrange­
ments in other countries or in different legal traditions,
including the civil-law tradition. And, in any case, our
own legal system has adopted conceptions of custody that
accord with the Convention’s broad definition. Joint legal
custody, in which one parent cares for the child while the
other has joint decisionmaking authority concerning the
child’s welfare, has become increasingly common. See
Singer, Dispute Resolution and the Postdivorce Family:
Implications of a Paradigm Shift, 47 Family Ct. Rev. 363,
366 (2009) (“[A] recent study of child custody outcomes in
North Carolina indicated that almost 70% of all custody


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

resolutions included joint legal custody, as did over 90% of
all mediated custody agreements”); E. Maccoby & R.
Mnookin, Dividing the Child: Social and Legal Dilemmas
of Custody 107 (1992) (“[F]or 79% of our entire sample, the
[California] divorce decree provided for joint legal cus­
tody”); see generally Elrod, Reforming the System to Pro­
tect Children in High Conflict Custody Cases, 28 Wm.
Mitchell L. Rev. 495, 505–508 (2001).
Ms. Abbott gets the analysis backwards in claiming that
a ne exeat right is not a right of custody because the Con­
vention requires that any right of custody must be capable
of exercise. The Convention protects rights of custody
when “at the time of removal or retention those rights
were actually exercised, either jointly or alone, or would
have been so exercised but for the removal or retention.”
Art. 3(b), Treaty Doc., at 7. In cases like this one, a
ne exeat right is by its nature inchoate and so has no
operative force except when the other parent seeks to
remove the child from the country. If that occurs, the
parent can exercise the ne exeat right by declining consent
to the exit or placing conditions to ensure the move will be
in the child’s best interests. When one parent removes the
child without seeking the ne exeat holder’s consent, it is an
instance where the right would have been “exercised but
for the removal or retention.” Ibid.
The Court of Appeals’ conclusion that a breach of a ne
exeat right does not give rise to a return remedy would
render the Convention meaningless in many cases where
it is most needed. The Convention provides a return
remedy when a parent takes a child across international
borders in violation of a right of custody. The Convention
provides no return remedy when a parent removes a child
in violation of a right of access but requires contracting
states “to promote the peaceful enjoyment of access
rights.” Art. 21, id., at 11. For example, a court may force
the custodial parent to pay the travel costs of visitation,


10

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Opinion of the Court

see, e.g., Viragh v. Foldes, 415 Mass. 96, 109–111, 612
N. E. 2d 241, 249–250 (1993), or make other provisions for
the noncustodial parent to visit his or her child, see
§11603(b) (authorizing petitions to “secur[e] the effective
exercise of rights of access to a child”). But unlike rights
of access, ne exeat rights can only be honored with a return
remedy because these rights depend on the child’s location
being the country of habitual residence.
Any suggestion that a ne exeat right is a “righ[t] of
access” is illogical and atextual. The Convention defines
“rights of access” as “includ[ing] the right to take a child
for a limited period of time to a place other than the child’s
habitual residence,” Art. 5(b), Treaty Doc., at 7, and
ICARA defines that same term as “visitation rights,”
§11602(7). The joint right to decide a child’s country of
residence is not even arguably a “right to take a child for a
limited period of time” or a “visitation righ[t].” Reaching
the commonsense conclusion that a ne exeat right does not
fit these definitions of “rights of access” honors the Con­
vention’s distinction between rights of access and rights of
custody.
Ms. Abbott argues that the ne exeat order in this case
cannot create a right of custody because it merely protects
a court’s jurisdiction over the child. Even if this argument
were correct, it would not be dispositive. Ms. Abbott
contends the Chilean court’s ne exeat order contains no
parental consent provision and so awards the father no
rights, custodial or otherwise. See Brief for Respondent
22; but see 495 F. Supp. 2d, at 638, n. 3 (the District Court
treating the order as containing a consent provision); 542
F. 3d, at 1084 (same for the Court of Appeals). Even a
ne exeat order issued to protect a court’s jurisdiction pend­
ing issuance of further decrees is consistent with allowing
a parent to object to the child’s removal from the country.
This Court need not decide the status of ne exeat orders
lacking parental consent provisions, however; for here the


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

father relies on his rights under Minors Law 16,618. Mr.
Abbott’s rights derive not from the order but from Minors
Law 16,618. That law requires the father’s consent before
the mother can remove the boy from Chile, subject only to
the equitable power family courts retain to override any
joint custodial arrangements in times of disagreement.
Minors Law 16,618; see 1 J. Atkinson, Modern Child
Custody Practice §6–11 (2d ed. 2009) (“[T]he court remains
the final arbiter and may resolve the [dispute between
joint custodians] itself or designate one parent as having
final authority on certain issues affecting the child”);
Lombardo v. Lombardo, 202 Mich. App. 151, 159, 507
N. W. 2d 788, 792 (1993) (“[W]here the parents as joint
custodians cannot agree on important matters such as
education, it is the court’s duty to determine the issue in
the best interests of the child”). The consent provision in
Minors Law 16,618 confers upon the father the joint right
to determine his child’s country of residence. This is a
right of custody under the Convention.
B
This Court’s conclusion that Mr. Abbott possesses a
right of custody under the Convention is supported and
informed by the State Department’s view on the issue.
The United States has endorsed the view that ne exeat
rights are rights of custody. In its brief before this Court
the United States advises that “the Department of State,
whose Office of Children’s Issues serves as the Central
Authority for the United States under the Convention, has
long understood the Convention as including ne exeat
rights among the protected ‘rights of custody.’ ” Brief for
United States as Amicus Curiae 21; see Sumitomo Shoji
America, Inc. v. Avagliano, 457 U. S. 176, 184–185, n. 10
(1982) (deferring to the Executive’s interpretation of a
treaty as memorialized in a brief before this Court). It is
well settled that the Executive Branch’s interpretation of


12

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Opinion of the Court

a treaty “is entitled to great weight.” Id., at 185. There is
no reason to doubt that this well-established canon of
deference is appropriate here. The Executive is well in­
formed concerning the diplomatic consequences resulting
from this Court’s interpretation of “rights of custody,”
including the likely reaction of other contracting states
and the impact on the State Department’s ability to re­
claim children abducted from this country.
C
This Court’s conclusion that ne exeat rights are rights of
custody is further informed by the views of other contract­
ing states. In interpreting any treaty, “[t]he ‘opinions of
our sister signatories’ . . . are ‘entitled to considerable
weight.’ ” El Al Israel Airlines, Ltd. v. Tsui Yuan Tseng,
525 U. S. 155, 176 (1999) (quoting Air France v. Saks, 470
U. S. 392, 404 (1985)). The principle applies with special
force here, for Congress has directed that “uniform inter­
national interpretation of the Convention” is part of the
Convention’s framework. See §11601(b)(3)(B).
A review of the international case law confirms broad
acceptance of the rule that ne exeat rights are rights of
custody. In an early decision, the English High Court of
Justice explained that a father’s “right to ensure that the
child remain[ed] in Australia or live[d] anywhere outside
Australia only with his approval” is a right of custody
requiring return of the child to Australia. C. v. C., [1989]
1 W. L. R. 654, 658 (C. A.). Lords of the House of Lords
have agreed, noting that C. v. C.’s conclusion is “settled, so
far as the United Kingdom is concerned” and “appears to
be the majority [view] of the common law world.” See In
re D (A Child), [2007] 1 A. C. 619, 628, 633, 635 (2006).
The Supreme Court of Israel follows the same rule,
concluding that “the term ‘custody’ should be interpreted
in an expansive way, so that it will apply [i]n every case in
which there is a need for the consent of one of the parents


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

to remove the children from one country to another.” CA
5271/92 Foxman v. Foxman, [1992], §§3(D), 4 (K. Chagall
transl.). The High Courts of Austria, South Africa, and
Germany are in accord.
See Oberster Gerichtshof
[O. G. H.] [Supreme Court] Feb. 5, 1992, 2 Ob 596/91
(Austria) (“Since the English Custody Court had ordered
that the children must not be removed from England and
Wales without the father’s written consent, both parents
had, in effect, been granted joint custody concerning the
children’s place of residence”); Sonderup v. Tondelli,
2001(1) SA 1171, 1183 (Constitutional Ct. of South Africa
2000) (“[The mother’s] failure to return to British Colum­
bia with the child . . . was a breach of the conditions upon
which she was entitled to exercise her rights of custody
and . . . therefore constituted a wrongful retention . . . as
contemplated by [Article 3] of the Convention”); Bundes­
verfassungsgericht [BVerfG] [Federal Constitutional
Court of Germany] July 18, 1997, 2 BvR 1126/97, ¶15 (the
Convention requires a return remedy for a violation of the
“right to have a say in the child’s place of residence”).
Appellate courts in Australia and Scotland agree. See In
the Marriage of Resina [1991] FamCA 33 (Austl., May 22,
1991), ¶¶18–27; A. J. v. F. J., [2005] CSIH 36, 2005 1 S. C.
428, 435–436.
It is true that some courts have stated a contrary view,
or at least a more restrictive one. The Canadian Supreme
Court has said ne exeat orders are “usually intended” to
protect access rights. Thomson v. Thomson, [1994] 3
S. C. R. 551, 589–590, 119 D. L. R. (4th) 253, 281; see D. S.
v. V. W., [1996] 2 S. C. R. 108, 134 D. L. R. (4th) 481. But
the Canadian cases are not precisely on point here.
Thomson ordered a return remedy based on an interim
ne exeat order, and only noted in dicta that it may not
order such a remedy pursuant to a permanent ne exeat
order. See [1994] 3 S. C. R., at 589–590, 119 D. L. R. (4th),
at 281. D. S. involved a parent’s claim based on an im­


14

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Opinion of the Court

plicit ne exeat right and, in any event, the court ordered a
return remedy on a different basis. See [1996] 2 S. C. R.,
at 140–141, 142, 134 D. L. R. (4th), at 503–504, 505.
French courts are divided. A French Court of Appeals
held that “the right to accept or refuse the removal of the
children’s residence” outside of a region was “a joint exer­
cise of rights of custody.” Public Ministry v. M. B., [CA]
Aix-en-Provence, 6e ch., Mar. 23, 1989, Rev. crit. dr. inter­
nat. Privé 79(3), July–Sept. 1990, 529, 533–535. A trial
court in a different region of France rejected this view,
relying on the mother’s “fundamental liberty” to establish
her domicil. See Attorney for the Republic at Périgueux v.
Mrs. S., [T. G. I.] Périgueux, Mar. 17, 1992, Rev. cr. dr.
internat. Privé 82(4) Oct.–Dec. 1993, 650, 651–653, note
Bertrand Ancel, D. 1992, note G. C.
Scholars agree that there is an emerging international
consensus that ne exeat rights are rights of custody, even if
that view was not generally formulated when the Conven­
tion was drafted in 1980. At that time, joint custodial
arrangements were unknown in many of the contracting
states, and the status of ne exeat rights was not yet well
understood. See 1980 Conférence de La Haye de droit
international privé, Enlèvement d’enfants, morning meet­
ing of Wed., Oct. 8, 1980 (discussion by Messrs. Leal & van
Boeschoten), in 3 Actes et Documents de la Quatorzième
session, pp. 263–266 (1982) (Canadian and Dutch dele­
gates disagreeing whether the Convention protected
ne exeat rights, while agreeing that it should protect such
rights). Since 1980, however, joint custodial arrange­
ments have become more common. See supra, at 8–9.
And, within this framework, most contracting states and
scholars now recognize that ne exeat rights are rights of
custody. See, e.g., Hague Conference on Private Interna­
tional Law: Transfrontier Contact Concerning Children:
General Principles and Guide to Good Practice §9.3, p. 43
(2008) (“[P]reponderance of the case law supports the


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

view” that ne exeat rights are “rights of custody” (footnote
omitted)); Hague Conference on Private International
Law: Overall Conclusions of the Special Commission of
Oct. 1989 on the Operation of the Hague Convention of 25
Oct. 1980 on the Civil Aspects of International Child
Abduction, reprinted in 29 I. L. M. 219, 222, ¶9 (1990);
Hague Conference on Private International Law: Report of
the Second Special Commission Meeting to Review the
Operation of the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of
International Child Abduction 11 (1993), reprinted in 33
I. L. M. 225 (1994); Silberman, The Hague Child Abduc­
tion Convention Turns Twenty: Gender Politics and Other
Issues, 33 N. Y. U. J. Int’l L. & Pol. 221, 226–232, and
n. 13 (2000); Whitman, Croll v. Croll: The Second Circuit
Limits “Custody Rights” Under the Hague Convention on
the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction, 9
Tulane J. Int’l & Comp. L. 605, 611–616 (2001).
A history of the Convention, known as the Pérez-Vera
Report, has been cited both by the parties and by Courts of
Appeals that have considered this issue. See 1980 Con­
férence de La Haye de droit international privé, Enlève­
ment d’enfants, E. Pérez-Vera, Explanatory Report (PérezVera Report or Report), in 3 Actes et Documents de la
Quatorzième session, pp. 425–473 (1982). We need not
decide whether this Report should be given greater weight
than a scholarly commentary. Compare Hague Interna­
tional Child Abduction Convention; Text and Legal Analy­
sis, 51 Fed. Reg. 10503–10506 (1986) (identifying the
Report as the “official history” of the Convention and “a
source of background on the meaning of the provisions of
the Convention”), with Pérez-Vera Report ¶8, at 427–428
(“[the Report] has not been approved by the Conference,
and it is possible that, despite the Rapporter’s [sic] efforts
to remain objective, certain passages reflect a viewpoint
which is in part subjective”). It suffices to note that the
Report supports the conclusion that ne exeat rights are


16

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Opinion of the Court

rights of custody. The Report explains that rather than
defining custody in precise terms or referring to the laws
of different nations pertaining to parental rights, the
Convention uses the unadorned term “rights of custody” to
recognize “all the ways in which custody of children can be
exercised” through “a flexible interpretation of the terms
used, which allows the greatest possible number of cases
to be brought into consideration.” Id., ¶¶67, 71, at 446,
447–448. Thus the Report rejects the notion that because
ne exeat rights do not encompass the right to make medi­
cal or some other important decisions about a child’s life
they cannot be rights of custody. Indeed, the Report is
fully consistent with the conclusion that ne exeat rights
are just one of the many “ways in which custody of chil­
dren can be exercised.” Id., ¶ 71, at 447.
D
Adopting the view that the Convention provides a re­
turn remedy for violations of ne exeat rights accords with
its objects and purposes. The Convention is based on the
principle that the best interests of the child are well
served when decisions regarding custody rights are made
in the country of habitual residence. See Convention
Preamble, Treaty Doc., at 7. Ordering a return remedy
does not alter the existing allocation of custody rights, Art.
19, id., at 11, but does allow the courts of the home coun­
try to decide what is in the child’s best interests. It is the
Convention’s premise that courts in contracting states will
make this determination in a responsible manner.
Custody decisions are often difficult. Judges must strive
always to avoid a common tendency to prefer their own
society and culture, a tendency that ought not interfere
with objective consideration of all the factors that should
be weighed in determining the best interests of the child.
This judicial neutrality is presumed from the mandate of
the Convention, which affirms that the contracting states


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

are “[f]irmly convinced that the interests of children are of
paramount importance in matters relating to their cus­
tody.” Convention Preamble, Treaty Doc., at 7. Interna­
tional law serves a high purpose when it underwrites
the determination by nations to rely upon their domes­
tic courts to enforce just laws by legitimate and fair
proceedings.
To interpret the Convention to permit an abducting
parent to avoid a return remedy, even when the other
parent holds a ne exeat right, would run counter to the
Convention’s purpose of deterring child abductions by
parents who attempt to find a friendlier forum for deciding
custodial disputes. Ms. Abbott removed A. J. A. from
Chile while Mr. Abbott’s request to enhance his relation­
ship with his son was still pending before Chilean courts.
After she landed in Texas, the mother asked the state
court to diminish or eliminate the father’s custodial and
visitation rights. The Convention should not be inter­
preted to permit a parent to select which country will
adjudicate these questions by bringing the child to a dif­
ferent country, in violation of a ne exeat right. Denying a
return remedy for the violation of such rights would “le­
gitimize the very action—removal of the child—that the
home country, through its custody order [or other provi­
sion of law], sought to prevent” and would allow “parents
to undermine the very purpose of the Convention.” Croll,
229 F. 3d, at 147 (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). This Court
should be most reluctant to adopt an interpretation that
gives an abducting parent an advantage by coming here to
avoid a return remedy that is granted, for instance, in the
United Kingdom, Israel, Germany, and South Africa. See
supra, at 12–13.
Requiring a return remedy in cases like this one helps
deter child abductions and respects the Convention’s
purpose to prevent harms resulting from abductions. An
abduction can have devastating consequences for a child.


18

ABBOTT v. ABBOTT
Opinion of the Court

“Some child psychologists believe that the trauma children
suffer from these abductions is one of the worst forms of
child abuse.” H. R. Rep. No. 103–390, p. 2 (1993). A child
abducted by one parent is separated from the second
parent and the child’s support system. Studies have
shown that separation by abduction can cause psychologi­
cal problems ranging from depression and acute stress
disorder to posttraumatic stress disorder and identity­
formation issues. See N. Faulkner, Parental Child Abduc­
tion is Child Abuse (1999), http://www.prevent-abuse­
now.com/unreport.htm (as visited May 13, 2010, and
available in Clerk of Court’s case file). A child abducted at
an early age can experience loss of community and stabil­
ity, leading to loneliness, anger, and fear of abandonment.
See Huntington, Parental Kidnapping: A New Form of
Child Abuse (1982), in American Prosecutors Research
Institute’s National Center for Prosecution of Child Abuse,
Parental Abduction Project, Investigation and Prosecution
of Parental Abduction (1995) (App. A). Abductions may
prevent the child from forming a relationship with the left­
behind parent, impairing the child’s ability to mature. See
Faulkner, supra, at 5.
IV
While a parent possessing a ne exeat right has a right of
custody and may seek a return remedy, a return order is
not automatic. Return is not required if the abducting
parent can establish that a Convention exception applies.
One exception states return of the child is not required
when “there is a grave risk that his or her return would
expose the child to physical or psychological harm or
otherwise place the child in an intolerable situation.” Art.
13(b), Treaty Doc., at 10. If, for example, Ms. Abbott could
demonstrate that returning to Chile would put her own
safety at grave risk, the court could consider whether this
is sufficient to show that the child too would suffer “psy­


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of the Court

chological harm” or be placed “in an intolerable situation.”
See, e.g., Baran v. Beaty, 526 F. 3d 1340, 1352–1353
(CA11 2008); Walsh v. Walsh, 221 F. 3d 204, 220–221
(CA1 2000). The Convention also allows courts to decline
to order removal if the child objects, if the child has
reached a sufficient “age and degree of maturity at which
it is appropriate to take account of its views.” Art. 13(b),
Treaty Doc., at 10. The proper interpretation and applica­
tion of these and other exceptions are not before this
Court. These matters may be addressed on remand.
*
*
*
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed, and
the case is remanded for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

