Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

ALITO, J., concurring

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–945
_________________

ALBERT W. FLORENCE, PETITIONER v. BOARD OF

CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF THE COUNTY OF

BURLINGTON ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT

[April 2, 2012]


JUSTICE ALITO, concurring.
I join the opinion of the Court but emphasize the limits
of today’s holding. The Court holds that jail administrators may require all arrestees who are committed to
the general population of a jail to undergo visual strip
searches not involving physical contact by corrections
officers. To perform the searches, officers may direct the
arrestees to disrobe, shower, and submit to a visual inspection. As part of the inspection, the arrestees may be
required to manipulate their bodies.
Undergoing such an inspection is undoubtedly humiliating and deeply offensive to many, but there are reasonable grounds for strip searching arrestees before they are
admitted to the general population of a jail. As the Court
explains, there is a serious danger that some detainees
will attempt to smuggle weapons, drugs, or other contraband into the jail. Some detainees may have lice, which
can easily spread to others in the facility, and some detainees may have diseases or injuries for which the jail
is required to provide medical treatment. In addition, if a
detainee with gang-related tattoos is inadvertently housed
with detainees from a rival gang, violence may ensue.
Petitioner and the dissent would permit corrections
officers to conduct the visual strip search at issue here


2

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

ALITO, J., concurring


only if the officers have a reasonable basis for thinking
that a particular arrestee may present a danger to other
detainees or members of the jail staff. But as the Court
explains, corrections officers are often in a very poor position to make such a determination, and the threat to the
health and safety of detainees and staff, should the officers miscalculate, is simply too great.
It is important to note, however, that the Court does not
hold that it is always reasonable to conduct a full strip
search of an arrestee whose detention has not been reviewed by a judicial officer and who could be held in available facilities apart from the general population. Most of
those arrested for minor offenses are not dangerous, and
most are released from custody prior to or at the time of
their initial appearance before a magistrate. In some
cases, the charges are dropped. In others, arrestees are
released either on their own recognizance or on minimal
bail. In the end, few are sentenced to incarceration. For
these persons, admission to the general jail population,
with the concomitant humiliation of a strip search, may
not be reasonable, particularly if an alternative procedure
is feasible. For example, the Federal Bureau of Prisons
(BOP) and possibly even some local jails appear to segregate temporary detainees who are minor offenders from
the general population. See, e.g., Brief for United States
as Amicus Curiae 30; Bull v. City & Cty. of San Francisco,
595 F. 3d 964, 968 (CA9 2010) (en banc).*
——————
* In its amicus brief, the United States informs us that, according to
BOP policy, prison and jail officials cannot subject persons arrested for
misdemeanor or civil contempt offenses to visual body-cavity searches
without their consent or without reasonable suspicion that they are
concealing contraband. Brief for United States 30. Those who are not
searched must be housed separately from the inmates in the general
population. Ibid. Similarly, as described by the Court of Appeals in
Bull, 595 F. 3d 964, the San Francisco County jail system distinguishes
between arrestees who are eligible for release because, for instance,
they can post bail within 12 hours and those who must be housed for an


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

ALITO, J., concurring

The Court does not address whether it is always reasonable, without regard to the offense or the reason for detention, to strip search an arrestee before the arrestee’s detention has been reviewed by a judicial officer. The lead
opinion explicitly reserves judgment on that question. See
ante, at 18–19. In light of that limitation, I join the opinion of the Court in full.

——————
extended period of time. Id., at 968. The former are kept in holding
cells at a temporary intake and release facility where they are pat
searched and scanned with a metal detector but apparently are not
strip searched. Ibid. The latter are transported to a jail with custodial
housing facilities where they are then strip searched prior to their
admission into the general population. Ibid.

