(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS 

OF COUNTY OF BURLINGTON ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 10–945.

Argued October 12, 2011—Decided April 2, 2012

Petitioner was arrested during a traffic stop by a New Jersey state
trooper who checked a statewide computer database and found a
bench warrant issued for petitioner’s arrest after he failed to appear
at a hearing to enforce a fine. He was initially detained in the Burlington County Detention Center and later in the Essex County Correctional Facility, but was released once it was determined that the
fine had been paid. At the first jail, petitioner, like every incoming
detainee, had to shower with a delousing agent and was checked for
scars, marks, gang tattoos, and contraband as he disrobed. Petitioner claims that he also had to open his mouth, lift his tongue, hold out
his arms, turn around, and lift his genitals. At the second jail, petitioner, like other arriving detainees, had to remove his clothing while
an officer looked for body markings, wounds, and contraband; had an
officer look at his ears, nose, mouth, hair, scalp, fingers, hands, armpits, and other body openings; had a mandatory shower; and had his
clothes examined. Petitioner claims that he was also required to lift
his genitals, turn around, and cough while squatting. He filed a 42
U. S. C. §1983 action in the Federal District Court against the government entities that ran the jails and other defendants, alleging
Fourth and Fourteenth Amendment violations, and arguing that persons arrested for minor offenses cannot be subjected to invasive
searches unless prison officials have reason to suspect concealment of
weapons, drugs, or other contraband. The court granted him summary judgment, ruling that “strip-searching” nonindictable offenders
without reasonable suspicion violates the Fourth Amendment. The
Third Circuit reversed.
Held: The judgment is affirmed.


2

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Syllabus


621 F. 3d 296, affirmed.
JUSTICE KENNEDY delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to
Part IV, concluding that the search procedures at the county jails
struck a reasonable balance between inmate privacy and the needs of
the institutions, and thus the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments
do not require adoption of the framework and rules petitioner proposes. Pp. 5−18, 19.
(a) Maintaining safety and order at detention centers requires the
expertise of correctional officials, who must have substantial discretion to devise reasonable solutions to problems. A regulation impinging on an inmate’s constitutional rights must be upheld “if it is reasonably related to legitimate penological interests.” Turner v. Safley,
482 U. S. 78, 89. This Court, in Bell v. Wolfish, 441 U. S. 520, 558,
upheld a rule requiring pretrial detainees in federal correctional facilities “to expose their body cavities for visual inspection as a part of
a strip search conducted after every contact visit with a person from
outside the institution[s],” deferring to the judgment of correctional
officials that the inspections served not only to discover but also to
deter the smuggling of weapons, drugs, and other prohibited items.
In Block v. Rutherford, 468 U. S. 576, 586−587, the Court upheld a
general ban on contact visits in a county jail, noting the smuggling
threat posed by such visits and the difficulty of carving out exceptions
for certain detainees. The Court, in Hudson v. Palmer, 468 U. S. 517,
522−523, also recognized that deterring the possession of contraband
depends in part on the ability to conduct searches without predictable
exceptions when it upheld the constitutionality of random searches of
inmate lockers and cells even without suspicion that an inmate is
concealing a prohibited item. These cases establish that correctional
officials must be permitted to devise reasonable search policies to detect and deter the possession of contraband in their facilities, and
that “in the absence of substantial evidence in the record to indicate
that the officials have exaggerated their response to these considerations courts should ordinarily defer to their expert judgment in such
matters,” Block, supra, at 584–585.
Persons arrested for minor offenses may be among the detainees to
be processed at jails. See Atwater v. Lago Vista, 532 U. S. 318, 354.
Pp. 5−9.
(b) The question here is whether undoubted security imperatives
involved in jail supervision override the assertion that some detainees must be exempt from the invasive search procedures at issue absent reasonable suspicion of a concealed weapon or other contraband.
Correctional officials have a significant interest in conducting a thorough search as a standard part of the intake process. The admission
of new inmates creates risks for staff, the existing detainee popula-


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
tion, and the new detainees themselves. Officials therefore must
screen for contagious infections and for wounds or injuries requiring
immediate medical attention. It may be difficult to identify and treat
medical problems until detainees remove their clothes for a visual inspection. Jails and prisons also face potential gang violence, giving
them reasonable justification for a visual inspection of detainees for
signs of gang affiliation as part of the intake process. Additionally,
correctional officials have to detect weapons, drugs, alcohol, and
other prohibited items new detainees may possess. Drugs can make
inmates aggressive toward officers or each other, and drug trading
can lead to violent confrontations. Contraband has value in a jail’s
culture and underground economy, and competition for scarce goods
can lead to violence, extortion, and disorder. Pp. 9−13.
(c) Petitioner’s proposal―that new detainees not arrested for serious crimes or for offenses involving weapons or drugs be exempt from
invasive searches unless they give officers a particular reason to suspect them of hiding contraband―is unworkable. The seriousness of
an offense is a poor predictor of who has contraband, and it would be
difficult to determine whether individual detainees fall within the
proposed exemption. Even persons arrested for a minor offense may
be coerced by others into concealing contraband. Exempting people
arrested for minor offenses from a standard search protocol thus may
put them at greater risk and result in more contraband being
brought into the detention facility.
It also may be difficult to classify inmates by their current and prior offenses before the intake search. Jail officials know little at the
outset about an arrestee, who may be carrying a false ID or lie about
his identity. The officers conducting an initial search often do not
have access to criminal history records. And those records can be inaccurate or incomplete. Even with accurate information, officers
would encounter serious implementation difficulties. They would be
required to determine quickly whether any underlying offenses were
serious enough to authorize the more invasive search protocol. Other
possible classifications based on characteristics of individual detainees also might prove to be unworkable or even give rise to charges of
discriminatory application. To avoid liability, officers might be inclined not to conduct a thorough search in any close case, thus creating unnecessary risk for the entire jail population. While the restrictions petitioner suggests would limit the intrusion on the privacy
of some detainees, it would be at the risk of increased danger to everyone in the facility, including the less serious offenders. The Fourth
and Fourteenth Amendments do not require adoption of the proposed
framework. Pp. 13−18, 19.


4

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF 

COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Syllabus


KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to Part IV.
ROBERTS, C. J., and SCALIA and ALITO, JJ., joined that opinion in full,
and THOMAS, J., joined as to all but Part IV. ROBERTS, C. J., and ALITO,
J., filed concurring opinions. BREYER, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in
which GINSBURG, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined.

