Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Washington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–945
_________________

ALBERT W. FLORENCE, PETITIONER v. BOARD OF

CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF THE COUNTY OF

BURLINGTON ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT

[April 2, 2012]


JUSTICE KENNEDY delivered the opinion of the Court,
except as to Part IV.*
Correctional officials have a legitimate interest, indeed
a responsibility, to ensure that jails are not made less
secure by reason of what new detainees may carry in on
their bodies. Facility personnel, other inmates, and the
new detainee himself or herself may be in danger if these
threats are introduced into the jail population. This case
presents the question of what rules, or limitations, the
Constitution imposes on searches of arrested persons who
are to be held in jail while their cases are being processed.
The term “jail” is used here in a broad sense to include
prisons and other detention facilities.
The specific
measures being challenged will be described in more
detail; but, in broad terms, the controversy concerns
whether every detainee who will be admitted to the general population may be required to undergo a close visual
inspection while undressed.
The case turns in part on the extent to which this Court
——————
* JUSTICE THOMAS joins all but Part IV of this opinion.


2

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Opinion of the Court 


has sufficient expertise and information in the record to
mandate, under the Constitution, the specific restrictions
and limitations sought by those who challenge the visual
search procedures at issue. In addressing this type of
constitutional claim courts must defer to the judgment of
correctional officials unless the record contains substantial
evidence showing their policies are an unnecessary or unjustified response to problems of jail security. That
necessary showing has not been made in this case.
I
In 1998, seven years before the incidents at issue, petitioner Albert Florence was arrested after fleeing from
police officers in Essex County, New Jersey. He was
charged with obstruction of justice and use of a deadly
weapon. Petitioner entered a plea of guilty to two lesser
offenses and was sentenced to pay a fine in monthly installments. In 2003, after he fell behind on his payments
and failed to appear at an enforcement hearing, a bench
warrant was issued for his arrest. He paid the outstanding balance less than a week later; but, for some unexplained reason, the warrant remained in a statewide
computer database.
Two years later, in Burlington County, New Jersey,
petitioner and his wife were stopped in their automobile
by a state trooper. Based on the outstanding warrant in
the computer system, the officer arrested petitioner and
took him to the Burlington County Detention Center. He
was held there for six days and then was transferred to
the Essex County Correctional Facility. It is not the arrest or confinement but the search process at each jail that
gives rise to the claims before the Court.
Burlington County jail procedures required every arrestee to shower with a delousing agent. Officers would
check arrestees for scars, marks, gang tattoos, and contraband as they disrobed. App. to Pet. for Cert. 53a–56a.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of the Court

Petitioner claims he was also instructed to open his
mouth, lift his tongue, hold out his arms, turn around, and
lift his genitals. (It is not clear whether this last step was
part of the normal practice. See ibid.) Petitioner shared a
cell with at least one other person and interacted with
other inmates following his admission to the jail. Tr. of
Oral Arg. 17.
The Essex County Correctional Facility, where petitioner was taken after six days, is the largest county jail
in New Jersey. App. 70a. It admits more than 25,000 inmates each year and houses about 1,000 gang members at
any given time. When petitioner was transferred there,
all arriving detainees passed through a metal detector and
waited in a group holding cell for a more thorough search.
When they left the holding cell, they were instructed to
remove their clothing while an officer looked for body
markings, wounds, and contraband. Apparently without
touching the detainees, an officer looked at their ears,
nose, mouth, hair, scalp, fingers, hands, arms, armpits,
and other body openings. Id., at 57a–59a; App. to Pet.
for Cert. 137a–144a. This policy applied regardless of the
circumstances of the arrest, the suspected offense, or the
detainee’s behavior, demeanor, or criminal history. Petitioner alleges he was required to lift his genitals, turn
around, and cough in a squatting position as part of the
process. After a mandatory shower, during which his
clothes were inspected, petitioner was admitted to the
facility. App. 3a–4a, 52a, 258a. He was released the next
day, when the charges against him were dismissed.
Petitioner sued the governmental entities that operated
the jails, one of the wardens, and certain other defendants.
The suit was commenced in the United States District
Court for the District of New Jersey. Seeking relief under
42 U. S. C. §1983 for violations of his Fourth and Fourteenth Amendment rights, petitioner maintained that persons arrested for a minor offense could not be required


4

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Opinion of the Court 


to remove their clothing and expose the most private areas
of their bodies to close visual inspection as a routine part
of the intake process. Rather, he contended, officials could
conduct this kind of search only if they had reason to
suspect a particular inmate of concealing a weapon, drugs,
or other contraband. The District Court certified a class of
individuals who were charged with a nonindictable offense
under New Jersey law, processed at either the Burlington
County or Essex County jail, and directed to strip naked
even though an officer had not articulated any reasonable
suspicion they were concealing contraband.
After discovery, the court granted petitioner’s motion
for summary judgment on the unlawful search claim. It
concluded that any policy of “strip searching” nonindictable offenders without reasonable suspicion violated the
Fourth Amendment. A divided panel of the United States
Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit reversed, holding
that the procedures described by the District Court struck
a reasonable balance between inmate privacy and the
security needs of the two jails. 621 F. 3d 296 (2010). The
case proceeds on the understanding that the officers
searched detainees prior to their admission to the general
population, as the Court of Appeals seems to have assumed. See id., at 298, 311. Petitioner has not argued
this factual premise is incorrect.
The opinions in earlier proceedings, the briefs on file,
and some cases of this Court refer to a “strip search.” The
term is imprecise. It may refer simply to the instruction
to remove clothing while an officer observes from a distance of, say, five feet or more; it may mean a visual inspection from a closer, more uncomfortable distance; it
may include directing detainees to shake their heads or to
run their hands through their hair to dislodge what might
be hidden there; or it may involve instructions to raise
arms, to display foot insteps, to expose the back of the
ears, to move or spread the buttocks or genital areas, or to


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

cough in a squatting position. In the instant case, the
term does not include any touching of unclothed areas
by the inspecting officer. There are no allegations that
the detainees here were touched in any way as part of the
searches.
The Federal Courts of Appeals have come to differing
conclusions as to whether the Fourth Amendment requires
correctional officials to exempt some detainees who will be
admitted to a jail’s general population from the searches
here at issue. This Court granted certiorari to address the
question. 563 U. S. ___ (2011).
II
The difficulties of operating a detention center must not
be underestimated by the courts. Turner v. Safley, 482
U. S. 78, 84–85 (1987). Jails (in the stricter sense of
the term, excluding prison facilities) admit more than 13
million inmates a year. See, e.g., Dept. of Justice, Bureau
of Justice Statistics, T. Minton, Jail Inmates at Midyear
2010—Statistical Tables 2 (2011). The largest facilities
process hundreds of people every day; smaller jails may be
crowded on weekend nights, after a large police operation,
or because of detainees arriving from other jurisdictions.
Maintaining safety and order at these institutions requires the expertise of correctional officials, who must
have substantial discretion to devise reasonable solutions
to the problems they face. The Court has confirmed the
importance of deference to correctional officials and explained that a regulation impinging on an inmate’s constitutional rights must be upheld “if it is reasonably related
to legitimate penological interests.” Turner, supra, at 89;
see Overton v. Bazzetta, 539 U. S. 126, 131–132 (2003).
But see Johnson v. California, 543 U. S. 499, 510–511
(2005) (applying strict scrutiny to racial classifications).
The Court’s opinion in Bell v. Wolfish, 441 U. S. 520
(1979), is the starting point for understanding how this


6

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Opinion of the Court 


framework applies to Fourth Amendment challenges.
That case addressed a rule requiring pretrial detainees
in any correctional facility run by the Federal Bureau of
Prisons “to expose their body cavities for visual inspection
as a part of a strip search conducted after every contact
visit with a person from outside the institution.” Id., at
558. Inmates at the federal Metropolitan Correctional
Center in New York City argued there was no security
justification for these searches. Officers searched guests
before they entered the visiting room, and the inmates
were under constant surveillance during the visit. Id., at
577–578 (Marshall, J., dissenting). There had been but
one instance in which an inmate attempted to sneak contraband back into the facility. See id., at 559 (majority
opinion). The Court nonetheless upheld the search policy.
It deferred to the judgment of correctional officials that
the inspections served not only to discover but also to
deter the smuggling of weapons, drugs, and other prohibited items inside. Id., at 558. The Court explained that
there is no mechanical way to determine whether intrusions on an inmate’s privacy are reasonable. Id., at 559.
The need for a particular search must be balanced against
the resulting invasion of personal rights. Ibid.
Policies designed to keep contraband out of jails and
prisons have been upheld in cases decided since Bell. In
Block v. Rutherford, 468 U. S. 576 (1984), for example, the
Court concluded that the Los Angeles County Jail could
ban all contact visits because of the threat they posed:
“They open the institution to the introduction of
drugs, weapons, and other contraband. Visitors can
easily conceal guns, knives, drugs, or other contraband in countless ways and pass them to an inmate
unnoticed by even the most vigilant observers. And
these items can readily be slipped from the clothing of
an innocent child, or transferred by other visitors


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

permitted close contact with inmates.” Id., at 586.
There were “many justifications” for imposing a general
ban rather than trying to carve out exceptions for certain
detainees. Id., at 587. Among other problems, it would be
“a difficult if not impossible task” to identify “inmates who
have propensities for violence, escape, or drug smuggling.”
Ibid. This was made “even more difficult by the brevity of
detention and the constantly changing nature of the inmate population.” Ibid.
The Court has also recognized that deterring the possession of contraband depends in part on the ability to conduct searches without predictable exceptions. In Hudson
v. Palmer, 468 U. S. 517 (1984), it addressed the question
of whether prison officials could perform random searches
of inmate lockers and cells even without reason to suspect
a particular individual of concealing a prohibited item.
Id., at 522–523. The Court upheld the constitutionality of
the practice, recognizing that “ ‘[f]or one to advocate that
prison searches must be conducted only pursuant to an
enunciated general policy or when suspicion is directed at
a particular inmate is to ignore the realities of prison
operation.’ ” Id., at 529 (quoting Marrero v. Commonwealth, 222 Va. 754, 757, 284 S. E. 2d 809, 811 (1981)).
Inmates would adapt to any pattern or loopholes they
discovered in the search protocol and then undermine the
security of the institution. 468 U. S., at 529.
These cases establish that correctional officials must be
permitted to devise reasonable search policies to detect
and deter the possession of contraband in their facilities.
See Bell, 441 U. S., at 546 (“[M]aintaining institutional
security and preserving internal order and discipline are
essential goals that may require limitation or retraction of
retained constitutional rights of both convicted prisoners
and pretrial detainees”). The task of determining whether
a policy is reasonably related to legitimate security inter-


8

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Opinion of the Court 


ests is “peculiarly within the province and professional
expertise of corrections officials.” Id., at 548. This Court
has repeated the admonition that, “ ‘in the absence of
substantial evidence in the record to indicate that the
officials have exaggerated their response to these considerations courts should ordinarily defer to their expert
judgment in such matters.’ ” Block, supra, at 584–585;
Bell, supra, at 548.
In many jails officials seek to improve security by requiring some kind of strip search of everyone who is to be
detained. These procedures have been used in different
places throughout the country, from Cranston, Rhode
Island, to Sapulpa, Oklahoma, to Idaho Falls, Idaho. See
Roberts v. Rhode Island, 239 F. 3d 107, 108–109 (CA1
2001); Chapman v. Nichols, 989 F. 2d 393, 394 (CA10
1993); Giles v. Ackerman, 746 F. 2d 614, 615 (CA9 1984)
(per curiam); see also, e.g., Bull v. City and Cty. of San
Francisco, 595 F. 3d 964 (CA9 2010) (en banc) (San Francisco, California); Powell v. Barrett, 541 F. 3d 1298 (CA11
2008) (en banc) (Fulton Cty., Ga.); Masters v. Crouch, 872
F. 2d 1248, 1251 (CA6 1989) (Jefferson Cty., Ky.); Weber v.
Dell, 804 F. 2d 796, 797–798 (CA2 1986) (Monroe Cty.,
N. Y.); Stewart v. Lubbock Cty., 767 F. 2d 153, 154 (CA5
1985) (Lubbock Cty., Tex.).
Persons arrested for minor offenses may be among the
detainees processed at these facilities. This is, in part, a
consequence of the exercise of state authority that was the
subject of Atwater v. Lago Vista, 532 U. S. 318 (2001).
Atwater addressed the perhaps more fundamental question of who may be deprived of liberty and taken to jail in
the first place. The case involved a woman who was arrested after a police officer noticed neither she nor her
children were wearing their seatbelts. The arrestee argued the Fourth Amendment prohibited her custodial
arrest without a warrant when an offense could not result
in jail time and there was no compelling need for immedi-


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

ate detention. Id., at 346. The Court held that a Fourth
Amendment restriction on this power would put officers in
an “almost impossible spot.” Id., at 350. Their ability to
arrest a suspect would depend in some cases on the precise weight of drugs in his pocket, whether he was a repeat
offender, and the scope of what counted as a compelling
need to detain someone. Id., at 348–349. The Court rejected the proposition that the Fourth Amendment barred
custodial arrests in a set of these cases as a matter of
constitutional law. It ruled, based on established principles, that officers may make an arrest based upon probable cause to believe the person has committed a criminal
offense in their presence. See id., at 354. The Court
stated that “a responsible Fourth Amendment balance is
not well served by standards requiring sensitive, case-bycase determinations of government need, lest every discretionary judgment in the field be converted into an occasion
for constitutional review.” Id., at 347.
Atwater did not address whether the Constitution imposes special restrictions on the searches of offenders
suspected of committing minor offenses once they are
taken to jail. Some Federal Courts of Appeals have held
that corrections officials may not conduct a strip search of
these detainees, even if no touching is involved, absent
reasonable suspicion of concealed contraband. 621 F. 3d,
at 303–304, and n. 4. The Courts of Appeals to address
this issue in the last decade, however, have come to the
opposite conclusion. See 621 F. 3d 296 (case below); Bame
v. Dillard, 637 F. 3d 380 (CADC 2011); Powell, supra;
Bull, supra. The current case is set against this precedent
and governed by the principles announced in Turner and
Bell.
III
The question here is whether undoubted security imperatives involved in jail supervision override the asser-


10

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Opinion of the Court 


tion that some detainees must be exempt from the more
invasive search procedures at issue absent reasonable
suspicion of a concealed weapon or other contraband. The
Court has held that deference must be given to the officials in charge of the jail unless there is “substantial
evidence” demonstrating their response to the situation is
exaggerated. Block, 468 U. S., at 584–585 (internal quotation marks omitted). Petitioner has not met this standard,
and the record provides full justifications for the procedures used.
A
Correctional officials have a significant interest in conducting a thorough search as a standard part of the intake
process. The admission of inmates creates numerous risks
for facility staff, for the existing detainee population, and
for a new detainee himself or herself. The danger of introducing lice or contagious infections, for example, is well
documented. See, e.g., Deger & Quick, The Enduring
Menace of MRSA: Incidence, Treatment, and Prevention
in a County Jail, 15 J. Correctional Health Care 174, 174–
175, 177–178 (2009); Bick, Infection Control in Jails and
Prisons, 45 Healthcare Epidemiology 1047, 1049 (2007).
The Federal Bureau of Prisons recommends that staff
screen new detainees for these conditions. See Clinical
Practice Guidelines, Management of Methicillin-Resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) Infections 2 (2011); Clinical Practice Guidelines, Lice and Scabies Protocol 1 (2011).
Persons just arrested may have wounds or other injuries
requiring immediate medical attention. It may be difficult
to identify and treat these problems until detainees remove their clothes for a visual inspection. See Prison and
Jail Administration: Practice and Theory 142 (P. Carlson
& G. Garrett eds., 2d ed. 2008) (hereinafter Carlson &
Garrett).
Jails and prisons also face grave threats posed by the


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

increasing number of gang members who go through the
intake process. See Brief for Policemen’s Benevolent Association, Local 249, et al. as Amici Curiae 14 (hereinafter PBA Brief); New Jersey Comm’n of Investigation,
Gangland Behind Bars: How and Why Organized Criminal
Street Gangs Thrive in New Jersey’s Prisons . . . And
What Can Be Done About It 10–11 (2009). “Gang rivalries
spawn a climate of tension, violence, and coercion.” Carlson & Garrett 462. The groups recruit new members by
force, engage in assaults against staff, and give other
inmates a reason to arm themselves. Ibid. Fights among
feuding gangs can be deadly, and the officers who must
maintain order are put in harm’s way. PBA Brief 17.
These considerations provide a reasonable basis to justify
a visual inspection for certain tattoos and other signs of
gang affiliation as part of the intake process. The identification and isolation of gang members before they are
admitted protects everyone in the facility. Cf. Fraise v.
Terhune, 283 F. 3d 506, 509–510 (CA3 2002) (Alito, J.)
(describing a statewide policy authorizing the identification and isolation of gang members in prison).
Detecting contraband concealed by new detainees, furthermore, is a most serious responsibility. Weapons,
drugs, and alcohol all disrupt the safe operation of a jail.
Cf. Hudson, 468 U. S., at 528 (recognizing “the constant
fight against the proliferation of knives and guns, illicit
drugs, and other contraband”). Correctional officers have
had to confront arrestees concealing knives, scissors, razor
blades, glass shards, and other prohibited items on their
person, including in their body cavities. See Bull, 595
F. 3d, at 967, 969; Brief for New Jersey County Jail Wardens Association as Amicus Curiae 17–18 (hereinafter
New Jersey Wardens Brief). They have also found crack,
heroin, and marijuana. Brief for City and County of San
Francisco et al. as Amici Curiae 9–11 (hereinafter San
Francisco Brief). The use of drugs can embolden inmates


12

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Opinion of the Court 


in aggression toward officers or each other; and, even
apart from their use, the trade in these substances can
lead to violent confrontations. See PBA Brief 11.
There are many other kinds of contraband. The textbook definition of the term covers any unauthorized item.
See Prisons: Today and Tomorrow 237 (J. Pollock ed.
1997) (“Contraband is any item that is possessed in violation of prison rules. Contraband obviously includes drugs
or weapons, but it can also be money, cigarettes, or even
some types of clothing”). Everyday items can undermine
security if introduced into a detention facility:
“Lighters and matches are fire and arson risks or potential weapons. Cell phones are used to orchestrate
violence and criminality both within and without jailhouse walls. Pills and medications enhance suicide
risks. Chewing gum can block locking devices; hairpins can open handcuffs; wigs can conceal drugs and
weapons.” New Jersey Wardens Brief 8–9.
Something as simple as an overlooked pen can pose a
significant danger. Inmates commit more than 10,000
assaults on correctional staff every year and many more
among themselves. See Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice
Statistics, J. Stephan & J. Karberg, Census of State and
Federal Correctional Facilities, 2000, p. v (2003).
Contraband creates additional problems because scarce
items, including currency, have value in a jail’s culture
and underground economy. Correctional officials inform
us “[t]he competition . . . for such goods begets violence,
extortion, and disorder.” New Jersey Wardens Brief 2.
Gangs exacerbate the problem. They “orchestrate thefts,
commit assaults, and approach inmates in packs to take
the contraband from the weak.” Id., at 9–10. This puts
the entire facility, including detainees being held for a
brief term for a minor offense, at risk. Gangs do coerce
inmates who have access to the outside world, such as


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

people serving their time on the weekends, to sneak things
into the jail. Id., at 10; see, e.g., Pugmire, Vegas Suspect
Has Term to Serve, Los Angeles Times, Sept. 23, 2005,
p. B1 (“Weekend-only jail sentences are a common punishment for people convicted of nonviolent drug crimes . . .”).
These inmates, who might be thought to pose the least
risk, have been caught smuggling prohibited items into
jail. See New Jersey Wardens Brief 10. Concealing contraband often takes little time and effort. It might be done
as an officer approaches a suspect’s car or during a brief
commotion in a group holding cell. Something small
might be tucked or taped under an armpit, behind an ear,
between the buttocks, in the instep of a foot, or inside the
mouth or some other body cavity.
It is not surprising that correctional officials have
sought to perform thorough searches at intake for disease,
gang affiliation, and contraband. Jails are often crowded,
unsanitary, and dangerous places. There is a substantial
interest in preventing any new inmate, either of his own
will or as a result of coercion, from putting all who live or
work at these institutions at even greater risk when he is
admitted to the general population.
B
Petitioner acknowledges that correctional officials must
be allowed to conduct an effective search during the intake
process and that this will require at least some detainees
to lift their genitals or cough in a squatting position.
These procedures, similar to the ones upheld in Bell, are
designed to uncover contraband that can go undetected by
a patdown, metal detector, and other less invasive
searches. See Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 23
(hereinafter United States Brief); New Jersey Wardens
Brief 19, n. 6. Petitioner maintains there is little benefit
to conducting these more invasive steps on a new detainee
who has not been arrested for a serious crime or for any


14

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Opinion of the Court 


offense involving a weapon or drugs. In his view these detainees should be exempt from this process unless they
give officers a particular reason to suspect them of hiding
contraband. It is reasonable, however, for correctional
officials to conclude this standard would be unworkable.
The record provides evidence that the seriousness of an
offense is a poor predictor of who has contraband and
that it would be difficult in practice to determine whether
individual detainees fall within the proposed exemption.
1
People detained for minor offenses can turn out to be
the most devious and dangerous criminals. Cf. Clements v.
Logan, 454 U. S. 1304, 1305 (1981) (Rehnquist, J., in
chambers) (deputy at a detention center shot by misdemeanant who had not been strip searched). Hours after
the Oklahoma City bombing, Timothy McVeigh was
stopped by a state trooper who noticed he was driving
without a license plate. Johnston, Suspect Won’t Answer
Any Questions, N. Y. Times, Apr. 25, 1995, p. A1. Police
stopped serial killer Joel Rifkin for the same reason.
McQuiston, Confession Used to Portray Rifkin as Methodical Killer, N. Y. Times, Apr. 26, 1994, p. B6. One of
the terrorists involved in the September 11 attacks was
stopped and ticketed for speeding just two days before
hijacking Flight 93. The Terrorists: Hijacker Got a Speeding Ticket, N. Y. Times, Jan. 8, 2002, p. A12. Reasonable
correctional officials could conclude these uncertainties
mean they must conduct the same thorough search of
everyone who will be admitted to their facilities.
Experience shows that people arrested for minor offenses have tried to smuggle prohibited items into jail,
sometimes by using their rectal cavities or genitals for the
concealment. They may have some of the same incentives
as a serious criminal to hide contraband. A detainee
might risk carrying cash, cigarettes, or a penknife to


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

survive in jail. Others may make a quick decision to hide
unlawful substances to avoid getting in more trouble at
the time of their arrest. This record has concrete examples. Officers at the Atlantic County Correctional Facility,
for example, discovered that a man arrested for driving
under the influence had “2 dime bags of weed, 1 pack of
rolling papers, 20 matches, and 5 sleeping pills” taped
under his scrotum. Brief for Atlantic County et al. as
Amici Curiae 36 (internal quotation marks omitted). A
person booked on a misdemeanor charge of disorderly
conduct in Washington State managed to hide a lighter,
tobacco, tattoo needles, and other prohibited items in his
rectal cavity. See United States Brief 25, n. 15. San
Francisco officials have discovered contraband hidden in
body cavities of people arrested for trespassing, public
nuisance, and shoplifting. San Francisco Brief 3. There
have been similar incidents at jails throughout the country. See United States Brief 25, n. 15.
Even if people arrested for a minor offense do not themselves wish to introduce contraband into a jail, they may
be coerced into doing so by others. See New Jersey Wardens Brief 16; cf. Block, 468 U. S., at 587 (“It is not unreasonable to assume, for instance, that low security risk
detainees would be enlisted to help obtain contraband or
weapons by their fellow inmates who are denied contact
visits”). This could happen any time detainees are held in
the same area, including in a van on the way to the station
or in the holding cell of the jail. If, for example, a person
arrested and detained for unpaid traffic citations is not
subject to the same search as others, this will be well
known to other detainees with jail experience. A hardened
criminal or gang member can, in just a few minutes, approach the person and coerce him into hiding the fruits of
a crime, a weapon, or some other contraband. As an expert in this case explained, “the interaction and mingling
between misdemeanants and felons will only increase the


16

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Opinion of the Court 


amount of contraband in the facility if the jail can only
conduct admission searches on felons.” App. 381a. Exempting people arrested for minor offenses from a standard search protocol thus may put them at greater risk and
result in more contraband being brought into the detention facility. This is a substantial reason not to mandate
the exception petitioner seeks as a matter of constitutional
law.
2
It also may be difficult, as a practical matter, to classify
inmates by their current and prior offenses before the
intake search. Jails can be even more dangerous than
prisons because officials there know so little about the
people they admit at the outset. See New Jersey Wardens
Brief 11–14. An arrestee may be carrying a false ID or lie
about his identity. The officers who conduct an initial
search often do not have access to criminal history records.
See, e.g., App. 235a; New Jersey Wardens Brief 13. And
those records can be inaccurate or incomplete. See Department of Justice v. Reporters Comm. for Freedom of
Press, 489 U. S. 749, 752 (1989). Petitioner’s rap sheet is
an example. It did not reflect his previous arrest for possession of a deadly weapon. Tr. of Oral Arg. 18–19. In
the absence of reliable information it would be illogical to
require officers to assume the arrestees in front of them do
not pose a risk of smuggling something into the facility.
The laborious administration of prisons would become
less effective, and likely less fair and evenhanded, were
the practical problems inevitable from the rules suggested
by petitioner to be imposed as a constitutional mandate.
Even if they had accurate information about a detainee’s
current and prior arrests, officers, under petitioner’s proposed regime, would encounter serious implementation
difficulties. They would be required, in a few minutes, to
determine whether any of the underlying offenses were


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of the Court

serious enough to authorize the more invasive search
protocol. Other possible classifications based on characteristics of individual detainees also might prove to be
unworkable or even give rise to charges of discriminatory
application. Most officers would not be well equipped to
make any of these legal determinations during the pressures of the intake process. Bull, 595 F. 3d, at 985–987
(Kozinski, C. J., concurring); see also Welsh v. Wisconsin,
466 U. S. 740, 761–762 (1984) (White, J., dissenting)
(“[T]he Court’s approach will necessitate a case-by-case
evaluation of the seriousness of particular crimes, a difficult task for which officers and courts are poorly
equipped”). To avoid liability, officers might be inclined
not to conduct a thorough search in any close case, thus
creating unnecessary risk for the entire jail population.
Cf. Atwater, 532 U. S., at 351, and n. 22.
The Court addressed an analogous problem in Atwater.
The petitioner in that case argued the Fourth Amendment
prohibited a warrantless arrest when being convicted of
the suspected crime “could not ultimately carry any jail
time” and there was “no compelling need for immediate
detention.” Id., at 346. That rule “promise[d] very little in
the way of administrability.” Id., at 350. Officers could
not be expected to draw the proposed lines on a moment’s
notice, and the risk of violating the Constitution would
have discouraged them from arresting criminals in any
questionable circumstances. Id., at 350–351 (“An officer
not quite sure the drugs weighed enough to warrant jail
time or not quite certain about a suspect’s risk of flight
would not arrest, even though it could perfectly well turn
out that, in fact, the offense called for incarceration and
the defendant was long gone on the day of trial”). The
Fourth Amendment did not compel this result in Atwater.
The Court held that officers who have probable cause to
believe even a minor criminal offense has been committed
in their presence may arrest the offender. See id., at 354.


18

FLORENCE v. BOARD OF CHOSEN FREEHOLDERS OF
COUNTY OF BURLINGTON

Opinion of ENNEDY, J.
Opinion of Kthe Court 


Individual jurisdictions can of course choose “to impose
more restrictive safeguards through statutes limiting
warrantless arrests for minor offenders.” Id., at 352.
One of the central principles in Atwater applies with
equal force here. Officers who interact with those suspected of violating the law have an “essential interest in
readily administrable rules.” Id., at 347; accord, New York
v. Belton, 453 U. S. 454, 458 (1981). The officials in charge
of the jails in this case urge the Court to reject any complicated constitutional scheme requiring them to conduct less
thorough inspections of some detainees based on their
behavior, suspected offense, criminal history, and other
factors. They offer significant reasons why the Constitution must not prevent them from conducting the same
search on any suspected offender who will be admitted to
the general population in their facilities. The restrictions
suggested by petitioner would limit the intrusion on the
privacy of some detainees but at the risk of increased
danger to everyone in the facility, including the less serious offenders themselves.
IV
This case does not require the Court to rule on the types
of searches that would be reasonable in instances where,
for example, a detainee will be held without assignment to
the general jail population and without substantial contact
with other detainees. This describes the circumstances in
Atwater. See 532 U. S., at 324 (“Officers took Atwater’s
‘mug shot’ and placed her, alone, in a jail cell for about one
hour, after which she was taken before a magistrate and
released on $310 bond”). The accommodations provided in
these situations may diminish the need to conduct some
aspects of the searches at issue. Cf. United States Brief 30
(discussing the segregation, and less invasive searches, of
individuals held by the Federal Bureau of Prisons for
misdemeanors or civil contempt). The circumstances


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

19

Opinion of the Court

before the Court, however, do not present the opportunity
to consider a narrow exception of the sort JUSTICE ALITO
describes, post, at 2–3 (concurring opinion), which might
restrict whether an arrestee whose detention has not yet
been reviewed by a magistrate or other judicial officer,
and who can be held in available facilities removed from
the general population, may be subjected to the types of
searches at issue here.
Petitioner’s amici raise concerns about instances of
officers engaging in intentional humiliation and other
abusive practices. See Brief for Sister Bernie Galvin et al.
as Amici Curiae; see also Hudson, 468 U. S., at 528
(“[I]ntentional harassment of even the most hardened
criminals cannot be tolerated by a civilized society”); Bell,
441 U. S., at 560. There also may be legitimate concerns
about the invasiveness of searches that involve the touching of detainees. These issues are not implicated on the
facts of this case, however, and it is unnecessary to consider them here.
V
Even assuming all the facts in favor of petitioner, the
search procedures at the Burlington County Detention
Center and the Essex County Correctional Facility struck
a reasonable balance between inmate privacy and the
needs of the institutions. The Fourth and Fourteenth
Amendments do not require adoption of the framework of
rules petitioner proposes.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals for the Third
Circuit is affirmed.
It is so ordered.

