(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP. v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
No. 09–1298. Argued January 18, 2011—Decided May 23, 2011*
After petitioners fell behind schedule in developing a stealth aircraft
(A–12) for the Navy, the contracting officer terminated their $4.8 bil
lion fixed-price contract for default and ordered petitioners to repay
approximately $1.35 billion in progress payments for work the Gov
ernment never accepted. Petitioners filed suit in the Court of Federal
Claims (CFC), challenging the termination decision under the Con
tract Disputes Act of 1978. They argued that Federal Circuit prece
dent permitted their default to be excused because the Government
had failed to share its “superior knowledge” about how to design and
manufacture stealth aircraft. Uncovering the extent of such knowl
edge proved difficult because the design, materials, and manufactur
ing process for prior stealth aircraft, operated by the Air Force, are
closely guarded military secrets. After military secrets were dis
closed during discovery, the Acting Secretary of the Air Force warned
the CFC that further discovery into the extent of the Government’s
superior knowledge would risk disclosing classified information. The
CFC terminated such discovery and found the superior-knowledge
question nonjusticiable. The CFC subsequently converted the termi
nation into a less-Government-friendly termination for convenience
and awarded petitioners $1.2 billion. The Federal Circuit reversed.
On remand, the CFC sustained the default termination and reaf
firmed that petitioners’ superior-knowledge affirmative defense could
not be litigated. The Federal Circuit again reversed, but it found
that the state-secrets privilege prevented adjudicating petitioners’
superior-knowledge defense. On remand, the CFC again found peti
——————
* Together with No. 09–1302, Boeing Co., Successor to McDonnell
Douglas Corp. v. United States, also on certiorari to the same court.


2

GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP. v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
tioners had defaulted, and the Federal Circuit affirmed.

Held: When, to protect state secrets, a court dismisses a Government
contractor’s prima facie valid affirmative defense to the Govern
ment’s allegations of contractual breach, the proper remedy is to
leave the parties where they were on the day they filed suit. Pp. 5–
14.
(a) The CFC held that, since invocation of the state-secrets privi
lege obscured too many of the facts relevant to the superior
knowledge defense, the issue of that defense was nonjusticiable, even
though petitioners had brought forward enough unprivileged evi
dence for a prima facie showing. In this situation, the Court must
exercise its common-law authority to fashion contractual remedies in
Government-contracting disputes. The relevant state-secrets juris
prudence comes not from United States v. Reynolds, 345 U. S. 1,
which deals with the Government’s evidentiary privilege against
court-ordered disclosure of state and military secrets, but from Totten
v. United States, 92 U. S. 105, and Tenet v. Doe, 544 U. S. 1, two
cases dealing with alleged contracts to spy.
Where liability depends on the validity of a plausible superior
knowledge defense, and when full litigation of that defense “would
inevitably lead to the disclosure of” state secrets, Totten, supra, at
107, neither party can obtain judicial relief. It seems unrealistic to
separate the claim from the defense, allowing the former to proceed
while barring the latter. Claims and defenses together establish the
justification, or lack of justification, for judicial relief; and when pub
lic policy precludes judicial intervention for the one it should also
preclude judicial intervention for the other. Suit on the contract, or
for performance rendered or funds paid under the contract, will not
lie, and courts should leave the parties to the agreement where they
stood on the day they filed suit. The Government suggests that at
the time of suit, petitioners had been held in default by the contract
ing officer and were liable for the ensuing consequences. But that
was merely one step in the parties’ contractual regime. The “position
of the parties” at the time of suit is not their position with regard to
legal burdens and the legal consequences of contract-related deter
minations, but their position with regard to possession of funds and
property. Pp. 5–10.
(b) Neither side will be entirely happy with this resolution. Gen
eral Dynamics (but not Boeing) wants to turn the termination into
one for convenience and reinstate the CFC’s $1.2 billion award, but
that is not an option under the A–12 agreement. Moreover, state se
crets would make it impossible to calculate petitioners’ damages.
The Government wants a return of the $1.35 billion it paid petition
ers for work never accepted, but the validity of that claim depends on


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
the nonjusticiable issue whether petitioners are in default. As in Tot
ten, see 92 U. S., at 106, the Court’s refusal to enforce this contract
captures what the ex ante expectations of the parties were or rea
sonably ought to have been. They must have assumed the risk that
state secrets would prevent the adjudication of inadequate perform
ance claims. Moreover, this ruling’s impact here is likely much more
significant than its impact in future cases, except to the extent that it
renders the law more predictable and hence more subject to accom
modation by contracting parties. Whether the Government had an
obligation to share its superior knowledge about stealth technology is
left for the Federal Circuit to address on remand. Pp. 10–13.
567 F. 3d 1340, vacated and remanded.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

