Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–7412
_________________

TERRANCE JAMAR GRAHAM, PETITIONER v.

FLORIDA 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE DISTRICT COURT OF APPEAL
OF FLORIDA, FIRST DISTRICT
[May 17, 2010]

CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS, concurring in the judgment.
I agree with the Court that Terrance Graham’s sentence
of life without parole violates the Eighth Amendment’s
prohibition on “cruel and unusual punishments.” Unlike
the majority, however, I see no need to invent a new con
stitutional rule of dubious provenance in reaching that
conclusion. Instead, my analysis is based on an applica
tion of this Court’s precedents, in particular (1) our cases
requiring “narrow proportionality” review of noncapital
sentences and (2) our conclusion in Roper v. Simmons, 543
U. S. 551 (2005), that juvenile offenders are generally less
culpable than adults who commit the same crimes.
These cases expressly allow courts addressing allega
tions that a noncapital sentence violates the Eighth
Amendment to consider the particular defendant and
particular crime at issue. The standards for relief under
these precedents are rigorous, and should be. But here
Graham’s juvenile status—together with the nature of his
criminal conduct and the extraordinarily severe punish
ment imposed—lead me to conclude that his sentence of
life without parole is unconstitutional.
I
Our Court has struggled with whether and how to apply
the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause to sentences


2

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

for noncapital crimes. Some of my colleagues have raised
serious and thoughtful questions about whether, as an
original matter, the Constitution was understood to re
quire any degree of proportionality between noncapital
offenses and their corresponding punishments. See, e.g.,
Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U. S. 957, 962–994 (1991)
(principal opinion of SCALIA, J.); post, at 3–5, and n. 1
(THOMAS, J., dissenting). Neither party here asks us to
reexamine our precedents requiring such proportionality,
however, and so I approach this case by trying to apply
our past decisions to the facts at hand.
A
Graham’s case arises at the intersection of two lines of
Eighth Amendment precedent. The first consists of deci
sions holding that the Cruel and Unusual Punishments
Clause embraces a “narrow proportionality principle” that
we apply, on a case-by-case basis, when asked to review
noncapital sentences. Lockyer v. Andrade, 538 U. S. 63, 72
(2003) (internal quotation marks omitted); Solem v. Helm,
463 U. S. 277, 290 (1983); Ewing v. California, 538 U. S.
11, 20 (2003) (plurality opinion); Harmelin, supra, at 996–
997 (KENNEDY, J., concurring in part and concurring in
judgment). This “narrow proportionality principle” does
not grant judges blanket authority to second-guess deci
sions made by legislatures or sentencing courts. On the
contrary, a reviewing court will only “rarely” need “to
engage in extended analysis to determine that a sentence
is not constitutionally disproportionate,” Solem, supra, at
290, n. 16 (emphasis added), and “successful challenges” to
noncapital sentences will be all the more “exceedingly
rare,” Rummel v. Estelle, 445 U. S. 263, 272 (1980).
We have “not established a clear or consistent path for
courts to follow” in applying the highly deferential “narrow
proportionality” analysis. Lockyer, supra, at 72. We have,
however, emphasized the primacy of the legislature in


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

setting sentences, the variety of legitimate penological
schemes, the state-by-state diversity protected by our
federal system, and the requirement that review be guided
by objective, rather than subjective, factors. Ewing, supra,
at 23 (plurality opinion); Harmelin, supra, at 998–1001
(opinion of KENNEDY, J.). Most importantly, however, we
have explained that the Eighth Amendment “ ‘does not
require strict proportionality between crime and sen
tence’ ”; rather, “ ‘it forbids only extreme sentences that are
“grossly disproportionate” to the crime.’ ” Ewing, supra, at
23 (plurality opinion) (quoting Harmelin, supra, at 1001
(opinion of KENNEDY, J.)).
Our cases indicate that courts conducting “narrow pro
portionality” review should begin with a threshold inquiry
that compares “the gravity of the offense and the harsh
ness of the penalty.” Solem, 463 U. S., at 290–291. This
analysis can consider a particular offender’s mental state
and motive in committing the crime, the actual harm
caused to his victim or to society by his conduct, and any
prior criminal history. Id., at 292–294, 296–297, and n. 22
(considering motive, past criminal conduct, alcoholism,
and propensity for violence of the particular defendant);
see also Ewing, supra, at 28–30 (plurality opinion) (exam
ining defendant’s criminal history); Harmelin, 501 U. S.,
at 1001–1004 (opinion of KENNEDY, J.) (noting specific
details of the particular crime of conviction).
Only in “the rare case in which a threshold comparison
of the crime committed and the sentence imposed leads
to an inference of gross disproportionality,” id., at 1005,
should courts proceed to an “intrajurisdictional” compari
son of the sentence at issue with those imposed on other
criminals in the same jurisdiction, and an “interjurisdic
tional” comparison with sentences imposed for the same
crime in other jurisdictions. Solem, supra, at 291–292. If
these subsequent comparisons confirm the inference of
gross disproportionality, courts should invalidate the


4

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

sentence as a violation of the Eighth Amendment.
B
The second line of precedent relevant to assessing Gra
ham’s sentence consists of our cases acknowledging that
juvenile offenders are generally—though not necessarily in
every case—less morally culpable than adults who commit
the same crimes. This insight animated our decision in
Thompson v. Oklahoma, 487 U. S. 815 (1988), in which we
invalidated a capital sentence imposed on a juvenile who
had committed his crime under the age of 16. More re
cently, in Roper, 543 U. S. 551, we extended the prohibi
tion on executions to those who committed their crimes
before the age of 18.
Both Thompson and Roper arose in the unique context
of the death penalty, a punishment that our Court has
recognized “must be limited to those offenders who commit
‘a narrow category of the most serious crimes’ and whose
extreme culpability makes them ‘the most deserving of
execution.’ ” 543 U. S., at 568 (quoting Atkins v. Virginia,
536 U. S. 304, 319 (2002)). Roper’s prohibition on the
juvenile death penalty followed from our conclusion that
“[t]hree general differences between juveniles under 18
and adults demonstrate that juvenile offenders cannot
with reliability be classified among the worst offenders.”
543 U. S., at 569. These differences are a lack of maturity
and an underdeveloped sense of responsibility, a height
ened susceptibility to negative influences and outside
pressures, and the fact that the character of a juvenile is
“more transitory” and “less fixed” than that of an adult.
Id., at 569–570. Together, these factors establish the
“diminished culpability of juveniles,” id., at 571, and “ren
der suspect any conclusion” that juveniles are among “the
worst offenders” for whom the death penalty is reserved,
id., at 570.
Today, the Court views Roper as providing the basis for


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

a new categorical rule that juveniles may never receive a
sentence of life without parole for nonhomicide crimes. I
disagree. In Roper, the Court tailored its analysis of
juvenile characteristics to the specific question whether
juvenile offenders could constitutionally be subject to
capital punishment. Our answer that they could not be
sentenced to death was based on the explicit conclusion
that they “cannot with reliability be classified among the
worst offenders.” Id., at 569 (emphasis added).
This conclusion does not establish that juveniles can
never be eligible for life without parole. A life sentence is
of course far less severe than a death sentence, and we
have never required that it be imposed only on the very
worst offenders, as we have with capital punishment.
Treating juvenile life sentences as analogous to capital
punishment is at odds with our longstanding view that
“the death penalty is different from other punishments in
kind rather than degree.” Solem, supra, at 294. It is also
at odds with Roper itself, which drew the line at capital
punishment by blessing juvenile sentences that are “less
severe than death” despite involving “forfeiture of some of
the most basic liberties.” 543 U. S., at 573–574. Indeed,
Roper explicitly relied on the possible imposition of life
without parole on some juvenile offenders. Id., at 572.
But the fact that Roper does not support a categorical
rule barring life sentences for all juveniles does not mean
that a criminal defendant’s age is irrelevant to those
sentences. On the contrary, our cases establish that the
“narrow proportionality” review applicable to noncapital
cases itself takes the personal “culpability of the offender”
into account in examining whether a given punishment is
proportionate to the crime. Solem, supra, at 292. There
is no reason why an offender’s juvenile status should be
excluded from the analysis. Indeed, given Roper’s conclu
sion that juveniles are typically less blameworthy than
adults, 543 U. S., at 571, an offender’s juvenile status can


6

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

play a central role in the inquiry.
JUSTICE THOMAS disagrees with even our limited reli
ance on Roper on the ground that the present case does
not involve capital punishment. Post, at 26 (dissenting
opinion). That distinction is important—indeed, it under
lies our rejection of the categorical rule declared by the
Court. But Roper’s conclusion that juveniles are typically
less culpable than adults has pertinence beyond capital
cases, and rightly informs the case-specific inquiry I be
lieve to be appropriate here.
In short, our existing precedent already provides a
sufficient framework for assessing the concerns outlined
by the majority. Not every juvenile receiving a life sen
tence will prevail under this approach. Not every juvenile
should. But all will receive the protection that the Eighth
Amendment requires.
II
Applying the “narrow proportionality” framework to the
particular facts of this case, I conclude that Graham’s
sentence of life without parole violates the Eighth
Amendment.*
——————
* JUSTICE ALITO suggests that Graham has failed to preserve any
challenge to his sentence based on the “narrow, as-applied proportional
ity principle.” Post, at 1 (dissenting opinion). I disagree. It is true that
Graham asks us to declare, categorically, that no juvenile convicted of a
nonhomicide offense may ever be subject to a sentence of life without
parole. But he claims that this rule is warranted under the narrow
proportionality principle we set forth in Solem v. Helm, 463 U. S. 277
(1983), Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U. S. 957 (1991), and Ewing v.
California, 538 U. S. 11 (2003). Brief for Petitioner 30, 31, 54–64.
Insofar as he relies on that framework, I believe we may do so as well,
even if our analysis results in a narrower holding than the categorical rule Graham seeks. See also Reply Brief for Petitioner 15, n. 8
(“[T]he Court could rule narrowly in this case and hold only that
petitioner’s sentence of life without parole was unconstitutionally
disproportionate”).


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

A
I begin with the threshold inquiry comparing the gravity
of Graham’s conduct to the harshness of his penalty.
There is no question that the crime for which Graham
received his life sentence—armed burglary of a nondomicil
with an assault or battery—is “a serious crime deserving
serious punishment.” Enmund v. Florida, 458 U. S. 782,
797 (1982). So too is the home invasion robbery that was
the basis of Graham’s probation violation. But these
crimes are certainly less serious than other crimes, such
as murder or rape.
As for Graham’s degree of personal culpability, he com
mitted the relevant offenses when he was a juvenile—a
stage at which, Roper emphasized, one’s “culpability or
blameworthiness is diminished, to a substantial degree, by
reason of youth and immaturity.” 543 U. S., at 571. Gra
ham’s age places him in a significantly different category
from the defendants in Rummel, Harmelin, and Ewing, all
of whom committed their crimes as adults. Graham’s
youth made him relatively more likely to engage in reck
less and dangerous criminal activity than an adult; it also
likely enhanced his susceptibility to peer pressure. See,
e.g., Roper, supra, at 569; Johnson v. Texas, 509 U. S. 350,
367 (1993); Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455 U. S. 104, 115–117
(1982). There is no reason to believe that Graham should
be denied the general presumption of diminished culpabil
ity that Roper indicates should apply to juvenile offenders.
If anything, Graham’s in-court statements—including his
request for a second chance so that he could “do whatever
it takes to get to the NFL”—underscore his immaturity.
App. 380.
The fact that Graham committed the crimes that he did
proves that he was dangerous and deserved to be pun
ished. But it does not establish that he was particularly
dangerous—at least relative to the murderers and rapists
for whom the sentence of life without parole is typically


8

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

reserved. On the contrary, his lack of prior criminal con
victions, his youth and immaturity, and the difficult cir
cumstances of his upbringing noted by the majority, ante,
at 1, all suggest that he was markedly less culpable than a
typical adult who commits the same offenses.
Despite these considerations, the trial court sentenced
Graham to life in prison without the possibility of parole.
This is the second-harshest sentence available under our
precedents for any crime, and the most severe sanction
available for a nonhomicide offense. See Kennedy v. Lou
isiana, 554 U. S. ___ (2008). Indeed, as the majority notes,
Graham’s sentence far exceeded the punishment proposed
by the Florida Department of Corrections (which sug
gested a sentence of four years, Brief for Petitioner 20),
and the state prosecutors (who asked that he be sentenced
to 30 years in prison for the armed burglary, App. 388).
No one in Graham’s case other than the sentencing judge
appears to have believed that Graham deserved to go to
prison for life.
Based on the foregoing circumstances, I conclude that
there is a strong inference that Graham’s sentence of life
imprisonment without parole was grossly disproportionate
in violation of the Eighth Amendment. I therefore proceed
to the next steps of the proportionality analysis.
B
Both intrajurisdictional and interjurisdictional compari
sons of Graham’s sentence confirm the threshold inference
of disproportionality.
Graham’s sentence was far more severe than that im
posed for similar violations of Florida law, even without
taking juvenile status into account. For example, indi
viduals who commit burglary or robbery offenses in Flor
ida receive average sentences of less than 5 years and less
than 10 years, respectively. Florida Dept. of Corrections,
Annual Report FY 2007–2008: The Guidebook to Correc


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

tions in Florida 35. Unsurprisingly, Florida’s juvenile
criminals receive similarly low sentences—typically less
than five years for burglary and less than seven years for
robbery. Id., at 36. Graham’s life without parole sentence
was far more severe than the average sentence imposed on
those convicted of murder or manslaughter, who typically
receive under 25 years in prison. Id., at 35. As the Court
explained in Solem, 463 U. S., at 291, “[i]f more serious
crimes are subject to the same penalty, or to less serious
penalties, that is some indication that the punishment at
issue may be excessive.”
Finally, the inference that Graham’s sentence is dispro
portionate is further validated by comparison to the sen
tences imposed in other domestic jurisdictions. As the
majority opinion explains, Florida is an outlier in its will
ingness to impose sentences of life without parole on juve
niles convicted of nonhomicide crimes. See ante, at 11–13.
III
So much for Graham. But what about Milagro Cun
ningham, a 17-year-old who beat and raped an 8-year-old
girl before leaving her to die under 197 pounds of rock in a
recycling bin in a remote landfill? See Musgrave, Cruel or
Necessary? Life Terms for Youths Spur National Debate,
Palm Beach Post, Oct. 15, 2009, p. 1A. Or Nathan Walker
and Jakaris Taylor, the Florida juveniles who together
with their friends gang-raped a woman and forced her to
perform oral sex on her 12-year-old son? See 3 Sentenced
to Life for Gang Rape of Mother, Associated Press, Oct. 14,
2009. The fact that Graham cannot be sentenced to life
without parole for his conduct says nothing whatever
about these offenders, or others like them who commit
nonhomicide crimes far more reprehensible than the
conduct at issue here. The Court uses Graham’s case as a
vehicle to proclaim a new constitutional rule—applicable
well beyond the particular facts of Graham’s case—that a


10

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

sentence of life without parole imposed on any juvenile for
any nonhomicide offense is unconstitutional. This cate
gorical conclusion is as unnecessary as it is unwise.
A holding this broad is unnecessary because the particu
lar conduct and circumstances at issue in the case before
us are not serious enough to justify Graham’s sentence.
In reaching this conclusion, there is no need for the Court
to decide whether that same sentence would be constitu
tional if imposed for other more heinous nonhomicide
crimes.
A more restrained approach is especially appropriate in
light of the Court’s apparent recognition that it is perfectly
legitimate for a juvenile to receive a sentence of life with
out parole for committing murder. This means that there
is nothing inherently unconstitutional about imposing
sentences of life without parole on juvenile offenders;
rather, the constitutionality of such sentences depends on
the particular crimes for which they are imposed. But if
the constitutionality of the sentence turns on the particu
lar crime being punished, then the Court should limit its
holding to the particular offenses that Graham committed
here, and should decline to consider other hypothetical
crimes not presented by this case.
In any event, the Court’s categorical conclusion is also
unwise. Most importantly, it ignores the fact that some
nonhomicide crimes—like the ones committed by Milagro
Cunningham, Nathan Walker, and Jakaris Taylor—are
especially heinous or grotesque, and thus may be deserv
ing of more severe punishment.
Those under 18 years old may as a general matter have
“diminished” culpability relative to adults who commit the
same crimes, Roper, 543 U. S., at 571, but that does not
mean that their culpability is always insufficient to justify
a life sentence. See generally Thompson, 487 U. S., at 853
(O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment). It does not take a
moral sense that is fully developed in every respect to


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

know that beating and raping an 8-year-old girl and leav
ing her to die under 197 pounds of rocks is horribly wrong.
The single fact of being 17 years old would not afford
Cunningham protection against life without parole if the
young girl had died—as Cunningham surely expected she
would—so why should it do so when she miraculously
survived his barbaric brutality?
The Court defends its categorical approach on the
grounds that a “clear line is necessary to prevent the
possibility that life without parole sentences will be im
posed on juvenile nonhomicide offenders who are not
sufficiently culpable to merit that punishment.” Ante, at
24. It argues that a case-by-case approach to proportional
ity review is constitutionally insufficient because courts
might not be able “with sufficient accuracy [to] distinguish
the few incorrigible juvenile offenders from the many that
have the capacity for change.” Ante, at 27.
The Court is of course correct that judges will never
have perfect foresight—or perfect wisdom—in making
sentencing decisions. But this is true when they sentence
adults no less than when they sentence juveniles. It is
also true when they sentence juveniles who commit mur
der no less than when they sentence juveniles who commit
other crimes.
Our system depends upon sentencing judges applying
their reasoned judgment to each case that comes before
them. As we explained in Solem, the whole enterprise of
proportionality review is premised on the “justified” as
sumption that “courts are competent to judge the gravity
of an offense, at least on a relative scale.” 463 U. S., at
292. Indeed, “courts traditionally have made these judg
ments” by applying “generally accepted criteria” to analyze
“the harm caused or threatened to the victim or society,
and the culpability of the offender.” Id., at 292, 294.


12

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment

*
*
*
Terrance Graham committed serious offenses, for which
he deserves serious punishment. But he was only 16 years
old, and under our Court’s precedents, his youth is one
factor, among others, that should be considered in decid
ing whether his punishment was unconstitutionally exces
sive. In my view, Graham’s age—together with the nature
of his criminal activity and the unusual severity of his
sentence—tips the constitutional balance. I thus concur in
the Court’s judgment that Graham’s sentence of life with
out parole violated the Eighth Amendment.
I would not, however, reach the same conclusion in
every case involving a juvenile offender. Some crimes are
so heinous, and some juvenile offenders so highly culpable,
that a sentence of life without parole may be entirely
justified under the Constitution. As we have said, “suc
cessful challenges” to noncapital sentences under the
Eighth Amendment have been—and, in my view, should
continue to be—“exceedingly rare.” Rummel, 445 U. S., at
272. But Graham’s sentence presents the exceptional case
that our precedents have recognized will come along. We
should grant Graham the relief to which he is entitled
under the Eighth Amendment. The Court errs, however,
in using this case as a vehicle for unsettling our estab
lished jurisprudence and fashioning a categorical rule
applicable to far different cases.

