(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
CERTIORARI TO THE DISTRICT COURT OF APPEAL OF

FLORIDA, 1ST DISTRICT

No. 08–7412. Argued November 9, 2009—Decided May 17, 2010; 

modified July 6, 2010 

Petitioner Graham was 16 when he committed armed burglary and
another crime. Under a plea agreement, the Florida trial court sen
tenced Graham to probation and withheld adjudication of guilt. Sub
sequently, the trial court found that Graham had violated the terms
of his probation by committing additional crimes. The trial court ad
judicated Graham guilty of the earlier charges, revoked his proba
tion, and sentenced him to life in prison for the burglary. Because
Florida has abolished its parole system, the life sentence left Graham
no possibility of release except executive clemency. He challenged his
sentence under the Eighth Amendment’s Cruel and Unusual Pun
ishments Clause, but the State First District Court of Appeal af
firmed.
Held: The Clause does not permit a juvenile offender to be sentenced to
life in prison without parole for a nonhomicide crime. Pp. 7–31.
(a) Embodied in the cruel and unusual punishments ban is the
“precept . . . that punishment for crime should be graduated and pro
portioned to [the] offense.” Weems v. United States, 217 U. S. 349,
367. The Court’s cases implementing the proportionality standard
fall within two general classifications. In cases of the first type, the
Court has considered all the circumstances to determine whether the
length of a term-of-years sentence is unconstitutionally excessive for
a particular defendant’s crime. The second classification comprises
cases in which the Court has applied certain categorical rules against
the death penalty. In a subset of such cases considering the nature of
the offense, the Court has concluded that capital punishment is im
permissible for nonhomicide crimes against individuals. E.g., Ken
nedy v. Louisiana, 554 U. S. ___, ___. In a second subset, cases turn
ing on the offender’s characteristics, the Court has prohibited death


2

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
Syllabus
for defendants who committed their crimes before age 18, Roper v.
Simmons, 543 U. S. 551, or whose intellectual functioning is in a low
range, Atkins v. Virginia, 536 U. S. 304. In cases involving categori
cal rules, the Court first considers “objective indicia of society’s stan
dards, as expressed in legislative enactments and state practice” to
determine whether there is a national consensus against the sentenc
ing practice at issue. Roper, supra, at 563. Next, looking to “the
standards elaborated by controlling precedents and by the Court’s
own understanding and interpretation of the Eighth Amendment’s
text, history, meaning, and purpose,” Kennedy, supra, at ___, the
Court determines in the exercise of its own independent judgment
whether the punishment in question violates the Constitution, Roper,
supra, at 564. Because this case implicates a particular type of sen
tence as it applies to an entire class of offenders who have committed
a range of crimes, the appropriate analysis is the categorical ap
proach used in Atkins, Roper, and Kennedy. Pp. 7–10.
(b) Application of the foregoing approach convinces the Court that
the sentencing practice at issue is unconstitutional. Pp. 10–31.
(1) Six jurisdictions do not allow life without parole sentences for
any juvenile offenders. Seven jurisdictions permit life without parole
for juvenile offenders, but only for homicide crimes. Thirty-seven
States, the District of Columbia, and the Federal Government permit
sentences of life without parole for a juvenile nonhomicide offender in
some circumstances. The State relies on these data to argue that no
national consensus against the sentencing practice in question exists.
An examination of actual sentencing practices in those jurisdictions
that permit life without parole for juvenile nonhomicide offenders,
however, discloses a consensus against the sentence. Nationwide,
there are only 123 juvenile offenders serving life without parole sen
tences for nonhomicide crimes. Because 77 of those offenders are
serving sentences imposed in Florida and the other 46 are imprisoned
in just 10 States, it appears that only 11 jurisdictions nationwide in
fact impose life without parole sentences on juvenile nonhomicide of
fenders, while 26 States, the District of Columbia, and the Federal
Government do not impose them despite apparent statutory authori
zation. Given that the statistics reflect nearly all juvenile nonhomi
cide offenders who have received a life without parole sentence
stretching back many years, moreover, it is clear how rare these sen
tences are, even within the States that do sometimes impose them.
While more common in terms of absolute numbers than the sentenc
ing practices in, e.g., Atkins and Enmund v. Florida, 458 U. S. 782, the
type of sentence at issue is actually as rare as those other sentencing
practices when viewed in proportion to the opportunities for its imposi
tion. The fact that many jurisdictions do not expressly prohibit the


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
sentencing practice at issue is not dispositive because it does not nec
essarily follow that the legislatures in those jurisdictions have delib
erately concluded that such sentences would be appropriate. See
Thompson v. Oklahoma, 487 U. S. 815, 826, n. 24, 850. Pp. 10–16.
(2) The inadequacy of penological theory to justify life without
parole sentences for juvenile nonhomicide offenders, the limited cul
pability of such offenders, and the severity of these sentences all lead
the Court to conclude that the sentencing practice at issue is cruel
and unusual. No recent data provide reason to reconsider Roper’s
holding that because juveniles have lessened culpability they are less
deserving of the most serious forms of punishment. 543 U. S., at 551.
Moreover, defendants who do not kill, intend to kill, or foresee that
life will be taken are categorically less deserving of such punishments
than are murderers. E.g., Kennedy, supra. Serious nonhomicide
crimes “may be devastating in their harm . . . but ‘in terms of moral
depravity and of the injury to the person and to the public,’ . . . they
cannot be compared to murder in their ‘severity and irrevocability.’ ”
Id., at ___. Thus, when compared to an adult murderer, a juvenile of
fender who did not kill or intend to kill has a twice diminished moral
culpability. Age and the nature of the crime each bear on the analy
sis. As for the punishment, life without parole is “the second most
severe penalty permitted by law,” Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U. S.
957, 1001, and is especially harsh for a juvenile offender, who will on
average serve more years and a greater percentage of his life in
prison than an adult offender, see, e.g., Roper, supra, at 572. And
none of the legitimate goals of penal sanctions—retribution, deter
rence, incapacitation, and rehabilitation, see Ewing v. California, 538
U. S. 11, 25—is adequate to justify life without parole for juvenile
nonhomicide offenders, see, e.g., Roper, 543 U. S., at 571, 573. Be
cause age “18 is the point where society draws the line for many pur
poses between childhood and adulthood,” it is the age below which a
defendant may not be sentenced to life without parole for a nonhomi
cide crime. Id., at 574. A State is not required to guarantee eventual
freedom to such an offender, but must impose a sentence that pro
vides some meaningful opportunity for release based on demon
strated maturity and rehabilitation. It is for the State, in the first
instance, to explore the means and mechanisms for compliance.
Pp. 16–24.
(3) A categorical rule is necessary, given the inadequacy of two
alternative approaches to address the relevant constitutional con
cerns. First, although Florida and other States have made substan
tial efforts to enact comprehensive rules governing the treatment of
youthful offenders, such laws allow the imposition of the type of sen
tence at issue based only on a discretionary, subjective judgment by a


4

GRAHAM v. FLORIDA
Syllabus
judge or jury that the juvenile offender is irredeemably depraved, and
are therefore insufficient to prevent the possibility that the offender
will receive such a sentence despite a lack of moral culpability. Sec
ond, a case-by-case approach requiring that the particular offender’s
age be weighed against the seriousness of the crime as part of a gross
disproportionality inquiry would not allow courts to distinguish with
sufficient accuracy the few juvenile offenders having sufficient psy
chological maturity and depravity to merit a life without parole sen
tence from the many that have the capacity for change. Cf. Roper,
supra, at 572–573. Nor does such an approach take account of spe
cial difficulties encountered by counsel in juvenile representation,
given juveniles’ impulsiveness, difficulty thinking in terms of long
term benefits, and reluctance to trust adults. A categorical rule
avoids the risk that, as a result of these difficulties, a court or jury
will erroneously conclude that a particular juvenile is sufficiently
culpable to deserve life without parole for a nonhomicide. It also
gives the juvenile offender a chance to demonstrate maturity and re
form. Pp. 24–29.
(4) Additional support for the Court’s conclusion lies in the fact
that the sentencing practice at issue has been rejected the world over:
The United States is the only Nation that imposes this type of sen
tence. While the judgments of other nations and the international
community are not dispositive as to the meaning of the Eighth
Amendment, the Court has looked abroad to support its independent
conclusion that a particular punishment is cruel and unusual. See,
e.g., Roper, supra, at 575–578. Pp. 29–31.

982 So. 2d 43, reversed and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which STEVENS,
GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. STEVENS, J., filed a
concurring opinion, in which GINSBURG and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.
ROBERTS, C. J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment. THOMAS,
J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which SCALIA, J., joined, and in which
ALITO, J., joined as to Parts I and III. ALITO, J., filed a dissenting opin
ion.

