OCTOBER TERM, 2009

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BLACK ET AL. v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–876.

Argued December 8, 2009—Decided June 24, 2010

Petitioners (hereinafter Defendants)—executives of Hollinger Interna
tional, Inc. (Hollinger), a publicly held U. S. company—were indicted
for mail fraud, 18 U. S. C. §§1341, 1346, and other federal crimes. At
trial, the Government pursued alternative mail-fraud theories, charg
ing that (1) Defendants stole millions from Hollinger by fraudulently
paying themselves bogus “noncompetition fees”; and (2) by failing to
disclose those fees, Defendants deprived Hollinger of their honest
services. Before jury deliberations began, the Government proposed
special-verdict forms that would reveal, in the event that the jury
voted to convict on a mail-fraud count, the particular theory or theo
ries accounting for the verdict. Defendants resisted, preferring an
unelaborated general verdict. The Government ultimately acqui
esced. The District Court instructed the jury on each of the alterna
tive theories. As to honest-services fraud, the court informed the
jury, over Defendants’ timely objection, that a person commits that
offense if he misuses his position for private gain for himself and/or a
co-schemer and knowingly and intentionally breaches his duty of loy
alty. The jury returned general verdicts of “guilty” on the mail-fraud
counts, found that one Defendant was also guilty of obstruction of
justice, and acquitted Defendants on all other charges.
On appeal, Defendants urged the invalidity of the honest-services
fraud jury instructions. Seeking reversal of their mail-fraud convic
tions, Defendants relied on Yates v. United States, 354 U. S. 298, 312,
which held that a general verdict may be set aside “where the verdict
is supportable on one ground, but not on another, and it is impossible
to tell which ground the jury selected.” The Seventh Circuit found no
infirmity in the honest-services instructions, but further determined
that even if those instructions were wrong, Defendants could not pre

