2

BLACK v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

forfeited their objection to the honest-services-fraud in
structions given to the jury. 530 F. 3d 596, 603 (CA7
2008). We reverse that ruling. A criminal defendant, we
hold, need not request special interrogatories, nor need he
acquiesce in the Government’s request for discrete find
ings by the jury, in order to preserve in full a timely raised
objection to jury instructions on an alternative theory of
guilt.
I
Petitioners Conrad Black, John Boultbee, and Mark
Kipnis, as well as Peter Atkinson,1 (collectively, Defen
dants) were leading executives of Hollinger International,
Inc. (Hollinger), a publicly held U. S. company that,
through subsidiaries, owned newspapers here and abroad.
In 2005, the Government indicted Defendants on multiple
counts, of prime concern here, three counts of mail fraud
in violation of §§1341 and 1346.2 Two theories were pur
sued by the Government on each mail-fraud count. The
Government charged that (1) Defendants stole millions
from Hollinger by fraudulently paying themselves bogus
“noncompetition fees”; and that (2) by failing to disclose
their receipt of those fees, Defendants deprived Hollinger
of their honest services as managers of the company. App.
to Pet. for Cert. 24a–54a.
At the close of the four-month trial, the U. S. District
Court for the Northern District of Illinois instructed the
jury, discretely, on the theft-of-money-or-property and
——————
1 Peter Atkinson is a respondent in support of petitioners who quali
fies for relief under this Court’s Rule 12.6. See Letter from Michael S.
Schachter to the Clerk of Court (July 29, 2009).
2 Section 1341 criminalizes use of the mails to further “any scheme or
artifice to defraud, or for obtaining money or property by means of false
or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises.” Section 1346
defines the §1341 term “scheme or artifice to defraud” to include “a
scheme or artifice to deprive another of the intangible right of honest
services.”

