6

BLACK v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

In addressing this issue, we note first the absence of any
provision in the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure for
submission of special questions to the jury. See Stein v.
New York, 346 U. S. 156, 178 (1953) (“Our own Rules of
Criminal Procedure make no provision for anything but a
general verdict.”), overruled on other grounds, Jackson v.
Denno, 378 U. S. 368 (1964).8 The sole call for special
findings in the Criminal Rules concerns nonjury trials.
Rule 23(c) provides: “If a party [in a case tried without a
jury] requests before the finding of guilty or not guilty, the
court must state its specific findings of fact in open court
or in a written decision or opinion.”
In contrast, the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provide
for jury interrogatories of two kinds: special verdicts,
which instruct the jury to return “a special written finding
on each issue of fact,” Rule 49(a); and general verdicts
with answers to “written questions on one or more issues
of fact,” Rule 49(b).9 Although not dispositive,10 the ab
sence of a Criminal Rule authorizing special verdicts
counsels caution.11
——————
8 The

absence of a special verdict or interrogatory provision in the
Criminal Rules is hardly accidental. See Skidmore v. Baltimore & Ohio
R. Co., 167 F. 2d 54, 70 (CA2 1948) (L. Hand, J., concurring) (“I should
like to subject a verdict, as narrowly as was practical, to a review which
should make it in fact, what we very elaborately pretend that it should
be: a decision based upon law. In criminal prosecutions there may be,
and in my judgment there are, other considerations which intervene to
make such an attempt undesirable.”).
9 Although the special interrogatories requested by the Government
in this case have been called “special verdicts” by the parties and the
courts below, they more closely resemble what Civil Rule 49(b) de
scribes as “general verdict[s] with answers to written questions.”
(Capitalization omitted.)
10 See Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 57(b) (when there is no controlling law,
“[a] judge may regulate practice in any manner consistent with federal
law, these rules, and the local rules of the district”).
11 By calling for caution, we do not mean to suggest that special ver
dicts in criminal cases are never appropriate. See United States v.

