4

BLACK v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

interrogatories, the Government represented that it would
not object to submission of the mail-fraud counts for jury
decision by general verdict. Id., at 228a. The jury re
turned general verdicts of “guilty” on the three mail-fraud
counts;5 it also found defendant Black guilty of obstruction
of justice in violation of 18 U. S. C. §1512(c)(1), and it
acquitted Defendants on all other charges.
On appeal, Defendants urged the invalidity of the jury
instructions on honest-services fraud. Under the rule
declared by this Court in Yates v. United States, 354 U. S.
298, 312 (1957), a general verdict may be set aside “where
the verdict is supportable on one ground, but not on an
other, and it is impossible to tell which ground the jury
selected.” Relying on that rule, Defendants urged reversal
of their mail-fraud convictions. The Court of Appeals
found no infirmity in the honest-services instructions, 530
F. 3d, at 600–602, but further determined that Defendants
could not prevail even if those instructions were wrong,
id., at 602–603. For this determination, the court homed
in on the Government’s special-verdict proposal.
The challenge to the honest-services instructions would
have become moot, the court observed, had the jury re
ceived special-verdict forms separating money-or-property
fraud from honest-services fraud, and reported on the
forms that Defendants were not guilty of honest-services
fraud. Defendants, the Court of Appeals reasoned, bore
responsibility for the obscurity of the jury’s verdict. True,
the court acknowledged, it was not incumbent on Defen
dants to request special verdicts. But by resisting the
Government’s proposal for separate findings on money-or
property fraud and on honest-services fraud, and request
——————
she had “absolutely” never seen the postverdict procedure used. App. to
Pet. for Cert. 225a.
5 The District Court later granted Kipnis’ motion for judgment of
acquittal on one of these counts.

