2

BLACK v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
vail. By opposing the Government-proposed special-verdict forms,
the Court of Appeals declared, defendants had forfeited their objec
tion to the instructions. Their challenge would have become moot,
the court observed, had the jury received special-verdict forms sepa
rating the alternative fraud theories, and reported on the forms that
Defendants were not guilty of honest-services fraud. Defendants, the
Court of Appeals therefore reasoned, bore responsibility for the ob
scurity of the jury’s verdict.

Held:
1. In Skilling v. United States, decided today, ante, p. __, this Court
vacated a conviction on the ground that the honest-services compo
nent of the federal mail-fraud statute, §1346, criminalizes only
schemes to defraud that involve bribes or kickbacks. That holding
renders the honest-services instructions given in this case incorrect.
P. 5.
2. By properly objecting to the honest-services jury instructions at
trial, Defendants secured their right to challenge those instructions
on appeal. They did not forfeit that right by declining to acquiesce in
the Government-proposed special-verdict forms. The Federal Rules
of Criminal Procedure do not provide for submission of special ques
tions to the jury. In contrast, Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 49 pro
vides for jury interrogatories of two kinds: special verdicts, Rule
49(a); and general verdicts with answers to written questions, Rule
49(b). While the Criminal Rules are silent on special verdicts, they
are informative on objections to instructions. Criminal Rule 30(d)
provides that a “party who objects to any portion of the instructions
or to a failure to give a requested instruction must inform the court of
the specific objection and the grounds for the objection before the jury
retires to deliberate.” Defendants here, it is undisputed, complied
with that requirement. The Seventh Circuit, in essence, added a fur
ther requirement for preservation of a meaningful objection to jury
instructions. It devised a forfeiture sanction unmoored to any federal
statute or criminal rule. And it placed in the prosecutor’s hands au
thority to trigger the sanction simply by requesting a special verdict.
To boot, the appeals court applied the sanction to Defendants, al
though they lacked any notice that forfeiture would attend their re
sistance to the Government’s special-verdict request. Criminal Rule
57(b) is designed to ward off such judicial invention. It provides: “No
sanction . . . may be imposed for noncompliance with any require
ment not in federal law [or] federal rules . . . unless the alleged viola
tor was furnished with actual notice of the requirement before the
noncompliance.” Pp. 5–8.
3. As in Skilling, the Court expresses no opinion on whether the
honest-services instructional error was ultimately harmless, but

