Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

While the Criminal Rules are silent on special verdicts,
they are informative on objections to instructions. Rule
30(d) “clarifies what . . . counsel must do to preserve a
claim of error regarding an instruction.” Advisory Com
mittee’s Notes on 2002 Amendment on Fed. Rule Crim.
Proc. 30(d), 18 U. S. C. App., p. 915. The Rule provides: “A
party who objects to any portion of the instructions or to a
failure to give a requested instruction must inform the
court of the specific objection and the grounds for the
objection before the jury retires to deliberate.” Defendants
here, it is undisputed, complied with that requirement.12
The Court of Appeals, in essence, added a further re
quirement for preservation of a meaningful objection to
jury instructions. It devised a forfeiture sanction un
moored to any federal statute or criminal rule. And it
placed in the prosecutor’s hands authority to trigger the
sanction simply by requesting a special verdict. See 530
——————
Ruggiero, 726 F. 2d 913, 922–923 (CA2 1984) (in complex Racketeer
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act cases, “it can be extremely
useful for a trial judge to request the jury to record their specific
dispositions of the separate predicate acts charged, in addition to their
verdict of guilty or innocence”); id., at 927 (Newman, J., concurring in
part and dissenting in part) (“[A] District Court should have the discre
tion to use a jury interrogatory in cases where risk of prejudice to the
defendant is slight and the advantage of securing particularized fact
finding is substantial.”).
12 The Government asserts that Defendants’ opposition to a special
verdict resulted in forfeiture not of their jury-instruction objection, but
of their “Yates argument” that any instructional error may “requir[e]
reversal.” Brief for United States 52, and n. 21 (internal quotation
marks omitted). The Government thus appears to concede that Defen
dants preserved their instructional challenge, but maintains that they
are powerless to ask a court to assess the prejudicial effect of any error
they may be able to demonstrate. See Reply Brief 29, n. 10 (on Gov
ernment’s view, “[Defendants] could still ‘claim’ they were wrongly
convicted, they just could not ask a court to do anything about it”). We
see little merit in the Government’s attempt to divorce preservation of
a claim from preservation of the right to redress should the claim
succeed.

