Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

allow state courts to force such a decision.8
The Concepcions contend that because parties may and
sometimes do agree to aggregation, class procedures are
not necessarily incompatible with arbitration. But the
same could be said about procedures that the Concepcions
admit States may not superimpose on arbitration: Parties
could agree to arbitrate pursuant to the Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure, or pursuant to a discovery process rival
ing that in litigation. Arbitration is a matter of contract,
and the FAA requires courts to honor parties’ expecta
tions. Rent-A-Center, West, 561 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
3). But what the parties in the aforementioned examples
would have agreed to is not arbitration as envisioned by
the FAA, lacks its benefits, and therefore may not be
required by state law.
The dissent claims that class proceedings are necessary
to prosecute small-dollar claims that might otherwise slip
through the legal system. See post, at 9. But States can
not require a procedure that is inconsistent with the FAA,
even if it is desirable for unrelated reasons. Moreover, the
claim here was most unlikely to go unresolved. As noted
earlier, the arbitration agreement provides that AT&T
will pay claimants a minimum of $7,500 and twice their
attorney’s fees if they obtain an arbitration award greater
than AT&T’s last settlement offer. The District Court
——————
8 The dissent cites three large arbitration awards (none of which
stems from classwide arbitration) as evidence that parties are willing to
submit large claims before an arbitrator. Post, at 7–8. Those examples
might be in point if it could be established that the size of the arbitral
dispute was predictable when the arbitration agreement was entered.
Otherwise, all the cases prove is that arbitrators can give huge
awards—which we have never doubted. The point is that in class
action arbitration huge awards (with limited judicial review) will be
entirely predictable, thus rendering arbitration unattractive. It is not
reasonably deniable that requiring consumer disputes to be arbitrated
on a classwide basis will have a substantial deterrent effect on incen
tives to arbitrate.

