Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

patible with arbitration itself, then on what basis can the
majority hold California’s law pre-empted?
For another thing, the majority’s argument that the
Discover Bank rule will discourage arbitration rests criti­
cally upon the wrong comparison. The majority compares
the complexity of class arbitration with that of bilateral
arbitration. See ante, at 14. And it finds the former more
complex. See ibid. But, if incentives are at issue, the
relevant comparison is not “arbitration with arbitration”
but a comparison between class arbitration and judicial
class actions. After all, in respect to the relevant set of
contracts, the Discover Bank rule similarly and equally
sets aside clauses that forbid class procedures—whether
arbitration procedures or ordinary judicial procedures are
at issue.
Why would a typical defendant (say, a business) prefer a
judicial class action to class arbitration? AAA statistics
“suggest that class arbitration proceedings take more time
than the average commercial arbitration, but may take
less time than the average class action in court.” AAA
Amicus Brief 24 (emphasis added). Data from California
courts confirm that class arbitrations can take considera­
bly less time than in-court proceedings in which class
certification is sought. Compare ante, at 14 (providing
statistics for class arbitration), with Judicial Council of
California, Administrative Office of the Courts, Class
Certification in California: Second Interim Report from
the Study of California Class Action Litigation 18 (2010)
(providing statistics for class-action litigation in California
courts). And a single class proceeding is surely more
efficient than thousands of separate proceedings for iden­
tical claims. Thus, if speedy resolution of disputes were
all that mattered, then the Discover Bank rule would
reinforce, not obstruct, that objective of the Act.
The majority’s related claim that the Discover Bank
rule will discourage the use of arbitration because

