Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

Second, class arbitration requires procedural formality.
The AAA’s rules governing class arbitrations mimic the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for class litigation. Com
pare AAA, Supplementary Rules for Class Arbitrations
(effective Oct. 8, 2003), online at http://www.adr.org/
sp.asp?id=21936, with Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 23. And while
parties can alter those procedures by contract, an alterna
tive is not obvious. If procedures are too informal, absent
class members would not be bound by the arbitration. For
a class-action money judgment to bind absentees in litiga
tion, class representatives must at all times adequately
represent absent class members, and absent members
must be afforded notice, an opportunity to be heard, and
a right to opt out of the class. Phillips Petroleum Co. v.
Shutts, 472 U. S. 797, 811–812 (1985). At least this
amount of process would presumably be required for ab
sent parties to be bound by the results of arbitration.
We find it unlikely that in passing the FAA Congress
meant to leave the disposition of these procedural re
quirements to an arbitrator. Indeed, class arbitration was
not even envisioned by Congress when it passed the FAA
in 1925; as the California Supreme Court admitted in
Discover Bank, class arbitration is a “relatively recent
development.” 36 Cal. 4th, at 163, 113 P. 3d, at 1110.
And it is at the very least odd to think that an arbitrator
would be entrusted with ensuring that third parties’ due
process rights are satisfied.
Third, class arbitration greatly increases risks to defen
dants. Informal procedures do of course have a cost: The
absence of multilayered review makes it more likely that
errors will go uncorrected. Defendants are willing to
accept the costs of these errors in arbitration, since their
—————— 

trating a class is more desirable than litigating one, however, is not

relevant. A State cannot defend a rule requiring arbitration-by-jury by

saying that parties will still prefer it to trial-by-jury. 


