Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

particular type of claim, the analysis is straightforward:
The conflicting rule is displaced by the FAA. Preston v.
Ferrer, 552 U. S. 346, 353 (2008). But the inquiry becomes
more complex when a doctrine normally thought to be
generally applicable, such as duress or, as relevant here,
unconscionability, is alleged to have been applied in a
fashion that disfavors arbitration. In Perry v. Thomas,
482 U. S. 483 (1987), for example, we noted that the FAA’s
preemptive effect might extend even to grounds tradition
ally thought to exist “ ‘at law or in equity for the revocation
of any contract.’ ” Id., at 492, n. 9 (emphasis deleted). We
said that a court may not “rely on the uniqueness of an
agreement to arbitrate as a basis for a state-law holding
that enforcement would be unconscionable, for this would
enable the court to effect what . . . the state legislature
cannot.” Id., at 493, n. 9.
An obvious illustration of this point would be a case
finding unconscionable or unenforceable as against public
policy consumer arbitration agreements that fail to pro
vide for judicially monitored discovery. The rationaliza
tions for such a holding are neither difficult to imagine nor
different in kind from those articulated in Discover Bank.
A court might reason that no consumer would knowingly
waive his right to full discovery, as this would enable
companies to hide their wrongdoing. Or the court might
simply say that such agreements are exculpatory—re
stricting discovery would be of greater benefit to the
company than the consumer, since the former is more
likely to be sued than to sue. See Discover Bank, supra, at
161, 113 P. 3d, at 1109 (arguing that class waivers are
similarly one-sided). And, the reasoning would continue,
because such a rule applies the general principle of uncon
scionability or public-policy disapproval of exculpatory
agreements, it is applicable to “any” contract and thus
preserved by §2 of the FAA. In practice, of course, the rule
would have a disproportionate impact on arbitration

