14

AT&T MOBILITY LLC v. CONCEPCION
Opinion of the Court

First, the switch from bilateral to class arbitration
sacrifices the principal advantage of arbitration—its in
formality—and makes the process slower, more costly, and
more likely to generate procedural morass than final
judgment. “In bilateral arbitration, parties forgo the
procedural rigor and appellate review of the courts in
order to realize the benefits of private dispute resolution:
lower costs, greater efficiency and speed, and the ability to
choose expert adjudicators to resolve specialized disputes.”
559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 21). But before an arbitrator
may decide the merits of a claim in classwide procedures,
he must first decide, for example, whether the class itself
may be certified, whether the named parties are suffi
ciently representative and typical, and how discovery for
the class should be conducted. A cursory comparison of
bilateral and class arbitration illustrates the difference.
According to the American Arbitration Association (AAA),
the average consumer arbitration between January and
August 2007 resulted in a disposition on the merits in
six months, four months if the arbitration was conducted
by documents only. AAA, Analysis of the AAA’s Con
sumer Arbitration Caseload, online at http://www.adr.org/
si.asp?id=5027 (all Internet materials as visited Apr. 25,
2011, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file). As of
September 2009, the AAA had opened 283 class arbitra
tions. Of those, 121 remained active, and 162 had been
settled, withdrawn, or dismissed. Not a single one, how
ever, had resulted in a final award on the merits. Brief for
AAA as Amicus Curiae in Stolt-Nielsen, O. T. 2009, No.
08–1198, pp. 22–24. For those cases that were no longer
active, the median time from filing to settlement, with
drawal, or dismissal—not judgment on the merits—was
583 days, and the mean was 630 days. Id., at 24.7
——————
7 The dissent claims that class arbitration should be compared to
class litigation, not bilateral arbitration. Post, at 6–7. Whether arbi

