10

AT&T MOBILITY LLC v. CONCEPCION
Opinion of the Court

their terms.” Volt, 489 U. S., at 478; see also Stolt-Nielsen
S. A. v. AnimalFeeds Int’l Corp., 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010)
(slip op., at 17). This purpose is readily apparent from the
FAA’s text. Section 2 makes arbitration agreements
“valid, irrevocable, and enforceable” as written (subject, of
course, to the saving clause); §3 requires courts to stay
litigation of arbitral claims pending arbitration of those
claims “in accordance with the terms of the agreement”;
and §4 requires courts to compel arbitration “in accor
dance with the terms of the agreement” upon the motion of
either party to the agreement (assuming that the “making
of the arbitration agreement or the failure . . . to perform
the same” is not at issue). In light of these provisions,
we have held that parties may agree to limit the issues
subject to arbitration, Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v. Soler
Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc., 473 U. S. 614, 628 (1985), to
arbitrate according to specific rules, Volt, supra, at 479,
and to limit with whom a party will arbitrate its disputes,
Stolt-Nielsen, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 19).
The point of affording parties discretion in designing
arbitration processes is to allow for efficient, streamlined
procedures tailored to the type of dispute. It can be speci
fied, for example, that the decisionmaker be a specialist in
the relevant field, or that proceedings be kept confidential
to protect trade secrets. And the informality of arbitral
proceedings is itself desirable, reducing the cost and in
creasing the speed of dispute resolution. 14 Penn Plaza
LLC v. Pyett, 556 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 20);
Mitsubishi Motors Corp., supra, at 628.
The dissent quotes Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. v. Byrd,
470 U. S. 213, 219 (1985), as “ ‘reject[ing] the suggestion
that the overriding goal of the Arbitration Act was to
promote the expeditious resolution of claims.’ ” Post, at 4
(opinion of BREYER, J.). That is greatly misleading. After
saying (accurately enough) that “the overriding goal of the
Arbitration Act was [not] to promote the expeditious reso

