16

AT&T MOBILITY LLC v. CONCEPCION
Opinion of the Court

impact is limited to the size of individual disputes, and
presumably outweighed by savings from avoiding the
courts. But when damages allegedly owed to tens of thou
sands of potential claimants are aggregated and decided at
once, the risk of an error will often become unacceptable.
Faced with even a small chance of a devastating loss,
defendants will be pressured into settling questionable
claims. Other courts have noted the risk of “in terrorem”
settlements that class actions entail, see, e.g., Kohen v.
Pacific Inv. Management Co. LLC, 571 F. 3d 672, 677–678
(CA7 2009), and class arbitration would be no different.
Arbitration is poorly suited to the higher stakes of class
litigation. In litigation, a defendant may appeal a certifi
cation decision on an interlocutory basis and, if unsuccess
ful, may appeal from a final judgment as well. Questions
of law are reviewed de novo and questions of fact for clear
error. In contrast, 9 U. S. C. §10 allows a court to vacate
an arbitral award only where the award “was procured by
corruption, fraud, or undue means”; “there was evident
partiality or corruption in the arbitrators”; “the arbitrators
were guilty of misconduct in refusing to postpone the
hearing . . . or in refusing to hear evidence pertinent and
material to the controversy[,] or of any other misbehavior
by which the rights of any party have been prejudiced”; or
if the “arbitrators exceeded their powers, or so imperfectly
executed them that a mutual, final, and definite award . . .
was not made.” The AAA rules do authorize judicial re
view of certification decisions, but this review is unlikely
to have much effect given these limitations; review un
der §10 focuses on misconduct rather than mistake. And
parties may not contractually expand the grounds or
nature of judicial review. Hall Street Assocs., 552 U. S., at
578. We find it hard to believe that defendants would bet
the company with no effective means of review, and even
harder to believe that Congress would have intended to

