2

AT&T MOBILITY LLC v. CONCEPCION
Opinion of the Court

to Pet. for Cert 61a.2 The agreement authorized AT&T to
make unilateral amendments, which it did to the arbitra
tion provision on several occasions. The version at issue in
this case reflects revisions made in December 2006, which
the parties agree are controlling.
The revised agreement provides that customers may
initiate dispute proceedings by completing a one-page No
tice of Dispute form available on AT&T’s Web site. AT&T
may then offer to settle the claim; if it does not, or if
the dispute is not resolved within 30 days, the customer
may invoke arbitration by filing a separate Demand for
Arbitration, also available on AT&T’s Web site. In the
event the parties proceed to arbitration, the agreement
specifies that AT&T must pay all costs for nonfrivolous
claims; that arbitration must take place in the county in
which the customer is billed; that, for claims of $10,000 or
less, the customer may choose whether the arbitration
proceeds in person, by telephone, or based only on submis
sions; that either party may bring a claim in small claims
court in lieu of arbitration; and that the arbitrator may
award any form of individual relief, including injunctions
and presumably punitive damages. The agreement, more
over, denies AT&T any ability to seek reimbursement of
its attorney’s fees, and, in the event that a customer re
ceives an arbitration award greater than AT&T’s last
written settlement offer, requires AT&T to pay a $7,500
minimum recovery and twice the amount of the claimant’s
attorney’s fees.3
The Concepcions purchased AT&T service, which was
advertised as including the provision of free phones; they
——————
2 That provision further states that “the arbitrator may not consoli
date more than one person’s claims, and may not otherwise preside
over any form of a representative or class proceeding.” App. to Pet. for
Cert. 61a.
3 The guaranteed minimum recovery was increased in 2009 to
$10,000. Brief for Petitioner 7.

