Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

toothless and malleable (the Ninth Circuit has held that
damages of $4,000 are sufficiently small, see Oestreicher v.
Alienware Corp., 322 Fed. Appx. 489, 492 (2009) (unpub
lished)), and the latter has no limiting effect, as all that is
required is an allegation. Consumers remain free to bring
and resolve their disputes on a bilateral basis under Dis
cover Bank, and some may well do so; but there is little
incentive for lawyers to arbitrate on behalf of individuals
when they may do so for a class and reap far higher fees in
the process. And faced with inevitable class arbitration,
companies would have less incentive to continue resolving
potentially duplicative claims on an individual basis.
Although we have had little occasion to examine class
wide arbitration, our decision in Stolt-Nielsen is instruc
tive. In that case we held that an arbitration panel ex
ceeded its power under §10(a)(4) of the FAA by imposing
class procedures based on policy judgments rather than
the arbitration agreement itself or some background prin
ciple of contract law that would affect its interpretation.
559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 20–23). We then held that
the agreement at issue, which was silent on the question
of class procedures, could not be interpreted to allow them
because the “changes brought about by the shift from
bilateral arbitration to class-action arbitration” are “fun
damental.” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 22). This is obvious as a
structural matter: Classwide arbitration includes absent
parties, necessitating additional and different procedures
and involving higher stakes. Confidentiality becomes
more difficult. And while it is theoretically possible to
select an arbitrator with some expertise relevant to the
class-certification question, arbitrators are not generally
knowledgeable in the often-dominant procedural aspects of
certification, such as the protection of absent parties. The
conclusion follows that class arbitration, to the extent it is
manufactured by Discover Bank rather than consensual,
is inconsistent with the FAA.

