2

AT&T MOBILITY LLC v. CONCEPCION
Syllabus
formation Sciences, Inc. v. Board of Trustees of Leland Stanford Jun
ior Univ., 489 U. S. 468, 478. Section 2’s saving clause permits
agreements to be invalidated by “generally applicable contract de
fenses,” but not by defenses that apply only to arbitration or derive
their meaning from the fact that an agreement to arbitrate is at is
sue. Doctor’s Associates, Inc. v. Casarotto, 517 U. S. 681, 687. Pp. 4–
5.
(b) In Discover Bank, the California Supreme Court held that class
waivers in consumer arbitration agreements are unconscionable if
the agreement is in an adhesion contract, disputes between the par
ties are likely to involve small amounts of damages, and the party
with inferior bargaining power alleges a deliberate scheme to de
fraud. Pp. 5–6.
(c) The Concepcions claim that the Discover Bank rule is a ground
that “exist[s] at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract”
under FAA §2. When state law prohibits outright the arbitration of a
particular type of claim, the FAA displaces the conflicting rule. But
the inquiry is more complex when a generally applicable doctrine is
alleged to have been applied in a fashion that disfavors or interferes
with arbitration. Although §2’s saving clause preserves generally
applicable contract defenses, it does not suggest an intent to preserve
state-law rules that stand as an obstacle to the accomplishment of
the FAA’s objectives. Cf. Geier v. American Honda Motor Co., 529
U. S. 861, 872. The FAA’s overarching purpose is to ensure the en
forcement of arbitration agreements according to their terms so as to
facilitate informal, streamlined proceedings. Parties may agree to
limit the issues subject to arbitration, Mitsubishi Motors Corp. v.
Soler Chrysler-Plymouth, Inc., 473 U. S. 614, 628, to arbitrate accord
ing to specific rules, Volt, supra, at 479, and to limit with whom they
will arbitrate, Stolt-Nielsen, supra, at ___. Pp. 6–12.
(d) Class arbitration, to the extent it is manufactured by Discover
Bank rather than consensual, interferes with fundamental attributes
of arbitration. The switch from bilateral to class arbitration sacri
fices arbitration’s informality and makes the process slower, more
costly, and more likely to generate procedural morass than final
judgment. And class arbitration greatly increases risks to defen
dants. The absence of multilayered review makes it more likely that
errors will go uncorrected. That risk of error may become unaccept
able when damages allegedly owed to thousands of claimants are ag
gregated and decided at once. Arbitration is poorly suited to these
higher stakes. In litigation, a defendant may appeal a certification
decision and a final judgment, but 9 U. S. C. §10 limits the grounds
on which courts can vacate arbitral awards. Pp. 12–18.

584 F. 3d 849, reversed and remanded.

