10

AT&T MOBILITY LLC v. CONCEPCION
BREYER, J., dissenting

rational view, nonclass arbitration over such sums will
also sometimes have the effect of depriving claimants of
their claims (say, for example, where claiming the $30.22
were to involve filling out many forms that require techni­
cal legal knowledge or waiting at great length while a call
is placed on hold). Discover Bank sets forth circumstances
in which the California courts believe that the terms of
consumer contracts can be manipulated to insulate an
agreement’s author from liability for its own frauds by
“deliberately cheat[ing] large numbers of consumers out
of individually small sums of money.” 36 Cal. 4th, at
162–163, 113 P. 3d, at 1110. Why is this kind of deci­
sion—weighing the pros and cons of all class proceedings
alike—not California’s to make?
Finally, the majority can find no meaningful support for
its views in this Court’s precedent. The federal Act has
been in force for nearly a century. We have decided doz­
ens of cases about its requirements. We have reached
results that authorize complex arbitration procedures.
E.g., Mitsubishi Motors, 473 U. S., at 629 (antitrust claims
arising in international transaction are arbitrable). We
have upheld nondiscriminatory state laws that slow down
arbitration proceedings. E.g., Volt Information Sciences,
489 U. S., at 477–479 (California law staying arbitration
proceedings until completion of related litigation is not
pre-empted). But we have not, to my knowledge, applied
the Act to strike down a state statute that treats arbitra­
tions on par with judicial and administrative proceedings.
Cf. Preston, 552 U. S., at 355–356 (Act pre-empts state law
that vests primary jurisdiction in state administrative
board).
At the same time, we have repeatedly referred to the
Act’s basic objective as assuring that courts treat arbitra­
tion agreements “like all other contracts.” Buckeye Check
Cashing, Inc. v. Cardegna, 546 U. S. 440, 447 (2006). See
also, e.g., Vaden v. Discover Bank, 556 U. S. ___, ___

