(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

AT&T MOBILITY LLC v. CONCEPCION ET UX.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–893.

Argued November 9, 2010—Decided April 27, 2011

The cellular telephone contract between respondents (Concepcions) and
petitioner (AT&T) provided for arbitration of all disputes, but did not
permit classwide arbitration. After the Concepcions were charged
sales tax on the retail value of phones provided free under their ser
vice contract, they sued AT&T in a California Federal District Court.
Their suit was consolidated with a class action alleging, inter alia,
that AT&T had engaged in false advertising and fraud by charging
sales tax on “free” phones. The District Court denied AT&T’s motion
to compel arbitration under the Concepcions’ contract. Relying on
the California Supreme Court’s Discover Bank decision, it found the
arbitration provision unconscionable because it disallowed classwide
proceedings. The Ninth Circuit agreed that the provision was uncon
scionable under California law and held that the Federal Arbitration
Act (FAA), which makes arbitration agreements “valid, irrevocable,
and enforceable, save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity
for the revocation of any contract,” 9 U. S. C. §2, did not preempt its
ruling.
Held: Because it “stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and exe
cution of the full purposes and objectives of Congress,” Hines v.
Davidowitz, 312 U. S. 52, 67, California’s Discover Bank rule is pre
empted by the FAA. Pp. 4–18.
(a) Section 2 reflects a “liberal federal policy favoring arbitration,”
Moses H. Cone Memorial Hospital v. Mercury Constr. Corp., 460 U. S.
1, 24, and the “fundamental principle that arbitration is a matter of
contract,” Rent-A-Center, West, Inc. v. Jackson, 561 U. S. ____, ____.
Thus, courts must place arbitration agreements on an equal footing
with other contracts, Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v. Cardegna, 546
U. S. 440, 443, and enforce them according to their terms, Volt In

