Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

STEVENS, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–674
_________________

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC, ET AL., PETITIONERS
v. MAINE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION ET AL.
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

[January 13, 2010] 


JUSTICE STEVENS, dissenting.
The opinion that the Court announces today is the third
chapter in a story about how a reasonable principle, ex
tended beyond its foundation, becomes bad law.
In the first chapter the Court wisely and correctly held
that a seller who is a party to a long-term contract to
provide energy to a wholesaler could not unilaterally
repudiate its contract obligations in response to changes in
market conditions by simply filing a new rate schedule
with the regulatory commission. Only if the rate was so
low that the seller might be unable to stay in business,
thereby impairing the public interest, could the seller be
excused from performing its contract. That is what the
Court held in United Gas Pipe Line Co. v. Mobile Gas
Service Corp., 350 U. S. 332 (1956), and FPC v. Sierra
Pacific Power Co., 350 U. S. 348 (1956).
In the second chapter the Court unwisely and incor
rectly held that the same rule should apply to a buyer who
had been forced by unprecedented market conditions to
enter into a long-term contract to buy energy at abnor
mally high prices. The Court held the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC) could not set aside such a
contract as unjust and unreasonable, even though it sad
dled consumers with a duty to pay prices that would be
considered unjust and unreasonable under normal market


2

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC v. MAINE PUB. 

UTIL. COMM’N
STEVENS, J., dissenting 





conditions, unless the purchaser could also prove that “the
contract seriously harms the public interest.” Morgan
Stanley Capital Group Inc. v. Public Util. Dist. No. 1 of
Snohomish Cty., 554 U. S. ___, ___ (2008) (slip op., at 1).
The Court held in Morgan Stanley that Mobile-Sierra
established a presumption: FERC “must presume that the
rate set out in a freely negotiated wholesale-energy con
tract meets the ‘just and reasonable’ requirement imposed
by law.” 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 1). And that pre
sumption, according to the Court, is a simple application
of the just-and-reasonable standard to contract rates, not
a different standard of review. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 6)
(rejecting the “obviously indefensible proposition that a
standard different from the statutory just-and-reasonable
standard applies to contract rates”). But applying the
presumption nonetheless sets a higher bar for a rate chal
lenge.1 FERC may abrogate the rate only if the public
interest is seriously harmed. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 22)
(“[U]nder the Mobile-Sierra presumption, setting aside a
contract rate requires a finding of ‘unequivocal public
necessity,’ ” Permian Basin Area Rate Cases, 390 U. S. 747,
822 (1968), “or ‘extraordinary circumstances,’ Arkansas
Louisiana Gas Co. v. Hall, 453 U. S. 571, 582 (1981)”).
As I explained in my dissent in Morgan Stanley, the
imposition of this additional burden on purchasers chal
lenging rates was not authorized by the governing statute.
Under the Federal Power Act (FPA), all wholesale electric
ity rates must be “just and reasonable.” 16 U. S. C.
§824d(a). “[N]othing in the statute mandates differing
application of the statutory standard to rates set by con
——————
1 Whether the Court explains the Mobile-Sierra doctrine as a pre
sumption or as a different standard of review, “[t]here is no significant
difference between requiring a heightened showing to overcome an
otherwise conclusive presumption and imposing a heightened standard
of review.” Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 3) (STEVENS,
J., dissenting).


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., dissenting

tract.” Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 3)
(STEVENS, J., dissenting) (internal quotation marks omit
ted; emphasis deleted). And the Mobile-Sierra line of
cases did not “mandate a ‘serious harm’ standard of re
view,” much less “require any assumption that high rates
and low rates impose symmetric burdens on the public
interest.” Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 7)
(STEVENS, J., dissenting). Instead, “the statement in
Permian Basin about ‘unequivocal public necessity,’ 390
U. S., at 822, speaks to the difficulty of establishing injury
to the public interest in the context of a low-rate chal
lenge,” i.e., one brought by sellers of electricity. Id., at ___
(slip op., at 8). It does not establish a new standard that
applies as well to a “high-rate challenge” brought by pur
chasers. Ibid.
But even accepting Morgan Stanley as the law, the
Court unwisely goes further today. In this third chapter of
the Mobile-Sierra story, the Court applies a rule—one
designed initially to protect the enforceability of freely
negotiated contracts against parties who seek a release
from their obligations—to impose a special burden on
third parties exercising their statutory right to object to
unjust and unreasonable rates. This application of the
rule represents a quantum leap from the modest origin set
forth in the first chapter of this tale. As the Court of
Appeals correctly concluded in the opinion that the Court
sets aside today: “This case is clearly outside the scope of
the Mobile-Sierra doctrine.” Maine Pub. Util. Comm’n v.
FERC, 520 F. 3d 464, 477 (CADC 2008) (per curiam).
As the D. C. Circuit noted,2 “[c]ourts have rarely men
——————
2 Because the D. C. Circuit’s opinion was written before this Court’s
decision in Morgan Stanley, that court’s purported error in describing
the Mobile-Sierra doctrine as an “exception” to the just-and-reasonable
standard, 520 F. 3d, at 477, is understandable. As that court recog
nized, and the majority does not change today, the Mobile-Sierra
standard in fact “makes it harder for [respondents] to successfully


4

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC v. MAINE PUB. 

UTIL. COMM’N
STEVENS, J., dissenting 





tioned the Mobile-Sierra doctrine without reiterating that
it is premised on the existence of a voluntary contract
between the parties.” Ibid. But, the Court asks, “[I]f
FERC itself must presume just and reasonable a contract
rate resulting from fair, arms-length negotiations, how can
it be maintained that noncontracting parties nevertheless
may escape that presumption?” Ante, at 9. This Court’s
understanding of Sierra provides an answer. “Sierra was
grounded in the commonsense notion that ‘[i]n wholesale
markets, the party charging the rate and the party
charged [are] often sophisticated businesses enjoying
presumptively equal bargaining power, who could be
expected to negotiate a “just and reasonable” rate as be
tween the two of them.’ ” Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 17) (quoting Verizon Communications Inc. v.
FCC, 535 U. S. 467, 479 (2002); emphasis added). This
“commonsense notion” supports the rule requiring FERC
to apply a presumption against letting a party out of its
own contract, as the D. C. Circuit recognized. 520 F. 3d,
at 478 (“The Mobile-Sierra doctrine applies a more defer
ential standard of review to preserve the terms of the
bargain as between the contracting parties”). It does not,
however, support a rule requiring FERC to apply a pre
sumption against abrogating any rate set by contract,
even when, as in this case, a noncontracting party may be
required in practice to pay a rate it did not agree to.
The Court further reasons that “confinement of MobileSierra to rate challenges by contracting parties diminishes
the animating purpose of the doctrine,” which is ensuring
the stability of contract-based supply arrangements. Ante,
at 9. Maybe so, but applying Mobile-Sierra to rate chal
lenges by noncontracting parties loses sight of the animat
ing purpose of the FPA, which is “the protection of the
public interest.” Sierra, 350 U. S., at 355. That interest is
—————— 

challenge rates.” 520 F. 3d, at 478. 



Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., dissenting

“the interest of consumers in paying ‘ “the lowest possible
reasonable rate consistent with the maintenance of ade
quate service in the public interest.” ’ ” Morgan Stanley,
554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 7) (STEVENS, J., dissenting)
(quoting Permian Basin, 390 U. S., at 793). I do not doubt
that stable energy markets are important to the public
interest, but “under the FPA, Congress has charged
FERC, not the courts, with balancing the short-term and
long-term interests of consumers” under the just-and
reasonable standard of review. Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 9) (STEVENS, J., dissenting). The Court
today imposes additional limits upon FERC’s ability to
protect that interest. If a third-party wholesale buyer can
show a rate harms the public interest (perhaps because it
is too high to be just and reasonable under normal review),
but cannot show it seriously harms the public, FERC may
do nothing about it.3
The Court assures respondents that the “public interest
standard” does not “overlook third-party interests” and is
“framed with a view to their protection.” Ante, at 8, 9.
Perhaps in practice the Mobile-Sierra doctrine will protect
third parties’ interests, and the public interest, just as
well as the so-called “ordinary” just-and-reasonable stan
dard. But respondents are rightly skeptical. The MobileSierra doctrine, as interpreted by the Court in Morgan
Stanley, must pose a higher bar to respondents’ rate chal
lenge—that is, it requires them to show greater harm to
——————
3 FERC agrees with petitioners that the public interest standard
“govern[s] all challenges to the rates set by contract, regardless of the
identity of the challenger.” Reply Brief for FERC 4. But “not even
FERC has the authority to endorse [this] rule.” Morgan Stanley, 554
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 9) (STEVENS, J., dissenting). “The FPA does not
indulge, much less require, a ‘practically insurmountable’ presumption,
see Papago Tribal Util. Auth. v. FERC, 723 F. 2d 950, 954 (CADC 1983)
(opinion for the court by Scalia, J.), that all rates set by contract com
port with the public interest and are therefore just and reasonable.”
Id., at ___ (slip op., at 9–10).


6

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC v. MAINE PUB. 

UTIL. COMM’N
STEVENS, J., dissenting 





the public.4 Otherwise, it would hardly serve to protect
contract stability better than the plain vanilla just-and
reasonable standard and the Court’s decision in Morgan
Stanley would have little effect. Furthermore, the Court
today reiterates that the doctrine poses a high bar. See
ante, at 7–8.
It was sensible to require a contracting party to show
something more than its own desire to get out of what
proved to be a bad bargain before FERC could abrogate
the parties’ bargain. It is not sensible, nor authorized by
the statute, for the Court to change the de facto standard
of review whenever a rate is set by private contract, based
solely on the Court’s view that contract stability should be
——————
4 In my view, “whether a rate is ‘just and reasonable’ is measured
against the public interest, not the private interests of regulated
[parties].” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 7). But I note the Court’s assertion
that the Mobile-Sierra doctrine protects “third-party interests,” ante, at
9, is a new twist on the “public interest standard” as traditionally
understood. As the Court recognized in Morgan Stanley, one conse
quence of applying Mobile-Sierra is that “ ‘the sole concern of the
Commission’ ” is the public interest, and FERC cannot consider, for
example, whether a rate guarantees a sufficient rate of return to a
regulated entity. 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 4) (quoting FPC v. Sierra
Pacific Power Co., 350 U. S. 348, 355 (1956)); see also Morgan Stanley,
554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 17, n. 3). In addition to requiring that
FERC find some greater degree of harm to the public than would be
required under the ordinary just-and-reasonable standard, therefore,
the Mobile-Sierra doctrine leaves little room for respondents—at least
one of which did not negotiate the rate but must nonetheless purchase
electricity at that price in the forward capacity market unless it self
supplies its capacity—to assert their private interest in making a rate
challenge. The Court suggests that FERC could set aside a rate under
the public interest standard if the contract established favorable rates
between allied businesses to the detriment of other wholesale custom
ers, ante, at 9, but has not spelled out whether a challenger would still
have to show that circumstance harmed the public interest. It remains
unclear whether a noncontracting party that must purchase or sell
electricity at a rate it did not negotiate could argue that a rate fails the
“public interest standard” because the rate is detrimental to that
entity’s private interest.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

STEVENS, J., dissenting

preserved unless there is extraordinary harm to the public
interest.
For these reasons, I respectfully dissent.

