(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC, ET AL. v. MAINE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT
No. 08–674.

Argued November 3, 2009—Decided January 13, 2010

The Mobile-Sierra doctrine—see United Gas Pipe Line Co. v. Mobile
Gas Service Corp., 350 U. S. 332, and FPC v. Sierra Pacific Power
Co., 350 U. S. 348—requires the Federal Energy Regulatory Commis
sion (FERC) to presume that an electricity rate set by a freely negoti
ated wholesale-energy contract meets the Federal Power Act’s (FPA)
“just and reasonable” prescription, 16 U. S. C. §7824d(a); the pre
sumption may be overcome only if FERC concludes that the contract
seriously harms the public interest. Morgan Stanley Capital Group
Inc. v. Public Util. Dist. No. 1 of Snohomish Cty., 554 U. S. ___, ___.
For many years, New England’s supply of electricity capacity was
barely sufficient to meet the region’s demand. FERC and New Eng
land’s generators, electricity providers, and power customers made
several attempts to address the problem. This case arises from the
latest effort to design a solution. Concerned parties reached a com
prehensive settlement agreement (Agreement) that, inter alia, estab
lished rate-setting mechanisms for sales of energy capacity and pro
vided that the Mobile-Sierra public interest standard would govern
rate challenges. FERC approved the Agreement, finding that it pre
sents a just and reasonable outcome that is consistent with the public
interest. Objectors to the settlement sought review in the D. C. Cir
cuit, which largely rejected their efforts to overturn FERC’s approval
order, but agreed with them that when a challenge to a contract rate
is brought by noncontracting third parties, Mobile-Sierra’s public in
terest standard does not apply.
Held: The Mobile-Sierra presumption does not depend on the identity of
the complainant who seeks FERC investigation. The presumption is
not limited to challenges to contract rates brought by contracting par


2

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC v. MAINE PUB. 

UTIL. COMM’N
Syllabus 





ties. It applies, as well, to challenges initiated by noncontracting
parties. Pp. 5–11.
(a) Morgan Stanley did not reach the question presented here, but
its reasoning strongly suggests that the D. C. Circuit’s holding mis
perceives the aim, and diminishes the force, of the Mobile-Sierra doc
trine. Announced three months after the Court of Appeals’ disposi
tion in this case, Morgan Stanley reaffirmed Mobile-Sierra’s
instruction to FERC to “presume that the rate set out in a freely ne
gotiated . . . contract meets the ‘just and reasonable’ requirement”
unless “FERC concludes that the contract seriously harms the public
interest.” 554 U. S., at ___. The Morgan Stanley opinion makes it
unmistakably clear that the public interest standard is not, as the
D. C. Circuit suggested, independent of, and sometimes at odds with,
the “just and reasonable” standard. Rather, the public interest stan
dard defines “what it means for a rate to satisfy the just-and
reasonable standard in the contract context.” Id., at ___. And if
FERC itself must presume just and reasonable a contract rate result
ing from fair, arms-length negotiations, noncontracting parties may
not escape that presumption. Moreover, the Mobile-Sierra doctrine
does not neglect third-party interests; it directs FERC to reject a con
tract rate that “seriously harms the consuming public.” 554 U. S., at
___. Finally, the D. C. Circuit’s confinement of Mobile-Sierra to rate
challenges by contracting parties diminishes the doctrine’s animating
purpose: promotion of “the stability of supply arrangements which all
agree is essential to the health of the [energy] industry.” Mobile, 350
U. S., at 344. A presumption applicable to contracting parties only,
and inoperative as to everyone else—consumers, advocacy groups,
state utility commissions, elected officials acting parens patriae—
could scarcely provide the stability Mobile-Sierra aimed to secure.
Pp. 5–10.
(b) Whether the rates at issue qualify as “contract rates” for Mo
bile-Sierra purposes, and, if not, whether FERC had discretion to
treat them analogously are questions raised before, but not ruled
upon by, the D. C. Circuit. They remain open for that court’s consid
eration on remand. Pp. 10–11.
520 F. 3d 464, reversed in part and remanded.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR,
JJ., joined. STEVENS, J., filed a dissenting opinion.

