Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash­
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–674
_________________

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC, ET AL., PETITIONERS
v. MAINE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION ET AL.
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT

[January 13, 2010] 


JUSTICE GINSBURG delivered the opinion of the Court.
The Federal Power Act (FPA or Act), 41 Stat. 1063, as
amended, 16 U. S. C. §791a et seq., authorizes the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC or Commission) to
superintend the sale of electricity in interstate commerce
and provides that all wholesale-electricity rates must be
“just and reasonable,” §824d(a). Under this Court’s Mo
bile-Sierra doctrine, FERC must presume that a rate set
by “a freely negotiated wholesale-energy contract” meets
the statutory “just and reasonable” requirement. Morgan
Stanley Capital Group Inc. v. Public Util. Dist. No. 1 of
Snohomish Cty., 554 U. S. ___, ___ (2008) (slip op., at 1).
“The presumption may be overcome only if FERC con­
cludes that the contract seriously harms the public inter­
est.” Ibid.
This case stems from New England’s difficulties in
maintaining the reliability of its energy grid. In 2006,
after several attempts by the Commission and concerned
parties to address the problems, FERC approved a com­
prehensive settlement agreement (hereinafter Settlement
Agreement or Agreement).
Most relevant here, the


2

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC v. MAINE PUB. 

UTIL. COMM’N
Opinion of the Court 





Agreement established rate-setting mechanisms for sales
of energy capacity, and provided that the Mobile-Sierra
public interest standard would govern rate challenges.
Parties who opposed the settlement petitioned for review
in the United States Court of Appeals for the D. C. Circuit.
Among multiple objections to FERC’s order approving the
Agreement, the settlement opponents urged that the rate
challenges of nonsettling parties should not be controlled
by the restrictive Mobile-Sierra public interest standard.
The Court of Appeals agreed, holding that “when a rate
challenge is brought by a non-contracting third party, the
Mobile-Sierra doctrine simply does not apply.” Maine Pub.
Util. Comm’n v. FERC, 520 F. 3d 464, 478 (2008) (per
curiam).
We reverse the D. C. Circuit’s judgment to the extent
that it rejects the application of Mobile-Sierra to noncon­
tracting parties. Our decision in Morgan Stanley, an­
nounced three months after the D. C. Circuit’s disposition,
made clear that the Mobile-Sierra public interest standard
is not an exception to the statutory just-and-reasonable
standard; it is an application of that standard in the con­
text of rates set by contract. The “venerable Mobile-Sierra
doctrine” rests on “the stabilizing force of contracts.”
Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 19); see id.,
at 22 (describing contract rates as “a key source of stabil­
ity”). To retain vitality, the doctrine must control FERC
itself, and, we hold, challenges to contract rates brought
by noncontracting as well as contracting parties.
I
In a capacity market, in contrast to a wholesale energy
market, an electricity provider purchases from a generator
an option to buy a quantity of energy, rather than pur­
chasing the energy itself. To maintain the reliability of
the grid, electricity providers generally purchase more
capacity, i.e., rights to acquire energy, than necessary to


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

meet their customers’ anticipated demand. For many
years in New England, the supply of capacity was barely
sufficient to meet the region’s demand. FERC and New
England’s generators, electricity providers, and power
customers made several attempts to address this problem.
This case stems from the latest effort to design a solution.
In 2003, a group of generators sought to enter into
“reliability must-run” agreements with the New England
Independent System Operator (ISO), which operates the
region’s transmission system.1 In its orders addressing
those agreements, FERC directed the ISO to develop a
new market mechanism that would set prices separately
for various geographical sub-regions. Devon Power LLC,
103 FERC ¶61,082, pp. 61,266, 61,271 (2003).
In March 2004, the ISO proposed a market structure
responsive to FERC’s directions. See Devon Power LLC,
107 FERC ¶61,240, p. 62,020 (2004). FERC set the matter
for hearing before an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ),
who issued a 177-page order largely accepting the ISO’s
proposal. Devon Power LLC, 111 FERC ¶63,063, p. 65,205
(2005). Several parties filed exceptions to the ALJ’s order;
on September 20, 2005, the full Commission heard argu­
ments on the proposed market structure, and thereafter
established settlement procedures. Devon Power LLC, 113
FERC ¶61,075, p. 61,271 (2005).
After four months of negotiations, on March 6, 2006, a
settlement was reached. Of the 115 negotiating parties,
only 8 opposed the settlement.
The Settlement Agreement installed a “forward capacity
market” under which annual auctions would set capacity
——————
1 An ISO is an independent company that has operational control, but
not ownership, of the transmission facilities owned by member utilities.
ISOs “provide open access to the regional transmission system to all
electricity generators at rates established in a single, unbundled, grid­
wide tariff . . . .” Midwest ISO Transmission Owners v. FERC, 373
F. 3d 1361, 1364 (CADC 2004) (internal quotation marks omitted).


4

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC v. MAINE PUB. 

UTIL. COMM’N
Opinion of the Court 





prices; auctions would be conducted three years in ad­
vance of the time when the capacity would be needed.
Devon Power LLC, 115 FERC ¶61,340, pp. 62,304, 62,306–
62,308 (2006). Each energy provider would be required to
purchase enough capacity to meet its share of the “in­
stalled capacity requirement,” i.e., the minimum level of
capacity needed to maintain reliability on the grid, as
determined by the ISO. Id., at 62,307. For the three-year
gap between the first auction and the time when the ca­
pacity procured in that auction would be provided,2 the
Agreement prescribed a series of fixed, transition-period
payments to capacity-supplying generators.
Id., at
62,308–62,309.
The issue before us centers on §4.C of the Agreement
(hereinafter Mobile-Sierra provision). Under that provi­
sion, challenges to both transition-period payments and
auction-clearing prices would be adjudicated under “the
‘public interest’ standard of review set forth in United Gas
Pipe Line Co. v. Mobile Gas Service Corp., 350 U. S. 332
(1956)[,] and [FPC] v. Sierra Pacific Power Co., 350 U. S.
348 (1956) (the ‘Mobile-Sierra’ doctrine).” App. 95. Mo
bile-Sierra applies, §4.C instructs, “whether the [price is
challenged] by a Settling Party, a non-Settling Party, or
[by] the FERC acting sua sponte.” Ibid.
FERC approved the Settlement Agreement, “finding
that as a package, it presents a just and reasonable out­
come for this proceeding consistent with the public inter­
est.” 115 FERC, at 62,304. The Mobile-Sierra provision,
FERC explicitly determined, “appropriately balances the
need for rate stability and the interests of the diverse
entities who will be subject to the [forward capacity mar­
ket’s auction system].” Id., at 62,335.
Six of the eight objectors to the settlement sought re­
view in the D. C. Circuit. For the most part, the Court of
——————
2 The

transition period runs from December 1, 2006 to June 1, 2010.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

Appeals rejected the objectors’ efforts to overturn FERC’s
order approving the settlement. 520 F. 3d, at 467. But
the objectors prevailed on the Mobile-Sierra issue: The
D. C. Circuit held that Mobile-Sierra applies only to con­
tracting parties. Id., at 478. In this Court, the parties
have switched places. Defenders of the settlement, includ­
ing the Mobile-Sierra provision, are petitioners; objectors
to the settlement, victorious in the Court of Appeals only
on the Mobile-Sierra issue, are respondents.
Because of the importance of the issue, and in light of
our recent decision in Morgan Stanley, we granted certio­
rari, 556 U. S. ___ (2009), to resolve this question: “[Does]
Mobile-Sierra’s public-interest standard appl[y] when a
contract rate is challenged by an entity that was not a
party to the contract[?]” Brief for Petitioners i. Satisfied
that the answer to that question is yes, we reverse the
D. C. Circuit’s judgment insofar as it rejected application
of Mobile-Sierra to noncontracting parties.
II
The FPA gives FERC authority to regulate the “sale of
electric energy at wholesale in interstate commerce.” See
16 U. S. C. §824(b)(1). The Act allows regulated utilities
to set rates unilaterally by tariff; alternatively, sellers and
buyers may agree on rates by contract. See §824d(c), (d).
Whether set by tariff or contract, however, all rates must
be “just and reasonable.” §824d(a). Rates may be exam­
ined by the Commission, upon complaint or on its own
initiative, when a new or altered tariff or contract is filed
or after a rate goes into effect. §§824d(e), 824e(a). Follow­
ing a hearing, the Commission may set aside any rate
found “unjust, unreasonable, unduly discriminatory or
preferential,” and replace it with a just and reasonable
rate. §824e(a).
The Mobile-Sierra doctrine originated in twin decisions
announced on the same day in 1956: United Gas Pipe Line


6

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC v. MAINE PUB. 

UTIL. COMM’N
Opinion of the Court 





Co. v. Mobile Gas Service Corp., 350 U. S. 332, and FPC v.
Sierra Pacific Power Co., 350 U. S. 348. Both concerned
rates set by contract rather than by tariff. Mobile involved
the Natural Gas Act, which, like the FPA, requires utili­
ties to file all new rates with the regulatory commission.
15 U. S. C. §717c(c). In Mobile, we rejected a gas utility’s
argument that the file-all-new-rates requirement author­
ized the utility to abrogate a lawful contract with a pur­
chaser simply by filing a new tariff. 350 U. S., at 336–337.
Filing, we explained, was a precondition to changing a
rate, not an authorization to do so in violation of a lawful
contract. Id., at 339–344; see Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 4).
The Sierra case involved a further issue. Not only had
the Commission erroneously concluded that a newly filed
tariff superseded a contract rate. In addition, the Com­
mission had suggested that, in any event, the contract
rate, which the utility sought to escape, was itself unjust
and unreasonable. The Commission thought that was so
“solely because [the contract rate] yield[ed] less than a fair
return on the [utility’s] net invested capital.” 350 U. S., at
355.
The Commission’s suggestion prompted this Court to
home in on “the question of how the Commission may
evaluate whether a contract rate is just and reasonable.”
Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 4). The
Sierra Court answered the question this way:
“[T]he Commission’s conclusion appears on its face to
be based on an erroneous standard. . . . [W]hile it may
be that the Commission may not normally impose
upon a public utility a rate which would produce less
than a fair return, it does not follow that the public
utility may not itself agree by contract to a rate af­
fording less than a fair return or that, if it does so, it
is entitled to be relieved of its improvident bar­


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

gain. . . . In such circumstances the sole concern of the
Commission would seem to be whether the rate is so
low as to adversely affect the public interest—as where
it might impair the financial ability of the public util­
ity to continue its service, cast upon other consumers
an excessive burden, or be unduly discriminatory.”
350 U. S., at 354–355 (some emphasis added).
In a later case, we similarly explained: “The regulatory
system created by the [FPA] is premised on contractual
agreements voluntarily devised by the regulated compa­
nies; it contemplates abrogation of these agreements only
in circumstances of unequivocal public necessity.” Per
mian Basin Area Rate Cases, 390 U. S. 747, 822 (1968).3
Two Terms ago, in Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S. ___, the
Court reaffirmed and clarified the Mobile-Sierra doctrine.
That case presented two questions: First, does the MobileSierra presumption (that contract rates freely negotiated
between sophisticated parties meet the just and reason­
able standard imposed by 16 U. S. C. §824d(a)) “apply only
when FERC has had an initial opportunity to review a
contract rate without the presumption?” 554 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 1). “Second, does the presumption [generally]
impose as high a bar to challenges by purchasers of whole­
sale electricity as it does to challenges by sellers?” Id., at
——————
3 Consistent with the lead role of contracts recognized in MobileSierra, we held in United Gas Pipe Line Co. v. Memphis Light, Gas and
Water Div., 358 U. S. 103, 110–113 (1958), that parties may contract
out of the Mobile-Sierra presumption. They could do so, we ruled, by
specifying in their contracts that a new rate filed with the Commission
would supersede the contract rate. Courts of Appeals have approved an
option midway between Mobile-Sierra and Memphis Light: A contract
that does not allow the seller to supersede the contract rate by filing a
new rate may nonetheless permit the Commission to set aside the
contract rate if it results in an unfair rate of return, without a further
showing that it adversely affects the public interest. See, e.g., Papago
Tribal Util. Auth. v. FERC, 723 F. 2d 950, 953 (CADC 1983); Louisiana
Power & Light Co. v. FERC, 587 F. 2d 671, 675–676 (CA5 1979).


8

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC v. MAINE PUB. 

UTIL. COMM’N
Opinion of the Court 





___ (slip op., at 1–2); see id., at 19–20. Answering no to
the first question and yes to the second, the Court empha­
sized the essential role of contracts as a key factor foster­
ing stability in the electricity market, to the longrun bene­
fit of consumers. Id., at ___, ___ (slip op., at 19, 22); see,
e.g., Market-Based Rates ¶6, 72 Fed. Reg. 39906 (2007)
(noting chilling effect on investments caused by “uncer­
tainties regarding rate stability and contract sanctity”);
Nevada Power Co. v. Duke Energy Trading & Marketing,
L. L. C., 99 FERC ¶61,047, pp. 61,184, 61,190 (2002)
(“Competitive power markets simply cannot attract the
capital needed to build adequate generating infrastructure
without regulatory certainty, including certainty that the
Commission will not modify market-based contracts
unless there are extraordinary circumstances.”).
Morgan Stanley did not reach the question presented
here: Does Mobile-Sierra’s public interest standard apply
to challenges to contract rates brought by noncontracting
parties? But Morgan Stanley’s reasoning strongly sug­
gests that the D. C. Circuit’s negative answer misperceives
the aim, and diminishes the force, of the Mobile-Sierra
doctrine.
In unmistakably plain language, Morgan Stanley re­
stated Mobile-Sierra’s instruction to the Commission:
FERC “must presume that the rate set out in a freely
negotiated wholesale-energy contract meets the ‘just and
reasonable’ requirement imposed by law. The presump­
tion may be overcome only if FERC concludes that the
contract seriously harms the public interest.” 554 U. S., at
___ (slip op., at 1). As our instruction to FERC in Morgan
Stanley conveys, the public interest standard is not, as the
D. C. Circuit presented it, a standard independent of, and
sometimes at odds with, the “just and reasonable” stan­
dard, see 520 F. 3d, at 478; rather, the public interest
standard defines “what it means for a rate to satisfy the
just-and-reasonable standard in the contract context.”


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 17). And if
FERC itself must presume just and reasonable a contract
rate resulting from fair, arms-length negotiations, how can
it be maintained that noncontracting parties nevertheless
may escape that presumption? 4
Moreover, the Mobile-Sierra doctrine does not overlook
third-party interests; it is framed with a view to their
protection. The doctrine directs the Commission to reject
a contract rate that “seriously harms the consuming pub­
lic.” Morgan Stanley, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 17); see
Verizon Communications Inc. v. FCC, 535 U. S. 467, 479
(2002) (When a buyer and a seller agree upon a rate, “the
principal regulatory responsibility [i]s not to relieve a
contracting party of an unreasonable rate, . . . but to pro­
tect against potential discrimination by favorable contract
rates between allied businesses to the detriment of other
wholesale customers.” (Emphasis added.)).
Finally, as earlier indicated, see supra, at 7–8, the D. C.
Circuit’s confinement of Mobile-Sierra to rate challenges
by contracting parties diminishes the animating purpose
of the doctrine: promotion of “the stability of supply ar­
rangements which all agree is essential to the health of
the [energy] industry.” Mobile, 350 U. S., at 344. That
dominant concern was expressed by FERC in the order on
review: “Stability is particularly important in this case,
——————
4 The D. C. Circuit emphasized a point no doubt true, but hardly dis­
positive: Contracts bind parties, not nonparties. Maine Pub. Util.
Comm’n v. FERC, 520 F. 3d 464, 478 (2008) (per curiam). MobileSierra holds sway, however, because well-informed wholesale-market
participants of approximately equal bargaining power generally can be
expected to negotiate just-and-reasonable rates, see Morgan Stanley
Capital Group Inc. v. Public Util. Dist. No. 1 of Snohomish Cty., 554
U. S. ___, ___ (2008) (slip op., at 17), and because “contract stability
ultimately benefits consumers,” id., at ___ (slip op., at 22). These
reasons for the presumption explain why FERC, surely not legally
bound by a contract rate, must apply the presumption and, correspond­
ingly, why third parties are similarly controlled by it.


10

NRG POWER MARKETING, LLC v. MAINE PUB. 

UTIL. COMM’N
Opinion of the Court 





which was initiated in part because of the unstable nature
of [installed capacity] revenues and the effect that has on
generating units, particularly those . . . critical to main­
taining reliability.” 115 FERC, at 62,335. A presumption
applicable to contracting parties only, and inoperative as
to everyone else—consumers, advocacy groups, state
utility commissions, elected officials acting parens pa
triae—could scarcely provide the stability Mobile-Sierra
aimed to secure.5
We therefore hold that the Mobile-Sierra presumption
does not depend on the identity of the complainant who
seeks FERC investigation. The presumption is not limited
to challenges to contract rates brought by contracting
parties. It applies, as well, to challenges initiated by third
parties.
III
The objectors to the settlement appearing before us
maintain that the rates at issue in this case—the auction
rates and the transition payments—are prescriptions of
general applicability rather than “contractually negotiated
rates,” hence Mobile-Sierra is inapplicable. See Brief for
Respondents 15–17, and n. 1 (internal quotation marks
omitted). FERC agrees that the rates covered by the
settlement “are not themselves contract rates to which the
Commission was required to apply Mobile-Sierra.” Brief
for FERC 15. But, FERC urges, “the Commission had
discretion to do so,” id., at 28; furthermore, “[t]he court of
appeals’ error in creating a third-party exception to the
Mobile-Sierra presumption is a sufficient basis for revers­
ing its judgment,” id., at 22. Whether the rates at issue
——————
5 The FPA authorizes “[a]ny person, electric utility, State, municipal­
ity, or State commission” to complain. 16 U. S. C. §825e (emphasis
added). FERC regulations similarly permit “[a]ny person [to] file a
complaint seeking Commission action.” 18 CFR §385.206(a) (2009)
(emphasis added).


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

qualify as “contract rates,” and, if not, whether FERC had
discretion to treat them analogously are questions raised
before, but not ruled upon by, the Court of Appeals. They
remain open for that court’s consideration on remand. See
Tr. of Oral Arg. 16.
*
*
*
For the reasons stated, the judgment of the Court of Ap­
peals for the D. C. Circuit is reversed to the extent that it
rejects the application of Mobile-Sierra to noncontracting
parties, and the case is remanded for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.

