(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

GLOBAL-TECH APPLIANCES, INC., ET AL. v. SEB S. A.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
No. 10–6. Argued February 23, 2011—Decided May 31, 2011
After respondent SEB invented an innovative deep fryer, obtained a
U. S. patent for its design, and began selling its fryer in this country,
Sunbeam Products, Inc., asked petitioner Pentalpha Enterprises,
Ltd., a Hong Kong home appliance maker and wholly owned subsidi
ary of petitioner Global-Tech Appliances, Inc., to supply Sunbeam
with deep fryers meeting certain specifications. Pentalpha purchased
an SEB fryer that was made for sale in a foreign market and thus
lacked U. S. patent markings, copied all but the fryer’s cosmetic fea
tures, and retained an attorney to conduct a right-to-use study with
out telling him it had copied directly from SEB’s design. Failing to
locate SEB’s patent, the attorney issued an opinion letter stating that
Pentalpha’s deep fryer did not infringe any of the patents that he had
found. Pentalpha then started selling its fryers to Sunbeam, which
resold them in this country under its own trademarks at a price that
undercut SEB’s.
SEB then sued Sunbeam for patent infringement. Though Sun
beam notified Pentalpha of the lawsuit, Pentalpha went on to sell its
fryers to other companies, which resold them in the U. S. market un
der their respective trademarks. After settling the Sunbeam lawsuit,
SEB sued Pentalpha, asserting, as relevant here, that it had contra
vened 35 U. S. C. §271(b) by actively inducing Sunbeam and the
other purchasers of Pentalpha fryers to sell or offer to sell them in
violation of SEB’s patent rights. The jury found for SEB on the in
duced infringement theory, and the District Court entered judgment
for SEB. Affirming, the Federal Circuit stated that induced in
fringement under §271(b) requires a showing that the alleged in
fringer knew or should have known that his actions would induce ac
tual infringements; declared that this showing includes proof that the


2

GLOBAL-TECH APPLIANCES, INC. v. SEB S. A.
Syllabus
alleged infringer knew of the patent; held that, although there was
no direct evidence that Pentalpha knew of SEB’s patent before it re
ceived notice of the Sunbeam suit, there was adequate proof that it
deliberately disregarded a known risk that SEB had a protective pat
ent; and said that such disregard is not different from, but a form of,
actual knowledge.

Held:
1. Induced infringement under §271(b) requires knowledge that the
induced acts constitute patent infringement. Pp. 3–10.
(a) Section 271(b)’s text—“[w]hoever actively induces infringe
ment of a patent shall be liable as an infringer”—is ambiguous as to
the intent needed to impose liability. In referring to a party that “in
duces infringement,” the provision may require merely that the in
ducer must lead another to engage in conduct that happens to
amount to infringement. On the other hand, the reference to a party
that “induces infringement” may also be read to mean that the in
ducer must persuade another to engage in conduct that the inducer
knows is infringement. Pp. 4–5.
(b) Like §271(b)’s language, the pre-1952 case law is susceptible
to conflicting interpretations. However, Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible
Top Replacement Co., 377 U. S. 476 (Aro II), resolves the question at
issue. Pp. 5–8.
(c) Induced infringement was not considered a separate theory of
indirect liability in the pre-1952 case law, but was treated as evi
dence of “contributory infringement,” i.e., the aiding and abetting of
direct infringement by another party. When Congress enacted §271,
it separated the contributory infringement concept into two catego
ries: induced infringement, covered by §271(b), and sale of a compo
nent of a patented invention, covered by §271(c). In the badly frac
tured Aro II decision, a majority concluded that a violator of §271(c)
must know “that the combination for which his component was espe
cially designed was both patented and infringing.” 377 U. S., at 488.
That conclusion, now a fixture in the law, compels this same knowl
edge for liability under §271(b), given that the two provisions have a
common origin and create the same difficult interpretive choice. Pp.
8–10.
2. Deliberate indifference to a known risk that a patent exists does
not satisfy the knowledge required by §271(b). Nevertheless, the
Federal Circuit’s judgment must be affirmed because the evidence in
this case was plainly sufficient to support a finding of Pentalpha’s
knowledge under the doctrine of willful blindness. Pp. 10–16.
(a) The doctrine of willful blindness is well established in crimi
nal law. Many criminal statutes require proof that a defendant acted
knowingly or willfully, and courts applying the doctrine have held


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
that defendants cannot escape the reach of these statutes by deliber
ately shielding themselves from clear evidence of critical facts that
are strongly suggested by the circumstances. The traditional ration
ale for the doctrine is that defendants who behave in this manner are
just as culpable as those who have actual knowledge. This Court en
dorsed a concept similar to willful blindness over a century ago in
Spurr v. United States, 174 U. S. 728, 735, and every Federal Court
of Appeals but one has fully embraced willful blindness. Given the
doctrine's long history and wide acceptance in the Federal Judiciary,
there is no reason why the doctrine should not apply in civil lawsuits
for induced patent infringement under §271(b). Pp. 10–13.
(b) Although the Courts of Appeals articulate the doctrine of will
ful blindness in slightly different ways, all agree on two basic re
quirements. First, the defendant must subjectively believe that there
is a high probability that a fact exists. Second, the defendant must
take deliberate actions to avoid learning of that fact. These require
ments give willful blindness an appropriately limited scope that sur
passes recklessness and negligence. Pp. 13–14.
(c) Although the Federal Circuit’s test departs from the proper
willful blindness standard in important respects, the evidence when
viewed in the light most favorable to the verdict for SEB was suffi
cient under the correct standard. Pentalpha believed that SEB’s
fryer embodied advanced technology that would be valuable in the
U. S. market as evidenced by its decision to copy all but the fryer’s
cosmetic features. Also revealing is Pentalpha’s decision to copy an
overseas model of SEB’s fryer, aware that it would not bear U. S.
patent markings. Even more telling is Pentalpha’s decision not to in
form its attorney that the product to be evaluated was simply a
knockoff of SEB’s fryer. Taken together, the evidence was more than
sufficient for a jury to find that Pentalpha subjectively believed there
was a high probability that SEB’s fryer was patented and took delib
erate steps to avoid knowing that fact, and that it therefore willfully
blinded itself to the infringing nature of Sunbeam’s sales. Pp. 14–16.
594 F. 3d 1360, affirmed.
ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
and SCALIA, THOMAS, GINSBURG, BREYER, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined. KENNEDY, J., filed a dissenting opinion.

