Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

21

Opinion of the Court

spondent sells.23 This kind of arrangement, in the unique
regulatory environment within which pharmaceutical com­
panies must operate, comfortably falls within the catchall category of “other disposition.”
That petitioners bear all of the external indicia of
salesmen provides further support for our conclusion.
Petitioners were hired for their sales experience. They
were trained to close each sales call by obtaining the
maximum commitment possible from the physician. They
worked away from the office, with minimal supervision,
and they were rewarded for their efforts with incentive
compensation. It would be anomalous to require respond­
ent to compensate petitioners for overtime, while at the
same time exempting employees who function identically to
petitioners in every respect except that they sell physician­
administered drugs, such as vaccines and other injectable pharmaceuticals, that are ordered by the physician
directly rather than purchased by the end user at a phar­
macy with a prescription from the physician.
Our holding also comports with the apparent purpose of
the FLSA’s exemption for outside salesmen. The exemp­
tion is premised on the belief that exempt employees
“typically earned salaries well above the minimum wage”
and enjoyed other benefits that “se[t] them apart from the
nonexempt workers entitled to overtime pay.” Preamble
22124. It was also thought that exempt employees per­
formed a kind of work that “was difficult to standardize to
——————
23 Our point is not, as the dissent suggests, that any employee who
does the most that he or she is able to do in a particular position to
ensure the eventual sale of a product should qualify as an exempt
outside salesman. See post, at 9 (noting that “the ‘most’ a California
firm’s marketing employee may be able ‘to do’ to secure orders from
New York customers is to post an advertisement on the Internet”).
Rather, our point is that, when an entire industry is constrained by law
or regulation from selling its products in the ordinary manner, an
employee who functions in all relevant respects as an outside salesman
should not be excluded from that category based on technicalities.

