Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

outside salesman,” §213(a)(1), and therefore were exempt
from the FLSA’s overtime compensation requirement.9
The District Court agreed and granted summary judgment
to respondent. See App. to Pet. for Cert. 37a47a.
After the District Court issued its order, petitioners filed
a motion to alter or amend the judgment, contending that
the District Court had erred in failing to accord controlling deference to the DOL’s interpretation of the pertinent
regulations. That interpretation had been announced in
an uninvited amicus brief filed by the DOL in a similar
action then pending in the Second Circuit. See Brief for
Secretary of Labor as Amicus Curiae in In re Novartis
Wage and Hour Litigation, No. 09–0437 (hereinafter
Secretary’s Novartis Brief). The District Court rejected
this argument and denied the motion. See App. to Pet. for
Cert. 48a52a.
The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed.
See 635 F. 3d 383. The Court of Appeals agreed that
the DOL’s interpretation10 was not entitled to controlling
deference. See id., at 393395. It held that, because the
commitment that petitioners obtained from physicians
was the maximum possible under the rules applicable to
the pharmaceutical industry, petitioners made sales with­
in the meaning of the regulations. See id., at 395397.
The court found it significant, moreover, that the DOL had
previously interpreted the regulations as requiring only
that an employee “ ‘in some sense’ ” make a sale, see id.,
at 395396 (emphasis deleted), and had “acquiesce[d] in
the sales practices of the drug industry for over seventy
——————
9 Respondent also argued that petitioners were exempt administra­
tive employees. The District Court and the Court of Appeals found it
unnecessary to reach that argument, and the question is not before us.
10 The DOL filed an amicus brief in the Ninth Circuit advancing sub­
stantially the same interpretation it had advanced in its brief in the
Second Circuit. See Brief for Secretary of Labor as Amicus Curiae in
No. 10–15257.

