20

CHRISTOPHER v. SMITHKLINE BEECHAM CORP.
Opinion of the Court

lation instructs that sales within the meaning of 29
U. S. C. §203(k) “include the transfer of title to tangible
property,” 29 CFR §541.501(b) (emphasis added), but this
regulation in no way limits the broad statutory definition
of “sale.” And although the promotion-work regulation
distinguishes between promotion work that is incidental
to an employee’s own sales and work that is incidental to
sales made by someone else, see §541.503(a), this distinc­
tion tells us nothing about the meaning of “sale.”22
2
Given our interpretation of “other disposition,” it follows
that petitioners made sales for purposes of the FLSA and
therefore are exempt outside salesmen within the mean­
ing of the DOL’s regulations. Obtaining a nonbinding
commitment from a physician to prescribe one of respond­
ent’s drugs is the most that petitioners were able to do to
ensure the eventual disposition of the products that re­
——————
inapposite where, as here, we are interpreting a general definition that
applies throughout the FLSA.
22 The dissent’s view that pharmaceutical detailers are more naturally
characterized as nonexempt promotional employees than as exempt out­
side salesmen relies heavily on the DOL’s explanation in its 1940 Re­
port that “sales promotion men” are not salesmen. See post, at 7; see
also 1940 Report 46. There, the Department described a “sales promo­
tion man” as an employee who merely “pav[es] the way for salesmen”
and who frequently “deals with retailers who are not customers of his
own employer but of his employer’s customer” and is “interested in
sales by the retailer, not to the retailer.” 1940 Report 46. The dissent
asserts that detailers are analogous to “sales promotion men” because
they deal with “individuals, namely doctors, ‘who are not customers’ of
their own employer” and “are primarily interested in sales authorized
by the doctor, not to the doctor.” Post, at 7. But this comparison is
inapt. The equivalent of a “sales promotion man” in the pharmaceuti­
cal industry would be an employee who promotes a manufacturer’s
products to the retail pharmacies that sell the products after purchas­
ing them from a wholesaler or distributor. Detailers, by contrast,
obtain nonbinding commitments from the gatekeepers who must
prescribe the product if any sale is to take place at all.

