Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

ment, pharmaceutical companies have long focused their
direct marketing efforts, not on the retail pharmacies
that dispense prescription drugs, but rather on the medical practitioners who possess the authority to prescribe the
drugs in the first place. Pharmaceutical companies pro­
mote their prescription drugs to physicians through a
process called “detailing,” whereby employees known as
“detailers” or “pharmaceutical sales representatives”
provide information to physicians about the company’s
products in hopes of persuading them to write prescrip­
tions for the products in appropriate cases. See Sorrell v.
IMS Health Inc., 564 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 12)
(describing the process of “detailing”). The position of
“detailer” has existed in the pharmaceutical industry in
substantially its current form since at least the 1950’s,
and in recent years the industry has employed more than
90,000 detailers nationwide. See 635 F. 3d 383, 387, and
n. 5, 396 (CA9 2011).
Respondent hired petitioners Michael Christopher and
Frank Buchanan as pharmaceutical sales representatives
in 2003. During the roughly four years when petitioners
were employed in that capacity,5 they were responsible
for calling on physicians in an assigned sales territory to
discuss the features, benefits, and risks of an assigned
portfolio of respondent’s prescription drugs. Petitioners’
primary objective was to obtain a nonbinding commit­
ment6 from the physician to prescribe those drugs in ap­
propriate cases, and the training that petitioners received
underscored the importance of that objective.
Petitioners spent about 40 hours each week in the field
calling on physicians. These visits occurred during normal
——————
5 Respondent

terminated Christopher’s employment in 2007, and
Buchanan left voluntarily the same year to accept a similar position
with another pharmaceutical company.
6 The parties agree that the commitment is nonbinding.

