10

CHRISTOPHER v. SMITHKLINE BEECHAM CORP.
BREYER, J., dissenting

industry an outside salesman lurking somewhere (if only
we can find him). An industry might, after all, sell its
goods through wholesalers or retailers, while using its own
outside employees to encourage sales only by providing
third parties with critically important information.
The Court expresses concern lest a holding that detailers are not “salesmen” lead to holdings that the statute
forbids treating as a “salesman” an employee “who takes
an order from a retailer but then transfers the order to a
jobber’s employee to be filled,” ante, at 23, or “a car salesman who receives a commitment to buy but then asks his
or her assistant to enter the order into the computer,” ibid.
But there is no need for any such fear. Both these examples involve employees who are salesmen because they
obtain a firm commitment to buy the product. See 1949
Report 83 (as to the first example, such an employee “has
obtained a commitment from the customer”); 69 Fed. Reg.
22163 (2004) (as to the second example, explaining that
“[e]xempt status should not depend on . . . who types the
order into a computer,” but maintaining requirement that
a salesman “obtai[n] a commitment to buy from the person
to whom he is selling”). The problem facing the detailer is
that he does not obtain any such commitment.
Finally, the Court points to the detailers’ relatively high
pay, their uncertain hours, the location of their work, their
independence, and the fact that they frequently work
overtime, all as showing that detailers fall within the
basic purposes of the statutory provision that creates
exceptions from wage and hour requirements. Ante, at 5–
6. The problem for the detailers, however, is that the
statute seeks to achieve its general objectives by creating
certain categories of exempt employees, one of which is the
category of “outside salesman.” It places into that category
only those who satisfy the definition of “outside salesman” as “defined and delimited from time to time by regulations of the Secretary.” 29 U. S. C. §213(a)(1) (emphasis

