Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

19

Opinion of the Court

much too narrow, as is petitioners’ view that a sale re­
quires a “firm agreement” or “firm commitment” to buy,
see Tr. of Oral Arg. 64, 66. These interpretations would
defeat Congress’ intent to define “sale” in a broad manner
and render the general statutory language meaningless.
See United States v. Alpers, 338 U. S. 680, 682 (1950)
(instructing that rule of ejusdem generis cannot be em­
ployed to “obscure and defeat the intent and purpose of
Congress” or “render general words meaningless”). In­
deed, we are hard pressed to think of any contract for the
exchange of goods or services in return for value or any
firm agreement to buy that would not also fall within one
of the specifically enumerated categories.20
The specific list of transactions that precedes the phrase
“other disposition” seems to us to represent an attempt to
accommodate industry-by-industry variations in methods
of selling commodities. Consequently, we think that the
catchall phrase “other disposition” is most reasonably in­
terpreted as including those arrangements that are tan­
tamount, in a particular industry, to a paradigmatic sale
of a commodity.
Nothing in the remaining regulations requires a nar­
rower construction.21 As discussed above, the sales regu­
——————
20 The dissent’s approach suffers from the same flaw. The dissent
contends that, in order to make a sale, an employee must at least
obtain a “firm commitment to buy.” Post, at 10 (opinion of BREYER, J.).
But when an employee who has extended an offer to sell obtains a “firm
commitment to buy,” that transaction amounts to a “contract to sell.”
Given that a “contract to sell” already falls within the statutory defini­
tion of “sale,” the dissent’s interpretation would strip the catchall
phrase of independent meaning.
21 In the past, we have stated that exemptions to the FLSA must be
“narrowly construed against the employers seeking to assert them and
their application limited to those [cases] plainly and unmistakably
within their terms and spirit.” Arnold v. Ben Kanowsky, Inc., 361 U. S.
388, 392 (1960). Petitioners and the DOL contend that Arnold requires
us to construe the outside salesman exemption narrowly, but Arnold is

