Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
its regulations is not entitled to deference under Auer v. Robbins, 519
U. S. 452. Although Auer ordinarily calls for deference to an agency’s
interpretation of its own ambiguous regulation, even when that interpretation is advanced in a legal brief, see, id., at 461462, this
general rule does not apply in all cases. Deference is inappropriate,
for example, when the agency’s interpretation is “ ‘plainly erroneous
or inconsistent with the regulation,’ ” id., at 461, or when there is
reason to suspect that the interpretation “does not reflect the agency’s fair and considered judgment on the matter,” id., at 462. There
are strong reasons for withholding Auer deference in this case. Petitioners invoke the DOL’s interpretation to impose potentially massive liability on respondent for conduct that occurred well before the
interpretation was announced. To defer to the DOL’s interpretation
would result in precisely the kind of “unfair surprise” against which
this Court has long warned. See, e.g., Long Island Care at Home,
Ltd. v. Coke, 551 U. S. 158, 170171. Until 2009, the pharmaceutical
industry had little reason to suspect that its longstanding practice of
treating detailers as exempt outside salesmen transgressed the
FLSA. The statute and regulations do not provide clear notice. Even
more important, despite the industry’s decades-long practice, the
DOL never initiated any enforcement actions with respect to detailers or otherwise suggested that it thought the industry was acting
unlawfully. The only plausible explanation for the DOL’s inaction is
acquiescence. Whatever the general merits of Auer deference, it is
unwarranted here. The DOL’s interpretation should instead be given
a measure of deference proportional to its power to persuade. See
United States v. Mead Corp., 533 U. S. 218, 228. Pp. 8–14.
(b) The DOL’s current interpretation—that a sale demands a transfer of title—is quite unpersuasive. It plainly lacks the hallmarks of
thorough consideration. Because the DOL first announced its view
that pharmaceutical sales representatives are not outside salesmen
in a series of amicus briefs, there was no opportunity for public comment, and the interpretation that initially emerged from the DOL’s
internal decisionmaking process proved to be untenable. The interpretation is also flatly inconsistent with the FLSA. The statute defines “sale” to mean, inter alia, a “consignment for sale,” and a “consignment for sale” does not involve the transfer of title. The DOL
relies heavily on 29 CFR §541.501, which provides that “[s]ales . . .
include the transfer of title to tangible property,” §541.501(b), but it
is apparent that this regulation does not mean that a sale must include a transfer of title, only that transactions involving a transfer of
title are included within the term “sale.” The DOL’s “explanation
that obtaining a non-binding commitment to prescribe a drug constitutes promotion, and not sales,” Reply Brief for Petitioners 17, is also

