6

CHRISTOPHER v. SMITHKLINE BEECHAM CORP.
BREYER, J., dissenting

scribes a detailer’s job in some depth. It consistently
refers to detailers as “delivering accurate, up-to-date
information to healthcare professionals,” id., at 14, and it
stresses the importance of a doctor’s treatment decision
being based “solely on each patient’s medical needs” and
the doctor’s “medical knowledge and experience,” id., at 2.
The PhRMA Code also forbids the offering or providing of
anything “in a manner or on conditions that would interfere with the independence of a healthcare professional’s
prescribing practices.” Id., at 13. But the PhRMA Code
nowhere refers to detailers as if they were salesmen,
rather than providers of information, nor does it refer to
any kind of commitment.
To the contrary, the document makes clear that the
pharmaceutical industry itself understands that it cannot
be a detailer’s “primary duty” to obtain a nonbinding
commitment, for, in respect to many doctors, such a commitment taken alone is unlikely to make a significant
difference to their doctor’s use of a particular drug. When
a particular drug, say Drug D, constitutes the best treatment for a particular patient, a knowledgeable doctor
should (hence likely will) prescribe it irrespective of any
nonbinding commitment to do so. Where some other drug,
however, is likely to prove more beneficial for a particular
patient, that doctor should not (hence likely will not)
prescribe Drug D irrespective of any nonbinding commitment to the contrary.
At a minimum, the document explains why a detailer
should not (hence likely does not) see himself as seeking
primarily to obtain a promise to prescribe a particular
drug, as opposed to providing information so that the
doctor will keep the drug in mind with an eye toward
using it when appropriate. And because the detailer’s
“primary duty” is informational, as opposed to salesoriented, he fails to qualify as an outside salesman. See
§541.500(a)(1)(i) (restricting the outside salesman exemp-

