2

CHRISTOPHER v. SMITHKLINE BEECHAM CORP.
Syllabus
their products to physicians through a process called “detailing,”
whereby employees known as “detailers” or “pharmaceutical sales
representatives” try to persuade physicians to write prescriptions for
the products in appropriate cases.
Petitioners were employed by respondent as pharmaceutical sales
representatives for roughly four years, and during that time their
primary objective was to obtain a nonbinding commitment from physicians to prescribe respondent’s products in appropriate cases. Each
week, petitioners spent about 40 hours in the field calling on physicians during normal business hours and an additional 10 to 20 hours
attending events and performing other miscellaneous tasks. Petitioners were not required to punch a clock or report their hours, and
they were subject to only minimal supervision. Petitioners were well
compensated for their efforts, and their gross pay included both a
base salary and incentive pay. The amount of incentive pay was determined based on the performance of petitioners’ assigned portfolio
of drugs in their assigned sales territories. It is undisputed that petitioners were not paid time-and-a-half wages when they worked more
than 40 hours per week.
Petitioners filed suit, alleging that respondent violated the FLSA
by failing to compensate them for overtime. Respondent moved for
summary judgment, arguing that petitioners were “employed in the
capacity of outside salesman,” §213(a)(1), and therefore were exempt
from the FLSA’s overtime compensation requirement. The District
Court agreed and granted summary judgment to respondent. Petitioners filed a motion to alter or amend the judgment, contending
that the District Court had erred in failing to accord controlling deference to the DOL’s interpretation of the pertinent regulations, which
the DOL had announced in an amicus brief filed in a similar action.
The District Court rejected this argument and denied the motion.
The Ninth Circuit, agreeing that the DOL’s interpretation was not
entitled to controlling deference, affirmed.

Held: Petitioners qualify as outside salesmen under the most reasonable interpretation of the DOL’s regulations. Pp. 8–25.
(a) The DOL filed amicus briefs in the Second Circuit and the
Ninth Circuit in which it took the view that “a ‘sale’ for the purposes
of the outside sales exemption requires a consummated transaction
directly involving the employee for whom the exemption is sought.”
Brief for Secretary of Labor as Amicus Curiae in In re Novartis Wage
and Hour Litigation, No. 09–0437 (CA2), p. 11. The DOL changed
course after the Court granted certiorari in this case, however, and
now maintains that “[a]n employee does not make a ‘sale’ . . . unless
he actually transfers title to the property at issue.” Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 1213. The DOL’s current interpretation of

