22

CHRISTOPHER v. SMITHKLINE BEECHAM CORP.
Opinion of the Court

any time frame and could not be easily spread to other
workers after 40 hours in a week, making compliance with
the overtime provisions difficult and generally precluding
the potential job expansion intended by the FLSA’s time­
and-a-half overtime premium.” Ibid. Petitioners—each of
whom earned an average of more than $70,000 per year
and spent between 10 and 20 hours outside normal busi­
ness hours each week performing work related to his as­
signed portfolio of drugs in his assigned sales territory—
are hardly the kind of employees that the FLSA was
intended to protect. And it would be challenging, to say
the least, for pharmaceutical companies to compensate
detailers for overtime going forward without significantly
changing the nature of that position. See, e.g., Brief for
PhRMA as Amicus Curiae 1420 (explaining that “key
aspects of [detailers’] jobs as they are currently structured
are fundamentally incompatible with treating [detailers]
as hourly employees”).
3
The remaining arguments advanced by petitioners and
the dissent are unavailing. Petitioners contend that de­
tailers are more naturally classified as nonexempt promo­
tional employees who merely stimulate sales made by
others than as exempt outside salesmen. They point out
that respondent’s prescription drugs are not actually sold
until distributors and retail pharmacies order the drugs
from other employees. See Reply Brief for Petitioners 7.
Those employees,24 they reason, are the true salesmen in
——————
24 According to one of respondent’s amici, most pharmaceutical com­
panies “have systems in place to maintain the inventories of wholesal­
ers and retailers of prescription drugs (consisting mainly of periodic
restocking pursuant to a general contract), [and] these systems are
largely ministerial and require only a few employees to administer
them.” Brief for PhRMA as Amicus Curiae 24; see also ibid. (explaining
that one of its members employs more than 2,000 pharmaceutical sales

