Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

23

Opinion of the Court

the industry, not detailers. This formalistic argument is
inconsistent with the realistic approach that the outside
salesman exemption is meant to reflect.
Petitioners’ theory seems to be that an employee is
properly classified as a nonexempt promotional employee
whenever there is another employee who actually makes
the sale in a technical sense. But, taken to its extreme,
petitioners’ theory would require that we treat as a nonex­
empt promotional employee a manufacturer’s representa­
tive who takes an order from a retailer but then transfers
the order to a jobber’s employee to be filled, or a car
salesman who receives a commitment to buy but then asks
his or her assistant to enter the order into the computer.
This formalistic approach would be difficult to reconcile
with the broad language of the regulations and the stat­
utory definition of “sale,” and it is in significant ten­
sion with the DOL’s past practice. See 1949 Report 83
(explaining that the manufacturer’s representative was
clearly “performing sales work regardless of the fact that
the order is filled by the jobber rather than directly by his
own employer”); Preamble 22162 (noting that “technologi­
cal changes in how orders are taken and processed should
not preclude the exemption for employees who in some
sense make the sales”).
Petitioners additionally argue that detailers are the
functional equivalent of employees who sell a “concept,”
and they point to Wage and Hour Division opinion letters,
as well as lower court decisions, deeming such employees
nonexempt. See Brief for Petitioners 4748. Two of these
opinions, however, concerned employees who were more
analogous to buyers than to sellers. See Clements v. Serco,
Inc., 530 F. 3d 1224, 1229–1230, n. 4 (CA10 2008) (ex­
—————— 

representatives but “fewer than ten employees who are responsible for

processing orders from retailers and wholesalers, a ratio that is typical

of how the industry is structured”).


