Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

BREYER, J., dissenting

“Promotion work,” §541.503. The relevant language of
the first two regulations is similar. The first says that
the term “ ‘employee employed in the capacity of outside
salesman’ . . . shall mean any employee . . . [w]hose primary duty is: (i) making sales within the meaning of section 3(k) of the Act, or (ii) obtaining orders or contracts for
services or for the use of facilities . . . .” §541.500(a)(1).
The second regulation tells us that the first regulation
“requires that the employee be engaged in . . . (1) Making
sales within the meaning of section 3(k) of the Act, or (2)
Obtaining orders or contracts for services or for the use of
facilities.” §541.501(a).
The second part of these quoted passages is irrelevant
here, for it concerns matters not at issue, namely “orders
or contracts for services or for the use of facilities.” The
remaining parts of the two regulations are similarly irrelevant. See Appendix, infra. Thus, the relevant portions of
the first two regulations say simply that the employee’s
“primary duty” must be “making sales within the meaning
of section 3(k) of the Act.” And §3(k) of the Act says that
the word “ ‘Sale’ or ‘sell’ includes any sale, exchange, contract to sell, consignment for sale, shipment for sale, or
other disposition.” 29 U. S. C. §203(k).
Unless we give the words of the statute and regulations
some special meaning, a detailer’s primary duty is not that
of “making sales” or the equivalent. A detailer might
convince a doctor to prescribe a drug for a particular kind
of patient. If the doctor encounters such a patient, he
might prescribe the drug. The doctor’s client, the patient,
might take the prescription to a pharmacist and ask the
pharmacist to fill the prescription. If so, the pharmacist
might sell the manufacturer’s drug to the patient, or
might substitute a generic version. But it is the pharmacist, not the detailer, who will have sold the drug.
To put the same fairly obvious point in the language of
the regulations and of §3(k) of the FLSA, see 29 U. S. C.

