12

CHRISTOPHER v. SMITHKLINE BEECHAM CORP.
Opinion of the Court

faith reliance on [agency] pronouncements” or in a case
involving “fines or damages”).
This case well illustrates the point. Until 2009, the
pharmaceutical industry had little reason to suspect that
its longstanding practice of treating detailers as exempt
outside salesmen transgressed the FLSA. The statute and
regulations certainly do not provide clear notice of this.
The general regulation adopts the broad statutory defini­
tion of “sale,” and that definition, in turn, employs the
broad catchall phrase “other disposition.” See 29 CFR
§541.500(a)(1). This catchall phrase could reasonably be
construed to encompass a nonbinding commitment from a
physician to prescribe a particular drug, and nothing in
the statutory or regulatory text or the DOL’s prior guid­
ance plainly requires a contrary reading. See Preamble
22162 (explaining that an employee must “in some sense”
make a sale); 1940 Report 46 (same).
Even more important, despite the industry’s decades­
long practice of classifying pharmaceutical detailers as
exempt employees, the DOL never initiated any enforce­
ment actions with respect to detailers or otherwise sug­
gested that it thought the industry was acting unlaw­
fully.16 We acknowledge that an agency’s enforcement
decisions are informed by a host of factors, some bearing
no relation to the agency’s views regarding whether a
violation has occurred. See, e.g., Heckler v. Chaney, 470
U. S. 821, 831 (1985) (noting that “an agency decision not
——————
16 It appears that the DOL only once directly opined on the exempt
status of detailers prior to 2009. In 1945, the Wage and Hour Division
issued an opinion letter tentatively concluding that “medical detailists”
who performed “work . . . aimed at increasing the use of [their employ­
er’s] product in hospitals and through physicians’ recommendations”
qualified as administrative employees. Opinion Letter from Dept. of
Labor, Wage and Hour Division (May 19, 1945), 1 CCH Labor Law
Service, Federal Wage-Hour Guide ¶33,093. But that letter did not
address the outside salesman exemption.

