24

CHRISTOPHER v. SMITHKLINE BEECHAM CORP.
Opinion of the Court

plaining that, although military recruiters “[i]n a loose
sense” were “selling the Army’s services,” it was the Army
that would “pa[y] for the services of the recruits who en­
list”); Opinion Letter from Dept. of Labor, Wage and Hour
Division (Aug. 19, 1994), 1994 WL 1004855 (explaining
that selling the “concept” of organ donation “is similar
to that of outside buyers who in a very loose sense are
sometimes described as selling their employer’s ‘service’
to the person for whom they obtain their goods”). And the
other two opinions are likewise inapposite. One concerned
employees who were not selling a good or service at all,
see Opinion Letter from Dept. of Labor, Wage and Hour
Division (May 22, 2006), 2006 WL 1698305 (concluding
that employees who solicit charitable contributions are not
exempt), and the other concerned employees who were
incapable of selling any good or service because their
employer had yet to extend an offer, see Opinion Letter
from Dept. of Labor, Wage and Hour Division (Apr. 20,
1999), 1999 WL 1002391 (concluding that college recruit­
ers are not exempt because they merely induce qualified
customers to apply to the college, and the college “in turn
decides whether to make a contractual offer of its educa­
tional services to the applicant”).
Finally, the dissent posits that the “primary duty” of a
pharmaceutical detailer is not “to obtain a promise to
prescribe a particular drug,” but rather to “provid[e] in­
formation so that the doctor will keep the drug in mind
with an eye toward using it when appropriate.” Post, at 6.
But the record in this case belies that contention. Peti­
tioners’ end goal was not merely to make physicians aware
of the medically appropriate uses of a particular drug.
Rather, it was to convince physicians actually to prescribe
the drug in appropriate cases. See App. to Pet. for Cert.
40a (finding that petitioners’ “primary objective was con­
vincing physicians to prescribe [respondent’s] products to
their patients”).

