4

CHRISTOPHER v. SMITHKLINE BEECHAM CORP.
BREYER, J., dissenting

§203(k), the detailer does not “sell” anything to the doctor.
See Black’s Law Dictionary 1454 (9th ed. 2009) (defining
“sale” as “[t]he transfer of property or title for a price”).
Nor does he, during the course of that visit or immediately thereafter, “exchange” the manufacturer’s product for
money or for anything else. He enters into no “contract to
sell” on behalf of anyone. He “consigns” nothing “for sale.”
He “ships” nothing for sale. He does not “dispose” of any
product at all.
What the detailer does is inform the doctor about the
nature of the manufacturer’s drugs and explain their uses,
their virtues, their drawbacks, and their limitations. The
detailer may well try to convince the doctor to prescribe
the manufacturer’s drugs for patients. And if the detailer
is successful, the doctor will make a “nonbinding commitment” to write prescriptions using one or more of those
drugs where appropriate. If followed, that “nonbinding
commitment” is, at most, a nonbinding promise to consider
advising a patient to use a drug where medical indications
so indicate (if the doctor encounters such a patient), and to
write a prescription that will likely (but may not) lead that
person to order that drug under its brand name from the
pharmacy. (I say “may not” because 30% of patients in a
2-year period have not filled a prescription given to them
by a doctor. See USA Today, Kaiser Family Foundation,
Harvard School of Public Health, The Public on Prescription Drugs and Pharmaceutical Companies 3 (2008),
available at http://www.kff.org/kaiserpolls/upload/7748.pdf
(all Internet materials as visited June 13, 2012, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file). And when patients do
fill prescriptions, 75% are filled with generic drugs. See
Dept. of Health and Human Services, Office of Science &
Data Policy, Expanding the Use of Generic Drugs 2
(2010).)
Where in this process does the detailer sell the product?
At most he obtains from the doctor a “nonbinding com-

