Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

exemption unless he actually transfers title to the prop­
erty at issue.” U. S. Brief 1213.
This new interpretation is flatly inconsistent with the
FLSA, which defines “sale” to mean, inter alia, a “con­
signment for sale.” A “consignment for sale” does not
involve the transfer of title. See, e.g., Sturm v. Boker, 150
U. S. 312, 330 (1893) (“The agency to sell and return the
proceeds, or the specific goods if not sold . . . does not
involve a change of title”); Hawkland, Consignment Sell­
ing Under the Uniform Commercial Code, 67 Com. L. J.
146, 147 (1962) (explaining that “ ‘[a] consignment of goods
for sale does not pass the title at any time, nor does it
contemplate that it should be passed’ ” (quoting Rio
Grande Oil Co. v. Miller Rubber Co. of N. Y., 31 Ariz. 84,
87, 250 P. 564, 565 (1926))).
The DOL cannot salvage its interpretation by arguing
that a “consignment for sale” may eventually result in the
transfer of title (from the consignor to the ultimate pur­
chaser if the consignee in fact sells the good). Much the
same may be said about a physician’s nonbinding com­
mitment to prescribe a particular product in an appropri­
ate case. In that situation, too, agreement may eventually
result in the transfer of title (from the manufacturer to a
pharmacy and ultimately to the patient for whom the drug
is prescribed).
In support of its new interpretation, the DOL relies
heavily on its sales regulation, which states in part that
“[s]ales [for present purposes] include the transfer of title
to tangible property,” 29 CFR §541.501(b) (emphasis
added). This regulation, however, provides little support
for the DOL’s position. The DOL reads the sales regula­
tion to mean that a “sale” necessarily includes the transfer
of title, but that is not what the regulation says. And it
seems clear that that is not what the regulation means.
The sentence just subsequent to the one on which the DOL
relies, echoing the terms of the FLSA, makes clear that a

