4

CHRISTOPHER v. SMITHKLINE BEECHAM CORP.
Syllabus
unconvincing. Since promotion work that is performed incidental to
an employee’s own sales is exempt, the DOL’s conclusion that detailers perform only nonexempt promotion work is only as strong as the
reasoning underlying its conclusion that those employees do not
make sales. Pp. 14–16.
(c) Because the DOL’s interpretation is neither entitled to Auer
deference nor persuasive in its own right, traditional tools of interpretation must be employed to determine whether petitioners are exempt outside salesmen. Pp. 16–24.
(1) The FLSA does not furnish a clear answer to this question,
but it provides at least one interpretive clue by exempting anyone
“employed . . . in the capacity of [an] outside salesman.” 29 U. S. C.
§213(a)(1). The statute’s emphasis on “capacity” counsels in favor of
a functional, rather than a formal, inquiry, one that views an employee’s responsibilities in the context of the particular industry in
which the employee works. The DOL’s regulations provide additional
guidance. Section 541.500 defines an outside salesman as an employee whose primary duty is “making sales” and adopts the statutory definition of “sale.” This statutory definition contains at least
three important textual clues. First, the definition is introduced with
the verb “includes,” which indicates that the examples enumerated
in the text are illustrative, not exhaustive. See Burgess v. United
States, 553 U. S. 124, 131, n. 3. Second, the list of transactions included in the statutory definition is modified by “any,” which, in the
context of §203(k), is best read to mean “ ‘one or some indiscriminately of whatever kind,’ ” United States v. Gonzales, 520 U. S. 1, 5.
Third, the definition includes the broad catchall phrase “other disposition.” Under the rule of ejusdem generis, the catchall phrase is
most reasonably interpreted as including those arrangements that
are tantamount, in a particular industry, to a paradigmatic sale of a
commodity. Nothing in the remaining regulations requires a narrower construction. Pp. 16–20.
(2) Given this interpretation of “other disposition,” it follows that
petitioners made sales under the FLSA and thus are exempt outside
salesmen within the meaning of the DOL’s regulations. Petitioners
obtain nonbinding commitments from physicians to prescribe respondent’s drugs. This kind of arrangement, in the unique regulatory environment within which pharmaceutical companies operate,
comfortably falls within the catchall category of “other disposition.”
That petitioners bear all of the external indicia of salesmen provides
further support for this conclusion. And this holding also comports
with the apparent purpose of the FLSA’s exemption. The exemption
is premised on the belief that exempt employees normally earn salaries well above the minimum wage and perform a kind of work that is

