Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

Circuit, the DOL took the view that “a ‘sale’ for the pur­
poses of the outside sales exemption requires a consummated transaction directly involving the employee for
whom the exemption is sought.” Secretary’s Novartis
Brief 11; see also Brief for Secretary of Labor as Amicus
Curiae in No. 10–15257 (CA9), p. 12. Perhaps because
of the nebulous nature of this “consummated transaction”
test,12 the Department changed course after we granted
certiorari in this case. The Department now takes the
position that “[a]n employee does not make a ‘sale’ for
purposes of the ‘outside salesman’ exemption unless he
actually transfers title to the property at issue.” Brief for
United States as Amicus Curiae 1213 (hereinafter U. S.
Brief).13 Petitioners and the DOL assert that this new
interpretation of the regulations is entitled to controlling
deference. See Brief for Petitioners 3142; U. S. Brief
3034.14
——————
12 For example, it is unclear why a physician’s nonbinding commit­
ment to prescribe a drug in an appropriate case cannot qualify as a sale
under this test. The broad term “transaction” easily encompasses such
a commitment. See Webster’s Third New International Dictionary
2425 (2002) (hereinafter Webster’s Third) (defining “transaction” to
mean “a communicative action or activity involving two parties or two
things reciprocally affecting or influencing each other”). A “consum­
mated transaction” is simply a transaction that has been fully completed.
See id., at 490 (defining “consummate” to mean “to bring to comple­
tion”). And a pharmaceutical sales representative who obtains such a
commitment is “directly involv[ed]” in this transaction. Thus, once a
pharmaceutical sales representative and a physician have fully com­
pleted their agreement, it may be said that they have entered into a
“consummated transaction.”
13 When pressed to clarify its position at oral argument, the DOL
suggested that a “transfer of possession in contemplation of a transfer
of title” might also suffice. Tr. of Oral Arg. 17.
14 Neither petitioners nor the DOL asks us to accord controlling def­
erence to the “consummated transaction” interpretation the Depart­
ment advanced in its briefs in the Second Circuit and Ninth Circuit, nor
could we given that the Department has now abandoned that interpre­
tation. See Estate of Cowart v. Nicklos Drilling Co., 505 U. S. 469, 480

