18

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, 

KRAMER & ULRICH LPA 

KENNEDY, J., dissenting 


place. There is nothing incongruous in this scheme.
Indeed, for the reasons described in Part I, supra, it is far
less peculiar than the Court’s reading, which would sub
ject attorneys to liability for good-faith legal advocacy,
even advocacy based on an accurate assessment of then
existing case law.
Third, in construing §1692k(c) to exclude legal errors,
the Court points to the requirement that a debt collector
maintain “procedures reasonably adapted to avoid any
such error.” The Court asserts that this phrase most
naturally evokes procedures to avoid clerical or factual
mistakes. There is nothing natural in reading this phrase
contrary to its plain terms, which do not distinguish be
tween different categories of mistakes. Nor is there any
thing unusual about procedures adopted to avoid legal
mistakes. The present case is again instructive. Accord
ing to the District Court, respondents designated a lead
FDCPA compliance attorney, who regularly attended
conferences and seminars; subscribed to relevant periodi
cals; distributed leading FDCPA cases to all attorneys;
trained new attorneys on their statutory obligations; and
held regular firm-wide meetings on FDCPA issues. See
538 F. 3d 469, 477 (CA6 2008). These procedures are not
only “reasonably adapted to avoid [legal] error[s],” but also
accord with the FDCPA’s purposes.
The Court argues, nonetheless, that the statute contem
plates only clerical or factual errors, for these are the type
of errors that can mostly naturally be addressed through
“ ‘a series of steps followed in a regular orderly definite
way.’ ” Ante, at 12 (quoting Webster’s Third New Interna
tional Dictionary 1807 (1976)). As made clear by the steps
that respondents have taken to ensure FDCPA compli
ance, this is simply not true. The Court also speculates
that procedures to avoid clerical or factual errors will be
easier to implement than procedures to avoid legal errors.
Even if this were not pure conjecture, it has nothing to do

