Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

Even if the text of §1692k(c), read in isolation, leaves
room for doubt, the context and history of the FDCPA
provide further reinforcement for construing that provi
sion not to shield violations resulting from misinterpreta
tions of the requirements of the Act. See Dada v. Mu
kasey, 554 U. S. 1, __ (2008) (slip op., at 13) (“In reading a
statute we must not look merely to a particular clause, but
consider in connection with it the whole statute” (internal
quotation marks omitted)). As described above, Congress
included in the FDCPA not only the bona fide error de
fense but also a separate protection from liability for “any
act done or omitted in good faith in conformity with any
advisory opinion of the [FTC].” §1692k(e). In our view,
the Court of Appeals’ reading is at odds with the role
Congress evidently contemplated for the FTC in resolving
ambiguities in the Act. Debt collectors would rarely need
to consult the FTC if §1692k(c) were read to offer immu
nity for good-faith reliance on advice from private counsel.
Indeed, debt collectors might have an affirmative incentive
not to seek an advisory opinion to resolve ambiguity in the
law, as receipt of such advice would prevent them from
claiming good-faith immunity for violations and would
potentially trigger civil penalties for knowing violations
under the FTC Act.8 More importantly, the existence of a
separate provision that, by its plain terms, is more obvi
ously tailored to the concern at issue (excusing civil liabil
ity when the Act’s prohibitions are uncertain) weighs
against stretching the language of the bona fide error
——————
8 One

of Carlisle’s amici suggests the FTC safe harbor would provide
a more categorical immunity than §1692k(c), obviating the need, e.g., to
maintain “procedures reasonably adapted to avoid any such error.”
Brief for National Association of Retail Collection Attorneys as Amicus
Curiae 18–19 (NARCA Brief). Even if that is true, we need not con
clude that the FTC safe harbor would be rendered entirely superfluous
to reason that the existence of that provision counsels against extend
ing the bona fide error defense to serve an overlapping function.

