28

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, 

KRAMER & ULRICH LPA 

Opinion of the Court 


the boundaries of the Act’s prohibitions on collection tech
niques. It is far from obvious why immunizing debt collec
tors who adopt aggressive but mistaken interpretations of
the law would be consistent with the statute’s broadly
worded prohibitions on debt collector misconduct. Jerman
and her amici express further concern that the dissent’s
reading would give a competitive advantage to debt collec
tors who press the boundaries of lawful conduct. They
foresee a “race to the bottom” driving ethical collectors out
of business. Brief for Petitioner 32; Brief for Public Citi
zen et al. as Amici Curiae 16–18. It is difficult to square
such a result with Congress’ express purpose “to eliminate
abusive debt collection practices by debt collectors, [and]
to insure that those debt collectors who refrain from using
abusive debt collection practices are not competitively
disadvantaged,” §1692(e).
The dissent’s reading also invites litigation about a debt
collector’s subjective intent to violate the FDCPA and the
adequacy of procedures maintained to avoid legal error.
Cf. Barlow, 7 Pet., at 411 (maxim that ignorance of the
law will not excuse civil or criminal liability “results from
the extreme difficulty of ascertaining what is, bona fide,
the interpretation of the party”).
Courts that read
§1692k(c) to permit a mistake-of-law defense have adopted
varying formulations of what legal procedures are “rea
sonably adapted to avoid any [legal] error.”20 Among other
uncertainties, the dissent does not explain whether it
——————
20 Compare Hartman v. Great Senaca Financial Corp., 569 F. 3d 606,
614–615 (CA6 2009) (suggesting that reasonable procedures might
include “perform[ing] ongoing FDCPA training, procur[ing] the most
recent case law, or hav[ing] an individual responsible for continuing
compliance with the FDCPA”), with Johnson v. Riddle, 443 F. 3d 723,
730–731 (CA10 2006) (suggesting that researching case law and filing a
test case might be sufficient, but remanding for a jury determination of
whether the “limited [legal] analysis” undertaken was sufficient and
whether the test case was in fact a “sham”).

