Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

27

Opinion of the Court

§646.641 (2007); Wis. Stat. §427.105 (2007–2008). More
generally, a group of 21 States as amici supporting Jer
man inform us they are aware of “no [judicial] decisions
interpreting a parallel state bona fide error provision [in a
civil regulatory statute] to immunize a defendant’s mis
take of law,” except in a minority of statutes that ex
pressly provide to the contrary.18 See Brief for State of
New York et al. as Amici Curiae 11, and n. 6. Neither
Carlisle and its amici nor the dissent demonstrate that
lawyers have suffered drastic consequences under these
state regimes.
In the dissent’s view, these policy concerns are evidence
that “Congress could not have intended” the reading we
adopt today. Post, at 5. But the dissent’s reading raises
concerns of its own. The dissent focuses on the facts of
this case, in which an attorney debt collector, in the dis
sent’s view, “acted reasonably at every step” and commit
ted a “technical violation” resulting in no “actual harm” to
the debtor. Post, at 12, 6, 8. But the dissent’s legal theory
does not limit the defense to attorney debt collectors or
“technical” violations.19 Under that approach, it appears,
nonlawyer debt collectors could obtain blanket immunity
for mistaken interpretations of the FDCPA simply by
seeking the advice of legal counsel. Moreover, many debt
collectors are compensated with a percentage of money
recovered, and so will have a financial incentive to press
——————
18 See,

e.g., Kan. Stat. Ann. §16a–5–201(7) (2007) (provision of Kansas
Consumer Credit Code providing a defense for a “bona fide error of law
or fact”); Ind. Code §24–9–5–5 (West 2004) (defense for creditor’s “bona
fide error of law or fact” in Indiana Home Loan Practices Act).
19 The dissent also downplays the predicate fact that respondents in
this case brought a foreclosure lawsuit against Jerman for a debt she
had already repaid. Neither the lower courts nor this Court have been
asked to consider, and thus we express no view about, whether Carlisle
could be subject to liability under the FDCPA for that uncontested
error—regardless of how reasonably Carlisle may have acted after the
mistake was pointed out by Jerman’s (privately retained) lawyer.

