12

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, 

KRAMER & ULRICH LPA 

KENNEDY, J., dissenting 


writing. See, e.g., Graziano v. Harrison, 950 F. 2d 107,
112 (CA3 1991) (written objection is necessary for coherent
statutory scheme and protects the debtor by “creat[ing] a
lasting record of the fact that the debt has been disputed”).
When Jerman disputed the debt, respondents verified that
the debt had been satisfied and withdrew the lawsuit.
Respondents acted reasonably at every step, and yet may
still find themselves liable for a harmless violation.
After today’s ruling, attorneys can be punished for
advocacy reasonably deemed to be in compliance with the
law or even required by it. This distorts the legal process.
Henceforth, creditors’ attorneys of the highest ethical
standing are encouraged to adopt a debtor-friendly inter
pretation of every question, lest the attorneys themselves
incur personal financial risk. It is most disturbing that
this Court now adopts a statutory interpretation that will
interject an attorney’s personal financial interests into the
professional and ethical dynamics of the attorney-client
relationship. These consequences demonstrate how un
tenable the Court’s statutory interpretation is and counsel
in favor of a different reading. See Milavetz, Gallop &
Milavetz, P. A. v. United States, 559 U. S. ___, ___, n. 5
(2010) (slip op., at 16, n. 5) (rejecting a reading of federal
law that “would seriously undermine the attorney-client
relationship”).
The Court’s response is that this possibility is nothing
new, because attorneys are already duty-bound to comply
with the law and with standards of professional conduct.
Attorneys face sanctions for harassing behavior and frivo
lous litigation, and in some cases misconduct may give rise
to personal liability. Ante, at 25–26.
This response only underscores the problem with the
Court’s approach. By reading §1692k(c) to exclude mis
takes of law, the Court ensures that attorneys will face
liability even when they have done nothing wrong—
indeed, even when they have acted in accordance with

