Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

thereby producing the very result that Heintz said would
not come about. Attorneys may now be held liable for
taking reasonable legal positions in good faith if those
positions are ultimately rejected.
Attorneys are duty-bound to represent their clients with
diligence, creativity, and painstaking care, all within the
confines of the law. When statutory provisions have not
yet been interpreted in a definitive way, principled advo
cacy is to be prized, not punished. Surely this includes
offering interpretations of a statute that are permissible,
even if not yet settled. The FDCPA is a complex statute,
and its provisions are subject to different interpretations.
See, e.g., ante, at 5, n. 4 (identifying splits of authority on
two different FDCPA issues); Brief for National Associa
tion of Retail Collection Attorneys as Amicus Curiae 5–6
(identifying another split); see also ante, at 12. Attorneys
will often find themselves confronted with a statutory
provision that is susceptible to different but still reason
able interpretations.
An attorney’s obligation in the face of uncertainty is to
give the client his or her best professional assessment of
the law’s mandate. Under the Court’s interpretation of
the FDCPA, however, even that might leave the attorney
vulnerable to suit. For if the attorney proceeds based on
an interpretation later rejected by the courts, today’s
decision deems that to be actionable as an intentional
“violation,” with personal financial liability soon to follow.
Indeed, even where a particular practice is compelled by
existing precedent, the attorney may be sued if that prece
dent is later overturned.
These adverse consequences are evident in the instant
case. When respondents filed a foreclosure complaint
against Jerman on behalf of their client, they had no
reason to doubt that the debt was valid. They had every
reason, furthermore, to believe that they were on solid
legal ground in asking her to dispute the amount owed in

