20

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, 

KRAMER & ULRICH LPA 

Opinion of the Court 


of §1692k(c). Carlisle perceives an inconsistency between
our reading of the term “intentional” in that provision and
the instruction in §1692k(b) that a court look to whether
“noncompliance was intentional” in assessing statutory
additional damages. But assuming §1692k(b) encom
passes errors of law, we see no conflict, only congruence, in
reading the Act to permit a court to adjust statutory dam
ages for a good-faith misinterpretation of law, even where
a debt collector is not entitled to the categorical protection
of the bona fide error defense. Carlisle is also concerned
that under our reading, §1692k(c) would be unavailable to
a debt collector who violates a provision of the FDCPA
applying to acts taken with particular intent because in
such instances the relevant act would not be uninten
tional. See, e.g., §1692d(5) (prohibiting a debt collector
from “[c]ausing a telephone to ring . . . continuously with
intent to annoy, abuse, or harass”). Including mistakes as
to the scope of such a prohibition, Carlisle urges, would
ensure that §1692k(c) applied throughout the FDCPA. We
see no reason, however, why the bona fide error defense
must cover every provision of the Act.
The parties and amici make arguments concerning the
legislative history that we address for the sake of com
pleteness. Carlisle points to a sentence in a Senate Com
mittee Report stating that “[a] debt collector has no liabil
ity . . . if he violates the act in any manner, including with
regard to the act’s coverage, when such violation is unin
tentional and occurred despite procedures designed to
avoid such violations.” S. Rep. No. 95–382, p. 5 (1977); see
also post, at 4–6 (opinion of SCALIA, J.) (discussing report).
But by its own terms, the quoted sentence does not unam
biguously support Carlisle’s reading. Even if a bona fide
mistake “with regard to the act’s coverage” could be read
in isolation to contemplate a mistake of law, that reading
does not exclude mistakes of fact. A mistake “with regard
to the act’s coverage” may derive wholly from a debt collec

