2

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, 

KRAMER & ULRICH LPA 

Syllabus 

ing, Carlisle had violated §1692g(a) of the FDCPA, which governs the
contents of notices to debtors. The District Court, acknowledging a
division of authority on the question, held that Carlisle had violated
§1692g(a) but ultimately granted Carlisle summary judgment under
§1692k(c)’s “bona fide error” defense. The Sixth Circuit affirmed,
holding that the defense in §1692k(c) is not limited to clerical or fac
tual errors, but extends to mistakes of law.

Held: The bona fide error defense in §1692k(c) does not apply to a viola
tion resulting from a debt collector’s mistaken interpretation of the
legal requirements of the FDCPA. Pp. 6–30.
(a) A violation resulting from a debt collector’s misinterpretation of
the legal requirements of the FDCPA cannot be “not intentional” un
der §1692k(c). It is a common maxim that “ignorance of the law will
not excuse any person, either civilly or criminally.” Barlow v. United
States, 7 Pet. 404, 411. When Congress has intended to provide a
mistake-of-law defense to civil liability, it has often done so more ex
plicitly than here. In particular, the administrative-penalty provi
sions of the FTC Act, which are expressly incorporated into the
FDCPA, apply only when a debt collector acts with “actual knowledge
or knowledge fairly implied on the basis of objective circumstances”
that the FDCPA prohibited its action. §§45(m)(1)(A), (C). Given the
absence of similar language in §1692k(c), it is fair to infer that Con
gress permitted injured consumers to recover damages for “inten
tional” conduct, including violations resulting from a mistaken inter
pretation of the FDCPA, while reserving the more onerous
administrative penalties for debt collectors whose intentional actions
reflected knowledge that the conduct was prohibited. Congress also
did not confine FDCPA liability to “willful” violations, a term more of
ten understood in the civil context to exclude mistakes of law. See,
e.g., Trans World Airlines, Inc. v. Thurston, 469 U. S. 111, 125–126.
Section 1692k(c)’s requirement that a debt collector maintain “proce
dures reasonably adapted to avoid any such error” also more natu
rally evokes procedures to avoid mistakes like clerical or factual er
rors. Pp. 6–12.
(b) Additional support for this reading is found in the statute’s con
text and history. The FDCPA’s separate protection from liability for
“any act done or omitted in good faith in conformity with any [FTC]
advisory opinion,” §1692k(e), is more obviously tailored to the con
cern at issue (excusing civil liability when the FDCPA’s prohibitions
are uncertain) than the bona fide error defense. Moreover, in enact
ing the FDCPA in 1977, Congress copied the pertinent portions of the
bona fide error defense from the Truth in Lending Act (TILA),
§1640(c). At that time, the three Federal Courts of Appeals to have
considered the question interpreted the TILA provision as referring

