Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of the Court

tor’s factually mistaken belief, for example, that a particu
lar debt arose out of a nonconsumer transaction and was
therefore not “covered” by the Act. There is no reason to
read this passing statement in the Senate Report as con
templating an exemption for legal error that is the product
of an attorney’s erroneous interpretation of the FDCPA—
particularly when attorneys were excluded from the Act’s
definition of “debt collector” until 1986. 100 Stat. 768.
Moreover, the reference to “any manner” of violation is
expressly qualified by the requirements that the violation
be “unintentional” and occur despite maintenance of ap
propriate procedures. In any event, we need not choose
between these possible readings of the Senate Report, as
the legislative record taken as a whole does not lend
strong support to Carlisle’s view.14 We therefore decline to
——————
14 For

instance, an amendment was proposed and rejected during the
Senate Banking Committee’s consideration of the FDCPA that would
have required proof that a debt collector’s violation was “knowin[g].”
Senator Riegle, one of the Act’s primary sponsors, opposed the change,
explaining that the bill reflected the view that “certain things ought not
to happen, period. . . . [W]hether somebody does it knowingly, willfully,
you know, with a good heart, bad heart, is really quite incidental.” See
Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, Markup
Session: S. 1130—Debt Collection Legislation 60 (July 26, 1977) (here
inafter Markup); see also ibid. (“We have left a way for these disputes
to be adj[u]dicated if they are brought, where somebody can say, I
didn’t know that, or my computer malfunctioned, something happened,
I didn’t intend for the effect to be as it was”). To similar effect, a House
Report on an earlier version of the bill explained the need for new
legislation governing use of the mails for debt collection on grounds
that existing statutes “frequently require[d]” a showing of “specific
intent[,] which is difficult to prove.” H. R. Rep. No. 95–131, p. 3 (1977).
Elsewhere, to be sure, the legislative record contains statements more
supportive of Carlisle’s interpretation. In particular, a concern was
raised in the July 26 markup session that the TILA bona fide error
defense had been interpreted “as only protecting against a mathemati
cal error,” and that the FDCPA defense should “go beyond” TILA to
“allow the courts discretion to dismiss a violation where it was a
technical error.” Markup 20. In response, a staffer explained that the

