Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

their professional responsibilities. Here respondents’ law
firm did not harass Jerman; it did not file a frivolous suit
against her; it did not intentionally mislead her; it caused
her no damages or injury. The firm acted upon a reason
able legal interpretation that the District Court later
thought to be mistaken. The District Court’s position, as
all concede, was in conflict with other published, reasoned
opinions. Ante, at 4, n. 2. (And in the instant case, nei
ther the Court of Appeals nor this Court has decided the
issue. See ante, at 5, n. 3.) If the law firm can be pun
ished for making a good-faith legal error, then to be safe
an attorney must always stick to the most debtor-friendly
interpretation of the statute, lest automatic liability follow
if some later decision adopts a different rule. This dy
namic creates serious concerns, not only for the attorney
client relationship but also for First Amendment rights.
Cf. Legal Services Corporation v. Velazquez, 531 U. S. 533,
545 (2001) (law restricting arguments available to attor
neys “prohibits speech and expression upon which courts
must depend for the proper exercise of the judicial
power”). We need not decide that these concerns rise to
the level of an independent constitutional violation, see
ante, at 29, n. 21, to recognize that they counsel against a
problematic interpretation of the statute. See Edward J.
DeBartolo Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Building & Constr.
Trades Council, 485 U. S. 568, 575 (1988) (“[W]here an
otherwise acceptable construction of a statute would raise
serious constitutional problems, the Court will construe
the statute to avoid such problems unless such construc
tion is plainly contrary to the intent of Congress”).
JUSTICE BREYER—although not the Court—argues that
an attorney faced with legal uncertainty only needs to
turn to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) for an advi
sory opinion. An attorney’s actions in conformity with the
opinion will be shielded from liability. Ante, at 1 (concur
ring opinion) (citing 15 U. S. C. §1692k(e)). This argument

