12

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, 

KRAMER & ULRICH LPA 

Opinion of the Court 


“actual knowledge or knowledge fairly implied on the basis
of objective circumstances” that particular conduct was
unlawful. The dissent’s reading gives short shrift to that
textual distinction.
We draw additional support for the conclusion that bona
fide errors in §1692k(c) do not include mistaken interpre
tations of the FDCPA, from the requirement that a debt
collector maintain “procedures reasonably adapted to
avoid any such error.” The dictionary defines “procedure”
as “a series of steps followed in a regular orderly definite
way.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1807
(1976). In that light, the statutory phrase is more natu
rally read to apply to processes that have mechanical or
other such “regular orderly” steps to avoid mistakes—for
instance, the kind of internal controls a debt collector
might adopt to ensure its employees do not communicate
with consumers at the wrong time of day, §1692c(a)(1), or
make false representations as to the amount of a debt,
§1692e(2). The dissent, like the Court of Appeals, finds
nothing unusual in attorney debt collectors maintaining
procedures to avoid legal error. Post, at 18; 538 F. 3d, at
476. We do not dispute that some entities may maintain
procedures to avoid legal errors. But legal reasoning is
not a mechanical or strictly linear process. For this rea
son, we find force in the suggestion by the Government (as
amicus curiae supporting Jerman) that the broad statu
tory requirement of procedures reasonably designed to
avoid “any” bona fide error indicates that the relevant
procedures are ones that help to avoid errors like clerical
or factual mistakes. Such procedures are more likely to
avoid error than those applicable to legal reasoning, par
ticularly in the context of a comprehensive and complex
federal statute such as the FDCPA that imposes open
ended prohibitions on, inter alia, “false, deceptive,”
§1692e, or “unfair” practices, §1692f. See Brief for United
States as Amicus Curiae 16–18.

