Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

29

Opinion of the Court

would read §1692k(c) to impose a heightened standard for
the procedures attorney debt collectors must maintain, as
compared to nonattorney debt collectors. The increased
cost to prospective plaintiffs in time, fees, and uncertainty
of outcome may chill private suits under the statutory
right of action, undermining the FDCPA’s calibrated
scheme of statutory incentives to encourage self
enforcement. Cf. FTC, Collecting Consumer Debts: The
Challenge of Change 67 (2009) (“Because the Commission
receives more than 70,000 third-party debt collection
complaints per year, it is not feasible for federal govern
ment law enforcement to be the exclusive or primary
means of deterring all possible law violations”). The state
amici predict that, on the dissent’s reading, consumers
will have little incentive to bring enforcement actions
“where the law [i]s at all unsettled, because in such cir
cumstances a debt collector could easily claim bona fide
error of law”; in the States’ view, the resulting “enforce
ment gap” would be “extensive” at both the federal and
State levels. See Brief for State of New York et al. as
Amici Curiae 7–10. In short, the policy concerns identified
by the dissent tell only half the story.21
In sum, we do not foresee that our decision today will
place unmanageable burdens on lawyers practicing in the
debt collection industry. To the extent debt collecting
lawyers face liability for mistaken interpretations of the
requirements of the FDCPA, Carlisle, its amici, and the
dissent have not shown that “the result [will be] so absurd
as to warrant” disregarding the weight of textual author
——————
21 The dissent adds in passing that today’s decision “creates serious
concerns . . . for First Amendment rights.” Post, at 13 (citing Legal
Services Corporation v. Velazquez, 531 U. S. 533, 545 (2001)). That
claim was neither raised nor passed upon below, and was mentioned
neither in the certiorari papers nor the parties’ merits briefing to this
Court. We decline to express any view on it. See Cutter v. Wilkinson,
544 U. S. 709, 718, n. 7 (2005).

