2

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, 

KRAMER & ULRICH LPA 

Opinion of SCALIA, J. 


able to assume that Congress was aware of those holdings,
took them to be correct, and intended the same meaning in
adopting that text.1 It seems to me unreasonable, how
ever, to assume that, when Congress has a bill before it
that contains language used in an earlier statute, it is
aware of, and approves as correct, a mere three Court of
Appeals decisions interpreting that earlier statute over
the previous nine years. Can one really believe that a
majority in both Houses of Congress knew of those three
cases, and accepted them as correct (even when, as was
the case here, some District Court opinions and a State
Supreme Court opinion had concluded, to the contrary,
that the defense covered legal errors, see ante, at 14–15,
n. 10)? This is a legal fiction, which has nothing to be said
for it except that it can sometimes make our job easier.
The Court acknowledges that “the interpretations of three
Federal Courts of Appeals may not have ‘settled’ the
meaning of TILA’s bona fide error defense,” but says
“there is no reason to suppose that Congress disagreed
with those interpretations.” Ante, at 15–16. Perhaps not;
but no reason to suppose that it knew of and agreed with
them either—which is presumably the proposition for
which the Court cites them.
Even assuming, moreover, that Congress knew and
approved of those cases, they would not support the
Court’s conclusion today. All three of them said that
TILA’s bona fide error defense covered only clerical errors.
See Ives v. W. T. Grant Co., 522 F. 2d 749, 758 (CA2 1975)
(“only available for clerical errors”); Haynes v. Logan
——————
1 Of course where so many federal courts have read the language that
way, the text was probably clear enough that resort to unexpressed
congressional intent would be unnecessary. Or indeed it could be said
that such uniform and longstanding judicial interpretation had estab
lished the public meaning of the text, whether the Members of Con
gress were aware of the cases or not. That would be the understanding
of the text by reasonable people familiar with its legal context.

