Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

with what the statute requires. The statute does not talk
about procedures that eliminate all—or even most—
errors. It merely requires procedures “reasonably adapted
to avoid any such error.” The statute adopts the sensible
approach of requiring reasonable safeguards if liability is
to be avoided. This approach, not the Court’s interpreta
tion, reflects the reality of debt-collection practices.
Fourth, the Court argues that construing §1692k(c) to
encompass a mistake-of-law defense “is at odds with” the
role contemplated for the FTC. Ante, at 13. This is so, it
contends, because the FTC is authorized to issue advisory
opinions, and the statute shields from liability “any act
done or omitted in good faith in conformity” with such
opinions. §1692k(e). But why, asks the Court, would a
debt collector seek an opinion from the FTC if immunity
under §1692k(c) could be obtained simply by relying in
good faith on advice from private counsel? Going further,
the Court suggests that debt collectors might “have an
affirmative incentive not to seek an advisory opinion to
resolve ambiguity in the law, which would then prevent
them from claiming good-faith immunity for violations.”
Ante, at 13.
There is little substance to this line of reasoning. As the
Court itself acknowledges, debt collectors would have an
incentive to invoke the FTC safe harbor even if §1692k(c)
is construed to include a mistake-of-law defense, because
the safe harbor provides a “more categorical immunity.”
Ante, at 13, n. 8. Additionally, if a debt collector avoids
seeking an advisory opinion from the FTC out of concern
that the answer will be unfavorable, that seems quite at
odds with saying that his or her ignorance is “bona fide.”
It should be noted further that the Court’s concern
about encouraging ignorance could apply just as well to
§45(m)(1)(A). That provision subjects a debt collector to
harsh penalties for violating an FTC rule “with actual
knowledge or knowledge fairly implied on the basis of

