Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

possibility that an act may be “intentional” for purposes of
civil liability, even if the actor lacked actual knowledge
that her conduct violated the law. In Kolstad v. American
Dental Assn., 527 U. S. 526 (1999), for instance, we ad
dressed a provision of the Civil Rights Act of 1991 author
izing compensatory and punitive damages for “intentional
——————
difference, as our precedents have made clear for more than 175 years.
Barlow involved a statute providing for forfeiture of any goods entered
“by a false denomination” in the office of a customs collector “for the
benefit of drawback or bounty upon the exportation”; the statute
included, however, an exception under which “said forfeiture shall not
be incurred, if it shall be made appear . . . that such false denomination
. . . happened by mistake or accident, and not from any intention to
defraud the revenue.” 7 Pet., at 406; see also Act of Mar. 2, 1799, §84, 1
Stat. 694. The Court concluded that the shipment at issue, entered as
“refined sugars,” was mislabeled under the prevailing meaning of that
term and thus was subject to forfeiture “unless the [petitioner] c[ould]
bring himself within the exceptio[n].” 7 Pet., at 409–410. As there had
been no “accident” or “mistake” of fact, the “only mistake, if there ha[d]
been any, [wa]s a mistake of law.” Id., at 410–411. The Court observed
that the shipper’s conduct, even if “entirely compatible with good faith,
[wa]s not wholly free from the suspicion of an intention to overreach . . .
by passing off, as refined sugars, what he well knew were not admitted
to be such.” Id., at 411. But the Court declined to resolve the case on
the ground of the shipper’s intent, instead invoking the “common
maxim, familiar to all minds, that ignorance of the law will not excuse
any person, either civilly or criminally.” Ibid. Notwithstanding the
existence of a statutory exception—which did not expressly exclude
legal errors from the category of “mistake[s]” made without “intention
to defraud”—the Court saw “not the least reason to suppose that the
legislature, in this enactment, had any intention to supersede the
common principle.” Ibid.
The dissent implies Barlow is too old to be relevant. Post, at 16. But
at least in the context of stare decisis, this Court has suggested prece
dents tend to gain, not lose, respect with age. See Montejo v. Louisi
ana, 556 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 13). In any event, Justice
Story’s opinion for a unanimous Court in Barlow is hardly a relic. As
recently as 1994 this Court cited it for the “venerable principle” that
ignorance of the law generally is no defense. Ratzlaf v. United States,
510 U. S. 135, 149; see also Cheek v. United States, 498 U. S. 192, 199
(1991) (citing Barlow for a similar proposition).

