6

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, 

KRAMER & ULRICH LPA 

Opinion of the Court 


II 

A

The parties disagree about whether a “violation” result
ing from a debt collector’s misinterpretation of the legal
requirements of the FDCPA can ever be “not intentional”
under §1692k(c). Jerman contends that when a debt
collector intentionally commits the act giving rise to the
violation (here, sending a notice that included the “in
writing” language), a misunderstanding about what the
Act requires cannot render the violation “not intentional,”
given the general rule that mistake or ignorance of law is
no defense. Carlisle and the dissent, in contrast, argue
that nothing in the statutory text excludes legal errors
from the category of “bona fide error[s]” covered by
§1692k(c) and note that the Act refers not to an uninten
tional “act” but rather an unintentional “violation.” The
latter term, they contend, evinces Congress’ intent to
impose liability only when a party knows its conduct is
unlawful. Carlisle urges us, therefore, to read §1692k(c) to
encompass “all types of error,” including mistakes of law.
Brief for Respondents 7.
We decline to adopt the expansive reading of §1692k(c)
that Carlisle proposes. We have long recognized the
“common maxim, familiar to all minds, that ignorance of
the law will not excuse any person, either civilly or crimi
nally.” Barlow v. United States, 7 Pet. 404, 411 (1833)
(opinion for the Court by Story, J.); see also Cheek v.
United States, 498 U. S. 192, 199 (1991) (“The general rule
that ignorance of the law or a mistake of law is no defense
to criminal prosecution is deeply rooted in the American
legal system”).5 Our law is therefore no stranger to the
——————
5 The

dissent discounts the relevance of the principle here, on grounds
that this case involves the scope of a statutory exception to liability,
rather than a provision “delineat[ing] a category of prohibited conduct.”
Post, at 15 (opinion of KENNEDY, J.). That is a distinction without a

