22

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, 

KRAMER & ULRICH LPA 

Opinion of the Court 


give controlling weight to this isolated passage.
B
Carlisle, its amici, and the dissent raise the additional
concern that our reading will have unworkable practical
consequences for debt collecting lawyers. See, e.g., Brief
for Respondents 40–41, 45–48; NARCA Brief 4–16; post, at
5–14. Carlisle claims the FDCPA’s private enforcement
provisions have fostered a “cottage industry” of profes
sional plaintiffs who sue debt collectors for trivial viola
tions of the Act. See Brief for Respondents 40–41. If debt
collecting attorneys can be held personally liable for their
reasonable misinterpretations of the requirements of the
Act, Carlisle and its amici foresee a flood of lawsuits
against creditors’ lawyers by plaintiffs (and their attor
neys) seeking damages and attorney’s fees. The threat of
such liability, in the dissent’s view, creates an irreconcil
able conflict between an attorney’s personal financial
interest and her ethical obligation of zealous advocacy on
behalf of a client: An attorney uncertain about what the
FDCPA requires must choose between, on the one hand,
exposing herself to liability and, on the other, resolving
the legal ambiguity against her client’s interest or advis
ing the client to settle—even where there is substantial
legal authority for a position favoring the client. Post, at
10–14.15
——————
FDCPA defense would “apply to any violation of the act which was
unintentional,” and answered affirmatively when the Chairman asked:
“So it’s not simply a mathematical error but any bona fide error without
intent?” Id., at 21. Whatever the precise balance of these statements
may be, we can conclude that this equivocal evidence from legislative
history does not displace the clear textual and contextual authority
discussed above.
15 The dissent also cites several other consumer-protection statutes,
such as TILA and the Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 U. S. C. §1681 et
seq., which in its view create “incentives to file lawsuits even where no
actual harm has occurred” and are illustrative of what the dissent

