Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

Opinion of the Court

has typically been three or four months. Tr. of Oral Arg.
27–28, 30. Without disregarding the possibility that the
FTC advisory opinion process might be useful in some
cases, evidence of present administrative practice makes
us reluctant to place significant weight on §1692k(e) as a
practical remedy for the concerns Carlisle has identified.
We are unpersuaded by what seems an implicit premise
of Carlisle’s arguments: that the bona fide error defense is
a debt collector’s sole recourse to avoid potential liability.
We addressed a similar argument in Heintz, in which the
petitioner urged that certain of the Act’s substantive
provisions would generate “ ‘anomalies’ ” if the term “debt
collector” was read to include litigating lawyers. 514
U. S., at 295. Among other things, the petitioner in Heintz
contended that §1692c(c)’s bar on further communication
with a consumer who notifies a debt collector that she is
refusing to pay the debt would prohibit a lawyer from
filing a lawsuit to collect the debt. Id., at 296–297. We
agreed it would be “odd” if the Act interfered in this way
with “an ordinary debt-collecting lawsuit” but suggested
§1692c(c) did not demand such a reading in light of several
exceptions in the text of that provision itself. Ibid. As in
Heintz, we need not authoritatively interpret the Act’s
conduct-regulating provisions to observe that those provi
sions should not be assumed to compel absurd results
when applied to debt collecting attorneys.
To the extent the FDCPA imposes some constraints on a
lawyer’s advocacy on behalf of a client, it is hardly unique
in our law. “[A]n attorney’s ethical duty to advance the
interests of his client is limited by an equally solemn duty
to comply with the law and standards of professional
conduct.” Nix v. Whiteside, 475 U. S. 157, 168 (1986).
Lawyers face sanctions, among other things, for suits
presented “for any improper purpose, such as to harass,
cause unnecessary delay, or needlessly increase the cost of
litigation.” Fed. Rules Civ. Proc. 11(b), (c). Model rules of

