8

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, 

KRAMER & ULRICH LPA 

KENNEDY, J., dissenting 


action subject of the claim is unsuccessful”).
Again the present case is instructive. Jerman brought
suit without pointing to any actual harm that resulted
from respondents’ actions. At the time her complaint was
filed, it was an open question in the Sixth Circuit whether
a debt collector could demand that a debt be disputed in
writing, and the district courts in the Circuit had reached
different answers. Ante, at 4, n. 2. The trial court in this
case happened to side with Jerman on the issue, 464
F. Supp. 2d 720, 722–725 (ND Ohio 2006), but it seems
unlikely that the court would have labeled her suit “abu
sive” or “in bad faith” even if it had gone the other way.
There is no good basis for optimism, then, when one
contemplates the practical consequences of today’s deci
sion. Given the complexity of the FDCPA regime, see 16
CFR pt. 901 (2009) (FDCPA regulations), technical viola
tions are likely to be common. Indeed, the Court acknowl
edges that they are inevitable. See ante, at 12. As long as
legal mistakes occur, plaintiffs and their attorneys will
have an incentive to bring suits for these infractions. It
seems unlikely that Congress sought to create a system
that encourages costly and time-consuming litigation over
harmless violations committed in good faith despite rea
sonable safeguards.
When construing a federal statute, courts should be
mindful of the effect of the interpretation on congressional
purposes explicit in the statutory text. The FDCPA states
an objective that today’s decision frustrates. The statu
tory purpose was to “eliminate abusive debt collection
practices” and to ensure that debt collectors who refrain
from using those practices “are not competitively disad
vantaged.” 15 U. S. C. §1692(e) (“Purposes”). The prac
tices Congress addressed involved misconduct that is
deliberate, see §1692(a) (“abusive, deceptive, and unfair
debt collection practices”); §1692(c) (“misrepresentation or
other abusive debt collection practices”), or unreasonable,

