6

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, 

KRAMER & ULRICH LPA 

KENNEDY, J., dissenting 


necessarily the goal; often the plaintiff will be just as
happy with a settlement, as will his or her attorney (who
will receive fees regardless). The defendant, meanwhile,
may conclude a quick settlement is preferable to the costs
of discovery and a protracted trial. And if the suit attains
class-action status, the financial stakes rise in magnitude.
See, e.g., §1640(a)(2)(B) (class-action recovery of up to “the
lesser of $500,000 or 1 per centum of the net worth of the
[defendant]”); §1692k(a)(2)(B) (same).
The present case offers an object lesson. Respondents
filed a complaint in state court on behalf of a client that
mistakenly believed Jerman owed money to it. Jerman’s
attorney then informed respondents that the debt had
been paid in full. Respondents confirmed this fact with
the client and withdrew the lawsuit.
This might have been the end of the story. But because
respondents had informed Jerman that she was required
to dispute the debt in writing, she filed a class-action
complaint. It did not matter that Jerman had claimed no
harm as a result of respondents’ actions. Jerman sued for
damages, attorney’s fees, and costs—including class dam
ages of “$500,000 or 1% of defendants’ net worth which
ever is less.” Amended Complaint in No. 1:06–CV–01397
(ND Ohio), p. 4. In addition to merits-related discovery,
Jerman sought information from respondents concerning
the income and net worth of each partner in the firm. At
some point, Jerman proposed to settle with respondents
for $15,000 in damages and $7,500 in attorney’s fees.
Amended Joint App. in No. 07–3964 (CA6), pp. 256–262.
The case illustrates how a technical violation of a complex
federal statute can give rise to costly litigation with incen
tives to settle simply to avoid attorney’s fees.
Today’s holding gives new impetus to this already trou
bling dynamic of allowing certain actors in the system to
spin even good-faith, technical violations of federal law
into lucrative litigation, if not for themselves then for the

