Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

First, the Court relies on the maxim that “ ‘ignorance of
the law will not excuse any person, either civilly or crimi
nally.’ ” Ante, at 6 (quoting Barlow v. United States, 7 Pet.
404, 411 (1833)). There is no doubt that this principle “is
deeply rooted in the American legal system.” Cheek v.
United States, 498 U. S. 192, 199 (1991). Yet it is unhelp
ful to the Court’s position. The maxim the Court cites is
based on the premise “that the law is definite and know
able,” so that all must be deemed to know its mandate.
Ibid. See also O. Holmes, The Common Law 48 (1881)
(“[T]o admit the excuse [of ignorance] at all would be to
encourage ignorance where the law-maker has determined
to make men know and obey”). In other words, citizens
cannot avoid compliance with the law simply by demon
strating a failure to learn it.
The most straightforward application of this principle is
to statutory provisions that delineate a category of prohib
ited conduct. These statutes will not be read to excuse
legal mistakes absent some indication that the legislature
meant to do so. See, e.g., Armour Packing Co. v. United
States, 209 U. S. 56, 70, 85–86 (1908) (rejecting the defen
dant’s attempt to read a mistake-of-law defense into a
criminal statute forbidding shippers to “obtain or dispose
of property at less than the regular rate established”);
ante, at 7–8 (discussing a federal statute imposing liability
for “intentional discrimination”).
In the present case, however, the Court is not asked
whether a mistake of law should excuse respondents from
a general prohibition that would otherwise cover their
conduct. Rather, the issue is the scope of an express ex
ception to a general prohibition. There is good reason to
think the distinction matters. It is one thing to presume
that Congress does not intend to create an exception to a
general rule through silence; it is quite another to pre
sume that an explicit statutory exception should be con
fined despite the existence of other sensible interpreta

