8

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, 

KRAMER & ULRICH LPA 

Opinion of the Court 


discrimination,” 42 U. S. C. §1981a, but limiting punitive
damages to conduct undertaken “with malice or with
reckless indifference to the federally protected rights of an
aggrieved individual,” §1981a(b)(1). We observed that in
some circumstances “intentional discrimination” could
occur without giving rise to punitive damages liability,
such as where an employer is “unaware of the relevant
federal prohibition” or acts with the “distinct belief that its
discrimination is lawful.” 527 U. S., at 536–537. See also
W. Keeton, D. Dobbs, R. Keeton, & D. Owen, Prosser and
Keeton on Law of Torts 110 (5th ed. 1984) (“[I]f one inten
tionally interferes with the interests of others, he is often
subject to liability notwithstanding the invasion was made
under an erroneous belief as to some . . . legal matter that
would have justified the conduct”); Restatement (Second)
of Torts §164, and Comment e (1963–1964) (intentional
tort of trespass can be committed despite the actor’s
mistaken belief that she has a legal right to enter the
property).6
Likely for this reason, when Congress has intended to
provide a mistake-of-law defense to civil liability, it has
often done so more explicitly than here. In particular, the
FTC Act’s administrative-penalty provisions—which, as
noted above, Congress expressly incorporated into the
FDCPA—apply only when a debt collector acts with “ac
tual knowledge or knowledge fairly implied on the basis of
objective circumstances” that its action was “prohibited by
——————
6 Different considerations apply, of course, in interpreting criminal
statutes. Safeco Ins. Co. of America v. Burr, 551 U. S. 47, 57–58, n. 9
(2007). But even in that context, we have not consistently required
knowledge that the offending conduct is unlawful. See, e.g., Ellis v.
United States, 206 U. S. 246, 255, 257 (1907) (observing, in the context
of a statute imposing liability for “intentiona[l] violat[ions],” that “[i]f a
man intentionally adopts certain conduct in certain circumstances
known to him, and that conduct is forbidden by the law under those
circumstances, he intentionally breaks the law in the only sense in
which the law ever considers intent”).

