(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, KRAMER &
ULRICH LPA ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1200. Argued January 13, 2010—Decided April 21, 2010
The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (FDCPA), 15 U. S. C. §1692 et
seq., imposes civil liability on “debt collector[s]” for certain prohibited
debt collection practices. A debt collector who “fails to comply with
any [FDCPA] provision . . . with respect to any person is liable to
such person” for “actual damage[s],” costs, “a reasonable attorney’s
fee as determined by the court,” and statutory “additional damages.”
§1692k(a). In addition, violations of the FDCPA are deemed unfair or
deceptive acts or practices under the Federal Trade Commission Act
(FTC Act), §41 et seq., which is enforced by the Federal Trade Com
mission (FTC). See §1692l. A debt collector who acts with “actual
knowledge or knowledge fairly implied on the basis of objective cir
cumstances that such act is [prohibited under the FDCPA]” is subject
to civil penalties enforced by the FTC. §§45(m)(1)(A), (C). A debt col
lector is not liable in any action brought under the FDCPA, however,
if it “shows by a preponderance of evidence that the violation was not
intentional and resulted from a bona fide error notwithstanding the
maintenance of procedures reasonably adapted to avoid any such er
ror.” §1692k(c).
Respondents, a law firm and one of its attorneys (collectively Car
lisle), filed a lawsuit in Ohio state court on behalf of a mortgage com
pany to foreclose a mortgage on real property owned by petitioner
Jerman. The complaint included a notice that the mortgage debt
would be assumed valid unless Jerman disputed it in writing. Jer
man’s lawyer sent a letter disputing the debt, and, when the mort
gage company acknowledged that the debt had in fact been paid, Car
lisle withdrew the suit. Jerman then filed this action, contending
that by sending the notice requiring her to dispute the debt in writ

