4

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, 

KRAMER & ULRICH LPA 

Opinion of SCALIA, J. 


As it happens, moreover, one of the supposedly most
“authoritative” snippets of legislative history, a Senate
Committee Report dealing with the meaning of TILA,
states very clearly that the 1980 amendment to TILA’s
bona fide error defense “clarified” the defense “to make
clear that it applies to mechanical and computer errors,”
S. Rep. No. 96–73, pp. 7–8 (1979). Likewise, the 1999
American Law Report the Court cites, ante, at 17, n. 12,
which relies on another Senate Committee Report, de
scribes the amendment as clarifying the “prevailing view”
that the defense “applies to clerical errors,” Lockhart, 153
A. L. R. Fed. 211–212, §2[a] (1999).2 Once again, the legal
fiction contradicts the Court’s conclusion that the lan
guage in the FDCPA, identical to the original TILA de
fense, applies to mistakes of fact.
But if legislative history is to be used, it should be used
impartially. (Legislative history, after all, almost always
has something for everyone!) The Court dismisses with a
wave of the hand what seems to me the most persuasive
legislative history (if legislative history could ever be
persuasive) in the case. The respondents point to the
Senate Committee Report on the FDCPA, which says that
“[a] debt collector has no liability . . . if he violates the act
in any manner, including with regard to the act’s coverage,
when such violation is unintentional and occurred despite
procedures designed to avoid such violations.” S. Rep. No.
95–382, p. 5 (1977) (emphasis added). The Court claims
that a mistake about “the act’s coverage” in this passage
might refer to factual mistakes, such as a debt collector’s
mistaken belief “that a particular debt arose out of a
nonconsumer transaction and was therefore not ‘covered’
——————
2 The page cited in the Senate Committee Report does not actually
support the American Law Report’s statement. It makes no mention of
clarification or judicial interpretations; it merely states that the
amendment is intended to “provide protection where errors are clerical
or mechanical in nature,” S. Rep. No. 96–368, p. 32 (1979).

