Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

attorneys who conceive of the suit. See Federal Home
Loan Mortgage Corp. v. Lamar, 503 F. 3d 504, 513 (CA6
2007) (referring to the “cottage industry” of litigation that
has arisen out of the FDCPA (internal quotation marks
omitted)). It is clear that Congress, too, was troubled by
this dynamic. That is precisely why it enacted a bona fide
error defense. The Court’s ruling, however, endorses and
drives forward this dynamic, for today’s holding leaves
attorneys and their clients vulnerable to civil liability for
adopting good-faith legal positions later determined to be
mistaken, even if reasonable efforts were made to avoid
mistakes.
The Court seeks to brush aside these concerns by noting
that trivial violations will give rise to little in the way of
actual damages and that trial courts “have discretion in
calculating reasonable attorney’s fees under [the] statute.”
Ante, at 23. It is not clear, however, that a court is per
mitted to adjust a fee award based on its assessment of
the suit’s utility. Cf. Perdue v. Kenny A., post, at 9 (noting
a “ ‘strong presumption’ ” of reasonableness that attaches
to a lodestar calculation of attorney’s fees). Though the
Court, properly, does not address the question here, it
acknowledges that some courts have deemed fee awards to
victorious plaintiffs to be “ ‘mandatory,’ ” even if the plain
tiff suffered no damage. Ante, at 23–24, n. 16.
The Court’s second response is that the FDCPA guards
against abusive suits and that suits brought “ ‘in bad faith
and for the purpose of harassment’ ” can lead to a fee
award for the defendant.
Ante, at 24 (quoting
§1692k(a)(3)). Yet these safeguards cannot deter suits
based on technical—but harmless—violations of the stat
ute. If the plaintiff obtains a favorable judgment or a
settlement, then by definition the suit will not have been
brought in bad faith. See Emanuel v. American Credit
Exch., 870 F. 2d 805, 809 (CA2 1989) (FDCPA defendant’s
“claim for malicious prosecution cannot succeed unless the

