16

JERMAN v. CARLISLE, MCNELLIE, RINI, 

KRAMER & ULRICH LPA 

Opinion of the Court 


Congress disagreed with those interpretations when it
enacted the FDCPA. Congress copied verbatim the perti
nent portions of TILA’s bona fide error defense into the
FDCPA. Compare 15 U. S. C. §1640(c) (1976 ed.) with
§813(c), 91 Stat. 881. This close textual correspondence
supports an inference that Congress understood the statu
tory formula it chose for the FDCPA consistent with Fed
eral Court of Appeals interpretations of TILA.11
Carlisle and the dissent urge reliance, consistent with
the approach taken by the Court of Appeals, on a 1980
amendment to TILA that added the following sentence to
that statute’s bona fide error defense: “Examples of a bona
fide error include, but are not limited to, clerical, calcula
tion, computer malfunction and program[m]ing, and print
ing errors, except that an error of legal judgment with
respect to a person’s obligations under [TILA] is not a
bona fide error.” See Truth in Lending Simplification and
Reform Act, §615, 94 Stat. 181. The absence of a corre
——————
11 That only three Courts of Appeals had occasion to address the ques
tion by the time the FDCPA was enacted does not render such an
inference unreasonable. Contra, post, at 1–2 (opinion of SCALIA, J.).
Whether or not we would take that view when such an inference serves
as a court’s sole interpretative guide, here our conclusion also relies on
common principles of statutory interpretation, as well as the statute’s
text and structure. Moreover, the inference is supported by the fact
that TILA and the FDCPA were enacted as complementary titles of the
CCPA, a comprehensive consumer-protection statute.
While not
necessary to our conclusion, evidence from the legislative record dem
onstrates that some Members of Congress understood the relationship
between the FDCPA and existing provisions of the CCPA. See, e.g., 123
Cong. Rec. 10242 (1977) (remarks of Rep. Annunzio) (civil penalty
provisions in House version of bill were “consistent with those in the
[CCPA]”); Fair Debt Collection Practices Act: Hearings on S. 656 et al.
before the Subcommittee on Consumer Affairs of the Senate Committee
on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, 95th Cong., 1st Sess., 51, 707
(1977) (statement of Rep. Wylie) (describing “[c]ivil liability provisions”
in the House bill as “the standard provisions that attach to all the titles
of the [CCPA]”).

