Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
to clerical errors, and there is no reason to suppose Congress dis
agreed with those interpretations when it incorporated TILA’s lan
guage into the FDCPA. Although in 1980 Congress amended the de
fense in TILA, but not in the FDCPA, to exclude errors of legal
judgment, it is not obvious that amendment changed the scope of the
TILA defense in a way material here, given the prior uniform judicial
interpretation of that provision. It is also unclear why Congress
would have intended the FDCPA’s defense to be broader than TILA’s,
and Congress has not expressly included mistakes of law in any of
the parallel bona fide error defenses elsewhere in the U. S. Code.
Carlisle’s reading is not supported by Heintz v. Jenkins, 514 U. S.
291, 292, which had no occasion to address the overall scope of the
FDCPA bona fide error defense, and which did not depend on the
premise that a misinterpretation of the requirements of the FDCPA
would fall under that provision. Pp. 13–22.
(c) Today’s decision does not place unmanageable burdens on debt
collecting lawyers. The FDCPA contains several provisions expressly
guarding against abusive lawsuits, and gives courts discretion in cal
culating additional damages and attorney’s fees. Lawyers have re
course to the bona fide error defense in §1692k(c) when a violation
results from a qualifying factual error. To the extent the FDCPA im
poses some constraints on a lawyer’s advocacy on behalf of a client, it
is not unique; lawyers have a duty, for instance, to comply with the
law and standards of professional conduct. Numerous state con
sumer protection and debt collection statutes contain bona fide error
defenses that are either silent as to, or expressly exclude, legal er
rors. To the extent lawyers face liability for mistaken interpretations
of the FDCPA, Carlisle and its amici have not shown that “the result
[will be] so absurd as to warrant” disregarding the weight of textual
authority. Heintz, supra, at 295. Absent such a showing, arguments
that the FDCPA strikes an undesirable balance in assigning the risks
of legal misinterpretation are properly addressed to Congress.
Pp. 22–30.
538 F. 3d 469, reversed and remanded.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and STEVENS, THOMAS, GINSBURG, and BREYER, JJ., joined.
BREYER, J., filed a concurring opinion. SCALIA, J., filed an opinion con
curring in part and concurring in the judgment. KENNEDY, J., filed a
dissenting opinion, in which ALITO, J., joined.

