(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MERCK & CO., INC., ET AL. v. REYNOLDS ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 08–905.

Argued November 30, 2009—Decided April 27, 2010

On November 6, 2003, respondent investors filed a securities fraud ac
tion under §10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, alleging
that petitioner Merck & Co. knowingly misrepresented the heart
attack risks associated with its drug Vioxx. A securities fraud com
plaint is timely if filed no more than “2 years after the discovery of
the facts constituting the violation” or 5 years after the violation. 28
U. S. C. §1658(b). The District Court dismissed the complaint as un
timely because the plaintiffs should have been alerted to the possibil
ity of Merck’s misrepresentations prior to November 2001, more than
2 years before the complaint was filed, and they had failed to under
take a reasonably diligent investigation at that time. Among the
relevant circumstances were (1) a March 2000 “VIGOR” study com
paring Vioxx with the painkiller naproxen and showing adverse car
diovascular results for Vioxx, which Merck suggested might be due to
the absence of a benefit conferred by naproxen rather than a harm
caused by Vioxx (the naproxen hypothesis); (2) an FDA warning let
ter, released to the public on September 21, 2001, saying that Merck’s
Vioxx marketing with regard to the cardiovascular results was “false,
lacking in fair balance, or otherwise misleading”; and (3) pleadings
filed in products-liability actions in September and October 2001 al
leging that Merck had concealed information about Vioxx and inten
tionally downplayed its risks. The Third Circuit reversed, holding
that the pre-November 2001 events did not suggest that Merck acted
with scienter, an element of a §10(b) violation, and consequently did
not commence the running of the limitations period.
Held:
1. The limitations period in §1658(b)(1) begins to run once the
plaintiff actually discovered or a reasonably diligent plaintiff would


2

MERCK & CO. v. REYNOLDS
Syllabus
have “discover[ed] the facts constituting the violation”—whichever
comes first. In the statute of limitations context, “discovery” is often
used as a term of art in connection with the “discovery rule,” a doc
trine that delays accrual of a cause of action until the plaintiff has
“discovered” it. The rule arose in fraud cases but has been applied by
state and federal courts in other types of claims, and legislatures
have sometimes codified this rule. When “discovery” is written di
rectly into a statute, courts have typically interpreted the word to re
fer not only to actual discovery, but also to the hypothetical discovery
of facts a reasonably diligent plaintiff would know. Congress in
tended courts to interpret the word “discovery” in §1658(b)(1) simi
larly. That statute was enacted after this Court determined a gov
erning limitations period for private §10(b) actions, Lampf, Pleva,
Lipkind, Prupis & Petigrow v. Gilbertson, 501 U. S. 350, concluding
that such actions “must be commenced within one year after the dis
covery of the facts constituting the violation . . . ,” id., at 364 (empha
sis added). Since then, Courts of Appeals deciding the matter have
held that “discovery” occurs both when a plaintiff actually discovers
the facts and when a hypothetical reasonably diligent plaintiff would
have discovered them. In 2002, Congress repeated Lampf’s critical
language in enacting the present limitations statute. Normally,
when Congress enacts statutes, it is aware of relevant judicial prece
dent. See, e.g., Edelman v. Lynchburg College, 535 U. S. 106, 116–
117, and n. 13. Given the history and precedent surrounding the use
of “discovery” in the limitations context generally as well as in this
provision, the reasons for making this assumption are particularly
strong here. Merck’s claims are evaluated accordingly. Pp. 8–12.
2. In determining the time at which “discovery” occurs, terms such
as “inquiry notice” and “storm warnings” may be useful insofar as
they identify a time when the facts would have prompted a reasona
bly diligent plaintiff to begin investigating. But the limitations pe
riod does not begin to run until the plaintiff thereafter discovers or a
reasonably diligent plaintiff would have discovered “the facts consti
tuting the violation,” including scienter—irrespective of whether the
actual plaintiff undertook a reasonably diligent investigation.
Pp. 12–17.
(a) Contrary to Merck’s argument, facts showing scienter are
among those that “constitut[e] the violation.” Scienter is assuredly a
“fact.” In a §10(b) action, it refers to “a mental state embracing in
tent to deceive, manipulate, or defraud,” Ernst & Ernst v. Hochfelder,
425 U. S. 185, 194, n. 12, and “constitut[es]” an important and neces
sary element of a §10(b) “violation.” See Tellabs, Inc. v. Makor Issues
& Rights, Ltd., 551 U. S. 308, 319. Because the scienter element of
§10(b) fraud cases has special heightened pleading requirements, see


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
15 U. S. C. §78u–4(b)(2), unless a §10(b) complaint sets forth facts show
ing that it is “at least as likely as” not that the defendant acted with the
relevant intent, the claim will fail. Tellabs, supra, at 328 (emphasis de
leted). It would frustrate the very purpose of the discovery rule codified in
§1658(b)(1) if the limitations period began to run regardless of whether a
plaintiff had “discover[ed]” any facts suggesting scienter. Pp. 12–14.
(b) The Court also rejects Merck’s argument that, even if “discov
ery” requires facts related to scienter, facts that tend to show a mate
rially false or misleading statement (or material omission) are ordi
narily sufficient to show scienter. Where §10(b) is at issue, the
relation of factual falsity and state of mind is more context specific.
For instance, an incorrect prediction about a firm’s future earnings,
by itself, does not automatically show whether the speaker deliber
ately lied or made an innocent error. Hence, “discovery” of additional
scienter-related facts may be required. The statute’s inclusion of an
unqualified bar on actions instituted “5 years after such violation,”
§1658(b)(2), should diminish Merck’s fear that this requirement will
give life to stale claims or subject defendants to liability for acts
taken long ago. P. 14.
(c) And the Court cannot accept Merck’s argument that the limi
tations period begins at “inquiry notice,” meaning the point where
the facts would lead a reasonably diligent plaintiff to investigate fur
ther, because that point is not necessarily the point at which the
plaintiff would already have “discover[ed]” facts showing scienter or
other “facts constituting the violation.” The statute says that the
plaintiff’s claim accrues only after the “discovery” of those latter
facts. It contains no indication that the limitations period can some
times begin before “discovery” can take place. Merck also argues that
determining when a hypothetical reasonably diligent plaintiff would
have “discover[ed]” the necessary facts is too complicated for judges
to undertake. But courts applying the traditional discovery rule have
long had to ask what a reasonably diligent plaintiff would have
known and done in myriad circumstances and already undertake this
kind of inquiry in securities fraud cases. Pp. 14–17.
3. Prior to November 6, 2001, the plaintiffs did not discover, and
Merck has not shown that a reasonably diligent plaintiff would have
discovered, “the facts constituting the violation.” The FDA’s Septem
ber 2001 warning letter shows little or nothing about the here
relevant scienter, i.e., whether Merck advanced the naproxen hy
pothesis with fraudulent intent. The FDA itself described the hy
pothesis as a “possible explanation” for the VIGOR results, faulting
Merck only for failing sufficiently to publicize the less favorable al
ternative, that Vioxx might be harmful. The products-liability com
plaints’ general statements about Merck’s state of mind show little


4

MERCK & CO. v. REYNOLDS
Syllabus
more. Thus, neither these circumstances nor any of the other preNovember 2001 circumstances reveal “facts” indicating the relevant
scienter. Pp. 17–19.

543 F. 3d 150, affirmed.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, GINSBURG, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.
STEVENS, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the
judgment. SCALIA, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concur
ring in the judgment, in which THOMAS, J., joined.

