Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

law may be, since the former line of authority is suggested
by the governing text, which requires that discrimination
be “a motivating factor” in the adverse action. When a
decision to fire is made with no unlawful animus on the
part of the firing agent, but partly on the basis of a report
prompted (unbeknownst to that agent) by discrimination,
discrimination might perhaps be called a “factor” or a
“causal factor” in the decision; but it seems to us a consid
erable stretch to call it “a motivating factor.”
Proctor, on the other hand, contends that the employer
is not liable unless the de facto decisionmaker (the techni
cal decisionmaker or the agent for whom he is the “cat’s
paw”) is motivated by discriminatory animus. This avoids
the aggregation of animus and adverse action, but it
seems to us not the only application of general tort law
that can do so. Animus and responsibility for the adverse
action can both be attributed to the earlier agent (here,
Staub’s supervisors) if the adverse action is the intended
consequence of that agent’s discriminatory conduct. So
long as the agent intends, for discriminatory reasons, that
the adverse action occur, he has the scienter required to be
liable under USERRA. And it is axiomatic under tort law
that the exercise of judgment by the decisionmaker does
not prevent the earlier agent’s action (and hence the ear
lier agent’s discriminatory animus) from being the proxi
mate cause of the harm. Proximate cause requires only
“some direct relation between the injury asserted and the
injurious conduct alleged,” and excludes only those “link[s]
that are too remote, purely contingent, or indirect.” Hemi
Group, LLC v. City of New York, 559 U. S. 1, ___ (2010)
(slip op., at 9) (internal quotation marks omitted).2 We do
——————
2 Under the traditional doctrine of proximate cause, a tortfeasor is
sometimes, but not always, liable when he intends to cause an adverse
action and a different adverse action results. See Restatement (Second)
Torts §§435, 435B and Comment a (1963 and 1964). That issue is not
presented in this case since the record contains no evidence that Mu

