Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

of the employee’s allegations of discriminatory animus
ought to do so. We decline to adopt such a hard-and-fast
rule. As we have already acknowledged, the requirement
that the biased supervisor’s action be a causal factor of the
ultimate employment action incorporates the traditional
tort-law concept of proximate cause. See, e.g., Anza v.
Ideal Steel Supply Corp., 547 U. S. 451, 457–458 (2006);
Sosa, supra, at 703. Thus, if the employer’s investigation
results in an adverse action for reasons unrelated to the
supervisor’s original biased action (by the terms of
USERRA it is the employer’s burden to establish that),
then the employer will not be liable. But the supervisor’s
biased report may remain a causal factor if the independ
ent investigation takes it into account without determin
ing that the adverse action was, apart from the supervi
sor’s recommendation, entirely justified. We are aware of
no principle in tort or agency law under which an em
ployer’s mere conduct of an independent investigation has
a claim-preclusive effect. Nor do we think the independ
ent investigation somehow relieves the employer of “fault.”
The employer is at fault because one of its agents commit
ted an action based on discriminatory animus that was
intended to cause, and did in fact cause, an adverse em
ployment decision.
JUSTICE ALITO claims that our failure to adopt a rule
immunizing an employer who performs an independent
investigation reflects a “stray[ing] from the statutory
text.” Post, at 2 (opinion concurring in judgment). We do
not understand this accusation. Since a supervisor is an
agent of the employer, when he causes an adverse em
ployment action the employer causes it; and when dis
crimination is a motivating factor in his doing so, it is a
“motivating factor in the employer’s action,” precisely as
the text requires. JUSTICE ALITO suggests that the em
ployer should be held liable only when it “should be re
garded as having delegated part of the decisionmaking

