Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

issued in the January 2004 Corrective Action.
Staub challenged his firing through Proctor’s grievance
process, claiming that Mulally had fabricated the allega
tion underlying the Corrective Action out of hostility
toward his military obligations. Buck did not follow
up with Mulally about this claim. After discussing the
matter with another personnel officer, Buck adhered to
her decision.
Staub sued Proctor under the Uniformed Services Em
ployment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, 38
U. S. C. §4301 et seq., claiming that his discharge was
motivated by hostility to his obligations as a military
reservist. His contention was not that Buck had any such
hostility but that Mulally and Korenchuk did, and that
their actions influenced Buck’s ultimate employment
decision. A jury found that Staub’s “military status was a
motivating factor in [Proctor’s] decision to discharge him,”
App. 68a, and awarded $57,640 in damages.
The Seventh Circuit reversed, holding that Proctor was
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. 560 F. 3d 647.
The court observed that Staub had brought a “ ‘cat’s paw’
case,” meaning that he sought to hold his employer liable
for the animus of a supervisor who was not charged with
making the ultimate employment decision. Id., at 655–
656.1 It explained that under Seventh Circuit precedent, a
“cat’s paw” case could not succeed unless the nondecision
maker exercised such “ ‘singular influence’ ” over the deci
——————
1 The term “cat’s paw” derives from a fable conceived by Aesop, put
into verse by La Fontaine in 1679, and injected into United States
employment discrimination law by Posner in 1990. See Shager v.
Upjohn Co., 913 F. 2d 398, 405 (CA7). In the fable, a monkey induces a
cat by flattery to extract roasting chestnuts from the fire. After the cat
has done so, burning its paws in the process, the monkey makes off
with the chestnuts and leaves the cat with nothing. A coda to the fable
(relevant only marginally, if at all, to employment law) observes that
the cat is similar to princes who, flattered by the king, perform services
on the king’s behalf and receive no reward.

