2

STAUB v. PROCTOR HOSPITAL
Syllabus
mus that is intended by the supervisor to cause an adverse employ
ment action, and if that act is a proximate cause of the ultimate em
ployment action, then the employer is liable under USERRA. In con
struing the phrase “motivating factor in the employer’s action,” this
Court starts from the premise that when Congress creates a federal
tort it adopts the background of general tort law. See, e.g., Burling
ton N. & S. F. R. Co. v. United States, 556 U. S. ___, ___. Intentional
torts such as the one here “generally require that the actor intend
‘the consequences’ of an act,’ not simply ‘the act itself.’ ” Kawaauhau
v. Geiger, 523 U. S. 57, 61–62. However, Proctor errs in contending
that an employer is not liable unless the de facto decisionmaker is
motivated by discriminatory animus. So long as the earlier agent in
tended, for discriminatory reasons, that the adverse action occur, he
has the scienter required for USERRA liability. Moreover, it is axio
matic under tort law that the decisionmaker’s exercise of judgment
does not prevent the earlier agent’s action from being the proximate
cause of the harm. See Hemi Group, LLC v. City of New York, 559
U. S. 1, ___. Nor can the ultimate decisionmaker’s judgment be
deemed a superseding cause of the harm. See Exxon Co., U. S. A. v.
Sofec, Inc., 517 U. S. 830, 837. Proctor’s approach would have an im
probable consequence: If an employer isolates a personnel official
from its supervisors, vests the decision to take adverse employment
actions in that official, and asks that official to review the employee’s
personnel file before taking the adverse action, then the employer
will be effectively shielded from discriminatory acts and recommen
dations of supervisors that were designed and intended to produce
the adverse action. Proctor also errs in arguing that a decision
maker’s independent investigation, and rejection, of an employee’s
discriminatory animus allegations should negate the effect of the
prior discrimination. Pp. 4–10.
2. Applying this analysis here, the Seventh Circuit erred in holding
that Proctor was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Both Mu
lally and Korenchuk acted within the scope of their employment
when they took the actions that allegedly caused Buck to fire Staub.
There was also evidence that their actions were motivated by hostil
ity toward Staub’s military obligations, and that those actions were
causal factors underlying Buck’s decision. Finally, there was evi
dence that both Mulally and Korenchuk had the specific intent to
cause Staub’s termination. The Seventh Circuit is to consider in the
first instance whether the variance between the jury instruction
given at trial and the rule adopted here was harmless error or should
mandate a new trial. Pp. 11–12.

560 F. 3d 647, reversed and remanded.

