Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

See ante, at 10. A decisionmaker who credits information
provided by another person—for example, a judge who
credits the testimony of a witness in a bench trial—does
not thereby delegate a portion of the decisionmaking
authority to the person who provides the information.
This interpretation of §4311(c)(1) heeds the statutory
text and would provide fair treatment for both employers
and employees who are members of the uniformed ser
vices. It would also encourage employers to establish
internal grievance procedures similar to those that have
been adopted following our decisions in Burlington Indus
tries, Inc. v. Ellerth, 524 U. S. 742 (1998), and Faragher v.
Boca Raton, 524 U. S. 775 (1998). Such procedures would
often provide relief for employees without the need for
litigation, and they would provide protection for employers
who proceed in good faith.
The Court’s contrary approach, by contrast, is almost
certain to lead to confusion and is likely to produce results
that will not serve the interests of either employers or
employees who are members of the uniformed services.
The Court’s holding will impose liability unfairly on em
ployers who make every effort to comply with the law, and
it may have the perverse effect of discouraging employers
from hiring applicants who are members of the Reserves
or the National Guard. In addition, by leaving open the
possibility that an employer may be held liable if it inno
cently takes into account adverse information provided,
not by a supervisor, but by a low-level employee, see ante,
at 10–11, n. 4, the Court increases the confusion that its
decision is likely to produce.
For these reasons, I cannot accept the Court’s interpre
tation of §4311(c)(1), but I nevertheless agree that the
decision below must be reversed. There was sufficient
evidence to support a finding that at least Korenchuk was
actually delegated part of the decisionmaking authority in
this case. Korenchuk was the head of the unit in which
Staub worked and it was Korenchuk who told Buck that

