(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

STAUB v. PROCTOR HOSPITAL
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–400.

Argued November 2, 2010—Decided March 1, 2011

While employed as an angiography technician by respondent Proctor
Hospital, petitioner Staub was a member of the United States Army
Reserve. Both his immediate supervisor (Mulally) and Mulally’s su
pervisor (Korenchuk) were hostile to his military obligations. Mu
lally gave Staub disciplinary warning which included a directive re
quiring Staub to report to her or Korenchuk when his cases were
completed. After receiving a report from Korenchuk that Staub had
violated the Corrective Action, Proctor’s vice president of human re
sources (Buck) reviewed Staub’s personnel file and decided to fire
him. Staub filed a grievance, claiming that Mulally had fabricated
the allegation underlying the warning out of hostility toward his
military obligations, but Buck adhered to her decision. Staub sued
Proctor under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemploy
ment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA), which forbids an employer to
deny “employment, reemployment, retention in employment, promo
tion, or any benefit of employment” based on a person’s “membership”
in or “obligation to perform service in a uniformed service,” 38
U. S. C. §4311(a), and provides that liability is established “if the
person’s membership . . . is a motivating factor in the employer’s ac
tion,” §4311(c). He contended not that Buck was motivated by hostil
ity to his military obligations, but that Mulally and Korenchuk were,
and that their actions influenced Buck’s decision. A jury found Proc
tor liable and awarded Staub damages, but the Seventh Circuit re
versed, holding that Proctor was entitled to judgment as a matter of
law because the decisionmaker had relied on more than Mulally’s and
Korenchuk’s advice in making her decision.
Held:
1. If a supervisor performs an act motivated by antimilitary ani

