10

STAUB v. PROCTOR HOSPITAL
Opinion of the Court

power” to the biased supervisor. Ibid. But if the inde
pendent investigation relies on facts provided by the bi
ased supervisor—as is necessary in any case of cat’s-paw
liability—then the employer (either directly or through
the ultimate decisionmaker) will have effectively delegated
the factfinding portion of the investigation to the biased
supervisor. Contrary to JUSTICE ALITO’s suggestion, the
biased supervisor is not analogous to a witness at a bench
trial. The mere witness is not an actor in the events that
are the subject of the trial. The biased supervisor and the
ultimate decisionmaker, however, acted as agents of the
entity that the plaintiff seeks to hold liable; each of them
possessed supervisory authority delegated by their em
ployer and exercised it in the interest of their employer.
In sum, we do not see how “fidelity to the statutory text,”
ibid., requires the adoption of an independent
investigation defense that appears nowhere in the text.
And we find both speculative and implausible JUSTICE
ALITO’s prediction that our Nation’s employers will sys
tematically disfavor members of the armed services in
their hiring decisions to avoid the possibility of cat’s-paw
liability, a policy that would violate USERRA in any
event.
We therefore hold that if a supervisor performs an act
motivated by antimilitary animus that is intended by the
supervisor to cause an adverse employment action,3 and if
that act is a proximate cause of the ultimate employment
action, then the employer is liable under USERRA. 4
——————
3 Under

traditional tort law, “ ‘intent’ . . . denote[s] that the actor
desires to cause consequences of his act, or that he believes that the
consequences are substantially certain to result from it.” Id., §8A.
4 Needless to say, the employer would be liable only when the super
visor acts within the scope of his employment, or when the supervisor
acts outside the scope of his employment and liability would be imputed
to the employer under traditional agency principles. See Burlington
Industries, Inc. v. Ellerth, 524 U. S. 742, 758 (1998). We express no

