2

STAUB v. PROCTOR HOSPITAL
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

take that action. And “the employer’s action” here is the
decision to fire petitioner. Thus, petitioner, in order to
recover, was required to show that discrimination moti
vated that action.
The Court, however, strays from the statutory text by
holding that it is enough for an employee to show that
discrimination motivated some other action and that this
latter action, in turn, caused the termination decision.
That is simply not what the statute says.
The Court fears this interpretation of the statute would
allow an employer to escape liability by assigning formal
decisionmaking authority to an officer who may merely
rubberstamp the recommendation of others who are moti
vated by antimilitary animus. See ante, at 8. But fidelity
to the statutory text does not lead to this result. Where
the officer with formal decisionmaking authority merely
rubberstamps the recommendation of others, the em
ployer, I would hold, has actually delegated the decision
making responsibility to those whose recommendation is
rubberstamped. I would reach a similar conclusion where
the officer with the formal decisionmaking authority is put
on notice that adverse information about an employee may
be based on antimilitary animus but does not undertake
an independent investigation of the matter. In that situa
tion, too, the employer should be regarded as having dele
gated part of the decisionmaking power to those who are
responsible for memorializing and transmitting the ad
verse information that is accepted without examination.
The same cannot be said, however, where the officer with
formal decisionmaking responsibility, having been alerted
to the possibility that adverse information may be tainted,
undertakes a reasonable investigation and finds insuffi
cient evidence to dispute the accuracy of that information.
Nor can the employer be said to have “effectively dele
gated” decisionmaking authority any time a decision
maker “relies on facts provided by [a] biased supervisor.”

