Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011) 


11

Opinion of the Court 


III 

Applying our analysis to the facts of this case, it is clear
that the Seventh Circuit’s judgment must be reversed.
Both Mulally and Korenchuk were acting within the scope
of their employment when they took the actions that
allegedly caused Buck to fire Staub. A “reprimand . . . for
workplace failings” constitutes conduct within the scope of
an agent’s employment. Faragher v. Boca Raton, 524
U. S. 775, 798–799 (1998). As the Seventh Circuit recog
nized, there was evidence that Mulally’s and Korenchuk’s
actions were motivated by hostility toward Staub’s mili
tary obligations. There was also evidence that Mulally’s
and Korenchuk’s actions were causal factors underlying
Buck’s decision to fire Staub. Buck’s termination notice
expressly stated that Staub was terminated because he
had “ignored” the directive in the Corrective Action. Fi
nally, there was evidence that both Mulally and Koren
chuk had the specific intent to cause Staub to be termi
nated. Mulally stated she was trying to “ ‘get rid of ’ ”
Staub, and Korenchuk was aware that Mulally was “ ‘out
to get’ ” Staub. Moreover, Korenchuk informed Buck,
Proctor’s personnel officer responsible for terminating
employees, of Staub’s alleged noncompliance with Mu
lally’s Corrective Action, and Buck fired Staub immedi
ately thereafter; a reasonable jury could infer that Koren
chuk intended that Staub be fired. The Seventh Circuit
therefore erred in holding that Proctor was entitled to
judgment as a matter of law.
It is less clear whether the jury’s verdict should be
reinstated or whether Proctor is entitled to a new trial.
——————
view as to whether the employer would be liable if a co-worker, rather
than a supervisor, committed a discriminatory act that influenced the
ultimate employment decision. We also observe that Staub took advan
tage of Proctor’s grievance process, and we express no view as to
whether Proctor would have an affirmative defense if he did not. Cf.
Pennsylvania State Police v. Suders, 542 U. S. 129, 148–149 (2004).

