Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
emissions of carbon dioxide from the defendants’ plants. The Act di
rects EPA to establish emissions standards for categories of station
ary sources that, “in [the Administrator’s] judgment,” “caus[e], or
contribut[e] significantly to, air pollution which may reasonably be
anticipated to endanger public health or welfare.” §7411(b)(1)(A).
Once EPA lists a category, it must establish performance standards
for emission of pollutants from new or modified sources within that
category, §7411(b)(1)(B), and, most relevant here, must regulate ex
isting sources within the same category, §7411(d). The Act also pro
vides multiple avenues for enforcement. If EPA does not set emis
sions limits for a particular pollutant or source of pollution, States
and private parties may petition for a rulemaking on the matter, and
EPA’s response will be reviewable in federal court. See §7607(b)(1).
The Act itself thus provides a means to seek limits on emissions of
carbon dioxide from domestic power plants—the same relief the
plaintiffs seek by invoking federal common law. There is no room for
a parallel track. Pp. 9–11.
(c) The Court rejects the plaintiffs’ argument, and the Second
Circuit’s holding, that federal common law is not displaced until EPA
actually exercises its regulatory authority by setting emissions stan
dards for the defendants’ plants. The relevant question for displace
ment purposes is “whether the field has been occupied, not whether it
has been occupied in a particular manner.” Milwaukee II, 451 U. S.,
at 324. The Clean Air Act is no less an exercise of the Legislature’s
“considered judgment” concerning air pollution regulation because it
permits emissions until EPA acts. The critical point is that Congress
delegated to EPA the decision whether and how to regulate carbon
dioxide emissions from power plants; the delegation displaces federal
common law. If the plaintiffs in this case are dissatisfied with the
outcome of EPA’s forthcoming rulemaking, their recourse is to seek
Court of Appeals review, and, ultimately, to petition for certiorari.
The Act’s prescribed order of decisionmaking—first by the expert
agency, and then by federal judges—is yet another reason to resist
setting emissions standards by judicial decree under federal tort law.
The appropriate amount of regulation in a particular greenhouse gas
producing sector requires informed assessment of competing inter
ests. The Clean Air Act entrusts such complex balancing to EPA in
the first instance, in combination with state regulators. The expert
agency is surely better equipped to do the job than federal judges,
who lack the scientific, economic, and technological resources an
agency can utilize in coping with issues of this order. The plaintiffs’
proposal to have federal judges determine, in the first instance, what
amount of carbon-dioxide emissions is “unreasonable” and what level
of reduction is necessary cannot be reconciled with Congress’ scheme.

