4

AMERICAN ELEC. POWER CO. v. CONNECTICUT
Opinion of the Court

separate complaints in the Southern District of New York
against the same five major electric power companies.
The first group of plaintiffs included eight States3 and
New York City, the second joined three nonprofit land
trusts4; both groups are respondents here. The defen
dants, now petitioners, are four private companies5 and
the Tennessee Valley Authority, a federally owned corpo
ration that operates fossil-fuel fired power plants in sev
eral States. According to the complaints, the defendants
“are the five largest emitters of carbon dioxide in the
United States.” App. 57, 118. Their collective annual
emissions of 650 million tons constitute 25 percent of
emissions from the domestic electric power sector, 10
percent of emissions from all domestic human activities,
ibid., and 2.5 percent of all anthropogenic emissions
worldwide, App. to Pet. for Cert. 72a.
By contributing to global warming, the plaintiffs as
serted, the defendants’ carbon-dioxide emissions created
a “substantial and unreasonable interference with public
rights,” in violation of the federal common law of inter
state nuisance, or, in the alternative, of state tort law.
App. 103–105, 145–147. The States and New York City
alleged that public lands, infrastructure, and health were
at risk from climate change. App. 88–93. The trusts
urged that climate change would destroy habitats for
animals and rare species of trees and plants on land the
trusts owned and conserved. App. 139–145. All plaintiffs
sought injunctive relief requiring each defendant “to cap
——————
3 California, Connecticut, Iowa, New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island,
Vermont, and Wisconsin, although New Jersey and Wisconsin are no
longer participating. Brief for Respondents Connecticut et al. 3, n. 1.
4 Open Space Institute, Inc., Open Space Conservancy, Inc., and
Audubon Society of New Hampshire.
5 American Electric Power Company, Inc. (and a wholly owned subsidi
ary), Southern Company, Xcel Energy Inc., and Cinergy Corporation.

