2

AMERICAN ELEC. POWER CO. v. CONNECTICUT
Syllabus
quately alleged Article III standing. On the merits, the court held
that the plaintiffs had stated a claim under the “federal common law
of nuisance,” relying on this Court’s decisions holding that States
may maintain suits to abate air and water pollution produced by
other States or by out-of-state industry, see, e.g., Illinois v. Milwau
kee, 406 U. S. 91, 93 (Milwaukee I). The court further determined
that the Clean Air Act did not “displace” federal common law.

Held:
1. The Second Circuit’s exercise of jurisdiction is affirmed by an
equally divided Court. P. 6.
2. The Clean Air Act and the EPA action the Act authorizes dis
place any federal common-law right to seek abatement of carbon
dioxide emissions from fossil-fuel fired power plants. Pp. 6–16.
(a) Since Erie R. Co. v. Tompkins, 304 U. S. 64, 78, recognized
that there “is no federal general common law,” a new federal common
law has emerged for subjects of national concern. When dealing
“with air and water in their ambient or interstate aspects, there is a
federal common law.” Milwaukee I, 406 U. S., at 103. Decisions of
this Court predating Erie, but compatible with the emerging distinc
tion between general common law and the new federal common law,
have approved federal common-law suits brought by one State to
abate pollution emanating from another State. See, e.g., Missouri v.
Illinois, 180 U. S. 208, 241–243. The plaintiffs contend that their
right to maintain this suit follows from such cases. But recognition
that a subject is meet for federal law governance does not necessarily
mean that federal courts should create the controlling law. The
Court need not address the question whether, absent the Clean Air
Act and the EPA actions it authorizes, the plaintiffs could state a
federal common-law claim for curtailment of greenhouse gas emis
sions because of their contribution to global warming. Any such
claim would be displaced by the federal legislation authorizing EPA
to regulate carbon-dioxide emissions. Pp. 6–9.
(b) “[W]hen Congress addresses a question previously governed
by a decision rested on federal common law the need for such an un
usual exercise of law-making by federal courts disappears.” Milwau
kee v. Illinois, 451 U. S. 304, 314 (Milwaukee II). Legislative dis
placement of federal common law does not require the “same sort of
evidence of a clear and manifest [congressional] purpose” demanded
for preemption of state law. Id., at 317. Rather, the test is simply
whether the statute “speak[s] directly to [the] question” at issue.
Mobil Oil Corp. v. Higginbotham, 436 U. S. 618, 625. Here, Massa
chusetts made plain that emissions of carbon dioxide qualify as air
pollution subject to regulation under the Clean Air Act. 549 U. S., at
528–529. And it is equally plain that the Act “speaks directly” to

