14

AMERICAN ELEC. POWER CO. v. CONNECTICUT
Opinion of the Court

“tak[e] into account the cost of achieving [emissions] re
duction and any nonair quality health and environmental
impact and energy requirements.” §7411(a)(1), (b)(1)(B),
(d)(1); see also 40 C. F. R. §60.24(f) (EPA may permit
state plans to deviate from generally applicable emissions
standards upon demonstration that costs are “[u]n
reasonable”).
EPA may “distinguish among classes,
types, and sizes” of stationary sources in apportioning
responsibility for emissions reductions. §7411(b)(2), (d);
see also 40 C. F. R. §60.22(b)(5). And the agency may
waive compliance with emission limits to permit a facility
to test drive an “innovative technological system” that has
“not [yet] been adequately demonstrated.” §7411(j)(1)(A).
The Act envisions extensive cooperation between federal
and state authorities, see §7401(a), (b), generally permit
ting each State to take the first cut at determining how
best to achieve EPA emissions standards within its do
main, see §7411(c)(1), (d)(1)–(2).
It is altogether fitting that Congress designated an ex
pert agency, here, EPA, as best suited to serve as primary regulator of greenhouse gas emissions. The expert
agency is surely better equipped to do the job than indi
vidual district judges issuing ad hoc, case-by-case injunc
tions. Federal judges lack the scientific, economic, and
technological resources an agency can utilize in coping
with issues of this order. See generally Chevron U. S. A.
Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U. S.
837, 865–866 (1984). Judges may not commission scien
tific studies or convene groups of experts for advice, or
issue rules under notice-and-comment procedures inviting
input by any interested person, or seek the counsel of
regulators in the States where the defendants are located.
Rather, judges are confined by a record comprising the
evidence the parties present. Moreover, federal district
judges, sitting as sole adjudicators, lack authority to ren
der precedential decisions binding other judges, even

