(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER CO., INC., ET AL. v. 

CONNECTICUT ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 10–174.

Argued April 19, 2011—Decided June 20, 2011

In Massachusetts v. EPA, 549 U. S. 497, this Court held that the Clean
Air Act authorizes federal regulation of emissions of carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gases, and that the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) had misread that Act when it denied a rulemaking pe
tition seeking controls on greenhouse gas emissions from new motor
vehicles. In response, EPA commenced a rulemaking under §111 of
the Act, 42 U. S. C. §7411, to set limits on greenhouse gas emissions
from new, modified, and existing fossil-fuel fired power plants. Pur
suant to a settlement finalized in March 2011, EPA has committed to
issuing a final rule by May 2012.
The lawsuits considered here began well before EPA initiated ef
forts to regulate greenhouse gases. Two groups of plaintiffs, respon
dents here, filed separate complaints in a Federal District Court
against the same five major electric power companies, petitioners
here. One group of plaintiffs included eight States and New York
City; the second joined three nonprofit land trusts. According to the
complaint, the defendants are the largest emitters of carbon dioxide
in the Nation. By contributing to global warming, the plaintiffs as
serted, the defendants’ emissions substantially and unreasonably in
terfered with public rights, in violation of the federal common law of
interstate nuisance, or, in the alternative, of state tort law. All plain
tiffs ask for a decree setting carbon-dioxide emissions for each defen
dant at an initial cap, to be further reduced annually.
The District Court dismissed both suits as presenting nonjusticia
ble political questions, but the Second Circuit reversed. On the
threshold questions, the Circuit held that the suits were not barred
by the political question doctrine and that the plaintiffs had ade

