8

AMERICAN ELEC. POWER CO. v. CONNECTICUT
Opinion of the Court

ernance, however, does not necessarily mean that federal
courts should create the controlling law. Absent a demon
strated need for a federal rule of decision, the Court has
taken “the prudent course” of “adopt[ing] the readymade
body of state law as the federal rule of decision until Con
gress strikes a different accommodation.” United States v.
Kimbell Foods, Inc., 440 U. S. 715, 740 (1979); see Bank of
America Nat. Trust & Sav. Assn. v. Parnell, 352 U. S. 29,
32–34 (1956). And where, as here, borrowing the law of a
particular State would be inappropriate, the Court re
mains mindful that it does not have creative power akin to
that vested in Congress. See Missouri v. Illinois, 200 U. S.
496, 519 (1906) (“fact that this court must decide does not
mean, of course, that it takes the place of a legislature”);
cf. United States v. Standard Oil Co. of Cal., 332 U. S. 301,
308, 314 (1947) (holding that federal law determines
whether Government could secure indemnity from a com
pany whose truck injured a United States soldier, but
declining to impose such an indemnity absent action by
Congress, “the primary and most often the exclusive arbi
ter of federal fiscal affairs”).
In the cases on which the plaintiffs heavily rely, States
were permitted to sue to challenge activity harmful to
their citizens’ health and welfare. We have not yet de
cided whether private citizens (here, the land trusts) or
political subdivisions (New York City) of a State may
invoke the federal common law of nuisance to abate out-of
state pollution. Nor have we ever held that a State may
sue to abate any and all manner of pollution originating
outside its borders.
The defendants argue that considerations of scale and
complexity distinguish global warming from the more
bounded pollution giving rise to past federal nuisance
suits. Greenhouse gases once emitted “become well mixed
in the atmosphere,” 74 Fed. Reg. 66514; emissions in New
Jersey may contribute no more to flooding in New York

