Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

Opinion of the Court

judicial review. Federal courts, we earlier observed, see
supra, at 11, can review agency action (or a final rule
declining to take action) to ensure compliance with the
statute Congress enacted. As we have noted, see supra,
at 10, the Clean Air Act directs EPA to establish emissions standards for categories of stationary sources that,
“in [the Administrator’s] judgment,” “caus[e], or contri
but[e] significantly to, air pollution which may reasonably
be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare.”
§7411(b)(1)(A). “[T]he use of the word ‘judgment,’ ” we
explained in Massachusetts, “is not a roving license to
ignore the statutory text.” 549 U. S., at 533. “It is but a
direction to exercise discretion within defined statutory
limits.” Ibid. EPA may not decline to regulate carbon
dioxide emissions from power plants if refusal to act would
be “arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or other
wise not in accordance with law.” §7607(d)(9)(A). If the
plaintiffs in this case are dissatisfied with the outcome
of EPA’s forthcoming rulemaking, their recourse under
federal law is to seek Court of Appeals review, and, ulti
mately, to petition for certiorari in this Court.
Indeed, this prescribed order of decisionmaking—the
first decider under the Act is the expert administrative
agency, the second, federal judges—is yet another reason
to resist setting emissions standards by judicial decree
under federal tort law. The appropriate amount of regula
tion in any particular greenhouse gas-producing sector
cannot be prescribed in a vacuum: as with other questions
of national or international policy, informed assessment of
competing interests is required. Along with the environ
mental benefit potentially achievable, our Nation’s energy
needs and the possibility of economic disruption must
weigh in the balance.
The Clean Air Act entrusts such complex balancing to
EPA in the first instance, in combination with state regu
lators. Each “standard of performance” EPA sets must

