Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–651
_________________

JOSE PADILLA, PETITIONER v. KENTUCKY
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF

KENTUCKY

[March 31, 2010] 


JUSTICE ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE joins,
concurring in the judgment.
I concur in the judgment because a criminal defense
attorney fails to provide effective assistance within the
meaning of Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668
(1984), if the attorney misleads a noncitizen client regard
ing the removal consequences of a conviction. In my view,
such an attorney must (1) refrain from unreasonably
providing incorrect advice and (2) advise the defendant
that a criminal conviction may have adverse immigration
consequences and that, if the alien wants advice on this
issue, the alien should consult an immigration attorney. I
do not agree with the Court that the attorney must at
tempt to explain what those consequences may be. As the
Court concedes, “[i]mmigration law can be complex”; “it is
a legal specialty of its own”; and “[s]ome members of the
bar who represent clients facing criminal charges, in
either state or federal court or both, may not be well
versed in it.” Ante, at 11. The Court nevertheless holds
that a criminal defense attorney must provide advice in
this specialized area in those cases in which the law is
“succinct and straightforward”—but not, perhaps, in other
situations. Ante, at 11–12. This vague, halfway test will
lead to much confusion and needless litigation.


2

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

I
Under Strickland, an attorney provides ineffective
assistance if the attorney’s representation does not meet
reasonable professional standards. 466 U. S., at 688.
Until today, the longstanding and unanimous position of
the federal courts was that reasonable defense counsel
generally need only advise a client about the direct conse
quences of a criminal conviction. See, e.g., United States v.
Gonzalez, 202 F. 3d 20, 28 (CA1 2000) (ineffective
assistance-of-counsel claim fails if “based on an attorney’s
failure to advise a client of his plea’s immigration conse
quences”); United States v. Banda, 1 F. 3d 354, 355 (CA5
1993) (holding that “an attorney’s failure to advise a client
that deportation is a possible consequence of a guilty plea
does not constitute ineffective assistance of counsel”); see
generally Chin & Holmes, Effective Assistance of Counsel
and the Consequences of Guilty Pleas, 87 Cornell L. Rev.
697, 699 (2002) (hereinafter Chin & Holmes) (noting that
“virtually all jurisdictions”—including “eleven federal
circuits, more than thirty states, and the District of Co
lumbia”—“hold that defense counsel need not discuss with
their clients the collateral consequences of a conviction,”
including deportation). While the line between “direct”
and “collateral” consequences is not always clear, see ante,
at 7, n. 8, the collateral-consequences rule expresses an
important truth: Criminal defense attorneys have exper
tise regarding the conduct of criminal proceedings. They
are not expected to possess—and very often do not pos
sess—expertise in other areas of the law, and it is unreal
istic to expect them to provide expert advice on matters
that lie outside their area of training and experience.
This case happens to involve removal, but criminal
convictions can carry a wide variety of consequences other
than conviction and sentencing, including civil commit
ment, civil forfeiture, the loss of the right to vote, disquali
fication from public benefits, ineligibility to possess fire


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

arms, dishonorable discharge from the Armed Forces, and
loss of business or professional licenses. Chin & Holmes
705–706. A criminal conviction may also severely damage
a defendant’s reputation and thus impair the defendant’s
ability to obtain future employment or business opportuni
ties. All of those consequences are “seriou[s],” see ante, at
17, but this Court has never held that a criminal defense
attorney’s Sixth Amendment duties extend to providing
advice about such matters.
The Court tries to justify its dramatic departure from
precedent by pointing to the views of various professional
organizations. See ante, at 9 (“The weight of prevailing
professional norms supports the view that counsel must
advise her client regarding the risk of deportation”).
However, ascertaining the level of professional competence
required by the Sixth Amendment is ultimately a task for
the courts. E.g., Roe v. Flores-Ortega, 528 U. S. 470, 477
(2000). Although we may appropriately consult standards
promulgated by private bar groups, we cannot delegate to
these groups our task of determining what the Constitu
tion commands. See Strickland, supra, at 688 (explaining
that “[p]revailing norms of practice as reflected in Ameri
can Bar Association standards . . . are guides to determin
ing what is reasonable, but they are only guides”). And we
must recognize that such standards may represent only
the aspirations of a bar group rather than an empirical
assessment of actual practice.
Even if the only relevant consideration were “prevailing
professional norms,” it is hard to see how those norms can
support the duty the Court today imposes on defense
counsel. Because many criminal defense attorneys have
little understanding of immigration law, see ante, at 11, it
should follow that a criminal defense attorney who re
frains from providing immigration advice does not violate
prevailing professional norms. But the Court’s opinion
would not just require defense counsel to warn the client


4

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

of a general risk of removal; it would also require counsel
in at least some cases, to specify what the removal conse
quences of a conviction would be. See ante, at 11–12.
The Court’s new approach is particularly problematic
because providing advice on whether a conviction for a
particular offense will make an alien removable is often
quite complex. “Most crimes affecting immigration status
are not specifically mentioned by the [Immigration and
Nationality Act (INA)], but instead fall under a broad
category of crimes, such as crimes involving moral turpi
tude or aggravated felonies.” M. Garcia & L. Eig, CRS
Report for Congress, Immigration Consequences of Crimi
nal Activity (Sept. 20, 2006) (summary) (emphasis in
original). As has been widely acknowledged, determining
whether a particular crime is an “aggravated felony” or a
“crime involving moral turpitude [(CIMT)]” is not an easy
task. See R. McWhirter, ABA, The Criminal Lawyer’s
Guide to Immigration Law: Questions and Answers 128
(2d ed. 2006) (hereinafter ABA Guidebook) (“Because of
the increased complexity of aggravated felony law, this
edition devotes a new [30-page] chapter to the subject”);
id., §5.2, at 146 (stating that the aggravated felony list at
8 U. S. C. §1101(a)(43) is not clear with respect to several
of the listed categories, that “the term ‘aggravated felonies’
can include misdemeanors,” and that the determination of
whether a crime is an “aggravated felony” is made “even
more difficult” because “several agencies and courts inter
pret the statute,” including Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA),
and Federal Circuit and district courts considering immi
gration-law and criminal-law issues); ABA Guidebook
§4.65, at 130 (“Because nothing is ever simple with immi
gration law, the terms ‘conviction,’ ‘moral turpitude,’ and
‘single scheme of criminal misconduct’ are terms of art”);
id., §4.67, at 130 (“[T]he term ‘moral turpitude’ evades
precise definition”).


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

Defense counsel who consults a guidebook on whether a
particular crime is an “aggravated felony” will often find
that the answer is not ‘‘easily ascertained.” For example,
the ABA Guidebook answers the question “Does simple
possession count as an aggravated felony?” as follows:
“Yes, at least in the Ninth Circuit.” §5.35, at 160 (empha
sis added). After a dizzying paragraph that attempts to
explain the evolution of the Ninth Circuit’s view, the ABA
Guidebook continues: “Adding to the confusion, however,
is that the Ninth Circuit has conflicting opinions depend
ing on the context on whether simple drug possession
constitutes an aggravated felony under 8 U. S. C.
§1101(a)(43).” Id., §5.35, at 161 (citing cases distinguish
ing between whether a simple possession offense is an
aggravated felony “for immigration purposes” or for “sen
tencing purposes”). The ABA Guidebook then proceeds to
explain that “attempted possession,” id., §5.36, at 161
(emphasis added), of a controlled substance is an aggra
vated felony, while “[c]onviction under the federal acces
sory after the fact statute is probably not an aggravated
felony, but a conviction for accessory after the fact to the
manufacture of methamphetamine is an aggravated fel
ony,” id., §537, at 161 (emphasis added). Conspiracy or
attempt to commit drug trafficking are aggravated felo
nies, but “[s]olicitation is not a drug-trafficking offense
because a generic solicitation offense is not an offense
related to a controlled substance and therefore not an
aggravated felony.” Id., §5.41, at 162.
Determining whether a particular crime is one involving
moral turpitude is no easier. See id., at 134 (“Writing bad
checks may or may not be a CIMT” (emphasis added));
ibid. (“[R]eckless assault coupled with an element of in
jury, but not serious injury, is probably not a CIMT” (em
phasis added)); id., at 135 (misdemeanor driving under the
influence is generally not a CIMT, but may be a CIMT if
the DUI results in injury or if the driver knew that his


6

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

license had been suspended or revoked); id., at 136 (“If
there is no element of actual injury, the endangerment
offense may not be a CIMT” (emphasis added)); ibid.
(“Whether [a child abuse] conviction involves moral turpi
tude may depend on the subsection under which the indi
vidual is convicted. Child abuse done with criminal negli
gence probably is not a CIMT” (emphasis added)).
Many other terms of the INA are similarly ambiguous or
may be confusing to practitioners not versed in the intri
cacies of immigration law. To take just a few examples, it
may be hard, in some cases, for defense counsel even to
determine whether a client is an alien,1 or whether a
particular state disposition will result in a “conviction” for
purposes of federal immigration law.2 The task of offering
advice about the immigration consequences of a criminal
conviction is further complicated by other problems, in
cluding significant variations among Circuit interpreta
tions of federal immigration statutes; the frequency with
——————
1 Citizens

are not deportable, but “[q]uestions of citizenship are not
always simple.” ABA Guidebook §4.20, at 113 (explaining that U.S.
citizenship conferred by blood is “ ‘derivative,’ ” and that “[d]erivative
citizenship depends on a number of confusing factors, including
whether the citizen parent was the mother or father, the immigration
laws in effect at the time of the parents’ and/or defendant’s birth, and
the parents’ marital status”).
2 “A disposition that is not a ‘conviction,’ under state law may still be
a ‘conviction’ for immigration purposes.” Id., §4.32, at 117 (citing
Matter of Salazar, 23 I. & N. Dec. 223, 231 (BIA 2002) (en banc)). For
example, state law may define the term “conviction” not to include a
deferred adjudication, but such an adjudication would be deemed a
conviction for purposes of federal immigration law. See ABA Guide
book §4.37; accord, D. Kesselbrenner & L. Rosenberg, Immigration Law
and Crimes §2:1, p. 2–2 (2008) (hereinafter Immigration Law and
Crimes) (“A practitioner or respondent will not even know whether the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) or the Executive Office for
Immigration Review (EOIR) will treat a particular state disposition as
a conviction for immigration purposes. In fact, the [BIA] treats certain
state criminal dispositions as convictions even though the state treats
the same disposition as a dismissal”).


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

which immigration law changes; different rules governing
the immigration consequences of juvenile, first-offender,
and foreign convictions; and the relationship between the
“length and type of sentence” and the determination
“whether [an alien] is subject to removal, eligible for relief
from removal, or qualified to become a naturalized citi
zen,” Immigration Law and Crimes §2:1, at 2–2 to 2–3.
In short, the professional organizations and guidebooks
on which the Court so heavily relies are right to say that
“nothing is ever simple with immigration law”—including
the determination whether immigration law clearly makes
a particular offense removable. ABA Guidebook §4.65, at
130; Immigration Law and Crimes §2:1. I therefore can
not agree with the Court’s apparent view that the Sixth
Amendment requires criminal defense attorneys to pro
vide immigration advice.
The Court tries to downplay the severity of the burden it
imposes on defense counsel by suggesting that the scope of
counsel’s duty to offer advice concerning deportation con
sequences may turn on how hard it is to determine those
consequences. Where “the terms of the relevant immigra
tion statute are succinct, clear, and explicit in defining the
removal consequence[s]” of a conviction, the Court says,
counsel has an affirmative duty to advise the client that
he will be subject to deportation as a result of the plea.
Ante, at 11. But “[w]hen the law is not succinct and
straightforward . . . , a criminal defense attorney need do
no more than advise a noncitizen client that pending
criminal charges may carry a risk of adverse immigration
consequences.” Ante, at 11–12. This approach is problem
atic for at least four reasons.
First, it will not always be easy to tell whether a par
ticular statutory provision is “succinct, clear, and explicit.”
How can an attorney who lacks general immigration law
expertise be sure that a seemingly clear statutory provi
sion actually means what it seems to say when read in


8

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

isolation? What if the application of the provision to a
particular case is not clear but a cursory examination of
case law or administrative decisions would provide a
definitive answer? See Immigration Law and Crimes §2:1,
at 2–2 (“Unfortunately, a practitioner or respondent can
not tell easily whether a conviction is for a removable
offense. . . . [T]he cautious practitioner or apprehensive
respondent will not know conclusively the future immigra
tion consequences of a guilty plea”).
Second, if defense counsel must provide advice regard
ing only one of the many collateral consequences of a
criminal conviction, many defendants are likely to be
misled. To take just one example, a conviction for a par
ticular offense may render an alien excludable but not
removable. If an alien charged with such an offense is
advised only that pleading guilty to such an offense will
not result in removal, the alien may be induced to enter a
guilty plea without realizing that a consequence of the
plea is that the alien will be unable to reenter the United
States if the alien returns to his or her home country for
any reason, such as to visit an elderly parent or to attend
a funeral. See ABA Guidebook §4.14, at 111 (“Often the
alien is both excludable and removable. At times, how
ever, the lists are different. Thus, the oddity of an alien
that is inadmissible but not deportable. This alien should
not leave the United States because the government will
not let him back in” (emphasis in original)). Incomplete
legal advice may be worse than no advice at all because it
may mislead and may dissuade the client from seeking
advice from a more knowledgeable source.
Third, the Court’s rigid constitutional rule could inad
vertently head off more promising ways of addressing the
underlying problem—such as statutory or administrative
reforms requiring trial judges to inform a defendant on the
record that a guilty plea may carry adverse immigration
consequences. As amici point out, “28 states and the


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

District of Columbia have already adopted rules, plea
forms, or statutes requiring courts to advise criminal
defendants of the possible immigration consequences of
their pleas.” Brief for State of Louisiana et al. 25; accord,
Chin & Holmes 708 (“A growing number of states require
advice about deportation by statute or court rule”). A
nonconstitutional rule requiring trial judges to inform
defendants on the record of the risk of adverse immigra
tion consequences can ensure that a defendant receives
needed information without putting a large number of
criminal convictions at risk; and because such a warning
would be given on the record, courts would not later have
to determine whether the defendant was misrepresenting
the advice of counsel. Likewise, flexible statutory proce
dures for withdrawing guilty pleas might give courts
appropriate discretion to determine whether the interests
of justice would be served by allowing a particular defen
dant to withdraw a plea entered into on the basis of in
complete information. Cf. United States v. Russell, 686
F. 2d 35, 39–40 (CADC 1982) (explaining that a district
court’s discretion to set aside a guilty plea under the Fed
eral Rules of Criminal Procedure should be guided by,
among other considerations, “the possible existence of
prejudice to the government’s case as a result of the de
fendant’s untimely request to stand trial” and “the
strength of the defendant’s reason for withdrawing the
plea, including whether the defendant asserts his inno
cence of the charge”).
Fourth, the Court’s decision marks a major upheaval in
Sixth Amendment law. This Court decided Strickland in
1984, but the majority does not cite a single case, from this
or any other federal court, holding that criminal defense
counsel’s failure to provide advice concerning the removal
consequences of a criminal conviction violates a defen
dant’s Sixth Amendment right to counsel. As noted above,
the Court’s view has been rejected by every Federal Court


10

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

of Appeals to have considered the issue thus far. See, e.g.,
Gonzalez, 202 F. 3d, at 28; Banda, 1 F. 3d, at 355; Chin &
Holmes 697, 699. The majority appropriately acknowl
edges that the lower courts are “now quite experienced
with applying Strickland,” ante, at 14, but it casually
dismisses the longstanding and unanimous position of
the lower federal courts with respect to the scope of
criminal defense counsel’s duty to advise on collateral
consequences.
The majority seeks to downplay its dramatic expansion
of the scope of criminal defense counsel’s duties under the
Sixth Amendment by claiming that this Court in Hill v.
Lockhart, 474 U. S. 52 (1985), similarly “applied Strick
land to a claim that counsel had failed to advise the client
regarding his parole eligibility before he pleaded guilty.”
Ante, at 14. That characterization of Hill obscures much
more than it reveals. The issue in Hill was whether a
criminal defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to counsel
was violated where counsel misinformed the client about
his eligibility for parole. The Court found it “unnecessary
to determine whether there may be circumstances under
which erroneous advice by counsel as to parole eligibility
may be deemed constitutionally ineffective assistance of
counsel, because in the present case we conclude that
petitioner’s allegations are insufficient to satisfy the
Strickland v. Washington requirement of ‘prejudice.’ ” 474
U. S., at 60. Given that Hill expressly and unambiguously
refused to decide whether criminal defense counsel must
avoid misinforming his or her client as to one consequence
of a criminal conviction (parole eligibility), that case
plainly provides no support whatsoever for the proposition
that counsel must affirmatively advise his or her client as
to another collateral consequence (removal).
By the
Court’s strange logic, Hill would support its decision here
even if the Court had held that misadvice concerning
parole eligibility does not make counsel’s performance


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

objectively unreasonable. After all, the Court still would
have “applied Strickland” to the facts of the case at hand.
II
While mastery of immigration law is not required by
Strickland, several considerations support the conclu
sion that affirmative misadvice regarding the removal
consequences of a conviction may constitute ineffective
assistance.
First, a rule prohibiting affirmative misadvice regarding
a matter as crucial to the defendant’s plea decision as
deportation appears faithful to the scope and nature of the
Sixth Amendment duty this Court has recognized in its
past cases. In particular, we have explained that “a guilty
plea cannot be attacked as based on inadequate legal
advice unless counsel was not ‘a reasonably competent
attorney’ and the advice was not ‘within the range of
competence demanded of attorneys in criminal cases.’ ”
Strickland, 466 U. S., at 687 (quoting McMann v. Richard
son, 397 U. S. 759, 770, 771 (1970); emphasis added). As
the Court appears to acknowledge, thorough understand
ing of the intricacies of immigration law is not “within the
range of competence demanded of attorneys in criminal
cases.” See ante, at 11 (“Immigration law can be complex,
and it is a legal specialty of its own. Some members of the
bar who represent clients facing criminal charges, in
either state or federal court or both, may not be well
versed in it”). By contrast, reasonably competent attor
neys should know that it is not appropriate or responsible
to hold themselves out as authorities on a difficult and
complicated subject matter with which they are not famil
iar. Candor concerning the limits of one’s professional
expertise, in other words, is within the range of duties
reasonably expected of defense attorneys in criminal cases.
As the dissenting judge on the Kentucky Supreme Court
put it, “I do not believe it is too much of a burden to place


12

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

on our defense bar the duty to say, ‘I do not know.’ ” 253
S. W. 3d 482, 485 (2008).
Second, incompetent advice distorts the defendant’s
decisionmaking process and seems to call the fairness and
integrity of the criminal proceeding itself into question.
See Strickland, 466 U. S., at 686 (“In giving meaning to
the requirement [of effective assistance of counsel], we
must take its purpose—to ensure a fair trial—as the
guide”). When a defendant opts to plead guilty without
definitive information concerning the likely effects of the
plea, the defendant can fairly be said to assume the risk
that the conviction may carry indirect consequences of
which he or she is not aware. That is not the case when a
defendant bases the decision to plead guilty on counsel’s
express misrepresentation that the defendant will not be
removable. In the latter case, it seems hard to say that
the plea was entered with the advice of constitutionally
competent counsel—or that it embodies a voluntary and
intelligent decision to forsake constitutional rights. See
ibid. (“The benchmark for judging any claim of ineffec
tiveness must be whether counsel’s conduct so under
mined the proper functioning of the adversarial process
that the trial cannot be relied on as having produced a just
result”).
Third, a rule prohibiting unreasonable misadvice re
garding exceptionally important collateral matters would
not deter or interfere with ongoing political and adminis
trative efforts to devise fair and reasonable solutions to
the difficult problem posed by defendants who plead
guilty without knowing of certain important collateral
consequences.
Finally, the conclusion that affirmative misadvice re
garding the removal consequences of a conviction can give
rise to ineffective assistance would, unlike the Court’s
approach, not require any upheaval in the law. As the
Solicitor General points out, “[t]he vast majority of the


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

lower courts considering claims of ineffective assistance in
the plea context have [distinguished] between defense
counsel who remain silent and defense counsel who give
affirmative misadvice.” Brief for United States as Amicus
Curiae 8 (citing cases). At least three Courts of Appeals
have held that affirmative misadvice on immigration
matters can give rise to ineffective assistance of counsel,
at least in some circumstances.3 And several other Circuits have held that affirmative misadvice concerning
nonimmigration consequences of a conviction can violate
the Sixth Amendment even if those consequences might be
deemed “collateral.”4 By contrast, it appears that no court
of appeals holds that affirmative misadvice concerning
collateral consequences in general and removal in particular can never give rise to ineffective assistance. In short,
——————
3 See

United States v. Kwan, 407 F. 3d 1005, 1015–1017 (CA9 2005);
United States v. Couto, 311 F. 3d 179, 188 (CA2 2002); Downs-Morgan
v. United States, 765 F. 2d 1534, 1540–1541 (CA11 1985) (limiting
holding to the facts of the case); see also Santos-Sanchez v. United
States, 548 F. 3d 327, 333–334 (CA5 2008) (concluding that counsel’s
advice was not objectively unreasonable where counsel did not purport
to answer questions about immigration law, did not claim any expertise
in immigration law, and simply warned of “possible” deportation
consequence; use of the word “possible” was not an affirmative misrepresentation, even though it could indicate that deportation was not a
certain consequence).
4 See Hill v. Lockhart, 894 F. 2d 1009, 1010 (CA8 1990) (en banc)
(“[T]he erroneous parole-eligibility advice given to Mr. Hill was ineffective assistance of counsel under Strickland v. Washington”); Sparks v.
Sowders, 852 F. 2d 882, 885 (CA6 1988) (“[G]ross misadvice concerning
parole eligibility can amount to ineffective assistance of counsel”); id.,
at 886 (Kennedy, J., concurring) (“When the maximum possible exposure is overstated, the defendant might well be influenced to accept a
plea agreement he would otherwise reject”); Strader v. Garrison, 611
F. 2d 61, 65 (CA4 1979) (“[T]hough parole eligibility dates are collateral
consequences of the entry of a guilty plea of which a defendant need not
be informed if he does not inquire, when he is grossly misinformed
about it by his lawyer, and relies upon that misinformation, he is
deprived of his constitutional right to counsel”).


14

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

the considered and thus far unanimous view of the lower
federal courts charged with administering Strickland
clearly supports the conclusion that that Kentucky Su
preme Court’s position goes too far.
In concluding that affirmative misadvice regarding the
removal consequences of a criminal conviction may consti
tute ineffective assistance, I do not mean to suggest that
the Sixth Amendment does no more than require defense
counsel to avoid misinformation. When a criminal defense
attorney is aware that a client is an alien, the attorney
should advise the client that a criminal conviction may
have adverse consequences under the immigration laws
and that the client should consult an immigration special
ist if the client wants advice on that subject. By putting
the client on notice of the danger of removal, such advice
would significantly reduce the chance that the client
would plead guilty under a mistaken premise.
III
In sum, a criminal defense attorney should not be re
quired to provide advice on immigration law, a complex
specialty that generally lies outside the scope of a criminal
defense attorney’s expertise. On the other hand, any
competent criminal defense attorney should appreciate the
extraordinary importance that the risk of removal might
have in the client’s determination whether to enter a
guilty plea.
Accordingly, unreasonable and incorrect
information concerning the risk of removal can give rise to
an ineffectiveness claim. In addition, silence alone is not
enough to satisfy counsel’s duty to assist the client. In
stead, an alien defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to
counsel is satisfied if defense counsel advises the client
that a conviction may have immigration consequences,
that immigration law is a specialized field, that the attor
ney is not an immigration lawyer, and that the client
should consult an immigration specialist if the client
wants advice on that subject.

