(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF KENTUCKY
No. 08–651.

Argued October 13, 2009—Decided March 31, 2010

Petitioner Padilla, a lawful permanent resident of the United States for
over 40 years, faces deportation after pleading guilty to drug
distribution charges in Kentucky. In postconviction proceedings, he
claims that his counsel not only failed to advise him of this conse
quence before he entered the plea, but also told him not to worry
about deportation since he had lived in this country so long. He al
leges that he would have gone to trial had he not received this incor
rect advice. The Kentucky Supreme Court denied Padilla postconvic
tion relief on the ground that the Sixth Amendment’s effective
assistance-of-counsel guarantee does not protect defendants from er
roneous deportation advice because deportation is merely a “collat
eral” consequence of a conviction.
Held: Because counsel must inform a client whether his plea carries a
risk of deportation, Padilla has sufficiently alleged that his counsel
was constitutionally deficient. Whether he is entitled to relief de
pends on whether he has been prejudiced, a matter not addressed
here. Pp. 2–18.
(a) Changes to immigration law have dramatically raised the
stakes of a noncitizen’s criminal conviction. While once there was
only a narrow class of deportable offenses and judges wielded broad
discretionary authority to prevent deportation, immigration reforms
have expanded the class of deportable offenses and limited judges’
authority to alleviate deportation’s harsh consequences. Because the
drastic measure of deportation or removal is now virtually inevitable
for a vast number of noncitizens convicted of crimes, the importance
of accurate legal advice for noncitizens accused of crimes has never
been more important. Thus, as a matter of federal law, deportation is
an integral part of the penalty that may be imposed on noncitizen de
fendants who plead guilty to specified crimes. Pp. 2–6.


2

PADILLA v. KENTUCKY
Syllabus
(b) Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668, applies to Padilla’s
claim. Before deciding whether to plead guilty, a defendant is enti
tled to “the effective assistance of competent counsel.” McMann v.
Richardson, 397 U. S. 759, 771. The Supreme Court of Kentucky re
jected Padilla’s ineffectiveness claim on the ground that the advice he
sought about deportation concerned only collateral matters. How
ever, this Court has never distinguished between direct and collat
eral consequences in defining the scope of constitutionally “reason
able professional assistance” required under Strickland, 466 U. S., at
689. The question whether that distinction is appropriate need not
be considered in this case because of the unique nature of deporta
tion. Although removal proceedings are civil, deportation is inti
mately related to the criminal process, which makes it uniquely diffi
cult to classify as either a direct or a collateral consequence. Because
that distinction is thus ill-suited to evaluating a Strickland claim
concerning the specific risk of deportation, advice regarding deporta
tion is not categorically removed from the ambit of the Sixth Amend
ment right to counsel. Pp. 7–9.
(c) To satisfy Strickland’s two-prong inquiry, counsel’s representa
tion must fall “below an objective standard of reasonableness,” 466
U. S., at 688, and there must be “a reasonable probability that, but
for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would
have been different,” id., at 694. The first, constitutional deficiency,
is necessarily linked to the legal community’s practice and expecta
tions. Id., at 688. The weight of prevailing professional norms sup
ports the view that counsel must advise her client regarding the de
portation risk. And this Court has recognized the importance to the
client of “ ‘[p]reserving the . . . right to remain in the United States’ ”
and “preserving the possibility of” discretionary relief from deporta
tion. INS v. St. Cyr, 533 U. S. 289, 323. Thus, this is not a hard case
in which to find deficiency: The consequences of Padilla’s plea could
easily be determined from reading the removal statute, his deporta
tion was presumptively mandatory, and his counsel’s advice was in
correct. There will, however, undoubtedly be numerous situations in
which the deportation consequences of a plea are unclear. In those
cases, a criminal defense attorney need do no more than advise a
noncitizen client that pending criminal charges may carry adverse
immigration consequences. But when the deportation consequence is
truly clear, as it was here, the duty to give correct advice is equally
clear. Accepting Padilla’s allegations as true, he has sufficiently al
leged constitutional deficiency to satisfy Strickland’s first prong.
Whether he can satisfy the second prong, prejudice, is left for the
Kentucky courts to consider in the first instance. Pp. 9–12.
(d) The Solicitor General’s proposed rule—that Strickland should


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
be applied to Padilla’s claim only to the extent that he has alleged af
firmative misadvice—is unpersuasive. And though this Court must
be careful about recognizing new grounds for attacking the validity of
guilty pleas, the 25 years since Strickland was first applied to inef
fective-assistance claims at the plea stage have shown that pleas are
less frequently the subject of collateral challenges than convictions
after a trial. Also, informed consideration of possible deportation can
benefit both the State and noncitizen defendants, who may be able to
reach agreements that better satisfy the interests of both parties.
This decision will not open the floodgates to challenges of convictions
obtained through plea bargains. Cf. Hill v. Lockhart, 474 U. S. 52,
58. Pp. 12–16.
253 S. W. 3d 482, reversed and remanded.
STEVENS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which KENNEDY,
GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. ALITO, J., filed an opin
ion concurring in the judgment, in which ROBERTS, C. J., joined.
SCALIA, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which THOMAS, J., joined.

