Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

would remain subject to Katz analysis.” Ante, at 11. As
JUSTICE ALITO incisively observes, the same technological
advances that have made possible nontrespassory surveillance techniques will also affect the Katz test by shaping
the evolution of societal privacy expectations. Post, at
10–11. Under that rubric, I agree with JUSTICE ALITO that,
at the very least, “longer term GPS monitoring in investigations of most offenses impinges on expectations of
privacy.” Post, at 13.
In cases involving even short-term monitoring, some
unique attributes of GPS surveillance relevant to the Katz
analysis will require particular attention. GPS monitoring
generates a precise, comprehensive record of a person’s
public movements that reflects a wealth of detail about
her familial, political, professional, religious, and sexual
associations. See, e.g., People v. Weaver, 12 N. Y. 3d 433,
441–442, 909 N. E. 2d 1195, 1199 (2009) (“Disclosed in
[GPS] data . . . will be trips the indisputably private nature of which takes little imagination to conjure: trips
to the psychiatrist, the plastic surgeon, the abortion clinic,
the AIDS treatment center, the strip club, the criminal
defense attorney, the by-the-hour motel, the union meeting, the mosque, synagogue or church, the gay bar and
on and on”). The Government can store such records
and efficiently mine them for information years into the
future. Pineda-Moreno, 617 F. 3d, at 1124 (opinion of
Kozinski, C. J.). And because GPS monitoring is cheap
in comparison to conventional surveillance techniques and,
by design, proceeds surreptitiously, it evades the ordinary
checks that constrain abusive law enforcement practices:
“limited police resources and community hostility.” Illinois v. Lidster, 540 U. S. 419, 426 (2004).
Awareness that the Government may be watching chills
associational and expressive freedoms. And the Government’s unrestrained power to assemble data that reveal
private aspects of identity is susceptible to abuse. The net

