6

UNITED STATES v. JONES
Opinion of the Court

that understanding. Less than two years later the Court
upheld defendants’ contention that the Government could
not introduce against them conversations between other
people obtained by warrantless placement of electronic
surveillance devices in their homes. The opinion rejected
the dissent’s contention that there was no Fourth
Amendment violation “unless the conversational privacy of
the homeowner himself is invaded.”4 Alderman v. United
States, 394 U. S. 165, 176 (1969). “[W]e [do not] believe
that Katz, by holding that the Fourth Amendment protects
persons and their private conversations, was intended
to withdraw any of the protection which the Amendment
extends to the home . . . .” Id., at 180.
More recently, in Soldal v. Cook County, 506 U. S. 56
(1992), the Court unanimously rejected the argument that
although a “seizure” had occurred “in a ‘technical’ sense”
when a trailer home was forcibly removed, id., at 62, no
Fourth Amendment violation occurred because law enforcement had not “invade[d] the [individuals’] privacy,”
id., at 60. Katz, the Court explained, established that
“property rights are not the sole measure of Fourth
——————
in the target’s coach in order to track its movements. Ibid. There is no
doubt that the information gained by that trespassory activity would be
the product of an unlawful search—whether that information consisted
of the conversations occurring in the coach, or of the destinations to
which the coach traveled.
In any case, it is quite irrelevant whether there was an 18th-century
analog. Whatever new methods of investigation may be devised, our
task, at a minimum, is to decide whether the action in question would
have constituted a “search” within the original meaning of the Fourth
Amendment. Where, as here, the Government obtains information by
physically intruding on a constitutionally protected area, such a search
has undoubtedly occurred.
4 Thus, the concurrence’s attempt to recast Alderman as meaning that
individuals have a “legitimate expectation of privacy in all conversations that [take] place under their roof,” post, at 6–7, is foreclosed by
the Court’s opinion. The Court took as a given that the homeowner’s
“conversational privacy” had not been violated.

