Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

Amendment violations,” but did not “snuf[f ] out the previously recognized protection for property.” 506 U. S., at 64.
As Justice Brennan explained in his concurrence in
Knotts, Katz did not erode the principle “that, when the
Government does engage in physical intrusion of a constitutionally protected area in order to obtain information,
that intrusion may constitute a violation of the Fourth
Amendment.” 460 U. S., at 286 (opinion concurring in
judgment). We have embodied that preservation of past
rights in our very definition of “reasonable expectation
of privacy” which we have said to be an expectation “that
has a source outside of the Fourth Amendment, either by
reference to concepts of real or personal property law or
to understandings that are recognized and permitted by
society.” Minnesota v. Carter, 525 U. S. 83, 88 (1998)
(internal quotation marks omitted). Katz did not narrow
the Fourth Amendment’s scope.5
The Government contends that several of our post-Katz
cases foreclose the conclusion that what occurred here
constituted a search. It relies principally on two cases in
——————
5 The

concurrence notes that post-Katz we have explained that “ ‘an
actual trespass is neither necessary nor sufficient to establish a constitutional violation.’ ” Post, at 6 (quoting United States v. Karo, 468 U. S.
705, 713 (1984)). That is undoubtedly true, and undoubtedly irrelevant. Karo was considering whether a seizure occurred, and as the
concurrence explains, a seizure of property occurs, not when there is a
trespass, but “when there is some meaningful interference with an
individual’s possessory interests in that property.” Post, at 2 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Likewise with a search. Trespass alone
does not qualify, but there must be conjoined with that what was
present here: an attempt to find something or to obtain information.
Related to this, and similarly irrelevant, is the concurrence’s point
that, if analyzed separately, neither the installation of the device nor
its use would constitute a Fourth Amendment search. See ibid. Of
course not. A trespass on “houses” or “effects,” or a Katz invasion of
privacy, is not alone a search unless it is done to obtain information;
and the obtaining of information is not alone a search unless it is
achieved by such a trespass or invasion of privacy.

