Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

a minimum the degree of protection it afforded when it
was adopted. The concurrence does not share that belief.
It would apply exclusively Katz’s reasonable-expectationof-privacy test, even when that eliminates rights that
previously existed.
The concurrence faults our approach for “present[ing]
particularly vexing problems” in cases that do not involve
physical contact, such as those that involve the transmission of electronic signals. Post, at 9. We entirely fail to
understand that point. For unlike the concurrence, which
would make Katz the exclusive test, we do not make trespass the exclusive test. Situations involving merely the
transmission of electronic signals without trespass would
remain subject to Katz analysis.
In fact, it is the concurrence’s insistence on the exclusivity of the Katz test that needlessly leads us into “particularly vexing problems” in the present case. This Court has
to date not deviated from the understanding that mere
visual observation does not constitute a search. See Kyllo,
533 U. S., at 31–32. We accordingly held in Knotts that
“[a] person traveling in an automobile on public thoroughfares has no reasonable expectation of privacy in his
movements from one place to another.” 460 U. S., at 281.
Thus, even assuming that the concurrence is correct to
say that “[t]raditional surveillance” of Jones for a 4-week
period “would have required a large team of agents, multiple vehicles, and perhaps aerial assistance,” post, at 12,
our cases suggest that such visual observation is constitutionally permissible. It may be that achieving the same
result through electronic means, without an accompanying trespass, is an unconstitutional invasion of privacy,
but the present case does not require us to answer that
question.
And answering it affirmatively leads us needlessly into
additional thorny problems. The concurrence posits that
“relatively short-term monitoring of a person’s movements

