Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

intimacies of the home were tapped, recorded, or revealed?
The depth of the penetration of the electronic device—even
the degree of its remoteness from the inside of the house—
is not the measure of the injury”); Goldman, supra, at 139
(Murphy, J., dissenting) (“[T]he search of one’s home or
office no longer requires physical entry, for science has
brought forth far more effective devices for the invasion
of a person’s privacy than the direct and obvious methods
of oppression which were detested by our forebears and
which inspired the Fourth Amendment”).
Katz v. United States, 389 U. S. 347 (1967), finally did
away with the old approach, holding that a trespass was
not required for a Fourth Amendment violation. Katz involved the use of a listening device that was attached to
the outside of a public telephone booth and that allowed
police officers to eavesdrop on one end of the target’s
phone conversation. This procedure did not physically
intrude on the area occupied by the target, but the Katz
Court “repudiate[ed]” the old doctrine, Rakas v. Illinois,
439 U. S. 128, 143 (1978), and held that “[t]he fact that the
electronic device employed . . . did not happen to penetrate
the wall of the booth can have no constitutional significance,” 389 U. S., at 353 (“[T]he reach of th[e] [Fourth]
Amendment cannot turn upon the presence or absence of a
physical intrusion into any given enclosure”); see Rakas,
supra, at 143 (describing Katz as holding that the “capacity to claim the protection for the Fourth Amendment
depends not upon a property right in the invaded place but
upon whether the person who claims the protection of the
Amendment has a legitimate expectation of privacy in the
invaded place”); Kyllo, supra, at 32 (“We have since decoupled violation of a person’s Fourth Amendment rights
from trespassory violation of his property”). What mattered,
the Court now held, was whether the conduct at issue
“violated the privacy upon which [the defendant] justifiably relied while using the telephone booth.” Katz, supra,

