4

UNITED STATES v. JONES
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

result is that GPS monitoring—by making available at a
relatively low cost such a substantial quantum of intimate
information about any person whom the Government, in
its unfettered discretion, chooses to track—may “alter the
relationship between citizen and government in a way
that is inimical to democratic society.” United States v.
Cuevas-Perez, 640 F. 3d 272, 285 (CA7 2011) (Flaum, J.,
concurring).
I would take these attributes of GPS monitoring into
account when considering the existence of a reasonable
societal expectation of privacy in the sum of one’s public
movements. I would ask whether people reasonably expect that their movements will be recorded and aggregated in a manner that enables the Government to ascertain,
more or less at will, their political and religious beliefs,
sexual habits, and so on. I do not regard as dispositive
the fact that the Government might obtain the fruits of
GPS monitoring through lawful conventional surveillance
techniques. See Kyllo, 533 U. S., at 35, n. 2; ante, at 11
(leaving open the possibility that duplicating traditional
surveillance “through electronic means, without an accompanying trespass, is an unconstitutional invasion of
privacy”). I would also consider the appropriateness of
entrusting to the Executive, in the absence of any oversight from a coordinate branch, a tool so amenable to
misuse, especially in light of the Fourth Amendment’s goal
to curb arbitrary exercises of police power to and prevent
“a too permeating police surveillance,” United States v.
Di Re, 332 U. S. 581, 595 (1948).*
——————
* United States v. Knotts, 460 U. S. 276 (1983), does not foreclose the
conclusion that GPS monitoring, in the absence of a physical intrusion,
is a Fourth Amendment search. As the majority’s opinion notes, Knotts
reserved the question whether “ ‘different constitutional principles
may be applicable’ ” to invasive law enforcement practices such as GPS
tracking. See ante, at 8, n. 6 (quoting 460 U. S., at 284).
United States v. Karo, 468 U. S. 705 (1984), addressed the Fourth

