2

UNITED STATES v. JONES
SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

that the reach of the Fourth Amendment does not “turn
upon the presence or absence of a physical intrusion.” Id.,
at 353. As the majority’s opinion makes clear, however,
Katz’s reasonable-expectation-of-privacy test augmented,
but did not displace or diminish, the common-law trespassory test that preceded it. Ante, at 8. Thus, “when the
Government does engage in physical intrusion of a constitutionally protected area in order to obtain information,
that intrusion may constitute a violation of the Fourth
Amendment.” United States v. Knotts, 460 U. S. 276, 286
(1983) (Brennan, J., concurring in judgment); see also, e.g.,
Rakas v. Illinois, 439 U. S. 128, 144, n. 12 (1978). JUSTICE
ALITO’s approach, which discounts altogether the constitutional relevance of the Government’s physical intrusion on
Jones’ Jeep, erodes that longstanding protection for privacy expectations inherent in items of property that people
possess or control. See post, at 5–7 (opinion concurring in
judgment). By contrast, the trespassory test applied in
the majority’s opinion reflects an irreducible constitutional
minimum: When the Government physically invades
personal property to gather information, a search occurs.
The reaffirmation of that principle suffices to decide this
case.
Nonetheless, as JUSTICE ALITO notes, physical intrusion
is now unnecessary to many forms of surveillance. Post, at
9–12. With increasing regularity, the Government will be
capable of duplicating the monitoring undertaken in this
case by enlisting factory- or owner-installed vehicle tracking devices or GPS-enabled smartphones. See United
States v. Pineda-Moreno, 617 F. 3d 1120, 1125 (CA9 2010)
(Kozinski, C. J., dissenting from denial of rehearing en
banc). In cases of electronic or other novel modes of surveillance that do not depend upon a physical invasion
on property, the majority opinion’s trespassory test may
provide little guidance. But “[s]ituations involving merely
the transmission of electronic signals without trespass

