4

UNITED STATES v. JONES
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

search. In the early electronic surveillance cases, the
Court concluded that a Fourth Amendment search occurred when private conversations were monitored as a
result of an “unauthorized physical penetration into the
premises occupied” by the defendant. Silverman v. United
States, 365 U. S. 505, 509 (1961). In Silverman, police
officers listened to conversations in an attached home by
inserting a “spike mike” through the wall that this house
shared with the vacant house next door. Id., at 506. This
procedure was held to be a search because the mike made
contact with a heating duct on the other side of the wall
and thus “usurp[ed] . . . an integral part of the premises.”
Id., at 511.
By contrast, in cases in which there was no trespass, it
was held that there was no search. Thus, in Olmstead v.
United States, 277 U. S. 438 (1928), the Court found that
the Fourth Amendment did not apply because “[t]he taps
from house lines were made in the streets near the
houses.” Id., at 457. Similarly, the Court concluded that no
search occurred in Goldman v. United States, 316 U. S.
129, 135 (1942), where a “detectaphone” was placed on the
outer wall of defendant’s office for the purpose of overhearing conversations held within the room.
This trespass-based rule was repeatedly criticized. In
Olmstead, Justice Brandeis wrote that it was “immaterial
where the physical connection with the telephone wires
was made.” 277 U. S., at 479 (dissenting opinion). Although a private conversation transmitted by wire did not
fall within the literal words of the Fourth Amendment, he
argued, the Amendment should be understood as prohibiting “every unjustifiable intrusion by the government upon
the privacy of the individual.” Id., at 478. See also, e.g.,
Silverman, supra, at 513 (Douglas, J., concurring) (“The
concept of ‘an unauthorized physical penetration into the
premises,’ on which the present decision rests seems to me
beside the point. Was not the wrong . . . done when the

