8

UNITED STATES v. JONES
Opinion of the Court

which we rejected Fourth Amendment challenges to
“beepers,” electronic tracking devices that represent another form of electronic monitoring. The first case, Knotts,
upheld against Fourth Amendment challenge the use of a
“beeper” that had been placed in a container of chloroform,
allowing law enforcement to monitor the location of the
container. 460 U. S., at 278. We said that there had been
no infringement of Knotts’ reasonable expectation of privacy since the information obtained—the location of the
automobile carrying the container on public roads, and
the location of the off-loaded container in open fields near
Knotts’ cabin—had been voluntarily conveyed to the public.6 Id., at 281–282. But as we have discussed, the Katz
reasonable-expectation-of-privacy test has been added to,
not substituted for, the common-law trespassory test. The
holding in Knotts addressed only the former, since the
latter was not at issue. The beeper had been placed in
the container before it came into Knotts’ possession, with
the consent of the then-owner. 460 U. S., at 278. Knotts
did not challenge that installation, and we specifically declined to consider its effect on the Fourth Amendment
analysis. Id., at 279, n. Knotts would be relevant, perhaps, if the Government were making the argument that
what would otherwise be an unconstitutional search is
not such where it produces only public information. The
Government does not make that argument, and we know
of no case that would support it.
The second “beeper” case, United States v. Karo, 468
U. S. 705 (1984), does not suggest a different conclusion.
There we addressed the question left open by Knotts,
whether the installation of a beeper in a container
——————
6 Knotts noted the “limited use which the government made of the
signals from this particular beeper,” 460 U. S., at 284; and reserved the
question whether “different constitutional principles may be applicable”
to “dragnet-type law enforcement practices” of the type that GPS
tracking made possible here, ibid.

