Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring

More fundamentally, it may be necessary to reconsider
the premise that an individual has no reasonable expectation of privacy in information voluntarily disclosed to third
parties. E.g., Smith, 442 U. S., at 742; United States v.
Miller, 425 U. S. 435, 443 (1976). This approach is ill
suited to the digital age, in which people reveal a great
deal of information about themselves to third parties in
the course of carrying out mundane tasks. People disclose
the phone numbers that they dial or text to their cellular providers; the URLs that they visit and the e-mail
addresses with which they correspond to their Internet
service providers; and the books, groceries, and medications they purchase to online retailers. Perhaps, as
JUSTICE ALITO notes, some people may find the “tradeoff ”
of privacy for convenience “worthwhile,” or come to accept
this “diminution of privacy” as “inevitable,” post, at 10,
and perhaps not. I for one doubt that people would accept
without complaint the warrantless disclosure to the Government of a list of every Web site they had visited in the
last week, or month, or year. But whatever the societal
expectations, they can attain constitutionally protected
status only if our Fourth Amendment jurisprudence ceases
——————
Amendment implications of the installation of a beeper in a container
with the consent of the container’s original owner, who was aware
that the beeper would be used for surveillance purposes. Id., at 707.
Owners of GPS-equipped cars and smartphones do not contemplate
that these devices will be used to enable covert surveillance of their
movements. To the contrary, subscribers of one such service greeted
a similar suggestion with anger. Quain, Changes to OnStar’s Privacy
Terms Rile Some Users, N. Y. Times (Sept. 22, 2011), online at
http://wheels.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/09/22/changes-to-onstars-privacyterms-rile-some-users (as visited Jan. 19, 2012, and available in Clerk
of Court’s case file). In addition, the bugged container in Karo lacked
the close relationship with the target that a car shares with its owner.
The bugged container in Karo was stationary for much of the Government’s surveillance. See 468 U. S., at 708–710. A car’s movements, by
contrast, are its owner’s movements.

