Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

amounted to a search or seizure. 468 U. S., at 713. As in
Knotts, at the time the beeper was installed the container
belonged to a third party, and it did not come into possession of the defendant until later. 468 U. S., at 708. Thus,
the specific question we considered was whether the installation “with the consent of the original owner constitute[d] a search or seizure . . . when the container is delivered to a buyer having no knowledge of the presence of the
beeper.” Id., at 707 (emphasis added). We held not. The
Government, we said, came into physical contact with
the container only before it belonged to the defendant Karo;
and the transfer of the container with the unmonitored
beeper inside did not convey any information and thus did
not invade Karo’s privacy. See id., at 712. That conclusion is perfectly consistent with the one we reach here.
Karo accepted the container as it came to him, beeper and
all, and was therefore not entitled to object to the beeper’s
presence, even though it was used to monitor the container’s location. Cf. On Lee v. United States, 343 U. S. 747,
751–752 (1952) (no search or seizure where an informant,
who was wearing a concealed microphone, was invited into
the defendant’s business). Jones, who possessed the Jeep
at the time the Government trespassorily inserted the
information-gathering device, is on much different footing.
The Government also points to our exposition in New
York v. Class, 475 U. S. 106 (1986), that “[t]he exterior of
a car . . . is thrust into the public eye, and thus to examine
it does not constitute a ‘search.’ ” Id., at 114. That statement is of marginal relevance here since, as the Government acknowledges, “the officers in this case did more
than conduct a visual inspection of respondent’s vehicle,”
Brief for United States 41 (emphasis added). By attaching
the device to the Jeep, officers encroached on a protected
area. In Class itself we suggested that this would make a
difference, for we concluded that an officer’s momentary
reaching into the interior of a vehicle did constitute a

