12

UNITED STATES v. JONES
ALITO, J., concurring in judgment

are equipped with a GPS device, permit more precise
tracking. For example, when a user activates the GPS on
such a phone, a provider is able to monitor the phone’s
location and speed of movement and can then report back
real-time traffic conditions after combining (“crowdsourcing”) the speed of all such phones on any particular road.9
Similarly, phone-location-tracking services are offered as
“social” tools, allowing consumers to find (or to avoid)
others who enroll in these services. The availability and
use of these and other new devices will continue to shape
the average person’s expectations about the privacy of his
or her daily movements.
V
In the pre-computer age, the greatest protections of
privacy were neither constitutional nor statutory, but
practical. Traditional surveillance for any extended period
of time was difficult and costly and therefore rarely undertaken. The surveillance at issue in this case—constant
monitoring of the location of a vehicle for four weeks—
would have required a large team of agents, multiple
vehicles, and perhaps aerial assistance.10 Only an investigation of unusual importance could have justified such an
——————
9 See, e.g., The bright side of sitting in traffic: Crowdsourcing road
congestion data, Google Blog, http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2009/08/
bright-side-of-sitting-in-traffic.html.
10 Even with a radio transmitter like those used in United States v.
Knotts, 460 U. S. 276 (1983), or United States v. Karo, 468 U. S. 705
(1984), such long-term surveillance would have been exceptionally
demanding. The beepers used in those cases merely “emit[ted] periodic
signals that [could] be picked up by a radio receiver.” Knotts, 460 U.S.,
at 277. The signal had a limited range and could be lost if the police
did not stay close enough. Indeed, in Knotts itself, officers lost the
signal from the beeper, and only “with the assistance of a monitoring
device located in a helicopter [was] the approximate location of the
signal . . . picked up again about one hour later.” Id., at 278.

