(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ASTRA USA, INC., ET AL. v. SANTA CLARA COUNTY, 

CALIFORNIA 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–1273. Argued January 19, 2011—Decided March 29, 2011
Section 340B of the Public Health Services Act imposes ceilings on
prices drug manufacturers may charge for medications sold to speci
fied health care facilities (340B or covered entities), dominantly, local
providers of medical care for the poor. The §340B ceiling-price pro
gram (340B Program) is superintended by the Health Resources and
Services Administration (HRSA), part of the Department of Health
and Human Services (HHS). It is tied to the earlier-enacted, much
larger Medicaid Drug Rebate Program, under which manufacturers
gain Medicaid coverage for their drugs. To qualify for participation
in this program, a manufacturer must enter into a standardized
agreement with HHS undertaking to provide rebates to States on
their Medicaid drug purchases. The amount of the rebates depends
on a manufacturer’s “average” and “best” prices, as defined by legisla
tion and regulation. The 340B Program, like the Medicaid Rebate
Program, uses a form contract as an opt-in mechanism. The 340B
Program also draws on the larger scheme’s pricing methodology. In
the 340B Program’s contract, called the Pharmaceutical Pricing
Agreement (PPA), manufacturers agree to charge covered entities no
more than predetermined ceiling prices, derived from the “average”
and “best” prices and rebates calculated under the Medicaid Rebate
Program.
HRSA may require a manufacturer who overcharges a covered en
tity to reimburse that entity. HRSA may also terminate the manu
facturer’s PPA, which terminates as well the manufacturer’s eligibil
ity for Medicaid coverage of its drugs. Currently, HRSA handles
overcharge complaints through informal procedures, but the 2010 Pa
tient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) directs the Secre

