2

ASTRA USA, INC. v. SANTA CLARA COUNTY
Syllabus
tary to develop formal procedures. Once those procedures are in
place, HRSA will reach an “administrative resolution,” which will be
subject to judicial review under the Administrative Procedure Act
(APA). In addition to authorizing compensation awards to over
charged entities, the PPACA provides for the imposition of monetary
penalties payable to the Government.
Respondent Santa Clara County (County), operator of several 340B
entities, filed suit against Astra and eight other pharmaceutical com
panies, alleging that they were overcharging 340B entities in viola
tion of the PPAs. Asserting that 340B entities are the PPAs’ in
tended beneficiaries, the County sought compensatory damages for
breach of contract. The District Court dismissed the complaint, con
cluding that the PPAs conferred no enforceable rights on 340B enti
ties. Reversing, the Ninth Circuit held that, while 340B entities have
no right to sue under the statute, they could proceed against drug
manufacturers as third-party beneficiaries of the PPAs.

Held: Suits by 340B entities to enforce ceiling-price contracts running
between drug manufacturers and the Secretary of HHS are incom
patible with the statutory regime. As the County has conceded, cov
ered entities have no right of action under §340B itself. Congress
vested authority to oversee compliance with the 340B Program in
HHS and assigned no auxiliary enforcement role to covered entities.
Nonetheless, the County maintains that the PPAs are contracts en
forceable by covered entities as third-party beneficiaries. This argu
ment overlooks that the PPAs simply incorporate statutory obliga
tions and record the manufacturers’ agreement to abide by them.
The agreements have no negotiable terms. Like the Medicaid Rebate
Program agreements, the PPAs provide the means by which drug
manufacturers opt into the statutory scheme. A third-party suit to
enforce an HHS-drug manufacturer agreement, therefore, is in es
sence a suit to enforce the statute itself. Telling in this regard, the
County based its suit on allegations that the manufacturers charged
more than the §340B ceiling price, not that they violated an inde
pendent substantive obligation arising from the PPAs.
The Ninth Circuit reasoned that suits like the County’s would
spread the enforcement burden instead of placing it entirely on the
Government. But spreading the enforcement burden is hardly what
Congress contemplated when it made HHS administrator of the in
terdependent Medicaid Rebate Program and 340B Program. Suits by
340B entities would undermine the agency’s efforts to administer
these two programs harmoniously and uniformly. Notably, the Medi
caid Rebate Program’s statute prohibits HHS from disclosing pricing
information that could reveal the prices a manufacturer charges for
its drugs. Had Congress meant to leave open the prospect of third

