(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

RADLAX GATEWAY HOTEL, LLC, ET AL. v. 

AMALGAMATED BANK

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 11–166.

Argued April 23, 2012—Decided May 29, 2012

To finance the purchase of a commercial property and associated renovation and construction costs, petitioners (debtors) obtained a secured loan from an investment fund, for which respondent (Bank)
serves as trustee. The debtors ultimately became insolvent, and
sought relief under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code. Pursuant
to 11 U. S. C. §1129(b)(2)(A), the debtors sought to confirm a
“cramdown” bankruptcy plan over the Bank’s objection. That plan
proposed selling substantially all of the debtors’ property at an auction, and using the sale proceeds to repay the Bank. Under the debtors’ proposed auction procedures, the Bank would not be permitted to
bid for the property using the debt it is owed to offset the purchase
price, a practice known as “credit-bidding.” The Bankruptcy Court
denied the debtors’ request, concluding that the auction procedures
did not comply with §1129(b)(2)(A)’s requirements for cramdown
plans. The Seventh Circuit affirmed, holding that §1129(b)(2)(A)
does not permit debtors to sell an encumbered asset free and clear of
a lien without permitting the lienholder to credit-bid.
Held: The debtors may not obtain confirmation of a Chapter 11
cramdown plan that provides for the sale of collateral free and clear
of the Bank’s lien, but does not permit the Bank to credit-bid at the
sale. Pp. 3–10.
(a) A Chapter 11 plan proposed over the objection of a “class of secured claims” must meet one of three requirements in order to be
deemed “fair and equitable,” and therefore confirmable. The secured
creditor may retain its lien on the property and receive deferred cash
payments, §1129(b)(2)(A)(i); the debtors may sell the property free
and clear of the lien, “subject to section 363(k)”—which permits the


2

RADLAX GATEWAY HOTEL, LLC v. AMALGAMATED BANK
Syllabus
creditor to credit-bid at the sale—and provide the creditor with a lien
on the sale proceeds, §1129(b)(2)(A)(ii); or the plan may provide the
secured creditor with the “indubitable equivalent” of its claim,
§1129(b)(2)(A)(iii).
Here, the debtors proposed to sell their property free and clear of
the Bank’s liens and repay the Bank with the sale proceeds, as contemplated by clause (ii). Because the debtors’ auction procedures do
not permit the Bank to credit-bid, however, the proposed sale cannot
satisfy the requirements of clause (ii). The debtors claim their plan
can instead satisfy clause (iii) by providing the Bank with the “indubitable equivalent” of its secured claim, in the form of cash generated
by the auction.
The debtors’ reading of §1129(b)(2)(A), under which clause (iii)
permits precisely what clause (ii) proscribes, is hyperliteral and contrary to common sense. “[I]t is a commonplace of statutory construction that the specific governs the general.” Morales v. Trans World
Airlines, Inc., 504 U. S. 374, 384. Here, where general and specific
authorizations exist side-by-side, the general/specific canon avoids
rendering superfluous a specific provision that is swallowed by the
general one. See D. Ginsberg & Sons, Inc. v. Popkin, 285 U. S. 204,
208. As applied to §1129(b)(2)(A), the canon provides that the “general language” of clause (iii), “although broad enough to include it,
will not be held to apply to a matter specifically dealt with” in clause
(ii). 285 U. S., at 208. Although the canon can be overcome by other
textual indications of statutory meaning, the debtors point to none
here. Pp. 3–8.
(b) None of the debtors’ objections to this approach is valid. Pp. 8–
9.

651 F. 3d 642, affirmed.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which all other
Members joined, except KENNEDY, J., who took no part in the decision of
the case.

