2

KAWASHIMA v. HOLDER
Syllabus
correct as to every material matter,” shall be guilty of a felony. Although the words “fraud” and “deceit” are absent from §7206(1) and
are not themselves formal elements of the crime, it does not follow
that Mr. Kawashima’s offense falls outside Clause (i). Clause (i) is not
limited to offenses that include fraud or deceit as formal elements.
Rather, it refers more broadly to offenses involving fraud or deceit―meaning offenses with elements that necessarily entail fraudulent or deceitful conduct. Mr. Kawashima’s conviction under §7206(1)
involved deceitful conduct in that he knowingly and willfully submitted a tax return that was false as to a material matter. Mrs. Kawashima was convicted of violating §7206(2), which declares that any
person who “[w]illfully aids or assists in . . . the preparation or
presentation . . . of a return . . . which is fraudulent or is false as to
any material matter” has committed a felony. She committed a felony involving deceit by knowingly and willfully assisting her husband’s filing of a materially false tax return. Pp. 3−6.
(b) The Kawashimas’ argument that Clause (i), when considered in
light of 8 U. S. C. §1101(a)(43)(M)(ii) (Clause (ii)), must be interpreted as being inapplicable to tax crimes is also rejected. Clause (i) defines “aggravated felony” to mean an offense that “involves fraud or
deceit in which the loss to the victim or victims exceeds $10,000.”
Clause (ii) defines “aggravated felony” as an offense that is “described
in section 7201 of title 26 (relating to tax evasion) in which the revenue loss to the Government exceeds $10,000.” Contrary to the Kawashimas’ claim, the difference in the clauses’ language—“revenue
loss to the Government” in Clause (ii) compared to “loss to the victim”
in Clause (i)—does not establish Congress’ intent to remove tax
crimes from the scope of Clause (i). By its plain language, Clause (i)
covers a broad class of offenses that involve fraud or deceit, and Congress’ decision to tailor Clause (ii)’s language to match the sole type
of offense it covers does not demonstrate that Congress intended to
implicitly circumscribe Clause (i)’s broad scope. Furthermore, interpreting Clause (i) to include tax crimes does not violate the presumption against superfluities. The specific inclusion of tax evasion in
Clause (ii) does not make it redundant to Clause (i) because the inclusion was intended to ensure that tax evasion pursuant to 26
U. S. C. §7201 was a deportable offense. Pp. 6−10.
(c) The United States Sentencing Guidelines’ separate treatment of
tax crimes and crimes involving fraud and deceit does not support the
Kawashimas’ contention that Congress did not intend to include tax
crimes within Clause (i). No evidence suggests that Congress considered the Guidelines when drafting 8 U. S. C. §1101(a)(43)(M). Moreover, the differences between §1101(a)(43)(M) and the Guidelines undercut any inference that Congress was incorporating the distinction

