6

KAWASHIMA v. HOLDER
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

statute of limitations was three years; for tax offenses that
involve defrauding the United States, however, the limitation period was six years. An averment of intent to defraud, the Court said in Scharton, would be “surplusage,”
for it would suffice “to plead and prove a wilful attempt to
evade or defeat.” 285 U. S., at 521.
Courts had limited Scharton to its statute of limitations context several decades before Congress enacted
§1101(a)(43)(M) in 1994. See Tseung Chu v. Cornell, 247
F. 2d 929, 936, n. 6 (CA9 1957) (distinguishing Scharton
and holding that tax evasion is a crime of moral turpitude
because it entails fraud); Lefkowitz, 334 F. 2d, at 265
(distinguishing Scharton and holding that tax evasion
necessarily involves fraud). Moreover, Congress, since
1954, has expressly prescribed a six-year limitation period
for tax evasion. See 26 U. S. C. §6531(2). In short, Scharton is a cryptic, thinly reasoned opinion, one that did not
influence subsequent federal-court description of the crime
of tax evasion. The suggestion that Congress may have
worried about Scharton when framing legislation over 60
years later is hardly credible.
The Court presents another reason, drawn from the
Government’s brief, why Congress may have treated tax
evasion discretely, while embracing tax crimes generally
within the Clause (i) category. Section 7201 covers both
evasion of assessment and evasion of payment. Imagine a
taxpayer who files a truthful return, then moves her assets to a place “beyond the reach of the Internal Revenue
Service.” Ante, at 10; see Brief for Respondent 34. The
Court acknowledges that evasion-of-payment cases almost
always “involve some affirmative acts of fraud or deceit.”
Ante, at 10. Still, there may be a rare case in which that is
not so. Rare, indeed; imaginary would be an apt characterization.
The Government conceded that, to its
knowledge, there have been no actual instances of indictments for tax evasion unaccompanied by any act of fraud

