8

KAWASHIMA v. HOLDER
Opinion of the Court

ernment are aggravated felonies. The Kawashimas assert
that, if Clause (i) applies to tax crimes, then qualifying
convictions for tax evasion under Clause (ii) would also
qualify as aggravated felonies under Clause (i), because
tax evasion is a crime involving fraud or deceit. To buttress this argument, the Kawashimas point to a body of
law providing that a conviction for tax evasion under
§7201 collaterally estops the convicted taxpayer from
contesting a civil penalty under 26 U. S. C. §6663(b) for
“underpayment . . . attributable to fraud.” See, e.g., Gray
v. Commissioner, 708 F. 2d 243, 246 (CA6 1983) (“Numerous federal courts have held that a conviction for federal
income tax evasion, either upon a plea of guilty, or upon
a jury verdict of guilt, conclusively establishes fraud in a
subsequent civil tax fraud proceeding through application
of the doctrine of collateral estoppel”). Therefore, according to the Kawashimas, if Clause (i) covers tax offenses,
then Clause (ii) is mere surplusage.
We disagree with the Kawashimas’ contention that the
specific mention of one type of tax crime in Clause (ii)
impliedly limits the scope of Clause (i)’s plain language,
which extends to any offense that “involves fraud or deceit.” We think it more likely that Congress specifically
included tax evasion offenses under 26 U. S. C. §7201 in
Clause (ii) to remove any doubt that tax evasion qualifies
as an aggravated felony.
Several considerations support this conclusion. Like
§§7206(1) and (2), §7201 does not, on its face, mention
fraud or deceit. Instead, §7201 simply provides that “[a]ny
person who willfully attempts in any manner to evade or
defeat any tax imposed by [the Internal Revenue Code] or
the payment thereof shall, in addition to other penalties
provided by law, be guilty of a felony.” Accordingly, neither fraud nor deceit is among the elements of a conviction
under §7201, which include: (1) willfulness; (2) the existence of a tax deficiency; and (3) an affirmative act consti-

