Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

III
Nothing in the Clean Water Act expressly precludes
judicial review under the APA or otherwise. But in de­
termining “[w]hether and to what extent a particular
statute precludes judicial review,” we do not look “only [to]
its express language.” Block v. Community Nutrition
Institute, 467 U. S. 340, 345 (1984). The APA, we have
said, creates a “presumption favoring judicial review of
administrative action,” but as with most presumptions,
this one “may be overcome by inferences of intent drawn
from the statutory scheme as a whole.” Id., at 349. The
Government offers several reasons why the statutory
scheme of the Clean Water Act precludes review.
The Government first points to 33 U. S. C. §1319(a)(3),
which provides that, when the EPA “finds that any person
is in violation” of certain portions of the Act, the agency
“shall issue an order requiring such person to comply
with [the Act], or . . . shall bring a civil action [to enforce
the Act].” The Government argues that, because Congress
gave the EPA the choice between a judicial proceeding and
an administrative action, it would undermine the Act to
allow judicial review of the latter. But that argument
rests on the question-begging premise that the relevant
difference between a compliance order and an enforcement
proceeding is that only the latter is subject to judicial
review. There are eminently sound reasons other than
insulation from judicial review why compliance orders
are useful. The Government itself suggests that they
“provid[e] a means of notifying recipients of potential vio­
lations and quickly resolving the issues through voluntary compliance.” Brief for Respondents 39. It is entirely
consistent with this function to allow judicial review when
the recipient does not choose “voluntary compliance.” The
Act does not guarantee the EPA that issuing a compliance
order will always be the most effective choice.
The Government also notes that compliance orders are

