Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

consumers. 467 U. S., at 345–348. Where a statute pro­
vides that particular agency action is reviewable at the
instance of one party, who must first exhaust administra­
tive remedies, the inference that it is not reviewable at the
instance of other parties, who are not subject to the admin­
istrative process, is strong. In United States v. Erika, Inc.,
456 U. S. 201 (1982), we held that the Medicare statute,
which expressly provided for judicial review of awards
under Part A, precluded review of awards under Part B.
Id., at 206–208. The strong parallel between the award
provisions in Part A and Part B of the Medicare statute
does not exist between the issuance of a compliance order
and the assessment of administrative penalties under the
Clean Water Act. And in United States v. Fausto, 484
U. S. 439 (1988), we held that the Civil Service Reform
Act, which expressly excluded certain “nonpreference”
employees from the statute’s review scheme, precluded
review at the instance of those employees in a separate
Claims Court action. Id., at 448–449. Here, there is no
suggestion that Congress has sought to exclude compli­
ance-order recipients from the Act’s review scheme; quite
to the contrary, the Government’s case is premised on the
notion that the Act’s primary review mechanisms are open
to the Sacketts.
Finally, the Government notes that Congress passed the
Clean Water Act in large part to respond to the inefficien­
cy of then-existing remedies for water pollution. Compli­
ance orders, as noted above, can obtain quick remediation
through voluntary compliance. The Government warns
that the EPA is less likely to use the orders if they are
subject to judicial review. That may be true—but it will be
true for all agency actions subjected to judicial review.
The APA’s presumption of judicial review is a repudiation
of the principle that efficiency of regulation conquers all.
And there is no reason to think that the Clean Water Act
was uniquely designed to enable the strong-arming of

