2

SACKETT v. EPA
ALITO, J., concurring

millions. In a nation that values due process, not to mention private property, such treatment is unthinkable.
The Court’s decision provides a modest measure of relief. At least, property owners like petitioners will have
the right to challenge the EPA’s jurisdictional determination under the Administrative Procedure Act. But the
combination of the uncertain reach of the Clean Water Act
and the draconian penalties imposed for the sort of violations alleged in this case still leaves most property owners
with little practical alternative but to dance to the EPA’s
tune.
Real relief requires Congress to do what it should have
done in the first place: provide a reasonably clear rule regarding the reach of the Clean Water Act. When Congress passed the Clean Water Act in 1972, it provided
that the Act covers “the waters of the United States.” 33
U. S. C. §1362(7). But Congress did not define what it
meant by “the waters of the United States”; the phrase
was not a term of art with a known meaning; and the
words themselves are hopelessly indeterminate. Unsurprisingly, the EPA and the Army Corps of Engineers interpreted the phrase as an essentially limitless grant of
authority. We rejected that boundless view, see Rapanos
v. United States, 547 U. S. 715, 732–739 (2006) (plurality
opinion); Solid Waste Agency of Northern Cook Cty. v.
Army Corps of Engineers, 531 U. S. 159, 167–174 (2001),
but the precise reach of the Act remains unclear. For 40
years, Congress has done nothing to resolve this critical
ambiguity, and the EPA has not seen fit to promulgate a
rule providing a clear and sufficiently limited definition of
the phrase. Instead, the agency has relied on informal
guidance. But far from providing clarity and predictability, the agency’s latest informal guidance advises property
owners that many jurisdictional determinations concerning wetlands can only be made on a case-by-case basis by
EPA field staff. See Brief for Competitive Enterprise

