(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SACKETT ET VIR v. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 

AGENCY ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–1062. Argued January 9, 2012—Decided March 21, 2012
The Clean Water Act prohibits “the discharge of any pollutant by any
person,” 33 U. S. C. §1311, without a permit, into “navigable waters,”
§1344. Upon determining that a violation has occurred, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) may either issue a compliance
order or initiate a civil enforcement action. §1319(a)(3). The resulting civil penalty may not “exceed [$37,500] per day for each violation.” §1319(d). The Government contends that the amount doubles
to $75,000 when the EPA prevails against a person who has been issued a compliance order but has failed to comply.
The Sacketts, petitioners here, received a compliance order from
the EPA, which stated that their residential lot contained navigable
waters and that their construction project violated the Act. The
Sacketts sought declarative and injunctive relief in the Federal District Court, contending that the compliance order was “arbitrary
[and] capricious” under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 5
U. S. C. §706(2)(A), and that it deprived them of due process in violation of the Fifth Amendment. The District Court dismissed the
claims for want of subject-matter jurisdiction. The Ninth Circuit affirmed, concluding that the Clean Water Act precluded preenforcement judicial review of compliance orders and that such preclusion did not violate due process.
Held: The Sacketts may bring a civil action under the APA to challenge
the issuance of the EPA’s order. Pp. 4–10.
(a) The APA provides for judicial review of “final agency action for
which there is no other adequate remedy in a court.” 5 U. S. C. §704.
The compliance order here has all the hallmarks of APA finality.
Through it, the EPA “determined” “rights or obligations,” Bennett v.

