8

SACKETT v. EPA
Opinion of the Court

not self-executing, but must be enforced by the agency in
a plenary judicial action. It suggests that Congress there­
fore viewed a compliance order “as a step in the delibera­
tive process[,] . . . rather than as a coercive sanction that
itself must be subject to judicial review.” Id., at 38. But
the APA provides for judicial review of all final agency
actions, not just those that impose a self-executing sanc­
tion. And it is hard for the Government to defend its claim
that the issuance of the compliance order was just “a step
in the deliberative process” when the agency rejected the
Sacketts’ attempt to obtain a hearing and when the next
step will either be taken by the Sacketts (if they comply
with the order) or will involve judicial, not administrative,
deliberation (if the EPA brings an enforcement action). As
the text (and indeed the very name) of the compliance
order makes clear, the EPA’s “deliberation” over whether
the Sacketts are in violation of the Act is at an end; the
agency may still have to deliberate over whether it is
confident enough about this conclusion to initiate litiga­
tion, but that is a separate subject.
The Government further urges us to consider that Con­
gress expressly provided for prompt judicial review, on the
administrative record, when the EPA assesses administra­
tive penalties after a hearing, see §1319(g)(8), but did not
expressly provide for review of compliance orders. But if
the express provision of judicial review in one section of
a long and complicated statute were alone enough to overcome the APA’s presumption of reviewability for all final
agency action, it would not be much of a presumption at
all.
The cases on which the Government relies simply are
not analogous. In Block v. Community Nutrition Institute,
supra, we held that the Agricultural Marketing Agree­
ment Act of 1937, which expressly allowed milk handlers
to obtain judicial review of milk market orders, precluded
review of milk market orders in suits brought by milk

