6

SACKETT v. EPA
Opinion of the Court

Bennett, supra, at 178 (quoting Chicago & Southern Air
Lines, Inc. v. Waterman S. S. Corp., 333 U. S. 103, 113
(1948)). As the Sacketts learned when they unsuccessfully
sought a hearing, the “Findings and Conclusions” that the
compliance order contained were not subject to further
agency review. The Government resists this conclusion,
pointing to a portion of the order that invited the Sacketts
to “engage in informal discussion of the terms and re­
quirements” of the order with the EPA and to inform the
agency of “any allegations [t]herein which [they] believe[d]
to be inaccurate.” App. 22–23, ¶2.11. But that confers no
entitlement to further agency review. The mere possibil­
ity that an agency might reconsider in light of “informal
discussion” and invited contentions of inaccuracy does not
suffice to make an otherwise final agency action nonfinal.
The APA’s judicial review provision also requires that
the person seeking APA review of final agency action have
“no other adequate remedy in a court,” 5 U. S. C. §704. In
Clean Water Act enforcement cases, judicial review ordi­
narily comes by way of a civil action brought by the EPA
under 33 U. S. C. §1319. But the Sacketts cannot initiate
that process, and each day they wait for the agency to drop
the hammer, they accrue, by the Government’s telling, an
additional $75,000 in potential liability. The other possi­
ble route to judicial review—applying to the Corps of
Engineers for a permit and then filing suit under the APA
if a permit is denied—will not serve either. The remedy
for denial of action that might be sought from one agency
does not ordinarily provide an “adequate remedy” for action already taken by another agency. The Government,
to its credit, does not seriously contend that other availa­
ble remedies alone foreclose review under §704. Instead,
the Government relies on §701(a)(1) of the APA, which
excludes APA review “to the extent that [other] statutes
preclude judicial review.” The Clean Water Act, it says, is
such a statute.

