(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CHASE BANK USA, N. A. v. MCCOY, INDIVIDUALLY AND
ON BEHALF OF ALL OTHERS SIMILARLY SITUATED
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–329.

Argued December 8, 2010—Decided January 24, 2011

Regulation Z—promulgated by the Federal Reserve Board (Board) pur
suant to its authority under the Truth in Lending Act—requires
credit card issuers to disclose certain information to cardholders. The
version of the regulation in effect at the time this dispute arose
obliges issuers to provide to cardholders an “[i]nitial disclosure
statement,” 12 CFR §226.6, specifying “each periodic rate that may
be used to compute the finance charge,” §226.6(a)(2). It also imposes
“[s]ubsequent disclosure requirements,” §226.9, including notice to
cardholders “[w]henever any term required to be disclosed under
§226.6 is changed,” §226.9(c)(1). When “a periodic rate or other fi
nance charge is increased because of the consumer’s delinquency or
default,” notice must be given “before the effective date of the
change.” Ibid.
At the time respondent McCoy filed suit, he was the holder of a
credit card issued by petitioner Chase Bank. The cardholder agree
ment provided, in relevant part, that McCoy was eligible for “Pre
ferred rates” as long as he met certain conditions. If any of those
conditions were not met, Chase reserved the right to raise the rate,
up to a pre-set maximum, and to apply the change to both existing
and new balances. McCoy alleges that Chase increased his interest
rate due to his delinquency or default and applied that increase ret
roactively, and that this action violated Regulation Z because Chase
did not notify him of the increase until after it had taken effect. The
District Court dismissed his complaint, holding that because the in
crease did not constitute a “change in terms” under §226.9(c), Chase
was not required to notify him of the increase before implementing it.
The Ninth Circuit reversed in relevant part, holding that Regulation


2

CHASE BANK USA, N. A. v. MCCOY
Syllabus
Z requires issuers to provide notice of an interest-rate increase prior
to its effective date.

Held: At the time of the transactions at issue, Regulation Z did not re
quire Chase to provide McCoy with a change-in-terms notice before
implementing the agreement term allowing it to raise his interest
rate, up to a pre-set maximum, following delinquency or default.
Pp. 7–19.
(a) This case requires the Court to determine the meaning of a
regulation promulgated by the Board under its statutory authority.
However, Regulation Z’s text is unclear with respect to the crucial in
terpretive question at issue: whether a change to an interest rate,
pursuant to previously-disclosed contractual provision, constitutes a
change to a “term required to be disclosed under §226.6” requiring a
subsequent disclosure under §226.9(c)(1). Because of this ambiguity,
the Court must look to the Board’s own interpretation of the regula
tion for guidance in deciding this case. Pp. 7–12.
(b) The Board has made clear in its amicus brief to this Court that,
in its view, Chase was not required to give McCoy notice of the inter
est rate increase under the applicable version of Regulation Z. This
Court defers to an agency’s interpretation of its own regulation, ad
vanced in a legal brief, unless that interpretation is “plainly errone
ous or inconsistent with the regulation.” Auer v. Robbins, 519 U. S.
452, 461 (internal quotation marks omitted). In Auer, the Court de
ferred to the Secretary of Labor’s interpretation of his own regula
tion, presented in an amicus brief submitted by the agency at the
Court’s invitation. The Court held that the fact that the interpreta
tion came in a legal brief did not, “in the circumstances of th[at] case,
make it unworthy of deference.” Id., at 462. The interpretation was
“in no sense a post hoc rationalization advanced by an agency seeking
to defend past agency action against attack,” ibid. (internal quotation
marks and alteration omitted), and there was “no reason to suspect
that the interpretation [did] not reflect the agency’s fair and consid
ered judgment on the matter in question,” ibid. The brief submitted
by the Board here, at the Court’s invitation, is no different. As in
Auer, there is no reason to believe that the Board’s interpretation is a
“post hoc rationalization” taken as a litigation position, for the Board
is not a party to this case. And its interpretation is neither “plainly
erroneous” nor “inconsistent with” the indeterminate text of Regula
tion Z. Thus, there is no reason to suspect that the Board’s position
in its amicus brief reflects anything other than its fair and considered
judgment as to what the regulation required at the time this dispute
arose. That Congress and the Board may currently hold a different
view does not mean that deference is not warranted to the Board’s
understanding of what the applicable version of Regulation Z re


Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
quired. Under Auer, therefore, it is clear that deference to the inter
pretation in the agency amicus brief is warranted. Pp. 12–16.
(c) McCoy errs in arguing that deference to a legal brief is inappro
priate because the interpretation of Regulation Z in the Official Staff
Commentary commands a different result. While Commentary
promulgated by the Board as an interpretation of Regulation Z may
warrant deference as a general matter, the Commentary explaining
the requirements at issue in this case largely replicates the ambigu
ity present in the regulatory text, and therefore offers no reason to
disregard the interpretation advanced in the Board’s amicus brief.
Pp. 16–19.
559 F. 3d 963, reversed and remanded.
SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

