(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BOROUGH OF DURYEA, PENNSYLVANIA, ET AL. v. 

GUARNIERI 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 09–1476. Argued March 22, 2011—Decided June 20, 2011
After petitioner borough fired respondent Guarnieri as its police chief,
he filed a union grievance that led to his reinstatement. When the
borough council later issued directives instructing Guarnieri how to
perform his duties, he filed a second grievance, and an arbitrator or
dered that some of the directives be modified or withdrawn. Guarni
eri then filed this suit under 42 U. S. C. §1983, alleging that the di
rectives were issued in retaliation for the filing of his first grievance,
thereby violating his First Amendment “right . . . to petition the Gov
ernment for a redress of grievances”; he later amended his complaint
to allege that the council also violated the Petition Clause by denying
his request for overtime pay in retaliation for his having filed the
§1983 suit. The District Court instructed the jury, inter alia, that the
suit and the grievances were constitutionally protected activity, and
the jury found for Guarnieri. Affirming the compensatory damages
award, the Third Circuit held that a public employee who has peti
tioned the government through a formal mechanism such as the fil
ing of a lawsuit or grievance is protected under the Petition Clause
from retaliation for that activity, even if the petition concerns a mat
ter of solely private concern. In so ruling, the court rejected the view
of every other Circuit to have considered the issue that, to be pro
tected, the petition must address a matter of public concern.
Held: A government employer’s allegedly retaliatory actions against an
employee do not give rise to liability under the Petition Clause unless
the employee’s petition relates to a matter of public concern. The
Third Circuit’s conclusion that the public concern test does not limit
public employees’ Petition Clause claims is incorrect. Pp. 4–19.
(a) A public employee suing his employer under the First Amend


2

BOROUGH OF DURYEA v. GUARNIERI
Syllabus
ment’s Speech Clause must show that he spoke as a citizen on a mat
ter of public concern. Connick v. Myers, 461 U. S. 138, 147. Even
where the employee makes that showing, however, courts balance his
employee’s right to engage in speech against the government’s inter
est in promoting the efficiency and effectiveness of the public services
it performs through its employees. Pickering v. Board of Ed. of
Township High School Dist. 205, Will Cty., 391 U. S. 563, 568. Al
though cases might arise in which special Petition Clause concerns
would require a distinct analysis, public employees’ retaliation claims
do not call for this divergence. The close connection between the
rights of speech and petition has led Courts of Appeals other than the
Third Circuit to apply the public concern test to public employees’ Pe
tition Clause claims. This approach is justified by the substantial
common ground in the definition and delineation of these rights. Pp.
4–8.
(b) The substantial government interests that justify a cautious
and restrained approach to protecting public employees’ speech are
just as relevant in Petition Clause cases. A petition, no less than
speech, can interfere with government’s efficient and effective opera
tion by, e.g., seeking results that “contravene governmental policies
or impair the proper performance of governmental functions,” Gar
cetti v. Ceballos, 547 U. S. 410, 419. A petition taking the form of a
lawsuit against the government employer may be particularly disrup
tive, consuming public officials’ time and attention, burdening their
exercise of legitimate authority, and blurring the lines of accountabil
ity between them and the public. Here, for example, Guarnieri’s at
torney invited the jury to review myriad details of government deci
sionmaking. It is precisely to avoid this sort of intrusion into internal
governmental affairs that this Court has held that, “while the First
Amendment invests public employees with certain rights, it does not
empower them to ‘constitutionalize the employee grievance.’ ” Id., at
420. Interpreting the Petition Clause to apply even where matters of
public concern are not involved would be unnecessary, or even dis
ruptive, when there is already protection for the public employees’
rights to file grievances and litigate. Adopting a different rule for Pe
tition Clause claims would provide a ready means for public employ
ees to circumvent the public concern test’s protections and aggravate
potential harm to the government’s interests by compounding the
costs of complying with the Constitution. Pp. 8–13.
(c) Guarnieri’s claim that applying the public concern test to the
Petition Clause would be inappropriate in light of the private nature
of many petitions for redress lacks merit. Although the Clause un
doubtedly has force and application in the context of a personal
grievance addressed to the government, petitions to the government


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
assume an added dimension when they seek to advance political, so
cial, or other ideas of interest to the community as a whole. The
Clause’s history reveals the frequent use of petitions to address a
wide range of political, social, and other matters of great public im
port and interest. Pp. 13–17.
(d) The framework used to govern public employees’ Speech Clause
claims, when applied to the Petition Clause, will protect both the
government’s interests and the employee’s First Amendment right. If
a public employee petitions as an employee on a matter of purely pri
vate concern, his First Amendment interest must give way, as it does
in speech cases. San Diego v. Roe, 543 U. S. 77, 82–83. If he peti
tions as a citizen on a matter of public concern, his First Amendment
interest must be balanced against the government’s countervailing
interest in the effective and efficient management of its internal af
fairs. Pickering, supra, at 568. If that balance favors the public em
ployee, the First Amendment claim will be sustained. If the balance
favors the employer, the employee’s First Amendment claim will fail
even though the petition is on a matter of public concern. As under
the Speech Clause, whether a petition relates to a matter of public
concern will depend on its “content, form, and context . . . , as re
vealed by the whole record.” Connick, supra, at 147–148, n. 7. The
forum in which a petition is lodged will also be relevant. See Snyder
v. Phelps, 562 U. S. ___, ___. A petition filed with a government em
ployer using an internal grievance procedure in many cases will not
seek to communicate to the public or to advance a political or social
point of view beyond the employment context. Pp. 17–18.
(e) Absent full briefs by the parties, the Court need not consider
how the foregoing framework would apply to this case. P. 19.
364 Fed. Appx. 749, vacated and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined. THOMAS, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment.
SCALIA, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment in part and dis
senting in part.

