Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
also outside the Commission’s competence and expertise, and the
statutory questions involved do not require technical considerations
of agency policy. Pp. 7–10.
2. The dual for-cause limitations on the removal of Board members
contravene the Constitution’s separation of powers. Pp. 10–27.
(a) The Constitution provides that “[t]he executive Power shall be
vested in a President of the United States of America.” Art. II, §1,
cl. 1. Since 1789, the Constitution has been understood to empower
the President to keep executive officers accountable—by removing
them from office, if necessary. See generally Myers v. United States,
272 U. S. 52. This Court has determined that this authority is not
without limit. In Humphrey’s Executor, supra, this Court held that
Congress can, under certain circumstances, create independent agen
cies run by principal officers appointed by the President, whom the
President may not remove at will but only for good cause. And in
United States v. Perkins, 116 U. S. 483, and Morrison v. Olson, 487
U. S. 654, the Court sustained similar restrictions on the power of
principal executive officers—themselves responsible to the Presi
dent—to remove their own inferiors. However, this Court has not
addressed the consequences of more than one level of good-cause ten
ure. Pp. 10–14.
(b) Where this Court has upheld limited restrictions on the
President’s removal power, only one level of protected tenure sepa
rated the President from an officer exercising executive power. The
President—or a subordinate he could remove at will—decided
whether the officer’s conduct merited removal under the good-cause
standard. Here, the Act not only protects Board members from re
moval except for good cause, but withdraws from the President any
decision on whether that good cause exists. That decision is vested in
other tenured officers—the Commissioners—who are not subject to
the President’s direct control. Because the Commission cannot re
move a Board member at will, the President cannot hold the Com
mission fully accountable for the Board’s conduct. He can only review
the Commissioner’s determination of whether the Act’s rigorous good
cause standard is met. And if the President disagrees with that de
termination, he is powerless to intervene—unless the determination
is so unreasonable as to constitute “ ‘inefficiency, neglect of duty, or
malfeasance in office.’ ” Humphrey’s Executor, supra, at 620.
This arrangement contradicts Article II’s vesting of the executive
power in the President. Without the ability to oversee the Board, or
to attribute the Board’s failings to those whom he can oversee, the
President is no longer the judge of the Board’s conduct. He can nei
ther ensure that the laws are faithfully executed, nor be held respon
sible for a Board member’s breach of faith. If this dispersion of re

