32

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


tions are litigated in the lower courts because the Court’s
holding concerns only “the conditions under which th[e]se
officers might some day be removed.” Ante, at 27. But
this case was not brought by federal officials challenging
their potential removal. It was brought by private indi
viduals who were subject to regulation “ ‘here-and-now’ ”
and who “object to the” very “existence” of the regulators
themselves. Ante, at 33, 8 (emphasis added). And those
private individuals have prevailed. Thus, any person
similarly regulated by a federal official who is potentially
subject to the Court’s amorphous new rule will be able to
bring an “implied private right of action directly under the
Constitution” “seeking . . . a declaratory judgment that”
the official’s actions are “unconstitutional and an injunc
tion preventing the” official “from exercising [his] powers.”
Ante, at 10, n. 2, 6; cf., e.g., Legal Services Corporation v.
Velazquez, 531 U. S. 533, 546 (2001) (affirming grant of
preliminary injunction to cure, inter alia, a separation-of
powers violation); Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co., 343 U. S.
579 (same). Such a plaintiff need not even first exhaust
his administrative remedies. Ante, at 7–10.
Nor is it clear that courts will always be able to cure
such a constitutional defect merely by severing an offend
ing removal provision. For a court’s “ability to devise
[such] a judicial remedy . . . often depends on how clearly”
the “background constitutional rules at issue” have been
“articulated”; severance will be unavailable “in a murky
constitutional context,” which is precisely the context that
the Court’s new rule creates. Ayotte v. Planned Parent
hood of Northern New Eng., 546 U. S. 320, 329, 330 (2006).
Moreover, “the touchstone” of the severability analysis “is
legislative intent,” id., at 330, and Congress has repeat
edly expressed its judgment “over the last century that it
is in the best interest of the country, indeed essential, that
federal service should depend upon meritorious perform
ance rather than political service,” Civil Service Comm’n,

