6

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Opinion of the Court 


began a formal investigation. Beckstead and Watts and
the Free Enterprise Fund, a nonprofit organization of
which the firm is a member, then sued the Board and its
members, seeking (among other things) a declaratory
judgment that the Board is unconstitutional and an in­
junction preventing the Board from exercising its powers.
App. 71.
Before the District Court, petitioners argued that the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act contravened the separation of powers
by conferring wide-ranging executive power on Board
members without subjecting them to Presidential control.
Id., at 67–68. Petitioners also challenged the Act under
the Appointments Clause, which requires “Officers of the
United States” to be appointed by the President with the
Senate’s advice and consent. Art. II, §2, cl. 2. The Clause
provides an exception for “inferior Officers,” whose ap­
pointment Congress may choose to vest “in the President
alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Depart­
ments.” Ibid. Because the Board is appointed by the SEC,
petitioners argued that (1) Board members are not “infe­
rior Officers” who may be appointed by “Heads of Depart­
ments”; (2) even if they are, the Commission is not a “De­
partmen[t]”; and (3) even if it is, the several
Commissioners (as opposed to the Chairman) are not its
“Hea[d].” See App. 68–70. The United States intervened
to defend the Act’s constitutionality. Both sides moved for
summary judgment; the District Court determined that it
had jurisdiction and granted summary judgment to re­
spondents. App. to Pet. for Cert. 110a–117a.
A divided Court of Appeals affirmed. 537 F. 3d 667
(CADC 2008). It agreed that the District Court had juris­
diction over petitioners’ claims. Id., at 671. On the mer­
its, the Court of Appeals recognized that the removal issue
was “a question of first impression,” as neither that court
nor this one “ha[d] considered a situation where a restric­
tion on removal passes through two levels of control.” Id.,

