Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of the Court

gress’ ability to assert influence),” and indeed whether
particular unelected officials support or “resist” the Presi­
dent’s policies. Post, at 11, 13 (emphasis deleted). The
Framers did not rest our liberties on such bureaucratic
minutiae. As we said in Bowsher, supra, at 730, “[t]he
separated powers of our Government cannot be permitted
to turn on judicial assessment of whether an officer exer­
cising executive power is on good terms with Congress.”
In fact, the multilevel protection that the dissent en­
dorses “provides a blueprint for extensive expansion of the
legislative power.” MWAA, supra, at 277. In a system of
checks and balances, “[p]ower abhors a vacuum,” and one
branch’s handicap is another’s strength. 537 F. 3d, at 695,
n. 4 (Kavanaugh, J., dissenting) (internal quotation marks
omitted). “Even when a branch does not arrogate power to
itself,” therefore, it must not “impair another in the per­
formance of its constitutional duties.” Loving v. United
States, 517 U. S. 748, 757 (1996).5 Congress has plenary
control over the salary, duties, and even existence of ex­
ecutive offices. Only Presidential oversight can counter its
influence. That is why the Constitution vests certain
powers in the President that “the Legislature has no right
to diminish or modify.” 1 Annals of Cong., at 463 (J.
Madison).6
——————
5 The dissent quotes Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 138 (1976) (per
curiam), for the proposition that Congress has “broad authority to
‘create’ governmental ‘ “offices” ’ and to structure those offices ‘as it
chooses.’ ” Post, at 2. The Buckley Court put “ ‘offices’ ” in quotes
because it was actually describing legislative positions that are not
really offices at all (at least not under Article II). That is why the very
next sentence of Buckley said, “But Congress’ power . . . is inevitably
bounded by the express language” of the Constitution. 424 U. S., at
138–139 (emphasis added).
6 The dissent attributes to Madison a belief that some executive offi­
cers, such as the Comptroller, could be made independent of the Presi­
dent. See post, at 17–18. But Madison’s actual proposal, consistent
with his view of the Constitution, was that the Comptroller hold office

