(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND ET AL. v. PUBLIC COM-

PANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT
No. 08–861.

Argued December 7, 2009—Decided June 28, 2010

Respondent, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, was
created as part of a series of accounting reforms in the SarbanesOxley Act of 2002. The Board is composed of five members appointed
by the Securities and Exchange Commission. It was modeled on pri
vate self-regulatory organizations in the securities industry—such as
the New York Stock Exchange—that investigate and discipline their
own members subject to Commission oversight. Unlike these organi
zations, the Board is a Government-created entity with expansive
powers to govern an entire industry. Every accounting firm that au
dits public companies under the securities laws must register with
the Board, pay it an annual fee, and comply with its rules and over
sight. The Board may inspect registered firms, initiate formal inves
tigations, and issue severe sanctions in its disciplinary proceedings.
The parties agree that the Board is “part of the Government” for con
stitutional purposes, Lebron v. National Railroad Passenger Corpora
tion, 513 U. S. 374, 397, and that its members are “ ‘Officers of the
United States’ ” who “exercis[e] significant authority pursuant to the
laws of the United States,” Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 125–126.
While the SEC has oversight of the Board, it cannot remove Board
members at will, but only “for good cause shown,” “in accordance
with” specified procedures. §§7211(e)(6), 7217(d)(3). The parties also
agree that the Commissioners, in turn, cannot themselves be re
moved by the President except for “ ‘inefficiency, neglect of duty, or
malfeasance in office.’ ” Humphrey’s Executor v. United States, 295
U. S. 602, 620.
The Board inspected petitioner accounting firm, released a report
critical of its auditing procedures, and began a formal investigation.

