24

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


supra, at 17–18. What, then, are we to make of the
Court’s potential exception? And would such an exception
apply to an administrative law judge who also has impor
tant administrative duties beyond pure adjudication? See,
e.g., 8 CFR §1003.9, 34 CFR §81.4 (2009). The Court
elsewhere suggests that its rule may be limited to removal
statutes that provide for “judicial review of a[n] effort to
remove” an official for cause. Ante, at 22; ante, at 25. But
we have previously stated that all officers protected by a
for-cause removal provision and later subject to termina
tion are entitled to “notice and [a] hearing” in the “courts,”
as without such review “the appointing power” otherwise
“could remove at pleasure or for such cause as [only] it
deemed sufficient.” Reagan v. United States, 182 U. S.
419, 425 (1901); Shurtleff, 189 U. S., at 314; cf. Hum
phrey’s Executor, supra (entertaining civil suit challenging
removal). But cf. Bowsher, supra, at 729. What weight,
then, should be given to this hint of an exception?
The Court further seems to suggest that its holding may
not apply to inferior officers who have a different relation
ship to their appointing agents than the relationship
between the Commission and the Board. See ante, at 22,
24–26. But the only characteristic of the “relationship”
between the Commission and the Board that the Court
apparently deems relevant is that the relationship in
cludes two layers of for-cause removal. See, e.g., ante, at
23 (“Broad power over Board functions is not equivalent to
the power to remove Board members”). Why then would
any different relationship that also includes two layers of
for-cause removal survive where this one has not? Cf.
Part II–A, supra (describing the Commission’s near abso
lute control over the Board). In a word, what differences
are relevant? If the Court means to state that its holding
in fact applies only where Congress has “enacted an un
usually high standard” of for-cause removal—and does not
otherwise render two layers of “ ‘ordinary’ ” for-cause re

