16

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Opinion of the Court 


Indeed, if allowed to stand, this dispersion of responsi­
bility could be multiplied. If Congress can shelter the
bureaucracy behind two layers of good-cause tenure, why
not a third? At oral argument, the Government was un­
willing to concede that even five layers between the Presi­
dent and the Board would be too many. Tr. of Oral Arg.
47–48. The officers of such an agency—safely encased
within a Matryoshka doll of tenure protections—would be
immune from Presidential oversight, even as they exer­
cised power in the people’s name.
Perhaps an individual President might find advantages
in tying his own hands. But the separation of powers does
not depend on the views of individual Presidents, see
Freytag v. Commissioner, 501 U. S. 868, 879–880 (1991),
nor on whether “the encroached-upon branch approves the
encroachment,” New York v. United States, 505 U. S. 144,
182 (1992). The President can always choose to restrain
himself in his dealings with subordinates. He cannot,
however, choose to bind his successors by diminishing
their powers, nor can he escape responsibility for his
choices by pretending that they are not his own.
The diffusion of power carries with it a diffusion of
accountability. The people do not vote for the “Officers of
the United States.” Art. II, §2, cl. 2. They instead look to
the President to guide the “assistants or deputies . . .
subject to his superintendence.” The Federalist No. 72, p.
——————
President’s ability to remove a Board member the Commission wants to
retain. Without a second layer of protection, the Commission has no
excuse for retaining an officer who is not faithfully executing the law.
With the second layer in place, the Commission can shield its decision
from Presidential review by finding that good cause is absent—a
finding that, given the Commission’s own protected tenure, the Presi­
dent cannot easily overturn. The dissent describes this conflict merely
as one of four possible “scenarios,” see post, at 12–13, but it is the
central issue in this case: The second layer matters precisely when the
President finds it necessary to have a subordinate officer removed, and
a statute prevents him from doing so.

