Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

29

BREYER, J., dissenting

executive directors of the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission and the Federal Trade Commission, as well
as the general counsels of the Chemical Safety Board, the
Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission, and
the National Mediation Board.
This list is a conservative estimate because it consists
only of career appointees in the Senior Executive Service
(SES), see 5 U. S. C. §§2101a, 3132(a)(2), a group of high
ranking officials distinct from the “competitive service,” see
§2101(a)(1)(C), who “serve in the key positions just below
the top Presidential appointees,” Office of Personnel Man
agement, About the Senior Executive Service, online at
http://www.opm.gov/ses/about_ses/index.asp; §2102(a)(1)(C),
and who are, without exception, subject to “removal” only for
cause. §§7542–7543; see also §2302(a)(2) (substantially
limiting conditions under which “a career appointee in the
Senior Executive Service” may be “transfer[red], or reas
sign[ed]”). SES officials include, for example, the Director
of the Bureau of Prisons, the Director of the National Drug
Intelligence Center, and the Director of the Office of In
ternational Monetary Policy in the Treasury Department.
See Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Gov
ernment Affairs, United States Government Policy and
Supporting Positions (2008), pp. 99, 103, 129 (hereinafter
Plum Book). And by virtually any definition, essentially
all SES officials qualify as “inferior officers,” for their
duties, as defined by statute, require them to “direc[t] the
work of an organizational unit,” carry out high-level
managerial functions, or “otherwise exercis[e] important
policy-making, policy-determining, or other executive func
tions.” §3132(a)(2) (emphasis added). Cf. ante, at 2 (de
scribing an “inferior officer” as someone who “determines
the policy and enforces the laws of the United States”);
ante, at 26 (acknowledging that career SES appointees in
independent agencies may be rendered unconstitutional in
future cases). Is the SES exempt from today’s rule or is it

