36

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


to guess which department heads will be deemed by the
majority to be subject to for-cause removal notwithstand
ing statutes containing no such provision. If any agency
deemed “independent” will be similarly treated, the scope
of the majority’s holding is even broader still. See Appen
dix D, infra (listing agencies potentially affected).
The Court then, by assumption, reads into the statute
books a “for cause removal” phrase that does not appear in
the relevant statute and which Congress probably did not
intend to write. And it does so in order to strike down, not
to uphold, another statute. This is not a statutory con
struction that seeks to avoid a constitutional question, but
its opposite. See Ashwander v. TVA, 297 U. S. 288, 347
(1936) (Brandeis, J., concurring) (“It is not the habit of the
Court to decide questions of a constitutional nature unless
absolutely necessary to a decision of the case” (internal
quotation marks omitted)); NLRB v. Catholic Bishop of
Chicago, 440 U. S. 490, 500 (1979) (“[A]n Act of Congress
ought not to be construed to violate the Constitution if any
other possible construction remains available”).
I do not need to decide whether the Commissioners are
in fact removable only “for cause” because I would uphold
the Accounting Board’s removal provision as constitu
tional regardless. But were that not so, a determination
that the silent SEC statute means no more than it says
would properly avoid the determination of unconstitution
ality that the Court now makes.
*
*
*
In my view the Court’s decision is wrong—very wrong.
As Parts II–A, II–B, and II–C of this opinion make clear, if
the Court were to look to the proper functional and contex
tual considerations, it would find the Accounting Board
provision constitutional. As Part II–D shows, insofar as
the Court instead tries to create a bright-line rule, it fails
to do so. Its rule of decision is both imprecise and overly

