Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

Opinion of the Court

cause,” and rigorous procedures that must be followed
prior to removal.
The parties have identified only a handful of isolated
positions in which inferior officers might be protected by
two levels of good-cause tenure. See, e.g., PCAOB Brief
43. 	As Judge Kavanaugh noted in dissent below:
“Perhaps the most telling indication of the severe con­
stitutional problem with the PCAOB is the lack of his­
torical precedent for this entity. Neither the majority
opinion nor the PCAOB nor the United States as in­
tervenor has located any historical analogues for this
novel structure. They have not identified any inde­
pendent agency other than the PCAOB that is ap­
pointed by and removable only for cause by another
independent agency.” 537 F. 3d, at 669.
The dissent here suggests that other such positions
might exist, and complains that we do not resolve their
status in this opinion. Post, at 23–31. The dissent itself,
however, stresses the very size and variety of the Federal
Government, see post, at 7–8, and those features discour­
age general pronouncements on matters neither briefed
nor argued here. In any event, the dissent fails to support
its premonitions of doom; none of the positions it identifies
are similarly situated to the Board. See post, at 28–31.
For example, many civil servants within independent
agencies would not qualify as “Officers of the United
States,” who “exercis[e] significant authority pursuant to
the laws of the United States,” Buckley, 424 U. S., at 126.9
The parties here concede that Board members are execu­
tive “Officers,” as that term is used in the Constitution.
——————
9 One “may be an agent or employé working for the government and
paid by it, as nine-tenths of the persons rendering service to the gov­
ernment undoubtedly are, without thereby becoming its office[r].”
United States v. Germaine, 99 U. S. 508, 509 (1879). The applicable
proportion has of course increased dramatically since 1879.

