20

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Opinion of the Court 


The Framers created a structure in which “[a] depend­
ence on the people” would be the “primary controul on the
government.” The Federalist No. 51, at 349 (J. Madison).
That dependence is maintained, not just by “parchment
barriers,” id., No. 48, at 333 (same), but by letting
“[a]mbition . . . counteract ambition,” giving each branch
“the necessary constitutional means, and personal mo­
tives, to resist encroachments of the others,” id., No. 51, at
349. A key “constitutional means” vested in the Presi­
dent—perhaps the key means—was “the power of appoint­
ing, overseeing, and controlling those who execute the
laws.” 1 Annals of Cong., at 463. And while a government
of “opposite and rival interests” may sometimes inhibit the
smooth functioning of administration, The Federalist No.
51, at 349, “[t]he Framers recognized that, in the long
term, structural protections against abuse of power were
critical to preserving liberty.” Bowsher, supra, at 730.
Calls to abandon those protections in light of “the era’s
perceived necessity,” New York, 505 U. S., at 187, are not
unusual. Nor is the argument from bureaucratic expertise
limited only to the field of accounting. The failures of
accounting regulation may be a “pressing national prob­
lem,” but “a judiciary that licensed extraconstitutional
government with each issue of comparable gravity would,
in the long run, be far worse.” Id., at 187–188. Neither
respondents nor the dissent explains why the Board’s
task, unlike so many others, requires more than one layer
of insulation from the President—or, for that matter, why
only two. The point is not to take issue with for-cause
limitations in general; we do not do that. The question
here is far more modest. We deal with the unusual situa­
——————
for a term of “years, unless sooner removed by the President”; he would
thus be “dependent upon the President, because he can be removed by
him,” and also “dependent upon the Senate, because they must consent
to his [reappointment] for every term of years.” 1 Annals of Cong. 612
(1789).

