30

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


not? The Court, after listing reasons why the SES may be
different, simply says that it will not “addres[s]” the mat
ter. Ante, at 27. Perhaps it does not do so because it cannot
do so without revealing the difficulty of distinguishing the
SES from the Accounting Board and thereby also revealing
the inherent instability of the legal rule it creates.
The potential list of those whom today’s decision affects
is yet larger. As JUSTICE SCALIA has observed, adminis
trative law judges (ALJs) “are all executive officers.”
Freytag, 501 U. S., at 910 (opinion concurring in part and
concurring in judgment) (emphasis deleted); see also, e.g.,
id., at 881 (majority opinion) (“[A] [tax-court] special trial
judge is an ‘inferior Officer’ ”); Edmond, supra, at 654
(“[M]ilitary trial and appellate judges are [inferior] offi
cers”). But cf. ante, at 26, n. 10. And ALJs are each re
movable “only for good cause established and determined
by the Merit Systems Protection Board,” 5 U. S. C.
§§7521(a)–(b). But the members of the Merit Systems
Protection Board are themselves protected from removal
by the President absent good cause. §1202(d).
My research reflects that the Federal Government relies
on 1,584 ALJs to adjudicate administrative matters in
over 25 agencies. See Appendix C, infra; see also Memo
randum of Juanita Love, Office of Personnel Manage
ment, to Supreme Court Library (May 28, 2010) (avail
able in Clerk of Court’s case file). These ALJs adjudicate
Social Security benefits, employment disputes, and other
matters highly important to individuals. Does every
losing party before an ALJ now have grounds to appeal on
the basis that the decision entered against him is uncon
stitutional? Cf. ante, at 26, n. 10 (“[O]ur holding also does
not address” this question).
And what about the military? Commissioned military
officers “are ‘inferior officers.’ ” Weiss, 510 U. S., at 182
(Souter, J., concurring); id., at 169–170 (majority opinion).
There are over 210,000 active-duty commissioned officers

