22

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Opinion of the Court 


sary independence of the office”); Wiener v. United States,
357 U. S. 349, 356 (1958) (describing for-cause removal as
“involving the rectitude” of an officer). And here there is
judicial review of any effort to remove Board members, see
15 U. S. C. §78y(a)(1), so the Commission will not have the
final word on the propriety of its own removal orders. The
removal restrictions set forth in the statute mean what
they say.
Indeed, this case presents an even more serious threat
to executive control than an “ordinary” dual for-cause
standard. Congress enacted an unusually high standard
that must be met before Board members may be removed.
A Board member cannot be removed except for willful
violations of the Act, Board rules, or the securities laws;
willful abuse of authority; or unreasonable failure to en­
force compliance—as determined in a formal Commission
order, rendered on the record and after notice and an
opportunity for a hearing. §7217(d)(3); see §78y(a). The
Act does not even give the Commission power to fire Board
members for violations of other laws that do not relate to
the Act, the securities laws, or the Board’s authority. The
President might have less than full confidence in, say, a
Board member who cheats on his taxes; but that discovery
is not listed among the grounds for removal under
§7217(d)(3).7
The rigorous standard that must be met before a Board
member may be removed was drawn from statutes con­
——————
7 The Government implausibly argues that §7217(d)(3) “does not ex­
pressly make its three specified grounds of removal exclusive,” and that
“the Act could be construed to permit other grounds.” Brief for United
States 51, n. 19. But having provided in §7211(e)(6) that Board mem­
bers are to be removed “in accordance with [§7217(d)(3)], for good cause
shown,” Congress would not have specified the necessary Commission
finding in §7217(d)(3)—including formal procedures and detailed
conditions—if Board members could also be removed without any
finding at all. Cf. PCAOB Brief 6 (“Cause exists where” the §7217(d)(3)
conditions are met).

