12

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


actually sought to exercise that power by testing the scope
of a “for cause” provision. See Bruff, Bringing the Inde
pendent Agencies in from the Cold, 62 Vanderbilt L. Rev.
En Banc 63, 68 (2009), online at http://vanderbiltlawreview.
org/articles/2009/11/Bruff-62-Vand-L-Rev-En-Banc-63.pdf
(noting that “Presidents do not test the limits of their
power by removing commissioners . . . ”); Lessig & Sun
stein 110–112 (noting that courts have not had occasion to
define what constitutes “cause” because Presidents rarely
test removal provisions).
But even if we put all these other matters to the side, we
should still conclude that the “for cause” restriction before
us will not restrict presidential power significantly. For
one thing, the restriction directly limits, not the Presi
dent’s power, but the power of an already independent
agency. The Court seems to have forgotten that fact when
it identifies its central constitutional problem: According
to the Court, the President “is powerless to intervene” if he
has determined that the Board members’ “conduct merit[s]
removal” because “[t]hat decision is vested instead in other
tenured officers—the Commissioners—none of whom is
subject to the President’s direct control.” Ante, at 14–15.
But so long as the President is legitimately foreclosed from
removing the Commissioners except for cause (as the
majority assumes), nullifying the Commission’s power to
remove Board members only for cause will not resolve the
problem the Court has identified: The President will still
be “powerless to intervene” by removing the Board mem
bers if the Commission reasonably decides not to do so.
In other words, the Court fails to show why two layers of
“for cause” protection—Layer One insulating the Commis
sioners from the President, and Layer Two insulating the
Board from the Commissioners—impose any more serious
limitation upon the President’s powers than one layer.
Consider the four scenarios that might arise:
1. The President and the Commission both want to

