Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

ago observed, our Constitution is fashioned so as to allow
the three coordinate branches, including this Court, to
exercise practical judgment in response to changing condi
tions and “exigencies,” which at the time of the founding
could be seen only “dimly,” and perhaps not at all.
McCulloch, 4 Wheat., at 415.
For another, a functional approach permits Congress
and the President the flexibility needed to adapt statutory
law to changing circumstances. That is why the “powers
conferred upon the Federal Government by the Constitu
tion were phrased in language broad enough to allow for
the expansion of the Federal Government’s role” over time.
New York v. United States, 505 U. S. 144, 157 (1992).
Indeed, the Federal Government at the time of the found
ing consisted of about 2,000 employees and served a popu
lation of about 4 million. See Kaufman, The Growth of the
Federal Personnel System, in The Federal Government
Service 7, 8 (W. Sayre 2d ed. 1965); Dept. of Commerce,
Census Bureau, Historical Statistics of the United States:
Colonial Times to 1970, pt. 1, p. 8 (1975). Today, however,
the Federal Government employs about 4.4 million work
ers who serve a Nation of more than 310 million people
living in a society characterized by rapid technological,
economic, and social change. See Office of Management
and Budget, Analytical Perspectives, Budget of the U. S.
Government, Fiscal Year 2010, p. 368 (2009).
Federal statutes now require or permit Government
officials to provide, regulate, or otherwise administer, not
only foreign affairs and defense, but also a wide variety of
such subjects as taxes, welfare, social security, medicine,
pharmaceutical drugs, education, highways, railroads,
electricity, natural gas, nuclear power, financial instru
ments, banking, medical care, public health and safety,
the environment, fair employment practices, consumer
protection and much else besides. Those statutes create a
host of different organizational structures. Sometimes

