Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

BREYER, J., dissenting

units come in many different shapes and sizes.
The functional approach required by our precedents
recognizes this administrative complexity and, more im
portantly, recognizes the various ways presidential power
operates within this context—and the various ways in
which a removal provision might affect that power. As
human beings have known ever since Ulysses tied himself
to the mast so as safely to hear the Sirens’ song, some
times it is necessary to disable oneself in order to achieve
a broader objective. Thus, legally enforceable commit
ments—such as contracts, statutes that cannot instantly
be changed, and, as in the case before us, the establish
ment of independent administrative institutions—hold the
potential to empower precisely because of their ability to
constrain. If the President seeks to regulate through
impartial adjudication, then insulation of the adjudicator
from removal at will can help him achieve that goal. And
to free a technical decisionmaker from the fear of removal
without cause can similarly help create legitimacy with
respect to that official’s regulatory actions by helping to
insulate his technical decisions from nontechnical political
pressure.
Neither is power always susceptible to the equations of
elementary arithmetic. A rule that takes power from a
President’s friends and allies may weaken him. But a rule
that takes power from the President’s opponents may
strengthen him. And what if the rule takes power from a
functionally neutral independent authority? In that case,
it is difficult to predict how the President’s power is af
fected in the abstract.
These practical reasons not only support our precedents’
determination that cases such as this should examine the
specific functions and context at issue; they also indicate
that judges should hesitate before second-guessing a “for
cause” decision made by the other branches. See, e.g.,
Chadha, 462 U. S., at 944 (applying a “presumption that

