30

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Opinion of the Court 


consent. In particular, we noted that “[t]he power to
remove officers” at will and without cause “is a powerful
tool for control” of an inferior. Id., at 664. As explained
above, the statutory restrictions on the Commission’s
power to remove Board members are unconstitutional and
void. Given that the Commission is properly viewed,
under the Constitution, as possessing the power to remove
Board members at will, and given the Commission’s other
oversight authority, we have no hesitation in concluding
that under Edmond the Board members are inferior offi­
cers whose appointment Congress may permissibly vest in
a “Hea[d] of Departmen[t].”
But, petitioners argue, the Commission is not a “De­
partmen[t]” like the “Executive departments” (e.g., State,
Treasury, Defense) listed in 5 U. S. C. §101. In Freytag,
501 U. S., at 887, n. 4, we specifically reserved the ques­
tion whether a “principal agenc[y], such as . . . the Securi­
ties and Exchange Commission,” is a “Departmen[t]”
under the Appointments Clause. Four Justices, however,
would have concluded that the Commission is indeed such
a “Departmen[t],” see id., at 918 (SCALIA, J., concurring in
part and concurring in judgment), because it is a “free­
standing, self-contained entity in the Executive Branch,”
id., at 915.
Respondents urge us to adopt this reasoning as to those
entities not addressed by our opinion in Freytag, see Brief
for United States 37–39; PCAOB Brief 30–33, and we do.
Respondents’ reading of the Appointments Clause is con­
sistent with the common, near-contemporary definition of
a “department” as a “separate allotment or part of busi­
ness; a distinct province, in which a class of duties are
allotted to a particular person.” 1 N. Webster, American
Dictionary of the English Language (1828) (def. 2) (1995
facsimile ed.). It is also consistent with the early practice
of Congress, which in 1792 authorized the Postmaster
General to appoint “an assistant, and deputy postmasters,

