Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

25

BREYER, J., dissenting

moval unconstitutional—I should welcome the statement.
Ante, at 22 (emphasis added); see also ante, at 24–25, 15,
22, (underscoring this statute’s “sharply circumscribed
definition of what constitutes ‘good cause’ ” and its “rigor
ous,” “significant and unusual [removal] protections”).
But much of the majority’s opinion appears to avoid so
narrow a holding in favor of a broad, basically mechanical
rule—a rule that, as I have said, is divorced from the
context of the case at hand. Compare Parts III–A, III–B,
III–C, ante, with Parts II–A, II–B, II–C, supra. And such
a mechanical rule cannot be cabined simply by saying
that, perhaps, the rule does not apply to instances that, at
least at first blush, seem highly similar. A judicial holding
by its very nature is not “a restricted railroad ticket, good
for” one “day and train only.” Smith v. Allwright, 321
U. S. 649, 669 (1944) (Roberts, J., dissenting).
The Court begins to reveal the practical problems inher
ent in its double for-cause rule when it suggests that its
rule may not apply to “the civil service.” Ante, at 26. The
“civil service” is defined by statute to include “all appoint
ive positions in . . . the Government of the United States,”
excluding the military, but including all civil “officer[s]” up
to and including those who are subject to Senate confirma
tion. 5 U. S. C. §§2101, 2102(a)(1)(B), 2104. The civil
service thus includes many officers indistinguishable from
the members of both the Commission and the Accounting
Board. Indeed, as this Court recognized in Myers, the
“competitive service”—the class within the broader civil
service that enjoys the most robust career protection—
“includes a vast majority of all the civil officers” in the
United States. 272 U. S., at 173 (emphasis added); 5
U. S. C. §2102(c).
But even if I assume that the majority categorically
excludes the competitive service from the scope of its new
rule, cf. ante, at 26 (leaving this question open), the exclu
sion would be insufficient. This is because the Court’s

