24

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Opinion of the Court 


nowhere gives the Commission effective power to start,
stop, or alter individual Board investigations, executive
activities typically carried out by officials within the Ex­
ecutive Branch.
The Government and the dissent suggest that the Com­
mission could govern and direct the Board’s daily exercise
of prosecutorial discretion by promulgating new SEC
rules, or by amending those of the Board. Brief for United
States 27; post, at 15. Enacting general rules through the
required notice and comment procedures is obviously a
poor means of micromanaging the Board’s affairs. See
§§78s(c), 7215(b)(1), 7217(b)(5); cf. 5 U. S. C. §553, 15
U. S. C. §7202(a), PCAOB Brief 24, n. 6.8 So the Govern­
ment offers another proposal, that the Commission require
the Board by rule to “secure SEC approval for any actions
that it now may take itself.” Brief for United States 27.
That would surely constitute one of the “limitations upon
the activities, functions, and operations of the Board” that
the Act forbids, at least without Commission findings
equivalent to those required to fire the Board instead.
§7217(d)(2). The Board thus has significant independence
in determining its priorities and intervening in the affairs
of regulated firms (and the lives of their associated per­
sons) without Commission preapproval or direction.
Finally, respondents suggest that our conclusion is
contradicted by the past practice of Congress. But the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act is highly unusual in committing
substantial executive authority to officers protected by two
layers of for-cause removal—including at one level a
sharply circumscribed definition of what constitutes “good
——————
8 Contrary to the dissent’s assertions, see post, at 15–16, the Commis­
sion’s powers to conduct its own investigations (with its own resources),
to remove particular provisions of law from the Board’s bailiwick, or to
require the Board to perform functions “other” than inspections and
investigations, §7211(c)(5), are no more useful in directing individual
enforcement actions.

