18

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Opinion of the Court 


Board is, we are told, simply one example of the “vast
numbers of statutes governing vast numbers of subjects,
concerned with vast numbers of different problems, [that]
provide for, or foresee, their execution or administration
through the work of administrators organized within
many different kinds of administrative structures, exercis­
ing different kinds of administrative authority, to achieve
their legislatively mandated objectives.” Post, at 8.
No one doubts Congress’s power to create a vast and
varied federal bureaucracy. But where, in all this, is the
role for oversight by an elected President? The Constitu­
tion requires that a President chosen by the entire Nation
oversee the execution of the laws. And the “ ‘fact that a
given law or procedure is efficient, convenient, and useful
in facilitating functions of government, standing alone,
will not save it if it is contrary to the Constitution,’ ” for
“ ‘[c]onvenience and efficiency are not the primary objec­
tives—or the hallmarks—of democratic government.’ ”
Bowsher, 478 U. S., at 736 (quoting Chadha, 462 U. S., at
944).
One can have a government that functions without
being ruled by functionaries, and a government that bene­
fits from expertise without being ruled by experts. Our
Constitution was adopted to enable the people to govern
themselves, through their elected leaders. The growth of
the Executive Branch, which now wields vast power and
touches almost every aspect of daily life, heightens the
concern that it may slip from the Executive’s control, and
thus from that of the people. This concern is largely ab­
sent from the dissent’s paean to the administrative state.
For example, the dissent dismisses the importance of
removal as a tool of supervision, concluding that the Presi­
dent’s “power to get something done” more often depends
on “who controls the agency’s budget requests and fund­
ing, the relationships between one agency or department
and another, . . . purely political factors (including Con­

