2

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Syllabus 

The firm and petitioner Free Enterprise Fund, a nonprofit organiza
tion of which the firm is a member, sued the Board and its members,
seeking, inter alia, a declaratory judgment that the Board is uncon
stitutional and an injunction preventing the Board from exercising its
powers. Petitioners argued that the Sarbanes-Oxley Act contravened
the separation of powers by conferring executive power on Board
members without subjecting them to Presidential control. The basis
for petitioners’ challenge was that Board members were insulated
from Presidential control by two layers of tenure protection: Board
members could only be removed by the Commission for good cause,
and the Commissioners could in turn only be removed by the Presi
dent for good cause. Petitioners also challenged the Board’s ap
pointment as violating the Appointments Clause, which requires offi
cers to be appointed by the President with the Senate’s advice and
consent, or—in the case of “inferior Officers”—by “the President
alone, . . . the Courts of Law, or . . . the Heads of Departments,”
Art. II, §2, cl. 2. The United States intervened to defend the statute.
The District Court found it had jurisdiction and granted summary
judgment to respondents. The Court of Appeals affirmed. It first
agreed that the District Court had jurisdiction. It then ruled that the
dual restraints on Board members’ removal are permissible, and that
Board members are inferior officers whose appointment is consistent
with the Appointments Clause.

Held:
1. The District Court had jurisdiction over these claims. The
Commission may review any Board rule or sanction, and an ag
grieved party may challenge the Commission’s “final order” or “rule”
in a court of appeals under 15 U. S. C. §78y. The Government reads
§78y as an exclusive route to review, but the text does not expressly
or implicitly limit the jurisdiction that other statutes confer on dis
trict courts. It is presumed that Congress does not intend to limit ju
risdiction if “a finding of preclusion could foreclose all meaningful ju
dicial review”; if the suit is “ ‘wholly “collateral” ’ to a statute’s review
provisions”; and if the claims are “outside the agency’s expertise.”
Thunder Basin Coal Co. v. Reich, 510 U. S. 200, 212–213.
These considerations point against any limitation on review here.
Section 78y provides only for review of Commission action, and peti
tioners’ challenge is “collateral” to any Commission orders or rules
from which review might be sought. The Government advises peti
tioners to raise their claims by appealing a Board sanction, but peti
tioners have not been sanctioned, and it is no “meaningful” avenue of
relief, Thunder Basin, supra, at 212, to require a plaintiff to incur a
sanction in order to test a law’s validity, MedImmune, Inc. v. Genen
tech, Inc., 549 U. S. 118, 129. Petitioners’ constitutional claims are

