14

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


dent and Commission see eye to eye.
In order to avoid this elementary logic, the Court creates
two alternative scenarios. In the first, the Commission
and the President both want to remove a Board member,
but have varying judgments as to whether they have good
“cause” to do so—i.e., the President and the Commission
both conclude that a Board member should be removed,
but disagree as to whether that conclusion (which they
have both reached) is reasonable. Ante, at 14–15. In the
second, the President wants to remove a Board member
and the Commission disagrees; but, notwithstanding its
freedom to make reasonable decisions independent of the
President (afforded by Layer One), the Commission (while
apparently telling the President that it agrees with him
and would like to remove the Board member) uses Layer
Two as an “excuse” to pursue its actual aims—an excuse
which, given Layer One, it does not need. Ante, at 15, n. 4.
Both of these circumstances seem unusual. I do not
know if they have ever occurred. But I do not deny their
logical possibility. I simply doubt their importance. And
the fact that, with respect to the President’s power, the
double layer of for-cause removal sometimes might help,
sometimes might hurt, leads me to conclude that its over
all effect is at most indeterminate.
But once we leave the realm of hypothetical logic and
view the removal provision at issue in the context of the
entire Act, its lack of practical effect becomes readily
apparent. That is because the statute provides the Com
mission with full authority and virtually comprehensive
control over all of the Board’s functions. Those who cre
ated the Accounting Board modeled it, in terms of struc
ture and authority, upon the semiprivate regulatory bod
ies prevalent in the area of financial regulation, such as
the New York Stock Exchange and other similar self
regulating organizations. See generally Brief for Former
Chairmen of the SEC as Amici Curiae (hereinafter Brief

