34

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY
ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD.
BREYER, J., dissenting

ity to “stipulate away” what “the legislation declares”).
It is certainly not obvious that the SEC Commissioners
enjoy “for cause” protection. Unlike the statutes establishing the 48 federal agencies listed in Appendix A, infra, the
statute that established the Commission says nothing
about removal. It is silent on the question. As far as its
text is concerned, the President’s authority to remove the
Commissioners is no different from his authority to remove the Secretary of State or the Attorney General. See
Shurtleff, 189 U. S., at 315 (“To take away th[e] power of
removal . . . would require very clear and explicit language. It should not be held to be taken away by mere
inference or implication”); see also Memorandum from
David J. Barron, Acting Assistant Attorney General,
Office of Legal Counsel, to the Principal Deputy Counsel
to the President: Removability of the Federal Coordinator
for Alaska Natural Gas Transportation Projects, p. 2 (Oct.
23, 2009), online at http://justice.gov/olc/2009/gas-transportproject.pdf (“[Where] Congress did not explicitly provide
tenure protection . . . the President, consistent with . . .
settled principles, may remove . . . without cause”); The
Constitutional Separation of Powers Between the President and Congress, 20 Op. Legal Counsel 124, 170 (1996)
(same).
Nor is the absence of a “for cause” provision in the statute that created the Commission likely to have been inadvertent. Congress created the Commission during the 9year period after this Court decided Myers, and thereby
cast serious doubt on the constitutionality of all “for cause”
removal provisions, but before it decided Humphrey’s
Executor, which removed any doubt in respect to the constitutionality of making commissioners of independent
agencies removable only for cause. In other words, Congress created the SEC at a time when, under this Court’s
precedents, it would have been unconstitutional to make
the Commissioners removable only for cause. And, during

