4

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Syllabus 

sponsibility were allowed to stand, Congress could multiply it further
by adding still more layers of good-cause tenure. Such diffusion of
power carries with it a diffusion of accountability; without a clear and
effective chain of command, the public cannot determine where the
blame for a pernicious measure should fall. The Act’s restrictions are
therefore incompatible with the Constitution’s separation of powers.
Pp. 14–17.
(c) The “ ‘fact that a given law or procedure is efficient, conven
ient, and useful in facilitating functions of government, standing
alone, will not save it if it is contrary to the Constitution. ” Bowsher
v. Synar, 478 U. S. 714, 736. The Act’s multilevel tenure protections
provide a blueprint for the extensive expansion of legislative power.
Congress controls the salary, duties, and existence of executive of
fices, and only Presidential oversight can counter its influence. The
Framers created a structure in which “[a] dependence on the people”
would be the “primary controul on the government,” and that de
pendence is maintained by giving each branch “the necessary consti
tutional means and personal motives to resist encroachments of the
others.” The Federalist No. 51, p. 349. A key “constitutional means”
vested in the President was “the power of appointing, overseeing, and
controlling those who execute the laws.” 1 Annals of Congress 463.
While a government of “opposite and rival interests” may sometimes
inhibit the smooth functioning of administration, The Federalist No.
51, at 349, “[t]he Framers recognized that, in the long term, struc
tural protections against abuse of power were critical to preserving
liberty.” Bowsher, supra, at 730. Pp. 17–21.
(d) The Government errs in arguing that, even if some con
straints on the removal of inferior executive officers might violate the
Constitution, the restrictions here do not. There is no construction of
the Commission’s good-cause removal power that is broad enough to
avoid invalidation. Nor is the Commission’s broad power over Board
functions the equivalent of a power to remove Board members. Alter
ing the Board’s budget or powers is not a meaningful way to control
an inferior officer; the Commission cannot supervise individual Board
members if it must destroy the Board in order to fix it. Moreover, the
Commission’s power over the Board is hardly plenary, as the Board
may take significant enforcement actions largely independently of
the Commission. Enacting new SEC rules through the required no
tice and comment procedures would be a poor means of micro
managing the Board, and without certain findings, the Act forbids
any general rule requiring SEC preapproval of Board actions. Fi
nally, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is highly unusual in committing sub
stantial executive authority to officers protected by two layers of
good-cause removal. Pp. 21–27.

