8

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Opinion of the Court 


ered by the court unless it was urged before the Commis­
sion or there was reasonable ground for failure to do so.”
§§78y(a)(1), (b)(1), (c)(1).
The Government reads §78y as an exclusive route to
review. But the text does not expressly limit the jurisdic­
tion that other statutes confer on district courts. See, e.g.,
28 U. S. C. §§1331, 2201. Nor does it do so implicitly.
Provisions for agency review do not restrict judicial review
unless the “statutory scheme” displays a “fairly discerni­
ble” intent to limit jurisdiction, and the claims at issue
“are of the type Congress intended to be reviewed within
th[e] statutory structure.” Thunder Basin Coal Co. v.
Reich, 510 U. S. 200, 207, 212 (1994) (internal quotation
marks omitted). Generally, when Congress creates proce­
dures “designed to permit agency expertise to be brought
to bear on particular problems,” those procedures “are to
be exclusive.” Whitney Nat. Bank in Jefferson Parish v.
Bank of New Orleans & Trust Co., 379 U. S. 411, 420
(1965). But we presume that Congress does not intend to
limit jurisdiction if “a finding of preclusion could foreclose
all meaningful judicial review”; if the suit is “wholly col­
lateral to a statute’s review provisions”; and if the claims
are “outside the agency’s expertise.” Thunder Basin,
supra, at 212–213 (internal quotation marks omitted).
These considerations point against any limitation on
review here.
We do not see how petitioners could meaningfully pur­
sue their constitutional claims under the Government’s
theory. Section 78y provides only for judicial review of
Commission action, and not every Board action is encapsu­
lated in a final Commission order or rule.
The Government suggests that petitioners could first
have sought Commission review of the Board’s “auditing
standards, registration requirements, or other rules.”
Brief for United States 16. But petitioners object to the
Board’s existence, not to any of its auditing standards.

