10

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Opinion of the Court 


“formulated in constitutional terms,” rested ultimately on
“factors that call for [an] understanding of the milk indus­
try,” to which the Court made no pretensions. Id., at 294.
No similar expertise is required here, and the statutory
questions involved do not require “technical considerations
of [agency] policy.” Johnson v. Robison, 415 U. S. 361, 373
(1974). They are instead standard questions of adminis­
trative law, which the courts are at no disadvantage in
answering.
We therefore conclude that §78y did not strip the Dis­
trict Court of jurisdiction over these claims, which are
properly presented for our review.2
III
We hold that the dual for-cause limitations on the re­
moval of Board members contravene the Constitution’s
separation of powers.
A
The Constitution provides that “[t]he executive Power
shall be vested in a President of the United States of
——————
2 The Government asserts that “petitioners have not pointed to any
case in which this Court has recognized an implied private right of
action directly under the Constitution to challenge governmental action
under the Appointments Clause or separation-of-powers principles.”
Brief for United States 22. The Government does not appear to dispute
such a right to relief as a general matter, without regard to the particu­
lar constitutional provisions at issue here. See, e.g., Correctional
Services Corp. v. Malesko, 534 U. S. 61, 74 (2001) (equitable relief “has
long been recognized as the proper means for preventing entities from
acting unconstitutionally”); Bell v. Hood, 327 U. S. 678, 684 (1946) (“[I]t
is established practice for this Court to sustain the jurisdiction of
federal courts to issue injunctions to protect rights safeguarded by the
Constitution”); see also Ex parte Young, 209 U. S. 123, 149, 165, 167
(1908). If the Government’s point is that an Appointments Clause or
separation-of-powers claim should be treated differently than every
other constitutional claim, it offers no reason and cites no authority
why that might be so.

