12

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Opinion of the Court 


certain independent agencies. That case concerned the
members of the Federal Trade Commission, who held 7­
year terms and could not be removed by the President
except for “ ‘inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in
office.’ ” 295 U. S., at 620 (quoting 15 U. S. C. §41). The
Court distinguished Myers on the ground that Myers
concerned “an officer [who] is merely one of the units in
the executive department and, hence, inherently subject to
the exclusive and illimitable power of removal by the Chief
Executive, whose subordinate and aid he is.” 295 U. S., at
627. By contrast, the Court characterized the FTC as
“quasi-legislative and quasi-judicial” rather than “purely
executive,” and held that Congress could require it “to act
. . . independently of executive control.” Id., at 627–629.
Because “one who holds his office only during the pleasure
of another, cannot be depended upon to maintain an atti­
tude of independence against the latter’s will,” the Court
held that Congress had power to “fix the period during
which [the Commissioners] shall continue in office, and to
forbid their removal except for cause in the meantime.”
Id., at 629.
Humphrey’s Executor did not address the removal of
inferior officers, whose appointment Congress may vest in
heads of departments. If Congress does so, it is ordinarily
the department head, rather than the President, who
enjoys the power of removal. See Myers, supra, at 119,
127; Hennen, supra, at 259–260. This Court has upheld
for-cause limitations on that power as well.
In Perkins, a naval cadet-engineer was honorably dis­
charged from the Navy because his services were no longer
required. 116 U. S. 483. He brought a claim for his salary
under statutes barring his peacetime discharge except by
a court-martial or by the Secretary of the Navy “for mis­
conduct.” Rev. Stat. §§1229, 1525. This Court adopted
verbatim the reasoning of the Court of Claims, which had
held that when Congress “ ‘vests the appointment of infe­

