Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

punishment, can render a life-without-parole sentence
disproportionate. Cf. id., at ___ (slip op., at 20–23) (generally doubting the penological justifications for imposing
life without parole on juveniles). “An offender’s age,” we
made clear in Graham, “is relevant to the Eighth Amendment,” and so “criminal procedure laws that fail to take
defendants’ youthfulness into account at all would be
flawed.” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 25). THE CHIEF JUSTICE,
concurring in the judgment, made a similar point. Although rejecting a categorical bar on life-without-parole
sentences for juveniles, he acknowledged “Roper’s conclusion that juveniles are typically less culpable than adults,”
and accordingly wrote that “an offender’s juvenile status
can play a central role” in considering a sentence’s proportionality. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 5–6); see id., at ___ (slip
op., at 12) (Graham’s “youth is one factor, among others,
that should be considered in deciding whether his punishment was unconstitutionally excessive”).6
But the mandatory penalty schemes at issue here prevent the sentencer from taking account of these central
considerations. By removing youth from the balance—
by subjecting a juvenile to the same life-without-parole
sentence applicable to an adult—these laws prohibit a
sentencing authority from assessing whether the law’s
harshest term of imprisonment proportionately punishes a
juvenile offender. That contravenes Graham’s (and also
Roper’s) foundational principle: that imposition of a State’s
——————
6 In discussing Graham, the dissents essentially ignore all of this
reasoning. See post, at 3–6 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.); post, at 4
(opinion of ALITO, J.). Indeed, THE CHIEF JUSTICE ignores the points
made in his own concurring opinion. The only part of Graham that the
dissents see fit to note is the distinction it drew between homicide and
nonhomicide offenses. See post, at 7–8 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.); post,
at 4 (opinion of ALITO, J.). But contrary to the dissents’ charge, our
decision today retains that distinction: Graham established one rule (a
flat ban) for nonhomicide offenses, while we set out a different one
(individualized sentencing) for homicide offenses.

