Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

THOMAS, J., dissenting

possessing a large quantity of drugs. 501 U. S., at 961
(opinion of SCALIA, J.). In accordance with Michigan
law, he was sentenced to a mandatory term of life in prison
without the possibility of parole. Ibid. Citing the same
line of death penalty precedents on which the Court relies
today, the defendant argued that his sentence, due to its
mandatory nature, violated the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause. Id., at 994–995 (opinion of the Court).
The Court rejected that argument, explaining that
“[t]here can be no serious contention . . . that a sentence
which is not otherwise cruel and unusual becomes so simply because it is ‘mandatory.’ ” Id., at 995. In so doing,
the Court refused to analogize to its death penalty cases.
The Court noted that those cases had “repeatedly suggested
that there is no comparable [individualized-sentencing]
requirement outside the capital context, because of the
qualitative difference between death and all other penalties.” Ibid. The Court observed that, “even where the
difference” between a sentence of life without parole and
other sentences of imprisonment “is the greatest,” such
a sentence “cannot be compared with death.” Id., at 996.
Therefore, the Court concluded that the line of cases requiring individualized sentencing had been drawn at capital cases, and that there was “no basis for extending it
further.” Ibid.
Harmelin’s reasoning logically extends to these cases.
Obviously, the younger the defendant, “the great[er]” the
difference between a sentence of life without parole and
other terms of imprisonment. Ibid. But under Harmelin’s
rationale, the defendant’s age is immaterial to the Eighth
Amendment analysis. Thus, the result in today’s cases
should be the same as that in Harmelin. Petitioners, like
the defendant in Harmelin, were not sentenced to death.
Accordingly, this Court’s cases “creating and clarifying the
individualized capital sentencing doctrine” do not apply.
Id., at 995 (internal quotation marks omitted).

