26

MILLER v. ALABAMA
Opinion of the Court

Adults: An Analysis of State Transfer Laws and Reporting
5 (2011).
Even when States give transfer-stage discretion to
judges, it has limited utility. First, the decisionmaker
typically will have only partial information at this early,
pretrial stage about either the child or the circumstances
of his offense. Miller’s case provides an example. As
noted earlier, see n. 3, supra, the juvenile court denied
Miller’s request for his own mental-health expert at the
transfer hearing, and the appeals court affirmed on the
ground that Miller was not then entitled to the protections
and services he would receive at trial. See No. CR–03–
0915, at 3–4 (unpublished memorandum). But by then, of
course, the expert’s testimony could not change the sentence; whatever she said in mitigation, the mandatory
life-without-parole prison term would kick in. The key moment for the exercise of discretion is the transfer—and as
Miller’s case shows, the judge often does not know then
what she will learn, about the offender or the offense, over
the course of the proceedings.
Second and still more important, the question at transfer hearings may differ dramatically from the issue at a
post-trial sentencing. Because many juvenile systems
require that the offender be released at a particular age or
after a certain number of years, transfer decisions often
present a choice between extremes: light punishment as a
child or standard sentencing as an adult (here, life without
parole). In many States, for example, a child convicted in
juvenile court must be released from custody by the age of
21. See, e.g., Ala. Code §12–15–117(a) (Cum. Supp. 2011);
see generally 2006 National Report 103 (noting limitations
on the length of juvenile court sanctions). Discretionary
sentencing in adult court would provide different options:
There, a judge or jury could choose, rather than a lifewithout-parole sentence, a lifetime prison term with the
possibility of parole or a lengthy term of years. It is easy

