4

MILLER v. ALABAMA
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

considerable lengths to show that although theoretically
allowed in many States, the sentence at issue in that case
was “exceedingly rare” in practice. 560 U. S., at ___ (slip
op., at 16). The Court explained that only 123 prisoners
in the entire Nation were serving life without parole for
nonhomicide crimes committed as juveniles, with more
than half in a single State. It contrasted that with statistics showing nearly 400,000 juveniles were arrested for
serious nonhomicide offenses in a single year. Based on
the sentence’s rarity despite the many opportunities to impose it, Graham concluded that there was a national
consensus against life without parole for juvenile nonhomicide crimes. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 13–16).
Here the number of mandatory life without parole sentences for juvenile murderers, relative to the number of
juveniles arrested for murder, is over 5,000 times higher
than the corresponding number in Graham. There is thus
nothing in this case like the evidence of national consensus in Graham.1
The Court disregards these numbers, claiming that the
prevalence of the sentence in question results from the
number of statutes requiring its imposition. Ante, at 21,
n. 10. True enough. The sentence at issue is statutorily
mandated life without parole. Such a sentence can only
result from statutes requiring its imposition. In Graham
the Court relied on the low number of actual sentences to
explain why the high number of statutes allowing such
——————
1 Graham stated that 123 prisoners were serving life without parole
for nonhomicide offenses committed as juveniles, while in 2007 alone
380,480 juveniles were arrested for serious nonhomicide crimes. 560
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 13–14). I use 2,000 as the number of prisoners
serving mandatory life without parole sentences for murders committed
as juveniles, because all seem to accept that the number is at least that
high. And the same source Graham used reports that 1,170 juveniles
were arrested for murder and nonnegligent homicide in 2009. Dept.
of Justice, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention,
C. Puzzanchera & B. Adams, Juvenile Arrests 2009, p. 4 (Dec. 2011).

