6

MILLER v. ALABAMA
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

other, especially on an issue of such importance as the one
before us. But in Graham and Thompson it was at least
plausible as a practical matter. In Graham, the extreme
rarity with which the sentence in question was imposed
could suggest that legislatures did not really intend the
inevitable result of the laws they passed. See 560 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 15–16). In Thompson, the sentencing
practice was even rarer—only 20 defendants had received
it in the last century. 487 U. S., at 832 (plurality opinion).
Perhaps under those facts it could be argued that the legislature was not fully aware that a teenager could receive the particular sentence in question. But here the
widespread and recent imposition of the sentence makes it
implausible to characterize this sentencing practice as a
collateral consequence of legislative ignorance.3
Nor do we display our usual respect for elected officials
by asserting that legislators have accidentally required
2,000 teenagers to spend the rest of their lives in jail. This
is particularly true given that our well-publicized decision
in Graham alerted legislatures to the possibility that
teenagers were subject to life with parole only because of
legislative inadvertence. I am aware of no effort in the
wake of Graham to correct any supposed legislative oversight. Indeed, in amending its laws in response to Graham one legislature made especially clear that it does
intend juveniles who commit first-degree murder to receive mandatory life without parole. See Iowa Code Ann.
§902.1 (West Cum. Supp. 2012).
In the end, the Court does not actually conclude that
mandatory life sentences for juvenile murderers are unusual. It instead claims that precedent “leads to” today’s
——————
3 The

Court claims that I “take issue with some or all of these precedents” and “seek to relitigate” them. Ante, at 7–8, n. 4. Not so: applying this Court’s cases exactly as they stand, I do not believe they
support the Court’s decision in this case.

