Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

23

Opinion of the Court

explained why simply counting them would present a
distorted view. Most jurisdictions authorized the death
penalty or life without parole for juveniles only through
the combination of two independent statutory provisions.
One allowed the transfer of certain juvenile offenders to
adult court, while another (often in a far-removed part of
the code) set out the penalties for any and all individuals
tried there. We reasoned that in those circumstances, it
was impossible to say whether a legislature had endorsed
a given penalty for children (or would do so if presented
with the choice). In Thompson, we found that the statutes
“t[old] us that the States consider 15-year-olds to be old
enough to be tried in criminal court for serious crimes (or
too old to be dealt with effectively in juvenile court),
but t[old] us nothing about the judgment these States
have made regarding the appropriate punishment for such
youthful offenders.” 487 U. S., at 826, n. 24 (plurality
opinion) (emphasis deleted); see also id., at 850 (O’Connor,
J., concurring in judgment); Roper, 543 U. S., at 596, n.
(O’Connor, J., dissenting). And Graham echoed that
reasoning: Although the confluence of state laws “ma[de]
life without parole possible for some juvenile nonhomicide
offenders,” it did not “justify a judgment” that many
States actually “intended to subject such offenders” to
those sentences. 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 16).12
All that is just as true here. Almost all jurisdictions
allow some juveniles to be tried in adult court for some
——————
12 THE CHIEF JUSTICE attempts to distinguish Graham on this point,
arguing that there “the extreme rarity with which the sentence in
question was imposed could suggest that legislatures did not really
intend the inevitable result of the laws they passed.” Post, at 6. But
neither Graham nor Thompson suggested such reasoning, presumably
because the time frame makes it difficult to comprehend. Those cases
considered what legislators intended when they enacted, at different
moments, separate juvenile-transfer and life-without-parole provisions—by definition, before they knew or could know how many juvenile life-without-parole sentences would result.

