Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

ALITO, J., dissenting

in Coker, which held that the Eighth Amendment prohib­
its the imposition of the death penalty for the rape of an
adult woman, the Court noted that only one State permit­
ted that practice. Id., at 595–596. In Enmund, where the
Court held that the Eighth Amendment forbids capital
punishment for ordinary felony murder, both federal law
and the law of 28 of the 36 States that authorized the
death penalty at the time rejected that punishment. 458
U. S., at 789.
While the tally in these early cases may be character­
ized as evidence of a national consensus, the evidence
became weaker and weaker in later cases. In Atkins,
which held that low-IQ defendants may not be sentenced
to death, the Court found an anti–death-penalty consen­
sus even though more than half of the States that allowed
capital punishment permitted the practice. See 536 U. S.,
at 342 (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (observing that less than
half of the 38 States that permit capital punishment
have enacted legislation barring execution of the mentally
retarded). The Court attempted to get around this prob­
lem by noting that there was a pronounced trend against
this punishment. See id., at 313–315 (listing 18 States
that had amended their laws since 1986 to prohibit the
execution of mentally retarded persons).
The importance of trend evidence, however, was not
long lived. In Roper, which outlawed capital punishment
for defendants between the ages of 16 and 18, the lineup of
the States was the same as in Atkins, but the trend in
favor of abolition—five States during the past 15 years—
was less impressive. Roper, 543 U. S., at 564–565. Never­
theless, the Court held that the absence of a strong trend
in support of abolition did not matter. See id., at 566
(“Any difference between this case and Atkins with respect
to the pace of abolition is thus counterbalanced by the
consistent direction of the change”).
In Kennedy v. Louisiana, the Court went further. Hold­

