Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

unnecessary or unjust. But decency is not the same as
leniency. A decent society protects the innocent from
violence. A mature society may determine that this requires removing those guilty of the most heinous murders
from its midst, both as protection for its other members
and as a concrete expression of its standards of decency.
As judges we have no basis for deciding that progress
toward greater decency can move only in the direction of
easing sanctions on the guilty.
In this case, there is little doubt about the direction of
society’s evolution: For most of the 20th century, American
sentencing practices emphasized rehabilitation of the
offender and the availability of parole. But by the 1980’s,
outcry against repeat offenders, broad disaffection with
the rehabilitative model, and other factors led many legislatures to reduce or eliminate the possibility of parole,
imposing longer sentences in order to punish criminals
and prevent them from committing more crimes. See, e.g.,
Alschuler, The Changing Purposes of Criminal Punishment, 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1, 1–13 (2003); see generally
Crime and Public Policy (J. Wilson & J. Petersilia eds.
2011). Statutes establishing life without parole sentences
in particular became more common in the past quarter
century. See Baze v. Rees, 553 U. S. 35, 78, and n. 10
(2008) (Stevens, J., concurring in judgment). And the
parties agree that most States have changed their laws
relatively recently to expose teenage murderers to mandatory life without parole. Jackson Brief 54–55; Alabama
Brief 4–5.
The Court attempts to avoid the import of the fact that
so many jurisdictions have embraced the sentencing practice at issue by comparing this case to the Court’s prior
Eighth Amendment cases. The Court notes that Graham
found a punishment authorized in 39 jurisdictions unconstitutional, whereas the punishment it bans today is
mandated in 10 fewer. Ante, at 21. But Graham went to

