Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of the Court

to guarantee eventual freedom,” but must provide “some
meaningful opportunity to obtain release based on demonstrated maturity and rehabilitation”). By making youth
(and all that accompanies it) irrelevant to imposition of
that harshest prison sentence, such a scheme poses too
great a risk of disproportionate punishment. Because that
holding is sufficient to decide these cases, we do not consider Jackson’s and Miller’s alternative argument that
the Eighth Amendment requires a categorical bar on life
without parole for juveniles, or at least for those 14 and
younger. But given all we have said in Roper, Graham,
and this decision about children’s diminished culpability
and heightened capacity for change, we think appropriate
occasions for sentencing juveniles to this harshest possible
penalty will be uncommon. That is especially so because
of the great difficulty we noted in Roper and Graham of
distinguishing at this early age between “the juvenile offender whose crime reflects unfortunate yet transient
immaturity, and the rare juvenile offender whose crime
reflects irreparable corruption.” Roper, 543 U. S., at 573;
Graham, 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 17). Although we do
not foreclose a sentencer’s ability to make that judgment
in homicide cases, we require it to take into account how
children are different, and how those differences counsel against irrevocably sentencing them to a lifetime in
prison.8
——————
8 Given

our holding, and the dissents’ competing position, we see a
certain irony in their repeated references to 17-year-olds who have
committed the “most heinous” offenses, and their comparison of those
defendants to the 14-year-olds here. See post, at 2 (opinion of ROBERTS,
C. J.) (noting the “17-year old [who] is convicted of deliberately murdering an innocent victim”); post, at 3 (“the most heinous murders”); post,
at 7 (“the worst types of murder”); post, at 5 (opinion of ALITO, J.)
(warning the reader not to be “confused by the particulars” of these two
cases); post, at 1 (discussing the “171⁄2-year-old who sets off a bomb in
a crowded mall”). Our holding requires factfinders to attend to exactly
such circumstances—to take into account the differences among de-

