6

MILLER v. ALABAMA
ALITO, J., dissenting

It is true that, at least for now, the Court apparently
permits a trial judge to make an individualized decision
that a particular minor convicted of murder should be
sentenced to life without parole, but do not expect this
possibility to last very long. The majority goes out of its
way to express the view that the imposition of a sentence
of life without parole on a “child” (i.e., a murderer under
the age of 18) should be uncommon. Having held in Graham that a trial judge with discretionary sentencing
authority may not impose a sentence of life without parole
on a minor who has committed a nonhomicide offense, the
Justices in the majority may soon extend that holding to
minors who commit murder. We will see.
What today’s decision shows is that our Eighth Amend­
ment cases are no longer tied to any objective indicia of
society’s standards. Our Eighth Amendment case law is
now entirely inward looking. After entirely disregarding
objective indicia of our society’s standards in Graham, the
Court now extrapolates from Graham. Future cases may
extrapolate from today’s holding, and this process may
continue until the majority brings sentencing practices
into line with whatever the majority views as truly
evolved standards of decency.
The Eighth Amendment imposes certain limits on the
——————
rejected what it called the “outmoded rehabilitation model” for federal
criminal sentencing. S. Rep. No. 98–225, p. 38 (1983). According to
the Report, “almost everyone involved in the criminal justice system now
doubts that rehabilitation can be induced reliably in a prison setting,
and it is now quite certain that no one can really detect whether or
when a prisoner is rehabilitated.” Ibid. The Report also “observed that
the indeterminate-sentencing system had two ‘unjustifi[ed] and ‘shame­
ful’ consequences. The first was the great variation among sentences
imposed by different judges upon similarly situated offenders. The
second was uncertainty as to the time the offender would spend in
prison. Each was a serious impediment to an evenhanded and effective
operation of the criminal justice system.” Mistretta, supra, at 366
(quoting S. Rep. No. 98–225, at 38, 65 (citation omitted)).

