Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

prescribing appropriate punishment for crime.
The
Court’s analysis focuses on the mandatory nature of the
sentences in this case. See ante, at 11–17. But then—
although doing so is entirely unnecessary to the rule it
announces—the Court states that even when a life without parole sentence is not mandatory, “we think appropriate occasions for sentencing juveniles to this harshest
possible penalty will be uncommon.” Ante, at 17. Today’s
holding may be limited to mandatory sentences, but the
Court has already announced that discretionary life without parole for juveniles should be “uncommon”—or, to use
a common synonym, “unusual.”
Indeed, the Court’s gratuitous prediction appears to be
nothing other than an invitation to overturn life without
parole sentences imposed by juries and trial judges. If
that invitation is widely accepted and such sentences for
juvenile offenders do in fact become “uncommon,” the
Court will have bootstrapped its way to declaring that the
Eighth Amendment absolutely prohibits them.
This process has no discernible end point—or at least
none consistent with our Nation’s legal traditions. Roper
and Graham attempted to limit their reasoning to the
circumstances they addressed—Roper to the death penalty,
and Graham to nonhomicide crimes. Having cast aside
those limits, the Court cannot now offer a credible substitute, and does not even try. After all, the Court tells us,
“none of what [Graham] said about children . . . is crimespecific.” Ante, at 10. The principle behind today’s decision seems to be only that because juveniles are different
from adults, they must be sentenced differently. See ante,
at 14–17. There is no clear reason that principle would
not bar all mandatory sentences for juveniles, or any
juvenile sentence as harsh as what a similarly situated
adult would receive. Unless confined, the only stopping
point for the Court’s analysis would be never permitting
juvenile offenders to be tried as adults. Learning that an

