14

MILLER v. ALABAMA
Opinion of the Court

We found that evidence “particularly relevant”—more so
than it would have been in the case of an adult offender.
455 U. S., at 115. We held: “[J]ust as the chronological age
of a minor is itself a relevant mitigating factor of great
weight, so must the background and mental and emotional
development of a youthful defendant be duly considered”
in assessing his culpability. Id., at 116.
In light of Graham’s reasoning, these decisions too show
the flaws of imposing mandatory life-without-parole sentences on juvenile homicide offenders. Such mandatory
penalties, by their nature, preclude a sentencer from
taking account of an offender’s age and the wealth of
characteristics and circumstances attendant to it. Under
these schemes, every juvenile will receive the same sentence as every other—the 17-year-old and the 14-year-old,
the shooter and the accomplice, the child from a stable
household and the child from a chaotic and abusive one.
And still worse, each juvenile (including these two 14year-olds) will receive the same sentence as the vast majority of adults committing similar homicide offenses—but
really, as Graham noted, a greater sentence than those
adults will serve.7 In meting out the death penalty, the
elision of all these differences would be strictly forbidden.
And once again, Graham indicates that a similar rule
should apply when a juvenile confronts a sentence of life
(and death) in prison.
So Graham and Roper and our individualized sentenc——————
7 Although adults are subject as well to the death penalty in many
jurisdictions, very few offenders actually receive that sentence. See,
e.g., Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, S. Rosenmerkel, M.
Durose, & D. Farole, Felony Sentences in State Courts 2006—
Statistical Tables, p. 28 (Table 4.4) (rev. Nov. 22, 2010). So in practice,
the sentencing schemes at issue here result in juvenile homicide
offenders receiving the same nominal punishment as almost all adults,
even though the two classes differ significantly in moral culpability and
capacity for change.

