Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

1014 (2003)). And in Graham, we noted that “developments in psychology and brain science continue to show
fundamental differences between juvenile and adult
minds”—for example, in “parts of the brain involved in
behavior control.” 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 17).5 We
reasoned that those findings—of transient rashness, proclivity for risk, and inability to assess consequences—both
lessened a child’s “moral culpability” and enhanced the
prospect that, as the years go by and neurological development occurs, his “ ‘deficiencies will be reformed.’ ” Id., at
___ (slip op., at 18) (quoting Roper, 543 U. S., at 570).
Roper and Graham emphasized that the distinctive attributes of youth diminish the penological justifications
for imposing the harshest sentences on juvenile offenders,
even when they commit terrible crimes. Because “ ‘[t]he
heart of the retribution rationale’ ” relates to an offender’s
blameworthiness, “ ‘the case for retribution is not as strong
with a minor as with an adult.’ ” Graham, 560 U. S., at
___ (slip op., at 20–21) (quoting Tison v. Arizona, 481 U. S.
137, 149 (1987); Roper, 543 U. S., at 571). Nor can deterrence do the work in this context, because “ ‘the same
characteristics that render juveniles less culpable than
adults’ ”—their immaturity, recklessness, and impetuosity—make them less likely to consider potential punish——————
5 The evidence presented to us in these cases indicates that the science and social science supporting Roper’s and Graham’s conclusions
have become even stronger. See, e.g., Brief for American Psychological Association et al. as Amici Curiae 3 (“[A]n ever-growing body of
research in developmental psychology and neuroscience continues to
confirm and strengthen the Court’s conclusions”); id., at 4 (“It is increasingly clear that adolescent brains are not yet fully mature in
regions and systems related to higher-order executive functions such as
impulse control, planning ahead, and risk avoidance”); Brief for J.
Lawrence Aber et al. as Amici Curiae 12–28 (discussing post-Graham
studies); id., at 26–27 (“Numerous studies post-Graham indicate that
exposure to deviant peers leads to increased deviant behavior and is a
consistent predictor of adolescent delinquency” (footnote omitted)).

