Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

sentences was not dispositive. Here, the Court excuses
the high number of actual sentences by citing the high
number of statutes imposing it. To say that a sentence
may be considered unusual because so many legislatures
approve it stands precedent on its head.2
The Court also advances another reason for discounting
the laws enacted by Congress and most state legislatures. Some of the jurisdictions that impose mandatory life
without parole on juvenile murderers do so as a result of
two statutes: one providing that juveniles charged with
serious crimes may be tried as adults, and another generally mandating that those convicted of murder be imprisoned for life. According to the Court, our cases suggest
that where the sentence results from the interaction of two
such statutes, the legislature can be considered to have
imposed the resulting sentences “inadvertent[ly].” Ante,
at 22–25. The Court relies on Graham and Thompson v.
Oklahoma, 487 U. S. 815, 826, n. 24 (1988) (plurality
opinion), for the proposition that these laws are therefore
not valid evidence of society’s views on the punishment at
issue.
It is a fair question whether this Court should ever
assume a legislature is so ignorant of its own laws that it
does not understand that two of them interact with each
——————
2 The Court’s reference to discretionary sentencing practices is a distraction. See ante, at 21–22, n. 10. The premise of the Court’s decision
is that mandatory sentences are categorically different from discretionary ones. So under the Court’s own logic, whether discretionary sentences are common or uncommon has nothing to do with whether
mandatory sentences are unusual. In any event, if analysis of discretionary sentences were relevant, it would not provide objective support
for today’s decision. The Court states that “about 15% of all juvenile
life-without-parole sentences”—meaning nearly 400 sentences—were
imposed at the discretion of a judge or jury. Ante, at 22, n. 10. Thus
the number of discretionary life without parole sentences for juvenile
murderers, relative to the number of juveniles arrested for murder, is
about 1,000 times higher than the corresponding number in Graham.

