8

MILLER v. ALABAMA
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

categories. Which Graham also said: “defendants who do
not kill, intend to kill, or foresee that life will be taken are
categorically less deserving of the most serious forms of
punishment than are murderers.” 560 U. S., at ___ (slip
op., at 18) (emphasis added). Of course, to be especially
clear that what is said about one issue does not apply to
another, one could say that the two issues cannot be compared. Graham said that too: “Serious nonhomicide
crimes . . . cannot be compared to murder.” Ibid. (internal
quotation marks omitted). A case that expressly puts an
issue in a different category from its own subject, draws a
line between the two, and states that the two should not
be compared, cannot fairly be said to control that issue.
Roper provides even less support for the Court’s holding.
In that case, the Court held that the death penalty could
not be imposed for offenses committed by juveniles, no
matter how serious their crimes. In doing so, Roper also
set itself in a different category than this case, by expressly invoking “special” Eighth Amendment analysis for
death penalty cases. 543 U. S., at 568–569. But more
importantly, Roper reasoned that the death penalty was
not needed to deter juvenile murderers in part because
“life imprisonment without the possibility of parole” was
available. Id., at 572. In a classic bait and switch, the
Court now tells state legislatures that—Roper’s promise
notwithstanding—they do not have power to guarantee
that once someone commits a heinous murder, he will
never do so again. It would be enough if today’s decision
proved JUSTICE SCALIA’s prescience in writing that Roper’s
“reassurance . . . gives little comfort.” Id., at 623 (dissenting opinion). To claim that Roper actually “leads to” revoking its own reassurance surely goes too far.
Today’s decision does not offer Roper and Graham’s
false promises of restraint. Indeed, the Court’s opinion
suggests that it is merely a way station on the path to
further judicial displacement of the legislative role in

