Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of the Court

ing cases alike teach that in imposing a State’s harshest
penalties, a sentencer misses too much if he treats every
child as an adult. To recap: Mandatory life without parole
for a juvenile precludes consideration of his chronological
age and its hallmark features—among them, immaturity,
impetuosity, and failure to appreciate risks and consequences. It prevents taking into account the family and
home environment that surrounds him—and from which
he cannot usually extricate himself—no matter how brutal or dysfunctional. It neglects the circumstances of the
homicide offense, including the extent of his participation
in the conduct and the way familial and peer pressures
may have affected him. Indeed, it ignores that he might
have been charged and convicted of a lesser offense if not
for incompetencies associated with youth—for example,
his inability to deal with police officers or prosecutors
(including on a plea agreement) or his incapacity to assist
his own attorneys. See, e.g., Graham, 560 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 27) (“[T]he features that distinguish juveniles
from adults also put them at a significant disadvantage in
criminal proceedings”); J. D. B. v. North Carolina, 564
U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 5–6) (discussing children’s
responses to interrogation). And finally, this mandatory
punishment disregards the possibility of rehabilitation
even when the circumstances most suggest it.
Both cases before us illustrate the problem. Take Jackson’s first. As noted earlier, Jackson did not fire the bullet
that killed Laurie Troup; nor did the State argue that
he intended her death. Jackson’s conviction was instead
based on an aiding-and-abetting theory; and the appellate
court affirmed the verdict only because the jury could have
believed that when Jackson entered the store, he warned
Troup that “[w]e ain’t playin’,” rather than told his friends
that “I thought you all was playin’.” See 359 Ark., at
90–92, 194 S. W. 3d, at 759–760; supra, at 2. To be sure,
Jackson learned on the way to the video store that his

