4

MILLER v. ALABAMA
BREYER, J., concurring

Moreover, regardless of our law with respect to adults,
there is no basis for imposing a sentence of life without
parole upon a juvenile who did not himself kill or intend to
kill. At base, the theory of transferring a defendant’s
intent is premised on the idea that one engaged in a dangerous felony should understand the risk that the victim
of the felony could be killed, even by a confederate. See 2
LaFave, supra, §14.5(c). Yet the ability to consider the
full consequences of a course of action and to adjust one’s
conduct accordingly is precisely what we know juveniles
lack capacity to do effectively. Ante, at 8–9. Justice Frankfurter cautioned, “Legal theories and their phrasing in
other cases readily lead to fallacious reasoning if uncritically transferred to a determination of a State’s duty toward children.” May v. Anderson, 345 U. S. 528, 536
(1953) (concurring opinion). To apply the doctrine of
transferred intent here, where the juvenile did not kill, to
sentence a juvenile to life without parole would involve
such “fallacious reasoning.” Ibid.
This is, as far as I can tell, precisely the situation present in Kuntrell Jackson’s case. Jackson simply went
along with older boys to rob a video store. On the way, he
became aware that a confederate had a gun. He initially
stayed outside the store, and went in briefly, saying something like “We ain’t playin’ ” or “ ‘I thought you all was
playin,’ ” before an older confederate shot and killed the
store clerk. Jackson v. State, 359 Ark. 87, 91, 194 S. W. 3d
757, 760 (2004). Crucially, the jury found him guilty of
first-degree murder under a statute that permitted them
to convict if, Jackson “attempted to commit or committed
an aggravated robbery, and, in the course of that offense, he, or an accomplice, caused [the clerk’s] death
under circumstance manifesting extreme indifference to the
value of human life.” Ibid. See Ark. Code Ann. §5–10–
101(a)(1) (1997); ante, at 15. Thus, to be found guilty,
Jackson did not need to kill the clerk (it is conceded he did

