8

MILLER v. ALABAMA
THOMAS, J., dissenting

Nothing about our Constitution, or about the qualitative
difference between any term of imprisonment and death,
has changed since Harmelin was decided 21 years ago.
What has changed (or, better yet, “evolved”) is this Court’s
ever-expanding line of categorical proportionality cases.
The Court now uses Roper and Graham to jettison Harmelin’s clear distinction between capital and noncapital
cases and to apply the former to noncapital juvenile offenders.4 The Court’s decision to do so is even less supportable than the precedents used to reach it.
III
As THE CHIEF JUSTICE notes, ante, at 8–9 (dissenting
opinion), the Court lays the groundwork for future incursions on the States’ authority to sentence criminals. In its
categorical proportionality cases, the Court has considered
“ ‘objective indicia of society’s standards, as expressed
in legislative enactments and state practice’ to determine
whether there is a national consensus against the sentencing practice at issue.” Graham, 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op.,
at 10) (quoting Roper, 543 U. S., at 563). In Graham, for
example, the Court looked to “[a]ctual sentencing practices” to conclude that there was a national consensus
against life-without-parole sentences for juvenile nonhomicide offenders. 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 11–14);
see also Roper, supra, at 564–565; Atkins v. Virginia, 536
U. S. 304, 316 (2002).
Today, the Court makes clear that, even though its
——————
4 In

support of its decision not to apply Harmelin to juvenile offenders, the Court also observes that “ ‘[o]ur history is replete with laws and
judicial recognition that children cannot be viewed simply as miniature
adults.’ ” Ante, at 19 (quoting J. D. B. v. North Carolina, 564 U. S. ___,
___ (2011) (slip op., at 10–11) (some internal quotation marks omitted)).
That is no doubt true as a general matter, but it does not justify usurping authority that rightfully belongs to the people by imposing a constitutional rule where none exists.

