4

MILLER v. ALABAMA
ALITO, J., dissenting

ing that the Eighth Amendment prohibits capital punish­
ment for the brutal rape of a 12-year-old girl, the Court
disregarded a nascent legislative trend in favor of permitting capital punishment for this narrowly defined and
heinous crime. See 554 U. S., at 433 (explaining that,
although “the total number of States to have made child
rape a capital offense . . . is six,” “[t]his is not an indication
of a trend or change in direction comparable to the one
supported by data in Roper”). The Court felt no need to
see whether this trend developed further—perhaps be­
cause true moral evolution can lead in only one direction.
And despite the argument that the rape of a young child
may involve greater depravity than some murders, the
Court proclaimed that homicide is categorically different
from all (or maybe almost all) other offenses. See id.,
at 438 (stating that nonhomicide crimes, including child
rape, “may be devastating in their harm . . . but in terms
of moral depravity and of the injury to the person and
to the public, they cannot be compared to murder in their
severity and irrevocability” (internal quotation marks
and citation omitted)). As the Court had previously put
it, “death is different.” Ford, supra, at 411 (plurality
opinion).
Two years after Kennedy, in Graham v. Florida, any
pretense of heeding a legislative consensus was discarded.
In Graham, federal law and the law of 37 States and the
District of Columbia permitted a minor to be sentenced to
life imprisonment without parole for nonhomicide crimes,
but despite this unmistakable evidence of a national con­
sensus, the Court held that the practice violates the
Eighth Amendment. See 560 U. S., at ___ (THOMAS, J.,
dissenting) (slip op., at 1–3). The Court, however, drew a
distinction between minors who murder and minors who
commit other heinous offenses, so at least in that sense
the principle that death is different lived on.
Today, that principle is entirely put to rest, for here we

