2

MILLER v. ALABAMA
BREYER, J., concurring

of responsibility; they are more vulnerable or susceptible
to negative influences and outside pressures, including
peer pressure; and their characters are not as well
formed.” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 17) (internal quotation
marks omitted). See also ibid. (“[P]sychology and brain
science continue to show fundamental differences between
juvenile and adult minds” making their actions “less likely
to be evidence of ‘irretrievably depraved character’ than
are the actions of adults” (quoting Roper v. Simmons, 543
U. S. 551, 570 (2005))); ante, at 8–9. For another thing,
Graham recognized that lack of intent normally diminishes the “moral culpability” that attaches to the crime in
question, making those that do not intend to kill “categorically less deserving of the most serious forms of punishment than are murderers.” 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
18) (citing Kennedy v. Louisiana, 554 U. S. 407, 434–435
(2008); Enmund v. Florida, 458 U. S. 782 (1982); Tison v.
Arizona, 481 U. S. 137 (1987)). And we concluded that,
because of this “twice diminished moral culpability,” the
Eighth Amendment forbids the imposition upon juveniles
of a sentence of life without parole for nonhomicide cases.
Graham, supra, at ___, ___ (slip op., at 18, 32).
Given Graham’s reasoning, the kinds of homicide that
can subject a juvenile offender to life without parole must
exclude instances where the juvenile himself neither kills
nor intends to kill the victim. Quite simply, if the juvenile
either kills or intends to kill the victim, he lacks “twice
diminished” responsibility. But where the juvenile neither
kills nor intends to kill, both features emphasized in Graham as extenuating apply. The dissent itself here would
permit life without parole for “juveniles who commit the
worst types of murder,” post, at 7 (opinion of ROBERTS,
C. J.), but that phrase does not readily fit the culpability of
one who did not himself kill or intend to kill.
I recognize that in the context of felony-murder cases,
the question of intent is a complicated one. The felony-

