16

MILLER v. ALABAMA
Opinion of the Court

friend Shields was carrying a gun, but his age could well
have affected his calculation of the risk that posed, as well
as his willingness to walk away at that point. All these
circumstances go to Jackson’s culpability for the offense.
See Graham, 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 18) (“[W]hen
compared to an adult murderer, a juvenile offender who
did not kill or intend to kill has a twice diminished moral
culpability”). And so too does Jackson’s family background
and immersion in violence: Both his mother and his
grandmother had previously shot other individuals. See
Record in No. 10–9647, pp. 80–82. At the least, a sentencer should look at such facts before depriving a 14year-old of any prospect of release from prison.
That is true also in Miller’s case. No one can doubt that
he and Smith committed a vicious murder. But they did it
when high on drugs and alcohol consumed with the adult
victim. And if ever a pathological background might have
contributed to a 14-year-old’s commission of a crime, it is
here. Miller’s stepfather physically abused him; his alcoholic and drug-addicted mother neglected him; he had
been in and out of foster care as a result; and he had tried
to kill himself four times, the first when he should have
been in kindergarten. See 928 So. 2d, at 1081 (Cobb, J.,
concurring in result); Miller App. 26–28; supra, at 4.
Nonetheless, Miller’s past criminal history was limited—
two instances of truancy and one of “second-degree criminal mischief.” No. CR–03–0915, at 6 (unpublished memorandum). That Miller deserved severe punishment for
killing Cole Cannon is beyond question. But once again,
a sentencer needed to examine all these circumstances
before concluding that life without any possibility of parole
was the appropriate penalty.
We therefore hold that the Eighth Amendment forbids a
sentencing scheme that mandates life in prison without
possibility of parole for juvenile offenders. Cf. Graham,
560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 24) (“A State is not required

