Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

decision, primarily relying on Graham and Roper. Ante,
at 7. Petitioners argue that the reasoning of those cases
“compels” finding in their favor. Jackson Brief 34. The
Court is apparently unwilling to go so far, asserting only
that precedent points in that direction. But today’s decision invalidates the laws of dozens of legislatures and
Congress. This Court is not easily led to such a result.
See, e.g., United States v. Harris, 106 U. S. 629, 635 (1883)
(courts must presume an Act of Congress is constitutional
“unless the lack of constitutional authority . . . is clearly
demonstrated”). Because the Court does not rely on the
Eighth Amendment’s text or objective evidence of society’s
standards, its analysis of precedent alone must bear the
“heavy burden [that] rests on those who would attack the
judgment of the representatives of the people.” Gregg, 428
U. S., at 175. If the Court is unwilling to say that precedent compels today’s decision, perhaps it should reconsider
that decision.
In any event, the Court’s holding does not follow from
Roper and Graham. Those cases undoubtedly stand for
the proposition that teenagers are less mature, less responsible, and less fixed in their ways than adults—not
that a Supreme Court case was needed to establish that.
What they do not stand for, and do not even suggest, is
that legislators—who also know that teenagers are different from adults—may not require life without parole for
juveniles who commit the worst types of murder.
That Graham does not imply today’s result could not be
clearer. In barring life without parole for juvenile nonhomicide offenders, Graham stated that “[t]here is a line
‘between homicide and other serious violent offenses
against the individual.’ ” 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 18)
(quoting Kennedy, 554 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 27)). The
whole point of drawing a line between one issue and another is to say that they are different and should be
treated differently. In other words, the two are in different

