Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

BREYER, J., concurring

murder doctrine traditionally attributes death caused in
the course of a felony to all participants who intended to
commit the felony, regardless of whether they killed or
intended to kill. See 2 W. LaFave, Substantive Criminal
Law §§14.5(a) and (c) (2d ed. 2003). This rule has been
based on the idea of “transferred intent”; the defendant’s
intent to commit the felony satisfies the intent to kill
required for murder. See S. Kadish, S. Schulhofer, & C.
Steiker, Criminal Law and Its Processes 439 (8th ed.
2007); 2 C. Torcia, Wharton’s Criminal Law §147 (15th ed.
1994).
But in my opinion, this type of “transferred intent” is
not sufficient to satisfy the intent to murder that could
subject a juvenile to a sentence of life without parole. As
an initial matter, this Court has made clear that this
artificially constructed kind of intent does not count as
intent for purposes of the Eighth Amendment. We do not
rely on transferred intent in determining if an adult may
receive the death penalty. Thus, the Constitution forbids
imposing capital punishment upon an aider and abettor in
a robbery, where that individual did not intend to kill and
simply was “in the car by the side of the road . . . , waiting
to help the robbers escape.” Enmund, supra, at 788. Cf.
Tison, supra, at 157–158 (capital punishment permissible for aider and abettor where kidnaping led to death
because he was “actively involved” in every aspect of the
kidnaping and his behavior showed “a reckless disregard
for human life”). Given Graham, this holding applies to
juvenile sentences of life without parole a fortiori. See
ante, at 12–13. Indeed, even juveniles who meet the Tison
standard of “reckless disregard” may not be eligible for life
without parole. Rather, Graham dictates a clear rule: The
only juveniles who may constitutionally be sentenced to
life without parole are those convicted of homicide offenses
who “kill or intend to kill.” 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op.,
at 18).

