10

MILLER v. ALABAMA
Opinion of the Court

ment. Graham, 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 21) (quoting
Roper, 543 U. S., at 571). Similarly, incapacitation could
not support the life-without-parole sentence in Graham:
Deciding that a “juvenile offender forever will be a danger
to society” would require “mak[ing] a judgment that [he]
is incorrigible”—but “ ‘incorrigibility is inconsistent with
youth.’ ” 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 22) (quoting Workman v. Commonwealth, 429 S. W. 2d 374, 378 (Ky. App.
1968)). And for the same reason, rehabilitation could not
justify that sentence. Life without parole “forswears
altogether the rehabilitative ideal.” Graham, 560 U. S., at
___ (slip op., at 23). It reflects “an irrevocable judgment
about [an offender’s] value and place in society,” at odds
with a child’s capacity for change. Ibid.
Graham concluded from this analysis that life-withoutparole sentences, like capital punishment, may violate
the Eighth Amendment when imposed on children. To be
sure, Graham’s flat ban on life without parole applied only
to nonhomicide crimes, and the Court took care to distinguish those offenses from murder, based on both moral
culpability and consequential harm. See id., at ___ (slip
op., at 18). But none of what it said about children—about
their distinctive (and transitory) mental traits and environmental vulnerabilities—is crime-specific.
Those
features are evident in the same way, and to the same degree, when (as in both cases here) a botched robbery turns
into a killing. So Graham’s reasoning implicates any lifewithout-parole sentence imposed on a juvenile, even as its
categorical bar relates only to nonhomicide offenses.
Most fundamentally, Graham insists that youth matters
in determining the appropriateness of a lifetime of incarceration without the possibility of parole. In the circumstances there, juvenile status precluded a life-withoutparole sentence, even though an adult could receive it for a
similar crime. And in other contexts as well, the characteristics of youth, and the way they weaken rationales for

