Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

21

Opinion of the Court

enactments. See, e.g., Sumner v. Shuman, 483 U. S. 66
(relying on Woodson’s logic to prohibit the mandatory
death penalty for murderers already serving life without
parole); Lockett, 438 U. S., at 602–608 (plurality opinion)
(applying Woodson to require that judges and juries
consider all mitigating evidence); Eddings, 455 U. S., at
110–117 (similar). We see no difference here.
In any event, the “objective indicia” that the States offer
do not distinguish these cases from others holding that
a sentencing practice violates the Eighth Amendment. In
Graham, we prohibited life-without-parole terms for
juveniles committing nonhomicide offenses even though
39 jurisdictions permitted that sentence. See 560 U. S.,
at ___ (slip op., at 11). That is 10 more than impose life
without parole on juveniles on a mandatory basis.10 And
——————
10 In assessing indicia of societal standards, Graham discussed “actual sentencing practices” in addition to legislative enactments, noting
how infrequently sentencers imposed the statutorily available penalty.
560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 11). Here, we consider the constitutionality of mandatory sentencing schemes—which by definition remove a
judge’s or jury’s discretion—so no comparable gap between legislation
and practice can exist. Rather than showing whether sentencers
consider life without parole for juvenile homicide offenders appropriate,
the number of juveniles serving this sentence, see post, at 1, 3–4
(ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting), merely reflects the number who have committed homicide in mandatory-sentencing jurisdictions. For the same
reason, THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s comparison of ratios in this case and Graham carries little weight. He contrasts the number of mandatory
life-without-parole sentences for juvenile murderers, relative to the
number of juveniles arrested for murder, with “the corresponding
number” of sentences in Graham (i.e., the number of life-without-parole
sentences for juveniles who committed serious nonhomicide crimes, as
compared to arrests for those crimes). Post, at 4. But because the
mandatory nature of the sentences here necessarily makes them more
common, THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s figures do not “correspon[d]” at all. The
higher ratio is mostly a function of removing the sentencer’s discretion.
Where mandatory sentencing does not itself account for the number
of juveniles serving life-without-parole terms, the evidence we have of
practice supports our holding. Fifteen jurisdictions make life without

