Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

STEVENS, J., dissenting

that the agreement’s “delegation” provision suggests
assent is beside the point, because the gravamen of re
spondent’s claim is that he never consented to the terms in
his agreement.
In other words, when a party raises a good-faith validity
challenge to the arbitration agreement itself, that issue
must be resolved before a court can say that he clearly and
unmistakably intended to arbitrate that very validity
question. This case well illustrates the point: If respon
dent’s unconscionability claim is correct—i.e., if the terms
of the agreement are so one-sided and the process of its
making so unfair—it would contravene the existence of
clear and unmistakable assent to arbitrate the very ques
tion petitioner now seeks to arbitrate. Accordingly, it is
necessary for the court to resolve the merits of respon
dent’s unconscionability claim in order to decide whether
the parties have a valid arbitration agreement under §2.
Otherwise, that section’s preservation of revocation issues
for the Court would be meaningless.
This is, in essence, how I understand the Court of Ap
peals to have decided the issue below. See 581 F. 3d 912,
917 (CA9 2009) (“[W]e hold that where, as here, a party
challenges an arbitration agreement as unconscionable,
and thus asserts that he could not meaningfully assent to
——————
because he was in a position of unequal bargaining power when it was
imposed as a condition of employment”); id., at 3–4 (identifying three
distinct provisions of the agreement that were substantively uncon
scionable); accord, 581 F. 3d, at 917.
Some of respondent’s arguments, however, could be understood as
attacks not on the enforceability of the agreement as a whole but
merely on the fairness of individual contract terms. Such term-specific
challenges would generally be for the arbitrator to resolve (at least so
long as they do not go to the identity of the arbitrator or the ability of a
party to initiate arbitration). Cf. Restatement (Second) of Contracts
§208 (1979) (providing that “a contract or term thereof [may be] uncon
scionable” and that in the latter case “the remainder of the contract
without the unconscionable term” may be enforced).

