Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., dissenting

“whether an arbitration clause in a concededly binding
contract applies to a particular type of controversy,” ibid.
It would be bizarre to send these types of gateway matters
to the arbitrator as a matter of course, because they raise
a “ ‘question of arbitrability.’ ”1 See, e.g., ibid.; First Op
tions, 514 U. S., at 947.
“[Q]uestion[s] of arbitrability” thus include questions
regarding the existence of a legally binding and valid
arbitration agreement, as well as questions regarding the
scope of a concededly binding arbitration agreement. In
this case we are concerned with the first of these catego
ries: whether the parties have a valid arbitration agree
ment. This is an issue the FAA assigns to the courts.2
Section 2 of the FAA dictates that covered arbitration
agreements “shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable,
save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the
revocation of any contract.” 9 U. S. C. §2. “[S]uch
grounds,” which relate to contract validity and formation,
include the claim at issue in this case, unconscionability.
See Doctor’s Associates, Inc. v. Casarotto, 517 U. S. 681,
687 (1996).
Two different lines of cases bear on the issue of who
decides a question of arbitrability respecting validity, such
as whether an arbitration agreement is unconscionable.
Although this issue, as a gateway matter, is typically for
the court, we have explained that such an issue can be
delegated to the arbitrator in some circumstances. When
——————
1 Although it is not clear from our precedents, I understand “gateway
matters” and “questions of arbitrability” to be roughly synonymous, if
not exactly so. At the very least, the former includes all of the latter.
2 Gateway issues involving the scope of an otherwise valid arbitration
agreement also have a statutory origin. Section 3 of the FAA provides
that “upon being satisfied that the issue involved in such suit . . . is
referable to arbitration under such an agreement,” a court “shall . . .
stay the trial of the action until such arbitration has been had.” 9
U. S. C. §3.

