12

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
STEVENS, J., dissenting

ing rule requires more: A party must lodge a challenge
with even greater specificity than what would have satis
fied the Prima Paint Court. A claim that an entire arbi
tration agreement is invalid will not go to the court unless
the party challenges the particular sentences that delegate
such claims to the arbitrator, on some contract ground
that is particular and unique to those sentences. See ante,
at 8–10.
It would seem the Court reads Prima Paint to require,
as a matter of course, infinite layers of severability: We
must always pluck from an arbitration agreement the
specific delegation mechanism that would—but for present
judicial review—commend the matter to arbitration, even
if this delegation clause is but one sentence within one
paragraph within a standalone agreement. And, most
importantly, the party must identify this one sentence and
lodge a specific challenge to its validity. Otherwise, he
will be bound to pursue his validity claim in arbitration.
Even if limited to separately executed arbitration
agreements, however, such an infinite severability rule is
divorced from the underlying rationale of Prima Paint.
The notion that a party may be bound by an arbitration
clause in a contract that is nevertheless invalid may be
difficult for any lawyer—or any person—to accept, but this
is the law of Prima Paint. It reflects a judgment that the
“ ‘national policy favoring arbitration,’ ” Preston, 552 U. S.,
at 353, outweighs the interest in preserving a judicial
forum for questions of arbitrability—but only when ques
tions of arbitrability are bound up in an underlying dis
pute. Prima Paint, 388 U. S., at 404. When the two are so
bound up, there is actually no gateway matter at all: The
question “Who decides” is the entire ball game. Were a
court to decide the fraudulent inducement question in
Prima Paint, in order to decide the antecedent question of
the validity of the included arbitration agreement, then it
would also, necessarily, decide the merits of the underly

