10

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
Opinion of the Court

employment and was non-negotiable.” App. 41. But we
need not consider that claim because none of Jackson’s
substantive unconscionability challenges was specific to
the delegation provision. First, he argued that the Agree
ment’s coverage was one sided in that it required arbitra
tion of claims an employee was likely to bring—contract,
tort, discrimination, and statutory claims—but did not
require arbitration of claims Rent-A-Center was likely to
bring—intellectual property, unfair competition, and trade
secrets claims. Id., at 42–43. This one-sided-coverage
argument clearly did not go to the validity of the delega
tion provision.
Jackson’s other two substantive unconscionability ar
guments assailed arbitration procedures called for by the
contract—the fee-splitting arrangement and the limita
tions on discovery—procedures that were to be used dur
ing arbitration under both the agreement to arbitrate
employment-related disputes and the delegation provision.
It may be that had Jackson challenged the delegation
provision by arguing that these common procedures as
applied to the delegation provision rendered that provision
unconscionable, the challenge should have been consid
ered by the court. To make such a claim based on the
discovery procedures, Jackson would have had to argue
that the limitation upon the number of depositions causes
the arbitration of his claim that the Agreement is unen
forceable to be unconscionable. That would be, of course, a
much more difficult argument to sustain than the argu
ment that the same limitation renders arbitration of his
factbound employment-discrimination claim unconscion
able. Likewise, the unfairness of the fee-splitting ar
rangement may be more difficult to establish for the arbi
tration of enforceability than for arbitration of more
complex and fact-related aspects of the alleged employ
ment discrimination. Jackson, however, did not make any
arguments specific to the delegation provision; he argued

