10

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
STEVENS, J., dissenting

agreement void or voidable is irrelevant. Id., at 446. All
that matters is whether the party seeking to present the
issue to a court has brought a “discrete challenge,” Preston
v. Ferrer, 552 U. S. 346, 354 (2008), “to the validity of the
. . . arbitration clause.” Buckeye, 546 U. S., at 449.
Prima Paint and its progeny allow a court to pluck from
a potentially invalid contract a potentially valid arbitra
tion agreement. Today the Court adds a new layer of
severability—something akin to Russian nesting dolls—
into the mix: Courts may now pluck from a potentially
invalid arbitration agreement even narrower provisions
that refer particular arbitrability disputes to an arbitra
tor. See ante, at 6–7. I do not think an agreement to
arbitrate can ever manifest a clear and unmistakable
intent to arbitrate its own validity. But even assuming
otherwise, I certainly would not hold that the Prima Paint
rule extends this far.
In my view, a general revocation challenge to a stand
alone arbitration agreement is, invariably, a challenge to
the “ ‘making’ ” of the arbitration agreement itself, Prima
Paint, 388 U. S., at 403, and therefore, under Prima Paint,
must be decided by the court. A claim of procedural un
conscionability aims to undermine the formation of the
arbitration agreement, much like a claim of unconscion
ability aims to undermine the clear-and-unmistakable
intent requirement necessary for a valid delegation of a
“discrete” challenge to the validity of the arbitration agree
ment itself, Preston, 552 U. S., at 354. Moreover, because
we are dealing in this case with a challenge to an inde
pendently executed arbitration agreement—rather than a
clause contained in a contract related to another subject
matter—any challenge to the contract itself is also, neces
sarily, a challenge to the arbitration agreement.9 They are
——————
9 As respondent asserted in his opposition to petitioner’s motion to
compel arbitration, “the lack of mutuality regarding the type of claims

