8

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
Opinion of the Court

Here, the “written provision . . . to settle by arbitration a
controversy,” 9 U. S. C. §2, that Rent-A-Center asks us to
enforce is the delegation provision—the provision that
gave the arbitrator “exclusive authority to resolve any
dispute relating to the . . . enforceability . . . of this
Agreement,” App. 34. The “remainder of the contract,”
Buckeye, supra, at 445, is the rest of the agreement to
arbitrate claims arising out of Jackson’s employment with
Rent-A-Center. To be sure this case differs from Prima
Paint, Buckeye, and Preston, in that the arbitration provi
sions sought to be enforced in those cases were contained
in contracts unrelated to arbitration—contracts for con
sulting services, see Prima Paint, supra, at 397, check
cashing services, see Buckeye, supra, at 442, and “personal
management” or “talent agent” services, see Preston,
supra, at 352. In this case, the underlying contract is
itself an arbitration agreement. But that makes no differ
ence.3 Application of the severability rule does not depend
on the substance of the remainder of the contract. Section
2 operates on the specific “written provision” to “settle by
arbitration a controversy” that the party seeks to enforce.
Accordingly, unless Jackson challenged the delegation
provision specifically, we must treat it as valid under §2,
——————
3 The

dissent calls this a “breezy assertion,” post, at 1, but it seems to
us self-evident. When the dissent comes to discussing the point, post,
at 11, it gives no logical reason why an agreement to arbitrate one
controversy (an employment-discrimination claim) is not severable from
an agreement to arbitrate a different controversy (enforceability).
There is none. Since the dissent accepts that the invalidity of one
provision within an arbitration agreement does not necessarily invali
date its other provisions, post, at 7, n. 7, it cannot believe in some sort
of magic bond between arbitration provisions that prevents them from
being severed from each other. According to the dissent, it is fine to
sever an invalid provision within an arbitration agreement when
severability is a matter of state law, but severability is not allowed
when it comes to applying Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & Conklin Mfg.
Co., 388 U. S. 395 (1967).

