4

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
Opinion of the Court

terms, Volt Information Sciences, Inc. v. Board of Trustees
of Leland Stanford Junior Univ., 489 U. S. 468, 478
(1989). Like other contracts, however, they may be invali
dated by “generally applicable contract defenses, such as
fraud, duress, or unconscionability.” Doctor’s Associates,
Inc. v. Casarotto, 517 U. S. 681, 687 (1996).
The Act also establishes procedures by which federal
courts implement §2’s substantive rule. Under §3, a party
may apply to a federal court for a stay of the trial of an
action “upon any issue referable to arbitration under an
agreement in writing for such arbitration.” Under §4, a
party “aggrieved” by the failure of another party “to arbi
trate under a written agreement for arbitration” may
petition a federal court “for an order directing that such
arbitration proceed in the manner provided for in such
agreement.” The court “shall” order arbitration “upon
being satisfied that the making of the agreement for arbi
tration or the failure to comply therewith is not in issue.”
Ibid.
The Agreement here contains multiple “written provi
sion[s]” to “settle by arbitration a controversy,” §2. Two
are relevant to our discussion. First, the section titled
“Claims Covered By The Agreement” provides for arbitra
tion of all “past, present or future” disputes arising out of
Jackson’s employment with Rent-A-Center. App. 29.
Second, the section titled “Arbitration Procedures” pro
vides that “[t]he Arbitrator . . . shall have exclusive au
thority to resolve any dispute relating to the . . . enforce
ability . . . of this Agreement including, but not limited to
any claim that all or any part of this Agreement is void or
voidable.” Id., at 32, 34. The current “controversy” be
tween the parties is whether the Agreement is uncon
scionable. It is the second provision, which delegates
resolution of that controversy to the arbitrator, that RentA-Center seeks to enforce. Adopting the terminology used
by the parties, we will refer to it as the delegation provi

