6

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
Opinion of the Court

Kaplan, 514 U. S. 938, 943 (1995). An agreement to arbi
trate a gateway issue is simply an additional, antecedent
agreement the party seeking arbitration asks the federal
court to enforce, and the FAA operates on this additional
arbitration agreement just as it does on any other. The
additional agreement is valid under §2 “save upon such
grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of
any contract,” and federal courts can enforce the agree
ment by staying federal litigation under §3 and compelling
arbitration under §4. The question before us, then, is
whether the delegation provision is valid under §2.
B
There are two types of validity challenges under §2:
“One type challenges specifically the validity of the
agreement to arbitrate,” and “[t]he other challenges the
contract as a whole, either on a ground that directly af
fects the entire agreement (e.g., the agreement was
fraudulently induced), or on the ground that the illegality
of one of the contract’s provisions renders the whole con
tract invalid.” Buckeye, 546 U. S., at 444. In a line of
cases neither party has asked us to overrule, we held that
only the first type of challenge is relevant to a court’s
determination whether the arbitration agreement at issue
is enforceable.2 See Prima Paint Corp. v. Flood & Conklin
Mfg. Co., 388 U. S. 395, 403–404 (1967); Buckeye, supra, at
——————
course, whether it was void for unconscionability) is governed by §2’s
provision that it shall be valid “save upon such grounds as exist at law
or equity for the revocation of any contract.” Those grounds do not
include, of course, any requirement that its lack of unconscionability
must be “clear and unmistakable.” And they are not grounds that First
Options added for agreements to arbitrate gateway issues; §2 applies to
all written agreements to arbitrate.
2 The issue of the agreement’s “validity” is different from the issue
whether any agreement between the parties “was ever concluded,” and,
as in Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v. Cardegna, 546 U. S. 440 (2006),
we address only the former. Id., at 444, n. 1.

