2

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
Opinion of the Court

for discrimination” and “claims for violation of any federal
. . . law.” App. 29–30. It also provided that “[t]he Arbitra
tor, and not any federal, state, or local court or agency,
shall have exclusive authority to resolve any dispute
relating to the interpretation, applicability, enforceability
or formation of this Agreement including, but not limited
to any claim that all or any part of this Agreement is void
or voidable.” Id., at 34.
Jackson opposed the motion on the ground that “the
arbitration agreement in question is clearly unenforceable
in that it is unconscionable” under Nevada law. Id., at 40.
Rent-A-Center responded that Jackson’s unconscionability
claim was not properly before the court because Jackson
had expressly agreed that the arbitrator would have ex
clusive authority to resolve any dispute about the enforce
ability of the Agreement. It also disputed the merits of
Jackson’s unconscionability claims.
The District Court granted Rent-A-Center’s motion to
dismiss the proceedings and to compel arbitration. The
court found that the Agreement “ ‘ “clearly and unmistak
enly [sic]” ’ ” gives the arbitrator exclusive authority to
decide whether the Agreement is enforceable, App. to Pet.
for Cert. 4a. (quoting Howsam v. Dean Witter Reynolds,
Inc., 537 U. S. 79, 83 (2002)), and, because Jackson chal
lenged the validity of the Agreement as a whole, the issue
was for the arbitrator, App. to Pet. for Cert. 4a (citing
Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v. Cardegna, 546 U. S. 440,
444–445 (2006)). The court noted that even if it were to
examine the merits of Jackson’s unconscionability claims,
it would have rejected the claim that the agreement to
split arbitration fees was substantively unconscionable
under Nevada law. It did not address Jackson’s proce
dural or other substantive unconscionability arguments.
Without oral argument, a divided panel of the Court of
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed in part, affirmed in
part, and remanded. 581 F. 3d 912 (2009). The court

