Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

444–446; Preston v. Ferrer, 552 U. S. 346, 353–354 (2008).
That is because §2 states that a “written provision” “to
settle by arbitration a controversy” is “valid, irrevocable,
and enforceable” without mention of the validity of the
contract in which it is contained. Thus, a party’s chal
lenge to another provision of the contract, or to the con
tract as a whole, does not prevent a court from enforcing a
specific agreement to arbitrate. “[A]s a matter of substan
tive federal arbitration law, an arbitration provision is
severable from the remainder of the contract.” Buckeye,
546 U. S., at 445; see also id., at 447 (the severability rule
is based on §2).
But that agreements to arbitrate are severable does not
mean that they are unassailable. If a party challenges the
validity under §2 of the precise agreement to arbitrate at
issue, the federal court must consider the challenge before
ordering compliance with that agreement under §4. In
Prima Paint, for example, if the claim had been “fraud in
the inducement of the arbitration clause itself,” then the
court would have considered it. 388 U. S., at 403–404.
“To immunize an arbitration agreement from judicial
challenge on the ground of fraud in the inducement would
be to elevate it over other forms of contract,” id., at 404,
n. 12. In some cases the claimed basis of invalidity for the
contract as a whole will be much easier to establish than
the same basis as applied only to the severable agreement
to arbitrate. Thus, in an employment contract many
elements of alleged unconscionability applicable to the
entire contract (outrageously low wages, for example)
would not affect the agreement to arbitrate alone. But
even where that is not the case—as in Prima Paint itself,
where the alleged fraud that induced the whole contract
equally induced the agreement to arbitrate which was part
of that contract—we nonetheless require the basis of
challenge to be directed specifically to the agreement to
arbitrate before the court will intervene.

