8

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
STEVENS, J., dissenting

the agreement, the threshold question of unconscionability
is for the court”). I would therefore affirm its judgment,
leaving, as it did, the merits of respondent’s unconscion
ability claim for the District Court to resolve on remand.
III
Rather than apply First Options, the Court takes us
down a different path, one neither briefed by the parties
nor relied upon by the Court of Appeals. In applying
Prima Paint, the Court has unwisely extended a “fantas
tic” and likely erroneous decision. 388 U. S., at 407
(Black, J., dissenting).8
As explained at the outset, see supra, at 3–7, this case
lies at a seeming crossroads in our arbitration jurispru
dence. It implicates cases such as First Options, which
address whether the parties intended to delegate ques
tions of arbitrability, and also those cases, such as Prima
Paint, which address the severability of a presumptively
valid arbitration agreement from a potentially invalid
contract. The question of “Who decides?”—arbitrator or
court—animates both lines of cases, but they are driven by
different concerns. In cases like First Options, we are
concerned with the parties’ intentions. In cases like Prima
Paint, we are concerned with how the parties challenge
the validity of the agreement.
Under the Prima Paint inquiry, recall, we consider
whether the parties are actually challenging the validity
of the arbitration agreement, or whether they are chal
——————
8 Justice Black quite reasonably characterized the Court’s holding in
Prima Paint as “fantastic,” id., at 407 (dissenting opinion), because the
holding was, in his view, inconsistent with the text of §2 of the FAA,
388 U. S., at 412, as well as the intent of the draftsmen of the legisla
tion, id., at 413–416. Nevertheless, the narrow holding in that case has
been followed numerous times, see Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v.
Cardegna, 546 U. S. 440 (2006), and Preston v. Ferrer, 552 U. S. 346
(2008), and, as the Court correctly notes today, neither party has asked
us to revisit those cases, ante, at 6.

