(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–497.

Argued April 26, 2010—Decided June 21, 2010

Respondent Jackson filed an employment-discrimination suit against
petitioner Rent-A-Center, his former employer, in a Nevada Federal
District Court. Rent-A-Center filed a motion, under the Federal Ar
bitration Act (FAA), to dismiss or stay the proceedings, 9 U. S. C. §3,
and to compel arbitration, §4, based on the arbitration agreement
(Agreement) Jackson signed as a condition of his employment. Jack
son opposed the motion on the ground that the Agreement was unen
forceable in that it was unconscionable under Nevada law. The Dis
trict Court granted Rent-A-Center’s motion. The Ninth Circuit
reversed in relevant part.
Held: Under the FAA, where an agreement to arbitrate includes an
agreement that the arbitrator will determine the enforceability of the
agreement, if a party challenges specifically the enforceability of that
particular agreement, the district court considers the challenge, but if
a party challenges the enforceability of the agreement as a whole, the
challenge is for the arbitrator. Pp. 3–12.
(a) Section 2 of the FAA places arbitration agreements on an equal
footing with other contracts, Buckeye Check Cashing, Inc. v.
Cardegna, 546 U. S. 440, 443, and requires courts to enforce them ac
cording to their terms, Volt Information Sciences, Inc. v. Board of
Trustees of Leland Stanford Junior Univ., 489 U. S. 468, 478, “save
upon such grounds as exist under law or in equity for the revocation
of any contract,” §2. Here, the Agreement included two relevant arbi
tration provisions: it provided for arbitration of all disputes arising
out of Jackson’s employment, including discrimination claims, and it
gave the “Arbitrator . . . exclusive authority to resolve any dispute re
lating to the [Agreement’s] enforceability . . . including . . . any claim

