4

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
STEVENS, J., dissenting

the parties have purportedly done so, courts must examine
two distinct rules to decide whether the delegation is
valid.
The first line of cases looks to the parties’ intent. In
AT&T Technologies, we stated that “question[s] of arbi
trability” may be delegated to the arbitrator, so long as the
delegation is clear and unmistakable. 475 U. S., at 649.
We reaffirmed this rule, and added some nuance, in First
Options. Against the background presumption that ques
tions of arbitrability go to the court, we stated that federal
courts should “generally” apply “ordinary state-law princi
ples that govern the formation of contracts” to assess
“whether the parties agreed to arbitrate a certain matter
(including arbitrability).” 514 U. S., at 944. But, we
added, a more rigorous standard applies when the inquiry
is whether the parties have “agreed to arbitrate arbitrabil
ity”: “Courts should not assume that the parties agreed to
arbitrate arbitrability unless there is clear and unmistak
able evidence that they did so.”3 Ibid. (internal quotation
marks and brackets omitted). JUSTICE BREYER’s unani
mous opinion for the Court described this standard as a
type of “revers[e]” “presumption”4—one in favor of a judi
cial, rather than an arbitral, forum. Id., at 945. Clear and
unmistakable “evidence” of agreement to arbitrate arbi
trability might include, as was urged in First Options, a
course of conduct demonstrating assent,5 id., at 946, or, as
——————
3 We

have not expressly decided whether the First Options delegation
principle would apply to questions of arbitrability that implicate §2
concerns, i.e., grounds for contract revocation. I do not need to weigh in
on this issue in order to resolve the present case.
4 It is a “revers[e]” presumption because it is counter to the presump
tion we usually apply in favor of arbitration when the question con
cerns whether a particular dispute falls within the scope of a conced
edly binding arbitration agreement. First Options, 514 U. S., at 944–
945.
5 In First Options we found no clear and unmistakable assent to dele
gate to the arbitrator questions of arbitrability, given the parties’

