2

RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC. v. JACKSON
Syllabus
that all or any part of this Agreement is void or voidable.” Rent-ACenter seeks enforcement of the second provision, which delegates to
the arbitrator the “gateway” question of enforceability. See, e.g.,
Howsam v. Dean Witter Reynolds, Inc., 537 U. S. 79, 83–85. The
court must enforce the delegation provision under §§3 and 4 unless it
is unenforceable under §2. Pp. 3–6.
(b) There are two types of validity challenges under §2: one “chal
lenges specifically the validity of the agreement to arbitrate,” and
“[t]he other challenges the contract as a whole,” Buckeye, supra, at
444. Only the first is relevant to a court’s determination of an arbi
tration agreement’s enforceability, see, e.g., Prima Paint Corp. v.
Flood & Conklin Mfg. Co., 388 U. S. 395, 403–404, because under §2
“an arbitration provision is severable from the remainder of the con
tract,” Buckeye, supra, at 445. That does not mean that agreements
to arbitrate are unassailable. If a party challenges the validity under
§2 of the precise agreement to arbitrate at issue, the federal court
must consider the challenge before ordering compliance with the
agreement under §4. That is no less true when the precise agree
ment to arbitrate is itself part of a larger arbitration agreement. Be
cause here the agreement to arbitrate enforceability (the delegation
provision) is severable from the remainder of the Agreement, unless
Jackson challenged the delegation provision specifically, it must be
treated as valid under §2 and enforced under §§3 and 4. Pp. 6–9.
(c) The District Court correctly concluded that Jackson challenged
only the validity of the contract as a whole. In his brief to this Court
he raised a challenge to the delegation provision for the first time,
but that is too late and will not be considered. See 14 Penn Plaza
LLC v. Pyett, 556 U. S. ___, ___. Pp. 9–12.

581 F. 3d 912, reversed.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., joined. STEVENS, J., filed a
dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined.

