Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., dissenting

is urged in this case, an express agreement to do so. In
any event, whether such evidence exists is a matter for the
court to determine.
The second line of cases bearing on who decides the
validity of an arbitration agreement, as the Court ex
plains, involves the Prima Paint rule. See ante, at 6. That
rule recognizes two types of validity challenges. One type
challenges the validity of the arbitration agreement itself,
on a ground arising from an infirmity in that agreement.
The other challenges the validity of the arbitration agree
ment tangentially—via a claim that the entire contract (of
which the arbitration agreement is but a part) is invalid
for some reason. See Buckeye, 546 U. S., at 444. Under
Prima Paint, a challenge of the first type goes to the court;
a challenge of the second type goes to the arbitrator. See
388 U. S., at 403–404; see also Buckeye, 546 U. S., at 444–
445. The Prima Paint rule is akin to a pleading standard,
whereby a party seeking to challenge the validity of an
arbitration agreement must expressly say so in order to
get his dispute into court.
In sum, questions related to the validity of an arbitra
tion agreement are usually matters for a court to resolve
before it refers a dispute to arbitration. But questions of
arbitrability may go to the arbitrator in two instances: (1)
when the parties have demonstrated, clearly and unmis
takably, that it is their intent to do so; or (2) when the
validity of an arbitration agreement depends exclusively
on the validity of the substantive contract of which it is a
part.
II
We might have resolved this case by simply applying the
——————
conduct. Respondents in that case had participated in the arbitration,
but only to object to proceeding in arbitration and to challenge the
arbitrators’ jurisdiction. That kind of participation—in protest, to
preserve legal claims—did not constitute unmistakable assent to be
bound by the result. Id., at 946–947.

