(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

REYNOLDS v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 10–6549. Argued October 3, 2011—Decided January 23, 2012
The federal Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (Act) requires convicted sex offenders to provide state governments with, and
to update, information, e.g., names and current addresses, for state
and federal sex offender registries. It is a crime if a person who is
“required to register under [the Act]” and who “travels in interstate
. . . commerce” knowingly “fails to register or update a registration.”
18 U. S. C. §2250(a). The Act defines “sex offender” to include offenders who were convicted before the Act’s effective date, 42 U. S. C.
§16911(1), and says that “the Attorney General shall have the authority to specify the applicability of the [registration] requirements”
to pre-Act offenders, §16913(d). The Act, which seeks to make more
uniform and effective a patchwork of pre-Act federal and 50 state registration systems, became law in July 2006. In February 2007, the
Attorney General promulgated an Interim Rule specifying that the
Act applies to all pre-Act offenders. He has since promulgated further rules, regulations, and specifications.
Petitioner Reynolds, a pre-Act offender, registered in Missouri in
2005 but moved to Pennsylvania in September 2007 without updating the Missouri registration or registering in Pennsylvania. He was
indicted for failing to meet the Act’s registration requirements between September 16 and October 16, 2007. He moved to dismiss the
indictment on the ground that the Act was not applicable to pre-Act
offenders during that time, arguing that the Attorney General’s February 2007 Interim Rule was invalid because it violated the Constitution’s “nondelegation” doctrine and the Administrative Procedure
Act’s notice and comment requirements. The District Court rejected
on the merits of Reynolds’ legal attack on the Interim Rule, but the
Third Circuit rejected his argument without reaching the merits,

