Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of the Court

offender must update a registration within three business
days of any change of “name, residence, employment, or
student status.” Statement Four says that “[t]he Attorney
General shall have the authority to specify the applicability of the requirements of this subchapter to sex offenders
convicted before the enactment of this chapter.”
Read naturally, the Fourth Statement modifies the First.
It specifically deals with a subset (pre-Act offenders) of
a broad general class (all sex offenders) to which the First
Statement applies. And it therefore should control the
Act’s application to that subset. See Gozlon-Peretz v.
United States, 498 U. S. 395, 407 (1991) (specific statutory
provision normally controls over one of more general
application); see also Bloate v. United States, 559 U. S.
___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 10) (same).
At the same time, the Fourth Statement says that the
Attorney General has authority to specify the Act’s “applicability,” not its “nonapplicability.” And it consequently
is more naturally read as conferring the authority to apply
the Act, not the authority to make exceptions. That is
how we normally understand a term such as “authority to
specify” in the context of applying new rules to persons
already governed by pre-existing rules. If, for example,
the Major League Baseball Players Association and the
team owners agreed that the Commissioner of Baseball
“shall have the authority to specify the applicability” to
the major leagues of the more stringent minor league drug
testing policy, we should think that the minor league
policy would not apply unless and until the Commissioner
so specified.
For another thing, this reading of the Act efficiently
resolves what Congress may well have thought were practical problems arising when the Act sought to apply the
new registration requirements to pre-Act offenders. The
problems arise out of the fact that the Act seeks to make
more uniform a patchwork of pre-existing state systems.

