10

REYNOLDS v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

The Act’s history also reveals that many of its supporters placed considerable importance upon the registration
of pre-Act offenders. See, e.g., H. R. Rep. No. 109–218, pt.
1, p. 24 (2005) (H. R. Rep.) (“[Twenty] percent of sexual
offenders are ‘lost,’ and there is a strong public interest
in finding them and having them register with current
information to mitigate the risks of additional crimes
against children”); 152 Cong. Rec. 15333 (2006) (statement
of Sen. Cantwell) (“Child sex offenders have exploited this
stunning lack of uniformity, and the consequences have
been tragic. Twenty percent of the Nation’s 560,000 sex
offenders are ‘lost’ because State offender registry programs are not coordinated well enough”); id., at 15338
(statement of Sen. Kyl) (“There currently are over 100,000
sex offenders in this country who are required to register
but are ‘off the system.’ They are not registered. The
penalties in this bill should be adequate to ensure that
these individuals register”); id., at 13050 (statement of
Sen. Frist) (“There are currently 550,000 registered sex
offenders in the U. S. and at least 100,000 of them are
missing from the system. Every day that we don’t have
this national sex offender registry, these missing sex
predators are out there somewhere”).
The difficulty with the Government’s argument, however, is that it overstates the need for instantaneous registration of pre-Act offenders. Our different reading, we
concede, involves implementation delay. But that delay
need not be long (the Attorney General issued his Interim
Rule 217 days after the effective date of the new law).
And that delay can be justified by the need to accommodate other Act-related interests. See supra, at 7–9.
Second, the Government suggests that our reading leads
to an absurd result. As it points out, the Fourth Statement
grants the Attorney General the “authority to specify”
the registration requirements’ applicability not only to
pre-Act offenders but also to those convicted prior to the

