Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

The Court’s response to this—that “there was no need
for a mandatory requirement to avoid [the] unrealistic
possibility” that the Attorney General would not specify,
ante, at 12—seems to me a fine answer to the question
“What mandatory requirements must a poorly drafted
statute contain in order to be workable?” It is an inadequate answer, however, to the question that is relevant
here: “Would Congress have written the provision this way
if it wanted pre-Act offenders covered and did not think
they were covered absent specification by the Attorney General?” Intelligently drafted statutes make mandatory
those executive acts essential to their functioning, whether
or not those acts would likely occur anyway. It would have
taken little effort (in fact, less effort) for Congress to write
“the Attorney General shall specify the applicability”
instead of “the Attorney General shall have authority to
specify the applicability.” The latter formulation confers
discretion, and it is simply implausible that the Attorney
General was given discretion to determine whether coverage of pre-Act offenders (one of the purposes of the Act)
should exist.
Indeed, it is not entirely clear to me that Congress
can constitutionally leave it to the Attorney General to
decide—with no statutory standard whatever governing his
discretion—whether a criminal statute will or will not
apply to certain individuals. That seems to me sailing
close to the wind with regard to the principle that legislative powers are nondelegable, see Whitman v. American
Trucking Assns., Inc., 531 U. S. 457, 472–476 (2001);
Loving v. United States, 517 U. S. 748, 776–777 (1996)
(SCALIA, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment), and “[i]t is our settled policy to avoid an interpretation of a federal statute that engenders constitutional
issues if a reasonable alternative interpretation poses
no constitutional question.” Gomez v. United States, 490
U. S. 858, 864 (1989). Construing the Act to give the

