Cite as: 565 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of the Court

ground that in September and October 2007 the Act’s registration requirements had not yet become applicable to
pre-Act offenders. He conceded that the Act had become
law earlier (namely, in July 2006), and he conceded that
the Attorney General had already (in February 2007)
promulgated an Interim Rule specifying that the Act’s
registration requirements were applicable to pre-Act
offenders. But he claimed that the Interim Rule was
invalid because it violated both the Constitution’s “nondelegation” doctrine and the Administrative Procedure Act’s
(APA) requirement for “good cause” to promulgate a rule
without “notice and comment” (as the Attorney General
had done). See A. L. A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United
States, 295 U. S. 495, 529 (1935) (nondelegation doctrine);
5 U. S. C. §§553(b)(3)(B), (d)(3) (APA). Because the Interim Rule is invalid, he added, the law must treat him like a
pre-Act offender who traveled interstate and violated the
Act’s registration requirements before the Attorney General specified their applicability.
The District Court rejected on the merits Reynolds’ legal
attack on the Interim Rule. But the Court of Appeals
rejected Reynolds’ argument without reaching those merits. 380 Fed. Appx. 125 (2010). That court thought that
the Act’s registration requirements apply to pre-Act offenders such as Reynolds (who was subject to a preexisting state-law registration requirement) from the date
of the new law’s enactment—even in the absence of any
rule or regulation by the Attorney General specifying that
the new registration requirements apply. That being so,
the validity of the Interim Rule could make no legal difference, for the Act required Reynolds to follow the
new federal registration requirements regardless of any
rulemaking.
The Courts of Appeals have reached different conclusions about whether the Act’s registration requirements
apply to pre-Act offenders prior to the time that the Attor-

