2

REYNOLDS v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., dissenting

“a sex offender shall register,” §16913(a)—and that the
Court rightly believes was meant to cover pre-Act offenders.* The issue is whether “specify the applicability”
means that no pre-Act offenders need register unless the
Attorney General says so, or rather that the Attorney
General may excuse the unqualified requirement for preAct offenders. In that context, it seems to me that the
latter meaning is more natural. One specifies the applicability of an application that already exists by describing or
revising its contours.
I think it preferable to give “specify” this meaning not
only because here it is more natural, but also because
the alternative is to read the statute as leaving it up to the
Attorney General whether the registration requirement
would ever apply to pre-Act offenders, even though registration of pre-Act offenders was (as the Court acknowledges) what the statute sought to achieve. For the statute
does not instruct the Attorney General to specify; it merely
gives him “authority” to do so. In this respect, the provision at issue here stands in marked contrast to other
provisions of the Act which clearly impose duties on the
Attorney General. See, e.g., §16912(b) (“The Attorney
General shall issue guidelines and regulations to interpret
and implement this subchapter”); §16917(b) (“The Attorney General shall prescribe rules for the notification of
[certain] sex offenders”); §16919(a) (“The Attorney General
shall maintain a national database”); §16926(a) (“The
Attorney General shall establish and implement a Sex
Offender Management Assistance program”).
——————
* The Court reaches this conclusion based on an inquiry into legislative history. See ante, at 9–10. That inquiry is quite superf luous,
however since the text of the Act itself makes clear that Congress
sought to “establis[h] a comprehensive national system for the registration of [sex offenders],” 42 U. S. C. §16901, with “sex offender” defined
broadly to “mea[n] an individual who was convicted of a sex offense,”
§16911(1) (emphasis added).

