2

REYNOLDS v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
concluding that the Act’s registration requirements applied to pre-Act
offenders even in the absence of a rule by the Attorney General.
Thus, it found, the Interim Rule’s validity made no legal difference in
the outcome.

Held: The Act does not require pre-Act offenders to register before the
Attorney General validly specifies that the Act’s registration provisions apply to them. Pp. 6–13.
(a) This conclusion is supported by a natural reading of the Act’s
text, which consists of four statements. Statement One says that “[a]
sex offender shall register, and keep the registration current.”
Statement Two says that, generally, the offender must initially register before completing his “sentence of imprisonment.” Statement
Three says that the sex offender must update a registration within
three business days of any change of “name, residence, employment,
or student status.” Statement Four says that “[t]he Attorney General
shall have the authority to specify the applicability of the requirements . . . to sex offenders convicted before the enactment of” the Act.
§16913. Read naturally, the Fourth Statement modifies the First. It
deals specifically with a subset (pre-Act offenders) of the First Statement’s broad general class (all sex offenders) and thus should control
the Act’s application to that subset. See Gozlon-Peretz v. United
States, 498 U. S. 395, 407. Also, by giving the Attorney General authority to specify the Act’s “applicability,” not its “nonapplicability,”
the Fourth Statement is more naturally read to confer authority to
apply the Act, not authority to make exceptions. This reading efficiently resolves what may have been Congress’ concern about the
practical problems of applying the new registration requirements to a
large number of pre-Act offenders, which could have been expensive
and might not have proved feasible to do immediately. It might have
thought that such concerns warranted different treatment for different categories of pre-Act offenders. And it could have concluded that
it was efficient and desirable to ask the Justice Department, charged
with responsibility for implementation, to examine pre-Act offender
problems and to apply the new requirements accordingly. This reading also takes Congress to have filled potential lacunae (created by
related Act provisions) in a manner consistent with basic criminal
law principles. The Second Statement, e.g., requires a sex offender to
register before completing his prison term, but says nothing about
when a pre-Act offender who has left prison is to register. An Attorney General ruling could diminish such uncertainties, helping to
eliminate the kind of vagueness and uncertainty that criminal law
must seek to avoid. Pp. 6–9.
(b) The Government’s three principal contrary arguments—that
the Court’s reading conflicts with the Act’s purpose of establishing a

