Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

n. 6. We emphasized in Graham County that “all of the
sources [of public disclosure] listed in §3730(e)(4)(A) pro
vide interpretive guidance.” 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at
8). When all of the sources are considered, the reference
to “news media”—which the Court of Appeals did not
consider—suggests a much broader scope. Ibid.
The Government similarly errs by focusing only on
the adjectives “congressional, administrative, or [GAO],”5
which precede “report.” Brief for United States as Amicus
Curiae 18. It contends that these adjectives suggest that
the public disclosure bar applies only to agency reports
“analogous to those that Congress and the GAO would
issue or conduct.” Ibid. As we explained in Graham
County, however, those three adjectives tell us nothing
more than that a “report” must be governmental. See 559
U. S., at ___, n. 7 (slip op., at 7, n. 7). The governmental
nature of the FOIA responses at issue is not disputed.
Finally, applying the ordinary meaning of “report” does
not render superfluous the other sources of public disclo
sure in §3730(e)(4)(A). Kirk argues that reading “report”
to mean “something that gives information” would sub
sume the other words in the phrase “report, hearing,
audit, or investigation.” Brief for Respondent 23. But
Kirk admits that hearings, audits, and investigations are
processes “to obtain information.” Ibid. (emphasis added).
Those processes are thus clearly different from “something
that gives information.” Moreover, the statute contem
plates some redundancy: An “audit,” for example, will
often be a type of “investigation.”
We are not persuaded that we should adopt a “different,
somewhat special meaning” of “report” over the word’s
——————
5 Although

the statute refers to the “Government Accounting Office,”
it is undisputed that Congress meant the General Accounting Office,
also known as GAO and now renamed the Government Accountability
Office. See Graham County, 559 U. S., at ___, n. 6 (slip op., at 6, n. 6).

