12

SCHINDLER ELEVATOR CORP. v. UNITED STATES 

EX REL. KIRK 

Opinion of the Court 


are not troubled by the different treatment. By its plain
terms, the public disclosure bar applies to some methods of public disclosure and not to others. See Graham
County, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 4) (“[T]he FCA’s public
disclosure bar . . . deprives courts of jurisdiction over qui
tam suits when the relevant information has already
entered the public domain through certain channels”
(emphasis added)). It would not be anomalous if some
methods of FOIA disclosure fell within the scope of the
public disclosure bar and some did not.
We also are not concerned that potential defendants will
now insulate themselves from liability by making a FOIA
request for incriminating documents. This argument
assumes that the public disclosure of information in a
written FOIA response forever taints that information for
purposes of the public disclosure bar. But it may be that a
relator who comes by that information from a different
source has a legitimate argument that his lawsuit is not
“based upon” the initial public disclosure. 31 U. S. C.
§3730(e)(4)(A). That question has divided the Courts of
Appeals, and we do not resolve it here. See Glaser v.
Wound Care Consultants, Inc., 570 F. 3d 907, 915 (CA7
2009) (describing the split in authority). It may also
be that such a relator qualifies for the “original source”
exception.8
In any event, the notion that potential defendants will
make FOIA requests to insulate themselves from liability
——————
8 An “original source” is “an individual who has direct and independ
ent knowledge of the information on which the allegations are based
and has voluntarily provided the information to the Government before
filing an action under this section which is based on the information.”
§3730(e)(4)(B). Some Courts of Appeals have narrowly construed the
exception to limit “original sources” to those who were the cause of the
public disclosure, while others have been more generous. See United
States ex rel. Duxbury v. Ortho Biotech Prods., L. P., 579 F. 3d 13, 22
(CA1 2009) (describing a three-way split among the Courts of Appeals).
That question is not before us, and we do not decide it.

