Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

quotation marks omitted). Although Kirk alleges that he
became suspicious from his own experiences as a veteran
working at Schindler, anyone could have filed the same
FOIA requests and then filed the same suit. Similarly,
anyone could identify a few regulatory filing and certifica
tion requirements, submit FOIA requests until he discov
ers a federal contractor who is out of compliance, and
potentially reap a windfall in a qui tam action under the
FCA. See Brief for Chamber of Commerce of the United
States of America et al. as Amici Curiae 20 (“Government
contractors . . . are required to submit certifications re
lated to everything from how they dispose of hazardous
materials to their affirmative action plans” (citing 40
U. S. C. §3142 and 29 U. S. C. §793)).7
2
Nor will extending the public disclosure bar to written
FOIA responses necessarily lead to unusual consequences.
FOIA requires agencies to release some records even
absent a request. See 5 U. S. C. §§552(a)(1), (2). Kirk
argues that it would be strange that two relators could
obtain copies of the same document but that only the
relator who got the document in response to a FOIA re
quest would find his case barred.
This argument assumes that records released under
FOIA, but not attached to a written FOIA response, do not
fall within the public disclosure bar. We do not decide
that question. But even assuming, as Kirk does, that such
records are not covered by the public disclosure bar, we
——————
7 There is no merit to the suggestion that the public disclosure bar is
intended only to exclude qui tam suits that “ride the investigatory
coattails of the government’s own processes.” Brief for Taxpayers
Against Fraud Education Fund as Amicus Curiae 25, 26; see Graham
County, 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 19) (rejecting the argument that
the public disclosure bar applies only to allegations or transactions that
“have landed on the desk of a DOJ lawyer”).

