10

SCHINDLER ELEVATOR CORP. v. UNITED STATES 

EX REL. KIRK 

Opinion of the Court 


lawsuit. See Graham County, 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op.,
at 12). Accordingly, this Court upheld the recovery of a
relator, even though the Government claimed that he had
discovered the basis for his lawsuit by reading a federal
criminal indictment. See United States ex rel. Marcus v.
Hess, 317 U. S. 537 (1943).
In response, Congress
amended the statute to preclude such “parasitic” qui tam
actions based on “evidence or information in the posses
sion of the United States . . . at the time such suit was
brought.” 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 12–13) (internal
quotation marks omitted). Then, in 1986, Congress re
placed the so-called Government knowledge bar with the
narrower public disclosure bar. Id., at ___ (slip op., at 13).
The Court of Appeals concluded that it would be incon
sistent with this drafting history to hold that written
FOIA responses are reports. The court reasoned that
doing so would “essentially resurrect, in a significant
subset of cases, the government possession standard . . .
repudiated in 1986.” 601 F. 3d, at 109.
We disagree with the Court of Appeals’ conclusion. As a
threshold matter, “the drafting history of the public disclo
sure bar raises more questions than it answers.” Graham
County, supra, at ___ (slip op., at 14). In any event, it is
hardly inconsistent with the drafting history to read the
public disclosure bar as operating similarly to the Gov
ernment knowledge bar in a “subset of cases.” 601 F. 3d,
at 109. As we have observed, “[r]ather than simply repeal
the Government knowledge bar,” the public disclosure bar
was “an effort to strike a balance between encouraging
private persons to root out fraud and stifling parasitic
lawsuits.” 559 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 13) (emphasis
added).
If anything, the drafting history supports our holding.
The sort of case that Kirk has brought seems to us a clas
sic example of the “opportunistic” litigation that the public
disclosure bar is designed to discourage. Ibid. (internal

