2

SCHINDLER ELEVATOR CORP. v. UNITED STATES 

EX REL. KIRK 

Syllabus 

ing is consistent with the public disclosure bar’s generally broad
scope, see, e.g., Graham County Soil and Water Conservation Dist. v.
United States ex rel. Wilson, 559 U. S. ___, ___, as is evidenced by the
other sources of public disclosure in §3730(e)(4)(A), especially “news
media.” Pp. 4–6.
(2) Nor is there any textual basis for adopting a narrower defini
tion of “report.” The Second Circuit committed the very error this
Court reversed in Graham County. In applying the noscitur a sociis
canon to conclude that a narrower meaning for “report” was man
dated, the court failed to consider all of the sources of public disclo
sure listed in the statute—in particular, the reference to “news me
dia.” See 559 U. S., at ___. Applying the ordinary meaning of
“report” also does not render superfluous the other sources of public
disclosure in §3730(e)(4)(A). Pp. 6–8.
(b) The DOL’s three written FOIA responses in this case, along
with the accompanying records produced to Mrs. Kirk, are “reports”
within the public disclosure bar’s ordinary meaning. FOIA requires
each agency receiving a request to “notify the person making such re
quest of [its] determination and the reasons therefor.” 5 U. S. C.
§552(a)(6)(A)(i). Like other federal agencies, the DOL has adopted
FOIA regulations mandating a written response. Such agency re
sponses plainly fall within the broad, ordinary meaning of “report”
as, e.g., something that gives information. Moreover, any records
produced along with such responses are part of the responses, just as
if they had been produced as an appendix to a printed report. Pp. 8–
9.
(c) This Court is not persuaded by assertions that it would be
anomalous to read the public disclosure bar to encompass written
FOIA responses. Pp. 9–14.
(1) The Court’s holding is not inconsistent with the public disclo
sure bar’s drafting history. If anything, the drafting history supports
this Court’s holding. Kirk’s case seems a classic example of the “op
portunistic” litigation that the public disclosure bar is designed to
discourage. Id., at ___. Anyone could identify a few regulatory filing
and certification requirements, submit FOIA requests until he dis
covers a federal contractor who is out of compliance, and potentially
reap a windfall in a qui tam action under the FCA. Pp. 9–11.
(2) Nor will extending the public disclosure bar to written FOIA
responses necessarily lead to unusual consequences. Kirk argues
that the Court’s ruling would allow a suit by a qui tam relator pos
sessing records whose release was required by FOIA even absent a
request, but bar an action by a relator who got the same documents
by way of a FOIA request. Even assuming, as Kirk does, that unre
quested records are not covered by the public disclosure bar, the

