(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

SCHINDLER ELEVATOR CORP. v. UNITED STATES EX
REL. KIRK
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SECOND CIRCUIT
No. 10–188.

Argued March 1, 2011—Decided May 16, 2011

The public disclosure bar of the False Claims Act (FCA) generally fore
closes private parties from bringing qui tam suits to recover falsely or
fraudulently obtained federal payments where those suits are “based
upon the public disclosure of allegations or transactions in a criminal,
civil, or administrative hearing, in a congressional, administrative, or
Government Accounting Office report, hearing, audit, or investiga
tion, or from the news media.” 31 U. S. C. §3730(e)(4)(A). Respon
dent Kirk brought such a suit, alleging that his former employer, pe
titioner Schindler Elevator Corp., had submitted hundreds of false
claims for payment under its federal contracts. To support his alle
gations, Kirk pointed to information his wife received from the Labor
Department (DOL) in response to three requests for records she filed
under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 5 U. S. C. §552.
Granting Schindler’s motion to dismiss, the District Court concluded,
inter alia, that the FCA’s public disclosure bar deprived it of jurisdic
tion over Kirk’s allegations that were based on information disclosed
in a Government “report” or “investigation.” The Second Circuit va
cated and remanded, holding, in effect, that an agency’s response to a
FOIA request is neither a “report” nor an “investigation.”
Held: A federal agency’s written response to a FOIA request for records
constitutes a “report” within the meaning of the FCA’s public disclo
sure bar. Pp. 4–14.
(a) “[R]eport” in this context carries its ordinary meaning. Pp. 4–8.
(1) Because the FCA does not define “report,” the Court looks
first to the word’s ordinary meaning. See, e.g., Gross v. FBL Finan
cial Services, Inc., 557 U. S. ___, ___. Dictionaries define “report” as,
for example, something that gives information. This ordinary mean

