Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

SCALIA, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–444
_________________

MISSOURI, PETITIONER v. GALIN E. FRYE
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE COURT OF APPEALS OF 

MISSOURI, WESTERN DISTRICT

[March 21, 2012]

JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE,
JUSTICE THOMAS, and JUSTICE ALITO join, dissenting.
This is a companion case to Lafler v. Cooper, post, p. ___.
The principal difference between the cases is that the
fairness of the defendant’s conviction in Lafler was established by a full trial and jury verdict, whereas Frye’s
conviction here was established by his own admission of
guilt, received by the court after the usual colloquy that
assured it was voluntary and truthful. In Lafler all that
could be said (and as I discuss there it was quite enough)
is that the fairness of the conviction was clear, though a
unanimous jury finding beyond a reasonable doubt can
sometimes be wrong. Here it can be said not only that the
process was fair, but that the defendant acknowledged the
correctness of his conviction. Thus, as far as the reasons
for my dissent are concerned, this is an a fortiori case. I
will not repeat here the constitutional points that I discuss
at length in Lafler, but I will briefly apply those points to
the facts here and comment upon a few statements in the
Court’s analysis.
*
*
*
Galin Frye’s attorney failed to inform him about a plea
offer, and Frye ultimately pleaded guilty without the
benefit of a deal. Counsel’s mistake did not deprive Frye
of any substantive or procedural right; only of the oppor-


2

MISSOURI v. FRYE
SCALIA, J., dissenting

tunity to accept a plea bargain to which he had no entitlement in the first place. So little entitlement that, had
he known of and accepted the bargain, the prosecution
would have been able to withdraw it right up to the point
that his guilty plea pursuant to the bargain was accepted.
See 311 S. W. 3d 350, 359, and n. 4 (Mo. App. 2010).
The Court acknowledges, moreover, that Frye’s conviction was untainted by attorney error: “[T]he guilty plea
that was accepted, and the plea proceedings concerning it
in court, were all based on accurate advice and information from counsel.” Ante, at 5. Given the “ultimate
focus” of our ineffective-assistance cases on “the fundamental fairness of the proceeding whose result is being
challenged,” Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668, 696
(1984), that should be the end of the matter. Instead,
here, as in Lafler, the Court mechanically applies an
outcome-based test for prejudice, and mistakes the possibility of a different result for constitutional injustice. As
I explain in Lafler, post, p. ___ (dissenting opinion), that
approach is contrary to our precedents on the right to
effective counsel, and for good reason.
The Court announces its holding that “as a general rule,
defense counsel has the duty to communicate formal offers
from the prosecution” as though that resolves a disputed
point; in reality, however, neither the State nor the Solicitor General argued that counsel’s performance here was
adequate. Ante, at 9. The only issue was whether the inadequacy deprived Frye of his constitutional right to a
fair trial. In other cases, however, it will not be so clear
that counsel’s plea-bargaining skills, which must now
meet a constitutional minimum, are adequate. “[H]ow to
define the duty and responsibilities of defense counsel in
the plea bargain process,” the Court acknowledges, “is a
difficult question,” since “[b]argaining is, by its nature,
defined to a substantial degree by personal style.” Ante, at
8. Indeed. What if an attorney’s “personal style” is to


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

establish a reputation as a hard bargainer by, for example,
advising clients to proceed to trial rather than accept
anything but the most favorable plea offers? It seems
inconceivable that a lawyer could compromise his client’s
constitutional rights so that he can secure better deals for
other clients in the future; does a hard-bargaining “personal style” now violate the Sixth Amendment? The Court
ignores such difficulties, however, since “[t]his case presents neither the necessity nor the occasion to define the
duties of defense counsel in those respects.” Ante, at 8.
Perhaps not. But it does present the necessity of confronting the serious difficulties that will be created by constitutionalization of the plea-bargaining process. It will not do
simply to announce that they will be solved in the sweet
by-and-by.
While the inadequacy of counsel’s performance in this
case is clear enough, whether it was prejudicial (in the
sense that the Court’s new version of Strickland requires)
is not. The Court’s description of how that question is
to be answered on remand is alone enough to show how
unwise it is to constitutionalize the plea-bargaining process. Prejudice is to be determined, the Court tells us, by
a process of retrospective crystal-ball gazing posing as
legal analysis. First of all, of course, we must estimate
whether the defendant would have accepted the earlier
plea bargain. Here that seems an easy question, but as
the Court acknowledges, ante, at 14, it will not always be.
Next, since Missouri, like other States, permits accepted
plea offers to be withdrawn by the prosecution (a reality
which alone should suffice, one would think, to demonstrate that Frye had no entitlement to the plea bargain),
we must estimate whether the prosecution would have
withdrawn the plea offer. And finally, we must estimate
whether the trial court would have approved the plea
agreement. These last two estimations may seem easy in
the present case, since Frye committed a new infraction


4

MISSOURI v. FRYE
SCALIA, J., dissenting

before the hearing at which the agreement would have
been presented; but they assuredly will not be easy in the
mine run of cases.
The Court says “[i]t can be assumed that in most jurisdictions prosecutors and judges are familiar with the
boundaries of acceptable plea bargains and sentences.”
Ante, at 13. Assuredly it can, just as it can be assumed
that the sun rises in the west; but I know of no basis for
the assumption. Virtually no cases deal with the standards for a prosecutor’s withdrawal from a plea agreement
beyond stating the general rule that a prosecutor may
withdraw any time prior to, but not after, the entry of a
guilty plea or other action constituting detrimental reliance on the defendant’s part. See, e.g., United States v.
Kuchinski, 469 F. 3d 853, 857–858 (CA9 2006). And cases
addressing trial courts’ authority to accept or reject plea
agreements almost universally observe that a trial court
enjoys broad discretion in this regard. See, e.g., Missouri
v. Banks, 135 S. W. 3d 497, 500 (Mo. App. 2004) (trial
court abuses its discretion in rejecting a plea only if the
decision “is so arbitrary and unreasonable that it shocks
the sense of justice and indicates a lack of careful consideration” (internal quotation marks omitted)). Of course
after today’s opinions there will be cases galore, so the
Court’s assumption would better be cast as an optimistic
prediction of the certainty that will emerge, many years
hence, from our newly created constitutional field of pleabargaining law. Whatever the “boundaries” ultimately
devised (if that were possible), a vast amount of discretion
will still remain, and it is extraordinary to make a defendant’s constitutional rights depend upon a series of retrospective mind-readings as to how that discretion, in
prosecutors and trial judges, would have been exercised.
The plea-bargaining process is a subject worthy of regulation, since it is the means by which most criminal convictions are obtained. It happens not to be, however, a


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

subject covered by the Sixth Amendment, which is concerned not with the fairness of bargaining but with the
fairness of conviction. “The Constitution . . . is not an allpurpose tool for judicial construction of a perfect world;
and when we ignore its text in order to make it that, we
often find ourselves swinging a sledge where a tack hammer is needed.” Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U. S. ___, ___
(2010) (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (slip op., at 1). In this case
and its companion, the Court’s sledge may require the
reversal of perfectly valid, eminently just, convictions. A
legislature could solve the problems presented by these
cases in a much more precise and efficient manner. It
might begin, for example, by penalizing the attorneys
who made such grievous errors. That type of subconstitutional remedy is not available to the Court, which
is limited to penalizing (almost) everyone else by reversing
valid convictions or sentences. Because that result is
inconsistent with the Sixth Amendment and decades of
our precedent, I respectfully dissent.

