Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–1088
_________________

VINCENT CULLEN, ACTING WARDEN, PETITIONER
v. SCOTT LYNN PINHOLSTER
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[April 4, 2011]


JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG
and JUSTICE KAGAN join as to Part II, dissenting.
Some habeas petitioners are unable to develop the fac
tual basis of their claims in state court through no fault
of their own. Congress recognized as much when it en
acted the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of
1996 (AEDPA), 110 Stat. 1214, and permitted therein the
introduction of new evidence in federal habeas proceed
ings in certain limited circumstances. See 28 U. S. C.
§2254(e)(2). Under the Court’s novel interpretation of
§2254(d)(1), however, federal courts must turn a blind eye
to new evidence in deciding whether a petitioner has
satisfied §2254(d)(1)’s threshold obstacle to federal habeas
relief—even when it is clear that the petitioner would be
entitled to relief in light of that evidence. In reading
the statute to “compe[l]” this harsh result, ante, at 9,
the Court ignores a key textual difference between
§§2254(d)(1) and 2254(d)(2) and discards the previous
understanding in our precedents that new evidence can, in
fact, inform the §2254(d)(1) inquiry. I therefore dissent
from the Court’s first holding.
I also disagree with the Court that, even if the
§2254(d)(1) analysis is limited to the state-court record,
respondent Scott Pinholster failed to demonstrate that the
California Supreme Court’s decision denying his ineffec


2

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

tive-assistance-of-counsel claim was an unreasonable
application of Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668
(1984). There is no reason for the majority to decide
whether the §2254(d)(1) analysis is limited to the state
court record because Pinholster satisfied §2254(d)(1) on
either the state- or federal-court record.
I
The Court first holds that, in determining whether a
state-court decision is an unreasonable application of
Supreme Court precedent under §2254(d)(1), “review . . . is
limited to the record that was before the state court that
adjudicated the claim on the merits.” Ante, at 9. New
evidence adduced at a federal evidentiary hearing is
now irrelevant to determining whether a petitioner has
satisfied §2254(d)(1). This holding is unnecessary to pro
mote AEDPA’s purposes, and it is inconsistent with the
provision’s text, the structure of the statute, and our
precedents.
A
To understand the significance of the majority’s holding,
it is important to view the issue in context. AEDPA’s
entire structure—which gives state courts the opportunity
to decide factual and legal questions in the first instance—
ensures that evidentiary hearings in federal habeas pro
ceedings are very rare. See N. King, F. Cheesman, & B.
Ostrom, Final Technical Report: Habeas Litigation in
U. S. District Courts 35–36 (2007) (evidentiary hearings
under AEDPA occur in 0.4 percent of noncapital cases and
9.5 percent of capital cases). Even absent the new restric
tion created by today’s holding, AEDPA erects multiple
hurdles to a state prisoner’s ability to introduce new evi
dence in a federal habeas proceeding.
First, “[u]nder the exhaustion requirement, a habeas
petitioner challenging a state conviction must first at


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

tempt to present his claim in state court.” Harrington v.
Richter, 562 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip op., at 13); see also
§2254(b)(1)(A). With certain narrow exceptions, federal
courts cannot consider a claim at all, let alone accept new
evidence relevant to the claim, if it has not been exhausted
in state court.1 The exhaustion requirement thus reserves
to state courts the first opportunity to resolve factual
disputes relevant to a state prisoner’s claim.
See
O’Sullivan v. Boerckel, 526 U. S. 838, 845 (1999).
Second, the exhaustion requirement is “complement[ed]”
by the standards set forth in §2254(d). Harrington, 562
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 14). Under this provision, a fed
eral court may not grant habeas relief on any “claim that
was adjudicated on the merits in State court proceedings”
unless the adjudication
“(1) resulted in a decision that was contrary to, or
involved an unreasonable application of, clearly estab
lished Federal law, as determined by the Supreme
Court of the United States; or
“(2) resulted in a decision that was based on an un
reasonable determination of the facts in light of the
evidence presented in the State court proceeding.”
These standards “control whether to grant habeas relief.”
Schriro v. Landrigan, 550 U. S. 465, 474 (2007). Accord
ingly, we have said, if the factual allegations a petitioner
seeks to prove at an evidentiary hearing would not satisfy
these standards, there is no reason for a hearing. See id.,
at 481. In such a case, the district court may exercise its
“discretion to deny an evidentiary hearing.” Ibid.; see also
infra, at 13–14. This approach makes eminent sense: If
district courts held evidentiary hearings without first
——————
1 Relatedly,

a state prisoner must, as a general matter, properly ex
haust his federal claims in state court to avoid having his claim de
faulted on procedural grounds. See Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S.
722, 750 (1991).


4

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

asking whether the evidence the petitioner seeks to pre
sent would satisfy AEDPA’s demanding standards, they
would needlessly prolong federal habeas proceedings.
Third, even when a petitioner seeks to introduce new
evidence that would entitle him to relief, AEDPA prohibits
him from doing so, except in a narrow range of cases,
unless he “made a reasonable attempt, in light of the
information available at the time, to investigate and pur
sue claims in state court.” Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S.
420, 435 (2000) (Michael Williams). Thus, §2254(e)(2)
provides:
“If the applicant has failed to develop the factual basis
of a claim in State court proceedings, the court shall
not hold an evidentiary hearing on the claim unless
the applicant shows that—
“(A) the claim relies on—
“(i) a new rule of constitutional law, made retroac
tive to cases on collateral review by the Supreme
Court, that was previously unavailable; or
“(ii) a factual predicate that could not have been
previously discovered through the exercise of due dili
gence; and
“(B) the facts underlying the claim would be suffi
cient to establish by clear and convincing evidence
that but for constitutional error, no reasonable fact
finder would have found the applicant guilty of the
underlying offense.”
In Michael Williams, we construed the opening clause of
this provision—which triggers the bar on evidentiary
hearings—to apply when “there is lack of diligence, or
some greater fault, attributable to the prisoner or the
prisoner’s counsel.”2 Id., at 432. AEDPA thus bars an
——————
2 Section 2254(e)(2) also governs an attempt to obtain relief “based on
new evidence without an evidentiary hearing.” Holland v. Jackson, 542
U. S. 649, 653 (2004) (per curiam) (emphasis deleted).


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

evidentiary hearing for a nondiligent petitioner unless the
petitioner can satisfy both §§2254(e)(2)(A) and (B), which
few petitioners can. Section 2254(e)(2) in this way incen
tivizes state petitioners to develop the factual basis of
their claims in state court.
To the limited extent that federal evidentiary hearings
are available under AEDPA, they ensure that petitioners
who diligently developed the factual basis of their claims
in state court, discovered new evidence after the state
court proceeding, and cannot return to state court retain
the ability to access the Great Writ. See ante, at 2 (ALITO,
J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment). “When
Congress codified new rules governing this previously
judicially managed area of law, it did so without losing
sight of the fact that the ‘writ of habeas corpus plays a
vital role in protecting constitutional rights.’ ” Holland v.
Florida, 560 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 16) (quoting
Slack v. McDaniel, 529 U. S. 473, 483 (2000)). Allowing a
petitioner to introduce new evidence at a hearing in the
limited circumstance permitted by §2254(e)(2) does not
upset the balance that Congress struck in AEDPA be
tween the state and federal courts.
By construing
§2254(d)(1) to do the work of other provisions in AEDPA,
the majority has subverted Congress’ careful balance of
responsibilities. It has also created unnecessarily a brand
new set of procedural complexities that lower courts will
have to confront.3
B
The majority’s interpretation of §2254(d)(1) finds no
support in the provision’s text or the statute’s structure as
a whole.
1
Section 2254(d)(1) requires district courts to ask
——————
3 See,

e.g., nn. 5, 7, and 13, infra.


6

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

whether a state-court adjudication on the merits “resulted
in a decision that was contrary to, or involved an unrea
sonable application of, clearly established Federal law, as
determined by the Supreme Court of the United States.”
Because this provision uses “backward-looking lan
guage”—i.e., past-tense verbs—the majority believes that
it limits review to the state-court record. Ante, at 9. But
both §§2254(d)(1) and 2254(d)(2) use “backward-looking
language,” and §2254(d)(2)—unlike §2254(d)(1)—expressly
directs district courts to base their review on “the evidence
presented in the State court proceeding.” If use of the past
tense were sufficient to indicate Congress’ intent to re
strict analysis to the state-court record, the phrase “in
light of the evidence presented in the State court proceed
ing” in §2254(d)(2) would be superfluous. The majority’s
construction of §2254(d)(1) fails to give meaning to Con
gress’ decision to include language referring to the evi
dence presented to the state court in §2254(d)(2). Cf.
Bates v. United States, 522 U. S. 23, 29–30 (1997) (“Where
Congress includes particular language in one section of a
statute but omits it in another section of the same Act, it
is generally presumed that Congress acts intentionally
and purposely in the disparate inclusion or exclusion”
(internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)).
Ignoring our usual “reluctan[ce] to treat statutory terms
as surplusage in any setting,” TRW Inc. v. Andrews, 534
U. S. 19, 31 (2001) (internal quotation marks omitted), the
majority characterizes the phrase appearing in §2254(d)(2)
as mere “clarifying language,” ante, at 12, n. 7. It specu
lates that “[t]he omission of clarifying language from
§2254(d)(1) just as likely reflects Congress’ belief that such
language was unnecessary as it does anything else.” Ante,
at 12–13, n. 7. The argument that this phrase is merely
“clarifying” might have more force, however, had Congress
included this phrase in §2254(d)(1) but not in §2254(d)(2).
As between the two provisions, §2254(d)(2)—which re


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

quires review of the state court’s “determination of the
facts”—more logically depends on the facts presented to
the state court. Because this provision needs less clarifi
cation on this point than §2254(d)(1), it is all the more
telling that Congress included this phrase in §2254(d)(2)
but elected to exclude it from §2254(d)(1).
Unlike my colleagues in the majority, I refuse to assume
that Congress simply engaged in sloppy drafting. The
inclusion of this phrase in §2254(d)(2)—coupled with its
omission
from
§2254(d)(2)’s
partner
provision,
§2254(d)(1)—provides strong reason to think that Con
gress did not intend for the §2254(d)(1) analysis to be
limited categorically to “the evidence presented in the
State court proceeding.”
2
The “ ‘broader context of the statute as a whole,’ ” ante,
at 9 (quoting Robinson v. Shell Oil Co., 519 U. S. 337, 341
(1997)), reinforces this conclusion. In particular, Con
gress’ decision to include in AEDPA a provision,
§2254(e)(2), that permits federal evidentiary hearings in
certain circumstances provides further evidence that
Congress did not intend to limit the §2254(d)(1) inquiry to
the state-court record in every case.
We have long recognized that some diligent habeas
petitioners are unable to develop all of the facts support
ing their claims in state court.4 As discussed above, in
——————
4 See, e.g., Michael Williams, 529 U. S. 420, 432 (2000) (noting that
diligent efforts to develop the facts might be “thwarted, for example, by
the conduct of another or by happenstance”); id., at 434 (noting that the
prosecution might have “concealed the facts” supporting “a claim which
was pursued with diligence”); Townsend v. Sain, 372 U. S. 293, 313
(1963) (requiring federal courts to grant evidentiary hearings when,
inter alia, “the fact-finding procedure employed by the state court was
not adequate to afford a full and fair hearing” or “there is a substantial
allegation of newly discovered evidence”), overruled in part on other
grounds by Keeney v. Tamayo-Reyes, 504 U. S. 1, 5 (1992).


8

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

enacting AEDPA, Congress generally barred evidentiary
hearings for petitioners who did not “exercise diligence in
pursuing their claims” in state court. Michael Williams,
529 U. S., at 436; see also §2254(e)(2). Importantly, it did
not impose any express limit on evidentiary hearings for
petitioners who had been diligent in state court. See id.,
at 436 (“[T]he statute does not equate prisoners who exer
cise diligence in pursuing their claims with those who do
not”). For those petitioners, Congress left the decision to
hold a hearing “to the sound discretion of district courts.”
Landrigan, 550 U. S., at 473.
Faced with situations in which a diligent petitioner
offers additional evidence in federal court, the courts of
appeals have taken two approaches to applying
§2254(d)(1). Some courts have held that when a federal
court admits new evidence supporting a claim adjudicated
on the merits in state court, §2254(d)(1) does not apply at
all and the federal court may review the claim de novo.
See ante, at 12; Holland v. Jackson, 542 U. S. 649, 653
(2004) (per curiam); see, e.g., Winston v. Kelly, 592 F. 3d
535, 555–556 (CA4 2010). I agree with the majority’s
rejection of this approach. See ante, at 12. It would un
dermine the comity principles motivating AEDPA to de
cline to defer to a state-court adjudication of a claim
because the state court, through no fault of its own,
lacked all the relevant evidence.5
——————
5 Of

course, §2254(d)(1) only applies when a state court has adjudi
cated a claim on the merits. There may be situations in which new
evidence supporting a claim adjudicated on the merits gives rise to an
altogether different claim. See, e.g., Reply Brief for Petitioner 10–11
(evidence withheld by the prosecutor relating to one claim may give rise
to a separate claim under Brady v. Maryland, 373 U. S. 83 (1963)). The
majority opinion does not foreclose this possibility.
I assume that the majority does not intend to suggest that review is
limited to the state-court record when a petitioner’s inability to develop
the facts supporting his claim was the fault of the state court itself. See
generally Tr. of Oral Arg. in Bell v. Kelly, O. T. 2008, No. 07–1223.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Other courts of appeals, including the court below, have
struck a more considered balance. These courts have held
that §2254(d)(1) continues to apply but that new evidence
properly presented in a federal hearing is relevant to the
reasonableness of the state-court decision. See Pinholster
v. Ayers, 590 F. 3d 651, 668 (CA9 2009) (en banc) (“If the
evidence is admissible under Michael Williams or
§2254(e)(2), and if it does not render the petitioner’s
claims unexhausted . . . , then it is properly considered in
evaluating whether the legal conclusion reached by the
state habeas court was a reasonable application of Su
preme Court law”); accord, Wilson v. Mazzuca, 570 F. 3d
490, 500 (CA2 2009); Pecoraro v. Walls, 286 F. 3d 439, 443
(CA7 2002); Valdez v. Cockrell, 274 F. 3d 941, 952 (CA5
2001). This approach accommodates the competing goals,
reflected in §§2254(d) and 2254(e)(2), of according defer
ence to reasonable state-court decisions and preserving
the opportunity for diligent petitioners to present evidence
to the federal court when they were unable to do so in
state court.
The majority charts a third, novel course that, so far as I
am aware, no court of appeals has adopted: §2254(d)(1)
continues to apply when a petitioner has additional evi
dence that he was unable to present to the state court, but
the district court cannot consider that evidence in deciding
whether the petitioner has satisfied §2254(d)(1). The
problem with this approach is its potential to bar federal
habeas relief for diligent habeas petitioners who cannot
present new evidence to a state court.
Consider, for example, a petitioner who diligently at
tempted in state court to develop the factual basis of a
claim that prosecutors withheld exculpatory witness
statements in violation of Brady v. Maryland, 373 U. S. 83
(1963). The state court denied relief on the ground that
the withheld evidence then known did not rise to the level
of materiality required under Brady. Before the time for


10

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

filing a federal habeas petition has expired, however, a
state court orders the State to disclose additional docu
ments the petitioner had timely requested under the
State’s public records Act. The disclosed documents reveal
that the State withheld other exculpatory witness state
ments, but state law would not permit the petitioner to
present the new evidence in a successive petition.6
Under our precedent, if the petitioner had not presented
his Brady claim to the state court at all, his claim would
be deemed defaulted and the petitioner could attempt to
show cause and prejudice to overcome the default. See
Michael Williams, 529 U. S., at 444; see also n. 1, supra.
If, however, the new evidence merely bolsters a Brady
claim that was adjudicated on the merits in state court, it
is unclear how the petitioner can obtain federal habeas
relief after today’s holding. What may have been a rea
sonable decision on the state-court record may no longer
be reasonable in light of the new evidence. See Kyles v.
Whitley, 514 U. S. 419, 436 (1995) (materiality of Brady
evidence is viewed “collectively, not item by item”). Be
cause the state court adjudicated the petitioner’s Brady
claim on the merits, §2254(d)(1) would still apply. Yet,
under the majority’s interpretation of §2254(d)(1), a fed
eral court is now prohibited from considering the new
evidence in determining the reasonableness of the state
court decision.
The majority’s interpretation of §2254(d)(1) thus sug
gests the anomalous result that petitioners with new
claims based on newly obtained evidence can obtain fed
eral habeas relief if they can show cause and prejudice for
their default but petitioners with newly obtained evidence
supporting a claim adjudicated on the merits in state court
——————
6 See, e.g., id., at 37–38 (statement by counsel for the respondent
warden that Virginia law bars all successive habeas applications, even
in cases where the petitioner has new evidence).


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

cannot obtain federal habeas relief if they cannot first
satisfy §2254(d)(1) without the new evidence. That the
majority’s interpretation leads to this anomaly is good
reason to conclude that its interpretation is wrong. See
Keeney v. Tamayo-Reyes, 504 U. S. 1, 7–8 (1992) (“[I]t is
. . . irrational to distinguish between failing to properly
assert a federal claim in state court and failing in state
court to properly develop such a claim”).
The majority responds to this anomaly by suggesting
that my hypothetical petitioner “may well [have] a new
claim.”7 Ante, at 14, n. 10. This suggestion is puzzling.
New evidence does not usually give rise to a new claim; it
merely provides additional proof of a claim already adjudi
cated on the merits.8 The majority presumably means
to suggest that the petitioner might be able to obtain
federal-court review of his new evidence if he can show
cause and prejudice for his failure to present the “new”
claim to a state court. In that scenario, however, the
federal court would review the purportedly “new” claim de
novo. The majority’s approach thus threatens to replace
deferential review of new evidence under §2254(d)(1) with
de novo review of new evidence in the form of “new”
claims.9 Because it is unlikely that Congress intended
de novo review—the result suggested by the majority’s
opinion—it must have intended for district courts to
consider newly discovered evidence in conducting the
§2254(d)(1) analysis.
——————
7 The majority declines, however, to provide any guidance to the lower
courts on how to distinguish claims adjudicated on the merits from new
claims.
8 Even if it can fairly be argued that my hypothetical petitioner has a
new claim, the majority fails to explain how a diligent petitioner with
new evidence supporting an existing claim can present his new evi
dence to a federal court.
9 In this vein, it is the majority’s approach that “would not take seri
ously AEDPA’s requirement that federal courts defer to state-court
decisions.” Ante, at 10, n. 3.


12

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

The majority’s reading of §2254(d)(1) appears ultimately
to rest on its understanding that state courts must have
the first opportunity to adjudicate habeas petitioners’
claims. See ante, at 9–10 (“It would be contrary to
[AEDPA’s exhaustion requirement] to allow a petitioner to
overcome an adverse state-court decision with new evi
dence introduced in a federal habeas court and reviewed
by that court in the first instance effectively de novo”).10
JUSTICE BREYER takes the same position. See ante, at 2
(opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part)
(AEDPA is designed “to give the State a first opportunity
to consider most matters”). I fully agree that habeas
petitioners must attempt to present evidence to state
courts in the first instance, as does JUSTICE ALITO, see
ante, at 2. Where I disagree with the majority is in my
understanding that §2254(e)(2) already accomplishes this
result.
By reading §2254(d)(1) to do the work of
§2254(e)(2), the majority gives §2254(e)(2) an unnaturally
cramped reading. As a result, the majority either has
foreclosed habeas relief for diligent petitioners who,
through no fault of their own, were unable to present
exculpatory evidence to the state court that adjudicated
their claims or has created a new set of procedural com
plexities for the lower courts to navigate to ensure the
availability of the Great Writ for diligent petitioners.
3
These considerations lead me to agree with the courts of
appeals that have concluded that a federal court should
assess the reasonableness of a state court’s application of
clearly established federal law under §2254(d)(1) in light
of evidence properly admitted in a federal evidentiary
hearing. There is nothing “strange” about this approach.
——————
10 Under my reading of §2254(d)(1), of course, the district court would
review properly admitted new evidence through the deferential lens of
§2254(d)(1), not de novo.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Ante, at 10. Under §2254(d)(1), federal courts routinely
engage in analysis that the state court itself might never
have conducted or did not conduct. For example, when a
state court summarily denies a claim without explanation,
as the California Supreme Court did here, district courts
must deny habeas relief pursuant to §2254(d)(1) so long as
“there is any reasonable argument” supporting the denial
of the petitioner’s claim. Harrington, 562 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 16). We likewise ask whether a state-court
decision unreasonably applied clearly established federal
law when the state court issued a reasoned decision but
failed to cite federal law altogether. See Early v. Packer,
537 U. S. 3, 8 (2002) (per curiam). Determining whether a
state court could reasonably have denied a petitioner relief
in light of newly discovered evidence is not so different
than determining whether there is any reasonable basis
for a state court’s unreasoned decision.
Admittedly, the text of §2254(d)(1), standing alone, does
not compel either reading of that provision. But constru
ing §2254(d)(1) to permit consideration of evidence prop
erly introduced in federal court best accords with the text
of §2254(d)(2) and AEDPA’s structure as a whole. By
interpreting §2254(d)(1) to prevent nondiligent petitioners
from gaming the system—the very purpose of
§2254(e)(2)—the majority potentially has put habeas relief
out of reach for diligent petitioners with meritorious
claims based on new evidence.
C
The majority claims that its holding is “consistent” with
our case law. Ante, at 10. Quite the opposite is true: Our
cases reflect our previous understanding that evidence
properly admitted pursuant to §2254(e)(2) is relevant to
the §2254(d)(1) analysis.
In Landrigan, JUSTICE THOMAS, the author of today’s
opinion, confirmed this understanding of the interplay


14

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

between §§2254(d)(1) and 2254(e)(2). As noted above, we
admonished district courts to consider whether a peti
tioner’s allegations, if proved true, would satisfy §2254(d)
in determining whether to grant a hearing. After high
lighting the deference owed to state courts under
§§2254(d) and 2254(e)(1), we stated:
“In deciding whether to grant an evidentiary hearing,
a federal court must consider whether such a hearing
could enable an applicant to prove the petition’s fac
tual allegations, which, if true, would entitle the
applicant to federal habeas relief. Because the defer
ential standards prescribed by §2254 control whether
to grant habeas relief, a federal court must take into
account those standards in deciding whether an evi
dentiary hearing is appropriate.” 550 U. S., at 474 (ci
tation omitted).
By instructing district courts to consider the §2254(d)
standards in deciding whether to grant a hearing, we must
have understood that the evidence admitted at a hearing
could be considered in the §2254(d)(1) analysis. See Brief
for American Civil Liberties Union as Amicus Curiae 9
(“The whole point of Landrigan’s admonition that the
court must decide whether to hold a hearing with an eye
on §2254(d)(1) is that some proffers of evidence will not
justify federal fact-finding in view of §2254(d)(1), but that
other proffers of proof will”).11
In Michael Williams, the warden argued that
§2254(e)(2) bars an evidentiary hearing whenever a peti
tioner was unable to develop the factual record in state
court, “whether or not through his own fault or neglect.”
——————
11 The majority overlooks this aspect of Landrigan. It quotes Landri
gan’s observation that “if the record refutes the applicant’s factual
allegations or otherwise precludes habeas relief, a district court is not
required to hold an evidentiary hearing,” 550 U. S., at 474, but that
statement has no bearing on the question decided by the Court today.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

529 U. S., at 430. Under the warden’s argument, a peti
tioner who did not develop the record in state court, what
ever the reason, would be barred from presenting evidence
to the federal court. In rejecting that argument, we
observed:
“A prisoner who developed his claim in state court and
can prove the state court’s decision was ‘contrary to,
or involved an unreasonable application of, clearly es
tablished Federal law, as determined by the Supreme
Court of the United States,’ is not barred from obtain
ing relief by §2254(d)(1). If the opening clause of
§2254(e)(2) covers a request for an evidentiary hear
ing on a claim which was pursued with diligence but
remained undeveloped in state court because, for in
stance, the prosecution concealed the facts, a prisoner
lacking clear and convincing evidence of innocence
could be barred from a hearing on the claim even if he
could satisfy §2254(d).” Id., at 434 (citation omitted;
emphasis added).
A petitioner in the latter situation would almost certainly
be unable to “satisfy §2254(d)” without introducing the
concealed facts in federal court. This passage thus reflects
our understanding that, in some circumstances, a peti
tioner might need an evidentiary hearing in federal court
to prove the facts necessary to satisfy §2254(d). To avoid
foreclosing habeas relief for such petitioners, we concluded
that §2254(e)(2) could not bear the warden’s “harsh read
ing,” which essentially would have held petitioners strictly
at fault for their inability to develop the facts in state
court. Ibid. The majority today gives an equally “harsh
reading” to §2254(d)(1) to achieve the result we rejected in
Michael Williams.12
——————
12 The majority claims that Michael Williams supports its reading of
§2254(d)(1). With respect to one claim asserted by the petitioner, we
observed that “[t]he Court of Appeals rejected this claim on the merits


16

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

None of the other cases cited by the majority supports
its result. In Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362 (2000)
(Terry Williams), we interpreted §2254(d)(1) to ask
whether the state-court decision “identifies the correct
governing legal principle from this Court’s decisions but
unreasonably applies that principle to the facts of the
prisoner’s case.” Id., at 413. However, we had no reason
to decide whether the §2254(d)(1) inquiry was limited to
the state-court record, as the District Court did not hold
an evidentiary hearing in that case. See id., at 372.
In Holland v. Jackson, we stated that “we have made
clear that whether a state court’s decision was unreason
able must be assessed in light of the record the court had
before it.” 542 U. S., at 652. In the next sentence, how
ever, we observed that the evidence at issue “could have
been the subject of an evidentiary hearing by the District
Court, but only if respondent was not at fault in failing to
develop that evidence in state court.” Id., at 652–653. We
proceeded to find that the evidence was not properly ad
mitted under §2254(e)(2) before concluding that the Court
of Appeals had erred in its §2254(d)(1) analysis. Id., at
653; see also Bradshaw v. Richey, 546 U. S. 74, 79 (2005)
(per curiam).
In sum, our cases reflect our recognition that it is some
times appropriate to consider new evidence in deciding
whether a petitioner can satisfy §2254(d)(1). In reading
our precedent to require the opposite conclusion, the ma
jority disregards the concerns that motivated our decision
in Michael Williams: Some petitioners, even if diligent,
——————
under §2254(d)(1), so it is unnecessary to reach the question whether
§2254(e)(2) would permit a hearing on the claim.” 529 U. S., at 444.
That statement merely reflects the fact that the Court of Appeals had
rejected that claim under §2254(d)(1) without considering whether the
petitioner was entitled to a hearing because the petitioner had not
requested a hearing on that claim. See Williams v. Taylor, 189 F. 3d
421, 425, 428–429 (CA4 1999).


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

may be unable to develop the factual record in state court
through no fault of their own. We should not interpret
§2254(d)(1) to foreclose these diligent petitioners from
accessing the Great Writ when the state court will not
consider the new evidence and could not reasonably have
reached the same conclusion with the new evidence before
it.
II
I also disagree with the Court’s conclusion that the
Court of Appeals erred in holding that Pinholster had
satisfied §2254(d)(1) on the basis of the state-court
record.13
A
The majority omits critical details relating to the per
formance of Pinholster’s trial counsel, the mitigating
evidence they failed to discover, and the history of these
proceedings. I therefore highlight several aspects of the
facts and history of this case.
——————
13 I

agree with the majority that the state-court record in this case
consists of “the ‘allegations of [the] habeas corpus petition . . . and . . .
any matter of record pertaining to the case.’ ” Ante, at 16, n. 12 (quot
ing In re Hochberg, 2 Cal. 3d 870, 874, n. 2, 471 P. 2d 1, 3–4, n. 2
(1970); some internal quotation marks omitted).
The majority does not decide which of the two state-court decisions
should be reviewed. See ante, at 15, n. 11. One amicus argues that
Pinholster must prove that both state-court decisions involved an
unreasonable application of law. See Brief for Criminal Justice Legal
Foundation as Amicus Curiae 26. This argument is based on amicus’
understanding that the California Supreme Court rejected the second
petition as successive and, alternatively, on the merits. The State has
not argued, however, that the second ruling rests on a procedural
ground. See ante, at 6, n. 2. When a state court denies two petitions on
the merits and the difference between the petitions is that the second
petition contains additional evidence supporting the petitioner’s claim,
I see no reason why the petitioner must independently show that the
first decision was unreasonable.


18

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

1
After the jury returned a guilty verdict, the court in
structed the jury to return six days later for the penalty
phase. This prompted discussion at sidebar regarding
whether the State had provided notice of its intent to offer
aggravating evidence. Pinholster’s court-appointed attor
ney, Wilbur Dettmar, argued that the State should be
precluded from offering aggravating evidence:
“I am not presently prepared to offer anything by way
of mitigation. If I was going to proceed on mitigation,
the people would have the right to rebuttal with or
without notice.
“I took the position, since the people had not given
notice, I had not prepared any evidence by way of miti
gation. I would submit it on that basis.” 52 Re
porter’s Tr. 7250 (hereinafter Tr.) (emphasis added).
Undoubtedly anticipating that counsel might need addi
tional time to prepare an adequate mitigation defense, the
court asked Dettmar whether a continuance would be
helpful in the event it ruled against him. He declined the
offer on the spot, stating: “I think we would probably still
go forward on Monday. Clearly the one person that comes
to mind is the defendant’s mother. How much beyond that
I don’t know. I don’t think the pa[ss]age of time would
make a great deal of difference.” Id., at 7257–7258. After
hearing testimony, the court denied Pinholster’s motion to
preclude aggravating evidence.
At the penalty phase, defense counsel called only one
witness: Pinholster’s mother, Burnice Brashear. Brashear
testified that Pinholster “never really wanted for anything
at home too much” and “had everything normally materi
alwise that most people have.” Id., at 7395. She said that
Pinholster was “different” from his siblings, whom she
characterized as “basically very good children.” Id., at
7401–7402. Pinholster, she said, had a “friendly” relation


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

ship with his stepfather, although his stepfather “some
times would lose his temper” with Pinholster, who “had a
mind of his own.” Id., at 7392–7393; see also id., at 7293
(stating that his stepfather was “at times” “abusive or
near abusive”).
Brashear provided brief testimony regarding Pinhol
ster’s childhood. She described two car accidents—one
when she ran over him in the driveway and one when he
went through the windshield. Id., at 7389–7391. She
stated that he started failing school in the first grade and
that the school eventually “sent him to [an] educationally
handicapped class.” Id., at 7393–7394. When Pinholster
was 10, a psychologist recommended placing him in a
mental institution, but she “didn’t think he was that far
gone.” Id., at 7395. A few years later, she testified, he
spent six months in a state hospital for emotionally handi
capped children. Id., at 7402.
According to Brashear, Pinholster had suffered from
epilepsy since age 18, when he was beaten in jail. Id.,
at 7397. She said that her family doctor, Dr. Dubin,
had given him medication to treat the epilepsy. Ibid.
Brashear also suggested that Pinholster did not have long
to live, stating that he had “a chip in his head floating
around” and that “they don’t think—he won’t be here very
much longer anyway.”14 Ibid.
In closing argument, the prosecutor ridiculed Brashear’s
testimony. See 53 id., at 7442 (“She said his stepfather
disciplined him. So what? I am sure you have all disci
plined your children. I was disciplined myself”); ibid. (“He
was run over by a car when he was three years old. That’s
very unfortunate. There is no evidence of any brain dam
age. A lot of children get dropped, fall from their cribs or
——————
14 The judge instructed the jury to disregard this testimony upon
motion by the prosecutor, but the prosecutor then discussed the testi
mony in her closing argument. See infra, at 33–34.


20

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

whatever”); id., at 7444–7445 (“I submit to you that if this
defendant truly had epilepsy, . . . a doctor would have been
brought in to tell you that. Medical records, something”).
The prosecutor also highlighted Brashear’s testimony
about Pinholster’s stable home environment, arguing, “He
came from a good home. You heard that he was not a
deprived child. Had many things going for him, probably
more than many children.” Id., at 7442.
Notwithstanding the meager mitigation case presented
by Pinholster’s counsel, it took the jury two days to reach a
decision to sentence Pinholster to death. His counsel later
moved to modify the sentence to life imprisonment. In
denying the motion, the trial judge stated, “The evidence
which the defense offered concerning the defendant’s
extenuation was merely some testimony from his mother
that was not persuasive. His mother did not, in the court’s
opinion, present any evidence which the court would find
to be a moral justification or extenuation for his conduct.
No witness supplied such evidence.” 54 id., at 7514.
2
After his conviction and sentence were affirmed on
appeal, Pinholster filed a habeas petition in the California
Supreme Court alleging, among other things, that his
counsel had “unreasonably failed to investigate, prepare
and present available mitigating evidence during penalty
phase.” Record ER–103.
Pinholster’s state-court petition included 121 exhibits.
In a series of declarations, his trial attorney Harry
Brainard (who had by then been disbarred) confirmed
what Dettmar had forthrightly told the trial court:
Brainard and Dettmar neither expected nor prepared to
present mitigation evidence.15 See id., at ER–333 (“Mr.
——————
15 By the time of Pinholster’s state-court habeas petition, Dettmar
was deceased.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Dettmar and I did not prepare a case in mitigation. We
felt there would be no penalty phase hearing inasmuch as
we did not receive written notice of evidence in aggrava
tion pursuant to Penal Code §190.3”). Brainard further
confirmed what was apparent from the mitigation case
they eventually put on: They conducted virtually no miti
gation investigation. See id., at ER–182 (“I have no recol
lection of Mr. Dettmar having secured or reviewed any of
Scott’s medical records, nor did I see any of Scott’s medical
records. So far as I recollect, neither Mr. Dettmar nor
myself interviewed any of Scott’s previous medical provid
ers”); id., at ER–183 (“I do not recall interviewing or at
tempting to interview Scott’s family members or any other
persons regarding penalty phase testimony, except Mrs.
Brashears [sic]”); ibid. (“I have no recollection of seeing or
attempting to secure Scott’s school records, juvenile re
cords, medical records, or records of prior placements”);
ibid. (“I have no recollection of interviewing or attempting
to interview Scott’s former school teachers, counselors, or
juvenile officers”).16
Statements by relatives (none of whom trial counsel had
attempted to interview regarding Pinholster’s background)
and documentary evidence revealed that the picture of
Pinholster’s family life painted by his mother at trial was
false. Pinholster was “raised in chaos and poverty.” Id.,
at ER–312. A relative remembered seeing the children
mix together flour and water in an attempt to get some
thing to eat. Pinholster’s stepfather beat him several
times a week, including at least once with a two-by-four
board. “There was so much violence in [the] home” that
Pinholster’s brother “dreaded coming home each day.” Id.,
at ER–313. Pinholster’s half sister was removed from the
home as a result of a beating by his stepfather.
——————
16 Counsel’s billing records, which were before the California Supreme
Court as part of the trial record, confirmed Brainard’s recollection.


22

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Documentary evidence showed, directly contrary to
Brashear’s trial testimony, that Pinholster’s siblings had
very troubled pasts. Pinholster’s elder brother was ar
rested for armed burglary, robbery, and forcible rape of a
14-year-old with a deadly weapon. While in custody, he
was diagnosed as “catatonic-like” and “acutely psychotic,
probably suffering some type of schizophrenia.” Id., at
ER–219, ER–224. He later committed suicide.17 Pinhol
ster’s half sister, a recovering alcoholic, had been made a
ward of the juvenile court for prostitution and forcible
sexual battery on a 14-year-old.
Pinholster’s petition and exhibits described a long his
tory of emotional disturbance and neurological problems.
A former schoolteacher stated that, as a child, Pinholster
“seemed incapable of relating either to his peers or to
adults,” that “[i]t was even hard to maintain eye contact
with him,” and that “[h]is hyperactivity was so extreme
that [she] formed the opinion it probably had an organic
base.” Id., at ER–231. School records revealed that he
“talk[ed] to self continuously,” had “many grimaces,”
fought in his sleep, and could “control self for only 1 hour
per day.” Id., at ER–230, ER–233. He “show[ed] progres
sive deterioration each semester since Kindergarten.” Id.,
at ER–230. School officials recommended placement in a
school for emotionally handicapped students and referral
to a neurologist. At age nine, he had an abnormal EEG,
revealing “an organic basis for his behavior.” Id., at ER–
157, ER–234. Just months before the homicides, a doctor
recommended placement in the Hope Psychiatric Insti
tute, but this did not occur.
This and other evidence attached to the petition was
——————
17 According

to Pinholster’s half sister, “The death of our brother Al
vin was a severe emotional blow to me and to Scott. I believed Scott’s
substance abuse (heroin) arose following and as a result of Alvin’s
death.” Record ER–314.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

23

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

summarized in a declaration by Dr. George Woods. Dr.
Woods opined that Pinholster “suffer[ed] from severe and
long standing seizure disorders,” id., at ER–156, that his
childhood head traumas “may have been the precipitating
factors for [his] seizure disorder,” id., at ER–157, and that
he suffered from bipolar mood disorder. He pointed to
trial testimony that immediately before the burglary on
the night of the homicides, Pinholster announced that he
“ ‘ha[d] a message from God’ ”—which Dr. Woods believed
to reflect “[a]uditory hallucinations” and “severe psycho
sis.” Id., at ER–169. He concluded that at the time of the
homicides Pinholster “was suffering from bipolar mood
disorder with psychotic ideation and was suffering a com
plex partial seizure.” Id., at ER–170. He also observed
that Pinholster’s “grossly dysfunctional family, the abuse
he received as a child, his history of suffering from sub
stantial seizure and mood disorders, his frequently un
treated psychiatric and psychological disabilities and his
educational handicaps were relevant circumstances which
would extenuate the gravity of the crime.” Id., at ER–171.
On the basis of Pinholster’s submission, the California
Supreme Court denied Pinholster’s ineffective-assistance
of-counsel claim.
Pinholster then filed a habeas petition in Federal Dis
trict Court. He included an additional exhibit: a declara
tion by Dr. John Stalberg, a psychiatrist who had hastily
examined Pinholster and produced a two-page report in
the middle of the original trial.18 After reviewing the new
material collected by Pinholster’s habeas counsel, Dr.
Stalberg stated that the available evidence showed a
——————
18 Counsel had arranged for Dr. Stalberg to examine Pinholster in the
middle of his original trial. The only documents they provided to him
were police reports relating to the case and a 1978 probation report. In
a two-page report that focused primarily on Pinholster’s mental state at
the time of the offenses, Dr. Stalberg concluded that Pinholster had
“psychopathic personality traits.” Id., at ER–187.


24

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

familial history of “severe psychiatric disorders,” “a history
of seizure disorders of unknown etiology,” “repeated head
traumas,” “an abnormal EEG,” and “evidence of mental
disturbance during Mr. Pinholster’s childhood and some
degree of brain damage.” Id., at ER–493. He also opined
that “there [was] voluminous mitigating evidence which
includes a childhood of physical abuse, emotional neglect,
and a family history of mental illness and criminal behav
ior.” Id., at ER–494.
The District Court stayed the federal proceedings while
Pinholster sought state-court review of claims the District
Court deemed unexhausted. Pinholster’s second habeas
submission to the California Supreme Court included
Stalberg’s declaration. That court summarily denied
Pinholster’s petition on the merits.
Pinholster returned to Federal District Court and filed
an amended petition. After an evidentiary hearing, the
District Court concluded that Pinholster had demon
strated deficient performance and prejudice under Strick
land.19 The Ninth Circuit, sitting en banc, affirmed. 590
F. 3d 651.
B
As the majority notes, Pinholster’s claim arises under
Strickland v. Washington. “The benchmark for judging
any claim of ineffectiveness [under Strickland] must be
whether counsel’s conduct so undermined the proper
functioning of the adversarial process that the trial cannot
be relied on as having produced a just result.” 466 U. S.,
——————
19 The District Court based its decision on the evidence adduced at an
evidentiary hearing. The District Court did not apply 28 U. S. C.
§2254(d) because it thought, erroneously, that the California Supreme
Court had not adjudicated Pinholster’s claim on the merits. App. to
Pet. for Cert. 257. For the reasons I discuss, however, the District
Court could have concluded that Pinholster had satisfied §2254(d)(1) on
the basis of the state-court record alone.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

25

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

at 686. To satisfy this benchmark, a defendant must show
both that “counsel’s performance was deficient” and that
“the deficient performance prejudiced the defense.” Id., at
687.
When §2254(d)(1) applies, the question is whether “ ‘fair
minded jurists could disagree’ on the correctness of the
state court’s decision.” Harrington, 562 U. S., at ___ (slip
op., at 11) (quoting Yarborough v. Alvarado, 541 U. S. 652,
664 (2004)). When the state court rejected a Strickland
claim on the pleadings assuming the allegations to be
true, as here, see ante, at 16, n. 12, the federal court must
ask whether “there is any reasonable argument” support
ing the state court’s conclusion that the petitioner’s allega
tions did not state a claim, Harrington, 562 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 16). This standard is “difficult,” but not im
possible, “to meet.” Id., at ___ (slip op., at 12). This case is
one in which fairminded jurists could not disagree that the
state court erred.
C
Under Strickland, “the defendant must show that coun
sel’s representation fell below an objective standard of
reasonableness,” measured according to “prevailing pro
fessional norms.” 466 U. S., at 688. We “indulge a strong
presumption that counsel’s conduct falls within the wide
range of reasonable professional assistance.” Id., at 689.
When §2254(d) applies, federal-court review is “ ‘doubly’ ”
deferential. Harrington, 562 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 16)
(quoting Knowles v. Mirzayance, 556 U. S. ___, ___ (2009)
(slip op., at 11)). In the present AEDPA posture, “[t]he
question is whether there is any reasonable argument that
counsel satisfied Strickland’s deferential standard.” Har
rington, 562 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 16). Here, there is
none.
The majority surmises that counsel decided on a strat
egy “to get the prosecution’s aggravation witnesses ex


26

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

cluded for lack of notice, and if that failed, to put on Pin
holster’s mother.” Ante, at 19. This is the sort of “ ‘post
hoc rationalization’ for counsel’s decisionmaking that
contradicts the available evidence of counsel’s actions”
that courts cannot indulge. Harrington, 562 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 20) (quoting Wiggins v. Smith, 539 U. S. 510,
526–527 (2003)). The majority’s explanation for counsel’s
conduct contradicts the best available evidence of counsel’s
actions: Dettmar’s frank, contemporaneous statement to
the trial judge that he “had not prepared any evidence by
way of mitigation.” 52 Tr. 7250. The majority’s conjecture
that counsel had in fact prepared a mitigation defense,
based primarily on isolated entries in counsel’s billing
records, requires it to assume that Dettmar was lying to
the trial judge.20
In any event, even if Pinholster’s counsel had a strategic
reason for their actions, that would not automatically
render their actions reasonable. For example, had counsel
decided their best option was to move to exclude the ag
gravating evidence, it would have been unreasonable to
forgo a mitigation investigation on the hope that the mo
tion would be granted. With a client’s life at stake, it
would “flou[t] prudence,” Rompilla v. Beard, 545 U. S. 374,
——————
20 The

majority misleadingly cites entries showing that counsel were
preparing Brashear’s penalty phase testimony after counsel learned
that the State intended to present aggravation evidence. The cited
entries predating that event show only that counsel conducted about
one day’s worth of investigation—consisting of talking to Brashear and
researching epilepsy—two months before the penalty phase. See 3
Clerk’s Tr. 798 (1.5-hour phone call to Brashear on Jan. 13); id., at 864,
869 (3-hour meeting with Brashear regarding “childhood problems” on
Feb. 23); id., at 869 (3.5 hours for “[r]esearch re; epilepsy and conf. with
nurse” on Feb. 25). There is no evidence in the records that counsel
actually planned to present mitigating evidence. Indeed, their complete
failure to follow up on any of the information they learned in their
minimal investigation only confirms that they were not planning to
present mitigating evidence. See infra, at 29–31.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

27

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

389 (2005), for an attorney to rely on the possibility that
the court might preclude aggravating evidence pursuant
to a “legal technicality” without any backup plan in place
in case the court denied the motion, ante, at 19. No rea
sonable attorney would pursue such a risky strategy. I do
not understand the majority to suggest otherwise.
Instead, I understand the majority’s conclusion that
counsel’s actions were reasonable to rest on its belief that
they did have a backup plan: a family-sympathy defense.
In reaching this conclusion, the majority commits the
same Strickland error that we corrected, applying
§2254(d)(1), in Wiggins: It holds a purportedly “tactical
judgment” to be reasonable without assessing “the ade
quacy of the investigatio[n] supporting [that] judgmen[t],”
539 U. S., at 521. As we stated in Strickland:
“[S]trategic choices made after thorough investigation
of law and facts relevant to plausible options are vir
tually unchallengeable; and strategic choices made af
ter less than complete investigation are reasonable
precisely to the extent that reasonable professional
judgments support the limitations on investigation.
In other words, counsel has a duty to make reasonable
investigations or to make a reasonable decision that
makes particular investigations unnecessary. In any
ineffectiveness case, a particular decision not to inves
tigate must be directly assessed for reasonableness in
all the circumstances, applying a heavy measure of
deference to counsel’s judgments.” 466 U. S., at 690–
691.
We have repeatedly applied this principle since Strick
land. See Sears v. Upton, 561 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (per
curiam) (slip op., at 9); Porter v. McCollum, 558 U. S. ___,
___ (2009) (per curiam) (slip op., at 10); Wiggins, 539 U. S.,


28

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

at 527; Terry Williams, 529 U. S., at 396.21
As these cases make clear, the prevailing professional
norms at the time of Pinholster’s trial required his attor
neys to “conduct a thorough investigation of the defen
dant’s background,” ibid. (citing 1 ABA Standards for
Criminal Justice 4–4.1, commentary, p. 4–55 (2d ed. 1980)
(hereinafter ABA Standards)), or “to make a reasonable
decision that makes particular investigations unneces
sary,” Strickland, 466 U. S., at 691.22 “In judging the
defense’s investigation, as in applying Strickland gener
ally, hindsight is discounted by pegging adequacy to ‘coun
sel’s perspective at the time’ investigative decisions are
made, and by giving a ‘heavy measure of deference to
counsel’s judgments.’ ” Rompilla, 545 U. S., at 381 (quot
ing Strickland, 466 U. S., at 689, 691; citation omitted). In
some cases, “reasonably diligent counsel may draw a line
when they have good reason to think further investigation
would be a waste.” Rompilla, 545 U. S., at 383; see, e.g.,
Bobby v. Van Hook, 558 U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (per curiam)
(slip op., at 8); Burger v. Kemp, 483 U. S. 776, 794–795
(1987). In other cases, however, Strickland requires fur
ther investigation.
——————
21 I do not doubt that a decision to present a family-sympathy mitiga
tion defense might be consistent “with the standard of professional
competence in capital cases that prevailed in Los Angeles in 1984” in
some cases. Ante, at 24. My point is that even if counsel made a
strategic decision to proceed with such a defense, that decision was
unreasonable because it was based on an unreasonably incomplete
investigation.
22 See also 1 ABA Standards 4–4.1, commentary, at 4–55 (“Informa
tion concerning the defendant’s background, education, employment
record, mental and emotional stability, family relationships, and the
like, will be relevant, as will mitigating circumstances surrounding the
commission of the offense itself”). As we recognized in Strickland, the
ABA Standards, though not dispositive, “are guides to determining
what is reasonable.” 466 U. S., at 688; see also Wiggins v. Smith, 539
U. S. 510, 524 (2003).


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

29

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

Wiggins is illustrative of the competence we have re
quired of counsel in a capital case. There, counsel’s in
vestigation was limited to three sources: psychological
testing, a presentencing report, and Department of Social
Services records. 539 U. S., at 523–524. The records
revealed that the petitioner’s mother was an alcoholic,
that he displayed emotional difficulties in foster care, that
he was frequently absent from school, and that on one
occasion, his mother left him alone for days without food.
Id., at 525. In these circumstances, we concluded, “any
reasonably competent attorney would have realized that
pursuing these leads was necessary to making an in
formed choice among possible defenses.” Ibid. Accord
ingly, we held, the state court’s assumption that counsel’s
investigation was adequate was an unreasonable applica
tion of Strickland. 539 U. S., at 528.23
This case is remarkably similar to Wiggins. As the
majority reads the record, counsel’s mitigation investiga
tion consisted of talking to Pinholster’s mother, consulting
with Dr. Stalberg, and researching epilepsy.24 Ante, at 20.
What little information counsel gleaned from this “rudi
mentary” investigation, Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 524, would
have led any reasonable attorney “to investigate further,”
id., at 527. Counsel learned from Pinholster’s mother that
he attended a class for educationally handicapped chil
dren, that a psychologist had recommended placing him in
a mental institution, and that he spent time in a state
——————
23 As the majority notes, see ante, at 24–25, Wiggins’ trial counsel
acknowledged that the investigation he conducted was inconsistent
with standard practice in Maryland. See 539 U. S., at 524. We inde
pendently concluded, however, that the investigation “was also unrea
sonable in light of what counsel actually discovered in the . . . records.”
Id., at 525 (emphasis added).
24 The majority also posits that Brainard likely spent time preparing
Pinholster’s brother Terry. However, Terry averred in a declaration
that Pinholster’s attorneys “never asked [him] any questions relating to
Scott’s background or [their] family history.” Record ER–313.


30

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

hospital for emotionally handicapped children. They knew
that Pinholster had been diagnosed with epilepsy.
“[A]ny reasonably competent attorney would have real
ized that pursuing” the leads suggested by this informa
tion “was necessary to making an informed choice among
possible defenses.” Id., at 525; see also Penry v. Lynaugh,
492 U. S. 302, 319 (1989) (“[E]vidence about the defen
dant’s background and character is relevant because of the
belief, long held by this society, that defendants who
commit criminal acts that are attributable to a disadvan
taged background, or to emotional and mental problems,
may be less culpable than defendants who have no such
excuse” (internal quotation marks omitted)). Yet counsel
made no effort to obtain the readily available evidence
suggested by the information they learned, such as Pin
holster’s schooling or medical records, or to contact
Pinholster’s school authorities. They did not contact Dr.
Dubin or the many other health-care providers who had
treated Pinholster. Put simply, counsel “failed to act while
potentially powerful mitigating evidence stared them in
the face.” Bobby, 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 8) (citing
Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 525).
The “impediments” facing counsel, ante, at 21, did not
justify their minimal investigation. It is true that Pinhol
ster was “an unsympathetic client.” Ibid. But this fact
compounds, rather than excuses, counsel’s deficiency in
ignoring the glaring avenues of investigation that could
explain why Pinholster was the way he was. See Sears,
561 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 7) (“This evidence might not
have made Sears any more likable to the jury, but it might
well have helped the jury understand Sears, and his hor
rendous acts—especially in light of his purportedly stable
upbringing”). Nor can Dr. Stalberg’s two-page report,
which was based on a very limited record and focused
primarily on Pinholster’s mental state at the time of
the homicides, excuse counsel’s failure to investigate the


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

31

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

broader range of potential mitigating circumstances.
“The record of the actual sentencing proceedings under
scores the unreasonableness of counsel’s conduct by
suggesting that their failure to investigate thoroughly re
sulted from inattention, not reasoned strategic judgment.”
Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 526. Dettmar told the trial judge
that he was unprepared to present any mitigation evi
dence. The mitigation case that counsel eventually put on
can be described, at best, as “halfhearted.” Ibid. Counsel
made no effort to bolster Brashear’s self-interested testi
mony with school or medical records, as the prosecutor
effectively emphasized in closing argument. And because
they did not pursue obvious leads, they failed to recognize
that Brashear’s testimony painting Pinholster as the bad
apple in a normal, nondeprived family was false.
In denying Pinholster’s claim, the California Supreme
Court necessarily overlooked Strickland’s clearly estab
lished admonition that “strategic choices made after less
than complete investigation are reasonable precisely to
the extent that reasonable professional judgments support
the limitations.” 466 U. S., at 690–691. As in Wiggins, in
light of the information available to Pinholster’s counsel, it
is plain that “reasonable professional judgments” could not
have supported their woefully inadequate investigation.25
466 U. S., at 691. Accordingly, the California Supreme
Court could not reasonably have concluded that Pinholster
——————
25 The

majority chastises the Court of Appeals for “attributing strict
rules to this Court’s recent case law.” Ante, at 24. I agree that courts
should not interpret our cases to prescribe strict rules regarding the
required scope of mitigation investigations. See Rompilla v. Beard, 545
U. S. 374, 394 (2005) (O’Connor, J., concurring) (noting “our longstand
ing case-by-case approach to determining whether an attorney’s per
formance was unconstitutionally deficient under Strickland”). The
Ninth Circuit, however, did no such thing. It appropriately gave
thoughtful consideration to the guideposts contained in these cases,
just as we have previously done. See, e.g., Bobby v. Van Hook, 558
U. S. ___, ___ (2009) (per curiam) (slip op., at 8).


32

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

had failed to allege that his counsel’s investigation was
inadequate under Strickland.
D
The majority also concludes that the California Supreme
Court could reasonably have concluded that Pinholster did
not state a claim of prejudice. This conclusion, in light of
the overwhelming mitigating evidence that was not before
the jury, is wrong. To establish prejudice, “[t]he defendant
must show that there is a reasonable probability that, but
for counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the pro
ceeding would have been different.” Id., at 694. When a
habeas petitioner challenges a death sentence, “the ques
tion is whether there is a reasonable probability that,
absent the errors, the sentencer . . . would have concluded
that the balance of aggravating and mitigating circum
stances did not warrant death.” Id., at 695. This inquiry
requires evaluating “the totality of the available mitiga
tion evidence—both that adduced at trial, and the evi
dence adduced in the habeas proceeding—in reweighing it
against the evidence in aggravation.” Terry Williams, 529
U. S., at 397–398. The ultimate question in this case is
whether, taking into account all the mitigating and aggra
vating evidence, “there is a reasonable probability that at
least one juror would have struck a different balance.”
Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 537; see Cal. Penal Code Ann.
§190.4(b) (West 2008) (requiring a unanimous jury verdict
to impose a death sentence).
1
Like the majority, I first consider the aggravating and
mitigating evidence presented at trial. By virtue of its
verdict in the guilt phase, the jury had already concluded
that Pinholster had stabbed and killed the victims. As the
majority states, the jury saw Pinholster “revel” in his
history of burglaries during the guilt phase. Ante, at 26.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

33

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

The jury heard evidence of Pinholster’s violent tendencies:
He had kidnapped someone with a knife, cut a person in
the arm with a razor, and had a history of hitting and
kicking people. He threatened to kill the State’s lead
witness. And he had an extensive disciplinary record in
jail.
Brashear offered brief testimony that was apparently
intended to be mitigating. See supra, at 19–20; see also
ante, at 27–28.26 However, as the prosecutor argued,
Brashear was not a neutral witness. See 53 Tr. 7441 (“A
mother clearly loves her son, ladies and gentlemen.
Clearly not the most unbiased witness in the world”).
Notwithstanding Brashear’s obvious self-interest, counsel
failed to offer readily available, objective evidence that
would have substantiated and expanded on her testimony.
Their failure to do so allowed the prosecutor to belittle her
testimony in closing argument. See supra, at 19–20. And
Brashear’s statement that Pinholster would not be alive
much longer because he had “a chip in his head floating
around,” 52 Tr. 7397, could only have undermined her
credibility, as the prosecutor urged, see 53 id., at 7447
(“Does she want you to believe sometime before he got to
——————
26 The majority mischaracterizes several aspects of Brashear’s testi
mony. Although Brashear testified that the family “didn’t have lots of
money,” she followed up that comment by stating that Pinholster did
not bring friends to the house because “it was too nice a house.” 52 Tr.
7404. The prosecutor did not understand Brashear to have testified
that Pinholster’s childhood was deprived. See 53 id., at 7442 (“You
heard that he was not a deprived child”). Nor did the California Su
preme Court on direct appeal. People v. Pinholster, 1 Cal. 4th 865, 910,
824 P. 2d 571, 587 (1992).
Brashear did testify that Pinholster’s stepfather tried to “discipline”
him and that he was “at times” “abusive or near abusive.” 52 Tr. 7392–
7393. She suggested, however, that Pinholster deserved the “disci
pline” he received. See, e.g., id., at 7392 (“Scott was always—he had a
mind of his own”). It is unlikely the jury understood Brashear to be
suggesting that her husband routinely beat Pinholster. The prosecutor
did not come away with this understanding. See 53 id., at 7442.


34

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

country jail some doctor looked in a crystal ball and
said, ‘In three years you are going to die’? That’s ridicu
lous”). The trial judge was thoroughly unimpressed with
Brashear’s testimony. See supra, at 20.
Moreover, the evidence presented in Pinholster’s state
court petition revealed that Brashear distorted facts in her
testimony in ways that undermined Pinholster’s mitiga
tion case. As in Sears, 561 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 3), the
prosecutor used Brashear’s testimony that Pinholster
came from a good family against him. See 53 Tr. 7442.
In sum, counsel presented little in the way of mitigating
evidence, and the prosecutor effectively used their half
hearted attempt to present a mitigation case to advocate
for the death penalty. The jury nonetheless took two days
to reach a decision to impose a death sentence.
2
The additional mitigating evidence presented to the
California Supreme Court “adds up to a mitigation case
that bears no relation” to Brashear’s unsubstantiated
testimony. Rompilla, 545 U. S., at 393.
Assuming the evidence presented to the California
Supreme Court to be true, as that court was required to
do, the new mitigating evidence presented to that court
would have shown that Pinholster was raised in “chaos
and poverty.” Record ER–312. The family home was filled
with violence. Pinholster’s siblings had extremely trou
bled pasts. There was substantial evidence of “mental
disturbance during Mr. Pinholster’s childhood and some
degree of brain damage.” Id., at ER–493.
Dr. Woods concluded that Pinholster’s aggressive con
duct resulted from bipolar mood disorder. Just months
before the murders, a doctor had recommended that Pin
holster be sent to a psychiatric institute. Dr. Woods also
explained that Pinholster’s bizarre behavior before the
murders reflected “[a]uditory hallucinations” and “severe


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

35

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

psychosis.” Id., at ER–169. The available records con
firmed that Pinholster suffered from longstanding seizure
disorders, which may have been caused by his childhood
head injuries.
On this record, I do not see how it can be said that “[t]he
‘new’ evidence largely duplicated the mitigation evidence
at trial.” Ante, at 29; see Arizona v. Fulminante, 499 U. S.
279, 298–299 (1991) (evidence is not “merely cumulative”
if it corroborates other evidence that is “unbelievable” on
its own). Brashear’s self-interested testimony was not
confirmed with objective evidence, as the prosecutor high
lighted. The new evidence would have “destroyed the
[relatively] benign conception of [Pinholster’s] upbringing”
presented by his mother. Rompilla, 545 U. S., at 391. The
jury heard no testimony at all that Pinholster likely suf
fered from brain damage or bipolar mood disorder, and
counsel offered no evidence to help the jury understand
the likely effect of Pinholster’s head injuries or his bizarre
behavior on the night of the homicides. The jury heard no
testimony recounting the substantial evidence of Pinhol
ster’s likely neurological problems. And it heard no medi
cal evidence that Pinholster suffered from epilepsy.
The majority responds that “much” of Pinholster’s new
mitigating evidence “is of questionable mitigating value.”
Ante, at 29. By presenting psychiatric testimony, it con
tends, “Pinholster would have opened the door to rebuttal
by a state expert.” Ibid. But, because the California
Supreme Court denied Pinholster’s petition on the plead
ings, it had no reason to know what a state expert might
have said. Moreover, given the record evidence, it is rea
sonably probable that at least one juror would have cred
ited his expert. In any event, even if a rebuttal expert
testified that Pinholster suffered from antisocial personal
ity disorder, this would hardly have come as a surprise to
the jury. See ante, at 22 (describing Pinholster as a “psy
chotic client whose performance at trial hardly endeared


36

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

him to the jury”). It is for this reason that it was espe
cially important for counsel to present the available evi
dence to help the jury understand Pinholster. See Sears,
561 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 6–7).
Had counsel conducted an adequate investigation, the
judge and jury would have heard credible evidence show
ing that Pinholster’s criminal acts and aggressive tenden
cies were “attributable to a disadvantaged background, or
to emotional and mental problems.” Penry, 492 U. S., at
319 (internal quotation marks omitted). They would have
learned that Pinholster had the “ ‘kind of troubled history
we have declared relevant to assessing a defendant’s
moral culpability.’ ” Porter, 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 12)
(quoting Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 535). Applying Strickland,
we have repeatedly found “a reasonable probability,” 466
U. S., at 694, that the sentencer would have reached a
different result had counsel presented similar evidence.
See, e.g., Porter, 558 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 12–13) (evi
dence of the defendant’s childhood history of physical
abuse, brain abnormality, limited schooling, and heroic
military service); Rompilla, 545 U. S., at 392 (evidence of
severe abuse and neglect as a child, as well as brain
damage); Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 535 (evidence of the de
fendant’s “severe privation and abuse” as a child, home
lessness, and “diminished mental capacities”); Terry
Williams, 529 U. S., at 398 (evidence of childhood
mistreatment and neglect, head injuries, possible organic
mental impairments, and borderline mental retardation).
The majority does not dispute the similarity between
this case and the cited cases. However, it criticizes the
Court of Appeals for relying on Rompilla and Terry Wil
liams on the ground that we reviewed the prejudice ques
tion de novo in those cases. See ante, at 31. I do not read
Terry Williams to review the prejudice question de novo.27
——————
27 Terry

Williams held that the state court’s decision was “unreason


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

37

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

More fundamentally, however, I cannot agree with the
premise that “[t]hose cases . . . offer no guidance with
respect to whether a state court has unreasonably deter
mined that prejudice is lacking.” Ante, at 31 (emphasis
deleted). In each of these cases, we did not purport to
create new law; we simply applied the same clearly estab
lished precedent, Strickland, to a different set of facts.
Because these cases illuminate the kinds of mitigation
evidence that suffice to establish prejudice under Strick
land, they provide useful, but not dispositive, guidance for
courts to consider when determining whether a state court
has unreasonably applied Strickland.
In many cases, a state court presented with additional
mitigation evidence will reasonably conclude that there is
no “reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unprofes
sional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been
different.” Strickland, 466 U. S., at 694. This is not such
a case. Admittedly, Pinholster unjustifiably stabbed and
killed two people, and his history of violent outbursts and
burglaries surely did not endear him to the jury. But the
homicides did not appear premeditated. And the State’s
aggravation case was no stronger than in Rompilla and
Terry Williams. See 545 U. S., at 378, 383 (the defendant
committed murder by torture and had a significant history
of violent felonies, including a rape); 529 U. S., at 418
(Rehnquist, C. J., concurring in part and dissenting in
part) (the defendant had a lifetime of crime, and after the
murder he “savagely beat an elderly woman,” set a home
on fire, and stabbed a man (internal quotation marks
omitted)). Even on the trial record, it took the jury two
days to decide on a penalty. The contrast between the “not
—————— 

able in at least two respects”: (1) It applied the wrong legal standard,

see 529 U. S., at 397, and (2) it “failed to accord appropriate weight to 

the body of mitigation evidence available to trial counsel,” id., at 398.

We did not purport to conduct de novo review. 



38

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

persuasive” mitigation case put on by Pinholster’s counsel,
54 Tr. 7514, and the substantial mitigation evidence at
their fingertips was stark. Given these considerations, it
is not a foregone conclusion, as the majority deems it, that
a juror familiar with his troubled background and psychi
atric issues would have reached the same conclusion
regarding Pinholster’s culpability. Fairminded jurists
could not doubt that, on the record before the California
Supreme Court, “there [was] a reasonable probability that
at least one juror would have struck a different balance.”
Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 537.
III
The state-court record on its own was more than ade
quate to support the Court of Appeals’ conclusion that the
California Supreme Court could not reasonably have
rejected Pinholster’s Strickland claim. The additional
evidence presented in the federal evidentiary hearing only
confirms that conclusion.
A
At the hearing, Pinholster offered many of the same
documents that were before the state habeas court. He
also offered his trial attorneys’ billing records, which were
before the state habeas court as part of the trial record. Of
the seven lay witnesses who testified at the hearing, six
had previously executed declarations in support of Pinhol
ster’s state-court petition. (The seventh, Pinholster’s
uncle, provided testimony cumulative of other testimony.)
Two experts testified on Pinholster’s behalf; neither had
presented declarations to the state habeas court. The first
was Dr. Donald Olson, assistant professor of neurology
and neurological sciences and director of the Pediatric
Epilepsy Program at Stanford University Medical Center.
It appears that Pinholster retained Dr. Olson to rebut the
testimony of the expert disclosed by the State in the fed


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

39

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

eral proceeding. See Decl. of Michael D. Abzug in Support
of Stipulated Ex Parte Application to Continue Eviden
tiary Hearing and Discovery Cut-Off and to Substitute
Counsel in Pinholster v. Calderon, No. CV 95–6240–GLT
(CD Cal.), p. 2. Relying in part on Pinholster’s abnormal
EEG, Dr. Olson opined that Pinholster’s childhood acci
dents “likely result[ed] in brain injury” and that these
injuries “conferred a risk of epilepsy.” Record ER–699 to
ER–700. He concluded that it was reasonably probable
that Pinholster had suffered from partial epilepsy since at
least 1968 and had suffered from brain injury since at
least 1964. Id., at ER–701.
Pinholster’s second expert was Dr. Sophia Vinogradov,
associate professor of psychiatry at the University of
California, San Francisco. Dr. Vinogradov’s testimony
was based on essentially the same facts as Dr. Woods’ and
Dr. Stalberg’s state-court declarations. She highlighted
Pinholster’s childhood head traumas, history of epilepsy,
abusive and neglected upbringing, history of substance
abuse, and bizarre behavior on the night of the homicides.
She opined that his aggressive behavior resulted from
childhood head traumas:
“All data indicates that there were severe effects of
the two serious head injuries sustained at age 2 and
age 3, with evidence for behavioral changes related to
dysfunction of frontal cortex: severe attentional and
learning problems in childhood, hyperactivity, aggres
sivity, impulsivity, social-emotional impairment, sei
zure disorder, and explosive dyscontrol.” Id., at ER–
731.
She also opined that, right before the homicides, Pinhol
ster was in an “apparently hallucinatory state [that] was
likely the result of his intoxication with multiple sub
stances.” Id., at ER–707
The State presented two experts: Dr. Stalberg, the


40

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

psychiatrist who had examined Pinholster in the middle of
trial,28 and Dr. David Rudnick. Although Dr. Stalberg
maintained that Pinholster suffered from antisocial per
sonality disorder, which was his original diagnosis in the
middle of trial, he again emphasized that there was “vo
luminous” and “compelling” mitigation evidence that had
not previously been made available to him or presented to
the jury. Id., at ER–926, ER–953. He stated that conver
sations with Pinholster’s family revealed that he and his
siblings were “raised like animals, wild animals,” id., at
ER–948, and he opined that Pinholster’s upbringing was a
risk factor for antisocial personality disorder. See ibid.
(Pinholster’s upbringing “would speak volumes, looking at
it from a mitigation point of view”). And he agreed that
the mitigation evidence presented at trial was “profoundly
misleading.” Id., at ER–966. Dr. Rudnick testified that
Pinholster suffered from antisocial personality disorder.
The State also introduced into evidence the 1978 proba
tion report that Pinholster’s counsel had in their posses
sion at the time of his trial. The report demonstrated that
counsel were aware that Pinholster was in classes for
educationally handicapped children, that he was commit
ted to a state hospital for emotionally handicapped chil
dren, and that he suffered two “severe head injuries.” Id.,
at SER–243.
B
Much of the evidence presented at the federal hearing
——————
28 Before the hearing, Dr. Stalberg had opined that Pinholster was
“substantially impaired by a bipolar mood disorder operating synergis
tically with intoxication and a seizure disorder at the time the crime
was committed.” Record ER–587. At a prehearing deposition, however,
Dr. Stalberg revised his opinion and stated that he continued to believe
that Pinholster suffered from psychopathic personality traits. After the
deposition, Pinholster elected to proceed with a different expert, pre
sumably in light of Dr. Stalberg’s unexpected change in position. The
State then retained Dr. Stalberg as its own expert.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

41

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

was duplicative of the evidence submitted to the California
Supreme Court. The additional evidence presented at the
hearing only confirmed that the California Supreme Court
could not reasonably have rejected Pinholster’s claim.29
For example, the probation report presented by the
State confirmed that counsel had in their possession in
formation that would have led any reasonable attorney “to
investigate further.” Wiggins, 539 U. S., at 527. Counsel
nevertheless took no action to investigate these leads.
Pinholster’s experts opined that his childhood head
traumas likely resulted in brain injury and conferred a
risk of epilepsy. Although the State presented testimony
that Pinholster had antisocial personality disorder, it was
not clear error for the District Court to conclude that
jurors could have credited Pinholster’s experts. Even the
——————
29 The

State argues that the District Court was not entitled to rely on
the evidence adduced at the hearing because Pinholster was not dili
gent in developing his claims in state court and the hearing was there
fore barred by 28 U. S. C. §2254(e)(2). This argument is somewhat
imprecise. Pinholster’s allegations in his amended federal petition
were “identical” to the allegations he presented to the California
Supreme Court, ante, at 6, and he diligently requested a hearing in
state court. The State presumably means to argue that Pinholster’s
new expert testimony changed “the factual basis” of his claim such that,
by the time of the evidentiary hearing, he no longer satisfied
§2254(e)(2). However, at oral argument, the State suggested that
Pinholster was presenting an altogether new claim in the federal court.
See Tr. of Oral Arg. 18. If that is the case, §2254(d)(1) does not apply at
all, and the State should be arguing lack of exhaustion or procedural
default. I do not understand Pinholster to have presented a new claim
to the District Court.
In any event, Pinholster satisfied §2254(e)(2) in this case. He made
“a reasonable attempt, in light of the information available at the time,
to investigate and pursue claims in state court.” Michael Williams, 529
U. S., at 435. His experts relied on the very same facts and evidence. I
cannot read §2254(e)(2) to impose a strict requirement that petitioners
must use the same experts they presented to the state court. This rule
would result in numerous practical problems, for example in the case of
the unanticipated death of an expert.


42

CULLEN v. PINHOLSTER
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

State’s own expert, Dr. Stalberg, testified to the “volumi
nous” mitigation evidence in Pinholster’s case. Record ER–
926.
In sum, the evidence confirmed what was already ap
parent from the state-court record: Pinholster’s counsel
failed to conduct an adequate mitigation investigation,
and there was a reasonable probability that at least one
juror confronted with the “voluminous” mitigating evi
dence counsel should have discovered would have voted to
spare Pinholster’s life. Ibid. Accordingly, whether on the
basis of the state- or federal-court record, the courts below
correctly concluded that Pinholster had shown that the
California Supreme Court’s decision reflected an unrea
sonable application of Strickland.30
*
*
*
I cannot agree with either aspect of the Court’s ruling. I
fear the consequences of the Court’s novel interpretation
of §2254(d)(1) for diligent state habeas petitioners with
compelling evidence supporting their claims who were
unable, through no fault of their own, to present that
evidence to the state court that adjudicated their claims.
And the Court’s conclusion that the California Supreme
Court reasonably denied Pinholster’s ineffective
assistance-of-counsel claim overlooks counsel’s failure to
investigate obvious avenues of mitigation and the contrast
between the woefully inadequate mitigation case they
presented and the evidence they should and would have
discovered. I respectfully dissent.
——————
30 The State’s challenge in this Court is limited to the questions
whether the Federal District Court was entitled to consider the addi
tional evidence in the §2254(d)(1) analysis and whether Pinholster
satisfied §2254(d)(1) on the basis of the state-court record. It has not
challenged the District Court’s ultimate conclusion that Pinholster had
proved that he was “in custody in violation of the Constitution or laws
or treaties of the United States.” §2254(a).

