(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

VIRGINIA OFFICE FOR PROTECTION AND ADVO-

CACY v. STEWART, COMMISSIONER, VIRGINIA 

DEPARTMENT OF BEHAVIORAL HEALTH

AND DEVELOPMENTAL SERVICES, ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–529.

Argued December 1, 2010—Decided April 19, 2011

Together, the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights
Act of 2000 (DD Act) and the Protection and Advocacy for Individuals
with Mental Illness Act (PAIMI Act) offer States federal money to
improve, inter alia, medical care for persons with developmental dis
abilities or mental illness. As a condition of funding, a State must es
tablish a protection and advocacy (P&A) system “to protect and advo
cate [those individuals’] rights.”
42 U. S. C. §15043(a)(1).
A
participating State may appoint either a state agency or a private
nonprofit entity as its P&A system, but if a state agency it must have
authority to litigate and freedom from the control of other state agen
cies or officers. Virginia has appointed an independent state agency,
petitioner Virginia Office for Protection and Advocacy (VOPA), au
thorizing it to litigate to secure disabled individuals’ rights, free of
executive-branch oversight; to operate independently of Virginia’s at
torney general; and to employ its own lawyers to sue on its behalf.
While investigating patient deaths and injuries at state mental
hospitals, VOPA asked respondents—state officials in charge of those
hospitals—to produce relevant patient records. Respondents refused,
asserting that a state-law privilege shielded the records from disclo
sure. VOPA then filed suit in Federal District Court, seeking a dec
laration that respondents’ refusal to produce the records violated the
DD and PAIMI Acts and an injunction requiring respondents to pro
duce the records and refrain in the future from interfering with
VOPA’s right of access. Respondents moved to dismiss on the ground


2

VIRGINIA OFFICE FOR PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY
v. STEWART
Syllabus
that they are immune from suit under the Eleventh Amendment, but
the court held that the suit was permitted by the doctrine of Ex parte
Young, 209 U. S. 123, which normally allows federal courts to award
prospective relief against state officials for violations of federal law.
The Fourth Circuit reversed, finding that Ex parte Young did not ap
ply because the suit was brought by a state agency.

Held: Ex parte Young allows a federal court to hear a lawsuit for pro
spective relief against state officials brought by another agency of the
same State. Pp. 4–13.
(a) Absent a waiver of sovereign immunity by a State itself or a
valid abrogation by Congress, federal courts may not entertain a pri
vate person’s suit against a State. Pp. 4–5.
(b) The doctrine of Ex parte Young, which establishes an important
limitation on the sovereign-immunity principle, is accepted as neces
sary to “permit the federal courts to vindicate federal rights.” Penn
hurst State School and Hospital v. Halderman, 465 U. S. 89. It rests
on the premise that when a federal court commands a state official to
do nothing more than refrain from violating federal law, he is not the
State for sovereign-immunity purposes. It does not apply “when ‘the
state is the . . . party in interest.’ ” Id., at 101. Pp. 5–6.
(c) Entertaining VOPA’s action is consistent with precedent and
does not offend the distinctive interests protected by sovereign im
munity. Pp. 6–13.
(1) Verizon Md. Inc. v. Public Serv. Comm’n of Md., 535 U. S.
635, held that, in determining the Ex parte Young doctrine’s applica
bility, “a court need only conduct a ‘straightforward inquiry into
whether [the] complaint alleges an ongoing violation of federal law
and seeks relief properly characterized as prospective.’ ” Id., at 645.
VOPA’s suit satisfies that inquiry. Respondents concede that the ac
tion would be proper were VOPA a private organization rather than a
state agency. The “general criterion for determining when a suit is in
fact against the sovereign is the effect of the relief sought,” Penn
hurst, supra, at 107, not who is bringing the lawsuit. This Court ap
plied that criterion in Idaho v. Coeur d’Alene Tribe of Idaho, 521 U. S.
261, which held that an Indian Tribe could not invoke Ex parte Young
to bring what was essentially a quiet title suit that would “extinguish
[Idaho’s] control over . . . lands and waters long deemed . . . an inte
gral part of its territory.” Id., at 282. Respondents have advanced no
argument that the relief sought here threatens a similar invasion of
Virginia’s sovereignty. Pp. 7–9.
(2) Respondents claim that a State’s dignity is diminished when
a federal court adjudicates a dispute between its components. But a
State’s stature is not diminished to any greater degree when its own
agency sues to enforce its officers’ compliance with federal law than


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
when a private person does so. Moreover, VOPA’s power to sue state
officials is a consequence of Virginia’s own decision to establish a
public P&A system. Not every offense to a State’s dignity constitutes
a denial of sovereign immunity. The specific indignity against which
sovereign immunity protects is the insult to a State of being haled
into court without its consent; that does not occur just because a suit
happens to be brought by another state agency. Pp. 9–11.
(3) The apparent novelty of this suit is not likely a consequence
of past constitutional doubts. In order to invoke the Ex parte Young
exception, a state agency needs both a federal right that it possesses
against its parent State and authority to sue state officials to enforce
that right, free from any internal state-government veto; such condi
tions rarely coincide. In any event, the principles undergirding the
Ex parte Young doctrine support its extension to actions of this kind.
Pp. 12–13.
568 F. 3d 110, reversed and remanded.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which KENNEDY,
THOMAS, GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. KENNEDY, J.,
filed a concurring opinion, in which THOMAS, J., joined. ROBERTS, C. J.,
filed a dissenting opinion, in which ALITO, J., joined. KAGAN, J., took no
part in the consideration or decision of the case.

