2

BEARD v. KINDLER
KENNEDY, J., concurring

who, in justified reliance upon prior decisions, seek vindi
cation in state courts of their federal constitutional
rights.” NAACP v. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U. S.
449, 457–458 (1958). We have also been mindful of the
danger that novel state procedural requirements will be
imposed for the purpose of evading compliance with a
federal standard. See, e.g., NAACP v. Alabama ex rel.
Flowers, 377 U. S. 288, 293–302 (1964).
Neither of these concerns applies here. First, no one
could seriously entertain the notion that Kindler acted in
“justified reliance” when he fled beyond the jurisdiction of
the Pennsylvania courts. Even if a hypothetical escapee
studiously examined the case law before making an in
formed decision that flight was worth it, that is not the
reliance the law should be required to consider. There is
no justification for an unlawful escape, which “operates as
an affront to the dignity of [a] court’s proceedings.” Or
tega-Rodriguez v. United States, 507 U. S. 234, 246 (1993).
And if some prior court rulings allowed a former escapee
to reinstate forfeited claims, there is no convincing reason
to say a future escapee is entitled to similar treatment.
Nor is there any indication that the Supreme Court of
Pennsylvania adopted its forfeiture rule out of any hostil
ity toward legitimate constitutional claims.
It is most doubtful that, in light of its underlying pur
poses, the adequate state ground doctrine ought to prevent
a State from adopting, and enforcing, a sensible rule that
the escaped felon forfeits any pending postverdict motions.
The law is entitled to protect the regularity and predict
ability of its own processes, and its own interest in the
prompt adjudication of disputed issues, by imposing a rule
of waiver quite without regard to some notion of express or
constructive reliance by the one who escapes. And if that
principle had not been fully explicated in prior decisions, it
seems to me that the State can establish a new baseline
without later having its procedural bar ignored by the

