Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

3

KENNEDY, J., concurring

federal courts. This should be true even if the principles
barring the postverdict motions are first elaborated in the
instant case.
The process of elaborating, defining, and then shaping a
State’s decisional law after considering the competing
arguments in a specific case rests on this premise: Novel
facts and circumstances may disclose principles that,
while consistent with the logic and rationality the law
seeks and in that sense predictable, still have not yet been
defined with precision in earlier cases. This is the dy
namic of the case system we rely upon to explain the law.
The adequate state ground doctrine ought not to fore
close the case process in the separate States. A too
rigorous or demanding insistence that procedural re
quirements be established in all of their detail before they
can be given effect in federal court would deprive the
States of the case law decisional dynamic that the Judici
ary of the United States finds necessary and appropriate
for the elaboration of its own procedural rules. See, e.g.,
Smith v. United States, 94 U. S. 97 (1876). Save where
there is exclusive jurisdiction or federal supremacy, a
proper constitutional balance ought not give federal courts
latitude in the interpretation and elaboration of its law
that it then withholds from the States. There is no sense
in applying the adequate state ground rule without its
being informed by these principles.
Whether the structure of this case either permits or
requires consideration of these matters is not clear at this
stage. In a proper case, however, these concerns should be
addressed. It seems most doubtful that this Court can or
should require federal courts to disregard a state proce
dural ground that was not in all respects explicit before
the case when it was first announced, absent a showing of
a purpose or pattern to evade constitutional guarantees.
And this is particularly so when the state procedural
requirement arose from the necessity, in new circum

