(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

BEARD, SECRETARY, PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT
OF CORRECTIONS, ET AL. v. KINDLER
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE THIRD CIRCUIT
No. 08–992.

Argued November 2, 2009—Decided December 8, 2009

Respondent Kindler was convicted of capital murder in Pennsylvania
state court, and the jury recommended a death sentence. Kindler
filed postverdict motions challenging his conviction and sentence, but
before the trial court could consider the motions or the jury’s death
recommendation, Kindler escaped and fled to Canada. The state trial
court subsequently dismissed Kindler’s postverdict motions because
of his escape. Canadian authorities ultimately captured Kindler and
held him in jail pending extradition. But before Kindler could be
transferred from Canadian custody, he escaped again, this time re
maining at large for more than two years. He was eventually recap
tured and transferred to the United States. Once back in this coun
try, Kindler sought to reinstate his postverdict motions, but the trial
court denied relief, holding that the judge who had dismissed the mo
tions had not abused his discretion under Pennsylvania’s fugitive for
feiture law. Kindler argued on direct appeal that the trial court
erred in declining to address the merits of his postverdict motions,
but the Pennsylvania Supreme Court affirmed. Kindler’s claims
were rejected on state habeas, and he sought federal habeas relief.
Under the adequate state ground doctrine, a federal habeas court will
not review a claim rejected by a state court “if the decision of [the
state] court rests on a state law ground that is independent of the
federal question and adequate to support the judgment.” Coleman v.
Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, 729. The District Court nonetheless
granted Kindler’s habeas petition, determining that the state fugitive
forfeiture rule did not provide an adequate basis to bar federal review
of Kindler’s habeas claims. The Third Circuit affirmed, and the
Commonwealth petitioned for certiorari. It argued that the Third

