2

BEARD v. KINDLER
Syllabus
Circuit had held the state fugitive forfeiture rule automatically in
adequate because the state courts had discretion in applying it, and
the Commonwealth sought review of that holding. The Court
granted that petition.

Held: A state procedural rule is not automatically “inadequate” under
the adequate state ground doctrine—and therefore unenforceable on
federal habeas review—because the state rule is discretionary rather
than mandatory. The question whether a state procedural ruling is
adequate is itself a question of federal law. Lee v. Kemna, 534 U. S.
362, 375. This Court has framed the adequacy inquiry by asking
whether the state rule was “firmly established and regularly fol
lowed.” Id., at 376. A discretionary state procedural rule can serve
as an adequate ground to bar federal habeas review even if the ap
propriate exercise of discretion may permit consideration of a federal
claim in some cases but not others. A contrary holding would pose an
unnecessary dilemma for the States: They could preserve flexibility
by granting courts discretion to excuse procedural errors, but only at
the cost of undermining the finality of state-court judgments. Or
States could preserve the finality of their judgments by withholding
such discretion, but only at the cost of precluding any flexibility in
applying the rules. If forced to choose, many States would opt for
mandatory rules to avoid the high costs of plenary federal review.
That would be unfortunate in many cases, as discretionary rules are
often desirable. The federal system, for example, often grants the
trial judge broad discretion when his ringside perspective at the main
event offers him a comparative advantage in decisionmaking. The
States have followed suit. Given the federalism and comity concerns
motivating the adequate state ground doctrine in the habeas context,
see Coleman, supra, at 730, this Court should not disregard discre
tionary state procedural rules that are in place in nearly every State
and are substantially similar to those given full force in federal
courts. Cf. Francis v. Henderson, 425 U. S. 536, 541–542. Pp. 7–9.
542 F. 3d 70, vacated and remanded.
ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which all other
Members joined, except ALITO, J., who took no part in the consideration
or decision of the case. KENNEDY, J., filed a concurring opinion, in
which THOMAS, J., joined.

