Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009) 


7

Opinion of the Court 


II 

The question whether a state procedural ruling is ade
quate is itself a question of federal law. Lee v. Kemna, 534
U. S. 362, 375 (2002). We have framed the adequacy
inquiry by asking whether the state rule in question was
“ ‘firmly established and regularly followed.’ ” Id., at 376
(quoting James v. Kentucky, 466 U. S. 341, 348 (1984)).
We hold that a discretionary state procedural rule can
serve as an adequate ground to bar federal habeas review.
Nothing inherent in such a rule renders it inadequate for
purposes of the adequate state ground doctrine. To the
contrary, a discretionary rule can be “firmly established”
and “regularly followed”—even if the appropriate exercise
of discretion may permit consideration of a federal claim
in some cases but not others. See Meltzer, State Court
Forfeitures of Federal Rights, 99 Harv. L. Rev. 1128, 1140
(1986) (“[R]efusals to exercise discretion do not form an
important independent category under the inadequate
state ground doctrine”).
A contrary holding would pose an unnecessary dilemma
for the States: States could preserve flexibility by granting
courts discretion to excuse procedural errors, but only at
the cost of undermining the finality of state court judg
ments. Or States could preserve the finality of their
judgments by withholding such discretion, but only at the
cost of precluding any flexibility in applying the rules.
We are told that, if forced to choose, many States would
opt for mandatory rules to avoid the high costs that come
with plenary federal review. See, e.g., Brief for State of
California et al. as Amici Curiae 19; Brief for Criminal
Justice Legal Foundation as Amicus Curiae 14. That
would be unfortunate in many cases, as discretionary
rules are often desirable. In some circumstances, for
example, the factors facing trial courts “are so numerous,
variable and subtle that the fashioning of rigid rules
would be more likely to impair [the trial judge’s] ability to

