Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

Moreover, even if today’s holding could (against all
logic) be restricted to ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel
claims, it would have essentially the same practical consequences as a holding that collateral-review counsel is
constitutionally required. Despite the Court’s suggestion
to the contrary, see ante, at 13, the rule it adopts calls into
question the common state practice of not appointing
counsel in all first collateral proceedings, see ante, at 11–
12. It does not, to be sure, call into question the lawfulness of that practice; only its sanity. For if the prisoner
goes through state collateral proceedings without counsel,
and fails to raise an ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel
claim which is, because of that failure, defaulted, the
default will not preclude federal habeas review of the
merits of that claim. And since ineffective assistance of
trial counsel is a monotonously standard claim on federal
habeas (has a duly convicted defendant ever been effectively represented?), whoever advises the State would himself
be guilty of ineffective assistance if he did not counsel
the appointment of state-collateral-review counsel in all
cases—lest the failure to raise that claim in the state proceedings be excused and the State be propelled into federal
habeas review of the adequacy of trial-court representation that occurred many years ago.2 Which is to say that
——————
fails to reopen the direct-appeal process in order to entertain such
claims. Such a radical change in what we require of the States surely
ought to be prescribed by language clearer than what today’s opinion
contains.
2 The Court says that to establish cause a prisoner must demonstrate
that the ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claim is “substantial,”
which apparently means the claim has at least some merit. See ante, at
11. The Court does not explain where this substantiality standard
comes from, and how it differs from the normal rule that a prisoner
must demonstrate actual prejudice to avoid the enforcement of a
procedural default, see Coleman v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, 750
(1991). But whatever the standard, examination of the adequacy of

