Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

attorney addressing that claim. Halbert, 545 U. S., at 619.
To present a claim of ineffective assistance at trial in
accordance with the State’s procedures, then, a prisoner
likely needs an effective attorney.
The same would be true if the State did not appoint an
attorney to assist the prisoner in the initial-review collat­
eral proceeding. The prisoner, unlearned in the law, may
not comply with the State’s procedural rules or may mis­
apprehend the substantive details of federal constitutional
law. Cf., e.g., id., at 620–621 (describing the educational
background of the prison population). While confined to
prison, the prisoner is in no position to develop the eviden­
tiary basis for a claim of ineffective assistance, which often
turns on evidence outside the trial record.
A prisoner’s inability to present a claim of trial error is
of particular concern when the claim is one of ineffective
assistance of counsel. The right to the effective assistance
of counsel at trial is a bedrock principle in our justice
system. It is deemed as an “obvious truth” the idea that
“any person haled into court, who is too poor to hire a
lawyer, cannot be assured a fair trial unless counsel is
provided for him.” Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U. S. 335,
344 (1963). Indeed, the right to counsel is the foundation
for our adversary system. Defense counsel tests the pros­
ecution’s case to ensure that the proceedings serve the
function of adjudicating guilt or innocence, while protect­
ing the rights of the person charged. See, e.g., Powell v.
Alabama, 287 U. S. 45, 68–69 (1932) (“[The defendant]
requires the guiding hand of counsel at every step in the
proceedings against him. Without it, though he be not
guilty, he faces the danger of conviction because he does
not know how to establish his innocence”). Effective trial
counsel preserves claims to be considered on appeal, see,
e.g., Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 52(b), and in federal habeas
proceedings, Edwards v. Carpenter, 529 U. S. 446 (2000).
This is not to imply the State acted with any impropri­

