2

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
SCALIA, J., dissenting

Ah, but perhaps the explanation of why the Court’s
action today amounts to praiseworthy self-restraint is this:
It pronounces this excuse from the usual rule of procedural default only in initial-review state habeas raising an
ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claim. But it could
have limited its invention of a new constitutional right to
collateral-review counsel in precisely the same fashion—
and with precisely the same consequences. Moreover, no
one really believes that the newly announced “equitable”
rule will remain limited to ineffective-assistance-of-trialcounsel cases. There is not a dime’s worth of difference
in principle between those cases and many other cases in
which initial state habeas will be the first opportunity for
a particular claim to be raised: claims of “newly discovered” prosecutorial misconduct, for example, see Brady v.
Maryland, 373 U. S. 83 (1963), claims based on “newly
discovered” exculpatory evidence or “newly discovered”
impeachment of prosecutorial witnesses, and claims asserting ineffective assistance of appellate counsel. The
Court’s soothing assertion, ante, at 14, that its holding
“addresses only the constitutional claims presented in this
case,” insults the reader’s intelligence.1
——————
1 The Court also seeks to restrict its holding to cases in which the
State has “deliberately cho[sen]” to move the asserted claim “outside of
the direct-appeal process,” ante, at 10. That line lacks any principled
basis, and will not last. Is there any relevant difference between cases
in which the State says that certain claims can only be brought on
collateral review and cases in which those claims by their nature can
only be brought on collateral review, since they do not manifest themselves until the appellate process is complete? Our cases establish that
to constitute cause for failure to raise an issue on direct review, the
excuse must be “an objective factor external to the defense.” See infra,
at 7. That the factual basis for a claim was not available until the
collateral-review stage is no less such a factor than a State’s requiring
that a claim be brought on collateral review. See Murray v. Carrier,
477 U. S. 478, 488 (1986). The Court’s asserted limitation makes sense
only if the opinion means that a State has “deliberately chos[en]” to
move newly-arisen claims “outside of the direct-appeal process” if it

