Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

circumstances like this one.
The holding here ought not to put a significant strain on
state resources. When faced with the question whether
there is cause for an apparent default, a State may answer
that the ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claim is in­
substantial, i.e., it does not have any merit or that it is
wholly without factual support, or that the attorney in the
initial-review collateral proceeding did not perform below
constitutional standards.
This is but one of the differences between a constitu­
tional ruling and the equitable ruling of this case. A
constitutional ruling would provide defendants a free­
standing constitutional claim to raise; it would require the
appointment of counsel in initial-review collateral proceed­
ings; it would impose the same system of appointing coun­
sel in every State; and it would require a reversal in all
state collateral cases on direct review from state courts if
the States’ system of appointing counsel did not conform to
the constitutional rule. An equitable ruling, by contrast,
permits States a variety of systems for appointing counsel
in initial-review collateral proceedings. And it permits a
State to elect between appointing counsel in initial-review
collateral proceedings or not asserting a procedural de­
fault and raising a defense on the merits in federal habeas
proceedings. In addition, state collateral cases on direct
review from state courts are unaffected by the ruling in
this case.
The rule of Coleman governs in all but the limited cir­
cumstances recognized here. The holding in this case does
not concern attorney errors in other kinds of proceedings,
including appeals from initial-review collateral proceed­
ings, second or successive collateral proceedings, and
petitions for discretionary review in a State’s appellate
courts. See 501 U. S., at 754; Carrier, 477 U. S., at 488. It
does not extend to attorney errors in any proceeding be­
yond the first occasion the State allows a prisoner to raise

