4

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
SCALIA, J., dissenting

the Court’s pretended avoidance of requiring States to appoint collateral-review counsel is a sham.3
Of course even the appointment of state-collateralreview counsel will not guarantee that the State’s criminal
proceeding can be concluded without years-long federal
retrial. Appointment of counsel may, as I have said, avoid
federal review of the adequacy of representation that
occurred years ago, at the original trial. But since, under
today’s opinion, the condition for exclusion of federal
habeas is the very same condition that would apply if
appointment of state-collateral-review counsel were constitutionally required, it will remain to be determined in
federal habeas review whether the state-appointed counsel
was effective. Thus, as a consequence of today’s decision
the States will always be forced to litigate in federal habeas, for all defaulted ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel
claims (and who knows what other claims), either (1) the
validity of the defaulted claim (where collateral-review
counsel was not appointed), or (2) the effectiveness of
collateral-review counsel (where collateral-review counsel
was appointed). The Court notes that many States already provide for the appointment of counsel in first col——————
years-ago representation has been substituted for summary dismissal
by reason of procedural default.
3 The Court also claims, ante, at 13, that its “equitable” ruling, unlike
a constitutional ruling, will not require “a reversal in all state collateral
cases on direct review from state courts” where counsel has not been
appointed. Surely the Court does not mean to suggest that an unconstitutional failure to appoint counsel on collateral review, like an
unconstitutional failure to appoint counsel at trial, would require the
entire conviction to be set aside. That is inconceivable. So either one of
two things would happen: Either the reviewing state court would be
able to inquire into prejudice (which is an improvement over having the
federal habeas court make that inquiry, as the Court’s “equitable”
solution requires); or else the appellate state court will remand for a
collateral proceeding with counsel (which is, as we have said, just what
the Court’s “equitable” ruling effectively requires anyway). So the
Court’s “equitable” ruling is no boon to the States.

