4

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
Opinion of the Court

Proc. 32.2(a)(3). Martinez, the theory went, should have
asserted the claims of ineffective assistance of trial coun­
sel in his first notice for postconviction relief. The Arizona
Court of Appeals agreed. It denied Martinez relief be­
cause he failed to raise his claims in the first collateral
proceeding. 623 F. 3d, at 734. The Arizona Supreme
Court declined to review Martinez’s appeal.
Martinez then sought relief in United States District
Court for the District of Arizona, where he filed a petition
for a writ of habeas corpus, again raising the ineffective­
assistance-of-trial-counsel claims. Martinez acknowledged
the state courts denied his claims by relying on a well­
established state procedural rule, which, under the doc­
trine of procedural default, would prohibit a federal court
from reaching the merits of the claims. See, e.g., Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U. S. 72, 84–85, 90–91 (1977). He
could overcome this hurdle to federal review, Martinez
argued, because he had cause for the default: His first
postconviction counsel was ineffective in failing to raise
any claims in the first notice of postconviction relief and in
failing to notify Martinez of her actions. See id., at 84–85.
On the Magistrate Judge’s recommendation, the District
Court denied the petition, ruling that Arizona’s preclusion
rule was an adequate and independent state-law ground
to bar federal review. App. to Pet. for Cert. 36a. Martinez
had not shown cause to excuse the procedural default,
the District Court reasoned, because under Coleman v.
Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, 753–754 (1991), an attorney’s
errors in a postconviction proceeding do not qualify as
cause for a default. See id., at 754–755.
The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed.
The Court of Appeals relied on general statements in
Coleman that, absent a right to counsel in a collateral
proceeding, an attorney’s errors in the proceeding do not
establish cause for a procedural default. Expanding on
the District Court’s opinion, the Court of Appeals, citing

