2

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
Syllabus
assistance claims, it is necessary to recognize a narrow exception to
Coleman’s unqualified statement that an attorney’s ignorance or inadvertence in a postconviction proceeding does not qualify as cause to
excuse a procedural default, namely, that inadequate assistance of
counsel at initial-review collateral proceedings may establish cause.
Pp. 5–6.
(b) A federal court can hear Martinez’s ineffective-assistance
claim only if he can establish cause to excuse the procedural default
and prejudice from a violation of federal law. Coleman held that a
postconviction attorney’s negligence “does not qualify as ‘cause,’ ” because “the attorney is the prisoner’s agent,” and “the principal bears
the risk of ” his agent’s negligent conduct, Maples v. Thomas, ante, at
12. However, in Coleman, counsel’s alleged error was on appeal from
an initial-review collateral proceeding. Thus, his claims had been
addressed by the state habeas trial court. This marks a key difference between initial-review collateral proceedings and other collateral proceedings. Here, where the initial-review collateral proceeding
is the first designated proceeding for a prisoner to raise the ineffective-assistance claim, the collateral proceeding is the equivalent of a
prisoner’s direct appeal as to that claim because the state habeas
court decides the claim’s merits, no other court has addressed the
claim, and defendants “are generally ill equipped to represent themselves” where they have no brief from counsel and no court opinion
addressing their claim. Halbert v. Michigan, 545 U. S. 605, 617. An
attorney’s errors during an appeal on direct review may provide
cause to excuse a procedural default; for if the attorney appointed by
the State is ineffective, the prisoner has been denied fair process and
the opportunity to comply with the State’s procedures and obtain an
adjudication on the merits of his claim. Without adequate representation in an initial-review collateral proceeding, a prisoner will have
similar difficulties vindicating a substantial ineffective-assistance-attrial claim. The same would be true if the State did not appoint an
attorney for the initial-review collateral proceeding. A prisoner’s inability to present an ineffective-assistance claim is of particular concern because the right to effective trial counsel is a bedrock principle
in this Nation’s justice system.
Allowing a federal habeas court to hear a claim of ineffective assistance at trial when an attorney’s errors (or an attorney’s absence)
caused a procedural default in an initial-review collateral proceeding
acknowledges, as an equitable matter, that a collateral proceeding, if
undertaken with no counsel or ineffective counsel, may not have been
sufficient to ensure that proper consideration was given to a substantial claim. It thus follows that, when a State requires a prisoner to
raise a i claim of ineffective assistance at trial in a collateral proceed-

