Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

SCALIA, J., dissenting

U. S., at 753. Whereas Coleman flatly repudiated that
claim as being inconsistent with our precedent, see ibid.,
today’s majority wholeheartedly embraces it, ante, at 11.
Rejection of the argument in Coleman was compelled by
our jurisprudence pertaining to cause for excusing procedural default, and in particular Murray v. Carrier, 477
U. S. 478 (1986). See Coleman, supra, at 752–753. Carrier involved the failure of a defendant’s attorney to raise a
claim on direct appeal. 477 U. S., at 482. This failure did
not constitute cause, we explained, because it was not an
“objective factor external to the defense.” Id., at 488 (emphasis added). This external-factor requirement reflects
the judgment that States should not be forced to undergo
federal habeas review of a defaulted claim unless a factor
not attributable to the prisoner obstructed his compliance
with state procedures. See id., at 487–488.
Although this externality requirement has been the
North Star of our excuse-for-cause jurisprudence, today’s
opinion does not whisper its name—no doubt because it is
impossible to say that Martinez’s procedural default was
caused by a factor external to his defense. Coleman and
Carrier set forth in clear terms when it is that attorney
error constitutes an external factor: Attorney error by itself does not, because when an attorney acts (or fails to
act) in furtherance of the litigation, he is acting as the
petitioner’s agent. Coleman, supra, at 753; Carrier, supra,
at 492. Any other rule would be inconsistent with our
system of representative litigation, under which “each
party is deemed bound by the acts of his lawyer-agent.”
Irwin v. Department of Veterans Affairs, 498 U. S. 89, 92
(1990) (internal quotation marks omitted). But when
attorney error amounts to constitutionally ineffective
assistance of counsel, that error is imputed to the State
(for the State has failed to comply with the constitutional
requirement to provide effective counsel), rendering the
error external to the petitioner. Coleman, supra, at 754;

