8

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
Opinion of the Court

postconviction proceedings. While counsel’s errors in
these proceedings preclude any further review of the
prisoner’s claim, the claim will have been addressed by
one court, whether it be the trial court, the appellate court
on direct review, or the trial court in an initial-review
collateral proceeding. See, e.g., Coleman, supra, at 756.
Where, as here, the initial-review collateral proceeding
is the first designated proceeding for a prisoner to raise a
claim of ineffective assistance at trial, the collateral pro­
ceeding is in many ways the equivalent of a prisoner’s
direct appeal as to the ineffective-assistance claim. This
is because the state habeas court “looks to the merits of
the clai[m]” of ineffective assistance, no other court has
addressed the claim, and “defendants pursuing first-tier
review . . . are generally ill equipped to represent them­
selves” because they do not have a brief from counsel or an
opinion of the court addressing their claim of error. Halbert v. Michigan, 545 U. S. 605, 617 (2005); see Douglas,
372 U. S., at 357–358.
As Coleman recognized, an attorney’s errors during an
appeal on direct review may provide cause to excuse a
procedural default; for if the attorney appointed by the
State to pursue the direct appeal is ineffective, the prison­
er has been denied fair process and the opportunity to
comply with the State’s procedures and obtain an adjudi­
cation on the merits of his claims. See 501 U. S., at 754;
Evitts v. Lucey, 469 U. S. 387, 396 (1985); Douglas, supra,
at 357–358. Without the help of an adequate attorney,
a prisoner will have similar difficulties vindicating a
substantial ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claim.
Claims of ineffective assistance at trial often require
investigative work and an understanding of trial strategy.
When the issue cannot be raised on direct review, moreover, a prisoner asserting an ineffective-assistance-of-trial­
counsel claim in an initial-review collateral proceeding
cannot rely on a court opinion or the prior work of an

