Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
ing, a prisoner may establish cause for a procedural default of such
claim in two circumstances: where the state courts did not appoint
counsel in the initial-review collateral proceeding for an ineffectiveassistance-at-trial claim; and where appointed counsel in the initialreview collateral proceeding, where that claim should have been
raised, was ineffective under Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S.
668. To overcome the default, a prisoner must also demonstrate that
the underlying ineffective-assistance-at-trial claim is substantial.
Most jurisdictions have procedures to ensure counsel is appointed for
substantial ineffective-assistance claims. It is likely that such attorneys are qualified to perform, and do perform, according to prevailing
professional norms. And where that is so, States may enforce a procedural default in federal habeas proceedings. Pp. 6–12.
(c) This limited qualification to Coleman does not implicate stare
decisis concerns. Coleman’s holding remains true except as to initialreview collateral proceedings for claims of ineffective assistance at
trial. The holding in this case should not put a significant strain on
state resources. A State facing the question of cause for an apparent
default may answer that the ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel
claim is insubstantial. The limited circumstances recognized here also reflect the importance of the right to effective assistance at trial.
Other claims may not implicate the same fundamentals of the adversary system. The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of
1996 does not speak to the question presented here, and thus does
not bar Martinez from asserting attorney error as cause for a procedural default. Pp. 12–14.
2. Whether Martinez’s attorney in his first collateral proceeding
was ineffective and whether his ineffective-assistance-at-trial claim
is substantial, as well as the question of prejudice, are questions that
remain open for a decision on remand. P. 15.
623 F. 3d 731, reversed and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined. SCALIA, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which THOMAS, J.,
joined.

