(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MARTINEZ v. RYAN, DIRECTOR, ARIZONA DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–1001. Argued October 4, 2011—Decided March 20, 2012
Arizona prisoners may raise claims of ineffective assistance of trial
counsel only in state collateral proceedings, not on direct review. In
petitioner Martinez’s first state collateral proceeding, his counsel did
not raise such a claim. On federal habeas review with new counsel,
Martinez argued that he received ineffective assistance both at trial
and in his first state collateral proceeding. He also claimed that he
had a constitutional right to an effective attorney in the collateral
proceeding because it was the first place to raise his claim of ineffective assistance at trial. The District Court denied the petition, finding that Arizona’s preclusion rule was an adequate and independent
state-law ground barring federal review, and that under Coleman v.
Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, the attorney’s errors in the postconviction
proceeding did not qualify as cause to excuse the procedural default.
The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed.
Held:
1. Where, under state law, ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel
claims must be raised in an initial-review collateral proceeding, a
procedural default will not bar a federal habeas court from hearing
those claims if, in the initial-review collateral proceeding, there was
no counsel or counsel in that proceeding was ineffective. Pp. 5–14.
(a) Given that the precise question here is whether ineffective
assistance in an initial-review collateral proceeding on an ineffectiveassistance-at-trial claim may provide cause for a procedural default
in a federal habeas proceeding, this is not the case to resolve the
question left open in Coleman: whether a prisoner has a constitutional right to effective counsel in initial-review collateral proceedings.
However, to protect prisoners with potentially legitimate ineffective-

