Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

lateral challenges—as though this proves that what the
Court forces the States to do today is eminently reasonable. But what the Court fails to point out is that currently, when state-appointed counsel does not raise an ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel claim, that is the end of the
matter: The issue has been procedurally defaulted. By
virtue of today’s opinion, however, all those cases can (and
where capital punishment is at issue assuredly will) proceed to federal habeas on the issue of whether stateappointed counsel was ineffective in failing to raise the
ineffective-assistance-of-trial-counsel issue. That is the
meaning of the Court’s (supposedly comforting) statement:
“It is likely that most of the attorneys appointed by
the courts are qualified to perform, and do perform,
according to prevailing professional norms; and, where
that is so, the States may enforce a procedural default
in federal habeas proceedings.” Ante, at 12 (emphasis
added).
To be more precise, the Court should have said “where
that is so, and where federal habeas courts have finally
rejected claims that it is not so, the States may enforce a
procedural default in federal habeas proceedings.”
I cannot possibly imagine the basis for the Court’s confidence, ante, at 12–13, that all this will not put a significant strain on state resources. The principal escape route
from federal habeas—existence of an “adequate and independent state ground”—has been closed.4 Whether
——————
4 See N. King, F. Cheesman, & B. Ostrom, Final Technical Report:
Habeas Litigation in U. S. District Courts 45–49 (2007) (documenting
the percentage of habeas petitions that included claims dismissed for
various procedural reasons); Administrative Office of the United States
Courts, Habeas Corpus Petitions Disposed of Procedurally During the
12-Month Period Ending September 30, 2011 (reporting that for appeals in noncapital state-prisoner habeas cases, procedural default
accounted for the largest percentage of procedural dispositions, with
the exception of the denial of a certificate of appealability) (available in

