8

MARTINEZ v. RYAN
SCALIA, J., dissenting

Carrier, supra, at 488. Accordingly, as Martinez himself
appears to recognize, see Brief for Petitioner 22, our cases
require that absent a determination that Arizona violated
the Constitution by failing to provide effective counsel,
attorney error cannot provide cause to excuse his procedural default. Rather than apply that rule here, the Court
adopts the very approach Coleman explicitly addressed
and rejected.
The Court essentially disclaims any need to give full
consideration to the principle of stare decisis because
Coleman did not involve an initial-review collateral proceeding for a claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel. See ante, at 12. That is rather like saying that Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch 137 (1803), does not establish
our authority to review the constitutionality of a new
federal statute because it involved a different enactment.
Just as the reasoning of Marbury was categorical, so was
the reasoning of Coleman and Carrier: Attorney error is
not an external factor constituting cause for excusing
default unless the State has a constitutional obligation to
provide effective counsel. Had the majority seriously
considered the relevant stare decisis factors, see, e.g.,
Montejo v. Louisiana, 556 U. S. 778, 792–793 (2009), it
would have had difficulty justifying today’s decision. Nor
can it escape the demands of stare decisis by saying that
our rules regarding the excuse of procedural default reflect
an “equitable judgment” that is “elaborated in the exercise
of the Court’s discretion.” Ante, at 10. Equity is not lawlessness, and discretion is not license to cast aside established jurisprudence reaffirmed this very Term. See Maples v. Thomas, 565 U. S. ___, ___ (2012) (slip op., at 12)
(“Negligence on the part of a prisoner’s postconviction
attorney does not qualify as ‘cause’ ” (quoting Coleman,
supra, at 753)). “ ‘[C]ourts of equity must be governed by
rules and precedents no less than courts of law.’ ” Lonchar
v. Thomas, 517 U. S. 314, 323 (1996) (quoting Missouri

