10

HAMILTON v. LANNING
SCALIA, J., dissenting

debtors whose circumstances deteriorate after confirma
tion, however, the Code already provides an answer. Just
as a creditor can request an upward modification in light
of postconfirmation developments, so too can a debtor ask
for a downward adjustment. §1329(a). Cf. §1329(b)(1)
(requiring that modifications meet requirements of
§§1322(a)–(b), 1323(c), and 1325(a), but not §1325(b)).
Moreover, even apart from the availability of modifica
tion it requires little imagination to see why Congress
might want to withhold relief from debtors whose situa
tions have suddenly deteriorated (after or even toward the
end of the 6-month window), or who in the midst of dire
straits have been blessed (within the 6-month window) by
an influx of unusually high income. Bankruptcy protec
tion is not a birthright, and Congress could reasonably
conclude that those who have just hit the skids do not yet
need a reprieve from repaying their debts; perhaps they
will recover. And perhaps the debtor who has received a
one-time bonus will thereby be enabled to stay afloat.
How long to wait before throwing the debtor a lifeline is
inherently a policy choice. Congress confined the calcula
tion of current monthly income to a 6-month period (ordi
narily ending before the case is commenced), but it could
have picked 2 or 12 months (or a different end date) in
stead. Whatever the wisdom of the window it chose, we
should not assume it did not know what it was doing and
accordingly refuse to give effect to its words.
Even if one insists on making provision for such debtors,
the Court is wrong to write off four alternative strategies
the trustee suggests, Brief for Petitioner 50–54:
● Presumably some debtors whose income has only
recently been reduced, or who have just received a jolt that
causes a temporary uptick in their average income, can
delay filing a Chapter 13 petition until their “current
monthly income” catches up with their present circum
stances. The Court speculates that delay might “giv[e] the

