Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

bad idea. One who is asked to predict future results, but
is armed with no other information than prior perform
ance, can still make a projection; it may simply be off the
mark. Congress, of course, could have tried to prevent
that possibility by prescribing, as it has done in other
contexts, that a debtor’s projected disposable income be
determined based on the “best available evidence,” 8
U. S. C. §1364(c)(2), or “any . . . relevant information,” 25
U. S. C. §2009(c)(1). But it included no such prescription
here, and instead identified the data a court should con
sider. Perhaps Congress concluded that other information
a bankruptcy court might consider is too uncertain or too
easily manipulated. Or perhaps it thought the cost of
considering such information outweighed the benefits. Cf.
7 U. S. C. §1301(b)(13)(J)–(M) (requiring national and
local “projected” yields of various crops to be adjusted only
for abnormal weather, trends in yields, and production
practices, apparently to the exclusion of other presumably
relevant variables such as a sudden increase or decrease
in the number of producers, farm subsidies, etc.). In all
events, neither the reasons for nor the wisdom of the
projection method Congress chose has any bearing on
what the statute means.
The Court contends that if Congress really meant courts
to multiply a static figure by a set number of months, it
would have used the word “multiplied,” as it has done
elsewhere—indeed, elsewhere in the same subsection, see,
e.g., 11 U. S. C. §1325(b)(3)—instead of the word “pro
jected.”2 Ante, at 8. I do not dispute that, as a general
matter, we should presume that Congress does not ordi
narily use two words in the same context to denote the
——————
2 Of course, since the number of months in the commitment period
may vary, Congress could not simply have substituted a single word,
but would have had to write “disposable income multiplied by the
number of months in the applicable commitment period” or some such
phrase.

