Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
Surety Co. of America v. Pacific Gas & Elec. Co., 549 U. S. 443, 454,
and Congress did not amend the term “projected disposable income”
in 2005. Pp. 6–10.
(b) The mechanical approach also clashes with §1325’s terms.
First, §1325(b)(1)(B)’s reference to projected disposable income “to be
received in the applicable commitment period” strongly favors the
forward-looking approach. Because respondent would have far less
than $756 per month in disposable income during the plan period, pe
titioner’s projection does not accurately reflect disposable income “to
be received.” In such circumstances, the mechanical approach effec
tively reads that phrase out of the statute. Second, §1325(b)(1)’s di
rection to courts to determine projected disposable income “as of the
effective date of the plan,”— i.e., the confirmation date—is more con
sistent with the view that they are to consider postfiling information
about a debtor’s financial situation. Had Congress intended for pro
jected disposable income to be no more than a multiple of disposable
income, it could have specified the plan’s filing date as the effective
date. Third, §1325(b)(1)(B)’s requirement that projected disposable
income “will be applied to make payments” is rendered a hollow
command if, as of the plan’s effective date, the debtor lacks the
means to pay creditors in the calculated monthly amounts. Pp. 11–
12.
(c) The arguments supporting the mechanical approach are unper
suasive. The claim that the Code’s detailed and precise “disposable
income” definition would have no purpose without the mechanical
approach overlooks the important role that this statutory formula
plays under the forward-looking approach, which begins with a dis
posable income calculation. The Tenth Circuit’s rebuttable “pre
sumption” analysis simply heeds the ordinary meaning of “projected.”
This Court rejects petitioner’s argument that only the mechanical
approach is consistent with §1129(a)(15)(B), which refers to “pro
jected disposable income of the debtor (as defined in section
1325(b)(2)).” And the Court declines to infer from the fact that
§1325(b)(3) incorporates §707—which allows courts to consider “spe
cial circumstances,” but only with respect to calculating expenses—
that Congress intended to eliminate, sub silentio, the discretion that
courts previously exercised to account for known or virtually certain
changes. Pp. 12–14.
(d) Petitioner’s proposed strategies for avoiding or mitigating the
harsh results that the mechanical approach may produce for debt
ors—a debtor could delay filing a petition so as to place any extraor
dinary income outside the 6-month period; a debtor with unusually
high income during that period could seek leave to delay filing a
schedule of current income and ask the bankruptcy court to select a

