12

HAMILTON v. LANNING
SCALIA, J., dissenting

● A debtor who learns after filing that he will be unable
to repay his full projected disposable income might also be
able to dismiss his case and refile it later. §1307(b). The
Court worries that this alternative also might be deemed
abusive, again with no pertinent authority for the specula
tion.6 Its concern is based primarily on its belief that this
“circumvents the statutory limits on a court’s ability to
shift the look-back period.” Ante, at 16–17. That belief is
mistaken, both because the Court exaggerates the statu
tory limitations on adjusting the look-back period, and
because, just as it does not defeat the disposable-income
formula’s rigidity to allow adjustments regarding the time
of determining that figure, it would not undermine the
limitations on adjustment applicable in a pending case to
allow the debtor to dismiss and refile.7
——————
zation for limited extensions, since that applies to extensions sought up
to 45 days after the filing deadline, whereas §521(a)(1)(B) seems to
apply only before the deadline.
6 The sole authority the Court supplies—a single Bankruptcy Court
decision predating BAPCPA—provides no support. See In re Glenn,
288 B. R. 516, 519–521 (Bkrtcy. Ct. ED Tenn. 2002). Although ac
knowledging that “[m]ultiple filings by a debtor are not, in and of
themselves, improper,” the court did note that “whether this is the first
or subsequent filin[g]” by the debtor is one among the “totality of the
circumstances” to be considered in a good-faith analysis. Id., at 520
(internal quotation marks omitted). The debtor in the case at hand had
filed three previous Chapter 13 petitions, “each on the eve of a sched
uled foreclosure,” and according to the court “never had any intention of
following through with any of the Chapter 13 cases,” but had used the
bankruptcy process “to hold [his creditor] hostage, while remaining in
his residence without paying for it.” Id., at 520–521.
7 The Court also notes that the Code precludes a debtor who has had
a case pending in the last 180 days from refiling if his prior case was
dismissed because he willfully failed to obey the court’s orders or to
appear before the court, §109(g)(1), or if he voluntarily dismissed the
prior suit “following the filing of a request for relief from the automatic
stay” under §362, §109(g)(2). Ante, at 17, n. 7. But the Court does not
explain why these barriers have any bearing on whether refiling for
bankruptcy would be abusive when the barriers do not apply.

