2

HAMILTON v. LANNING
Syllabus
petition to exceed her State’s median income. However, based on the
income from her new job, which was below the state median, and her
expenses, she reported a monthly disposable income of $149.03. She
thus filed a plan that would have required her to pay $144 per month
for 36 months. Petitioner, the Chapter 13 trustee, objected to confir
mation of the plan because the proposed payment amount was less
than the full amount of the claims against respondent, and because
she had not committed all of her “projected disposable income” to re
paying creditors. Petitioner claimed that the mechanical approach
was the proper way to calculate projected disposable income, and that
using that approach, respondent should pay $756 per month for 60
months. Her actual income was insufficient to make such payments.
The Bankruptcy Court endorsed a $144 payment over a 60-month
period, concluding that “projected” requires courts to consider the
debtor’s actual income. The Tenth Circuit Bankruptcy Appellate
Panel affirmed, as did the Tenth Circuit, which held that a court cal
culating “projected disposable income” should begin with the “pre
sumption” that the figure yielded by the mechanical approach is cor
rect, but that this figure may be rebutted by evidence of a substantial
change in the debtor’s circumstances.

Held: When a bankruptcy court calculates a debtor’s projected dispos
able income, the court may account for changes in the debtor’s income
or expenses that are known or virtually certain at the time of confir
mation. Pp. 6–18.
(a) Respondent has the better interpretation of “projected dispos
able income.” First, such a forward-looking approach is supported by
the ordinary meaning of “projected.” See Asgrow Seed Co. v. Winter
boer, 513 U. S. 179, 187. In ordinary usage future occurrences are
not “projected” based on the assumption that the past will necessarily
repeat itself. While a projection takes past events into account, ad
justments are often made based on other factors that may affect the
outcome. Second, “projected” appears in many federal statutes, yet
Congress rarely uses it to mean simple multiplication. See, e.g., 7
U. S. C. §1301(b)(8)(B). By contrast, as the Bankruptcy Code shows,
Congress can make its mandate of simple multiplication unambigu
ous—commonly using the term “multiplied.” See, e.g., 11 U. S. C.
§1325(b)(3). Third, under pre-BAPCPA case law, the general rule
was that courts would multiply a debtor’s current monthly income by
the number of months in the commitment period as the first step in
determining projected disposable income, but would also have discre
tion to account for known or virtually certain changes in the debtor’s
income. This is significant, since the Court “will not read the Bank
ruptcy Code to erode past bankruptcy practice absent a clear indica
tion that Congress intended such a departure,” Travelers Casualty &

