Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

SCALIA, J., dissenting

inflexible formula, at least in “exceptional cases,” to ac
count for “significant changes” in the debtor’s circum
stances, either actual or anticipated. Ante, at 6.
That interpretation runs aground because it either
renders superfluous text Congress included or requires
adding text Congress did not. It would be pointless to
define disposable income in such detail, based on data
during a specific 6-month period, if a court were free to set
the resulting figure aside whenever it appears to be a poor
predictor. And since “disposable income” appears nowhere
else in §1325(b), then unless §1325(b)(2)’s definition ap
plies to “projected disposable income” in §1325(b)(1)(B), it
does not apply at all.
The Court insists its interpretation does not render
§1325(b)(2)’s incorporation of “current monthly income” a
nullity: A bankruptcy court must still begin with that
figure, but is simply free to fiddle with it if a “significant”
change in the debtor’s circumstances is “known or virtu
ally certain.” Ante, at 6, 12. That construction conven
iently avoids superfluity, but only by utterly abandoning
the text the Court purports to construe. Nothing in the
text supports treating the definition of disposable income
Congress supplied as a suggestion. And even if the word
“projected” did allow (or direct) a court to disregard
§1325(b)(2)’s fixed formula and to consider other data,
there would be no basis in the text for the restrictions the
Court reads in, regarding when and to what extent a court
may (or must) do so. If the statute authorizes estimations,
it authorizes them in every case, not just those where
changes to the debtor’s income are both “significant” and
either “known or virtually certain.” Ibid. If the evidence
indicates it is merely more likely than not that the
debtor’s income will increase by some minimal amount,
there is no reading of the word “projected” that permits (or
requires) a court to ignore that change. The Court, in
short, can arrive at its compromise construction only by

