(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

HAMILTON, CHAPTER 13 TRUSTEE v. LANNING
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE TENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–998.

Argued March 22, 2010—Decided June 7, 2010

Debtors filing for protection under Chapter 13 of the Bankruptcy Code
must agree to a court-approved plan under which they pay creditors
out of their future income. If the bankruptcy trustee or an unsecured
creditor objects, a bankruptcy court may not approve the plan unless
it provides for the full repayment of unsecured claims or “provides
that all of the debtor’s projected disposable income to be received”
over the plan’s duration “will be applied to make payments” in accor
dance with plan terms. 11 U. S. C. §1325(b)(1). Before enactment of
the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of
2005 (BAPCPA), the Code loosely defined “disposable income.”
Though it did not define “projected disposable income,” most bank
ruptcy courts calculated it using a mechanical approach, multiplying
monthly income by the number of months in the plan and then de
termining the “disposable” portion of the result. In exceptional cases,
those courts also took into account foreseeable changes in a debtor’s
income or expenses. BAPCPA defines “disposable income” as “cur
rent monthly income received by the debtor” less “amounts reasona
bly necessary to be expended” for, e.g., the debtor’s maintenance and
support. §1325(b)(2)(A)(i). “Current monthly income,” in turn, is cal
culated by averaging the debtor’s monthly income during a 6-month
look-back period preceding the petition’s filing. See §101(10A)(A)(i).
If a debtor’s income is below the median for his or her State,
“amounts reasonably necessary” include the full amount needed for
“maintenance or support,” see §1325(b)(2)(A)(i), but if the debtor’s in
come exceeds the state median, only certain specified expenses are
included, see §§707(b)(2), 1325(b)(3)(A).
A one-time buyout from respondent’s former employer caused her
current monthly income for the six months preceding her Chapter 13

