No. 09–152 [February 22, 2011]  JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG joins, dissenting. Vaccine manufacturers have long been subject to a legal duty, rooted in basic principles of products liability law, to improve the designs of their vaccines in light of advances in science and technology. Until today, that duty was enforceable through a traditional state-law tort action for defective design. In holding that §22(b)(1) of the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 (Vaccine Act or Act), 42 U. S. C. §300aa–22(b)(1), pre-empts all design defect claims for injuries stemming from vaccines covered under the Act, the Court imposes its own bare policy preference over the considered judgment of Congress. In doing so, the Court excises 13 words from the statutory text, mis construes the Act’s legislative history, and disturbs the careful balance Congress struck between compensating vaccine-injured children and stabilizing the childhood vaccine market. Its decision leaves a regulatory vacuum in which no one ensures that vaccine manufacturers ade quately take account of scientific and technological ad vancements when designing or distributing their products. Because nothing in the text, structure, or legislative his tory of the Vaccine Act remotely suggests that Congress intended such a result, I respectfully dissent.
Section 22 of the Vaccine Act provides “[s]tandards of responsibility” to govern civil actions against vaccine manufacturers. 42 U. S. C. §300aa–22. Section 22(a) sets forth the “[g]eneral rule” that “State law shall apply to a civil action brought for damages for a vaccine-related injury or death.” §300aa–22(a). This baseline rule that state law applies is subject to three narrow exceptions, one of which, §22(b)(1), is at issue in this case. Section 22(b)(1) provides: “No vaccine manufacturer shall be liable in a civil ac tion for damages arising from a vaccine-related injury or death associated with the administration of a vac cine after October 1, 1988, if the injury or death re sulted from side effects that were unavoidable even though the vaccine was properly prepared and was accompanied by proper directions and warnings.” §300aa–22(b)(1). The provision contains two key clauses: “if the injury or death resulted from side effects that were unavoidable” (the “if ” clause), and “even though the vaccine was prop erly prepared and was accompanied by proper directions and warnings” (the “even though” clause). Blackletter products liability law generally recognizes three different types of product defects: design defects, manufacturing defects, and labeling defects (e.g., failure to warn).1 The reference in the “even though” clause to a “properly prepared” vaccine “accompanied by proper direc tions and warnings” is an obvious reference to two such defects—manufacturing and labeling defects. The plain terms of the “even though” clause thus indicate that
§22(b)(1) applies only where neither kind of defect is pre sent. Because §22(b)(1) is invoked by vaccine manufactur ers as a defense to tort liability, it follows that the “even though” clause requires a vaccine manufacturer in each civil action to demonstrate that its vaccine is free from manufacturing and labeling defects to fall within the liability exemption of §22(b)(1).2 Given that the “even though” clause requires the ab sence of manufacturing and labeling defects, the “if ” clause’s reference to “side effects that were unavoidable” must refer to side effects caused by something other than manufacturing and labeling defects. The only remaining kind of product defect recognized under traditional prod ucts liability law is a design defect. Thus, “side effects that were unavoidable” must refer to side effects caused by a vaccine’s design that were “unavoidable.” Because §22(b)(1) uses the conditional term “if,” moreover, the text plainly implies that some side effects stemming from a vaccine’s design are “unavoidable,” while others are avoid able. See Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1124 (2002) (“if ” means “in the event that,” “so long as,” or “on condition that”). Accordingly, because the “if ” clause (like the “even though” clause) sets forth a condition to invoke §22(b)(1)’s defense to tort liability, Congress must also have intended a vaccine manufacturer to demonstrate in each civil action that the particular side effects of a vaccine’s design were “unavoidable.” Congress’ use of conditional “if” clauses in two other provisions of the Vaccine Act supports the conclusion that §22(b)(1) requires an inquiry in each case in which a manufacturer seeks to invoke the provision’s exception to
state tort liability. In §22(b)(2), Congress created a pre sumption that, for purposes of §22(b)(1), “a vaccine shall be presumed to be accompanied by proper directions and warnings if the vaccine manufacturer shows that it com plied in all material respects with” federal labeling re quirements. 42 U. S. C. §300aa–22(b)(2). Similarly, in §23(d)(2), Congress created an exemption from punitive damages “[i]f . . . the manufacturer shows that it complied, in all material respects,” with applicable federal laws, unless it engages in “fraud,” “intentional and wrongful withholding of information” from federal regulators, or “other criminal or illegal activity.” §300aa–23(d)(2). It would be highly anomalous for Congress to use a condi tional “if ” clause in §§22(b)(2) and 23(d)(2) to require a specific inquiry in each case while using the same condi tional “if ” clause in §22(b)(1) to denote a categorical ex 409 U. S. 239, 243 (1972) (“[A] legislative body generally uses a particular word with a consistent meaning in a given context”). Indeed, when Congress intends to pre-empt design defect claims categorically, it does so using categorical (e.g., “all”) and/or declarative language (e.g., “shall”), rather than a conditional term (“if ”). For example, in a related context, Congress has authorized the Secretary of Health and Human Services to designate a vaccine designed to prevent a pandemic or epidemic as a “covered countermeasure.” 42 U. S. C. §§247d–6d(b), (i)(1), (i)(7)(A)(i). With respect to such “covered countermea sure[s],” Congress provided that subject to certain excep tions, “a covered person shall be immune from suit and liability under Federal and State law with respect to all claims for loss caused by, arising out of, relating to, or resulting from the administration to or the use by an individual of a covered countermeasure,” §247d–6d(a)(1) (emphasis added), including specifically claims relating to
“the design” of the countermeasure, §247d–6d(a)(2)(B). The plain text and structure of the Vaccine Act thus compel the conclusion that §22(b)(1) pre-empts some—but not all—design defect claims. Contrary to the majority’s and respondent’s categorical reading, petitioners correctly contend that, where a plaintiff has proved that she has suffered an injury resulting from a side effect caused by a vaccine’s design, a vaccine manufacturer may invoke §22(b)(1)’s liability exemption only if it demonstrates that the side effect stemming from the particular vaccine’s design is “unavoidable,” and that the vaccine is otherwise free from manufacturing and labeling defects.3 The legislative history confirms petitioners’ interpreta tion of §22(b)(1) and sheds further light on its pre-emptive scope. The House Energy and Commerce Committee Report accompanying the Vaccine Act, H. R. Rep. No. 99– 908, pt. 1 (1986) (hereinafter 1986 Report), explains in relevant part: “Subsection (b)—Unavoidable Adverse Side Effects; Direct Warnings.—This provision sets forth the prin ciple contained in Comment K of Section 402A of the Restatement of Torts (Second) that a vaccine manu facturer should not be liable for injuries or deaths re sulting from unavoidable side effects even though the vaccine was properly prepared and accompanied by proper directions and warnings. “The Committee has set forth Comment K in this bill because it intends that the principle in Comment K regarding ‘unavoidably unsafe’ products, i.e., those products which in the present state of human skill and knowledge cannot be made safe, apply to the vac
cines covered in the bill and that such products not be the subject of liability in the tort system.” Id., at 25– 26. The Report expressly adopts comment k of §402A of the Restatement of Torts (Second) (1963–1964) (hereinafter Restatement), which provides that “unavoidably unsafe” products—i.e., those that “in the present state of human knowledge, are quite incapable of being made safe for their intended and ordinary use”—are not defective.4 As “[a]n outstanding example” of an “[u]navoidably unsafe” product, comment k cites “the vaccine for the Pasteur treatment of rabies, which not uncommonly leads to very serious and damaging consequences when it is injected”;
“[s]ince the disease itself invariably leads to a dreadful death, both the marketing and the use of the vaccine are fully justified, notwithstanding the unavoidable high degree of risk which they involve.” Id., at 353. Comment k thus provides that “seller[s]” of “[u]navoidably unsafe” products are “not to be held to strict liability” provided that such products “are properly prepared and marketed, and proper warning is given.” Ibid. As the 1986 Report explains, Congress intended that the “principle in Comment K regarding ‘unavoidably unsafe’ products” apply to the vaccines covered in the bill. 1986 Report 26. That intent, in turn, is manifested in the plain text of §22(b)(1)—in particular, Congress’ use of the word “unavoidable,” as well as the phrases “properly prepared” and “accompanied by proper directions and warnings,” which were taken nearly verbatim from comment k. 42 U. S. C. §300aa–22(b)(1); see Restatement 353–354 (“Such a[n unavoidably unsafe] product, properly prepared, and accompanied by proper directions and warning, is not defective”). By the time of the Vaccine Act’s enactment in 1986, numerous state and federal courts had interpreted comment k to mean that a product is “unavoidably unsafe” when, given proper manufacture and labeling, no feasible alternative design would reduce the safety risks without compromising the product’s cost and utility.5 Given Con
gress’ expressed intent to codify the “principle in Comment K,” 1986 Report 26, the term “unavoidable” in §22(b)(1) is best understood as a term of art, which incorporates the commonly understood meaning of “unavoidably unsafe” products under comment k at the time of the Act’s enact U. S. 337, 342 (1991) (“[W]e assume that when a statute uses . . . a term [of art], Congress intended it to have its U. S. 246, 263 (1952) (same).6 Similarly, courts applying
comment k had long required manufacturers invoking the defense to demonstrate that their products were not only “unavoidably unsafe” but also properly manufactured and labeled.7 By requiring “prope[r] prepar[ation]” and “proper directions and warnings” in §22(b)(1), Congress plainly intended to incorporate these additional comment k requirements. The 1986 Report thus confirms petitioners’ interpreta tion of §22(b)(1). The Report makes clear that “side effects that were unavoidable” in §22(b)(1) refers to side effects stemming from a vaccine’s design that were “unavoidable.” By explaining what Congress meant by the term “un avoidable,” moreover, the Report also confirms that whether a side effect is “unavoidable” for purposes of §22(b)(1) involves a specific inquiry in each case as to whether the vaccine “in the present state of human skill and knowledge cannot be made safe,” 1986 Report 26—i.e., whether a feasible alternative design existed that would have eliminated the adverse side effects of the vaccine without compromising its cost and utility. See Brief for Kenneth W. Starr et al. as Amici Curiae 14–15 (“If a par ticular plaintiff could show that her injury at issue was avoidable . . . through the use of a feasible alternative design for a specific vaccine, then she would satisfy the plain language of the statute, because she would have demonstrated that the side effects were not unavoidable”). Finally, the Report confirms that the “even though” clause is properly read to establish two additional prerequisites— proper manufacturing and proper labeling—to qualify for
§22(b)(1)’s liability exemption.8 In addition to the 1986 Report, one other piece of the Act’s legislative history provides further confirmation of the petitioners’ textual reading of §22(b)(1). When Con gress enacted the Vaccine Act in 1986, it did not initially include a source of payment for the no-fault compensation program the Act established. The Act thus “made the compensation program and accompanying tort reforms contingent on the enactment of a tax to provide funding
for the compensation.” 1987 Report 690. In 1987, Con gress passed legislation to fund the compensation pro gram. The House Energy and Commerce Committee Report9 accompanying that legislation specifically stated that “the codification of Comment (k) of The Restatement (Second) of Torts was not intended to decide as a matter of law the circumstances in which a vaccine should be deemed unavoidably unsafe.” Id., at 691. The Committee noted that “[a]n amendment to establish . . . that a manu facturer’s failure to develop [a] safer vaccine was not grounds for liability was rejected by the Committee during its original consideration of the Act.” Ibid. In light of that rejection, the Committee emphasized that “there should be no misunderstanding that the Act undertook to decide as a matter of law whether vaccines were unavoidably unsafe or not,” and that “[t]his question is left to the courts to determine in accordance with applicable law.” Ibid. To be sure, postenactment legislative history created by a subsequent Congress is ordinarily a hazardous basis from which to infer the intent of the enacting Congress. (SCALIA, J., concurring in part). But unlike ordinary postenactment legislative history, which is justifiably given little or no weight, the 1987 Report reflects the intent of the Congress that enacted the funding legislation necessary to give operative effect to the principal provi sions of the Vaccine Act, including §22(b)(1).10 Congress in
1987 had a number of options before it, including adopting an entirely different compensation scheme, as the Reagan administration was proposing;11 establishing different limitations on tort liability, including eliminating design defect liability, as pharmaceutical industry leaders were advocating;12 or not funding the compensation program at all, which would have effectively nullified the relevant portions of the Act. Because the tort reforms in the 1986 Act, including §22(b)(1), had no operative legal effect unless and until Congress provided funding for the com pensation program, the views of the Congress that enacted that funding legislation are a proper and, indeed, authori tative guide to the meaning of §22(b)(1). Those views, as reflected in the 1987 Report, provide unequivocal confir
mation of petitioners’ reading of §22(b)(1). In sum, the text, structure, and legislative history of the Vaccine Act are fully consistent with petitioners’ reading of §22(b)(1). Accordingly, I believe §22(b)(1) exempts vaccine manufacturers from tort liability only upon a showing by the manufacturer in each case that the vaccine was properly manufactured and labeled, and that the side effects stemming from the vaccine’s design could not have been prevented by a feasible alternative design that would have eliminated the adverse side effects without compro mising the vaccine’s cost and utility. In contrast to the interpretation of §22(b)(1) set forth above, the majority’s interpretation does considerable vio lence to the statutory text, misconstrues the legislative history, and draws the wrong conclusions from the struc ture of the Vaccine Act and the broader federal scheme regulating vaccines. As a textual matter, the majority’s interpretation of §22(b)(1) is fundamentally flawed in three central re spects. First, the majority’s categorical reading rests on a faulty and untenable premise. Second, its reading func tionally excises 13 words from the statutory text, including the key term “unavoidable.” And third, the majority en tirely ignores the Vaccine Act’s default rule preserving state tort law. To begin, the majority states that “[a] side effect of a vaccine could always have been avoidable by use of a differently designed vaccine not containing the harmful element.” Ante, at 7. From that premise, the majority concludes that the statute must mean that “the design of the vaccine is a given, not subject to question in the tort action,” because construing the statute otherwise would
render §22(b)(1) a nullity. Ibid. A tort claimant, accord ing to the majority, will always be able to point to a differ ently designed vaccine not containing the “harmful ele ment,” and if that were sufficient to show that a vaccine’s side effects were not “unavoidable,” the statute would pre empt nothing. The starting premise of the majority’s interpretation, however, is fatally flawed. Although in the most literal sense, as the majority notes, a side effect can always be avoided “by use of a differently designed vaccine not con taining the harmful element,” ibid., this interpretation of “unavoidable” would effectively read the term out of the statute, and Congress could not have intended that result. Indeed, §22(b)(1) specifically uses the conditional phrase “if the injury or death resulted from side effects that were unavoidable,” which plainly indicates that Congress con templated that there would be some instances in which a vaccine’s side effects are “unavoidable” and other in stances in which they are not. See supra, at 3. The major ity’s premise that a vaccine’s side effects can always be “avoid[ed] by use of a differently designed vaccine not containing the harmful element,” ante, at 7, entirely ig nores the fact that removing the “harmful element” will often result in a less effective (or entirely ineffective) vaccine. A vaccine, by its nature, ordinarily employs a killed or weakened form of a bacteria or virus to stimulate antibody production;13 removing that bacteria or virus might remove the “harmful element,” but it would also necessarily render the vaccine inert. As explained above, the legislative history of the Vaccine Act and the cases interpreting comment k make clear that a side effect is
“unavoidable” for purposes of §22(b)(1) only where there is no feasible alternative design that would eliminate the side effect of the vaccine without compromising its cost and utility. See supra, at 7. The majority’s premise—that side effects stemming from a vaccine’s design are always avoidable—is thus belied by the statutory text and legisla tive history of §22(b)(1). And because its starting premise is invalid, its conclusion—that the design of a vaccine is not subject to challenge in a tort action—is also necessar ily invalid. The majority’s reading suffers from an even more fun damental defect. If Congress intended to exempt vaccine manufacturers categorically from all design defect liabil ity, it more logically would have provided: “No vaccine manufacturer shall be liable in a civil action for damages arising from a vaccine-related injury or death associated with the administration of a vaccine after October 1, 1988, if the vaccine was properly prepared and was accompanied by proper directions and warnings.” There would have been no need for Congress to include the additional 13 words “the injury or death resulted from side effects that drews, 534 U. S. 19, 31 (2001) (noting “cardinal principle of statutory construction that a statute ought, upon the whole, to be so construed that, if it can be prevented, no clause, sentence, or word shall be superfluous, void, or insignificant” (internal quotation marks omitted)). this Court considered an analogous situation where an express pre-emption provision stated that certain States “ ‘shall not impose or continue in effect any requirements for labeling or packaging in addition to or different from those required under this subchapter.’ ” Id., at 436 (quot ing 7 U. S. C. §136v(b) (2000 ed.)). The Bates Court stated:
“Conspicuously absent from the submissions by [re spondent] and the United States is any plausible al ternative interpretation of ‘in addition to or different from’ that would give that phrase meaning. Instead, they appear to favor reading those words out of the statute, which would leave the following: ‘Such State shall not impose or continue in effect any require ments for labeling or packaging.’ This amputated version of [the statute] would no doubt have clearly and succinctly commanded the pre-emption of all state requirements concerning labeling. That Con gress added the remainder of the provision is evidence of its intent to draw a distinction between state label ing requirements that are pre-empted and those that are not.” 544 U. S., at 448–449. As with the statutory interpretation rejected by this Court in Bates, the majority’s interpretation of §22(b)(1) func tionally excises 13 words out of the statute, including the 167, 174 (2001) (“We are especially unwilling” to treat a statutory term as surplusage “when the term occupies so pivotal a place in the statutory scheme”). Although the resulting “amputated version” of the statutory provision “would no doubt have clearly and succinctly commanded the pre-emption of all state” design defect claims, the fact “[t]hat Congress added the remainder of the provision” is strong evidence of its intent not to pre-empt design defect claims categorically. Bates, 544 U. S., at 449; see also 668 S. E. 2d 236, 242 (2008) (“ ‘If Congress had intended to deprive injured parties of a long available form of compen sation, it surely would have expressed that intent more clearly’ ” (quoting Bates, 544 U. S., at 449)), cert. pending, No. 08–1120. Strikingly, the majority concedes that its interpretation
renders 13 words of the statute entirely superfluous. See ante, at 12 (“The intervening passage (‘the injury or death resulted from side effects that were unavoidable even though’) is unnecessary. True enough”). Nevertheless, the majority contends that “the rule against giving a portion of text an interpretation which renders it superfluous . . . applies only if verbosity and prolixity can be eliminated by giving the offending passage, or the remainder of the text, a competing interpretation.” Ibid. According to the major ity, petitioners’ reading of §22(b)(1) renders the “even though” clause superfluous because, to reach petitioners’ desired outcome, “[i]t would suffice to say ‘if the injury or death resulted from side effects that were unavoidable’— full stop.” Ibid. As explained above, however, the “even though” clause establishes two additional prerequisites— proper manufacturing and proper labeling—to qualify for §22(b)(1)’s exemption from liability. Contrary to the ma jority’s contention, then, the “even though” clause serves an important function by limiting the scope of the pre emption afforded by the preceding “if ” clause.14 The majority’s only other textual argument is based on
the expressio unius, exclusio alterius canon. According to the majority, because blackletter products liability law generally recognizes three different types of product de fects, “[i]f all three were intended to be preserved, it would be strange [for Congress] to mention specifically only two”—namely, manufacturing and labeling defects in the “even though” clause—“and leave the third to implication.” Ante, at 8. The majority’s argument, however, ignores that the default rule under the Vaccine Act is that state law is preserved. As explained above, §22(a) expressly provides that the “[g]eneral rule” is that “State law shall apply to a civil action brought for damages for a vaccine related injury or death.” 42 U. S. C. §300aa–22(a). Be cause §22(a) already preserves state-law design defect claims (to the extent the exemption in §22(b)(1) does not apply), there was no need for Congress separately and expressly to preserve design defect claims in §22(b)(1). Indeed, Congress’ principal aim in enacting §22(b)(1) was not to preserve manufacturing and labeling claims (those, too, were already preserved by §22(a)), but rather, to federalize comment k-type protection for “unavoidably unsafe” vaccines. The “even though” clause simply func tions to limit the applicability of that defense. The lack of express language in §22(b)(1) specifically preserving de sign defect claims thus cannot fairly be understood as impliedly (and categorically) pre-empting such traditional state tort claims, which had already been preserved by §22(a).15
The majority also suggests that if Congress wished to preserve design defect claims, it could have simply pro vided that manufacturers would be liable for “defective manufacture, defective directions or warning, and defec tive design.” Ante, at 8 (internal quotation marks omit ted). Putting aside the fact that §22(a) already preserves design defect claims (to the extent §22(b)(1) does not ap ply), the majority’s proposed solution would not have fully effectuated Congress’ intent. As the legislative history makes clear, Congress used the term “unavoidable” to effectuate its intent that the “principle in Comment K regarding ‘unavoidably unsafe’ products . . . apply to the vaccines covered in the bill.” 1986 Report 26; see also 1987 Report 691. At the time of the Vaccine Act’s enact ment in 1986, at least one State had expressly rejected comment k,16 while many others had not addressed the applicability of comment k specifically to vaccines or ap plied comment k to civil actions proceeding on a theory other than strict liability (e.g., negligence17). A statute
that simply stated that vaccine manufacturers would be liable for “defective design” would be silent as to the avail ability of a comment k-type defense for “unavoidably unsafe” vaccines, and thus would not have fully achieved Congress’ aim of extending greater liability protection to vaccine manufacturers by providing comment k-type protection in all civil actions as a matter of federal law. The majority’s structural arguments fare no better than its textual ones. The principal thrust of the majority’s position is that, since nothing in the Vaccine Act or the FDA’s regulations governing vaccines expressly mentions design defects, Congress must have intended to remove issues concerning the design of FDA-licensed vaccines from the tort system. Ante, at 13. The flaw in that rea soning, of course, is that the FDA’s silence on design de fects existed long before the Vaccine Act was enacted. Indeed, the majority itself concedes that the “FDA has never even spelled out in regulations the criteria it uses to decide whether a vaccine is safe and effective for its in tended use.”18 Ibid. And yet it is undisputed that prior to the Act, vaccine manufacturers had long been subject to liability under state tort law for defective vaccine design. That the Vaccine Act did not itself set forth a comprehen sive regulatory scheme with respect to design defects is thus best understood to mean not that Congress suddenly decided to change course sub silentio and pre-empt a
longstanding, traditional category of state tort law, but rather, that Congress intended to leave the status quo alone (except, of course, with respect to those aspects of state tort law that the Act expressly altered). See 1987 Report 691 (“It is not the Committee’s intention to pre clude court actions under applicable law. The Commit tee’s intent at the time of considering the Act . . . was . . . to leave otherwise applicable law unaffected, except as expressly altered by the Act”). The majority also suggests that Congress necessarily intended to pre-empt design defect claims since the aim of such tort suits is to promote the development of improved designs and provide compensation for injured individuals, and the Vaccine Act “provides other means for achieving both effects”—most notably through the no-fault compen sation program and the National Vaccine Program. Ante, at 14, and nn. 57–60 (citing 42 U. S. C. §§300aa–1, 300aa– 2(a)(1)–(3), 300aa–3, 300aa–25(b), 300aa–27(a)(1)). But the majority’s position elides a significant difference be tween state tort law and the federal regulatory scheme. Although the Vaccine Act charges the Secretary of Health and Human Services with the obligation to “promote the development of childhood vaccines” and “make or assure improvements in . . . vaccines, and research on vaccines,” §300aa–27(a), neither the Act nor any other provision of federal law places a legal duty on vaccine manufacturers to improve the design of their vaccines to account for scientific and technological advances. Indeed, the FDA does not condition approval of a vaccine on it being the most optimally designed among reasonably available alternatives, nor does it (or any other federal entity) en sure that licensed vaccines keep pace with technological and scientific advances.19 Rather, the function of ensuring
that vaccines are optimally designed in light of existing science and technology has traditionally been left to the States through the imposition of damages for design de fects. Cf. Bates, 544 U. S., at 451 (“ ‘[T]he specter of dam age actions may provide manufacturers with added dy namic incentives to continue to keep abreast of all possible injuries stemming from use of their product[s] so as to forestall such actions through product improvement’ ”);
23) (noting that the FDA has “traditionally regarded state law as a complementary form of drug regulation” as “[s]tate tort suits uncover unknown drug hazards and provide incentives for drug manufacturers to disclose safety risks promptly”).20 The importance of the States’ traditional regulatory role is only underscored by the unique features of the vaccine market, in which there are “only one or two manufacturers for a majority of the vac cines listed on the routine childhood immunization sched ule.” Brief for Respondent 55. The normal competitive forces that spur innovation and improvements to existing product lines in other markets thus operate with less force in the vaccine market, particularly for vaccines that have already been released and marketed to the public. Absent a clear statutory mandate to the contrary, there is no reason to think that Congress intended in the vaccine context to eliminate the traditional incentive and deter rence functions served by state tort liability in favor of a federal regulatory scheme providing only carrots and no sticks.21 See Levine, 555 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 18) (“The
case for federal pre-emption is particularly weak where Congress has indicated its awareness of the operation of state law in a field of federal interest, and has nonetheless decided to stand by both concepts and to tolerate whatever tension there is between them.” (internal quotation marks and alteration omitted)). In enacting the Vaccine Act, Congress established a carefully wrought federal scheme that balances the com peting interests of vaccine-injured persons and vaccine manufacturers. As the legislative history indicates, the Act addressed “two overriding concerns”: “(a) the inade quacy—from both the perspective of vaccine-injured per sons as well as vaccine manufacturers—of the current approach to compensating those who have been damaged by a vaccine; and (b) the instability and unpredictability of the childhood vaccine market.” 1986 Report 7. When viewed in the context of the Vaccine Act as a whole, §22(b)(1) is just one part of a broader statutory scheme that balances the need for compensating vaccine-injured children with added liability protections for vaccine manu facturers to ensure a stable childhood vaccine market. The principal innovation of the Act was the creation of the no-fault compensation program—a scheme funded entirely through an excise tax on vaccines.22 Through that
program, Congress relieved vaccine manufacturers of the burden of compensating victims of vaccine-related injuries in the vast majority of cases23—an extremely significant economic benefit that “functionally creat[es] a valuable insurance policy for vaccine-related injuries.” Reply Brief for Petitioners 10. The structure and legislative history, moreover, point clearly to Congress’ intention to divert would-be tort claimants into the compensation program, rather than eliminate a longstanding category of tradi tional tort claims. See 1986 Report 13 (“The Committee anticipates that the speed of the compensation program, the low transaction costs of the system, the no-fault na ture of the required findings, and the relative certainty and generosity of the system’s awards will divert a signifi cant number of potential plaintiffs from litigation”). In deed, although complete pre-emption of tort claims would have eliminated the principal source of the “unpredictabil ity” in the vaccine market, Congress specifically chose not to pre-empt state tort claims categorically. See 42 U. S. C. §300aa–22(a) (providing as a “[g]eneral rule” that “State law shall apply to a civil action brought for damages for a vaccine-related injury or death”). That decision reflects Congress’ recognition that court actions are essential
because they provide injured persons with significant procedural tools—including, most importantly, civil dis covery—that are not available in administrative proceed ings under the compensation program. See §§300aa– 12(d)(2)(E), (d)(3). Congress thus clearly believed there was still an important function to be played by state tort law. Instead of eliminating design defect liability entirely, Congress enacted numerous measures to reduce manufac turers’ liability exposure, including a limited regulatory compliance presumption of adequate warnings, see §300aa–22(b)(2), elimination of claims based on failure to provide direct warnings to patients, §300aa–22(c), a heightened standard for punitive damages, §300aa– 23(d)(2), and, of course, immunity from damages for “un avoidable” side effects, §300aa–22(b)(1). Considered in light of the Vaccine Act as a whole, §22(b)(1)’s exemption from liability for unavoidably unsafe vaccines is just one part of a broader statutory scheme that reflects Congress’ careful balance between providing adequate compensation for vaccine-injured children and conferring substantial benefits on vaccine manufacturers to ensure a stable and predictable childhood vaccine supply. The majority’s decision today disturbs that careful balance based on a bare policy preference that it is better “to leave complex epidemiological judgments about vaccine design to the FDA and the National Vaccine Program rather than juries.” Ante, at 15.24 To be sure, reasonable minds can disagree about the wisdom of having juries weigh the relative costs and benefits of a particular vac cine design. But whatever the merits of the majority’s
policy preference, the decision to bar all design defect claims against vaccine manufacturers is one that Congress must make, not this Court.25 By construing §22(b)(1) to
pre-empt all design defect claims against vaccine manu facturers for covered vaccines, the majority’s decision leaves a regulatory vacuum in which no one—neither the FDA nor any other federal agency, nor state and federal juries—ensures that vaccine manufacturers adequately take account of scientific and technological advancements. This concern is especially acute with respect to vaccines that have already been released and marketed to the public. Manufacturers, given the lack of robust competi tion in the vaccine market, will often have little or no incentive to improve the designs of vaccines that are al ready generating significant profit margins. Nothing in the text, structure, or legislative history remotely suggests that Congress intended that result. I respectfully dissent.
——————
1 W. Keeton, D. Dobbs, R. Keeton, & D. Owen, Prosser and Keeton on
Law of Torts 695 (5th ed. 1984).


——————
2 See Silkwood v. Kerr-McGee Corp., 464 U. S. 238, 255 (1984); Brown
v. Earthboard Sports USA, Inc., 481 F. 3d 901, 912 (CA6 2007)
(“ ‘[F]ederal preemption is an affirmative defense upon which the
defendants bear the burden of proof ’ ” (quoting Fifth Third Bank v.
CSX Corp., 415 F. 3d 741, 745 (CA7 2005))).


——————
3 This leaves the question of what precisely §22(b)(1) means by “un
avoidable” side effects, which I address in the next section.


——————
4 Comment k provides as follows:
“Unavoidably unsafe products. There are some products which, in
the present state of human knowledge, are quite incapable of being
made safe for their intended and ordinary use. These are especially
common in the field of drugs. An outstanding example is the vaccine
for the Pasteur treatment of rabies, which not uncommonly leads to
very serious and damaging consequences when it is injected. Since the
disease itself invariably leads to a dreadful death, both the marketing
and the use of the vaccine are fully justified, notwithstanding the
unavoidable high degree of risk which they involve. Such a product,
properly prepared, and accompanied by proper directions and warning,
is not defective, nor is it unreasonably dangerous. The same is true of
many other drugs, vaccines, and the like, many of which for this very
reason cannot legally be sold except to physicians, or under the pre
scription of a physician. It is also true in particular of many new or
experimental drugs as to which, because of lack of time and opportunity
for sufficient medical experience, there can be no assurance of safety, or
perhaps even of purity of ingredients, but such experience as there is
justifies the marketing and use of the drug notwithstanding a medically
recognizable risk. The seller of such products, again with the qualifica
tion that they are properly prepared and marketed, and proper warning
is given, where the situation calls for it, is not to be held to strict
liability for unfortunate consequences attending their use, merely
because he has undertaken to supply the public with an apparently
useful and desirable product, attended with a known but apparently
reasonable risk.” Restatement 353–354.


——————
5 See, e.g., Smith ex rel. Smith v. Wyeth Labs., Inc., No. Civ. A 84–
2002, 1986 WL 720792, *5 (SD W. Va., Aug. 21, 1986) (“[A] prescription
drug is not ‘unavoidably unsafe’ when its dangers can be eliminated
through design changes that do not unduly affect its cost or utility”);
Kearl v. Lederle Labs., 172 Cal. App. 3d 812, 830, 218 Cal. Rptr. 453,
464 (1985) (“unavoidability” turns on “(i) whether the product was
designed to minimize—to the extent scientifically knowable at the time
it was distributed—the risk inherent in the product, and (ii) the avail
ability . . . of any alternative product that would have as effectively
accomplished the full intended purpose of the subject product”), disap
proved in part by Brown v. Superior Ct., 44 Cal. 3d 1049, 751 P. 2d 470
(1988); Belle Bonfils Memorial Blood Bank v. Hansen, 665 P. 2d 118,


——————
122 (Colo. 1983) (“[A]pplicability of comment k . . . depends upon the co
existence of several factors,” including that “the product’s benefits must
not be achievable in another manner; and the risk must be unavoidable
under the present state of knowledge”); see also 1 L. Frumer & M.
Friedman, Products Liability §§8.07[1]–[2], pp. 8–277 to 8–278 (2010)
(comment k applies “only to defects in design,” and there “must be no
feasible alternative design which on balance accomplishes the subject
product’s purpose with a lesser risk” (internal quotation marks omit
ted)). To be sure, a number of courts at the time of the Vaccine Act’s
enactment had interpreted comment k to preclude design defect claims
categorically for certain kinds of products, see Hill v. Searle Labs., 884
F. 2d 1064, 1068 (CA8 1989) (collecting cases), but as indicated by the
sources cited above, the courts that had construed comment k to apply
on a case-specific basis generally agreed on the basic elements of what
constituted an “unavoidably unsafe” product. See also n. 8, infra. The
majority’s suggestion that “judges who must rule on motions to dismiss,
motions for summary judgment, and motions for judgment as a matter
of law” are incapable of adjudicating claims alleging “unavoidable” side
effects, ante, at 7–8, n. 35, is thus belied by the experience of the many
courts that had adjudicated such claims for years by the time of the
Vaccine Act’s enactment.
6 The majority refuses to recognize that “unavoidable” is a term of art
derived from comment k, suggesting that “ ‘[u]navoidable’ is hardly a
rarely used word.” Ante, at 10. In fact, however, “unavoidable” is an
extremely rare word in the relevant context. It appears exactly once
(i.e., in §300aa–22(b)(1)) in the entirety of Title 42 of the U. S. Code
(“Public Health and Welfare”), which governs, inter alia, Social Secu
rity, see 42 U. S. C. §301 et seq., Medicare, see §1395 et seq., and several
other of the Federal Government’s largest entitlement programs. The
singular rarity in which Congress used the term supports the conclu


——————
sion that “unavoidable” is a term of art.
7 See, e.g., Brochu v. Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp., 642 F. 2d 652, 657
(CA1 1981); Needham v. White Labs., Inc., 639 F. 2d 394, 402 (CA7
1981); Reyes v. Wyeth Labs., 498 F. 2d 1264, 1274–1275 (CA5 1974);
Davis v. Wyeth Labs., 399 F. 2d 121, 127–129 (CA9 1968); Feldman v.
Lederle Labs., 97 N. J. 429, 448, 479 A. 2d 374, 384 (1984); see also
Toner v. Lederle Labs., 112 Idaho 328, 336, 732 P. 2d 297, 305 (1987).


——————
8 Respondent suggests an alternative reading of the 1986 Report.
According to respondent, “the principle in Comment K” is simply that of
nonliability for “unavoidably unsafe” products, and thus Congress’
stated intent in the 1986 Report to apply the “principle in Comment K”
to “the vaccines covered in the bill” means that Congress viewed the
covered vaccines as a class to be “ ‘unavoidably unsafe.’ ” 1986 Report
25–26; Brief for Respondent 42. The concurrence makes a similar
argument. Ante, at 1–2 (opinion of BREYER, J.). This interpretation
finds some support in the 1986 Report, which states that “if [injured
individuals] cannot demonstrate under applicable law either that a
vaccine was improperly prepared or that it was accompanied by im
proper directions or inadequate warnings [they] should pursue recom
pense in the compensation system, not the tort system.” 1986 Report
26. It also finds some support in the pre-Vaccine Act case law, which
reflected considerable disagreement in the courts over “whether com
ment k applies to pharmaceutical products across the board or only on
a case-by-case basis.” Ausness, Unavoidably Unsafe Products and
Strict Products Liability: What Liability Rule Should be Applied to the
Sellers of Pharmaceutical Products? 78 Ky. L. J. 705, 708, and n. 11
(1989–1990) (collecting cases). This interpretation, however, is under
mined by the fact that Congress has never directed the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) or any other federal agency to review vaccines
for optimal vaccine design, see infra, at 20–22, and n. 19, and thus it
seems highly unlikely that Congress intended to eliminate the tradi
tional mechanism for such review (i.e., design defect liability), particu
larly given its express retention of state tort law in the Vaccine Act, see
42 U. S. C. §300aa–22(a). In any event, to the extent there is ambiguity
as to how precisely Congress intended the “principle in Comment K” to
apply to the covered vaccines, that ambiguity is explicitly resolved in
petitioners’ favor by the 1987 House Energy and Commerce Committee
Report, H. R. Rep. No. 100–391, pt. 1, pp. 690–691 (hereinafter 1987
Report). See infra this page and 11–12.


——————
9 The Third Circuit’s opinion below expressed uncertainty as to
whether the 1987 Report was authored by the House Budget Commit
tee or the House Energy and Commerce Committee. See 561 F. 3d 233,
250 (2009). As petitioners explain, although the Budget Committee
compiled and issued the Report, the Energy and Commerce Committee
wrote and approved the relevant language. Title IV of the Report,
entitled “Committee on Energy and Commerce,” comprises “two Com
mittee Prints approved by the Committee on Energy and Commerce for
inclusion in the forthcoming reconciliation bill.” 1987 Report 377, 380.
10 The majority suggests that the 1987 legislation creating the fund


——————
ing mechanism is akin to appropriations legislation and that giving
weight to the legislative history of such legislation “would set a danger
ous precedent.” Ante, at 18. The difference, of course, is that appro
priations legislation ordinarily funds congressional enactments that
already have operative legal effect; in contrast, operation of the tort
reforms in the 1986 Act, including §22(b)(1), was expressly conditioned
on the enactment of a separate tax to fund the compensation program.
See §323(a), 100 Stat. 3784. Accordingly, this Court’s general reluc
tance to view appropriations legislation as modifying substantive
legislation, see, e.g., TVA v. Hill, 437 U. S. 153, 190 (1978), has no
bearing here.
11 See 1987 Report 700 (describing the administration’s alternative
proposal).
12 See, e.g., Hearings on Funding of the Childhood Vaccine Program
before the Subcommittee on Select Revenue Measures of the House
Committee on Ways and Means, 100th Cong., 1st Sess., 85 (1987)
(“[T]he liability provisions of the 1986 Act should be amended to assure
that manufacturers will not be found liable in the tort system if they
have fully complied with applicable government regulations. In par
ticular, manufacturers should not face liability under a ‘design defect’
theory in cases where plaintiffs challenge the decisions of public health
authorities and federal regulators that the licensed vaccines are the
best available way to protect children from deadly diseases” (statement
of Robert B. Johnson, President, Lederle Laboratories Division, Ameri
can Cyanamid Co.)).


——————
13 See

American Academy of Pediatrics, Questions and Answers about
Vaccine Ingredients (Oct. 2008), http://www.aap.org/immunization/
families/faq/Vaccineingredients.pdf (all Internet materials as visited
Feb. 18, 2011, and available in Clerk of Court’s case file).


——————
14 In this manner, the “even though” clause functions in a “concessive
subordinat[ing]” fashion, ante, at 11, in accord with normal grammati
cal usage. According to the majority, however, the “even though” clause
“clarifies the word that precedes it” by “delineat[ing]” the conditions
that make a side effect “unavoidable” under the statute. Ante, at 7.
The majority’s interpretation hardly treats the clause as “concessive,”
and indeed strains the meaning of “even though.” In the majority’s
view, proper manufacturing and labeling are the sole prerequisites that
render a vaccine’s side effects unavoidable. Thus, an injurious side
effect is unavoidable because the vaccine was properly prepared and
labeled, not “even though” it was. The two conjunctions are not equiva
lent: The sentence “I am happy even though it is raining” can hardly be
read to mean that “I am happy because it is raining.” In any event, the
more fundamental point is that petitioners’ interpretation actually
gives meaning to the words “even though,” whereas the majority
concedes that its interpretation effectively reads those words entirely
out of the statute. See supra this page.


——————
15 This

Court, moreover, has long operated on “the assumption that
the historic police powers of the States are not to be superseded by the
Federal Act unless that was the clear and manifest purpose of Con
gress.” Altria Group, Inc. v. Good, 555 U. S. ___, ___ (2008) (slip op., at
5) (internal quotation marks and alteration omitted). Given the long
history of state regulation of vaccines, see Brief for Petitioners 3–6, the
presumption provides an additional reason not to read §22(b)(1) as pre
empting all design defect claims, especially given Congress’ inclusion of


——————
an express saving clause in the same statutory section, see 42 U. S. C.
§300aa–22(a), and its use of the conditional “if” clause in defining the
pre-emptive scope of the provision. See Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC,
544 U. S. 431, 449 (2005) (“In areas of traditional state regulation, we
assume that a federal statute has not supplanted state law unless
Congress has made such an intention clear and manifest” (internal
quotation marks omitted)).
16 See Collins v. Eli Lilly Co., 116 Wis. 2d 166, 197, 342 N. W. 2d 37,
52 (1984) (“We conclude that the rule embodied in comment k is too
restrictive and, therefore, not commensurate with strict products
liability law in Wisconsin”). Collins did, however, “recognize that in
some exigent circumstances it may be necessary to place a drug on the
market before adequate testing can be done.” Ibid. It thus adopted a
narrower defense (based on “exigent circumstances”) than that recog
nized in other jurisdictions that had expressly adopted comment k.
17 See, e.g., Kearl, 172 Cal. App. 3d, at 831, n. 15, 218 Cal. Rptr., at
465, n. 15 (“[T]he unavoidably dangerous product doctrine merely
exempts the product from a strict liability design defect analysis; a
plaintiff remains free to pursue his design defect theory on the basis of


——————
negligence”); Toner, 112 Idaho, at 340, 732 P. 2d, at 309–310 (“The
authorities universally agree that where a product is deemed unavoid
ably unsafe, the plaintiff is deprived of the advantage of a strict liabil
ity cause of action, but may proceed under a negligence cause of ac
tion”).
18 See 42 U. S. C. §262(a)(2)(C)(i)(I) (“The Secretary shall approve a
biologics license application . . . on the basis of a demonstration that . . .
the biological product that is the subject of the application is safe, pure,
and potent”).


——————
19 See, e.g., Hurley v. Lederle Labs., 863 F. 2d 1173, 1177 (CA5 1988)
(“[T]he FDA is a passive agency: it considers whether to approve


——————
vaccine designs only if and when manufacturers come forward with a
proposal”); Jones v. Lederle Labs., 695 F. Supp. 700, 711 (EDNY 1988)
(“[T]he agency takes the drugs and manufacturers as it finds them.
While its goal is to oversee inoculation with the best possible vaccine, it
is limited to reviewing only those drugs submitted by various manufac
turers, regardless of their flaws”). Although the FDA has authority
under existing regulations to revoke a manufacturer’s biologics licenses,
that authority can be exercised only where (as relevant here) “[t]he
licensed product is not safe and effective for all of its intended uses.” 21
CFR §601.5(b)(1)(vi) (2010); see §600.3(p) (defining “safety” as “relative
freedom from harmful effect to persons affected, directly or indirectly,
by a product when prudently administered, taking into consideration
the character of the product in relation to the condition of the recipient
at the time”). The regulation does not authorize the FDA to revoke a
biologics license for a manufacturer’s failure to adopt an optimal
vaccine design in light of existing science and technology. See Conk, Is
There a Design Defect in the Restatement (Third) of Torts: Products
Liability? 109 Yale L. J. 1087, 1128–1129 (1999–2000) (“The FDA does
not claim to review products for optimal design . . . . FDA review thus
asks less of drug . . . manufacturers than the common law of products
liability asks of other kinds of manufacturers”). At oral argument,
counsel for amicus United States stated that the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) routinely performs comparative analyses
of vaccines that are already on the market. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 44–45;
id., at 52–53 (describing CDC’s comparison of Sabin and Salk polio
vaccines). Neither the United States nor any of the parties, however,
has represented that CDC examines whether a safer alternative
vaccine could have been designed given practical and scientific limits,
the central inquiry in a state tort law action for design defect. CDC
does not issue biologics licenses, moreover, and thus has no authority to
require a manufacturer to adopt a different vaccine design.


——————
20 Indeed,

we observed in Levine that the FDA is perpetually under
staffed and underfunded, see 555 U. S., at ___, n. 11 (slip op., at 22,
n. 11), and the agency has been criticized in the past for its slow re
sponse in failing to withdraw or warn about potentially dangerous
products, see, e.g., L. Leveton, H. Sox, & M. Soto, Institute of Medicine,
HIV and the Blood Supply: An Analysis of Crisis Decisionmaking
(1995) (criticizing FDA response to transmission of AIDS through blood
supply). These practical shortcomings reinforce the conclusion that
“state law offers an additional, and important, layer of consumer
protection that complements FDA regulation.” Levine, 555 U. S., at ___
(slip op., at 23).
21 The majority mischaracterizes my position as expressing a general
“skeptic[ism] of preemption unless the congressional substitute oper
ate[s] like the tort system.” Ante, at 16. Congress could, of course,
adopt a regulatory regime that operates differently from state tort
systems, and such a difference is not necessarily a reason to question
Congress’ pre-emptive intent. In the specific context of the Vaccine Act,
however, the relevant point is that this Court should not lightly assume


——————
that Congress intended sub silentio to displace a longstanding species
of state tort liability where, as here, Congress specifically included an
express saving clause preserving state law, there is a long history of
state-law regulation of vaccine design, and pre-emption of state law
would leave an important regulatory function—i.e., ensuring optimal
vaccine design—entirely unaddressed by the congressional substitute.
22 The majority’s suggestion that “vaccine manufacturers fund from
their sales” the compensation program is misleading. Ante, at 15.
Although the manufacturers nominally pay the tax, the amount of the
tax is specifically included in the vaccine price charged to purchasers.
See CDC Vaccine Price List (Feb. 15, 2011), http://www.cdc.gov/


——————
vaccines/programs/vfc/cdc-vac-price-list.htm. Accordingly, the only way
the vaccine manufacturers can be said to actually “fund” the compensa
tion program is if the cost of the excise tax has an impact on the num
ber of vaccines sold by the vaccine manufacturer. The majority points
to no evidence that the excise tax—which ordinarily amounts to 75
cents per dose, 26 U. S. C. §4131(b)—has any impact whatsoever on the
demand for vaccines.
23 See Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 28 (“Department of
Justice records indicate that 99.8% of successful Compensation Pro
gram claimants have accepted their awards, foregoing any tort reme
dies against vaccine manufacturers”); S. Plotkin, W. Orenstein, & P.
Offit, Vaccines 1673 (5th ed. 2008) (noting that “[v]irtually all . . .
petitioners, even those who were not awarded compensation” under the
compensation program, choose to accept the program’s determination).


——————
JUSTICE BREYER’s separate concurrence is even more explicitly
policy driven, reflecting his own preference for the “more expert judg
ment” of federal agencies over the “less expert” judgment of juries.
Ante, at 5.
24


——————
25 Respondent notes that there are some 5,000 petitions alleging a
causal link between certain vaccines and autism spectrum disorders
that are currently pending in an omnibus proceeding in the Court of
Federal Claims (Vaccine Court). Brief for Respondent 56–57. Accord
ing to respondent, a ruling that §22(b)(1) does not pre-empt design
defect claims could unleash a “crushing wave” of tort litigation that
would bankrupt vaccine manufacturers and deplete vaccine supply.
Id., at 28. This concern underlies many of the policy arguments in
respondent’s brief and appears to underlie the majority and concurring
opinions in this case. In the absence of any empirical data, however,
the prospect of an onslaught of autism-related tort litigation by claim
ants denied relief by the Vaccine Court seems wholly speculative. As
an initial matter, the special masters in the autism cases have thus far
uniformly rejected the alleged causal link between vaccines and autism.
See Brief for American Academy of Pediatrics et al. as Amici Curiae
20–21, n. 4 (collecting cases). To be sure, those rulings do not necessar
ily mean that no such causal link exists, cf. Brief for United States as
Amicus Curiae 29 (noting that injuries have been added to the Vaccine
Injury Table for existing vaccines), or that claimants will not ultimately
be able to prove such a link in a state tort action, particularly with the
added tool of civil discovery. But these rulings do highlight the sub
stantial hurdles to recovery a claimant faces. See Schafer v. American
Cyanamid Co., 20 F. 3d 1, 5 (CA1 1994) (“[A] petitioner to whom the
Vaccine Court gives nothing may see no point in trying to overcome tort
law’s yet more serious obstacles to recovery”). Trial courts, moreover,
have considerable experience in efficiently handling and disposing of
meritless products liability claims, and decades of tort litigation (in
cluding for design defect) in the prescription-drug context have not led
to shortages in prescription drugs. Despite the doomsday predictions of
respondent and the various amici cited by the concurrence, ante, at 6–7,
the possibility of a torrent of meritless lawsuits bankrupting manufac
turers and causing vaccine shortages seems remote at best. More
fundamentally, whatever the merits of these policy arguments, the
issue in this case is what Congress has decided, and as to that question,
the text, structure, and legislative history compel the conclusion that
Congress intended to leave the courthouse doors open for children who
have suffered severe injuries from defectively designed vaccines. The
majority’s policy-driven decision to the contrary usurps Congress’ role
and deprives such vaccine-injured children of a key remedy that Con
gress intended them to have.

