Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

reinstate the CFC’s $1.2 billion damages award. See Brief
for Petitioner in No. 09–1298, pp. 58–61. The language of
the A–12 agreement does not give us that option. It au­
thorizes a court to convert a default termination into a
termination for convenience only if it “determine[s] that
the Contractor was not in default, or that the default
was excusable.” 48 CFR §52.249–9(g) (2010). Our opinion
does not express a view on those issues. It holds them
nonjusticiable.
Moreover, state secrets would make it impossible to
calculate petitioners’ damages. A termination for conven­
ience ordinarily entitles a contractor to recover its in­
curred costs of performance, reasonable termination ex­
penses, and a reasonable profit on the work performed (or
an offset to account for the contractor’s expected losses
had the contract been performed to completion). See
§52.249–2(g). The CFC’s $1.2 billion award to petitioners
in 1996 simply reflected their actual costs incurred minus
progress payments received. The CFC decided it could not
calculate petitioners’ expected losses (or profits) without
deciding the extent to which the Government’s alleged
failure to share its superior knowledge contributed to
petitioners’ cost overruns—a nonjusticiable question. See
37 Fed. Cl., at 285. Absent proof of the Government’s
superior knowledge, and of how the sharing of that would
have made this a profitable contract, the $1.2 billion
award might represent an undeserved windfall.
The Government, for its part, wants a return of the
$1.35 billion it paid petitioners in progress payments for
work which it says it never approved. But the validity of
that claim depends upon whether petitioners are in de­
fault on their contract. If they are not, termination for
convenience of the Government would entitle them to
retain those progress payments (unless, of course, they
would have incurred a loss on the entire contract). Nei­
ther the question whether they are in default nor the

