6

GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP. v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

state-secrets privilege it had to abandon the claim to
which the thereby privileged evidence was relevant. That
was, the widows observed, the price paid in criminal cases.
If the Government refuses to provide state-secret informa­
tion that the accused reasonably asserts is necessary to
his defense, the prosecution must be dismissed. See id., at
12; Jencks v. United States, 353 U. S. 657, 672 (1957). The
penultimate paragraph of Reynolds said that this was a
false analogy. A like abandonment of the Government’s
claim is not the consequence “in a civil forum where the
Government is not the moving party, but is a defendant
only on terms to which it has consented.” 345 U. S., at 12.
Both petitioners and the Court of Appeals rely upon this
statement to support their differing positions.
We think that Reynolds has less to do with these cases
than the parties believe—and its dictum (of course), less
still. Reynolds was about the admission of evidence. It
decided a purely evidentiary dispute by applying eviden­
tiary rules: The privileged information is excluded and the
trial goes on without it. That was to the detriment, of
course, of the widows, whom the evidence would have
favored. But the Court did not order judgment in favor
of the Government. Here, by contrast, the CFC decreed
the substantive result that since invocation of the state­
secrets privilege obscured too many of the facts relevant to
the superior-knowledge defense, the issue of that defense
was nonjusticiable, and the defense thus not available.
See 37 Fed. Cl., at 284–285. And that was so even though
petitioners had brought forward enough unprivileged
evidence to “make a prima facie showing.” Id., at 280.
While we disagree, for reasons set forth below, with the
CFC’s disposition of the remainder of the case, its percep­
tion that in the present context the state-secrets issue
raises something quite different from a mere evidentiary
point seems to us sound. What we are called upon to
exercise is not our power to determine the procedural

