8

GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP. v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

fense, and when full litigation of that defense “would
inevitably lead to the disclosure of” state secrets, Totten,
supra, at 107, neither party can obtain judicial relief. As
the CFC concluded, that is the situation here. Disclosure
of state secrets occurred twice before the CFC terminated
discovery. See 37 Fed. Cl., at 277–278. Every document
request or question to a witness would risk further disclo­
sure, since both sides have an incentive to probe up to
the boundaries of state secrets. State secrets can also be
indirectly disclosed. Each assertion of the privilege can
provide another clue about the Government’s covert pro­
grams or capabilities. See Fitzgerald v. Penthouse Inter
national, Ltd., 776 F. 2d 1236, 1243, and n. 10 (CA4 1985).
For instance, the fact that the Government had to con­
tinue asserting the privilege after granting petitioners
access to B–2 and F–117A program information suggests
it had other, possibly covert stealth programs in the 1980’s
and early 1990’s.
It seems to us unrealistic to separate, as the CFC did,
the claim from the defense, and to allow the former to
proceed while the latter is barred. It is claims and de­
fenses together that establish the justification, or lack of
justification, for judicial relief; and when public policy
precludes judicial intervention for the one it should pre­
clude judicial intervention for the other as well.* If, in
Totten, it had been the Government seeking return of
funds that the estate claimed had been received in pay­
ment for espionage activities, it would have been the
height of injustice to deny the defense because of the
Government’s invocation of state-secret protection, but to
——————
*Of course, this does not mean the nonjusticiability of one aspect
of a case will necessarily end the entire litigation. If, for example, the
Government asserts two justifications for its default termination, and if
state secrets deprive the contractor of a prima facie valid defense to
only one of those claims, the court can still adjudicate the validity of the
other.

