2

GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP. v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
tioners had defaulted, and the Federal Circuit affirmed.

Held: When, to protect state secrets, a court dismisses a Government
contractor’s prima facie valid affirmative defense to the Govern
ment’s allegations of contractual breach, the proper remedy is to
leave the parties where they were on the day they filed suit. Pp. 5–
14.
(a) The CFC held that, since invocation of the state-secrets privi
lege obscured too many of the facts relevant to the superior
knowledge defense, the issue of that defense was nonjusticiable, even
though petitioners had brought forward enough unprivileged evi
dence for a prima facie showing. In this situation, the Court must
exercise its common-law authority to fashion contractual remedies in
Government-contracting disputes. The relevant state-secrets juris
prudence comes not from United States v. Reynolds, 345 U. S. 1,
which deals with the Government’s evidentiary privilege against
court-ordered disclosure of state and military secrets, but from Totten
v. United States, 92 U. S. 105, and Tenet v. Doe, 544 U. S. 1, two
cases dealing with alleged contracts to spy.
Where liability depends on the validity of a plausible superior
knowledge defense, and when full litigation of that defense “would
inevitably lead to the disclosure of” state secrets, Totten, supra, at
107, neither party can obtain judicial relief. It seems unrealistic to
separate the claim from the defense, allowing the former to proceed
while barring the latter. Claims and defenses together establish the
justification, or lack of justification, for judicial relief; and when pub
lic policy precludes judicial intervention for the one it should also
preclude judicial intervention for the other. Suit on the contract, or
for performance rendered or funds paid under the contract, will not
lie, and courts should leave the parties to the agreement where they
stood on the day they filed suit. The Government suggests that at
the time of suit, petitioners had been held in default by the contract
ing officer and were liable for the ensuing consequences. But that
was merely one step in the parties’ contractual regime. The “position
of the parties” at the time of suit is not their position with regard to
legal burdens and the legal consequences of contract-related deter
minations, but their position with regard to possession of funds and
property. Pp. 5–10.
(b) Neither side will be entirely happy with this resolution. Gen
eral Dynamics (but not Boeing) wants to turn the termination into
one for convenience and reinstate the CFC’s $1.2 billion award, but
that is not an option under the A–12 agreement. Moreover, state se
crets would make it impossible to calculate petitioners’ damages.
The Government wants a return of the $1.35 billion it paid petition
ers for work never accepted, but the validity of that claim depends on

