Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

maintain jurisdiction over the Government’s claim and
award it judgment. Judicial refusal to enforce promises
contrary to public policy (here, the Government’s alleged
promise to provide superior knowledge, which we could
not determine was breached without penetrating several
layers of state secrets) is not unknown to the common law,
and the traditional course is to leave the parties where
they stood when they knocked on the courthouse door.
“In general, if a court will not, on grounds of public
policy, aid a promisee by enforcing the promise, it will not
aid him by granting him restitution for performance that
he has rendered in return for the unenforceable promise.
Neither will it aid the promisor by allowing a claim in
restitution for performance that he has rendered under
the unenforceable promise. It will simply leave both
parties as it finds them, even though this may result in
one of them retaining a benefit that he has received as
a result of the transaction.” 2 Restatement (Second) of
Contracts §197, Comment a, p. 71 (1979); see, e.g., Worlton
v. Davis, 73 Idaho 217, 222–223, 249 P. 2d 810, 814 (1952).
These cases differ from the common-law cases that we
know, in that the unenforceability did not exist at the time
the contract was formed, See 2 Restatement (Second) of
Contracts §179, Comment d, at 18, but arose because
of the Government’s assertion of the state-secrets privilege
that rendered the promise of superior knowledge unadju­
dicable. We do not see why that should affect the remedy.
Suit on the contract, or for performance rendered or funds
paid under the contract, will not lie, and the parties will
be left where they are.
The law of contracts contains another doctrine that
relates to the CFC’s concern about the reliability of its
judgment “without numerous layers of potentially disposi­
tive facts,” 37 Fed. Cl., at 284–285. The Statute of Frauds,
which has been with us since the 17th century, reflects
concerns about the reliability of oral evidence. See Valdez

