Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

117A—are some of the Government’s most closely guarded
military secrets. “ ‘[N]eed-to-know’ or [special] access con­
trols beyond those normally provided for access to Con­
fidential, Secret, or Top Secret information” apply. 32
CFR §154.3(x) (2010); see App. 384–385. The Government
nevertheless granted 10 members of petitioners’ litigation
team “access to the Secret/Special Access level of the B–2
and F–117A programs.” Id., at 385. Four of those ten
individuals received access to even the most sensitive
aspects of the programs. See ibid.
That neither satisfied petitioners’ thirst for discovery
nor prevented the unauthorized disclosure of military
secrets. In March 1993, Acting Secretary of the Air Force
Michael Donley asserted the state-secrets privilege to bar
discovery into certain aspects of stealth technology beyond
petitioners’ “need-to-know” authorizations. At a deposi­
tion that month, a former Navy official’s responses to
questions by petitioners and the Government revealed
military secrets neither side’s litigation team was author­
ized to know. Copies of the unclassified deposition were
widely distributed and quoted in unsealed court filings
until Government security officials discovered the breach
a month later. A July 1993 deposition caused further
unauthorized disclosures of military secrets.
These disclosures led Acting Secretary of the Air Force
Merrill McPeak to file a declaration with the CFC. He
warned that further discovery into the extent of the Gov­
ernment’s superior knowledge “would present a continuing
threat of disclosure of . . . military and state secrets” sur­
rounding the “weight, profile or signature, and materials
involved in the design and construction of ‘stealt[h]’ . . .
aircraft and weapons systems.” Id., at 633, 635. Even
relatively straightforward and innocuous questions, in his
opinion, “would pose unacceptable risks of disclosure of
classified, special access information,” id., at 636, includ­
ing the potential disclosure of covert Government pro­

