12

GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP. v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

question whether performance of the entire contract would
have left them with a loss can be judicially determined
because of the valid assertion of the state-secret privilege.
We leave the parties where they are. As in Totten, see
92 U. S., at 106, our refusal to enforce this contract cap­
tures what the ex ante expectations of the parties were or
reasonably ought to have been. Both parties “must have
understood,” ibid., that state secrets would prevent courts
from resolving many possible disputes under the A–12
agreement. The Government asked petitioners to develop
an aircraft the design, materials, and manufacturing
process for which would be closely guarded military se­
crets. See Contract Schedule H–1, App. 73–75; Contract
Security Classified Specification, id., at 129–135. The
contract itself was a classified document at one point. See
Contract Schedule H–1, ¶8, id., at 75. Both parties—the
Government no less than petitioners—must have assumed
the risk that state secrets would prevent the adjudication
of claims of inadequate performance.
We believe, moreover, that the impact of our ruling on
these particular cases (which we think produces rough,
very rough, equity) is probably much more significant than
its impact in future cases, except to the extent that it
renders the law more predictable and hence more subject
to accommodation by contracting parties. They can ne­
gotiate, for example, the timing and amount of progress
payments to account for the possibility that state secrets
may ultimately render the contract unenforceable. The
Government’s concern that contractors will raise frivolous
superior-knowledge defenses designed to goad the Gov­
ernment into asserting the state-secrets privilege is mis­
placed. To begin with, the rule we announce today applies
only when the superior-knowledge defense is supported by
enough evidence to make out a prima facie case. More­
over, Government contractors—especially cutting-edge
defense contractors of the sort likely to operate in the

