(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP. v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
No. 09–1298. Argued January 18, 2011—Decided May 23, 2011*
After petitioners fell behind schedule in developing a stealth aircraft
(A–12) for the Navy, the contracting officer terminated their $4.8 bil
lion fixed-price contract for default and ordered petitioners to repay
approximately $1.35 billion in progress payments for work the Gov
ernment never accepted. Petitioners filed suit in the Court of Federal
Claims (CFC), challenging the termination decision under the Con
tract Disputes Act of 1978. They argued that Federal Circuit prece
dent permitted their default to be excused because the Government
had failed to share its “superior knowledge” about how to design and
manufacture stealth aircraft. Uncovering the extent of such knowl
edge proved difficult because the design, materials, and manufactur
ing process for prior stealth aircraft, operated by the Air Force, are
closely guarded military secrets. After military secrets were dis
closed during discovery, the Acting Secretary of the Air Force warned
the CFC that further discovery into the extent of the Government’s
superior knowledge would risk disclosing classified information. The
CFC terminated such discovery and found the superior-knowledge
question nonjusticiable. The CFC subsequently converted the termi
nation into a less-Government-friendly termination for convenience
and awarded petitioners $1.2 billion. The Federal Circuit reversed.
On remand, the CFC sustained the default termination and reaf
firmed that petitioners’ superior-knowledge affirmative defense could
not be litigated. The Federal Circuit again reversed, but it found
that the state-secrets privilege prevented adjudicating petitioners’
superior-knowledge defense. On remand, the CFC again found peti
——————
* Together with No. 09–1302, Boeing Co., Successor to McDonnell
Douglas Corp. v. United States, also on certiorari to the same court.

