Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

Opinion R the Court
Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.

the “ ‘business death penalty’ ” by “hiring unauthorized
workers.” Post, at 6–7 (dissenting opinion); see Brief for
Petitioners 3, 35. That is not the choice. License termina
tion is not an available sanction simply for “hiring unau
thorized workers.” Only far more egregious violations of
the law trigger that consequence. The Arizona law covers
only knowing or intentional violations. The law’s perma
nent licensing sanctions do not come into play until a
second knowing or intentional violation at the same busi
ness location, and only if the second violation occurs while
the employer is still on probation for the first. These
limits ensure that licensing sanctions are imposed only
when an employer’s conduct fully justifies them. An
employer acting in good faith need have no fear of the
sanctions.
As the Chamber points out, IRCA has its own anti
discrimination provisions, see 8 U. S. C. §1324b(a)(1),
(g)(1)(B) (imposing sanctions for discrimination “against
any individual . . . with respect to the hiring . . . or the
discharging of the individual from employment”); Arizona
law certainly does nothing to displace those. Other federal
laws, and Arizona anti-discrimination laws, provide fur
ther protection against employment discrimination—and
strong incentive for employers not to discriminate. See,
e.g., 42 U. S. C. §2000e–2(a) (prohibiting discrimination
based on “race, color, religion, sex, or national origin”);
Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §41–1463(B)(1) (West Supp. 2010)
(prohibiting employment discrimination based on “race,
color, religion, sex, age, or national origin”).
All that is required to avoid sanctions under the Legal
Arizona Workers Act is to refrain from knowingly or inten
tionally violating the employment law. Employers enjoy
safe harbors from liability when they use the I–9 system
and E-Verify—as Arizona law requires them to do. The
most rational path for employers is to obey the law—both
the law barring the employment of unauthorized aliens

