16

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA v. WHITING
Opinion R the Court
Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.

that authority.
And here Arizona went the extra mile in ensuring that
its law closely tracks IRCA’s provisions in all material
respects. The Arizona law begins by adopting the federal
definition of who qualifies as an “unauthorized alien.”
Compare 8 U. S. C. §1324a(h)(3) (an “unauthorized alien”
is an alien not “lawfully admitted for permanent resi
dence” or not otherwise authorized by federal law to be
employed) with Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §23–211(11) (adopt
ing the federal definition of “unauthorized alien”); see De
Canas, 424 U. S., at 363 (finding no preemption of state
law that operates “only with respect to individuals whom
the Federal Government has already declared cannot work
in this country”).
Not only that, the Arizona law expressly provides that
state investigators must verify the work authorization of
an allegedly unauthorized alien with the Federal Govern
ment, and “shall not attempt to independently make a
final determination on whether an alien is authorized to
work in the United States.” §23–212(B). What is more, a
state court “shall consider only the federal government’s
determination” when deciding “whether an employee is an
unauthorized alien.” §23–212(H) (emphasis added). As a
result, there can by definition be no conflict between state
and federal law as to worker authorization, either at the
investigatory or adjudicatory stage.7
——————
7 After

specifying that a state court may consider “only” the federal
determination, the Arizona law goes on to provide that the federal
determination is “a rebuttable presumption of the employee’s lawful
status,” Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §23–212(H) (West Supp. 2010). Arizona
explains that this provision does not permit the State to establish
unlawful status apart from the federal determination—the provision
could hardly do that, given the foregoing. It instead operates to “en
sur[e] that the employer has an opportunity to rebut the evidence
presented to establish a worker’s unlawful status.” Brief for Respon
dents 49 (emphasis added). Only in that sense is the federal determi
nation a “rebuttable presumption.” See Tr. of Oral Arg. 46–47. Giving

