16

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF UNITED STATES OF 

AMERICA v. WHITING 

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting


pre-emption”).
This case, however, is readily distinguishable from cases
like Williamson, in which state law regulates relationships
between private parties. Here, the Arizona Act directly
regulates the relationship between the Federal Govern­
ment and private parties by mandating use of a federally
created and administered resource. This case thus impli­
cates the “uniquely federal interes[t]” in managing use of a
federal resource. Boyle v. United Technologies Corp., 487
U. S. 500, 504 (1988) (internal quotation marks omitted);
see also Buckman Co. v. Plaintiffs’ Legal Comm., 531 U. S.
341, 347 (2001) (“[T]he relationship between a federal
agency and the entity it regulates is inherently federal
in character because the relationship originates from, is
governed by, and terminates according to federal law”).
Significant policy objectives motivated Congress’ deci­
sion to make use of E-Verify voluntary. In addition to
those discussed by JUSTICE BREYER, see ante, at 17–19
(dissenting opinion), I note that Congress considered the
cost of a mandatory program. In 2003, when Congress
elected to expand E-Verify to all 50 States but declined to
require its use, it cited a congressionally mandated report
concluding that the annual cost of the pilot program was
$6 million, the annual cost of a nationwide voluntary
program would be $11 million, and the annual cost of a
nationwide mandatory program would be $11.7 billion.
H. R. Rep. No. 108–304, pt. 1, p. 6 (2003); see also Insti­
tute for Survey Research, Temple Univ., and Westat, INS
Basic Pilot Evaluation: Summary Report 38 (2002) (con­
cluding that the Social Security Administration (SSA) and
the Immigration and Naturalization Service were not
“capable of enrolling and administering a program for the
hundreds of thousands of employers in any of the large
mandatory programs explored here”). A more recent re­
port prepared for the Department of Homeland Security
similarly noted the costs associated with mandatory use of

