Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion R the Court
Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.

The federal determination on which the State must rely
is provided under 8 U. S. C. §1373(c). See supra, at 6–7.
That provision requires the Federal Government to “verify
or ascertain” an individual’s “citizenship or immigration
status” in response to a state request. JUSTICE BREYER is
concerned that this information “says nothing about work
authorization.” Post, at 9 (dissenting opinion). JUSTICE
SOTOMAYOR shares that concern. Post, at 10 (dissenting
opinion). But if a §1373(c) inquiry reveals that someone is
a United States citizen, that certainly answers the ques
tion whether that individual is authorized to work. The
same would be true if the response to a §1373(c) query
disclosed that the individual was a lawful permanent
resident alien or, on the other hand, had been ordered
removed. In any event, if the information provided under
§1373(c) does not confirm that an employee is an unau
thorized alien, then the State cannot prove its case. See
Brief for Respondents 50, n. 10 (“if the information from
the federal authorities does not establish that a person is
an unauthorized alien, it means that the county attorney
cannot satisfy his burden of proof in an enforcement
action”); Tr. of Oral Arg. 47.
From this basic starting point, the Arizona law contin
ues to trace the federal law. Both the state and federal
law prohibit “knowingly” employing an unauthorized
alien. Compare 8 U. S. C. §1324a(a)(1)(A) with Ariz. Rev.
Stat. Ann. §23–212(A).8 But the state law does not stop
there in guarding against any conflict with the federal
law. The Arizona law provides that “ ‘[k]nowingly employ
an unauthorized alien’ means the actions described in 8
——————
an employer a chance to show that it did not break the state law
certainly does not place the Arizona regime in conflict with federal law.
8 State law also prohibits “intentionally” employing an unauthorized
alien, §23–212.01(A), a more severe violation of the law. The Chamber
does not suggest that this prohibition is any more problematic than the
prohibition on “knowingly” employing an unauthorized alien.

