Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

BREYER, J., dissenting

terms under which Congress created that program, Ari
zona’s mandatory state law simply ignores both the fed
eral language and the reasoning it reflects, thereby posing
an “ ‘obstacle to the accomplishment’ ” of the objectives
Congress’ statute evinces. Crosby, supra, at 373 (quoting
Hines, supra, at 67).
The majority reaches a contrary conclusion by pointing
out (1) that Congress has renewed the E-Verify program
several times, each time expanding its coverage, to the
point where it now encompasses all 50 States; (2) that the
E-Verify database has become more accurate; (3) that
the Executive Branch has itself mandated participation
for federal contractors; and (4) that the statute’s language
tells the Secretary of Homeland Security, not the States, to
maintain the program as voluntary.
The short, and, I believe, conclusive answers to these
objections are: (1) Congress has kept the language of the
statute—and the voluntary nature of the program—the
same throughout its program renewals. See 115 Stat.
2407; 117 Stat. 1944; §547, 123 Stat. 2177. And it is up to
Congress, not to Arizona or this Court, to decide when
participation in the program should cease to be voluntary.
(2) The studies and reports have repeatedly found both
(a) that the E-Verify program had achieved greater accu
racy, but (b) that problems remain. See, e.g., Social Secu
rity Report 11 (estimating that Social Security records
contain 4.8 million “discrepancies that could require the
numberholder to visit [the Social Security Administration]
. . . before employment eligibility would be confirmed”);
GAO Report 19 (estimating that, if E-Verify were made
mandatory nationwide, 164,000 newly hired workers each
year would erroneously be adjudged ineligible to work
because of name mismatches, as when the worker’s “first
or last name is incorrectly spelled in government data
bases or on identification documents”). And it is up to
Congress, not to Arizona or this Court, to determine when

