Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Opinion of the Court

case, we recognized that the “[p]ower to regulate immi
gration is unquestionably . . . a federal power.” Id., at 354.
At the same time, however, we noted that the “States
possess broad authority under their police powers to
regulate the employment relationship to protect workers
within the State,” id., at 356, that “prohibit[ing] the know
ing employment . . . of persons not entitled to lawful resi
dence in the United States, let alone to work here, is
certainly within the mainstream of [the State’s] police
power,” ibid., and that the Federal Government had “at
best” expressed “a peripheral concern with [the] employ
ment of illegal entrants” at that point in time, id., at 360.
As a result, we declined to hold that a state law assessing
civil fines for the employment of unauthorized aliens was
preempted by federal immigration law.
Ten years after De Canas, Congress enacted the Immi
gration Reform and Control Act (IRCA), 100 Stat. 3359.
IRCA makes it “unlawful for a person or other entity . . . to
hire, or to recruit or refer for a fee, for employment in the
United States an alien knowing the alien is an unauthor
ized alien.” 8 U. S. C. §1324a(a)(1)(A). IRCA defines an
“unauthorized alien” as an alien who is not “lawfully
admitted for permanent residence” or not otherwise au
thorized by the Attorney General to be employed in the
United States. §1324a(h)(3).
To facilitate compliance with this prohibition, IRCA
requires that employers review documents establishing
an employee’s eligibility for employment. §1324a(b). An
employer can confirm an employee’s authorization to work
by reviewing the employee’s United States passport, resi
dent alien card, alien registration card, or other document
approved by the Attorney General; or by reviewing a
combination of other documents such as a driver’s license
and social security card. §1324a(b)(1)(B)–(D). The em
ployer must attest under penalty of perjury on Depart
ment of Homeland Security Form I–9 that he “has verified

