Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

E-Verify. See Westat, Findings of the E-Verify® Program
Evaluation 224 (2009) (observing that the SSA estimated
that it would have to hire an additional 1,500 field staff
to handle a mandatory national program); id., at 251 (re­
commending that any expansion of E-Verify take place
gradually “to allow the Federal government adequate time
to hire and train the new staff required to run such a
program”). Permitting States to make use of E-Verify
mandatory improperly puts States in the position of mak­
ing decisions for the Federal Government that directly
affect expenditure and depletion of federal resources.10
The majority highlights the Government’s statement in
its amicus brief that “ ‘the E-Verify system can accommo­
date the increased use that the Arizona statute and exist­
ing similar laws would create.’ ” Ante, at 25 (quoting Brief
for United States as Amicus Curiae 34). But “[t]he pur­
pose of Congress is the ultimate touchstone in every
pre-emption case.” Medtronic, 518 U. S., at 494 (internal
quotation marks omitted). It matters not whether the
Executive Branch believes that the Government is now
capable of handling the burdens of a mandatory system.11
Congressional intent controls, and Congress has repeat­
edly decided to keep the E-Verify program voluntary.
Because state laws requiring use of E-Verify frustrate
the significant policy objectives underlying this decision,
——————
10 In Williamson v. Mazda Motor of America, Inc., 562 U. S. ___, ___
(2011) (slip op., at 10), we held that the Federal Government’s judg­
ment regarding the cost effectiveness of seatbelt options did not reveal
an intent “to forbid common-law tort suits in which a judge or jury
might reach a different conclusion.” The obvious distinction between
that case and this one is that Congress’ decision to keep use of E-Verify
voluntary bears directly on the costs to the Federal Government itself.
11 Notably, the Government’s brief does not state that the E-Verify
system could accommodate the increased use that would result if all 50
States enacted similar laws; it limits its statement to “the Arizona
statute and existing similar laws.” Brief for United States as Amicus
Curiae 34 (emphasis added).

