2

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF UNITED STATES OF 

AMERICA v. WHITING 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


(excepting professional licenses, and water and environ
mental permits). Congress did not intend its “licensing”
language to create so broad an exemption, for doing so
would permit States to eviscerate the federal Act’s pre
emption provision, indeed to subvert the Act itself, by
undermining Congress’ efforts (1) to protect lawful work
ers from national-origin-based discrimination and (2) to
protect lawful employers against erroneous prosecution or
punishment.
Dictionary definitions of the word “licensing” are, as the
majority points out, broad enough to include virtually any
permission that the State chooses to call a “license.” See
ante, at 10 (relying on a dictionary and the federal Admin
istrative Procedure Act). But neither dictionary defini
tions nor the use of the word “license” in an unrelated
statute can demonstrate what scope Congress intended
the word “licensing” to have as it used that word in this
federal statute. Instead, statutory context must ultimately
determine the word’s coverage. Context tells a driver that
he cannot produce a partnership certificate when a po
liceman stops the car and asks for a license. Context tells
all of us that “licensing” as used in the Act does not in
clude marriage licenses or the licensing of domestic ani
mals. And context, which includes statutory purposes,
language, and history, tells us that the federal statute’s
“licensing” language does not embrace Arizona’s overly
broad definition of that term. That is to say, ordinary
corporate charters, certificates of partnership, and the like
do not fall within the scope of the word “licensing” as used
in this federal exception. See Dolan v. Postal Service, 546
U. S. 481, 486 (2006) (statutory interpretation requires
courts to “rea[d] the whole statutory text, conside[r] the
purpose and context of the statute, and consul[t] any
precedents or authorities that inform the analysis”);
United States v. Heirs of Boisdoré, 8 How. 113, 122 (1849)
(similar).

