10

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF UNITED STATES OF 

AMERICA v. WHITING 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


of a defense when it immediately follows (1) its statement
that “the court shall consider only the federal govern
ment’s determination” when it considers “whether an
employee is an unauthorized alien” with (2) its statement
that “[t]he federal government’s determination creates a
rebuttable presumption of the employee’s lawful status.”
Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §23–212(H) (emphasis added). The
two statements sound as if they mean that a Federal
Government determination that the worker is unlawful
is conclusive against the employer, but its determination
that the worker’s employment is lawful is subject to rebut
tal by the State. Arizona tells us that the statute means
the opposite. See ante, at 16, n. 7. But the legal briefs of
Arizona’s attorney general do not bind the state courts.
And until the matter is cleared up, employers, despite I–9
checks, despite efforts to use E-Verify, will hesitate to hire
those they fear will turn out to lack the right to work in
the United States.
And that is my basic point. Either directly or through
the uncertainty that it creates, the Arizona statute will
impose additional burdens upon lawful employers and
consequently lead those employers to erect ever stronger
safeguards against the hiring of unauthorized aliens—
without counterbalancing protection against unlawful
discrimination. And by defining “licensing” so broadly, by
bringing nearly all businesses within its scope, Arizona’s
statute creates these effects statewide.
Why would Congress, after deliberately limiting ordi
nary penalties to the range of a few thousand dollars per
illegal worker, want to permit far more drastic state pen
alties that would directly and mandatorily destroy entire
businesses? Why would Congress, after carefully balanc
ing sanctions to avoid encouraging discrimination, want to
allow States to destroy that balance? Why would Con
gress, after creating detailed procedural protections for
employers, want to allow States to undermine them? Why

