Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

prosecutors and courts with no or little experience in
federal immigration law—will rest on less-than-complete
or inaccurate information, “creat[ing] enforcement risks
not present in the federal system.” Ante, at 7 (BREYER, J.,
dissenting). I can discern no reason why Congress would
have intended for state courts inexperienced in immigra­
tion matters to adjudicate, in the context of licensing
sanctions, the very same question that IRCA commits to
federal officers, ALJs, and the courts of appeals.
Equally problematic is the fact that employers charged
under a state enforcement scheme with hiring unauthor­
ized aliens are foreclosed from using I–9 forms in their
defense in the state proceedings. Like IRCA, the Arizona
Act confers an affirmative defense on employers who
comply in good faith with IRCA’s verification requirement.
See Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §§23–212(J), 23–212.01(J). As
discussed above, however, IRCA prohibits an employer
from using the I–9 form to establish that affirmative
defense under Arizona law. See 8 U. S. C. §1324a(b)(5); 8
CFR §274a.2(b)(4). Not to worry, the majority says: The
employer can establish the affirmative defense through
office policies and testimony of employees. Ante, at 18,
n. 9. But Congress made the I–9 verification system and
accompanying good-faith defense central to IRCA. See,
e.g., H. R. Rep. No. 99–682, at 60 (“[A]n effective verifica­
tion procedure, combined with an affirmative defense for
those who in good faith follow the procedure, is essential”).
Given the importance of this procedure, if Congress in fact
intended for state courts to adjudicate whether a person
had employed an unauthorized alien in connection with
licensing sanctions, why would it have prohibited that
person from using the I–9 form—“the employer’s most
effective evidence,” ante, at 9 (BREYER, J., dissenting)—in
the state-court proceeding? The question answers itself:
Congress intended no such thing.
Furthermore, given Congress’ express goal of “uni­

