(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF THE UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA ET AL. v. WHITING ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–115.

Argued December 8, 2010—Decided May 26, 2011

The Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA) makes it “unlawful
for a person or other entity . . . to hire, or to recruit or refer for a fee,
for employment in the United States an alien knowing the alien is an
unauthorized alien.” 8 U. S. C. §1324a(a)(1)(A). Employers that vio
late that prohibition may be subjected to federal civil and criminal
sanctions. IRCA also restricts the ability of States to combat em
ployment of unauthorized workers; the Act expressly preempts “any
State or local law imposing civil or criminal sanctions (other than
through licensing and similar laws) upon those who employ, or re
cruit or refer for a fee for employment, unauthorized aliens.”
§1324a(h)(2).
IRCA also requires employers to take steps to verify an employee’s
eligibility for employment. In an attempt to improve that verification
process in the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsi
bility Act (IIRIRA), Congress created E-Verify—an internet-based
system employers can use to check the work authorization status of
employees.
Against this statutory background, several States have recently
enacted laws attempting to impose sanctions for the employment of
unauthorized aliens through, among other things, “licensing and
similar laws.” Arizona is one of them. The Legal Arizona Workers
Act provides that the licenses of state employers that knowingly or
intentionally employ unauthorized aliens may be, and in certain cir
cumstances must be, suspended or revoked. That law also requires
that all Arizona employers use E-Verify.
The Chamber of Commerce of the United States and various busi
ness and civil rights organizations (collectively Chamber) filed this

