Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

regulating articles of incorporation, partnership certifi
cates, and the like is not itself a “licensing law,” it is at
the very least “similar” to a licensing law, and therefore
comfortably within the savings clause.
8 U. S. C.
§1324a(h)(2).5
The Chamber and the United States as amicus argue
that the Arizona law is not a “licensing” law because it
operates only to suspend and revoke licenses rather than
to grant them. Again, this construction of the term runs
contrary to the definition that Congress itself has codified.
See 5 U. S. C. §551(9) (“ ‘licensing’ includes agency process
respecting the grant, renewal, denial, revocation, sus
pension, annulment, withdrawal, limitation, amendment,
modification, or conditioning of a license” (emphasis
added)). It is also contrary to common sense. There is no
basis in law, fact, or logic for deeming a law that grants
licenses a licensing law, but a law that suspends or re
vokes those very licenses something else altogether.
——————
5 JUSTICE BREYER recognizes that Arizona’s definition of the word
“license” comports with dictionaries’ treatment of the term, but argues
that “license” must be read in a more restricted way so as not to include
things such as “marriage licenses” and “dog licens[es].” Post, at 2, 12
(dissenting opinion). Luckily, we need not address such fanciful hy
potheticals; Arizona limits its definition of “license” to those state per
missions issued “for the purposes of operating a business” in the
State. Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §23–211(9)(a) (West Supp. 2010).
JUSTICE BREYER’s primary concern appears to be that state permis
sions such as articles of incorporation and partnership certificates are
treated as “licensing and similar laws.” Because myriad other licenses
are required to operate a business, that concern is largely academic.
See §42–5005(A) (West 2006) (Corporations that receive “gross proceeds
of sales or gross income upon which a privilege tax is imposed . . . shall
make application to the department for a privilege license.” Such a
corporation “shall not engage or continue in business until the [corpora
tion] has obtained a privilege license.”). Suspending or revoking an
employer’s articles of incorporation will often be entirely redundant.
See §§42–5010, 5061–5076 (West 2006 and West Supp. 2010) (describ
ing when transaction privilege tax licenses are required).

