Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting

imposing sanctions); §1324a(f) (authorizing the Attorney
General to pursue injunctive relief and criminal sanctions
in federal district court). In this way, Congress ensured
that administrative orders finding violations of IRCA
would be reviewed by federal judges with experience
adjudicating immigration-related matters.
Fourth, Congress created a uniquely federal system by
which employers must verify the work authorization
status of new hires. Under this system, an employer must
attest under penalty of perjury on a form designated by
the Attorney General (the I–9 form) that it has examined
enumerated identification documents to verify that a new
hire is not an unauthorized alien. §1324a(b)(1)(A); see
also 8 CFR §274a.2; ante, at 3–4. Good-faith compliance
with this verification requirement entitles an employer to
an affirmative defense if charged with violating IRCA.
§1324a(a)(3); see also H. R. Rep. No. 99–682, at 57. Nota­
bly, however, IRCA prohibits use of the I–9 form for any
purpose other than enforcement of IRCA and various
provisions of federal criminal law. §1324a(b)(5); 8 CFR
§274a.2(b)(4). Use of the I–9 form is thus limited to fed
eral proceedings, as the majority acknowledges. See ante,
at 18, n. 9.
Finally, Congress created no mechanism for States to
access information regarding an alien’s work authoriza­
tion status for purposes of enforcing state prohibitions on
the employment of unauthorized aliens. The relevant
sections of IRCA make no provision for the sharing of
work authorization information between federal and state
authorities even though access to that information would
be critical to a State’s ability to determine whether an
employer has employed an unauthorized alien. In stark
contrast, a separate provision in the same title of IRCA
creates a verification system by which States can ascer­
tain the immigration status of aliens applying for benefits
under programs such as Medicaid and the food stamp

