4

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF UNITED STATES OF 

AMERICA v. WHITING 

Syllabus 

barring the employment of unauthorized aliens and the law prohibit
ing discrimination. There is no reason to suppose that Arizona em
ployers will choose not to do so. Pp. 15–22.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE delivered the opinion of the Court with respect
to Part III–A, concluding that Arizona’s E-Verify mandate is not im
pliedly preempted.
Arizona’s requirement that employers use E-Verify is not impliedly
preempted. The IIRIRA provision setting up E-Verify contains no
language circumscribing state action. It does, however, constrain
federal action: absent a prior violation of federal law, “the Secretary
of Homeland Security may not require any person or . . . entity” out
side the Federal Government “to participate in” E-Verify. IIRIRA,
§402(a), (e). The fact that the Federal Government may require the
use of E-Verify in only limited circumstances says nothing about
what the States may do. The Government recently argued just that
in another case and approvingly referenced Arizona’s law as an ex
ample of a permissible use of E-Verify when doing so.
Moreover, Arizona’s use of E-Verify does not conflict with the fed
eral scheme. The state law requires no more than that an employer,
after hiring an employee, “verify the employment eligibility of the
employee” through E-Verify. Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §23–214(A). And
the consequences of not using E-Verify are the same under the state
and federal law—an employer forfeits an otherwise available rebut
table presumption of compliance with the law. Pp. 23–24.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE, joined by JUSTICE SCALIA, JUSTICE KENNEDY,
and JUSTICE ALITO, concluded in Part III–B:
Arizona’s requirement that employers use E-Verify in no way ob
structs achieving the aims of the federal program. In fact, the Gov
ernment has consistently expanded and encouraged the use of EVerify, and Congress has directed that E-Verify be made available in
all 50 States. And the Government has expressly rejected the Cham
ber’s claim that the Arizona law, and those like it, will overload the
federal system. Pp. 24–25.

ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to Parts
II–B and III–B. SCALIA, KENNEDY, and ALITO, JJ., joined that opinion
in full, and THOMAS, J., joined as to Parts I, II–A, and III–A and con
curred in the judgment. BREYER, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which
GINSBURG, J., joined. SOTOMAYOR, J., filed a dissenting opinion. KAGAN,
J., took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.

