14

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF UNITED STATES OF 

AMERICA v. WHITING 

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting


Co. v. Forty-One Thirty-Six Wilcox Bldg. Corp., 302 U. S.
120, 127 (1937) (“How long and upon what terms a state­
created corporation may continue to exist is a matter
exclusively of state power”). As a result, if Congress
wanted to “ensur[e] that a full range of sanctions [was]
available to be used against businesses that employ unau­
thorized aliens,” Brief for Respondent 37, Congress had to
authorize the States and localities to impose licensing
sanctions following a federal adjudication of a violation of
IRCA.
I do not mean to suggest that the mere existence of a
comprehensive federal scheme necessarily reveals a con­
gressional intent to oust state remedies. Cf. English v.
General Elec. Co., 496 U. S. 72, 87 (1990) (“[T]he mere
existence of a federal regulatory or enforcement scheme
. . . does not by itself imply pre-emption of state reme­
dies”); New York State Dept. of Social Servs. v. Dublino,
413 U. S. 405, 415 (1973) (rejecting the argument that
“pre-emption is to be inferred merely from the comprehen­
sive character of the federal [program]”). Here, Congress
has made clear its intent to oust state civil and criminal
remedies; the sole question is the scope of the saving
clause’s exception for “licensing and similar laws.” The
comprehensive scheme established by Congress necessar­
ily informs the scope of this clause. For all the reasons
stated, the only interpretation of that clause that is consis­
tent with the rest of the statute is that it preserves the
States’ authority to impose licensing sanctions after a final
federal determination that a person has violated IRCA’s
prohibition on the knowing employment of unauthorized
aliens.
Under my construction of the saving clause, the Arizona
Act cannot escape pre-emption. The Act authorizes Ari­
zona county attorneys to commence actions charging an
employer with having employed an unauthorized alien.
Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §§23–212(D), 23–212.01(D). Arizona

