Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

BREYER, J., dissenting

accuracy rate is even worse “in states that require the use
of E-Verify for all or some of their employees.” Id., at 122.
A related provision of the state law aggravates the risk
of erroneous prosecutions. The state statute says that
in “determining whether an employee is an unauthorized
alien, the court shall consider only the federal govern
ment’s determination pursuant to 8 [U. S. C.] §1373(c).”
Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §23–212(H). But the federal provi
sion to which the state law refers, 8 U. S. C. §1373(c), says
only that the Federal Government, upon a State’s request,
shall verify a person’s “citizenship or immigration status.”
It says nothing about work authorization. See post, at 7–
10 (SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting). It says nothing about the
source of the Federal Government’s information. It im
poses no duty upon the Federal Government or anyone
else to investigate the validity of that information, which
may falsely implicate an employer 18% of the time.
So what is the employer to do? What statute gives an
employer whom the State proceeds against in state court
the right to conduct discovery against the Federal Gov
ernment? The Arizona statute, like the federal statute,
says that the employer’s use of an I–9 form provides a
defense. But there is a hitch. The federal Act says that
neither the I–9 form, nor “any information contained
in or appended to” the form, “may . . . be used for pur
poses other than for enforcement of this” federal Act.
§1324a(b)(5). So how can the employer present a defense,
say, that the Government’s information base is flawed?
The majority takes the view that the forms are not neces­
sary to receive the benefit of the affirmative defense. Ante,
at 18, n. 9. But the I–9 form would surely be the em
ployer’s most effective evidence. See also post, at 11
(SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting) (suggesting that the unavail
ability of I–9 forms to defend against state-court charges
means that Congress “intended no such” proceedings).
Nor does the Arizona statute facilitate the presentation

