2

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF UNITED STATES OF 

AMERICA v. WHITING 

Syllabus 

federal preenforcement suit against those charged with administer
ing the Arizona law, arguing that the state law’s license suspension
and revocation provisions were both expressly and impliedly pre
empted by federal immigration law, and that the mandatory use of EVerify was impliedly preempted. The District Court found that the
plain language of IRCA’s preemption clause did not invalidate the
Arizona law because the law did no more than impose licensing con
ditions on businesses operating within the State. Nor was the state
law preempted with respect to E-Verify, the court concluded, because
although Congress had made the program voluntary at the national
level, it had expressed no intent to prevent States from mandating
participation. The Ninth Circuit affirmed.

Held: The judgment is affirmed.
558 F. 3d 856, affirmed.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE delivered the opinion of the Court with respect
to Parts I and II–A, concluding that Arizona’s licensing law is not ex
pressly preempted.
Arizona’s licensing law falls well within the confines of the author
ity Congress chose to leave to the States and therefore is not ex
pressly preempted. While IRCA prohibits States from imposing “civil
or criminal sanctions” on those who employ unauthorized aliens, it
preserves state authority to impose sanctions “through licensing and
similar laws.” §1324a(h)(2). That is what the Arizona law does—it
instructs courts to suspend or revoke the business licenses of in-state
employers that employ unauthorized aliens. The definition of “li
cense” contained in the Arizona statute largely parrots the definition
of “license” that Congress codified in the Administrative Procedure
Act (APA).
The state statute also includes within its definition of “license”
documents such as articles of incorporation, certificates of partner
ship, and grants of authority to foreign companies to transact busi
ness in the State, Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §23–211(9), each of which has
clear counterparts in APA and dictionary definitions of the word “li
cense.” And even if a law regulating articles of incorporation and the
like is not itself a “licensing law,” it is at the very least “similar” to
one, and therefore comfortably within the savings clause. The
Chamber’s argument that the Arizona law is not a “licensing” law be
cause it operates only to suspend and revoke licenses rather than to
grant them is without basis in law, fact, or logic.
The Chamber contends that the savings clause should apply only to
certain types of licenses or only to license revocation following an
IRCA adjudication because Congress, when enacting IRCA, elimi
nated unauthorized worker prohibitions and associated adjudication
procedures in another federal statute. But no such limits are even

