26

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA v. WHITING
Opinion R the Court
Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.

E-Verify User Manual for Employers 4 (Sept. 2010).12
*
*
*
IRCA expressly reserves to the States the authority to
impose sanctions on employers hiring unauthorized work
ers, through licensing and similar laws. In exercising that
authority, Arizona has taken the route least likely to
cause tension with federal law. It uses the Federal Gov
ernment’s own definition of “unauthorized alien,” it relies
solely on the Federal Government’s own determination of
who is an unauthorized alien, and it requires Arizona
employers to use the Federal Government’s own system
for checking employee status. If even this gives rise to
impermissible conflicts with federal law, then there really
is no way for the State to implement licensing sanctions,
contrary to the express terms of the savings clause.
Because Arizona’s unauthorized alien employment law
fits within the confines of IRCA’s savings clause and does
not conflict with federal immigration law, the judgment of
——————
12 JUSTICE BREYER shares the Chamber’s concern about E-Verify’s
accuracy. See post, at 8, 19. Statistics from Fiscal Year 2010, however,
indicate that of the 15,640,167 E-Verify cases submitted, 98.3% were
automatically confirmed as work authorized, 0.3% were confirmed as
work authorized after contesting and resolving an initial nonconfir
mation—an avenue available to all workers—and 1.43% were not
found work authorized. E-Verify Statistics and Reports, available at
http://www.uscis.gov/portal/site/uscis/menuitem/statistics (as visited
May 23, 2011, and available in the Clerk of Court’s case file). As
JUSTICE BREYER notes, the initial mismatches (the 0.3%) are frequently
due to “ ‘incorrectly spelled [names] in government databases or on
identification documents.’ ” Post, at 19. Such a hazard is of course not
unique to E-Verify. Moreover, JUSTICE BREYER’s statistical analysis
underlying his conclusion that E-Verify queries, at least initially,
wrongly “suggest[] that an individual [i]s not lawfully employable”
“18% of the time” needs to be understood for what it is. Post, at 8. If
E-Verify initially indicated that two individuals were not found work
authorized, and later revealed that one of those determinations was
incorrect, JUSTICE BREYER would be able to exclaim that the error rate
was 50%.

