Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

BREYER, J., dissenting

not omit this matter. It answers the coexistence question
directly with the parenthetical phrase we are now consid
ering, namely, the phrase, “other than through licensing
and similar laws,” placed in the middle of the Act’s pre
emption provision. 8 U. S. C. §1324a(h)(2). That phrase
refers to agricultural labor contractors, and it says that,
in respect to those licensing schemes, dual state/federal
licensing can continue.
As of 1986, there were strong reasons for permitting
that dual system to continue in this specialized area. Dual
enforcement had proved helpful in preventing particularly
serious employment abuses. See, e.g., 128 Cong. Rec.
24090 (1982) (reflecting concerns that agricultural work
ers were “housed in hovels; . . . subjected to physical abuse
and kept in virtual slavery”). And because the contractors’
business consists of providing labor forces, their hiring of
authorized workers is closely related to their general
fitness to do business. See S. Rep. No. 202, 88th Cong.,
1st Sess., 1 (1963) (explaining that farm labor contractor
registration laws are needed to prevent “irresponsible
crew leaders” from “exploit[ing] . . . farmers”); Martin,
Good Intentions Gone Awry: IRCA and U. S. Agriculture,
534 Annals Am. Acad. Pol. & Soc. Sci. 44, 49 (1994) (de
scribing how farmers who relied on contractors risked
losing their labor forces to immigration raids). Dual en
forcement would not create a federal/state penalty dispar
ity, for federal systems as well as state systems provide for
license revocation. Experience had shown that dual en
forcement had not created any serious conflict or other
difficulty. And in light of the specialized nature and com
paratively small set of businesses subject to dual enforce
ment, to permit licensing of that set of businesses would
not seriously undermine the objectives of the Act or its
pre-emption provision.
Thus, it is not surprising that the legislative history of
the 1986 Act’s pre-emption provision says that the licens

