12

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF UNITED STATES OF 

AMERICA v. WHITING 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


virtually every permission-related state law into an
employment-related “licensing” law. The State need only
call the permission a “license” and revoke the license should
its holder hire an unauthorized alien. If what was not
previously an employment-related licensing law can be
come one simply by using it as a sanction for hiring unau
thorized aliens or simply by state definition, indeed, if the
State can call a corporate charter an employment-related
licensing law, then why not an auto licensing law
(amended to revoke the driver’s licenses of those who hire
unauthorized aliens)? Why not a dog licensing law? Or
why not “impute” a newly required license to conduct any
business to every human being in the State, withdrawing
that license should that individual hire an unauthorized
alien? See S. C. Code Ann. §41–8–20 (Supp. 2010) (provid
ing that “[a]ll private employers in South Carolina . . .
shall be imputed a South Carolina employment license,
which permits a private employer to employ a person in
this State,” but conditioning the license on the company’s
not hiring unauthorized aliens).
Such laws might prove more effective in stopping the
hiring of unauthorized aliens. But they are unlikely to do
so consistent with Congress’ other critically important
goals, in particular, Congress’ efforts to protect from dis
crimination legal workers who look or sound foreign. That
is why we should read the federal exemption’s “licensing”
laws as limited to those that involve the kind of licensing
that, in the absence of this general state statute, would
nonetheless have some significant relation to employment
or hiring practices. Otherwise we read the federal “licens
ing” exception as authorizing a State to undermine, if not
to swallow up, the federal pre-emption rule.
III
I would therefore read the words “licensing and similar
laws” as covering state licensing systems applicable pri

