12

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF UNITED STATES OF 

AMERICA v. WHITING 

Opinion of the Court 


The Chamber also submits that the manner in which
Congress amended a related statute when enacting IRCA
supports a narrow interpretation of the savings clause.
The Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection
Act (AWPA), 29 U. S. C. §1801 et seq., requires employers
to secure a registration certificate from the Department
of Labor before engaging in any “farm labor contracting
activity.” §1811(a). Prior to IRCA, AWPA had contained
its own prohibition on hiring unauthorized workers, with
accompanying adjudication procedures. See §1813(a);
§1816(a) (1982 ed.) (repealed by IRCA, 100 Stat. 3372);
§1851(a)–(b) (1982 ed.) (amended by IRCA, 100 Stat.
3372). When Congress enacted IRCA, it repealed AWPA’s
separate unauthorized worker prohibition and eliminated
the associated adjudication process. Under the current
state of the law, an AWPA certification may be denied
based on a prior IRCA violation. §1813(a)(6) (2006 ed.).
And once obtained, that certification can be revoked be
cause of the employment of an unauthorized alien only
following a finding of an IRCA violation. Ibid.
The Chamber asserts that IRCA’s amendment of AWPA
shows that Congress meant to allow state licensing sanc
tions only after a federal IRCA adjudication, just as ad
verse action under AWPA can now be taken only through
IRCA’s procedures. But the text of IRCA’s savings clause
says nothing about state licensing sanctions being contin
gent on prior federal adjudication, or indeed about state
licensing processes at all. The simple fact that federal law
creates procedures for federal investigations and adjudica
tions culminating in federal civil or criminal sanctions
does not indicate that Congress intended to prevent States
from establishing their own procedures for imposing
their own sanctions through licensing. Were AWPA not
amended to conform with IRCA, two different federal
agencies would be responsible for administering two dif
ferent unauthorized alien employment laws. The conform

