Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion R the Court
Opinion of ofOBERTS, C. J.

IRCA expressly preempts some state powers dealing
with the employment of unauthorized aliens and it ex
pressly preserves others. We hold that Arizona’s licensing
law falls well within the confines of the authority Con
gress chose to leave to the States and therefore is not
expressly preempted.
B
As an alternative to its express preemption argument,
the Chamber contends that Arizona’s law is impliedly
preempted because it conflicts with federal law. At its
broadest level, the Chamber’s argument is that Congress
“intended the federal system to be exclusive,” and that any
state system therefore necessarily conflicts with federal
law. Brief for Petitioners 39. But Arizona’s procedures
simply implement the sanctions that Congress expressly
allowed Arizona to pursue through licensing laws. Given
that Congress specifically preserved such authority for the
States, it stands to reason that Congress did not intend to
prevent the States from using appropriate tools to exercise
——————
Congress had intended such limited exceptions to its prohibition on
state sanctions, it did not simply say so, instead of excepting “licensing
and similar laws” generally?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR takes a different tack. Invoking arguments that
resemble those found in our implied preemption cases, she concludes
that the Arizona law “falls outside” the savings clause and is expressly
preempted because it allows “state courts to determine whether a
person has employed an unauthorized alien.” Post, at 2 (dissenting
opinion). While JUSTICE BREYER would add language to the statute
narrowly limiting the phrase “licensing and similar laws” to specific
types of licenses, JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR creates an entirely new statutory
requirement: She would allow States to impose sanctions through
“licensing and similar laws” only after a federal adjudication. Such a
requirement is found nowhere in the text, and JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR does
not even attempt to link it to a specific textual provision.
It should not be surprising that the two dissents have sharply differ
ent views on how to read the statute. That is the sort of thing that can
happen when statutory analysis is so untethered from the text.

