Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

BREYER, J., dissenting

By making mandatory that which federal law seeks to
make voluntary, the state provision stands as a significant
“ ‘obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full
purposes and objectives of Congress,’ ” Crosby, 530 U. S.,
at 373 (quoting Hines, 312 U. S., at 67). And it is conse
quently pre-empted.
The federal statute itself makes clear that participation
in the E-Verify program is voluntary. The statute’s rele
vant section bears the title “Voluntary Election to Partici
pate in a Pilot Program.” IIRIRA §402, note following 8
U. S. C. §1324a, p. 331. A subsection bears the further
title, “Voluntary Election.” §402(a). And within that
subsection, the statute says that employers “may elect to
participate.” (Emphasis added.) The statute elsewhere
requires the Secretary of Homeland Security to “widely
publicize . . . the voluntary nature” of the program.
§402(d)(2); see also §402(d)(3)(A) (requiring the designa
tion of local officials to advertise the “voluntary nature” of
the program). It adds that employers may “terminate”
their “election” to participate by following certain proce
dures. §402(c)(3). And it tells the Secretary of Homeland
Security (as an earlier version told the Attorney General)
that she “may not require any person or other entity to
participate.” §402(a); see also §402(e) (creating exceptions,
none of which is applicable here, that require federal
employers and certain others to participate in E-Verify or
another pilot program).
Congress had strong reasons for insisting on the volun
tary nature of the program. E-Verify was conceived as,
and remains, a pilot program. Its database consists of
tens of millions of Social Security and immigration records
kept by the Federal Government. These records are prone
to error. See, e.g., Office of the Inspector General, Social
Security Administration, Congressional Response Report:
Accuracy of the Social Security Administration’s Nu
mident File 12 (2006) (hereinafter Social Security Report)

