Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

13

BREYER, J., dissenting

marily to the licensing of firms in the business of recruit
ing or referring workers for employment, such as the state
agricultural labor contractor licensing schemes in exis
tence when the federal Act was created. This reading is
consistent with the provision’s history and language, and
it minimizes the risk of harm of the kind just described.
The Act’s history supports this interpretation. Ever
since 1964, the Federal Government has administered
statutes that create a federal licensing scheme for agricul
tural labor contractors, firms that specialize in recruiting
agricultural workers and referring them to farmers for a
fee. Farm Labor Contractor Registration Act of 1963
(FLCRA), 78 Stat. 920; Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural
Worker Protection Act (AWPA), 96 Stat. 2583. The stat
utes require agricultural labor contractors to register with
the federal Secretary of Labor, to obtain a registration
certificate (in effect a license), and to require the contrac
tor’s employees to carry that certificate with them when
engaging in agricultural labor contracting activities.
AWPA §101; FLCRA §4. The statutes list a host of forbid
den activities, one of which (prior to 1986) was hiring
unauthorized aliens. See AWPA §§103, 106; FLCRA §5(b).
Prior to 1986, if the federal Labor Department believed
a firm had violated these substantive provisions, it could
institute administrative proceedings within the Labor
Department. And if the Secretary found the labor con
tracting firm had violated the provisions, the Secretary
could impose monetary penalties or withdraw the firm’s
registration. AWPA §§103, 503; FLCRA §§5(b), 9.
Most important, and unlike the 1986 Act before us, the
earlier agricultural labor contracting statutes did not pre­
empt similar state laws. To the contrary, the earlier Acts
were “intended to supplement State law” and did not
“excuse any person from compliance with appropriate
State law and regulation.” AWPA §521; see FLCRA §12.
By 1986, nearly a dozen States had developed state licens

