10

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF UNITED STATES OF 

AMERICA v. WHITING 

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting


ing whether an employee is an unauthorized alien,” e.g.,
§23–212(H).7 Putting aside the question whether §1373(c)
actually provides access to work authorization informa­
tion, §1373(c) did not exist when IRCA was enacted in
1986. See supra, at 9. Arizona has not identified any
avenue by which States could have accessed work authori­
zation information in the first decade of IRCA’s existence.
The absence of any such avenue at the time of IRCA’s
enactment speaks volumes as to how Congress would have
understood the saving clause to operate: If States had no
access to information regarding the work authorization
status of aliens, how could state courts have accurately
adjudicated the question whether an employer had em­
ployed an unauthorized alien?
The Arizona Act’s reliance on §1373(c) highlights the
anomalies inherent in state schemes that purport to adju­
dicate whether an employee is an authorized alien. Even
when Arizona prosecutors obtain information regarding
an alien’s immigration status pursuant to §1373(c), the
prosecutors and state court will have to determine the
significance of that information to an alien’s work authori
zation status, which will often require deciding technical questions of immigration law. See, e.g., 8 CFR
§§274a.12(a)–(c) (dividing 62 different classes of aliens
into those authorized for employment incident to immigra­
tion status, those authorized for employment with a spe­
cific employer incident to immigration status, and those
who must apply for work authorization). And, as dis­
cussed above, that information may not shed light at all on
an alien’s work authorization status, which is oftentimes
distinct from immigration status. See supra, at 8, and
n. 5. As a result, in many cases state decisions—made by
——————
7 However, the “federal government’s determination creates [only] a
rebuttable presumption of the employee’s lawful status.” E.g., §23–
212(H).

