18

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF UNITED STATES OF 

AMERICA v. WHITING 

BREYER, J., dissenting 


(estimating that 3.3 million naturalized citizens are mis
classified in a Social Security database used by E-Verify);
GAO, Employment Verification: Federal Agencies Have
Taken Steps to Improve E-Verify, but Significant Chal
lenges Remain 16 (GAO–11–146, 2010) (hereinafter GAO
Report) (noting that “erroneous [nonconfirmations] related
to name inconsistencies . . . remain an issue” that “can
create the appearance of discrimination because of their
disparate impact on certain cultural groups”). And mak
ing the program mandatory would have been hugely ex
pensive. See post, at 16 (SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting).
The E-Verify program is still a pilot program, as a mat
ter of statute and practice. See IIRIRA §401; Letter from
H. Couch to R. Stana (Dec. 8, 2010) (discussing aspects of
E-Verify that have yet to be implemented). The effects of
the program’s efforts to take account of, and correct for,
potential errors remain uncertain. Congress could decide
that, based on the results of the pilot, E-Verify should
become a mandatory program. But it has not yet made
that determination. And in making that decision, it will
have to face a number of questions: Will workers receiving
tentative negative verdicts understand the possibility of
administrative challenge? Will they make the effort to
invoke that process, say traveling from a farm to an urban
Social Security office? Will employers prove willing to
undergo the financial burden of supporting a worker who
might lose the challenge? Will employers hesitate to train
those workers during the time they bring their challenges?
Will employers simply hesitate to hire workers who might
receive an initial negative verdict—more likely those who
look or sound foreign? Or will they find ways to dismiss
those workers? These and other unanswered questions
convinced Congress to make E-Verify a pilot program, to
commission continuous study and evaluation, and to insist
that participation be voluntary.
In co-opting a federal program and changing the key

