8

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF UNITED STATES OF 

AMERICA v. WHITING 

SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting


program. See IRCA §121(a)(1)(C), 42 U. S. C. §1320b–
7(d)(3). The existence of a verification system in one
provision of IRCA, coupled with its absence in the provi­
sion governing employment of unauthorized aliens, sug­
gests strongly that Congress did not contemplate any role
for the States in adjudicating questions regarding em­
ployment of unauthorized aliens. Cf. Bates v. United
States, 522 U. S. 23, 29–30 (1997) (“Where Congress in­
cludes particular language in one section of a statute but
omits it in another section of the same Act, it is generally
presumed that Congress acts intentionally and purposely
in the disparate inclusion or exclusion” (internal quotation
marks and brackets omitted)).
In an attempt to show that Congress intended for the
Federal Government to share immigration-related in­
formation with the States, Arizona points to a federal
statute, 8 U. S. C. §1373(c), requiring the Government to
respond to certain inquiries from state agencies. Section
1373(c), however, merely requires the Government to
respond to inquiries from state agencies “seeking to verify
or ascertain the citizenship or immigration status of any
individual within the jurisdiction of the agency.” It does
not require the provision of information regarding an
alien’s work authorization status, which is not necessarily synonymous with immigration status. See 8 CFR
§274a.12(c) (identifying categories of legal aliens “who
must apply for employment authorization”).5 Arizona has
not identified any federal statute or regulation requiring
the Federal Government to provide information regarding
an alien’s work authorization status to a State.6 More
——————
5 For example, spouses and minor children of persons working in the
United States as exchange visitors must apply for employment authori­
zation even though they have lawful immigration status as dependents
of the exchange visitor. See 8 CFR §274a.12(c)(5).
6 In its capacity as an employer, a State may be able to access in­
formation regarding the work authorization status of its employees

