Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

BREYER, J., dissenting

to prevent discriminatory practices, there is evidence that
four years after it had become law, discrimination was a
serious problem. In 1990, the General Accounting Office
identified “widespread discrimination . . . as a result of”
the Act. Report to the Congress, Immigration Reform:
Employer Sanctions and the Question of Discrimination 3,
37, 80. Sixteen percent of employers in Los Angeles ad
mitted that they applied the I–9 requirement “only to
foreign-looking or foreign-sounding persons,” and 22 per
cent of Texas employers reported that they “began a prac
tice to (1) hire only persons born in the United States or
(2) not hire persons with temporary work eligibility docu
ments” because of the Act. Id., at 41–43. If even the
federal Act (with its carefully balanced penalties) can
result in some employers discriminating, how will employ
ers behave when erring on the side of discrimination leads
only to relatively small fines, while erring on the side of
hiring unauthorized workers leads to the “business death
penalty”?
Second, Arizona’s law subjects lawful employers to in
creased burdens and risks of erroneous prosecution. In
addition to the Arizona law’s severely burdensome sanc
tions, the law’s procedures create enforcement risks not
present in the federal system. The federal Act creates one
centralized enforcement scheme, run by officials versed in
immigration law and with access to the relevant federal
documents. The upshot is an increased likelihood that
federal officials (or the employer) will discover whether
adverse information flows from an error-prone source and
that they will proceed accordingly, thereby diminishing
the likelihood that burdensome proceedings and liability
reflect documentary mistakes.
Contrast the enforcement system that Arizona’s statute
creates. Any citizen of the State can complain (anony
mously or otherwise) to the state attorney general (or any
county attorney), who then “shall investigate,” Ariz. Rev.

