Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
remotely discernible in the statutory text.
The Chamber’s reliance on IRCA’s legislative history to bolster its
textual and structural arguments is unavailing given the Court’s
conclusion that Arizona’s law falls within the plain text of the savings
clause. Pp. 9–15.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE, joined by JUSTICE SCALIA, JUSTICE KENNEDY,
and JUSTICE ALITO, concluded in Part II–B:
The Arizona licensing law is not impliedly preempted by federal
law. At its broadest, the Chamber’s argument is that Congress in
tended the federal system to be exclusive. But Arizona’s procedures
simply implement the sanctions that Congress expressly allowed the
States to pursue through licensing laws. Given that Congress spe
cifically preserved such authority for the States, it stands to reason
that Congress did not intend to prevent the States from using appro
priate tools to exercise that authority.
And here Arizona’s law closely tracks IRCA’s provisions in all ma
terial respects. For example, it adopts the federal definition of who
qualifies as an “unauthorized alien,” compare 8 U. S. C. §1324a(h)(3)
with Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §23–211(11); provides that state investiga
tors must verify the work authorization of an allegedly unauthorized
alien with the Federal Government, making no independent deter
mination of the matter, §23–212(B); and requires a state court to
“consider only the federal government’s determination,” §23–212(H).
The Chamber’s more general contention that the Arizona law is
preempted because it upsets the balance that Congress sought to
strike in IRCA also fails. The cases on which the Chamber relies in
making this argument all involve uniquely federal areas of interest,
see, e.g., Buckman Co. v. Plaintiffs’ Legal Comm., 531 U. S. 341.
Regulating in-state businesses through licensing laws is not such an
area. And those cases all concern state actions that directly inter
fered with the operation of a federal program, see, e.g., id., at 351.
There is no similar interference here.
The Chamber asserts that employers will err on the side of dis
crimination rather than risk the “ ‘business death penalty’ ” by “hir
ing unauthorized workers.” That is not the choice. License termina
tion is not an available sanction for merely hiring unauthorized
workers, but is triggered only by far more egregious violations. And
because the Arizona law covers only knowing or intentional viola
tions, an employer acting in good faith need not fear the law’s sanc
tions. Moreover, federal and state antidiscrimination laws protect
against employment discrimination and provide employers with a
strong incentive not to discriminate. Employers also enjoy safe har
bors from liability when using E-Verify as required by the Arizona
law. The most rational path for employers is to obey both the law

