10

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
Opinion of the Court

nal. The prohibition applies, of course, when the subse­
quent interrogation pertains to a different crime,
Roberson, supra, when it is conducted by a different law
enforcement authority, Minnick, 498 U. S. 146, and even
when the suspect has met with an attorney after the first
interrogation, ibid. And it not only prevents questioning
ex ante; it would render invalid ex post, confessions invited
and obtained from suspects who (unbeknownst to the
interrogators) have acquired Edwards immunity previ­
ously in connection with any offense in any jurisdiction.5
In a country that harbors a large number of repeat offend­
ers,6 this consequence is disastrous.
We conclude that such an extension of Edwards is not
justified; we have opened its “protective umbrella,” Solem,
465 U. S., at 644, n. 4, far enough. The protections offered
by Miranda, which we have deemed sufficient to ensure
that the police respect the suspect’s desire to have an
attorney present the first time police interrogate him,
adequately ensure that result when a suspect who initially
requested counsel is reinterrogated after a break in cus­
——————
5 This assumes that Roberson’s extension of Edwards to subsequent
interrogation for a different crime, and Minnick’s extension of Edwards
to subsequent interrogation by a different law enforcement agency
would apply even when the place of custody and the identity of the
custodial agency are not the same (as they were in Roberson and
Minnick) as those of the original interrogation. That assumption would
seem reasonable if the Edwards-suspending effect of a termination of
custody is rejected. Reinterrogation in different custody or by a differ­
ent interrogating agency would seem, if anything, less likely than
termination of custody to reduce coercive pressures. At the original
site, and with respect to the original interrogating agency, the suspect
has already experienced cessation of interrogation when he demands
counsel—which he may have no reason to expect elsewhere.
6 According to a recent study, 67.5% of prisoners released from 15
States in 1994 were rearrested within three years. See Dept. of Justice,
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Special Report, Recidivism of Prisoners
Released in 1994 (NCJ 193427, 2002).

