6

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

custody may make matters worse 9 “[w]hen a suspect
understands his (expressed) wishes to have been ignored”
and thus “may well see further objection as futile and
confession (true or not) as the only way to end his interro­
gation.” Davis, 512 U. S., at 472–473 (Souter, J., concur­
ring in judgment).10
The Court ignores these understandings from the Ed
wards line of cases and instead speculates that if a suspect
is reinterrogated and eventually talks, it must be that
“further deliberation in familiar surroundings has caused
him to believe (rightly or wrongly) that cooperating with
the investigation is in his interest.” Ante, at 9. But it is
——————
serted his right to an attorney, courts must presume he does “not feel
sufficiently comfortable with the pressures of custodial interrogation to
answer questions without an attorney. This discomfort is precisely the
state of mind that Edwards presumes to persist . . . .” 486 U. S., at 684.
We held in Roberson that just because different police come to speak
about a different investigation, that presumption does not change:
“[T]here is no reason to assume that a suspect’s state of mind is in any
way investigation-specific.” Ibid. Nor is there any reason to believe
that it is arrest specific.
9 The compulsion is heightened by the fact that “[t]he uncertainty of
fate that being released from custody and then reapprehended entails
is, in some circumstances, more coercive than continual custody.”
Strauss, Reinterrogation, 22 Hastings Const. L. Q. 359, 390 (1995).
10 Not only is this a likely effect of reinterrogation, but police may use
this effect to their advantage. Indeed, the Court’s rule creates a
strange incentive to delay formal proceedings, in order to gain addi­
tional information by way of interrogation after the time limit lapses.
The justification for Fifth Amendment rules “must be consistent with
. . . practical realities,” Roberson, 486 U. S., at 688 (KENNEDY, J.,
dissenting), and the reality is that police may operate within the
confines of the Fifth Amendment in order to extract as many confes­
sions as possible, see Leo & White, Adapting to Miranda: Modern
Interrogators’ Strategies for Dealing with the Obstacles Posed by
Miranda, 84 Minn. L. Rev. 397 (1999). With a time limit as short as 14
days, police who hope that they can eventually extract a confession may
feel comfortable releasing a suspect for a short period of time. The
resulting delay will only increase the compelling pressures on the
suspect.

