Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

not apparent why that is the case. The answer, we are
told, is that once a suspect has been out of Miranda cus­
tody for 14 days, “[h]e has likely been able to seek advice
from an attorney, family members, and friends.” Ante, at
8. This speculation, however, is overconfident and only
questionably relevant. As a factual matter, we do not
know whether the defendant has been able to seek advice:
First of all, suspects are told that if they cannot afford a
lawyer, one will be provided for them. Yet under the
majority’s rule, an indigent suspect who took the police at
their word when he asked for a lawyer will nonetheless be
assumed to have “been able to seek advice from an attor­
ney.” Second, even suspects who are not indigent cannot
necessarily access legal advice (or social advice as the
Court presumes) within 14 days. Third, suspects may not
realize that they need to seek advice from an attorney.
Unless police warn suspects that the interrogation will
resume in 14 days, why contact a lawyer? When a suspect
is let go, he may assume that the police were satisfied. In
any event, it is not apparent why interim advice matters.11
In Minnick v. Mississippi, 498 U. S. 146, 153 (1990), we
held that it is not sufficient that a detainee happened to
speak at some point with a lawyer. See ibid. (noting that
“consultation with an attorney” does not prevent “persis­
tent attempts by officials to persuade [a suspect] to waive
his rights” or shield against the “coercive pressures that
accompany custody”). If the actual interim advice of an
attorney is not sufficient, the hypothetical, interim advice
of “an attorney, family members, and friends,” ante, at 8,
is not enough.
——————
11 It is important to distinguish this from the point that I make above
about indigent suspects. If the police promise to provide a lawyer and
never do so, it sends a message to the suspect that the police have lied
and that the rights read to him are hollow. But the mere fact that a
suspect consulted a lawyer does not itself reduce the compulsion when
police reinterrogate him.

