2

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
Syllabus
serted Miranda rights,” Michigan v. Harvey, 494 U. S. 344, 350. It is
easy to believe that a suspect’s later waiver was coerced or badgered
when he has been held in uninterrupted Miranda custody since his
first refusal to waive. He remains cut off from his normal life and
isolated in a “police-dominated atmosphere,” Miranda v. Arizona, 384
U. S. 436, 456, where his captors “appear to control [his] fate,” Illi
nois v. Perkins, 496 U. S. 292, 297. But where a suspect has been re
leased from custody and returned to his normal life for some time be
fore the later attempted interrogation, there is little reason to think
that his change of heart has been coerced. Because the Edwards pre
sumption has been established by opinion of this Court, it is appro
priate for this Court to specify the period of release from custody that
will terminate its application. See County of Riverside v. McLaugh
lin, 500 U. S. 44. The Court concludes that the appropriate period is
14 days, which provides ample time for the suspect to get reaccli
mated to his normal life, consult with friends and counsel, and shake
off any residual coercive effects of prior custody. Pp. 4–13.
(b) Shatzer’s release back into the general prison population consti
tutes a break in Miranda custody. Lawful imprisonment imposed
upon conviction does not create the coercive pressures produced by
investigative custody that justify Edwards. When previously incar
cerated suspects are released back into the general prison population,
they return to their accustomed surroundings and daily routine—
they regain the degree of control they had over their lives before the
attempted interrogation. Their continued detention is relatively dis
connected from their prior unwillingness to cooperate in an investiga
tion. The “inherently compelling pressures” of custodial interrogation
ended when Shatzer returned to his normal life. Pp. 13–16.

405 Md. 585, 954 A. 2d 1118, reversed and remanded.
SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, GINSBURG, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined, and in which THOMAS, J., joined as to Part III. THOMAS, J., filed
an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment. STEVENS, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment.

