2

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

insufficiently sensitive to the concerns that motivated the
Edwards line of cases.
I
The most troubling aspect of the Court’s time-based rule
is that it disregards the compulsion caused by a second (or
third, or fourth) interrogation of an indigent suspect who
was told that if he requests a lawyer, one will be provided
for him. When police tell an indigent suspect that he has
the right to an attorney, that he is not required to speak
without an attorney present, and that an attorney will be
provided to him at no cost before questioning, the police
have made a significant promise. If they cease question­
ing and then reinterrogate the suspect 14 days later with­
out providing him with a lawyer, the suspect is likely to
feel that the police lied to him and that he really does not
have any right to a lawyer.2
——————
Fourteenth Amendments were violated by the use of his confession
obtained by police-instigated interrogation—without counsel present—
after he requested an attorney”); Oregon v. Bradshaw, 462 U. S. 1039,
1043 (1983) (plurality opinion) (“[The] subsequent incriminating
statements made without [an] attorney present violated the rights
secured to the defendant by the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to
the United States Constitution”); Miranda, 384 U. S., at 458 (examin­
ing the “history and precedent underlying the Self-Incrimination
Clause to determine its applicability in this situation”).
2 The Court states that this argument rests on a “fallacy” because “we
are not talking about ‘reinterrogating’ the suspect; we are talking about
asking his permission to be interrogated.” Ante, at 16 (emphasis
deleted). Because, however, a suspect always has the right to remain
silent, this is a distinction without a difference: Any time that the
police interrogate or reinterrogate, and read a suspect his Miranda
rights, the suspect may decline to speak. And if this is a “fallacy,” it is
the same “fallacy” upon which this Court has relied in the Edwards line
of cases that held that police may not continue to interrogate a suspect
who has requested a lawyer: Police may not continue to ask such a
suspect whether they may interrogate him until that suspect has a
lawyer present. The Court’s apparent belief that this is a “fallacy” only
underscores my concern that its analysis is insufficiently sensitive to

