Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

concurrence argues will often be the case, post, at 5, a
break in custody does not change the suspect’s mind, he
need only say so.
The concurrence also accuses the Court of “ignor[ing]
that when a suspect asks for counsel, until his request is
answered, there are still the same ‘inherently compelling’
pressures of custodial interrogation on which the Miranda
line of cases is based.” Post, at 4. We do not ignore these
pressures; nor do we suggest that they disappear when
custody is recommenced after a break, see post, at 5. But
if those pressures are merely “the same” as before, then
Miranda provides sufficient protection—as it did before.
The Edwards presumption of involuntariness is justified
only in circumstances where the coercive pressures have
increased so much that suspects’ waivers of Miranda
rights are likely to be involuntary most of the time. Con­
trary to the concurrence’s suggestion, post, at 3, it is only
in those narrow circumstances—when custody is unbro­
ken—that the Court has concluded a “fresh se[t] of
Miranda warnings” is not sufficient. See Roberson, 486
U. S., at 686.
In the last analysis, it turns out that the concurrence
accepts our principal points. It agrees that Edwards
prophylaxis is not perpetual; it agrees that a break in
custody reduces the inherently compelling pressure upon
which Edwards was based; it agrees that Shatzer’s release
back into the general prison population constituted a
break in custody; and it agrees that in this case the break
was long enough to render Edwards inapplicable. Post, at
10–12. We differ in two respects: Instead of terminating
Edwards protection when the custodial pressures that
were the basis for that protection dissipate, the concur­
rence would terminate it when the suspect would no
longer “feel that he has ‘been denied the counsel he has
clearly requested,’ ” post, at 11. This is entirely unrelated
to the rationale of Edwards. If confidence in the police’s

