8

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
Opinion of the Court

morning, two of the officer’s colleagues reinterrogated
Edwards at the jail. Id., at 479. Roberson was arrested
“at the scene of a just-completed burglary” and interro­
gated there until he requested a lawyer. Roberson, 486
U. S., at 678. A different officer interrogated him three
days later while he “was still in custody pursuant to the
arrest.” Ibid. Minnick was arrested by local police and
taken to the San Diego jail, where two FBI agents interro­
gated him the next morning until he requested counsel.
Minnick, 498 U. S., at 148–149. Two days later a Missis­
sippi Deputy Sheriff reinterrogated him at the jail. Id., at
149. None of these suspects regained a sense of control or
normalcy after they were initially taken into custody for
the crime under investigation.
When, unlike what happened in these three cases, a
suspect has been released from his pretrial custody and
has returned to his normal life for some time before the
later attempted interrogation, there is little reason to
think that his change of heart regarding interrogation
without counsel has been coerced. He has no longer been
isolated. He has likely been able to seek advice from an
attorney, family members, and friends.3 And he knows
from his earlier experience that he need only demand
counsel to bring the interrogation to a halt; and that in­
vestigative custody does not last indefinitely. In these
circumstances, it is far fetched to think that a police offi­
cer’s asking the suspect whether he would like to waive
his Miranda rights will any more “wear down the ac­
——————
3 JUSTICE

STEVENS points out, post, at 7 (opinion concurring in judg­
ment), that in Minnick, actual pre-reinterrogation consultation with an
attorney during continued custody did not suffice to avoid application of
Edwards. That does not mean that the ability to consult freely with
attorneys and others does not reduce the level of coercion at all, or that
it is “only questionably relevant,” post, at 7, to whether termination of
custody reduces the coercive pressure that is the basis for Edwards’
super-prophylactic rule.

