Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

tive power. But certain things change over time. An
indigent suspect who took police at their word that they
would provide an attorney probably will feel that he has
“been denied the counsel he has clearly requested,”
Roberson, 486 U. S., at 686, when police begin to question
him, without a lawyer, only 14 days later.15 But, when a
suspect has been left alone for a significant period of time,
he is not as likely to draw such conclusions when the
police interrogate him again.16 It is concededly “impossi­
ble to determine with precision” where to draw such a line.
Barker v. Wingo, 407 U. S. 514, 521 (1972). In the case
before us, however, the suspect was returned to the gen­
eral prison population for 2½ years. I am convinced that
——————
15 The Court responds that “[i]f confidence in the police’s promise to
provide counsel were the touchstone, Edwards would not have applied
in Minnick, where the suspect in continuing custody actually met with
appointed counsel.” Ante, at 17–18. But my view is not that “confi­
dence in the police’s promise to provide counsel” is “the touchtone.”
Ante, at 17. Rather, my view is that although an appropriate break in
custody will mitigate many of the reasons that custodial reinterrogation
of a suspect who requested counsel is inherently compelling, it will not
mitigate the effect of an indigent detainee believing that he has “been
denied the counsel he has clearly requested,” Roberson, 486 U. S., at
686. If police tell an indigent suspect that he is not required to speak
without an attorney, and that they will provide him with an attorney,
and that suspect asserts his right to an attorney, but police nonetheless
do not provide an attorney and reinterrogate him (even if there was a
break in custody between the interrogations), the indigent suspect is
likely to feel that the police lied to him or are ignoring his rights. This
view is not in tension with Minnick. Minnick holds only that consulta­
tion with an attorney between interrogations is not sufficient to end the
Edwards presumption and therefore that when there has been no break
in custody, “counsel’s presence at interrogation,” 498 U. S., at 152, is
necessary to address the compulsion with which the Edwards line of
cases is concerned.
16 I do not doubt that some of the compulsion caused by reinterrogat­
ing an indigent suspect without providing a lawyer may survive even a
break in custody and a very long passage of time. The relevant point
here is more limited: A long break in time, far longer than 14 days,
diminishes, rather than eliminates, that compulsion.

