12

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
Opinion of the Court

back into custody for reinterrogation. But once the sus­
pect has been out of custody long enough (14 days) to
eliminate its coercive effect, there will be nothing to gain
by such gamesmanship—nothing, that is, except the en­
tirely appropriate gain of being able to interrogate a sus­
pect who has made a valid waiver of his Miranda rights.7
Shatzer argues that ending the Edwards protections at
a break in custody will undermine Edwards’ purpose to
conserve judicial resources. To be sure, we have said that
“[t]he merit of the Edwards decision lies in the clarity of
its command and the certainty of its application.”
Minnick, 498 U. S., at 151. But clarity and certainty are
not goals in themselves. They are valuable only when
they reasonably further the achievement of some substan­
tive end—here, the exclusion of compelled confessions.
Confessions obtained after a 2-week break in custody and
a waiver of Miranda rights are most unlikely to be com­
pelled, and hence are unreasonably excluded. In any case,
a break-in-custody exception will dim only marginally, if
at all, the bright-line nature of Edwards. In every case
involving Edwards, the courts must determine whether
the suspect was in custody when he requested counsel and
when he later made the statements he seeks to suppress.
Now, in cases where there is an alleged break in custody,
they simply have to repeat the inquiry for the time be­
tween the initial invocation and reinterrogation. In most
cases that determination will be easy. And when it is
——————
7 A defendant who experiences a 14-day break in custody after invok­
ing the Miranda right to counsel is not left without protection. Ed
wards establishes a presumption that a suspect’s waiver of Miranda
rights is involuntary. See Arizona v. Roberson, 486 U. S. 675, 681
(1988). Even without this “second layer of prophylaxis,” McNeil v.
Wisconsin, 501 U. S. 171, 176 (1991), a defendant is still free to claim
the prophylactic protection of Miranda—arguing that his waiver of
Miranda rights was in fact involuntary under Johnson v. Zerbst, 304
U. S. 458 (1938). See Miranda, 384 U. S., at 475.

