Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

When officers informed Shatzer of his rights during the
first interrogation, they presumably informed him that if
he requested an attorney, one would be appointed for him
before he was asked any further questions. But if an
indigent suspect requests a lawyer, “any further interro­
gation” (even 14 days later) “without counsel having been
provided will surely exacerbate whatever compulsion to
speak the suspect may be feeling.” Roberson, 486 U. S., at
686. When police have not honored an earlier commit­
ment to provide a detainee with a lawyer, the detainee
likely will “understan[d] his (expressed) wishes to have
been ignored” and “may well see further objection as futile
and confession (true or not) as the only way to end his
interrogation.” Davis v. United States, 512 U. S. 452, 472–
473 (1994) (Souter, J., concurring in judgment). Cf. Coo
per v. Dupnik, 963 F. 2d 1220, 1225 (CA9 1992) (en banc)
(describing an elaborate police task force plan to ignore a
suspect’s requests for counsel, on the theory that such
would induce hopelessness and thereby elicit an admis­
sion). Simply giving a “fresh se[t] of Miranda warnings”
will not “ ‘reassure’ a suspect who has been denied the
counsel he has clearly requested that his rights have
remained untrammeled.” Roberson, 486 U. S., at 686.
II
The Court never explains why its rule cannot depend on,
in addition to a break in custody and passage of time, a
concrete event or state of affairs, such as the police having
honored their commitment to provide counsel. Instead,
the Court simply decides to create a time-based rule, and
in so doing, disregards much of the analysis upon which
Edwards and subsequent decisions were based. “[T]he
assertion of the right to counsel” “[i]s a significant event.”3
——————
the concerns that motivated the Edwards line of cases.
3 Indeed, a lawyer has a “unique ability to protect the Fifth Amend­
ment rights of a client undergoing custodial interrogation.” Fare v.

