Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

This ipse dixit does not explain why extending the Ed
wards presumption for 14 days following a break in cus
tody—as opposed to 0, 10, or 100 days—provides the “clos
est possible fit” with the Self-Incrimination Clause,
Patane, supra, at 640–641; see ante, at 11 (merely stating
that “[i]t seems to us that” the appropriate “period is 14
days”). Nor does it explain how the benefits of a prophy
lactic 14-day rule (either on its own terms or compared
with other possible rules) “outweigh its costs” (which
would include the loss of law enforcement information as
well as the exclusion of confessions that are in fact volun
tary). Ante, at 6 (citing Montejo, supra, at __ (slip op., at
14)).
To be sure, the Court’s rule has the benefit of providing
a bright line. Ante, at 12. But bright-line rules are not
necessary to prevent Fifth Amendment violations, as the
Court has made clear when refusing to adopt such rules in
cases involving other Miranda rights. See, e.g., Michigan
v. Mosley, 423 U. S. 96, 103–104 (1975). And an otherwise
arbitrary rule is not justifiable merely because it gives
clear instruction to law enforcement officers.2
As the Court concedes, “clarity and certainty are not
goals in themselves. They are valuable only when they
reasonably further the achievement of some substantive
end—here, the exclusion of compelled confessions” that
the Fifth Amendment prohibits. Ante, at 12. The Court’s
arbitrary 14-day rule fails this test, even under the rela
tively permissive criteria set forth in our precedents.
Accordingly, I do not join that portion of the Court’s
opinion.
——————
2 Though the Court asserts that its 14-day rule will tell “law enforce
ment officers . . . with certainty and beforehand, when renewed interro
gation is lawful,” ante, at 10, that is not so clear. Determining whether
a suspect was previously in custody, and when the suspect was re
leased, may be difficult without questioning the suspect, especially if
state and federal authorities are conducting simultaneous investiga
tions.

