Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

ignores these realities of prison, and instead rests its
argument on the supposition that a prisoner’s “detention
. . . is relatively disconnected from their prior unwilling­
ness to cooperate in an investigation.” Ante, at 14. But
that is not necessarily the case. Prisoners are uniquely
vulnerable to the officials who control every aspect of their
lives; prison guards may not look kindly upon a prisoner
who refuses to cooperate with police. And cooperation
frequently is relevant to whether the prisoner can obtain
parole. See, e.g., Code of Md. Regs., tit. 12, §08.01.18(A)(3)
(2008). Moreover, even if it is true as a factual matter
that a prisoner’s fate is not controlled by the police who
come to interrogate him, how is the prisoner supposed to
know that? As the Court itself admits, compulsion is
likely when a suspect’s “captors appear to control [his]
fate,” ante, at 7 (internal quotation marks omitted). But
when a guard informs a suspect that he must go speak
with police, it will “appear” to the prisoner that the guard
and police are not independent. “Questioning by captors,
who appear to control the suspect’s fate, may create mutu­
ally reinforcing pressures that the Court has assumed will
weaken the suspect’s will.” Illinois v. Perkins, 496 U. S.
292, 297 (1990) (emphasis added).14
——————
This means that police can interrogate suspects with little or no evi­
dence of guilt, and police can do so time after time, without fear of
being sued for wrongful arrest. Second, because police know that their
suspect is otherwise detained, there is no need necessarily to resolve
the case quickly. Police can comfortably bide their time, interrogating
and reinterrogating their suspect until he slips up. Third, because
police need not hold their suspect, they do not need to arraign him or
otherwise initiate formal legal proceedings that would trigger various
protections.
14 The Court attempts to distinguish detention in prison from the
“paradigm Edwards case,” ante, at 7, but it is not clear why that is so.
The difference cannot be simply that convicted prisoners’ “detention . . .
is relatively disconnected from their prior unwillingness to cooperate in
an investigation,” ante, at 14, because in many instances of pretrial

