Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

tody that is of sufficient duration to dissipate its coercive
effects.
If Shatzer’s return to the general prison population
qualified as a break in custody (a question we address in
Part III, infra), there is no doubt that it lasted long
enough (2½ years) to meet that durational requirement.
But what about a break that has lasted only one year? Or
only one week? It is impractical to leave the answer to
that question for clarification in future case-by-case adju­
dication; law enforcement officers need to know, with
certainty and beforehand, when renewed interrogation is
lawful. And while it is certainly unusual for this Court to
set forth precise time limits governing police action, it is
not unheard-of. In County of Riverside v. McLaughlin,
500 U. S. 44 (1991), we specified 48 hours as the time
within which the police must comply with the requirement
of Gerstein v. Pugh, 420 U. S. 103 (1975), that a person
arrested without a warrant be brought before a magistrate
to establish probable cause for continued detention.
Like McLaughlin, this is a case in which the requisite
police action (there, presentation to a magistrate; here,
abstention from further interrogation) has not been pre­
scribed by statute but has been established by opinion of
this Court. We think it appropriate to specify a period of
time to avoid the consequence that continuation of the
Edwards presumption “will not reach the correct result
most of the time.” Coleman, supra, at 737. It seems to us
that period is 14 days. That provides plenty of time for
the suspect to get reacclimated to his normal life, to con­
sult with friends and counsel, and to shake off any resid­
ual coercive effects of his prior custody.
The 14-day limitation meets Shatzer’s concern that a
break-in-custody rule lends itself to police abuse. He
envisions that once a suspect invokes his Miranda right to
counsel, the police will release the suspect briefly (to end
the Edwards presumption) and then promptly bring him

