(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

MARYLAND v. SHATZER
CERTIORARI TO THE COURT OF APPEALS OF MARYLAND
No. 08–680.

Argued October 5, 2009—Decided February 24, 2010

In 2003, a police detective tried to question respondent Shatzer, who
was incarcerated at a Maryland prison pursuant to a prior conviction,
about allegations that he had sexually abused his son. Shatzer in
voked his Miranda right to have counsel present during interroga
tion, so the detective terminated the interview. Shatzer was released
back into the general prison population, and the investigation was
closed. Another detective reopened the investigation in 2006 and at
tempted to interrogate Shatzer, who was still incarcerated. Shatzer
waived his Miranda rights and made inculpatory statements. The
trial court refused to suppress those statements, reasoning that Ed
wards v. Arizona, 451 U. S. 477, did not apply because Shatzer had
experienced a break in Miranda custody prior to the 2006 interroga
tion. Shatzer was convicted of sexual child abuse. The Court of Ap
peals of Maryland reversed, holding that the mere passage of time
does not end the Edwards protections, and that, assuming, arguendo,
a break-in-custody exception to Edwards existed, Shatzer’s release
back into the general prison population did not constitute such a
break.
Held: Because Shatzer experienced a break in Miranda custody lasting
more than two weeks between the first and second attempts at inter
rogation, Edwards does not mandate suppression of his 2006 state
ments. Pp. 4–18.
(a) Edwards created a presumption that once a suspect invokes the
Miranda right to the presence of counsel, any waiver of that right in
response to a subsequent police attempt at custodial interrogation is
involuntary. Edwards’ fundamental purpose is to “[p]reserv[e] the
integrity of an accused’s choice to communicate with police only
through counsel,” Patterson v. Illinois, 487 U. S. 285, 291, by “pre
vent[ing] police from badgering [him] into waiving his previously as

