Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

exists, the former interrogator has no apparent power to
decrease the time served. This is in stark contrast to the
circumstances faced by the defendants in Edwards,
Roberson, and Minnick, whose continued detention as
suspects rested with those controlling their interrogation,
and who confronted the uncertainties of what final
charges they would face, whether they would be convicted,
and what sentence they would receive.
Shatzer’s experience illustrates the vast differences
between Miranda custody and incarceration pursuant to
conviction. At the time of the 2003 attempted interroga­
tion, Shatzer was already serving a sentence for a prior
conviction. After that, he returned to the general prison
population in the Maryland Correctional InstitutionHagerstown and was later transferred, for unrelated
reasons, down the street to the Roxbury Correctional
Institute. Both are medium-security state correctional
facilities. See Maryland Div. of Correction Inmate Hand­
book 7 (2007), online at http://dpscs.md.gov/rehabservs/
doc/pdfs/2007_Inmate_Handbook.pdf (all Internet materi­
als as visited Feb. 22, 2010, and available in Clerk of
Court’s case file). Inmates in these facilities generally can
visit the library each week, id., at 28; have regular exer­
cise and recreation periods, id., at 17; can participate
in basic adult education and occupational training, id.,
at 26, 7; are able to send and receive mail, id., at 21–22,
16; and are allowed to receive visitors twice a week,
see http://dpscs.md.gov/locations/mcih.shtml; http://www.
dpscs.state.md.us/locations/rci.shtml. His continued de­
——————
what might be termed interrogative custody. When a prisoner is
removed from the general prison population and taken to a separate
location for questioning, the duration of that separation is assuredly
dependent upon his interrogators. For which reason once he has
asserted a refusal to speak without assistance of counsel Edwards
prevents any efforts to get him to change his mind during that inter­
rogative custody.

