10

MARYLAND v. SHATZER 

STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment


III 

Because, at the very least, we do not know whether
Shatzer could obtain a lawyer, and thus would have felt
that police had lied about providing one, I cannot join the
Court’s opinion. I concur in today’s judgment, however, on
another ground: Even if Shatzer could not consult a law­
yer and the police never provided him one, the 2½-year
break in custody is a basis for treating the second interro­
gation as no more coercive than the first. Neither a break
in custody nor the passage of time has an inherent, cura­
——————
custody, the custody will continue regardless of whether a detainee
answers questions. Take Roberson for example. Roberson was arrested
and being held for one crime when, days later, a different officer inter­
rogated him about a different crime. 486 U. S., at 678. Regardless of
whether he cooperated with the second investigation, he was still being
held for the first crime. Yet under the Court’s analysis, had Roberson
been held long enough that he had become “accustomed” to the deten­
tion facility, ante, at 14, there would have been a break in custody
between each interrogation. Thus, despite the fact that coercive pres­
sures “may increase as custody is prolonged,” Minnick, 498 U. S., at
153, the real problem in Roberson may have been that the police did not
leave him sitting in jail for long enough.
This problem of pretrial custody also highlights a tension with the
Court’s decision last Term in Montejo v. Louisiana, 556 U. S. ___
(2009). In Montejo, the Court overturned Michigan v. Jackson, 475
U. S. 625, 636 (1986), which had protected an accused’s Sixth Amend­
ment right to counsel by “forbidding police to initiate interrogation of a
criminal defendant once he has requested counsel at an arraignment or
similar proceeding.” 556 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 1). In so doing, the
Court emphasized that because the Edwards “regime suffices to protect
the integrity of ‘a suspect’s voluntary choice not to speak outside his
lawyer’s presence,’ before his arraignment, it is hard to see why it
would not also suffice to protect that same choice after arraignment.”
556 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 15) (quoting Texas v. Cobb, 532 U. S. 162,
175 (2001) (KENNEDY, J., concurring); citation omitted). But typically,
after arraignment, defendants are released on bail or placed in deten­
tion facilities, both of which, according to the majority’s logic, some­
times constitute breaks in custody. How then, under the Court’s
decision today, will Edwards serve the role that the Court placed on it
in Montejo?

