Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment

pressures of custodial interrogation,” id., at 686.6
Instead of deferring to these well-settled understand­
ings of the Edwards rule, the Court engages in its own
speculation that a 14-day break in custody eliminates the
compulsion that animated Edwards. But its opinion gives
no strong basis for believing that this is the case.7 A 14­
day break in custody does not eliminate the rationale for
the initial Edwards rule: The detainee has been told that
he may remain silent and speak only through a lawyer
and that if he cannot afford an attorney, one will be pro­
vided for him. He has asked for a lawyer. He does not
have one. He is in custody. And police are still question­
ing him. A 14-day break in custody does not change the
fact that custodial interrogation is inherently compelling.
It is unlikely to change the fact that a detainee “considers
himself unable to deal with the pressures of custodial
interrogation without legal assistance.” Roberson, 486
U. S., at 683.8 And in some instances, a 14-day break in
——————
6 See

Roberson, 486 U. S., at 681 (“[I]f a suspect believes that he is not
capable of undergoing such questioning without advice of counsel, then
it is presumed that any subsequent waiver that has come at the au­
thorities’ behest, and not at the suspect’s own instigation, is itself the
product of the ‘inherently compelling pressures’ ”); Michigan v. Mosley,
423 U. S. 96, 110, n. 2 (1975) (White, J., concurring in result) (“[T]he
accused having expressed his own view that he is not competent to deal
with the authorities without legal advice, a later decision at the au­
thorities’ insistence to make a statement without counsel’s presence
may properly be viewed with skepticism”).
7 Today’s decision, moreover, offers no reason for its 14-day time pe­
riod. To be sure, it may be difficult to marshal conclusive evidence
when setting an arbitrary time period. But in light of the basis for
Edwards, we should tread carefully. Instead, the only reason for
choosing a 14-day time period, the Court tells us, is that “[i]t seems to
us that period is 14 days.” Ante, at 11. That time period is “plenty of
time for the suspect to get reacclimated to his normal life, to consult
with friends and counsel, and to shake off any residual coercive effects
of his prior custody.” Ibid. But the Court gives no reason for that
speculation, which may well prove inaccurate in many circumstances.
8 In Roberson, for example, we observed that once a suspect has as­

