Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

ented article . . . with the intent and purpose that [the
direct infringer] should use the infringing article . . . they
would assist in her infringing use.” 224 U. S., at 33 (em­
phasis added and deleted).4 Our decision in MetroGoldwyn-Mayer Studios Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd., 545 U. S.
913 (2005), which looked to the law of contributory patent
infringement for guidance in determining the standard to
be applied in a case claiming contributory copyright in­
fringement, contains dicta that may be read as interpret­
ing the pre-1952 cases this way. In Grokster, we said that
“[t]he inducement rule . . . premises liability on purpose­
ful, culpable expression and conduct.” Id., at 937.
While both the language of §271(b) and the pre-1952
case law that this provision was meant to codify are sus­
ceptible to conflicting interpretations, our decision in Aro
II resolves the question in this case. In Aro II, a majority
held that a violator of §271(c) must know “that the combi­
——————
4 The earlier case of Cortelyou v. Charles Eneu Johnson & Co., 207
U. S. 196 (1907), contains language that may be read as adopting a
similar position. In that case, the Neostyle Company had a patent for
a “stencil duplicating machine” called the “rotary Neostyle,” and it
licensed the use of its machine pursuant to a license requiring the
licensee to use only Neostyle’s ink. Id., at 198. Another company,
Charles Eneu Johnson & Co., sold its ink to a Neostyle licensee, and
Neostyle sued the Johnson company, claiming that it was “inducing a
breach of the license contracts” and was thus indirectly infringing
Neostyle’s patent rights. Id., at 199. The Court held that the defen­
dant did not have “sufficient evidence of notice” to support liability.
The Court wrote:
“True, the defendant filled a few orders for ink to be used on a rotary
Neostyle, but it does not appear that it ever solicited an order for ink to
be so used, that it was ever notified by the plaintiffs of the rights which
they claimed, or that anything which it did was considered by them an
infringement upon those rights.” Id., at 200 (emphasis added).
The italicized language above may suggest that it was necessary to
show that the defendants had notice of Neostyle’s patent rights. See
also Tubular Rivet & Stud Co. v. O’Brien, 93 F. 200, 203 (CC Mass.
1898) (“a necessary condition of the defendant’s guilt is his knowledge
of the complainant’s patent”).

