2

GLOBAL-TECH APPLIANCES, INC. v. SEB S. A.
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

Culpability” Thesis: A Study of the Deeper Significance of
the Principle of Legality, 1994 Wis. L. Rev. 29, 35; see also
L. Alexander & K. Ferzan, Crime and Culpability: A The
ory of Criminal Law 34–35 (2009) (cautioning against
the temptation to “distort” cases of willful blindness “into
cases of knowledge”); G. Williams, Criminal Law: The
General Part §57, p. 157 (2d ed. 1961). The Court’s defini
tion of willful blindness reveals this basic purpose. One
can believe that there is a “high probability” that acts
might infringe a patent but nonetheless conclude they do
not infringe. Ante, at 14; see also ibid. (describing a will
fully blind defendant as one “who can almost be said
to have actually known the critical facts”). The alleged
inducer who believes a device is noninfringing cannot be
said to know otherwise.
The Court justifies its substitution of willful blindness
for the statutory knowledge requirement in two ways,
neither of which is convincing.
First, the Court appeals to moral theory by citing the
“traditional rationale” that willfully blind defendants “are
just as culpable as those who have actual knowledge.”
Ante, at 10. But the moral question is a difficult one. Is it
true that the lawyer who knowingly suborns perjury is no
more culpable than the lawyer who avoids learning that
his client, a criminal defendant, lies when he testifies that
he was not the shooter? See Hellman, Willfully Blind
for Good Reason, 3 Crim. L. & Philosophy 301, 305–308
(2009); Luban, Contrived Ignorance, 87 Geo. L. J. 957
(1999). The answer is not obvious. Perhaps the culpabil
ity of willful blindness depends on a person’s reasons for
remaining blind. E.g., ibid. Or perhaps only the person’s
justification for his conduct is relevant. E.g., Alexander &
Ferzan, supra, at 23–68. This is a question of morality
and of policy best left to the political branches. Even if
one were to accept the substitution of equally blamewor
thy mental states in criminal cases in light of the retribu

