Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

15

Opinion of the Court

SEB’s cool-touch fryer was an innovation in the U. S.
market when Pentalpha copied it. App. to Brief for Re­
spondent 49. As one would expect with any superior
product, sales of SEB’s fryer had been growing for some
time. Ibid. Pentalpha knew all of this, for its CEO and
president, John Sham, testified that, in developing a
product for Sunbeam, Pentalpha performed “market re­
search” and “gather[ed] information as much as possible.”
App. 23a. Pentalpha’s belief that SEB’s fryer embodied
advanced technology that would be valuable in the U. S.
market is evidenced by its decision to copy all but the
cosmetic features of SEB’s fryer.
Also revealing is Pentalpha’s decision to copy an over­
seas model of SEB’s fryer. Pentalpha knew that the prod­
uct it was designing was for the U. S. market, and Sham—
himself a named inventor on numerous U. S. patents, see
id., at 78a–86a—was well aware that products made for
overseas markets usually do not bear U. S. patent mark­
ings, App. in No. 2009–1099 etc. (CA Fed.), pp. A–1904 to
A–1906. Even more telling is Sham’s decision not to in­
form the attorney from whom Pentalpha sought a right-to­
use opinion that the product to be evaluated was simply a
knockoff of SEB’s deep fryer. On the facts of this case, we
cannot fathom what motive Sham could have had for
withholding this information other than to manufacture a
claim of plausible deniability in the event that his com­
pany was later accused of patent infringement. Nor does
Sham’s testimony on this subject provide any reason to
——————
dard we set out today, see App. to Brief for Respondent 26–27, and
Pentalpha asks us to remand the case so it can move for a new trial.
We reject that request. Pentalpha did not challenge the jury instruc­
tions in the Court of Appeals, see Brief for Appellants in No. 2009–1099
etc. (CA Fed.), pp. 21–22, and that court did not pass upon the issue.
Finding no “exceptional” circumstances in this case, we follow our usual
course and refuse to consider the issue. See Youakim v. Miller, 425
U. S. 231, 234 (1976) (per curiam).

