12

GLOBAL-TECH APPLIANCES, INC. v. SEB S. A.
Opinion of the Court

defining “knowledge of the existence of a particular fact”
to include a situation in which “a person is aware of a
high probability of [the fact’s] existence, unless he actually
believes that it does not exist.” ALI, Model Penal Code
§2.02(7) (Proposed Official Draft 1962). Our Court has
used the Code’s definition as a guide in analyzing whether
certain statutory presumptions of knowledge comported
with due process. See Turner v. United States, 396 U. S.
398, 416–417 (1970); Leary v. United States, 395 U. S. 6,
46–47, and n. 93 (1969). And every Court of Appeals—
with the possible exception of the District of Columbia
Circuit, see n. 9, infra—has fully embraced willful blind­
ness, applying the doctrine to a wide range of criminal
statutes.
Given the long history of willful blindness and its wide
acceptance in the Federal Judiciary, we can see no reason
why the doctrine should not apply in civil lawsuits for
induced patent infringement under 35 U. S. C. §271(b).8
Pentalpha urges us not to take this step, arguing that
§271(b) demands more than willful blindness with respect
to the induced acts that constitute infringement. See
Reply Brief for Petitioners 13–14. This question, however,
is not at issue here. There is no need to invoke the doc­
trine of willful blindness to establish that Pentalpha knew
that the retailers who purchased its fryer were selling that
product in the American market; Pentalpha was indis­
putably aware that its customers were selling its product
in this country.
——————
8 Unlike

the dissent, we do not think that utilitarian concerns de­
mand a stricter standard for knowledge under §271(b), see post, at 3
(opinion of KENNEDY, J.). The dissent does not explain—nor can we
see—why promoting “ ‘the Progress of Science and useful Arts,’ ” ibid.,
requires protecting parties who actively encourage others to violate
patent rights and who take deliberate steps to remain ignorant of those
rights despite a high probability that the rights exist and are being
infringed, see infra, at 13–14.

