4

GLOBAL-TECH APPLIANCES, INC. v. SEB S. A.
KENNEDY, J., dissenting

often probative of actual knowledge. Circumstantial facts
like these tend to be the only available evidence in any
event, for the jury lacks direct access to the defendant’s
mind. The jury must often infer knowledge from conduct,
and attempts to eliminate evidence of knowledge may
justify such inference, as where an accused inducer avoids
further confirming what he already believes with good
reason to be true. The majority’s decision to expand the
statute’s scope appears to depend on the unstated premise
that knowledge requires certainty, but the law often per
mits probabilistic judgments to count as knowledge. Cf.
Connecticut Mut. Life Ins. Co. v. Lathrop, 111 U. S. 612,
620 (1884) (Harlan, J.) (“[B]eing founded on actual obser
vation, and being consistent with common experience and
the ordinary manifestations of the condition of the mind, it
is knowledge, so far as the human intellect can acquire
knowledge, upon such subjects”).
The instant dispute provides a case in point. Pentalpha
copied an innovative fryer. The model it copied bore no
U. S. patent markings, but that could not have been a
surprise, for Pentalpha knew that a fryer purchased in
Hong Kong was unlikely to bear such markings. And
Pentalpha failed to tell the lawyer who ran a patent
search that it copied the SEB fryer. These facts may
suggest knowledge that Pentalpha’s fryers were infring
ing, and perhaps a jury could so find.
But examining the sufficiency of the evidence presented
in the 5-day trial requires careful review of an extensive
record. The trial transcript alone spans over 1,000 pages.
If willful blindness is as close to knowledge and as far
from the “knew or should have known” jury instruction
provided in this case as the Court suggests, then review
ing the record becomes all the more difficult. I would
leave that task to the Court of Appeals in the first in
stance on remand.
For these reasons, and with respect, I dissent.

