Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
that defendants cannot escape the reach of these statutes by deliber
ately shielding themselves from clear evidence of critical facts that
are strongly suggested by the circumstances. The traditional ration
ale for the doctrine is that defendants who behave in this manner are
just as culpable as those who have actual knowledge. This Court en
dorsed a concept similar to willful blindness over a century ago in
Spurr v. United States, 174 U. S. 728, 735, and every Federal Court
of Appeals but one has fully embraced willful blindness. Given the
doctrine's long history and wide acceptance in the Federal Judiciary,
there is no reason why the doctrine should not apply in civil lawsuits
for induced patent infringement under §271(b). Pp. 10–13.
(b) Although the Courts of Appeals articulate the doctrine of will
ful blindness in slightly different ways, all agree on two basic re
quirements. First, the defendant must subjectively believe that there
is a high probability that a fact exists. Second, the defendant must
take deliberate actions to avoid learning of that fact. These require
ments give willful blindness an appropriately limited scope that sur
passes recklessness and negligence. Pp. 13–14.
(c) Although the Federal Circuit’s test departs from the proper
willful blindness standard in important respects, the evidence when
viewed in the light most favorable to the verdict for SEB was suffi
cient under the correct standard. Pentalpha believed that SEB’s
fryer embodied advanced technology that would be valuable in the
U. S. market as evidenced by its decision to copy all but the fryer’s
cosmetic features. Also revealing is Pentalpha’s decision to copy an
overseas model of SEB’s fryer, aware that it would not bear U. S.
patent markings. Even more telling is Pentalpha’s decision not to in
form its attorney that the product to be evaluated was simply a
knockoff of SEB’s fryer. Taken together, the evidence was more than
sufficient for a jury to find that Pentalpha subjectively believed there
was a high probability that SEB’s fryer was patented and took delib
erate steps to avoid knowing that fact, and that it therefore willfully
blinded itself to the infringing nature of Sunbeam’s sales. Pp. 14–16.
594 F. 3d 1360, affirmed.
ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J.,
and SCALIA, THOMAS, GINSBURG, BREYER, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined. KENNEDY, J., filed a dissenting opinion.

