2

GLOBAL-TECH APPLIANCES, INC. v. SEB S. A.
Syllabus
alleged infringer knew of the patent; held that, although there was
no direct evidence that Pentalpha knew of SEB’s patent before it re
ceived notice of the Sunbeam suit, there was adequate proof that it
deliberately disregarded a known risk that SEB had a protective pat
ent; and said that such disregard is not different from, but a form of,
actual knowledge.

Held:
1. Induced infringement under §271(b) requires knowledge that the
induced acts constitute patent infringement. Pp. 3–10.
(a) Section 271(b)’s text—“[w]hoever actively induces infringe
ment of a patent shall be liable as an infringer”—is ambiguous as to
the intent needed to impose liability. In referring to a party that “in
duces infringement,” the provision may require merely that the in
ducer must lead another to engage in conduct that happens to
amount to infringement. On the other hand, the reference to a party
that “induces infringement” may also be read to mean that the in
ducer must persuade another to engage in conduct that the inducer
knows is infringement. Pp. 4–5.
(b) Like §271(b)’s language, the pre-1952 case law is susceptible
to conflicting interpretations. However, Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible
Top Replacement Co., 377 U. S. 476 (Aro II), resolves the question at
issue. Pp. 5–8.
(c) Induced infringement was not considered a separate theory of
indirect liability in the pre-1952 case law, but was treated as evi
dence of “contributory infringement,” i.e., the aiding and abetting of
direct infringement by another party. When Congress enacted §271,
it separated the contributory infringement concept into two catego
ries: induced infringement, covered by §271(b), and sale of a compo
nent of a patented invention, covered by §271(c). In the badly frac
tured Aro II decision, a majority concluded that a violator of §271(c)
must know “that the combination for which his component was espe
cially designed was both patented and infringing.” 377 U. S., at 488.
That conclusion, now a fixture in the law, compels this same knowl
edge for liability under §271(b), given that the two provisions have a
common origin and create the same difficult interpretive choice. Pp.
8–10.
2. Deliberate indifference to a known risk that a patent exists does
not satisfy the knowledge required by §271(b). Nevertheless, the
Federal Circuit’s judgment must be affirmed because the evidence in
this case was plainly sufficient to support a finding of Pentalpha’s
knowledge under the doctrine of willful blindness. Pp. 10–16.
(a) The doctrine of willful blindness is well established in crimi
nal law. Many criminal statutes require proof that a defendant acted
knowingly or willfully, and courts applying the doctrine have held

