(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

GLOBAL-TECH APPLIANCES, INC., ET AL. v. SEB S. A.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
No. 10–6. Argued February 23, 2011—Decided May 31, 2011
After respondent SEB invented an innovative deep fryer, obtained a
U. S. patent for its design, and began selling its fryer in this country,
Sunbeam Products, Inc., asked petitioner Pentalpha Enterprises,
Ltd., a Hong Kong home appliance maker and wholly owned subsidi
ary of petitioner Global-Tech Appliances, Inc., to supply Sunbeam
with deep fryers meeting certain specifications. Pentalpha purchased
an SEB fryer that was made for sale in a foreign market and thus
lacked U. S. patent markings, copied all but the fryer’s cosmetic fea
tures, and retained an attorney to conduct a right-to-use study with
out telling him it had copied directly from SEB’s design. Failing to
locate SEB’s patent, the attorney issued an opinion letter stating that
Pentalpha’s deep fryer did not infringe any of the patents that he had
found. Pentalpha then started selling its fryers to Sunbeam, which
resold them in this country under its own trademarks at a price that
undercut SEB’s.
SEB then sued Sunbeam for patent infringement. Though Sun
beam notified Pentalpha of the lawsuit, Pentalpha went on to sell its
fryers to other companies, which resold them in the U. S. market un
der their respective trademarks. After settling the Sunbeam lawsuit,
SEB sued Pentalpha, asserting, as relevant here, that it had contra
vened 35 U. S. C. §271(b) by actively inducing Sunbeam and the
other purchasers of Pentalpha fryers to sell or offer to sell them in
violation of SEB’s patent rights. The jury found for SEB on the in
duced infringement theory, and the District Court entered judgment
for SEB. Affirming, the Federal Circuit stated that induced in
fringement under §271(b) requires a showing that the alleged in
fringer knew or should have known that his actions would induce ac
tual infringements; declared that this showing includes proof that the

