Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

KENNEDY, J., dissenting

tive purposes of the criminal law, those purposes have no
force in the domain of patent law that controls in this case.
The Constitution confirms that the purpose of the patent
law is a utilitarian one, to “promote the Progress of Sci
ence and useful Arts,” Art. I, §8, cl. 8.
Second, the Court appeals to precedent, noting that
a “similar concept” to willful blindness appears in this
Court’s cases as early as 1899. Ante, at 11. But this Court
has never before held that willful blindness can substitute
for a statutory requirement of knowledge. Spurr v. United
States, 174 U. S. 728, 735 (1899), explained that “evil
design may be presumed if the [bank] officer purposefully
keeps himself in ignorance of whether the drawer has
money in the bank or not, or is grossly indifferent to his
duty in respect to the ascertainment of that fact.” The
question in Spurr was whether the defendant’s admitted
violation was willful, and with this sentence the Court
simply explained that wrongful intent may be inferred
from the circumstances. It did not suggest that blindness
can substitute for knowledge. Neither did Turner v.
United States, 396 U. S. 398 (1970), or Leary v. United
States, 395 U. S. 6 (1969). As the Court here explains,
both cases held only that certain statutory presumptions
of knowledge were consistent with due process. Ante, at
12. And although most Courts of Appeals have embraced
willful blindness, counting courts in a circuit split is not
this Court’s usual method for deciding important ques
tions of law.
The Court appears to endorse the willful blindness
doctrine here for all federal criminal cases involving
knowledge. It does so in a civil case where it has received
no briefing or argument from the criminal defense bar,
which might have provided important counsel on this
difficult issue.
There is no need to invoke willful blindness for the first
time in this case. Facts that support willful blindness are

