Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2009)

3

THOMAS, J., concurring

the claim itself has no constitutional foundation. Accord
ingly, the claim’s procedural posture does not matter for
purposes of merits relief; a Lackey claim would fail no
matter how it arrived. In addition, JUSTICE STEVENS
concedes that the unusual contours of petitioner’s Eighth
Amendment claim are the reason the procedural questions
in this case are difficult. Given that, our order in this case
rightly adheres to our precedents denying relief on Lackey
claims, however presented. Second, even if the procedural
claims in this case had merit, they would not warrant
review because JUSTICE STEVENS admits that a “successful
Lackey claim would have the effect of rendering invalid a
particular death sentence,” ante, at 4, and thus would
“ ‘directly call into question the “fact” or “validity” of the
sentence itself,’ ” ante, at 4 (quoting Nelson v. Campbell,
541 U. S. 637, 644 (2004)). Accordingly, the Sixth Circuit
plainly did not err in treating petitioner’s §1983 motion as
“the functional equivalent of” a habeas petition. Ante, at
3. And for the reasons above, the panel’s treatment of the
petition as a second or successive petition would not, even
if reversed, entitle petitioner to the merits relief he seeks.
At bottom, JUSTICE STEVENS’ arguments boil down to
policy disagreements with the Constitution and the Ten
nessee legislature. Ante, at 3–4 (“ ‘[D]elaying an execution
does not further public purposes of retribution and deter
rence but only diminishes whatever possible benefit soci
ety might receive from petitioner’s death. . . . In other
words, the penological justifications for the death penalty
diminish as the delay lengthens.” (internal quotation
marks and citation omitted)). Such views, no matter how
“steadfast[ly]” held, ante, at 2, are not grounds for enjoin
ing petitioner’s execution or for granting certiorari on the
procedural questions that attend his Lackey claim. As
long as our system affords capital defendants the proce
dural safeguards this Court has long endorsed, defendants
who avail themselves of these procedures will face the

