2

JOHNSON v. BREDESEN
THOMAS, J., concurring

and collateral procedures and then complain when his
execution is delayed.” Thompson v. McNeil, 556 U. S. ___,
(2009) (slip op., at 1) (THOMAS, J., concurring in denial of
certiorari) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
Petitioner cites no evidence otherwise and, for all his
current complaints about delay, did not raise a Lackey
objection to the speed of his proceedings in the 1999 ha
beas petition he filed 18 years into his tenure on death
row. See ante, at 4–5, n. 3.
Undeterred, JUSTICE STEVENS insists that petitioner’s
Eighth Amendment claim warrants relief. It does not, and
JUSTICE STEVENS’ arguments to the contrary stand in
stark contrast not only to history and precedent, but also
to his own recent statement in Muhammad v. Kelly, 558
U. S. ___ (2009) (slip op., at 1) (statement respecting de
nial of certiorari) decrying the “perversity of executing
inmates before their appeals process has been fully con
cluded.” In JUSTICE STEVENS’ view, it seems the State can
never get the timing just right. The reason, he has said, is
that the death penalty itself is wrong. McNeil, supra, at
___ (slip op., at 4) (statement respecting denial of certio
rari) (citing Baze v. Rees, 553 U. S. 35, ___ (2008)
(STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment) (slip op., at 8, 17)).
But that is where he deviates from the Constitution and
where proponents of his view are forced to find their sup
port in precedent from the “European Court of Human
Rights, the Supreme Court of Zimbabwe, the Supreme
Court of India, or the Privy Council.” Knight, supra, at
990 (THOMAS, J. concurring in denial of certiorari).
Eager to distinguish this case from Knight and all the
other cases in which the Court has refused to grant relief
on Lackey grounds, JUSTICE STEVENS asserts that the
petition here presents important questions regarding the
proper procedural vehicle for bringing a Lackey claim that
merit this Court’s review. First, the procedural posture in
which a Lackey claim arises does not change the fact that

