6

ARMOUR v. INDIANAPOLIS
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

could provide refunds to petitioners by “arrang[ing] for
payments from non-Barrett Law sources.” Id., at 36. One
cannot evade returning money to its rightful owner by
the simple expedient of spending it. The “fiscal challenge”
justification seems particularly inappropriate in this case,
as the City—with an annual budget of approximately $900
million—admits that the cost of refunding all of petitioners’ money would be approximately $300,000. Adopted
2012 Budget for the Consolidated City of Indianapolis,
Marion County (Oct. 17, 2011), p. 7; Tr. of Oral Arg. 17,
58.
Equally unconvincing is the Court’s attempt to distinguish Allegheny Pittsburgh. The Court claims that case
was different because it involved “a clear state law requirement clearly and dramatically violated.” Ante, at 14.
Nothing less is at stake here. Indiana law requires that
the costs of sewer projects be “apportioned equally among
all abutting lands.” Ind. Code §36–9–39–15(b)(3). The
City has instead apportioned the costs of the Brisbane/
Manning project such that petitioners paid between 10 and
30 times as much as their neighbors. Worse still, it
has done so in order to avoid administrative hassle and
save a bit of money. To paraphrase A Man for All Seasons: “It profits a city nothing to give up treating its citizens equally for the whole world . . . but for $300,000?”
See R. Bolt, A Man for All Seasons, act II, p. 158 (1st
Vintage Int’l ed. 1990).
Our precedents do not ask for much from government in
this area—only “rough equality in tax treatment.” Allegheny Pittsburgh, 488 U. S., at 343. The Court reminds us
that Allegheny Pittsburgh is a “rare case.” Ante, at 14. It
is and should be; we give great leeway to taxing authorities in this area, for good and sufficient reasons. But
every generation or so a case comes along when this Court
needs to say enough is enough, if the Equal Protection
Clause is to retain any force in this context. Allegheny

