(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ARMOUR ET AL. v. CITY OF INDIANAPOLIS, INDIANA,
ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIANA
No. 11–161.

Argued February 29, 2012—Decided June 4, 2012

For decades, Indianapolis (City) funded sewer projects using Indiana’s
Barrett Law, which permitted cities to apportion a public improvement project’s costs equally among all abutting lots. Under that system, a city would create an initial assessment, dividing the total estimated cost by the number of lots and making any necessary
adjustments. Upon a project’s completion, the city would issue a final
lot-by-lot assessment. Lot owners could elect to pay the assessment
in a lump sum or over time in installments.
After the City completed the Brisbane/Manning Sanitary Sewers
Project, it sent affected homeowners formal notice of their payment
obligations. Of the 180 affected homeowners, 38 elected to pay the
lump sum. The following year, the City abandoned Barrett Law financing and adopted the Septic Tank Elimination Program (STEP),
which financed projects in part through bonds, thereby lowering individual owner’s sewer-connection costs. In implementing STEP, the
City’s Board of Public Works enacted a resolution forgiving all assessment amounts still owed pursuant to Barrett Law financing.
Homeowners who had paid the Brisbane/Manning Project lump sum
received no refund, while homeowners who had elected to pay in installments were under no obligation to make further payments.
The 38 homeowners who paid the lump sum asked the City for a
refund, but the City denied the request. Thirty-one of these homeowners brought suit in Indiana state court claiming, in relevant part,
that the City’s refusal violated the Federal Equal Protection Clause.
The trial court granted summary judgment to the homeowners, and
the State Court of Appeals affirmed. The Indiana Supreme Court reversed, holding that the City’s distinction between those who had already paid and those who had not was rationally related to its legiti-

