Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

system that would effectively charge petitioners 30 times
more than their neighbors for the same service—when
state law promised equal treatment? Two things: the
desire to avoid administrative hassle and the “fiscal[] challeng[e]” of giving back money it wanted to keep. Brief for
Respondents 35–36. I cannot agree that those reasons
pass constitutional muster, even under rational basis
review.
The City argues that either of the other options for
transitioning away from the Barrett Law would have been
“immensely difficult from an administrative standpoint.”
Id., at 36. The Court accepts this rationale, observing that
“[o]rdinarily, administrative considerations can justify a
tax-related distinction.” Ante, at 7. The cases the Court
cites, however, stand only for the proposition that a legislature crafting a tax scheme may take administrative
concerns into consideration when creating classes of taxable entities that may be taxed differently. See, e.g.,
Lehnhausen v. Lake Shore Auto Parts Co., 410 U. S. 356,
359 (1973) (a State may “draw lines that treat one class of
individuals or entities differently from the others”); Madden v. Kentucky, 309 U. S. 83, 87 (1940) (referring to the
“broad discretion as to classification possessed by a legislature”); Carmichael v. Southern Coal & Coke Co., 301
U. S. 495, 510–511 (1937) (discussing permissible considerations for the legislature in establishing a tax scheme).
Here, however, Indiana’s tax scheme explicitly provides
that costs will “be primarily apportioned equally among
all abutting lands or lots.” Ind. Code §36–9–39–15(b)(3)
(emphasis added). The legislature has therefore decreed
that all abutting landowners are within the same class.
We have never before held that administrative burdens
justify grossly disparate tax treatment of those the State
has provided should be treated alike. Indeed, in Allegheny
Pittsburgh the County argued that its unequal assessments were based on “[a]dministrative cost[ ]” concerns, to

