2

ARMOUR v. INDIANAPOLIS
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

discriminatory treatment by subjecting him to taxes not
imposed on others of the same class”).
In this case, the Brisbane/Manning Sanitary Sewers
Project allowed 180 property owners to have their homes
hooked up to the City of Indianapolis’s sewer system under the State’s Barrett Law. That law requires sewer
costs to “be primarily apportioned equally among all abutting lands or lots.” Ind. Code §36–9–39–15(b)(3) (2011).
In the case of Brisbane/Manning, the cost came to $9,278
for each property owner. Some of the property owners—
petitioners here—paid the full $9,278 up front. Others
elected the option of paying in installments. Shortly after
hook-up, the City switched to a new financing system and
decided to forgive the hook-up debts of those paying on
an installment plan. The City refused, however, to refund
any portion of the payments made by their identically situated neighbors who had already paid the full amount
due. The result was that while petitioners each paid the
City $9,278 for their hook-ups, more than half their neighbors paid less than $500 for the same improvement—some
as little as $309.27. Another quarter paid less than $1,000.
Petitioners thus paid between 10 and 30 times as much
for their sewer hook-ups as their neighbors.
In seeking to justify this gross disparity, the City explained that it was presented with three choices: First, it
could have continued to collect the installment plan payments of those who had not yet settled their debts under
the old system. Second, it could have forgiven all those
debts and given equivalent refunds to those who had made
lump sum payments up front. Or third, it could have
forgiven the future payments and not refunded payments
that had already been made. The first two choices had the
benefit of complying with state law, treating all of Indianapolis’s citizens equally, and comporting with the Constitution. The City chose the third option.
And what did the City believe was sufficient to justify a

