Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

ture need not “actually articulate at any time the purpose
or rationale supporting its classification.” Nordlinger, 505
U. S., at 15; see also Fitzgerald, 539 U. S., at 108 (similar).
Rather, the “burden is on the one attacking the legislative
arrangement to negative every conceivable basis which
might support it.” Madden, 309 U. S., at 88; see Heller,
509 U. S., at 320 (same); Lehnhausen, 410 U. S., at 364
(same); see also Allied Stores of Ohio, Inc. v. Bowers, 358
U. S. 522, 530 (1959) (upholding state tax classification
resting “upon a state of facts that reasonably can be con­
ceived” as creating a rational distinction). Petitioners
have not “negative[d]” the Indiana Supreme Court’s first
listed justification, namely the administrative concerns we
have discussed.
Petitioners go on to propose various other forgiveness
systems that would have included refunds for at least
some of those who had already paid in full. They argue
that those systems are superior to the system that the
City chose. We have discussed those, and other possible,
systems earlier. Supra, at 8–9. Each has advantages and
disadvantages. But even if petitioners have found a supe­
rior system, the Constitution does not require the City to
draw the perfect line nor even to draw a line superior to
some other line it might have drawn. It requires only that
the line actually drawn be a rational line. And for the
reasons we have set forth in Part II–B, supra, we believe
that the line the City drew here is rational.
Petitioners further argue that administrative considera­
tions alone should not justify a tax distinction, lest a city
arbitrarily allocate taxes among a few citizens while for­
giving many similarly situated citizens on the ground that
it is cheaper and easier to collect taxes from a few people
than from many. Brief for Petitioners 45. Petitioners are
right that administrative considerations could not justify
such an unfair system. But that is not because adminis­
trative considerations can never justify tax differences

