Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

administrative convenience argument. Under the Court’s
view the City would apparently continue to accept monthly payments from installment plan homeowners in order
to gradually repay the money it owes to those who paid in
a lump sum. Ante, at 9, 12. But this approach was never
dreamt of by the City itself. See Brief for Respondents 18
(setting out City’s “three basic [transition] options,” none
of which involved the Court’s gradual refund scheme).
The Court suggests that the City’s administrative convenience argument is one with which the law is comfortable. The Court compares the City’s decision to forgive
the installment balances to the sort of parking ticket and
mortgage payment amnesty programs that currently
abound. Ante, at 9. This analogy is misplaced: Amnesty
programs are designed to entice those who are unlikely
ever to pay their debts to come forward and pay at least a
portion of what they owe. It is not administrative convenience alone that justifies such schemes. In a sense, these
schemes help remedy payment inequities by prompting
those who would pay nothing to pay at least some of their
fair share. The same cannot be said of the City’s system.
The Court is willing to concede that “administrative
considerations could not justify . . . an unfair system” in
which “a city arbitrarily allocate[s] taxes among a few
citizens while forgiving many others on the ground that it
is cheaper and easier to collect taxes from a few people
than from many.” Ante, at 11. Cold comfort, that. If the
quoted language does not accurately describe this case, I
am not sure what it would reach.
The Court wisely does not embrace the City’s alternative argument that the unequal tax burden is justified
because “it would have been fiscally challenging to issue
refunds.” Brief for Respondents 35. “Fiscally challenging”
gives euphemism a bad name. The City’s claim that it has
already spent petitioners’ money is hardly worth a response, and the City recognizes as much when it admits it

