8

ARMOUR v. INDIANAPOLIS
Opinion of the Court

ience and expense” involved); see also Lehnhausen, supra,
at 365 (comparing administrative cost of taxing corpora­
tions versus individuals); Madden, supra, at 90 (compar­
ing administrative cost of taxing deposits in local banks
versus those elsewhere). And the City’s decision to stop
collecting outstanding Barrett Law debts finds rational
support in related administrative concerns.
The City had decided to switch to the STEP system.
After that change, to continue Barrett Law unpaid-debt
collection could have proved complex and expensive. It
would have meant maintaining an administrative system
that for years to come would have had to collect debts
arising out of 20-plus different construction projects built
over the course of a decade, involving monthly payments
as low as $25 per household, with the possible need
to maintain credibility by tracking down defaulting debt­
ors and bringing legal action. The City, for example,
would have had to maintain its Barrett Law operation
within the City Controller’s Office, keep files on old, small,
installment-plan debts, and (a City official says) possibly
spend hundreds of thousands of dollars keeping computer­
ized debt-tracking systems current. See Brief for Interna­
tional City/County Management Association et al. as
Amici Curiae 13, n. 12 (citing Affidavit of Charles White
¶13, Record in Cox, Doc. No. 57–3). Unlike the collection
system prior to abandonment, the City would not have
added any new Barrett Law installment-plan debtors.
And that fact means that it would have had to spread the
fixed administrative costs of collection over an ever­
declining number of debtors, thereby continuously increas­
ing the per-debtor cost of collection.
Consistent with these facts, the Director of the City’s
Department of Public Works later explained that the City
decided to forgive outstanding debt in part because “[t]he
administrative costs to service and process remaining
balances on Barrett Law accounts long past the transition

