Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

valuable property. Id., at 345. It considered the constitu­
tionality of a county tax assessor’s practice (over a period
of many years) of determining property values as of the
time of the property’s last sale; that practice meant highly
unequal valuations for two identical properties that were
sold years or decades apart. Id., at 341. The Court first
found that the assessor’s practice was not rationally re­
lated to the county’s avowed purpose of assessing proper­
ties equally at true current value because of the intentional
systemic discrepancies the practice created. Id., at 343–
344. The Court then noted that, in light of the state con­
stitution and related laws requiring equal valuation, there
could be no other rational basis for the practice. Id., at
344–345. Therefore, the Court held, the assessor’s dis­
criminatory policy violated the Federal Constitution’s
insistence upon “equal protection of the law.” Id., at 346.
Petitioners argue that the City’s refusal to add refunds
to its forgiveness decision is similar, for it constitutes a
refusal to apply “equally” an Indiana state law that says
that the costs of a Barrett Law project shall be equally
“apportioned.” Ind. Code §36–9–39–15(b)(3). In other
words, petitioners say that even if the City’s decision
might otherwise be related to a rational purpose, state law
(as in Allegheny) makes this the rare case where the facts
preclude any rational basis for the City’s decision other
than to comply with the state mandate of equality.
Allegheny, however, involved a clear state law require­
ment clearly and dramatically violated. Indeed, we have
described Allegheny as “the rare case where the facts
precluded” any alternative reading of state law and thus
any alternative rational basis. Nordlinger, 505 U. S., at
16. Here, the City followed state law by apportioning the
cost of its Barrett Law projects equally. State law says
nothing about forgiveness, how to design a forgiveness
program, or whether or when rational distinctions in doing
so are permitted. To adopt petitioners’ view would risk

