2

ARMOUR v. INDIANAPOLIS
Syllabus
mate interests in reducing administrative costs, providing financial
hardship relief to homeowners, transitioning from the Barrett Law
system to STEP, and preserving its limited resources.

Held: The City had a rational basis for its distinction and thus did not
violate the Equal Protection Clause. Pp. 6–14.
(a) The City’s classification does not involve a fundamental right or
suspect classification. See Heller v. Doe, 509 U. S. 312, 319–320. Its
subject matter is local, economic, social, and commercial. See United
States v. Carolene Products Co., 304 U. S. 144, 152. It is a tax classification. See Regan v. Taxation With Representation of Wash., 461
U. S. 540, 547. And no one claims that the City has discriminated
against out-of-state commerce or new residents. Cf. Hooper v. Bernalillo County Assessor, 472 U. S. 612. Hence, the City’s distinction
does not violate the Equal Protection Clause as long as “there is any
reasonably conceivable state of facts that could provide a rational basis for the classification,” FCC v. Beach Communications, Inc., 508
U. S. 307, 313, and the “ ‘burden is on the one attacking the [classification] to negative every conceivable basis which might support it,’ ”
Heller, supra, at 320. Pp. 6–7.
(b) Administrative concerns can ordinarily justify a tax-related distinction, see, e.g., Carmichael v. Southern Coal & Coke Co., 301 U. S.
495, 511–512, and the City’s decision to stop collecting outstanding
Barrett Law debts finds rational support in the City’s administrative
concerns. After the City switched to the STEP system, any decision
to continue Barrett Law debt collection could have proved complex
and expensive. It would have meant maintaining an administrative
system for years to come to collect debts arising out of 20-plus different construction projects built over the course of a decade, involving
monthly payments as low as $25 per household, with the possible
need to maintain credibility by tracking down defaulting debtors and
bringing legal action. The rationality of the City’s distinction draws
further support from the nature of the line-drawing choices that confronted it. To have added refunds to forgiveness would have meant
adding further administrative costs, namely the cost of processing refunds. And limiting refunds only to Brisbane/Manning homeowners
would have led to complaints of unfairness, while expanding refunds
to the apparently thousands of other Barrett Law project homeowners would have involved an even greater administrative burden. Finally, the rationality of the distinction draws support from the fact
that the line that the City drew—distinguishing past payments from
future obligations—is well known to the law. See, e.g., 26 U. S. C.
§108(a)(1)(E). Pp. 7–10.
(c) Petitioners’ contrary arguments are unpersuasive. Whether financial hardship is a factor supporting rationality need not be con-

