Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

to the STEP program would not benefit the taxpayers” and
would defeat the purpose of the transition. App. 76. The
four other members of the City’s Board of Public Works
have said the same. See Affidavit of Gregory Taylor ¶6,
Record in Cox, Doc. No. 57–5; Affidavit of Kipper Tew ¶6,
ibid. Doc. No. 57–6; Affidavit of Susan Schalk ¶6, ibid.
Doc. No. 57–7; Affidavit of Roger Brown ¶6, ibid. Doc.
No. 57–8.
The rationality of the City’s distinction draws further
support from the nature of the line-drawing choices that
confronted it. To have added refunds to forgiveness would
have meant adding yet further administrative costs,
namely the cost of processing refunds. At the same time,
to have tried to limit the City’s costs and lost revenues by
limiting forgiveness (or refund) rules to Brisbane/Manning
homeowners alone would have led those involved in other
Barrett Law projects to have justifiably complained about
unfairness. Yet to have granted refunds (as well as providing forgiveness) to all those involved in all Barrett
Law projects (there were more than 40 projects) or in
all open projects (there were more than 20) would have
involved even greater administrative burden. The City
could not just “cut . . . checks,” post, at 4 (ROBERTS, C. J.,
dissenting), without taking funding from other programs
or finding additional revenue. If, instead, the City had
tried to keep the amount of revenue it lost constant (a
rational goal) but spread it evenly among the apparently
thousands of homeowners involved in any of the Barrett
Laws projects, the result would have been yet smaller
individual payments, even more likely to have been too
small to justify the administrative expense.
Finally, the rationality of the distinction draws support
from the fact that the line that the City drew—
distinguishing past payments from future obligations—is
a line well known to the law. Sometimes such a line takes
the form of an amnesty program, involving, say, mortgage

