4

ARMOUR v. INDIANAPOLIS
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

no avail. Brief for Respondent, O. T. 1988, No. 87–1303,
p. 22. The reason we have rejected this argument is obvious: The Equal Protection Clause does not provide that no
State shall “deny to any person within its jurisdiction the
equal protection of the laws, unless it’s too much of a
bother.”
Even if the Court were inclined to decide that administrative burdens alone may sometimes justify grossly disparate treatment of members of the same class, this would
hardly be the case to do that. The City claims it cannot
issue refunds because the process would be too difficult,
requiring that it pore over records of old projects to determine which homeowners had overpaid and by how much.
Brief for Respondents 36. But holding that the City must
refund petitioners’ overpayments would not mean that it
has to refund overpayments in every Barrett Law project.
The Equal Protection Clause is concerned with “gross” disparity in taxing. Because the Brisbane/Manning project
was initiated shortly before the Barrett Law transition,
the disparity between what petitioners paid in comparison to their installment plan neighbors was dramatic.
Not so with respect to, for example, a project initiated 10
years earlier, because for those projects even installment
plan payers will have largely satisfied their debts, resulting in far less significant disparities.
To the extent a ruling for petitioners would require
issuing refunds to others who overpaid under the Barrett
Law, I think the city workers are up to the task. The City
has in fact already produced records showing exactly how
much each lump-sum payer overpaid in every active Barrett Law Project—to the penny. Record in Cox v. Indianapolis, No. 1:09–cv–0435 (SD Ind.), Doc. 98–1 (Exh. A).
What the city employees would need to do, therefore, is cut
the checks and mail them out.
Certainly the job need not involve the complicated procedure the Court describes in an attempt to bolster its

