Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–5443
_________________

CHARLES ANDREW FOWLER, AKA MAN, PETITIONER
v. UNITED STATES
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT

[May 26, 2011] 


JUSTICE SCALIA, concurring in the judgment.
I disagree with the Court’s interpretation of 18 U. S. C.
§1512(a)(1)(C). In my view, the Government must prove
that the defendant intended to prevent a communication
which, had it been made, would beyond a reasonable doubt
have been made to a federal law enforcement officer. The
Court’s vague “reasonable likelihood” standard has no
basis in the statutory text and will serve only to confuse
judges and juries. Accordingly, although I agree the case
should be remanded for the Eleventh Circuit to consider
whether the objection to sufficiency of the evidence was
preserved or whether the District Court committed plain
error, I would hold that there was insufficient evidence to
support Fowler’s conviction.
I
Section 1512(a)(1)(C) of Title 18 makes it a federal crime
“to kill another person, with intent to . . . prevent the
communication by any person to a law enforcement officer
. . . of the United States of information relating to the
commission or possible commission of a Federal offense.”
Viewed in isolation, this provision contains an ambiguity:
Does the mens rea of the statute include a specific intent
to prevent communication to a law enforcement officer of
the United States; or is it satisfied by the mere intent to


2

FOWLER v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

prevent communication to a law enforcement officer who
happens to be a law enforcement officer of the United
States?
Happily, a different statutory provision resolves this
ambiguity. It states that “no state of mind need be proved
with respect to the circumstance . . . that the law enforce
ment officer is an officer or employee of the Federal Gov
ernment.” §1512(g)(2). This makes clear that the first
possibility is wrong, and the second right. But removing
the “federal officer” requirement as an element of the
statute’s mens rea does not remove it as an element of the
actus reus—that is, as an element of the facts that must be
proved for conviction. It must be proved, and proved
beyond a reasonable doubt, that the communication in
tended to be prevented was communication to a federal
officer. Thus, if a suspect in an investigation murders an
informant to prevent him from talking to authorities, but
is unaware that the informant was working for the FBI,
the suspect would be guilty: He would have committed a
murder with the intention of preventing the informant’s
communication to authorities about his criminal activities,
and the communication he sought to prevent would neces
sarily have been to federal law enforcement. Likewise, a
suspect would be guilty if he committed a murder to pre
vent a witness from informing law enforcement that he
lied on his federal income tax return: He sought to pre
vent a communication that would have been made to
federal officials, because they alone prosecute federal tax
violations. But a suspect who commits a murder with the
general intent of preventing law enforcement from learn
ing about activities that violate both state and federal
law would not be guilty, because the Government would
be unable to prove that the communication he sought to
prevent necessarily would have been to a federal official.
Applying that standard, this is an easy case. There was
evidence that Fowler murdered Officer Horner in order


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

to prevent him from communicating information about
Fowler’s criminal activities. But the only evidence prof
fered by the Government to establish that the communica
tion would have been to a federal law enforcement agent
was the fact that a different state police officer, four years
later, contacted federal law enforcement about a robbery
by Fowler’s confederate—and that only because the state
law statute of limitations for the robbery had expired.
That is not nearly enough to demonstrate Fowler’s guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt.
II
The Court gives the statute a broader reading than the
one I ascribe. The Government can obtain a conviction, it
says, so long as it can prove a “reasonable likelihood” that
the communication would have been made to a federal
law enforcement officer. I know of no precedent for using
a “likelihood” standard rather than the “beyond a rea
sonable doubt” standard for a finding of fact essential
to a criminal conviction; and the justifications the Court
presents for that course in the present case are not
convincing.
The Court maintains that the Government need not
show beyond a reasonable doubt that the communication
would have been to a federal officer because “[t]he relevant
question concerns the defendant’s intent.” Ante, at 5. But
that reasoning is directly contrary to §1512(g)(2), which
expressly states that the defendant’s intent is not the
relevant question with respect to the federal character of
law enforcement officer meant to be deprived of the infor
mation. The Court’s observation that “a defendant can kill
a victim with an intent to prevent the victim from commu
nicating with federal law enforcement officers even if
there is some considerable doubt that any such communi
cation would otherwise have taken place,” ante, at 6, is
completely irrelevant to the question presented.


4

FOWLER v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

The Court also proclaims that a narrower view “would
conflict with the statute’s basic purpose,” which is to
prevent witness tampering “at a time when the precise
communication and nature of the officer who may receive
it are not yet known.” Ante, at 4. It cites no basis for
attributing that purpose, and there is none—other than
the fact that it supports the Court’s outcome. Another
purpose is just as likely—and indeed more likely, since it
can be achieved without abandonment of the ancient rule
that in criminal prosecutions facts must be found beyond a
reasonable doubt. Murder, after all, is a crime, and often
a capital crime, under all state laws. There is no reason to
ascribe to Congress the “purpose” of transferring murder
prosecutions that would ordinarily be brought in state
court to federal court based on only a tangential federal
interest. Congress was concerned with preserving the
integrity and effectiveness of federal prosecutions, and
where they are not clearly involved (as the ordinary be
yond-a-reasonable-doubt standard would require) a federal
murder prosecution has no proper place. Limited as I
have suggested, the federal law would still have ample
scope, reaching what were surely the principal cases Con
gress had in mind—the killing of prospective witnesses in
federal trials or in ongoing federal investigations. Here,
as would be the case in many situations involving a
merely hypothetical link to a federal investigation, Fowler
murdered a state police officer. The natural place to have
prosecuted him would have been state court.
The Court’s analysis is even less persuasive in light of
the rule of lenity, under which we must construe ambigu
ous criminal statutes in favor of the defendant. Here, the
Court adopts a kind of rule of harshness, discarding the
most straightforward construction of the text in favor of
textually implausible one, based on vague intuitions about
the statute’s purpose. The Court’s opinion never cites the
rule of lenity, probably because it cannot honestly say that


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

the statute is so clear that “there is no ambiguity for the
rule of lenity to resolve.” Burgess v. United States, 553
U. S. 124, 136 (2008).
To make matters worse, the Court’s standard is hope
lessly indeterminate. The Government must show that a
communication to a federal officer is “reasonably likely,”
which is less likely than “more likely than not,” but more
likely than “reasonably possible.” Ante, at 7–9. I doubt
that any jury can grasp the distinction between “you must
find that a communication to a federal officer was rea
sonably likely” and “you must find that a communication
to a federal officer was reasonably possible.” Under
standably, the Court refuses to give any examples of what
“reasonably likely” means, except for an absurd example
involving communications with Lithuanian police officers,
ante, at 10—which obviously would not be “reasonably
possible” either. Indeed, the Court refuses to apply its
standard to the facts of this case, leaving that precarious
task to the lower court.
III
The dissent adopts a view of the statute that is even
broader than the Government’s. It effectively contends
that the Government need not prove anything with respect
to the fact that the communication sought to be prevented
was “to a law enforcement officer . . . of the United States.”
As long as the Government can prove that the defendant
sought to prevent the communication of information about
a federal crime (including a federal crime that is also a
state crime) it will necessarily have proved that the “set of
law enforcement officers (whose identities were unknown
to him)” he had in mind “included law enforcement officers
who were employed by the United States.” Post, at 3
(opinion of ALITO, J.). Conviction requires neither any
specific intent regarding the federal status of the officer,
nor even any likelihood that a communication to a federal


6

FOWLER v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

officer would have occurred.
The principal defect in this interpretation is that it
makes the words “of the United States” superfluous.
Section 1512(a)(1)(C) specifically requires that the in
formation the defendant seeks to prevent from being com
municated be “information relating to the commission or
possible commission of a Federal offense.” If the phrase
“to a law enforcement officer . . . of the United States”
requires nothing more than this it is utterly without effect.
The implication of this view is that Congress enacted
§1512(a)(1)(C)’s reference to “a law enforcement officer . . .
of the United States,” only to immediately nullify it by
§1512(g)(2)’s “no state of mind” provision. Not likely—and
not sound statutory interpretation.
The dissent claims that my analysis “confuses what the
prosecution must prove with what a rational jury may
choose to infer in a particular case.” Post, at 6. I find this
contention difficult to understand. In the dissent’s view, a
properly instructed jury should be required to find neither
that the defendant’s mens rea had any connection to a
federal officer, nor that the defendant’s actus reus had any
connection to a federal officer. It therefore follows that
under the dissent’s view, a properly instructed jury should
be required to find nothing about a connection to a federal
officer beyond the fact that the information related to a
federal offense, which means that, unless the jury is acting
irrationally or is engaging in jury nullification, the “of the
United States” provision is indeed superfluous. The dis
sent is correct that the proof of one element of a crime
(such as an overt act) can sometimes be used to prove that
a different element (such as a conspiratorial agreement) is
satisfied, post, at 6–7, n. 2; but in such cases, the jury is
instructed that it is required to make a separate finding to
convict (e.g., that a conspiratorial agreement actually
occurred). Here, the dissent identifies no separate finding
the jury must make beyond the fact of a federal offense.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

The dissent also observes that when a defendant murders
a federal officer to prevent him from communicating in
formation about a nonfederal crime, he does not violate
the statute. Post, at 7. This observation convincingly
establishes that the statutory words “Federal offense” are
not superfluous under the dissent’s view, an observation
irrelevant to my point that the dissent makes the statu
tory words “of the United States” superfluous.
The dissent contends that my interpretation “has no
grounding in the language of the statute.” Post, at 4. It
asserts that “the text of the statute makes it perfectly
clear that the federal officer requirement is exclusively an
element of the defendant’s mens rea.” Post, at 5 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Perhaps the only thing “per
fectly clear” about this statute is that it states the precise
opposite of that proposition: “[N]o state of mind need be
proved with respect to the circumstance . . . that the law
enforcement officer is an officer or employee of the Federal
Government.” §1512(g)(2).
The dissent’s interpretation would federalize crimes
that have no connection to any federal investigation. A
person caught by a state police officer with marijuana who
murders the state police officer to cover it up could be
prosecuted in federal court. That would approach the
outer limits of Congress’s enumerated powers. We have
adopted a federalism principle that applies when a statute
would render “traditionally local criminal conduct . . . a
matter for federal enforcement”: “[U]nless Congress con
veys its purpose clearly, it will not be deemed to have
significantly changed the federal-state balance in the
prosecution of crimes.” Jones v. United States, 529 U. S.
848, 858 (2000) (internal quotation marks omitted). Thus,
the dissent adds to the Court’s “rule of harshness” a rule of
antifederalism, under which a court must actually ignore
a federal connection that Congress prescribed so as to
avoid intrusion into traditionally local law enforcement.


8

FOWLER v. UNITED STATES
SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment

*
*
*
Because the Government did not establish that Fowler
intended to prevent a communication that, if made, would
have been made to a federal law enforcement officer, there
was insufficient evidence to convict him of violating
§1512(a)(1)(C). Since there remains, however, the ques
tion whether Fowler preserved this issue at trial or
whether the inadequacy of the evidence constituted plain
error, I concur in the Court’s order vacating the judgment
and remanding for resolution of that question.

