(Slip Opinion) OCTOBER TERM, 2010 Syllabus NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued. The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. Syllabus No. 10–5443. Argued March 29, 2011—Decided May 26, 2011 While preparing to rob a bank, petitioner Fowler and others were dis covered by a local police officer, whom Fowler killed. Fowler was convicted of violating the federal witness tampering statute, which makes it a crime “to kill another person, with intent to . . . prevent the communication by any person to a [Federal] law enforcement offi cer” of “information relating to the . . . possible commission of a Fed eral offense,” 18 U. S. C. §1512(a)(1)(C). Rejecting Fowler’s argument that the evidence was insufficient to show that he had killed the offi cer intending to prevent him from communicating with a federal offi cer, the Eleventh Circuit held that a showing of a possible or poten tial communication to federal authorities was sufficient. Held: In such circumstances, the Government must establish a §1512(a)(1)(C) violation by showing there was a reasonable likelihood that a relevant communication would have been made to a federal of ficer. Pp. 3–10. (a) In a §1512(a)(1)(C) prosecution, “no state of mind need be proved with respect to the circumstance . . . that the law enforcement officer is an . . . employee of the Federal Government,” §1512(g)(2). Thus, the Government must prove (1) a killing, (2) committed with a particular intent, namely, an intent (a) to “prevent” a “communica tion” (b) about “the commission or possible commission of a Federal offense” (c) to a federal “law enforcement officer.” P. 3. (b) Nothing in §1512(a)(1)(C)’s language limits it to instances in which the defendant has some identifiable law enforcement officers particularly in mind. Any such limitation would conflict with the statute’s basic purpose. Witness tampering may prove more serious (and more effective) when the crime takes place before the victim has engaged in any communication at all with officers—at a time when
Syllabus the precise communication and nature of the officer who may receive it are not yet known. Hence, the statute covers a defendant, like pe titioner, who kills with intent to prevent communication with any and all officers. The Court must consequently decide what, if any thing, the Government must show about the likelihood of a hypo thetical communication with a federal officer where the defendant did not think specifically about any particular communication or its re cipient. Pp. 4–7. (c) To determine what the Government must prove in such in stances, the Court looks to the dictionary definition of the statutory word “prevent,” which means rendering an “intended,” “possible,” or “likely” event impractical or impossible by anticipatory action. No one suggests that the word “intended” sets forth the appropriate standard here. The Government and the Eleventh Circuit would rest their standard on the word “possible.” But that standard would eliminate the independent force of the statutory “federal officer” re quirement, and would extend the statute beyond its intended, basi cally federal, scope. Fashioning a standard based on the word “likely” is consistent with the statute’s language and objectives. Thus, where the defendant kills a person with an intent to prevent communication with law enforcement officers generally, that intent includes an intent to prevent communications with federal officers only if there is a reasonable likelihood under the circumstances that, in the absence of the killing, at least one of the relevant communica tions would have been made to a federal officer. The Government need not show that such a communication, had it occurred, would have been federal beyond a reasonable doubt, nor even that it is more likely than not. But it must show that the likelihood of communica tion to a federal officer was more than remote, outlandish, or hypo thetical. Pp. 7–10. (d) Because Fowler’s argument that the evidence is insufficient to satisfy a “reasonable likelihood” standard was not raised at trial, the lower courts must determine whether, and how, the standard applies in this case. P. 10. 603 F. 3d 883, vacated and remanded. BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J., and KENNEDY, THOMAS, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. SCALIA, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment. ALITO, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which GINSBURG, J., joined.