(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

CARACO PHARMACEUTICAL LABORATORIES, LTD.,
ET AL. v. NOVO NORDISK A/S ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
No. 10–844.

Argued December 5, 2011—Decided April 17, 2012

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates the manufacture,
sale, and labeling of prescription drugs. A brand-name drug manufacturer seeking FDA approval for a drug submits a new drug application (NDA) containing, among other things, a statement of the
drug’s components and proposed labeling describing the uses for
which the drug may be marketed. See 21 U. S. C. §§355(b)(1), (d).
Once the FDA has approved a brand manufacturer’s drug, another
company may seek permission to market a generic version by filing
an abbreviated new drug application (ANDA). See §§355(j)(2)(A)(ii),
(iv). But the FDA cannot authorize a generic drug that would infringe a brand manufacturer’s patent. To facilitate the approval of
generic drugs as soon as patents allow, the Hatch-Waxman Amendments require a brand manufacturer to submit its patent numbers
and expiration dates, §355(b)(1); and FDA regulations require a description of any method-of-use patent, known as a use code, see 21
CFR §§314.53(c)(2)(ii)(P)(3), (e). The FDA does not attempt to verify
the accuracy of the use codes that brand manufacturers supply. Instead, it simply publishes the codes, patent numbers, and expiration
dates in a large volume known as the Orange Book.
After consulting the Orange Book, an ANDA applicant enters one
of several certifications to assure the FDA that its generic drug will
not infringe the brand’s patent. If the patent has not expired, an applicant may fulfill this requirement in one of two ways. First, it may
submit a so-called section viii statement asserting that it will market
the drug for only those methods of use not covered by the brand’s patent, see 21 U. S. C. §355(j)(2)(A)(viii), and proposing a label that
“carves out” the still-patented method(s) of use, see 21 CFR

