Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

23

Opinion of the Court

FDA therefore could not approve proper applications to
bring inexpensive drugs to market. The proof of that lies
in the statute itself (where the best proof of what Congress
means to address almost always resides). As we have described, the statute’s text and context demonstrate that
the counterclaim is available not only (as in Mylan) when
the patent listing is baseless, but also (as here) when it is
overbroad. See supra, at 10–20. In particular, Congress’s
decision to allow a counterclaimant to seek “correct[ion]”
of patent information explodes Novo’s theory, because the
remedy for a Mylan-type impropriety is complete delisting.
And to make matters still easier, Congress’s equation of
the two situations—the one in Mylan and the one here—
makes perfect sense. Whether a brand lists a patent that
covers no use or describes a patent on one use as extending to others, the brand submits misleading patent information to the FDA. In doing so, the brand equally exploits the FDA’s determination that it cannot police patent
claims. And the brand’s action may in either case delay or
block approval of a generic drug that infringes no patent—
and that under the statute should go to market. See supra, at 4. That is the danger Caraco faces here, as much
as it was the threat in Mylan: Novo seeks to preclude
Caraco from selling repaglinide for unpatented uses until
2018, when Novo’s patent on a different use expires.
Indeed, the need for the counterclaim is greater here
than in Mylan. When a brand lists a patent that covers no
use, a generic company has a pathway aside from the
counterclaim to challenge the listing. As described earlier, the company may make a paragraph IV certification
stating that the listed patent “is invalid or will not
be infringed” by the generic drug.
21 U. S. C.
§355(j)(2)(A)(vii)(IV); see supra, at 5. If the brand sues,
the generic company can argue that its product would not
infringe the patent. Using the counterclaim may enable a
generic manufacturer to obtain delisting more quickly, see

