Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

And the statutory context here supports Caraco’s position. As described earlier (and as Congress understood), a
single drug may have multiple methods of use, only one
or some of which a patent covers. See, e.g., 21 U. S. C.
§355(b)(1) (requiring that an NDA applicant file information about “any patent which claims the drug . . . or
which claims a method of using such drug” (emphasis
added)). The Hatch-Waxman Amendments authorize the
FDA to approve the marketing of a generic drug for particular unpatented uses; and section viii provides the
mechanism for a generic company to identify those uses,
so that a product with a label matching them can quickly
come to market. The statutory scheme, in other words,
contemplates that one patented use will not foreclose
marketing a generic drug for other unpatented ones.
Within that framework, the counterclaim naturally functions to challenge the brand’s assertion of rights over
whichever discrete use (or uses) the generic company
wishes to pursue. That assertion, after all, is the thing
blocking the generic drug’s entry on the market. The
availability of the counterclaim thus matches the availability of FDA approval under the statute: A company may
bring a counterclaim to show that a method of use is unpatented because establishing that fact allows the FDA to
authorize a generic drug via section viii.
Consider the point as applied to this case. Caraco wishes
to market a generic version of repaglinide for two (and
only two) uses. Under the statute, the FDA could approve
Caraco’s application so long as no patent covers those
uses, regardless whether a patent protects yet a third
method of using the drug. Novo agrees that Caraco could
bring a counterclaim if Novo’s assertion of patent protection for repaglinide lacked any basis—for example, if Novo
held no patent, yet claimed rights to the pair of uses for
—————— 

ordinary usage and the statutory context suggested it did not apply).


