2

CARACO PHARMACEUTICAL LABORATORIES, LTD. v.

NOVO NORDISK A/S 

SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring


quiring any further steps relating to the patent, and the
generic drug may reach the public without undue delay.
See ibid.
An overly broad use code “throws a wrench” into that
scheme. Ante, at 18. The reason why is simple: FDA
relies on use codes in determining whether to approve an
ANDA, but it refuses to evaluate the accuracy of those use
codes. See ante, at 4–5. Thus, if the use code overlaps
with the generic manufacturer’s proposed carve-out label
(i.e., if the use code is overly broad), FDA will not approve
an ANDA with a section viii statement. See ibid.
After today’s opinion, the generic manufacturer can respond to this situation by taking the following steps: submit an ANDA with a paragraph IV certification (which
requires a proposed label materially identical to the brand
manufacturer’s label, see ante, at 24), wait for the brand
manufacturer to institute suit, file a counterclaim, litigate
the counterclaim, and, if successful in securing the correction of the use code, return to the start of the process and
do what it always wanted to do—file an ANDA with a
section viii statement and a carve-out label.
The problem with this process is twofold. First, it results in delay and expense the statutory scheme does not
envision. Second, there is no guarantee the process will
work. It depends on the brand manufacturer initiating
paragraph IV litigation, but it is not obvious the brand
will have any incentive to do so. In light of today’s holding, the upshot of such litigation will be the correction of
the use code through the assertion of a counterclaim—an
outcome that is desirable, to be sure, for the generic manufacturer, but perhaps less so for the brand manufacturer.
Meanwhile, it is not clear what happens if the brand
manufacturer does not file suit. FDA may approve
the generic manufacturer’s application, see 21 U. S. C.
§355(j)(5)(B)(iii), “without prejudice to infringement claims
the patent owner might assert when the ANDA applicant

