4

CARACO PHARMACEUTICAL LABORATORIES, LTD. v.
NOVO NORDISK A/S 

Opinion of the Court 


See 21 U. S. C. §§355(j)(2)(A)(vii)(I)–(III). Otherwise, the
applicant has two possible ways to obtain approval.
One option is to submit a so-called section viii statement, which asserts that the generic manufacturer will
market the drug for one or more methods of use not covered by the brand’s patents. See §355(j)(2)(A)(viii). A
section viii statement is typically used when the brand’s
patent on the drug compound has expired and the brand
holds patents on only some approved methods of using
the drug. If the ANDA applicant follows this route, it will
propose labeling for the generic drug that “carves out”
from the brand’s approved label the still-patented methods
of use. See 21 CFR §314.94(a)(8)(iv). The FDA may approve such a modified label, see §314.127(a)(7), as an exception to the usual rule that a generic drug must bear
the same label as the brand-name product, see 21 U. S. C.
§§355(j)(2)(A)(v), (j)(4)(G). FDA acceptance of the carveout label allows the generic company to place its drug
on the market (assuming the ANDA meets other requirements), but only for a subset of approved uses—i.e., those
not covered by the brand’s patents.
Of particular relevance here, the FDA will not approve
such an ANDA if the generic’s proposed carve-out label
overlaps at all with the brand’s use code. See 68 Fed. Reg.
36682–36683 (2003). The FDA takes that code as a given:
It does not independently assess the patent’s scope or
otherwise look behind the description authored by the
brand. According to the agency, it lacks “both [the] expertise and [the] authority” to review patent claims; although
it will forward questions about the accuracy of a use code
to the brand,1 its own “role with respect to patent listing is
——————
1 Under the FDA’s regulations, any person may dispute the accuracy
of patent information listed in the Orange Book by notifying the agency
in writing. See 21 CFR §314.53(f). The FDA will then request that the
brand verify the information, but will make no changes “[u]nless the
[brand] withdraws or amends” the listing. Ibid.

