16

CARACO PHARMACEUTICAL LABORATORIES, LTD. v.
NOVO NORDISK A/S
Opinion of the Court

The more difficult question arises from the “submitted
under” phrase. The subsections mentioned there—(b) and
(c) of §355—require an NDA applicant to submit specified
information: “the patent number and the expiration date
of any patent” claiming the drug or a method of its use. 21
U. S. C. §§355(b)(1), (c)(2). According to Novo, only that
information comes within the counterclaim provision. But
subsections (b) and (c) as well govern the regulatory process by which brands provide additional patent information to the FDA, both before and after an NDA is approved. In particular, those subsections provide the basis
for the regulation requiring brands to submit use codes,
see 21 CFR §314.53; in issuing that regulation, the FDA
noted that “[o]ur principal legal authority . . . is section
505 of the act [codified at §355], in conjunction with our
general rulemaking authority.” 68 Fed. Reg. 36697–36698
(specifically referring to subsections (b) and (c)). And the
form (Form 3542) on which brands submit their use codes
states that the information appearing there is “provided
in accordance with Section [355](b) and (c).” App. 97. So
use codes fall within the counterclaim’s ambit if the phrase
“submitted under” reaches filings that not only subsections (b) and (c) themselves, but also their implementing
regulations require.
Several of our cases support giving “under” this broad
meaning. For example, in Eli Lilly, 496 U. S., at 665–668,
we examined a similar statutory reference to the “submission of information under a Federal law which regulates
——————
covered by a patent”). Those provisions (whether referring to methods
of use, conditions of use, or indications) all demand a description of the
patent. And second, even the provision Novo cites—which mandates
the submission of additional material, not listed in the Orange Book—
ties information about indications to patent coverage; that regulation
requires (when quoted in full) that the brand provide “a description of
each approved method of use or indication and related patent claim of
the patent being submitted.” §314.53(c)(2)(ii)(P)(1).

