2

CARACO PHARMACEUTICAL LABORATORIES, LTD. v.
NOVO NORDISK A/S 

Syllabus

§314.94(a)(8)(iv). The FDA will not approve an ANDA with a section
viii statement if the proposed label overlaps at all with the brand’s
use code. Second, the ANDA applicant may file a so-called paragraph
IV certification stating that the brand’s patent “is invalid or will not
be infringed by the [generic drug’s] manufacture, use, or sale.” 21
U. S. C. §355(j)(2)(A)(vii)(IV). Such filing is treated as an act of infringement, giving the brand an immediate right to sue and resulting
in a delay in the generic drug’s approval.
In 2002, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) issued a study detailing evidence that brands were submitting inaccurate patent information to the FDA in order to prevent or delay the marketing of
generic drugs. In response, Congress created a statutory counterclaim available to generic manufacturers sued for patent infringement. The provision allows a generic manufacturer to “assert a counterclaim seeking an order requiring the [brand] to correct or delete
the patent information submitted by the [brand] under subsection (b)
or (c) [of 21 U. S. C. §355] on the ground that the patent does not
claim . . . an approved method of using the drug.” 21 U. S. C.
§355(j)(5)(C)(ii)(I). This case concerns the scope of the counterclaim
provision.
Respondents (collectively Novo) manufacture the brand-name version of the diabetes drug repaglinide. The FDA has approved three
uses of the drug, but Novo’s method-of-use patent claims only one.
Petitioners (collectively Caraco) wish to market a generic version of
the drug for the other two approved methods of use. Caraco initially
filed a paragraph IV certification and, considering this an act of infringement, Novo brought suit. Caraco then submitted a section viii
statement and a proposed label carving out Novo’s patented therapy.
But before the FDA could approve Caraco’s ANDA, Novo changed its
use code to indicate that it held a patent on all three approved
methods of using repaglinide. Because Caraco’s proposed label now
overlapped with Novo’s use code, the FDA would not permit Caraco
to employ section viii to bring its drug to market.
Caraco filed a statutory counterclaim in the ongoing infringement
action, seeking an order requiring Novo to “correct” its use code because the patent did not claim two of the three approved methods of
using repaglinide. The District Court granted Caraco summary
judgment, but the Federal Circuit reversed. It read the counterclaim’s phrase “the patent does not claim . . . an approved method of
using the drug” as requiring Caraco to demonstrate that Novo’s patent does not claim any approved method of use; because the patent
covers one approved method, the counterclaim was unavailable. The
court also ruled that the counterclaim provision does not reach use
codes because they are not “patent information submitted by the

