Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

19

Opinion of the Court

claim, it proposes, can correct erroneous patent numbers.
Imagine, for example, that Novo mistakenly entered the
number ’359, instead of ’358, when submitting information
about its repaglinide patent for publication in the Orange
Book. Then, Novo suggests, Caraco could bring a counterclaim to challenge the inaccurate listing (on the ground
that ’359 does not claim any method of use), and the remedy would be “correct[ion]” (substituting an 8 for a 9). But
we think Novo’s admission that this scenario would be
“unusual,” Tr. of Oral Arg. 41, considerably understates
the matter. As Novo concedes, brands have every incentive to provide the right patent number in the first place,
and to immediately rectify any error brought to their
attention. See id., at 40–41. By doing so, they place both
generic companies and the FDA on notice of their patents
and thereby prevent infringement. And conversely, generics have little or no incentive to bring a counterclaim that
will merely replace one digit in the Orange Book with
another. So we doubt Congress created a legal action to
“correct” patent information just to fix such scrivener’s
errors. See, e.g., TRW Inc. v. Andrews, 534 U. S. 19, 31
(2001) (refusing to adopt an interpretation of a statute
that would render a piece of it “insignificant, if not wholly
superfluous” (internal quotation marks omitted)). That
would have been, in the most literal sense, to make a
federal case out of nothing.
The same problem afflicts Novo’s alternative contention—that “patent information submitted . . . under subsection (b) or (c)” includes only numbers and expiration
dates (and not use codes). Once again, we cannot think
Congress included the remedy of “correct[ion]” so that
courts could expunge typos in patent numbers. And not
even Novo has proffered a way for the counterclaim to
“correct” an erroneous expiration date. Suppose, for example, that a brand incorrectly lists the expiration date of
a valid patent as 2018 rather than 2015. The counter-

