12

CARACO PHARMACEUTICAL LABORATORIES, LTD. v.
NOVO NORDISK A/S 

Opinion of the Court 


the ’358 patent does not claim the use of repaglinide with
TZDs or its use alone.
Truth be told, the answer to the general question “What
does ‘not an’ mean?” is “It depends”: The meaning of the
phrase turns on its context. See Johnson v. United States,
559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip op., at 5) (“Ultimately, context determines meaning”). “Not an” sometimes means
“not any,” in the way Novo claims. If your spouse tells you
he is late because he “did not take a cab,” you will infer
that he took no cab at all (but took the bus instead). If
your child admits that she “did not read a book all summer,” you will surmise that she did not read any book (but
went to the movies a lot). And if a sports-fan friend bemoans that “the New York Mets do not have a chance of
winning the World Series,” you will gather that the team
has no chance whatsoever (because they have no hitting).
But now stop a moment. Suppose your spouse tells you
that he got lost because he “did not make a turn.” You
would understand that he failed to make a particular turn,
not that he drove from the outset in a straight line. Suppose your child explains her mediocre grade on a college
exam by saying that she “did not read an assigned text.”
You would infer that she failed to read a specific book, not
that she read nothing at all on the syllabus. And suppose
a lawyer friend laments that in her last trial, she “did not
prove an element of the offense.” You would grasp that
she is speaking not of all the elements, but of a particular
one. The examples could go on and on, but the point is
simple enough: When it comes to the meaning of “not an,”
context matters.6
——————
6 For this reason, we find Novo’s reliance on the occasional dictionary
definition of “a[n]” unconvincing. Although “an” sometimes means
“any” when used in negative structures, see, e.g., Microsoft Encarta
College Dictionary 1 (2001) (fifth definition), it sometimes does not. Cf.
FCC v. AT&T Inc., 562 U. S. ___, ___ (2011) (slip. op., at 3–5) (rejecting
a proposed definition of “personal” because it did not always hold in

