14

CARACO PHARMACEUTICAL LABORATORIES, LTD. v.
NOVO NORDISK A/S 

Opinion of the Court 


which Caraco seeks to market its drug. But because Novo
has a valid patent on a different use, Novo argues that
Caraco’s counterclaim evaporates. And that is so even
though, once again, Caraco has no wish to market its
product for that patented use and the FDA stands ready,
pursuant to the statute, to approve Caraco’s product for
the other two. To put the matter simply, Novo thinks the
counterclaim disappears because it has a patent for a
method of use in which neither Caraco nor the FDA is
interested at all. “It would take strong evidence to persuade us that this is what Congress wrought.” Eli Lilly,
496 U. S., at 673. That “not an” sometimes (but sometimes not) means “not any” is not enough.
Novo argues that our reading must be wrong because
Congress could have expressly “impose[d] additional . . .
qualifications” on the term “an approved method of
us[e]”—and indeed did so in another place in the statute.
Brief for Respondents 31; 21 U. S. C. §355(j)(5)(C)(ii)(I).
Novo points here to section viii itself, which applies when
the brand’s patent “does not claim a use for which the
[ANDA] applicant is seeking approval.” §355(j)(2)(A)(viii)
(emphasis added). But the mere possibility of clearer
phrasing cannot defeat the most natural reading of a
statute; if it could (with all due respect to Congress), we
would interpret a great many statutes differently than we
do. Nor does Congress’s use of more detailed language in
another provision, enacted years earlier, persuade us to
put the counterclaim clause at odds with its statutory
context. That is especially so because we can turn this
form of argument back around on Novo. Congress, after
all, could have more clearly expressed Novo’s proposed
meaning in the easiest of ways—by adding a single letter
to make clear that “not an” really means “not any.” And
indeed, Congress used a “not any” construction in the very
next subclause, enacted at the very same time. See
§355(j)(5)(C)(ii)(II) (“Subclause (I) does not authorize the

