Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of the Court

Caraco’s label now overlapped with Novo’s use code on the
other two uses. And Caraco could not carve out those uses
as well, because at that point nothing would be left for
it to market. The FDA has approved repaglinide for only
three uses, and Novo’s use code encompassed them all.
The FDA accordingly informed Caraco that it could no
longer employ section viii to bring its drug to market.
Caraco responded to Novo’s new, preclusive use code by
filing a statutory counterclaim in the ongoing infringement suit. The counterclaim sought an order requiring
Novo to “correct” its use code “on the ground that [the
’358] patent does not claim” two approved methods of
using repaglinide—alone and in combination with TZDs.
§355(j)(5)(C)(ii)(I); see supra, at 6–7. That order would
permit the FDA to accept Caraco’s proposed carve-out
label and approve the company’s ANDA. The District
Court granted summary judgment to Caraco, enjoining
Novo to “correct . . . its inaccurate description of the ’358
patent” by submitting a new Form 3542 to the FDA that
would “reinstat[e] its former” use code. App. to Pet. for
Cert. 65a–66a.
The Court of Appeals reversed, holding that Caraco
lacked “a statutory basis to assert a counterclaim.” 601
F. 3d, at 1360. The court first read the statutory phrase
“the patent does not claim . . . an approved method of
using the drug” to require Caraco to demonstrate that
the ’358 patent does not claim any approved method of
use. See id., at 1365 (“ ‘[A]n approved method’ means ‘any
approved method’ ”). Because the patent covers one approved method of use—repaglinide in combination with
metformin—the counterclaim was unavailable. The court
further ruled that the counterclaim provision does not
reach use codes because they are not “patent information
submitted by the [brand] under subsection (b) or (c).” On
the Federal Circuit’s view, that information consists only
of the patent number and expiration date. See id., at

