Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of the Court

can use the counterclaim.5
A
An ANDA applicant sued for patent infringement may
bring a counterclaim “on the ground that the patent does
not claim . . . an approved method of using the drug.” 21
U. S. C. §355(j)(5)(C)(ii)(I). The parties debate the meaning of this language. Novo (like the Federal Circuit) reads
“not an” to mean “not any,” contending that “the counterclaim is available only if the listed patent does not claim
any (or, equivalently, claims no) approved method of using
the drug.” Brief for Respondents 29 (internal quotation
marks omitted). By that measure, Caraco may not bring
a counterclaim because Novo’s ’358 patent claims the use of
repaglinide with metformin. In contrast, Caraco reads
“not an” to mean “not a particular one,” so that the statute
permits a counterclaim whenever the patent does not
claim a method of use for which the ANDA applicant seeks
to market the drug. On that view, the counterclaim is
available here—indeed, is available twice over—because
——————
5 Before

proceeding to the merits, we dispose of a recently raised jurisdictional argument. Novo now contends that the federal courts lost
subject-matter jurisdiction over this infringement action (including the
counterclaim) at the moment Caraco filed its section viii statement. On
Novo’s theory, such a statement (unlike a paragraph IV certification)
does not count as an act of infringement under the patent statute, see
35 U. S. C. §271(e)(2)(A), and so cannot provide a jurisdictional basis
for the suit. But that argument is wrong even assuming (as Novo contends) that Caraco’s section viii filing terminated its paragraph IV
certification and that a section viii filing is not an act of infringement.
The want of an infringing act is a merits problem, not a jurisdictional
one. Nothing in the section of the statute defining certain filings as
acts of infringement suggests anything to the contrary. And “we are
not inclined to interpret statutes as creating a jurisdictional bar when
they are not framed as such.” Stern v. Marshall, 564 U. S. ___, ___
(2011) (slip op., at 13). In the absence of such a bar, the federal courts
have jurisdiction over this suit for a single, simple reason: It “ar[ose]
under a[n] Act of Congress relating to patents.” 28 U. S. C. §1338(a).

