Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
[brand] under subsection (b) or (c)” of §355. That information, the
court concluded, consists only of the patent number and expiration
date expressly required by the statutory provisions.
Held: A generic manufacturer may employ the counterclaim provision
to force correction of a use code that inaccurately describes the
brand’s patent as covering a particular method of using a drug.
Pp. 10–24.
(a) The parties first dispute the meaning of “not an” in the phrase
“the patent does not claim . . . an approved method of using the drug.”
Novo contends that the counterclaim is available only if the patent
claims no approved method of use, but Caraco reads this language to
permit a counterclaim whenever a patent does not claim the particular method that the ANDA applicant seeks to market. In isolation,
either of these readings is plausible, so the meaning of the phrase
“not an” turns on statutory context, see Johnson v. United States, 559
U. S. ___, ___. This context favors Caraco: Congress understood that
a drug may have multiple methods of use, not all of which a patent
covers; and a section viii statement allows the FDA to approve a generic drug for unpatented uses so that it can quickly come to market.
The statute thus contemplates that one patented use will not foreclose marketing a generic drug for other unpatented ones. Within
this scheme, the counterclaim naturally functions to challenge the
brand’s assertion of rights over whichever discrete uses the generic
company wishes to pursue; the counterclaim’s availability matches
the availability of FDA approval under the statute. Pp. 11–15.
(b) The parties further dispute whether use codes qualify as “patent information submitted by the [brand] under subsection (b) or (c)”
of §355. A use code, which is a description of the patent, surely qualifies as “patent information.” Novo nonetheless contends that use
codes are not “submitted under” subsections (b) and (c) because those
provisions expressly require an NDA applicant to provide only “the
patent number and the expiration date of any patent” claiming the
drug or a method of its use. But §§355(b) and (c) also govern the regulatory process by which brands provide additional patent information to the FDA. The term “under” is broad enough to include patent information, like use codes, that brands submit as required by
this scheme. This reading draws support from the Court’s prior decisions in e.g., Eli Lilly & Co. v. Medtronic, Inc., 496 U. S. 661, 665–
668, and Ardestani v. INS, 502 U. S. 129, 135; and it is bolstered by
Congress’s use of the narrower phrases “described in” and “prescribed
by” in neighboring provisions. See §§355(c)(2), (d)(6). Again, the conclusion that use codes are “submitted under” §§355(b) and (c) fits the
broader statutory context. Use codes are pivotal to the FDA’s implementation of the Hatch-Waxman Amendments, and so it is unsur-

