4

CARACO PHARMACEUTICAL LABORATORIES, LTD. v.
NOVO NORDISK A/S 

Syllabus

prising that the counterclaim provision’s language sweeps widely
enough to embrace them. Pp. 15–18.
(c) The counterclaim provision’s description of available remedies
dispatches whatever remains of Novo’s arguments. The Court’s reading gives content to both remedies: It “delete[s]” a listing from the
Orange Book when the brand holds no relevant patent and “correct[s]” the listing when the brand has misdescribed the patent’s
scope. By contrast, Novo’s interpretation would all but read “correct”
out of the statute. If, as Novo contends, the counterclaim is available
only where the patent claims no approved method of use, the remedy
will always be to delete the patent information. And if the counterclaim reaches only patent numbers and expiration dates, the Orange
Book will include few if any mistakes in need of correction. Pp. 18–
20.
(d) Novo advances two arguments relating to the counterclaim’s
drafting history, but neither overcomes the statutory text and context. The company first points out that Congress failed to pass an
earlier bill that would have required brands to file descriptions of
method-of-use patents and would have allowed generic companies to
bring civil actions to “delete” or “correct” the information filed. Because that bill would have allowed a generic applicant to challenge
overbroad descriptions of a patent, Novo contends that this Court
cannot read the statute that was eventually enacted as doing the
same. But the earlier bill contained numerous items that may have
caused its failure. And the limited criticism of its mechanism for
challenging brands’ descriptions of their patents focused on the creation of an independent cause of action—stronger medicine than the
counterclaim at issue here. Finally, between that bill’s demise and
the counterclaim’s enactment, the FDA issued a rule requiring
brands to supply use codes. The counterclaim provision’s drafters
thus had no need to require this information.
Novo next contends that Congress established the counterclaim only
to address the impossibility of deleting an improperly listed patent
from the Orange Book—a problem that had come to light when the
Federal Circuit held in Mylan Pharmaceuticals, Inc. v. Thompson,
268 F. 3d 1323, that generics had no cause of action to delist a patent.
Novo thus contends that the counterclaim is a mere delisting provision. But this Court thinks Mylan alerted Congress to a broader
problem: that generic companies generally had no avenue to challenge the accuracy of brands’ patent listings, and that the FDA therefore could not approve proper applications to bring inexpensive drugs
to market. Again, the proof of that lies in the statute itself—its text
and context demonstrate that the counterclaim is available not only
(as in Mylan) when the patent listing is baseless, but also (as here)

