4

UNITED STATES v. TINKLENBERG
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

And finally, there are the administrative difficulties
that arise when “delay” is taken to mean “delay in trial,”
discussed in the Court’s opinion at pages 9–10. These are
not relevant on their own, but only because they bear upon
the meaning of the text. When one of two possible mean
ings yields impracticable results, the other meaning is
more likely correct.
Tinklenberg would invent a threshold inquiry applicable
only to §3161(h)(1)(D): If, he says, at least some delay of
the trial date has occurred, then the entire period specified
in §3161(h)(1)(D) may be excluded. This makes no sense.
First, nothing in the statute supports treating the word
“delay” as a trigger for an exclusion of an unrelated period
of time; quite the opposite, §3161(h)(1)(D) treats the period
of “delay” and the pendency of the pretrial motion equiva
lently. Second, that interpretation would ascribe different
meanings to the word “delay” as it is used throughout the
Speedy Trial Act. “[D]elay resulting from any interlocu
tory appeal,” §3161(h)(1)(C), for example, would refer to
the number of days a trial was postponed; but “delay
resulting from any pretrial motion,” §3161(h)(1)(D), would
refer to the different period specified in that paragraph.
Identical words used in different parts of a statute are pre
sumed to have the same meaning absent indication to
the contrary, and here no such indication exists. See IBP,
Inc. v. Alvarez, 546 U. S. 21, 34 (2005).
Tinklenberg also argues that his interpretation draws
support from the phrase “resulting from,” which appears
after the word “delay” in §3161(h)(1)(D). He asserts that
this phrase “underscores that Subsection (D) excludes
periods of delay that occur as a consequence of pretrial
motions, not merely the time during which such motions
are pending.” Brief for Respondent 17. That is true
enough, but it sheds no light on the meaning of the word
“delay.” Cf. Bloate, supra, at ___, n. 9 (slip op., at 8, n. 9).
There is nothing odd in saying that an interval of exclud

