(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STATES v. TINKLENBERG
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–1498. Argued February 22, 2011—Decided May 26, 2011
The Speedy Trial Act of 1974 (Act) provides, inter alia, that in “any case
in which a plea of not guilty is entered, the trial . . . shall commence
within seventy days” after the arraignment, 18 U. S. C. §3161(c)(1),
but lists a number of exclusions from the 70-day period, including
“delay resulting from any pretrial motion, from the filing of the mo
tion through the conclusion of the hearing on, or other prompt dispo
sition of, such motion,” §3161(h)(1)(D).
Respondent Tinklenberg’s trial on federal drug and gun charges
began 287 days after his arraignment. The District Court denied his
motion to dismiss the indictment on the ground that the trial violated
the Act’s 70-day requirement, finding that 218 of the days fell within
various of the Act’s exclusions, leaving 69 nonexcludable days, thus
making the trial timely. On Tinklenberg’s appeal from his convic
tion, the Sixth Circuit agreed that many of the 287 days were exclud
able, but concluded that 9 days during which three pretrial motions
were pending were not, because the motions did not actually cause a
delay, or the expectation of delay, of trial. Since these 9 days were
sufficient to bring the number of nonexcludable days above 70, the
court found a violation of the Act. And given that Tinklenberg had
already served his prison sentence, it ordered the indictment dis
missed with prejudice.
Held:
1. The Act contains no requirement that the filing of a pretrial mo
tion actually caused, or was expected to cause, delay of a trial.
Rather, §3161(h)(1)(D) stops the Speedy Trial clock from running
automatically upon the filing of a pretrial motion irrespective of
whether the motion has any impact on when the trial begins. Pp. 3–
12.

