6

UNITED STATES v. TINKLENBERG
Opinion of the Court

intend to place the entire species within that definition
without investigation of the characteristics of an individ
ual specimen. See United States v. Fifty-Three (53) Eclec
tus Parrots, 685 F. 2d 1131, 1137 (CA9 1982).
More than that, statutory language can sometimes
specify that a set of circumstances exhibits a certain char
acteristic virtually as a matter of definition and irrespec
tive of how a court may view it in a particular case. A
statute that describes “extortion” as a “crime of violence”
makes that fact so by definition, without asking a court
to second-guess Congress about the matter. 18 U. S. C.
§924(e)(2)(B)(ii) (2006 ed.) (defining “violent felony” to
include extortion for purposes of the Armed Career Crimi
nal Act).
The statute before us, though more complex, can be read
similarly. The pretrial motion subparagraph falls within a
general set of provisions introduced by the phrase: “The
following periods of delay shall be excluded.” §3161(h)
(2006 ed., Supp. III). That phrase is then followed by a list
that includes “[a]ny period of delay resulting from other
proceedings concerning the defendant, including . . . .”
§3161(h)(1). This latter list is followed by a sublist, each
member (but one) of which is introduced by the phrase
“delay resulting from . . . ,” ibid. (2006 ed. and Supp. III),
which words are followed by a more specific description,
such as “any pretrial motion” from its “filing” “through the
conclusion of the hearing on, or other prompt disposition
of, such motion.” §3161(h)(1)(D) (2006 ed., Supp. III). The
whole paragraph can be read as requiring the automatic
exclusion of the members of that specific sublist, while
referring to those members in general as “periods of delay”
and as causing that delay, not because Congress intended
the judge to determine causation, but because, in a close to
definitional way, the words embody Congress’ own view of
the matter.
It is not farfetched to describe the members of the spe

