Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

9

Opinion of the Court

great practical administrative importance in the daily
working lives of busy trial judges is itself entitled to strong
consideration, particularly when those courts have main
tained that interpretation consistently over a long a period
of time. See General Dynamics Land Systems, Inc. v.
Cline, 540 U. S. 581, 593–594 (2004).
Third, the Sixth Circuit’s interpretation would make the
subparagraph (D) exclusion significantly more difficult to
administer. And in doing so, it would significantly hinder
the Speedy Trial Act’s efforts to secure fair and efficient
criminal trial proceedings. See Zedner v. United States,
547 U. S. 489, 497 (2006) (noting that the Act’s exceptions
provide “necessary flexibility”); H. R. Rep. No. 93–1508, p.
15 (1974) (the Act seeks to achieve “efficiency in the proc
essing of cases which is commensurate with due process”);
S. Rep. No. 93–1021, p. 21 (1974). Trial judges may, for
example, set trial dates beyond 70 days in light of other
commitments. And in doing so, a trial judge may well be
aware, based on his or her experience, that pretrial mo
tions will likely consume the extra time—even though the
judge may know little about which specific motions will be
filed, when, and how many. How is that judge to apply the
Sixth Circuit’s approach, particularly when several, in
cluding unanticipated, pretrial proceedings did consume
the time in question?
Moreover, what is to happen if several excludable and
several nonexcludable potential causes of delay (e.g., pre
trial motions to take depositions, potential scheduling
conflicts, various health examinations, etc.) coincide,
particularly in multidefendant cases? Can the judge,
motion by motion, decide which motions were responsible
and which were not responsible for postponing what oth
erwise might have been an earlier trial date? And how is
a defendant or his attorney to predict whether or when a
judge will later find a particular motion to have caused a
postponement of trial? And if the matter is difficult to

