2

UNITED STATES v. TINKLENBERG
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

to the period between ticks of the speedy trial clock—in
other words, the period during which the Speedy Trial
Act’s 70-day requirement is tolled.
Interpreting the “delay” referred to in §3161(h)(1)(D) (or
referred to anywhere else in §3161(h)) as the delay of a
trial date* would make little sense in light of the context
of the provision and the structure of the statute. Section
3161(h)(1)(D) specifies starting and stopping points for the
excludable “delay” that bear no relation whatsoever to the
actual amount of time that a trial might be postponed by a
pretrial motion. It equates the “delay resulting from any
pretrial motion” to the period of time between “the filing
of the motion” and “the conclusion of the hearing on, or
other prompt disposition of, such motion.” This equation is
possible if “delay” refers to an interval of time excludable
for purposes of the Speedy Trial Act, but it makes no sense
if “delay” refers to the time a trial is postponed. Consider,
for example, a pretrial motion that is pending for 10 days
but causes the district court to push back a trial’s begin
ning by only one day. In such a situation, §3161(h)(1)(D)
would require that the entire 10-day period be excluded
for Speedy Trial Act purposes.
Neighboring statutory provisions, moreover, link the
excludable “delay” to the time consumed by the specified
event, not the number of days a trial is postponed. Section
3161(h)(1)(H), for example, excludes “delay reasonably
attributable to any period, not to exceed thirty days,
during which any proceeding concerning the defendant
is actually under advisement by the court.” And
§3161(h)(1)(F) excludes “delay resulting from transporta
——————
* I consider only this possibility, and not the extended meaning in
vented by the Sixth Circuit (“expectation of a dela[y] of trial”)—
presumably to explain how delay can be computed ex ante, before any
trial delay has actually occurred. See 579 F. 3d 589, 598 (2009).
“[E]xpectation of a delay” is simply not one of the possible meanings of
“delay.”

