10

UNITED STATES v. TINKLENBERG
Opinion of the Court

predict, how is the attorney to know when or whether he
or she should seek further postponement of the 70-day
deadline?
With considerable time and judicial effort, perhaps
through the use of various presumptions, courts could find
methods for overcoming these and other administrative
difficulties. In some instances, the judge may know at the
time of filing that a given motion is easily resolved or that
its complexity will almost certainly postpone the trial.
Judges could note on the record their predictions about
whether the motion will postpone trial at the time that the
motion is filed. Parties could also stipulate as to whether
a given motion would be excluded from the Speedy Trial
clock. But those theoretical strategies would not prevent
all or even most mistakes, needless dismissals of indict
ments, and potential retrials after appeal—all of which
exact a toll in terms of the fairness of and confidence in
the criminal justice system. And any such future strate
gies for administering the Sixth Circuit’s rule cannot
provide a present justification for turning the federal
judicial system away from the far less obstacle-strewn
path that the system has long traveled.
Fourth, we are reinforced in our conclusion by the diffi
culty of squaring the Sixth Circuit’s interpretation with
this Court’s precedent. In Henderson v. United States, 476
U. S. 321 (1986), the Court rejected the contention that
the exclusion provision for pretrial motions governs only
reasonable delays. The Court there concluded (as the
Court of Appeals had held) that the exclusion “was in
tended to be automatic.” Id., at 327 (quoting United States
v. Henderson, 746 F. 2d 619, 622 (CA9 1984); internal
quotation marks omitted). See also Bloate v. United
States, 559 U. S. ___ (2010) (holding based in part on
the view that the exclusion applies “automatically” to the
specified period of delay). Henderson did not consider
whether a trial court must determine whether the pretrial

