2

UNITED STATES v. TINKLENBERG
Syllabus
(a) The Sixth Circuit reasoned that subparagraph (D)’s “delay resulting from” phrase, read most naturally, requires a court to apply
the exclusion provision only to motions that actually cause a trial delay, or the expectation of such a delay. While such a reading is linguistically reasonable, it is not the only reasonable interpretation.
The subparagraph falls within a general set of provisions introduced
by the phrase: “The following periods of delay shall be excluded.”
§3161(h). That phrase is followed by a list that includes “[a]ny period
of delay resulting from other proceedings concerning the defendant,
including. . . .” §3161(h)(1). This latter list is followed by a sublist,
each member (but one) of which is introduced by the phrase “delay
resulting from . . . .” Ibid. Those words are followed by a more specific description, such as “any pretrial motion” from its “filing”
“through the conclusion of the hearing on, or other prompt disposition
of, such motion.” §3161(h)(1)(D). The whole paragraph can be read
as requiring the automatic exclusion of the members of that specific
sublist, while referring to those members in general as “periods of delay” and as causing that delay, not because Congress intended the
judge to determine causation, but because, in a close to definitional
way, the words embody Congress’ own view of the matter. Thus, language alone cannot resolve the basic question presented. Pp. 4–7.
(b) Several considerations, taken together, compel the conclusion
that Congress intended subparagraph (D) to apply automatically.
First, subparagraph (D) and neighboring subparagraphs (F) and (H)
contain language that instructs courts to measure the time actually
consumed by the specified pretrial occurrence, but those subparagraphs do not mention the date on which the trial begins or was expected to begin. Second, during the 37 years since Congress enacted
the statute, every other Court of Appeals has rejected the Sixth Circuit’s interpretation. Third, the Sixth Circuit’s interpretation would
make the subparagraph (D) exclusion significantly more difficult to
administer, thereby hindering the Act’s efforts to secure fair and efficient trials. Fourth, the Court’s conclusion is reinforced by the difficulty of squaring the Sixth Circuit’s interpretation with the “automatic application” rule expressed in, e.g., Henderson v. United States,
476 U. S. 321, 327. Fifth, the legislative history also supports the
Court’s conclusion. Sixth, because all the subparagraphs but one under paragraph (1) begin with the phrase “delay resulting from,” the
Sixth Circuit’s interpretation would potentially extend well beyond
pretrial motions and encompass such matters as mental and physical
competency examinations, interlocutory appeals, consideration of
plea agreements, and the absence of essential witnesses. Pp. 7–12.
2. The Sixth Circuit also misinterpreted §3161(h)(1)(F), which excludes from the 70-day calculation “delay resulting from transporta-

