Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
tion of any defendant . . . to and from places of examination . . . , ex
cept that any time consumed in excess of ten days . . . shall be pre
sumed to be unreasonable.” The lower courts agreed that a total of
20 transportation days had elapsed when Tinklenberg was evaluated
for competency, and that because the Government provided no justi
fication, all days in excess of the 10 days specified in the statute were
unreasonable. However, the Sixth Circuit exempted 8 weekend days
and holidays from the count on the theory that subparagraph (F) in
corporated Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 45(a), which, at the
time, excluded such days when computing any period specified in
“rules” and “court order[s]” that was less than 11 days. Thus, the
Circuit considered only two transportation days excessive, and the
parties concede that the eight extra days were enough to make the
difference between compliance with, and violation of, the Act.
This Court exercises its discretion to consider the subsidiary sub
paragraph (F) question because doing so is fairer to Tinklenberg, who
has already served his sentence. In the Court’s view, subparagraph
(F) does not incorporate Rule 45. The Act does not say that it does so,
the Government gives no good reason for such a reading, and the
Rule itself, as it existed at the relevant time, stated it applied to rules
and court orders, but said nothing about statutes. The fact that Rule
45 is revised from time to time also argues against its direct applica
tion to subparagraph (F) because such changes, likely reflecting con
siderations other than those related to the Act, may well leave courts
treating similar defendants differently. The better reading includes
weekend days and holidays in subparagraph (F)’s 10-day period un
der the common-law rule that such days are included when counting
a statutory time period of 10 days unless a statute specifically ex
cludes them. Many courts have treated statutory time periods this
way, and Congress has tended specifically to exclude weekend days
and holidays from statutory time periods of 10 days when it intended
that result. Indeed, Rule 45 has been recently modified to require a
similar result. Pp. 12–14.
3. Although the Sixth Circuit’s interpretations of subparagraphs
(D) and (F) are both mistaken, the conclusions the court drew from
its interpretations in relevant part cancel each other out, such that
the court’s ultimate conclusion that Tinklenberg’s trial failed to com
ply with the Act’s deadline is correct. Pp. 14–15.
579 F. 3d 589, affirmed.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which KENNEDY,
GINSBURG, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined, and in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA and THOMAS, JJ., joined as to Parts I and III. SCALIA,
J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment,

