Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Opinion of the Court

based its answer primarily upon that language. It argued
that the phrase “delay resulting from,” read most natu
rally, requires a court to apply the exclusion provision only
to those “motion[s]” that “actually cause a delay, or the
expectation of a delay, of trial.” 579 F. 3d, at 598. We
agree that such a reading is linguistically reasonable, but
the Court of Appeals wrote that there “is no conceivable
way to read this language other than to require a delay to
result from any pretrial motion before excludable time
occurs.” Ibid. See also ibid. (“[T]he statute is clear”). And
here we disagree.
When the Court of Appeals says that its reading is the
only way any reasonable person could read this language,
it overstates its claim. For one thing, even though the
word “delay” ordinarily indicates a postponement, it need
not inevitably do so. Compare The American Heritage
Dictionary 480 (4th ed. 2000) (“[t]o postpone until a later
time” or “[t]o cause to be later or slower than expected or
desired”) with ibid. (“[t]he interval of time between two
events”). In any event, terms must be read in their statu
tory context in order to determine how the provision in
question should be applied in an individual case.
Statutory language that describes a particular circum
stance, for example, might require a judge to examine
each individual case to see if that circumstance is present.
But, alternatively, it might ask a judge instead to look at
more general matters, such as when a statute requires a
judge to increase the sentence of one convicted of a “crime
of violence” without requiring the judge to determine
whether the particular crime at issue in a particular case
was committed in a violent manner. See Taylor v. United
States, 495 U. S. 575, 602 (1990) (“crime of violence” char
acterizes the generic crime, not the particular act commit
ted). Similarly a statute that forbids the importation of
“wild birds” need not require a court to decide whether a
particular parrot is, in fact, wild or domesticated. It may

