Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 11–551
_________________

KEN L. SALAZAR, SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR,

ET AL., PETITIONERS v. RAMAH NAVAJO 

CHAPTER ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE TENTH CIRCUIT

[June 18, 2012] 


CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS, with whom JUSTICE
GINSBURG, JUSTICE BREYER, and JUSTICE ALITO join,
dissenting.
Today the Court concludes that the Federal Government
must pay the full amount of contract support costs incurred by the respondent Tribes, regardless of whether
there are any appropriated funds left for that purpose.
This despite the facts that payment of such costs is
“subject to the availability of appropriations,” a condition
expressly set forth in both the statute and the contracts
providing for such payment, 25 U. S. C. §§450j–1(b),
450l(c) (Model Agreement §1(b)(4)); that payment of the
costs for all tribes is “not to exceed” a set amount, e.g., 108
Stat. 2511, an amount that would be exceeded here; and
that the Secretary “is not required to reduce funding for
programs, projects, or activities serving a tribe to make
funds available to another tribe,” §450j–1(b). Because the
Court’s conclusion cannot be squared with these unambiguous restrictions on the payment of contract support costs,
I respectfully dissent.
The Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act provides: “Notwithstanding any other provision
in [the Act], the provision of funds under this [Act] is
subject to the availability of appropriations . . . .” Ibid.


2

SALAZAR v. RAMAH NAVAJO CHAPTER
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

This condition is repeated in the Tribes’ contracts with the
Government. App. 206; see also §450l(c) (Model Agreement §1(b)(4)). The question in this case is whether appropriations were “available” during fiscal years 1994
through 2001 to pay all the contract support costs incurred
by the Tribes. Only if appropriations were “available”
may the Tribes hold the Government liable for the unpaid
amounts.
Congress restricted the amount of funds “available” to
pay the Tribes’ contract support costs in two ways. First,
in each annual appropriations statute for the Department of the Interior from fiscal year 1994 to 2001, Congress provided that spending on contract support costs for
all tribes was “not to exceed” a certain amount. The
fiscal year 1995 appropriations statute is representative.
It provided: “For operation of Indian programs . . . ,
$1,526,778,000, . . . of which not to exceed $95,823,000
shall be for payments to tribes and tribal organizations for
contract support costs . . . .” 108 Stat. 2510–2511. As the
Court acknowledges, ante, at 11–12, the phrase “not to
exceed” has a settled meaning in federal appropriations
law. By use of the phrase, Congress imposed a cap on the
total funds available for contract support costs in each
fiscal year. See 2 General Accounting Office, Principles of
Federal Appropriations Law, p. 6–8 (2d ed. 1992) (hereinafter GAO Redbook) (“[T]he most effective way to establish
a maximum . . . earmark is by the words ‘not to exceed’ or
‘not more than’ ”).
Second, in §450j–1(b) itself—in the very same sentence
that conditions funding on the “availability of appropriations”—Congress provided that “the Secretary [of the
Interior] is not required to reduce funding for programs,
projects, or activities serving a tribe to make funds available to another tribe or tribal organization under [the Act].”
An agency may be required to shift funds from one object
to another, within statutory limits, when doing so is


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

necessary to meet a contractual obligation. See 1 GAO
Redbook, p. 2–26 (2d ed. 1991). But the “reduction” clause
in §450j–1(b) expressly provides that the Secretary is “not
required” to engage in such reprogramming to make one
tribe’s funds “available to another tribe.” It follows that
appropriations allocated for “programs, projects, or activities serving a tribe” are not “available” to another tribe,
unless the Secretary reallocates them. Contrary to the
Court’s suggestion, ante, at 13–14, the Government shares
this view that the “reduction” clause “specifically relieves
the Secretary of any obligation to make funds available to
one contractor by reducing payments to others.” Brief for
Petitioners 51 (citing Arctic Slope Native Assn., Ltd. v.
Sebelius, 629 F. 3d 1296, 1304 (CA Fed. 2010), cert. pending, No. 11–83 (filed July 18, 2011)).
Given these express restrictions established by Congress—which no one doubts are valid—I cannot agree with
the Court’s conclusion that appropriations were “available” to pay the Tribes’ contract support costs in full.
Once the Secretary had allocated all the funds appropriated
for contract support costs, no other funds could be used
for that purpose without violating the “not to exceed” restrictions in the relevant appropriations statutes. The
Court agrees. Ante, at 11–12. That leaves only one other
possible source of funds to pay the disputed costs in this
case: funds appropriated for contract support costs, but
allocated to pay such costs incurred by other tribes. Those
funds were not “available” either, however, because they
were “funding for programs, projects, or activities serving
a tribe,” and the Secretary was not required to reduce
such funding “to make funds available to another tribe.”
§450j–1(b).
In reaching a contrary conclusion, the Court fails to
appreciate the full significance of the “reduction” clause in
§450j–1(b). As construed by the Court, that clause merely
confirms that the Secretary “may allocate funds to one


4

SALAZAR v. RAMAH NAVAJO CHAPTER
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

tribe at the expense of another.” Ante, at 9. But as explained above, the clause does more than that: It also
establishes that when the Secretary does allocate funds to
one tribe at the expense of another, the latter tribe has no
right to those funds—the funds are not “available” to it.
The fact that the Secretary could have allocated the funds
to the other tribe is irrelevant. What matters is what the
Secretary actually does, and once he allocates the funds to
one tribe, they are not “available” to another.
The Court rejects this reading of the “reduction” clause,
on the ground that it would constitute a “radical departure
from ordinary Government contracting principles.” Ante,
at 13, n. 6. But the fact that the clause operates as a
constraint on the “availability of appropriations” is evident
not only from its text, which speaks in terms of “funds
available,” but also from its placement in the statute,
immediately following the “subject to the availability”
clause. Under the Court’s view, by contrast, the “reduction” clause merely “underscores the Secretary’s discretion
to allocate funds among tribes.” Ante, at 13. There is,
however, no reason to suppose that Congress enacted the
provision simply to confirm this “ordinary” rule. Ibid. We
generally try to avoid reading statutes to be so “insignificant.” TRW Inc. v. Andrews, 534 U. S. 19, 31 (2001)
(internal quotation marks omitted).
The Court maintains that its holding is compelled by
our decision in Cherokee Nation of Okla. v. Leavitt, 543
U. S. 631 (2005). Ante, at 8. Like respondents here, the
tribes in Cherokee Nation sued the Government for unpaid
contract support costs under the Act. Congress had appropriated certain sums to the Indian Health Service “[f]or
expenses necessary to carry out” the Act, e.g., 108 Stat.
2527–2528, but—unlike in this case—those appropriations
“contained no relevant statutory restriction,” 543 U. S., at
637. The Government in Cherokee Nation contended that
it was not obligated to pay the contract support costs as


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

promised, in light of the “reduction” clause in §450j–1(b).
The Government argued that the clause “makes nonbinding a promise to pay one tribe’s costs where doing so would
require funds that the Government would otherwise devote to ‘programs, projects, or activities serving . . . another tribe.’ ” Id., at 641 (quoting §450j–1(b)).
We ruled against the Government, but not because of
any disagreement with its reading of the “reduction”
clause. The basis for our decision was instead that “the
relevant congressional appropriations contained other
unrestricted funds, small in amount but sufficient to pay
the claims at issue.” 543 U. S., at 641 (emphasis altered).
Those funds were allocated for “ ‘inherent federal functions,’ such as the cost of running the Indian Health Service’s central Washington office.” Id., at 641–642. They
were not restricted by the “reduction” clause, because they
were not funds for “ ‘programs, projects, or activities serving . . . another tribe.’ ” Id., at 641 (quoting §450j–1(b)).
Nor were they restricted by the pertinent appropriations
statutes, which, as noted, contained no relevant limiting
language. See ibid. We therefore held that those funds—
which we described as “unrestricted” throughout our
opinion, id., at 641, 642, 643, 647—were available to pay
the disputed contract support costs.
As even the Tribes concede, Cherokee Nation does not
control this case. Tr. of Oral Arg. 39 (“I don’t think this
case is controlled by Cherokee” (counsel for the Tribes)).
The reason is not that the appropriations statutes in this
case contained “not to exceed” caps while those in Cherokee Nation did not. The Court is correct that appropriating an amount “for” a particular purpose has the same
effect as providing that appropriations for that purpose
are “not to exceed” that amount. Ante, at 11. What makes
this case different is where Congress drew the line. In
Cherokee Nation, the statutes capped funding for “expenses
necessary to carry out” the Act, a category that included


6

SALAZAR v. RAMAH NAVAJO CHAPTER
ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

funding for both “inherent federal functions” and contract
support costs. Accordingly, funding for one could be used
for the other, without violating the cap. Here, by contrast,
the statutes capped funding for contract support costs
specifically. Thus, once the Secretary exhausted those
funds, he could not reprogram other funds—such as
funds for “inherent federal functions”—to pay the costs.
With the caps in place, moreover, the “reduction” clause, as
explained above, rendered unavailable the only possible
source of funds left: funds already allocated for other
contract support costs. Unlike in Cherokee Nation, therefore, there were no unrestricted funds to pay the costs at
issue in this case. The Court’s quotation from Cherokee
Nation concerning “when an ‘ “unrestricted appropriation
is sufficient to fund the contract,” ’ ” ante, at 12 (emphasis
added) (quoting Cherokee Nation, supra, at 641), is accordingly beside the point.
The Court also relies on Ferris v. United States, 27 Ct.
Cl. 542 (1892). That case involved a government contract
to dredge the Delaware River. When work under the
contract stopped because funds from the relevant appropriation had been exhausted, a contractor sued the Government for breach of contract, and the Court of Claims
held that he was entitled to recover lost profits. As the
court explained, “[a] contractor who is one of several persons to be paid out of an appropriation is not chargeable
with knowledge of its administration, nor can his legal
rights be affected or impaired by its maladministration or
by its diversion, whether legal or illegal, to other objects.”
Id., at 546. That principle, however, cannot “dictate the
result in this case.” Ante, at 8. The statute in Ferris
appropriated an amount “[f]or improving [the] Delaware
River,” which prevented spending for that purpose beyond
the specified amount. 20 Stat. 364. But in that case, all
funds appropriated for that purpose were equally available to all contractors. Here that is not true; §450j–1(b)


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

ROBERTS, C. J., dissenting

makes clear that funds allocated to one contractor are not
available to another. Thus, the principle in Ferris does not
apply.
It is true, as the Court notes, ante, at 10, that each of
the Tribes’ contracts provides that the Act and the contract “shall be liberally construed for the benefit of the
Contractor.” App. 203; see also §450l(c) (Model Agreement
§1(a)(2)). But a provision can be construed “liberally” as
opposed to “strictly” only when there is some ambiguity to
construe. And here there is none. Congress spoke clearly
when it said that the provision of funds was “subject to the
availability of appropriations,” that spending on contract
support costs was “not to exceed” a specific amount, and
that the Secretary was “not required” to make funds allocated for one tribe’s costs “available” to another. The
unambiguous meaning of these provisions is that when
the Secretary has allocated the maximum amount of funds
appropriated each fiscal year for contract support costs,
there are no other appropriations “available” to pay any
remaining costs.
This is hardly a typical government contracts case.
Many government contracts contain a “subject to the
availability of appropriations” clause, and many appropriations statutes contain “not to exceed” language. But this
case involves not only those provisions but a third, relieving the Secretary of any obligation to make funds “available” to one contractor by reducing payments to others.
Such provisions will not always appear together, but when
they do, we must give them effect. Doing so here, I would
hold that the Tribes are not entitled to payment of their
contract support costs in full, and I would reverse the
contrary judgment of the Court of Appeals for the Tenth
Circuit.

