14

JONES v. HARRIS ASSOCIATES L. P.
Opinion of the Court

greater frequency of shareholder redemptions in a mutual
fund, the higher turnover of mutual fund assets, the more
burdensome regulatory and legal obligations, and higher
marketing costs. 527 F. 3d, at 634 (“Different clients call
for different commitments of time”). If the services ren
dered are sufficiently different that a comparison is not
probative, then courts must reject such a comparison.
Even if the services provided and fees charged to an inde
pendent fund are relevant, courts should be mindful that
the Act does not necessarily ensure fee parity between
mutual funds and institutional clients contrary to peti
tioners’ contentions. See id., at 631. (“Plaintiffs maintain
that a fiduciary may charge its controlled clients no more
than its independent clients”).8
By the same token, courts should not rely too heavily on
comparisons with fees charged to mutual funds by other
advisers. These comparisons are problematic because
these fees, like those challenged, may not be the product of
negotiations conducted at arm’s length. See 537 F. 3d, at
731–732 (opinion dissenting from denial of rehearing en
banc); Gartenberg, supra, at 929 (“Competition between
money market funds for shareholder business does not
——————
8 Comparisons with fees charged to institutional clients, therefore,
will not “doo[m] [a]ny [f]und to [t]rial.” Brief for Respondent 49; see
also Strougo v. BEA Assocs., 188 F. Supp. 2d 373, 384 (SDNY 2002)
(suggesting that fee comparisons, where permitted, might produce a
triable issue). First, plaintiffs bear the burden in showing that fees are
beyond the range of arm’s-length bargaining. §80a–35(b)(1). Second, a
showing of relevance requires courts to assess any disparity in fees in
light of the different markets for advisory services. Only where plain
tiffs have shown a large disparity in fees that cannot be explained by
the different services in addition to other evidence that the fee is
outside the arm’s-length range will trial be appropriate. Cf. App. to
Pet. for Cert. 30a; see also In re AllianceBernstein Mut. Fund Excessive
Fee Litigation, No. 04 Civ. 4885 (SWK), 2006 WL 1520222, *2 (SDNY,
May 31, 2006) (citing report finding that fee differential resulted from
different services and different liabilities assumed).

