2

JONES v. HARRIS ASSOCIATES L. P.
Syllabus
concept in the analogous bankruptcy context: “The essence of the test
is whether or not under all the circumstances the transaction carries
the earmarks of an arm’s length bargain. If it does not, equity will
set it aside.” Gartenberg’s approach fully incorporates this under
standing, insisting that all relevant circumstances be taken into ac
count and using the range of fees that might result from arm’s-length
bargaining as the benchmark for reviewing challenged fees. Pp. 9–
11.
(c) Gartenberg’s approach also reflects §36(b)’s place in the statu
tory scheme and, in particular, its relationship to the other protec
tions the Act affords investors. Under the Act, scrutiny of investment
adviser compensation by a fully informed mutual fund board, see
Burks v. Lasker, 441 U. S. 471, 482, and shareholder suits under
§36(b) are mutually reinforcing but independent mechanisms for con
trolling adviser conflicts of interest, see Daily Income Fund, Inc. v.
Fox, 464 U. S. 523, 541. In recognition of the disinterested directors’
role, the Act instructs courts to give board approval of an adviser’s
compensation “such consideration . . . as is deemed appropriate under
all the circumstances.” §80a–35(b)(1). It may be inferred from this
formulation that (1) a measure of deference to a board’s judgment
may be appropriate in some instances, and (2) the appropriate meas
ure of deference varies depending on the circumstances. Gartenberg
heeds these precepts. See 694 F. 2d, at 930. Pp. 11–12.
(d) The Court resolves the parties’ disagreements on several impor
tant questions. First, since the Act requires consideration of all rele
vant factors, §80a–35(b)(2), courts must give comparisons between
the fees an investment adviser charges a captive mutual fund and
the fees it charges its independent clients the weight they merit in
light of the similarities and differences between the services the cli
ents in question require. In doing so, the Court must be wary of in
apt comparisons based on significant differences between those ser
vices and must be mindful that the Act does not necessarily ensure
fee parity between the two types of clients. However, courts should
not rely too heavily on comparisons with fees charged mutual funds
by other advisers, which may not result from arm’s-length negotia
tions. Finally, a court’s evaluation of an investment adviser’s fiduci
ary duty must take into account both procedure and substance.
Where disinterested directors consider all of the relevant factors,
their decision to approve a particular fee agreement is entitled to
considerable weight, even if the court might weigh the factors differ
ently. Cf. Lasker, 441 U. S., at 486. In contrast, where the board’s
process was deficient or the adviser withheld important information,
the court must take a more rigorous look at the outcome. Id., at 484.
Gartenberg’s “so disproportionately large” standard, 694 F. 2d, at

