Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

since a “pension fund does not face the myriad of daily
purchases and redemptions throughout the nation which
must be handled by [a money market fund].” Id., at 930,
n. 3.6
B
The meaning of §36(b)’s reference to “a fiduciary duty
with respect to the receipt of compensation for services”7 is
hardly pellucid, but based on the terms of that provision
and the role that a shareholder action for breach of that
duty plays in the overall structure of the Act, we conclude
that Gartenberg was correct in its basic formulation of
what §36(b) requires: to face liability under §36(b), an
investment adviser must charge a fee that is so dispropor
tionately large that it bears no reasonable relationship to
the services rendered and could not have been the product
of arm’s length bargaining.
1
We begin with the language of §36(b). As noted, the
Seventh Circuit panel thought that the phrase “fiduciary
duty” incorporates a standard taken from the law of
trusts. Petitioners agree but maintain that the panel
——————
6 A money market fund differs from a mutual fund in both the types
of investments and the frequency of redemptions. A money market
fund often invests in short-term money market securities, such as
short-term securities of the United States Government or its agencies,
bank certificates of deposit, and commercial paper. Investors can
invest in such a fund for as little as a day, so, from the investor’s
perspective, the fund resembles an investment “more like a bank
account than [a] traditional investment in securities.” Id., at 925.
7 Section 36 (b) provides as follows:
“[T]he investment adviser of a registered investment company shall
be deemed to have a fiduciary duty with respect to the receipt of com
pensation for services, or of payments of a material nature, paid by
such registered investment company, or by the security holders thereof,
to such investment adviser.” 84 Stat. 1429 (codified at 15 U. S. C.
§80a–35(b)).

