12

JONES v. HARRIS ASSOCIATES L. P.
Opinion of the Court

adviser. Id., at 484 (internal quotation marks omitted).
To provide these directors with the information needed to
judge whether an adviser’s compensation is excessive, the
Act requires advisers to furnish all information “reasona
bly . . . necessary to evaluate the terms” of the adviser’s
contract, 15 U. S. C. §80a–15(c), and gives the SEC the
authority to enforce that requirement. See §80a–41.
Board scrutiny of adviser compensation and shareholder
suits under §36(b), 84 Stat. 1429, are mutually reinforcing
but independent mechanisms for controlling conflicts. See
Daily Income Fund, 464 U. S., at 541 (Congress intended
for §36(b) suits and directorial approval of adviser con
tracts to act as “independent checks on excessive fees”);
Kamen, 500 U. S., at 108 (“Congress added §36(b) to the
[Act] in 1970 because it concluded that the shareholders
should not have to rely solely on the fund’s directors to
assure reasonable adviser fees, notwithstanding the in
creased disinterestedness of the board” (internal quotation
marks omitted)).
In recognition of the role of the disinterested directors,
the Act instructs courts to give board approval of an ad
viser’s compensation “such consideration . . . as is deemed
appropriate under all the circumstances.” §80a–35(b)(2).
Cf. Burks, 441 U. S., at 485 (“[I]t would have been para
doxical for Congress to have been willing to rely largely
upon [boards of directors as] ‘watchdogs’ to protect share
holder interests and yet, where the ‘watchdogs’ have done
precisely that, require that they be totally muzzled”).
From this formulation, two inferences may be drawn.
First, a measure of deference to a board’s judgment may
be appropriate in some instances. Second, the appro
priate measure of deference varies depending on the
circumstances.
Gartenberg heeds these precepts. Gartenberg advises
that “the expertise of the independent trustees of a fund,
whether they are fully informed about all facts bearing on

