8

JONES v. HARRIS ASSOCIATES L. P.
Opinion of the Court

respect to compensation but concluded that “the test is
essentially whether the fee schedule represents a charge
within the range of what would have been negotiated at
arm’s-length in the light of all of the surrounding circum
stances.” 694 F. 2d, at 928. The Second Circuit elabo
rated that, “[t]o be guilty of a violation of §36(b), . . . the
adviser-manager must charge a fee that is so dispropor
tionately large that it bears no reasonable relationship to
the services rendered and could not have been the product
of arm’s-length bargaining.” Ibid. “To make this determi
nation,” the Court stated, “all pertinent facts must be
weighed,” id., at 929, and the Court specifically mentioned
“the adviser-manager’s cost in providing the service, . . .
the extent to which the adviser-manager realizes econo
mies of scale as the fund grows larger, and the volume of
orders which must be processed by the manager.” Id., at
930.5 Observing that competition among advisers for the
business of managing a fund may be “virtually non
existent,” the Court rejected the suggestion that “the
principal factor to be considered in evaluating a fee’s
fairness is the price charged by other similar advisers to
funds managed by them,” although the Court did not
suggest that this factor could not be “taken into account.”
Id., at 929. The Court likewise rejected the “argument
that the lower fees charged by investment advisers to
large pension funds should be used as a criterion for de
termining fair advisory fees for money market funds,”
——————
5 Other factors cited by the Gartenberg court include (1) the nature
and quality of the services provided to the fund and shareholders; (2)
the profitability of the fund to the adviser; (3) any “fall-out financial
benefits,” those collateral benefits that accrue to the adviser because of
its relationship with the mutual fund; (4) comparative fee structure
(meaning a comparison of the fees with those paid by similar funds);
and (5) the independence, expertise, care, and conscientiousness of the
board in evaluating adviser compensation. 694 F. 2d, at 929–932
(internal quotation marks omitted).

