(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

JONES ET AL. v. HARRIS ASSOCIATES L. P.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–586.

Argued November 2, 2009—Decided March 30, 2010

Petitioners, shareholders in mutual funds managed by respondent in
vestment adviser, filed this suit alleging that respondent violated
§36(b)(1) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, which imposes a
“fiduciary duty [on investment advisers] with respect to the receipt of
compensation for services,” 15 U. S. C. §80a–35(b). Granting respon
dent summary judgment, the District Court concluded that petition
ers had not raised a triable issue of fact under the applicable stan
dard set forth in Gartenberg v. Merrill Lynch Asset Management, Inc.,
694 F. 2d 923, 928 (CA2): “[T]he test is essentially whether the fee
schedule represents a charge within the range of what would have
been negotiated at arm’s-length in light of all of the surrounding cir
cumstances. . . . To be guilty of a violation of §36(b), . . . the adviser
must charge a fee that is so disproportionately large it bears no rea
sonable relationship to the services rendered and could not have been
the product of arm’s length bargaining.” Rejecting the Gartenberg
standard, the Seventh Circuit panel affirmed based on different rea
soning.
Held: Based on §36(b)’s terms and the role that a shareholder action for
breach of the investment adviser’s fiduciary duty plays in the Act’s
overall structure, Gartenberg applied the correct standard. Pp. 7–17.
(a) A consensus has developed regarding the standard Gartenberg
set forth over 25 years ago: The standard has been adopted by other
federal courts, and the Securities and Exchange Commission’s regu
lations have recognized, and formalized, Gartenberg-like factors. Both
petitioners and respondents generally endorse the Gartenberg ap
proach but disagree in some respects about its meaning. Pp. 7–9.
(b) Section 36(b)’s “fiduciary duty” phrase finds its meaning in Pep
per v. Linton, 308 U. S. 295, 306–307, where the Court discussed the

