Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

support an inference that competition must therefore also
exist between [investment advisers] for fund business.
The former may be vigorous even though the latter is
virtually non-existent”).
Finally, a court’s evaluation of an investment adviser’s
fiduciary duty must take into account both procedure and
substance. See 15 U. S. C. §80a–35(b)(2) (requiring defer
ence to board’s consideration “as is deemed appropriate
under all the circumstances”); cf. Daily Income Fund, 464
U. S., at 541 (“Congress intended security holder and SEC
actions under §36(b), on the one hand, and directorial
approval of adviser contracts, on the other, to act as inde
pendent checks on excessive fees”). Where a board’s proc
ess for negotiating and reviewing investment-adviser
compensation is robust, a reviewing court should afford
commensurate deference to the outcome of the bargaining
process. See Burks, 441 U. S., at 484 (unaffiliated direc
tors serve as “independent watchdogs”). Thus, if the
disinterested directors considered the relevant factors,
their decision to approve a particular fee agreement is
entitled to considerable weight, even if a court might
weigh the factors differently. Cf. id., at 485. This is not to
deny that a fee may be excessive even if it was negotiated
by a board in possession of all relevant information, but
such a determination must be based on evidence that the
fee “is so disproportionately large that it bears no reason
able relationship to the services rendered and could not
have been the product of arm’s-length bargaining.” Gar
tenberg, supra, at 928.
In contrast, where the board’s process was deficient or
the adviser withheld important information, the court
must take a more rigorous look at the outcome. When an
investment adviser fails to disclose material information
to the board, greater scrutiny is justified because the
withheld information might have hampered the board’s
ability to function as “an independent check upon the

