Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

the surrounding circumstances.” App. 52.
The District Court granted summary judgment for
Harris Associates. Applying the standard adopted in
Gartenberg v. Merrill Lynch Asset Management, Inc., 694
F. 2d 923 (CA2 1982), the court concluded that petitioners
had failed to raise a triable issue of fact as to “whether the
fees charged . . . were so disproportionately large that they
could not have been the result of arm’s-length bargaining.”
App. to Pet. for Cert. 29a. The District Court assumed
that it was relevant to compare the challenged fees with
those that Harris Associates charged its other clients. Id.,
at 30a. But in light of those comparisons as well as com
parisons with fees charged by other investment advisers to
similar mutual funds, the Court held that it could not
reasonably be found that the challenged fees were outside
the range that could have been the product of arm’s-length
bargaining. Id., at 29a–32a.
A panel of the Seventh Circuit affirmed based on differ
ent reasoning, explicitly “disapprov[ing] the Gartenberg
approach.” 527 F. 3d 627, 632 (2008). Looking to trust
law, the panel noted that, while a trustee “owes an obliga
tion of candor in negotiation,” a trustee, at the time of the
creation of a trust, “may negotiate in his own interest and
accept what the settlor or governance institution agrees to
pay.” Ibid. (citing Restatement (Second) of Trusts §242,
and Comment f)). The panel thus reasoned that “[a] fidu
ciary duty differs from rate regulation. A fiduciary must
make full disclosure and play no tricks but is not subject
to a cap on compensation.” 527 F. 3d, at 632. In the
panel’s view, the amount of an adviser’s compensation
would be relevant only if the compensation were “so un
usual” as to give rise to an inference “that deceit must
have occurred, or that the persons responsible for decision
have abdicated.” Ibid.
The panel argued that this understanding of §36(b) is
consistent with the forces operating in the contemporary

