16

JONES v. HARRIS ASSOCIATES L. P.
Opinion of the Court

management.” Burks, supra, at 484 (internal quotation
marks omitted). “Section 36(b) is sharply focused on the
question of whether the fees themselves were excessive.”
Migdal v. Rowe Price-Fleming Int’l, Inc., 248 F. 3d 321,
328 (CA4 2001); see also 15 U. S. C. §80a–35(b) (imposing
a “fiduciary duty with respect to the receipt of compensa
tion for services, or of payments of a material nature”
(emphasis added)). But an adviser’s compliance or non
compliance with its disclosure obligations is a factor that
must be considered in calibrating the degree of deference
that is due a board’s decision to approve an adviser’s fees.
It is also important to note that the standard for fiduci
ary breach under §36(b) does not call for judicial second
guessing of informed board decisions. See Daily Income
Fund, supra, at 538; see also Burks, 441 U. S., at 483
(“Congress consciously chose to address the conflict-of
interest problem through the Act’s independent-directors
section, rather than through more drastic remedies”).
“[P]otential conflicts [of interests] may justify some re
straints upon the unfettered discretion of even disinter
ested mutual fund directors, particularly in their transac
tions with the investment adviser,” but they do not
suggest that a court may supplant the judgment of disin
terested directors apprised of all relevant information,
without additional evidence that the fee exceeds the arm’s
length range. Id., at 481. In reviewing compensation
under §36(b), the Act does not require courts to engage in
a precise calculation of fees representative of arm’s-length
bargaining. See 527 F. 3d, at 633 (“Judicial price-setting
does not accompany fiduciary duties”). As recounted
above, Congress rejected a “reasonableness” requirement
that was criticized as charging the courts with rate-setting
responsibilities. See Daily Income Fund, supra, at 538–
540. Congress’ approach recognizes that courts are not
well suited to make such precise calculations. Cf. General
Motors Corp. v. Tracy, 519 U. S. 278, 308 (1997) (“[T]he

