Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–1470
_________________

MARY BERGHUIS, WARDEN, PETITIONER v. VAN 

CHESTER THOMPKINS 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT

[June 1, 2010]


JUSTICE KENNEDY delivered the opinion of the Court.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Cir
cuit, in a habeas corpus proceeding challenging a Michi
gan conviction for first-degree murder and certain other
offenses, ruled that there had been two separate constitu
tional errors in the trial that led to the jury’s guilty ver
dict. First, the Court of Appeals determined that a state
ment by the accused, relied on at trial by the prosecution,
had been elicited in violation of Miranda v. Arizona, 384
U. S. 436 (1966). Second, it found that failure to ask for
an instruction relating to testimony from an accomplice
was ineffective assistance by defense counsel. See Strick
land v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668 (1984). Both of these
contentions had been rejected in Michigan courts and in
the habeas corpus proceedings before the United States
District Court. Certiorari was granted to review the deci
sion by the Court of Appeals on both points. The warden
of a Michigan correctional facility is the petitioner here,
and Van Chester Thompkins, who was convicted, is the
respondent.


2

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
Opinion of the Court

I

A

On January 10, 2000, a shooting occurred outside a mall
in Southfield, Michigan. Among the victims was Samuel
Morris, who died from multiple gunshot wounds. The
other victim, Frederick France, recovered from his injuries
and later testified. Thompkins, who was a suspect, fled.
About one year later he was found in Ohio and arrested
there.
Two Southfield police officers traveled to Ohio to inter
rogate Thompkins, then awaiting transfer to Michigan.
The interrogation began around 1:30 p.m. and lasted
about three hours. The interrogation was conducted in a
room that was 8 by 10 feet, and Thompkins sat in a chair
that resembled a school desk (it had an arm on it that
swings around to provide a surface to write on). App.
144a–145a. At the beginning of the interrogation, one of
the officers, Detective Helgert, presented Thompkins with
a form derived from the Miranda rule. It stated:
“NOTIFICATION OF CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS
AND STATEMENT
“1. You have the right to remain silent.
“2. Anything you say can and will be used against
you in a court of law.
“3. You have a right to talk to a lawyer before an
swering any questions and you have the right to have
a lawyer present with you while you are answering
any questions.
“4. If you cannot afford to hire a lawyer, one will be
appointed to represent you before any questioning, if
you wish one.
“5. You have the right to decide at any time before or
during questioning to use your right to remain silent
and your right to talk with a lawyer while you are be
ing questioned.” Brief for Petitioner 60 (some capi


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of the Court

talization omitted).
Helgert asked Thompkins to read the fifth warning out
loud. App. 8a. Thompkins complied. Helgert later said
this was to ensure that Thompkins could read, and Hel
gert concluded that Thompkins understood English. Id.,
at 9a. Helgert then read the other four Miranda warnings
out loud and asked Thompkins to sign the form to demon
strate that he understood his rights. App. 8a–9a. Thomp
kins declined to sign the form. The record contains con
flicting evidence about whether Thompkins then verbally
confirmed that he understood the rights listed on the form.
Compare id., at 9a (at a suppression hearing, Helgert
testified that Thompkins verbally confirmed that he un
derstood his rights), with id., at 148a (at trial, Helgert
stated, “I don’t know that I orally asked him” whether
Thompkins understood his rights).
Officers began an interrogation. At no point during the
interrogation did Thompkins say that he wanted to re
main silent, that he did not want to talk with the police, or
that he wanted an attorney. Id., at 10a. Thompkins was
“[l]argely” silent during the interrogation, which lasted
about three hours. Id., at 19a. He did give a few limited
verbal responses, however, such as “yeah,” “no,” or “I don’t
know.” And on occasion he communicated by nodding his
head. Id., at 23a. Thompkins also said that he “didn’t
want a peppermint” that was offered to him by the police
and that the chair he was “sitting in was hard.” Id., at
152a.
About 2 hours and 45 minutes into the interrogation,
Helgert asked Thompkins, “Do you believe in God?” Id., at
11a, 153a. Thompkins made eye contact with Helgert and
said “Yes,” as his eyes “well[ed] up with tears.” Id., at 11a.
Helgert asked, “Do you pray to God?” Thompkins said
“Yes.” Id., at 11a, 153a. Helgert asked, “Do you pray to
God to forgive you for shooting that boy down?” Id., at


4

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
Opinion of the Court

153a. Thompkins answered “Yes” and looked away. Ibid.
Thompkins refused to make a written confession, and the
interrogation ended about 15 minutes later. Id., at 11a.
Thompkins was charged with first-degree murder,
assault with intent to commit murder, and certain fire
arms-related offenses. He moved to suppress the state
ments made during the interrogation. He argued that he
had invoked his Fifth Amendment right to remain silent,
requiring police to end the interrogation at once, see
Michigan v. Mosley, 423 U. S. 96, 103 (1975) (citing
Miranda, 384 U. S., at 474), that he had not waived his
right to remain silent, and that his inculpatory statements
were involuntary. The trial court denied the motion.
At trial, the prosecution’s theory was that Thompkins
shot the victims from the passenger seat of a van driven
by Eric Purifoy. Purifoy testified that he had been driving
the van and that Thompkins was in the passenger seat
while another man, one Myzell Woodward, was in the
back. The defense strategy was to pin the blame on Puri
foy. Purifoy testified he did not see who fired the weapon
because the van was stopped and he was bending over
near the floor when shots were fired. Purifoy explained
that, just after the shooting, Thompkins, holding a pistol,
told Purifoy, “What the hell you doing? Pull off.” Purifoy
then drove away from the scene. App. 170a.
So that the Thompkins jury could assess Purifoy’s credi
bility and knowledge, the prosecution elicited testimony
from Purifoy that he had been tried earlier for the shoot
ing under an aiding-and-abetting theory. Purifoy and
Detective Helgert testified that a jury acquitted him of the
murder and assault charges, convicted him of carrying a
concealed weapon in a motor vehicle, and hung on two
other firearms offenses to which he later pleaded guilty.
At Purifoy’s trial, the prosecution had argued that Purifoy
was the driver and Thompkins was the shooter. This was
consistent with the prosecution’s argument at Thomp


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

kins’s trial.
After Purifoy’s trial had ended—but before Thompkins’s
trial began—Purifoy sent Thompkins some letters. The
letters expressed Purifoy’s disappointment that Thomp
kins’s family thought Purifoy was a “snitch” and a “rat.”
Id., at 179a–180a. In one letter Purifoy offered to send a
copy of his trial transcript to Thompkins as proof that
Purifoy did not place the blame on Thompkins for the
shooting. Id., at 180a. The letters also contained state
ments by Purifoy that claimed they were both innocent.
Id., at 178a–179a. At Thompkins’s trial, the prosecution
suggested that one of Purifoy’s letters appeared to give
Thompkins a trial strategy. It was, the prosecution sug
gested, that Woodward shot the victims, allowing Purifoy
and Thompkins to say they dropped to the floor when the
shooting started. Id., at 187a–189a.
During closing arguments, the prosecution suggested
that Purifoy lied when he testified that he did not see
Thompkins shoot the victims:
“Did Eric Purifoy’s Jury make the right decision? I’m
not here to judge that. You are not bound by what his
Jury found. Take his testimony for what it was, [a]
twisted attempt to help not just an acquaintance but
his tight buddy.” Id., at 202a.
Defense counsel did not object. Defense counsel also did
not ask for an instruction informing the jury that it could
consider evidence of the outcome of Purifoy’s trial only to
assess Purifoy’s credibility, not to establish Thompkins’s
guilt.
The jury found Thompkins guilty on all counts. He was
sentenced to life in prison without parole.
B
The trial court denied a motion for new trial filed by
Thompkins’s appellate counsel. The trial court rejected


6

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
Opinion of the Court

the claim of ineffective assistance of trial counsel for fail
ure to ask for a limiting instruction regarding the outcome
of Purifoy’s trial, reasoning that this did not prejudice
Thompkins. Id., at 236a.
Thompkins appealed this ruling, along with the trial
court’s refusal to suppress his pretrial statements under
Miranda. The Michigan Court of Appeals rejected the
Miranda claim, ruling that Thompkins had not invoked
his right to remain silent and had waived it. It also re
jected the ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claim, finding
that Thompkins failed to show that evidence of Purifoy’s
conviction for firearms offenses resulted in prejudice. App.
to Pet. for Cert. 74a–82a. The Michigan Supreme Court
denied discretionary review. 471 Mich. 866, 683 N. W. 2d
676 (2004) (table).
Thompkins filed a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in
the United States District Court for the Eastern District of
Michigan.
The District Court rejected Thompkins’s
Miranda and ineffective-assistance claims. App. to Pet.
for Cert. 39a–72a. It noted that, under the Antiterrorism
and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), a fed
eral court cannot grant a petition for a writ of habeas
corpus unless the state court’s adjudication of the merits
was “contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application
of, clearly established Federal law.”
28 U. S. C.
§2254(d)(1). The District Court reasoned that Thompkins
did not invoke his right to remain silent and was not
coerced into making statements during the interrogation.
It held further that the Michigan Court of Appeals was not
unreasonable in determining that Thompkins had waived
his right to remain silent.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
reversed, ruling for Thompkins on both his Miranda and
ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claims. 547 F. 3d 572
(2008). The Court of Appeals ruled that the state court, in
rejecting Thompkins’s Miranda claim, unreasonably ap


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of the Court

plied clearly established federal law and based its decision
on an unreasonable determination of the facts. See 28
U. S. C. §2254(d). The Court of Appeals acknowledged
that a waiver of the right to remain silent need not be
express, as it can be “ ‘inferred from the actions and words
of the person interrogated.’ ” 547 F. 3d, at 582 (quoting
North Carolina v. Butler, 441 U. S. 369, 373 (1979)). The
panel held, nevertheless, that the state court was unrea
sonable in finding an implied waiver in the circumstances
here. The Court of Appeals found that the state court
unreasonably determined the facts because “the evidence
demonstrates that Thompkins was silent for two hours
and forty-five minutes.” 547 F. 3d, at 586. According to
the Court of Appeals, Thompkins’s “persistent silence for
nearly three hours in response to questioning and re
peated invitations to tell his side of the story offered a
clear and unequivocal message to the officers: Thompkins
did not wish to waive his rights.” Id., at 588.
The Court of Appeals next determined that the state
court unreasonably applied clearly established federal law
by rejecting Thompkins’s ineffective-assistance-of-counsel
claim based on counsel’s failure to ask for a limiting in
struction regarding Purifoy’s acquittal. The Court of
Appeals asserted that because Thompkins’s central strat
egy was to pin the blame on Purifoy, there was a reason
able probability that the result of Thompkins’s trial would
have been different if there had been a limiting instruction
regarding Purifoy’s acquittal.
We granted certiorari. 557 U. S. ___ (2009).
II
Under AEDPA, a federal court may not grant a habeas
corpus application “with respect to any claim that was
adjudicated on the merits in State court proceedings,” 28
U. S. C. §2254(d), unless the state court’s decision “was
contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application of,


8

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
Opinion of the Court

clearly established Federal law, as determined by the
Supreme Court of the United States,” §2254(d)(1), or “was
based on an unreasonable determination of the facts in
light of the evidence presented in the State court proceed
ing,” §2254(d)(2). See Knowles v. Mirzayance, 556 U. S.
___, ___ (2009) (slip op., at 1). The relevant state-court
decision here is the Michigan Court of Appeals’ decision
affirming Thompkins’s conviction and rejecting his
Miranda and ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claims on
the merits.
III
The Miranda Court formulated a warning that must be
given to suspects before they can be subjected to custodial
interrogation. The substance of the warning still must be
given to suspects today. A suspect in custody must be
advised as follows:
“He must be warned prior to any questioning that he
has the right to remain silent, that anything he says
can be used against him in a court of law, that he has
the right to the presence of an attorney, and that if he
cannot afford an attorney one will be appointed for
him prior to any questioning if he so desires.” 384
U. S., at 479.
All concede that the warning given in this case was in full
compliance with these requirements. The dispute centers
on the response—or nonresponse—from the suspect.
A
Thompkins makes various arguments that his answers
to questions from the detectives were inadmissible. He
first contends that he “invoke[d] his privilege” to remain
silent by not saying anything for a sufficient period of
time, so the interrogation should have “cease[d]” before he
made his inculpatory statements. Id., at 474; see Mosley,
423 U. S., at 103 (police must “ ‘scrupulously hono[r]’ ” this


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

“critical safeguard” when the accused invokes his or her
“ ‘right to cut off questioning’ ” (quoting Miranda, supra, at
474, 479)).
This argument is unpersuasive. In the context of invok
ing the Miranda right to counsel, the Court in Davis v.
United States, 512 U. S. 452, 459 (1994), held that a sus
pect must do so “unambiguously.” If an accused makes a
statement concerning the right to counsel “that is ambigu
ous or equivocal” or makes no statement, the police are not
required to end the interrogation, ibid., or ask questions to
clarify whether the accused wants to invoke his or her
Miranda rights, 512 U. S., at 461–462.
The Court has not yet stated whether an invocation of
the right to remain silent can be ambiguous or equivocal,
but there is no principled reason to adopt different stan
dards for determining when an accused has invoked the
Miranda right to remain silent and the Miranda right to
counsel at issue in Davis. See, e.g., Solem v. Stumes, 465
U. S. 638, 648 (1984) (“[M]uch of the logic and language of
[Mosley],” which discussed the Miranda right to remain
silent, “could be applied to the invocation of the [Miranda
right to counsel]”). Both protect the privilege against
compulsory self-incrimination, Miranda, supra, at 467–
473, by requiring an interrogation to cease when either
right is invoked, Mosley, supra, at 103 (citing Miranda,
supra, at 474); Fare v. Michael C., 442 U. S. 707, 719
(1979).
There is good reason to require an accused who wants to
invoke his or her right to remain silent to do so unambigu
ously. A requirement of an unambiguous invocation of
Miranda rights results in an objective inquiry that
“avoid[s] difficulties of proof and . . . provide[s] guidance to
officers” on how to proceed in the face of ambiguity. Davis,
512 U. S., at 458–459. If an ambiguous act, omission, or
statement could require police to end the interrogation,
police would be required to make difficult decisions about


10

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
Opinion of the Court

an accused’s unclear intent and face the consequence of
suppression “if they guess wrong.” Id., at 461. Suppres
sion of a voluntary confession in these circumstances
would place a significant burden on society’s interest in
prosecuting criminal activity. See id., at 459–461; Moran
v. Burbine, 475 U. S. 412, 427 (1986). Treating an am
biguous or equivocal act, omission, or statement as an
invocation of Miranda rights “might add marginally to
Miranda’s goal of dispelling the compulsion inherent in
custodial interrogation.” Burbine, 475 U. S., at 425. But
“as Miranda holds, full comprehension of the rights to
remain silent and request an attorney are sufficient to
dispel whatever coercion is inherent in the interrogation
process.” Id., at 427; see Davis, supra, at 460.
Thompkins did not say that he wanted to remain silent
or that he did not want to talk with the police. Had he
made either of these simple, unambiguous statements, he
would have invoked his “ ‘right to cut off questioning.’ ”
Mosley, supra, at 103 (quoting Miranda, supra, at 474).
Here he did neither, so he did not invoke his right to re
main silent.
B
We next consider whether Thompkins waived his right
to remain silent. Even absent the accused’s invocation of
the right to remain silent, the accused’s statement during
a custodial interrogation is inadmissible at trial unless the
prosecution can establish that the accused “in fact know
ingly and voluntarily waived [Miranda] rights” when
making the statement. Butler, 441 U. S., at 373. The
waiver inquiry “has two distinct dimensions”: waiver must
be “voluntary in the sense that it was the product of a free
and deliberate choice rather than intimidation, coercion,
or deception,” and “made with a full awareness of both the
nature of the right being abandoned and the consequences
of the decision to abandon it.” Burbine, supra, at 421.


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

Some language in Miranda could be read to indicate
that waivers are difficult to establish absent an explicit
written waiver or a formal, express oral statement.
Miranda said “a valid waiver will not be presumed simply
from the silence of the accused after warnings are given or
simply from the fact that a confession was in fact eventu
ally obtained.” 384 U. S., at 475; see id., at 470 (“No effec
tive waiver . . . can be recognized unless specifically made
after the [Miranda] warnings . . . have been given”). In
addition, the Miranda Court stated that “a heavy burden
rests on the government to demonstrate that the defen
dant knowingly and intelligently waived his privilege
against self-incrimination and his right to retained or
appointed counsel.” Id., at 475.
The course of decisions since Miranda, informed by the
application of Miranda warnings in the whole course of
law enforcement, demonstrates that waivers can be estab
lished even absent formal or express statements of waiver
that would be expected in, say, a judicial hearing to de
termine if a guilty plea has been properly entered. Cf.
Fed. Rule Crim. Proc. 11. The main purpose of Miranda is
to ensure that an accused is advised of and understands
the right to remain silent and the right to counsel. See
Davis, supra, at 460; Burbine, supra, at 427. Thus, “[i]f
anything, our subsequent cases have reduced the impact
of the Miranda rule on legitimate law enforcement while
reaffirming the decision’s core ruling that unwarned
statements may not be used as evidence in the prosecu
tion’s case in chief.” Dickerson v. United States, 530 U. S.
428, 443–444 (2000).
One of the first cases to decide the meaning and import
of Miranda with respect to the question of waiver was
North Carolina v. Butler. The Butler Court, after discuss
ing some of the problems created by the language in
Miranda, established certain important propositions.
Butler interpreted the Miranda language concerning the


12

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
Opinion of the Court

“heavy burden” to show waiver, 384 U. S., at 475, in ac
cord with usual principles of determining waiver, which
can include waiver implied from all the circumstances.
See Butler, supra, at 373, 376. And in a later case, the
Court stated that this “heavy burden” is not more than the
burden to establish waiver by a preponderance of the
evidence. Colorado v. Connelly, 479 U. S. 157, 168 (1986).
The prosecution therefore does not need to show that a
waiver of Miranda rights was express. An “implicit
waiver” of the “right to remain silent” is sufficient to admit
a suspect’s statement into evidence. Butler, supra, at 376.
Butler made clear that a waiver of Miranda rights may be
implied through “the defendant’s silence, coupled with an
understanding of his rights and a course of conduct indi
cating waiver.” 441 U. S., at 373. The Court in Butler
therefore “retreated” from the “language and tenor of the
Miranda opinion,” which “suggested that the Court would
require that a waiver . . . be ‘specifically made.’ ” Con
necticut v. Barrett, 479 U. S. 523, 531–532 (1987) (Bren
nan, J., concurring in judgment).
If the State establishes that a Miranda warning was
given and the accused made an uncoerced statement, this
showing, standing alone, is insufficient to demonstrate “a
valid waiver” of Miranda rights. Miranda, supra, at 475.
The prosecution must make the additional showing that
the accused understood these rights. See Colorado v.
Spring, 479 U. S. 564, 573–575 (1987); Barrett, supra, at
530; Burbine, supra, at 421–422. Cf. Tague v. Louisiana,
444 U. S. 469, 469, 471 (1980) (per curiam) (no evidence
that accused understood his Miranda rights); Carnley v.
Cochran, 369 U. S. 506, 516 (1962) (government could not
show that accused “understandingly” waived his right to
counsel in light of “silent record”). Where the prosecution
shows that a Miranda warning was given and that it was
understood by the accused, an accused’s uncoerced state
ment establishes an implied waiver of the right to remain


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of the Court

silent.
Although Miranda imposes on the police a rule that is
both formalistic and practical when it prevents them from
interrogating suspects without first providing them with a
Miranda warning, see Burbine, 475 U. S., at 427, it does
not impose a formalistic waiver procedure that a suspect
must follow to relinquish those rights. As a general
proposition, the law can presume that an individual who,
with a full understanding of his or her rights, acts in a
manner inconsistent with their exercise has made a delib
erate choice to relinquish the protection those rights af
ford. See, e.g., Butler, supra, at 372–376; Connelly, supra,
at 169–170 (“There is obviously no reason to require more
in the way of a ‘voluntariness’ inquiry in the Miranda
waiver context than in the [due process] confession con
text”). The Court’s cases have recognized that a waiver of
Miranda rights need only meet the standard of Johnson v.
Zerbst, 304 U. S. 458, 464 (1938). See Butler, supra, at
374–375; Miranda, supra, at 475–476 (applying Zerbst
standard of intentional relinquishment of a known right).
As Butler recognized, 441 U. S., at 375–376, Miranda
rights can therefore be waived through means less formal
than a typical waiver on the record in a courtroom, cf. Fed.
Rule Crim. Proc. 11, given the practical constraints and
necessities of interrogation and the fact that Miranda’s
main protection lies in advising defendants of their rights,
see Davis, 512 U. S., at 460; Burbine, 475 U. S., at 427.
The record in this case shows that Thompkins waived
his right to remain silent. There is no basis in this case to
conclude that he did not understand his rights; and on
these facts it follows that he chose not to invoke or rely on
those rights when he did speak. First, there is no conten
tion that Thompkins did not understand his rights; and
from this it follows that he knew what he gave up when he
spoke. See id., at 421. There was more than enough
evidence in the record to conclude that Thompkins under


14

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
Opinion of the Court

stood his Miranda rights. Thompkins received a written
copy of the Miranda warnings; Detective Helgert deter
mined that Thompkins could read and understand Eng
lish; and Thompkins was given time to read the warnings.
Thompkins, furthermore, read aloud the fifth warning,
which stated that “you have the right to decide at any time
before or during questioning to use your right to remain
silent and your right to talk with a lawyer while you are
being questioned.” Brief for Petitioner 60 (capitalization
omitted). He was thus aware that his right to remain
silent would not dissipate after a certain amount of time
and that police would have to honor his right to be silent
and his right to counsel during the whole course of inter
rogation. Those rights, the warning made clear, could be
asserted at any time. Helgert, moreover, read the warn
ings aloud.
Second, Thompkins’s answer to Detective Helgert’s
question about whether Thompkins prayed to God for
forgiveness for shooting the victim is a “course of conduct
indicating waiver” of the right to remain silent. Butler,
supra, at 373. If Thompkins wanted to remain silent, he
could have said nothing in response to Helgert’s questions,
or he could have unambiguously invoked his Miranda
rights and ended the interrogation. The fact that Thomp
kins made a statement about three hours after receiving a
Miranda warning does not overcome the fact that he
engaged in a course of conduct indicating waiver. Police
are not required to rewarn suspects from time to time.
Thompkins’s answer to Helgert’s question about praying
to God for forgiveness for shooting the victim was suffi
cient to show a course of conduct indicating waiver. This
is confirmed by the fact that before then Thompkins
had given sporadic answers to questions throughout the
interrogation.
Third, there is no evidence that Thompkins’s statement
was coerced. See Burbine, supra, at 421. Thompkins does


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

not claim that police threatened or injured him during the
interrogation or that he was in any way fearful. The
interrogation was conducted in a standard-sized room in
the middle of the afternoon. It is true that apparently he
was in a straight-backed chair for three hours, but there is
no authority for the proposition that an interrogation of
this length is inherently coercive. Indeed, even where
interrogations of greater duration were held to be im
proper, they were accompanied, as this one was not, by
other facts indicating coercion, such as an incapacitated
and sedated suspect, sleep and food deprivation, and
threats. Cf. Connelly, 479 U. S., at 163–164, n. 1. The fact
that Helgert’s question referred to Thompkins’s religious
beliefs also did not render Thompkins’s statement invol
untary. “[T]he Fifth Amendment privilege is not con
cerned ‘with moral and psychological pressures to confess
emanating from sources other than official coercion.’ ” Id.,
at 170 (quoting Oregon v. Elstad, 470 U. S. 298, 305
(1985)). In these circumstances, Thompkins knowingly
and voluntarily made a statement to police, so he waived
his right to remain silent.
C
Thompkins next argues that, even if his answer to
Detective Helgert could constitute a waiver of his right to
remain silent, the police were not allowed to question him
until they obtained a waiver first. Butler forecloses this
argument. The Butler Court held that courts can infer a
waiver of Miranda rights “from the actions and words of
the person interrogated.” 441 U. S., at 373. This principle
would be inconsistent with a rule that requires a waiver at
the outset. The Butler Court thus rejected the rule pro
posed by the Butler dissent, which would have “requir[ed]
the police to obtain an express waiver of [Miranda rights]
before proceeding with interrogation.” Id., at 379 (Bren
nan, J., dissenting). This holding also makes sense given


16

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
Opinion of the Court

that “the primary protection afforded suspects subject[ed]
to custodial interrogation is the Miranda warnings them
selves.” Davis, 512 U. S., at 460. The Miranda rule and
its requirements are met if a suspect receives adequate
Miranda warnings, understands them, and has an oppor
tunity to invoke the rights before giving any answers or
admissions. Any waiver, express or implied, may be con
tradicted by an invocation at any time. If the right to
counsel or the right to remain silent is invoked at any
point during questioning, further interrogation must
cease.
Interrogation provides the suspect with additional
information that can put his or her decision to waive, or
not to invoke, into perspective. As questioning commences
and then continues, the suspect has the opportunity to
consider the choices he or she faces and to make a more
informed decision, either to insist on silence or to cooper
ate. When the suspect knows that Miranda rights can be
invoked at any time, he or she has the opportunity to
reassess his or her immediate and long-term interests.
Cooperation with the police may result in more favorable
treatment for the suspect; the apprehension of accom
plices; the prevention of continuing injury and fear; begin
ning steps towards relief or solace for the victims; and the
beginning of the suspect’s own return to the law and the
social order it seeks to protect.
In order for an accused’s statement to be admissible at
trial, police must have given the accused a Miranda warn
ing. See Miranda, 384 U. S., at 471. If that condition is
established, the court can proceed to consider whether
there has been an express or implied waiver of Miranda
rights. Id., at 476. In making its ruling on the admissibil
ity of a statement made during custodial questioning, the
trial court, of course, considers whether there is evidence
to support the conclusion that, from the whole course of
questioning, an express or implied waiver has been estab


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of the Court

lished. Thus, after giving a Miranda warning, police may
interrogate a suspect who has neither invoked nor waived
his or her Miranda rights. On these premises, it follows the police were not required to obtain a waiver of
Thompkins’s Miranda rights before commencing the
interrogation.
D
In sum, a suspect who has received and understood the
Miranda warnings, and has not invoked his Miranda
rights, waives the right to remain silent by making an
uncoerced statement to the police. Thompkins did not
invoke his right to remain silent and stop the questioning.
Understanding his rights in full, he waived his right to
remain silent by making a voluntary statement to the
police. The police, moreover, were not required to obtain a
waiver of Thompkins’s right to remain silent before inter
rogating him. The state court’s decision rejecting Thomp
kins’s Miranda claim was thus correct under de novo
review and therefore necessarily reasonable under the
more deferential AEDPA standard of review, 28 U. S. C.
§2254(d). See Knowles, 556 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 11)
(state court’s decision was correct under de novo review
and not unreasonable under AEDPA).
IV
The second issue in this case is whether Thompkins’s
counsel provided ineffective assistance by failing to re
quest a limiting instruction regarding how the jury could
consider the outcome of Purifoy’s trial. To establish inef
fective assistance of counsel, a defendant “must show both
deficient performance and prejudice.” Id., at ___ (slip op.,
at 10) (citing Strickland, 466 U. S., at 687). To establish
prejudice, a “defendant must show that there is a reason
able probability that, but for counsel’s unprofessional
errors, the result of the proceeding would have been dif


18

BERGHUIS v. THOMPKINS
Opinion of the Court

ferent.” Strickland, 466 U. S., at 694. In assessing preju
dice, courts “must consider the totality of the evidence
before the judge or jury.” Id., at 695. The Court of Ap
peals, however, neglected to take into account the other
evidence presented against Thompkins.
The Court of Appeals determined that the state court
was unreasonable, 28 U. S. C. §2254(d), when it found that
Thompkins suffered no prejudice from failure of defense
counsel to request an instruction regarding Purifoy’s
earlier acquittal of the murder and assault charges. The
state court had rejected Thompkins’s claim that he was
prejudiced by evidence of Purifoy’s earlier conviction for
firearms offenses, noting that “the record does not disclose
an attempt to argue that conviction for an improper pur
pose.” App. to Pet. for Cert. 80a. It is unclear what preju
dice standard the state court applied. The Court of Ap
peals ruled that the state court used the incorrect
standard for assessing prejudice under Strickland because
“[q]uestions of the prosecution’s purpose or intent are
completely irrelevant in analyzing whether an error re
sulted in prejudice, which by definition concerns the er
ror’s effect upon the outcome.” 547 F. 3d, at 591–592
(emphasis deleted).
Even if the state court used an incorrect legal standard,
we need not determine whether AEDPA’s deferential
standard of review, 28 U. S. C. §2254(d), applies in this
situation. Cf. Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362, 397–398
(2000). That is because, even if AEDPA deference does not
apply, Thompkins cannot show prejudice under de novo
review, the more favorable standard of review for Thomp
kins. Courts cannot grant writs of habeas corpus under
§2254 by engaging only in de novo review when it is un
clear whether AEDPA deference applies, §2254(d). In
those situations, courts must resolve whether AEDPA
deference applies, because if it does, a habeas petitioner
may not be entitled to a writ of habeas corpus under


Cite as: 560 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

Opinion of the Court

§2254(d). Courts can, however, deny writs of habeas
corpus under §2254 by engaging in de novo review when it
is unclear whether AEDPA deference applies, because a
habeas petitioner will not be entitled to a writ of habeas
corpus if his or her claim is rejected on de novo review, see
§2254(a).
It seems doubtful that failure to request the instruction
about the earlier acquittal or conviction was deficient
representation; but on the assumption that it was, on this
record Thompkins cannot show prejudice. The record
establishes that it was not reasonably likely that the
instruction would have made any difference in light of all
the other evidence of guilt. The surviving victim, Freder
ick France, identified Thompkins as the shooter, and the
identification was supported by a photograph taken from a
surveillance camera. Thompkins’s friend Omar Stephens
testified that Thompkins confessed to him during a phone
conversation, and the details of that confession were cor
roborated by evidence that Thompkins stripped the van
and abandoned it after the shooting. The jury, moreover,
was capable of assessing Purifoy’s credibility, as it was
instructed to do. The jury in Thompkins’s case could have
concluded that the earlier jury in Purifoy’s case made a
mistake, or alternatively, that Purifoy was not in fact
guilty of the crime for which he had been charged. There
was ample evidence in the record to support Thompkins’s
guilt under either theory, and his jury was instructed to
weigh all of the evidence in determining whether there
was guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Under our de novo
review of this record, Thompkins cannot show prejudice.
*
*
*
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed,
and the case is remanded with instructions to deny the
petition.
It is so ordered.

