(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND ET AL. v. PUBLIC COM-

PANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA CIRCUIT
No. 08–861.

Argued December 7, 2009—Decided June 28, 2010

Respondent, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, was
created as part of a series of accounting reforms in the SarbanesOxley Act of 2002. The Board is composed of five members appointed
by the Securities and Exchange Commission. It was modeled on pri
vate self-regulatory organizations in the securities industry—such as
the New York Stock Exchange—that investigate and discipline their
own members subject to Commission oversight. Unlike these organi
zations, the Board is a Government-created entity with expansive
powers to govern an entire industry. Every accounting firm that au
dits public companies under the securities laws must register with
the Board, pay it an annual fee, and comply with its rules and over
sight. The Board may inspect registered firms, initiate formal inves
tigations, and issue severe sanctions in its disciplinary proceedings.
The parties agree that the Board is “part of the Government” for con
stitutional purposes, Lebron v. National Railroad Passenger Corpora
tion, 513 U. S. 374, 397, and that its members are “ ‘Officers of the
United States’ ” who “exercis[e] significant authority pursuant to the
laws of the United States,” Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 125–126.
While the SEC has oversight of the Board, it cannot remove Board
members at will, but only “for good cause shown,” “in accordance
with” specified procedures. §§7211(e)(6), 7217(d)(3). The parties also
agree that the Commissioners, in turn, cannot themselves be re
moved by the President except for “ ‘inefficiency, neglect of duty, or
malfeasance in office.’ ” Humphrey’s Executor v. United States, 295
U. S. 602, 620.
The Board inspected petitioner accounting firm, released a report
critical of its auditing procedures, and began a formal investigation.


2

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Syllabus 

The firm and petitioner Free Enterprise Fund, a nonprofit organiza
tion of which the firm is a member, sued the Board and its members,
seeking, inter alia, a declaratory judgment that the Board is uncon
stitutional and an injunction preventing the Board from exercising its
powers. Petitioners argued that the Sarbanes-Oxley Act contravened
the separation of powers by conferring executive power on Board
members without subjecting them to Presidential control. The basis
for petitioners’ challenge was that Board members were insulated
from Presidential control by two layers of tenure protection: Board
members could only be removed by the Commission for good cause,
and the Commissioners could in turn only be removed by the Presi
dent for good cause. Petitioners also challenged the Board’s ap
pointment as violating the Appointments Clause, which requires offi
cers to be appointed by the President with the Senate’s advice and
consent, or—in the case of “inferior Officers”—by “the President
alone, . . . the Courts of Law, or . . . the Heads of Departments,”
Art. II, §2, cl. 2. The United States intervened to defend the statute.
The District Court found it had jurisdiction and granted summary
judgment to respondents. The Court of Appeals affirmed. It first
agreed that the District Court had jurisdiction. It then ruled that the
dual restraints on Board members’ removal are permissible, and that
Board members are inferior officers whose appointment is consistent
with the Appointments Clause.

Held:
1. The District Court had jurisdiction over these claims. The
Commission may review any Board rule or sanction, and an ag
grieved party may challenge the Commission’s “final order” or “rule”
in a court of appeals under 15 U. S. C. §78y. The Government reads
§78y as an exclusive route to review, but the text does not expressly
or implicitly limit the jurisdiction that other statutes confer on dis
trict courts. It is presumed that Congress does not intend to limit ju
risdiction if “a finding of preclusion could foreclose all meaningful ju
dicial review”; if the suit is “ ‘wholly “collateral” ’ to a statute’s review
provisions”; and if the claims are “outside the agency’s expertise.”
Thunder Basin Coal Co. v. Reich, 510 U. S. 200, 212–213.
These considerations point against any limitation on review here.
Section 78y provides only for review of Commission action, and peti
tioners’ challenge is “collateral” to any Commission orders or rules
from which review might be sought. The Government advises peti
tioners to raise their claims by appealing a Board sanction, but peti
tioners have not been sanctioned, and it is no “meaningful” avenue of
relief, Thunder Basin, supra, at 212, to require a plaintiff to incur a
sanction in order to test a law’s validity, MedImmune, Inc. v. Genen
tech, Inc., 549 U. S. 118, 129. Petitioners’ constitutional claims are


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
also outside the Commission’s competence and expertise, and the
statutory questions involved do not require technical considerations
of agency policy. Pp. 7–10.
2. The dual for-cause limitations on the removal of Board members
contravene the Constitution’s separation of powers. Pp. 10–27.
(a) The Constitution provides that “[t]he executive Power shall be
vested in a President of the United States of America.” Art. II, §1,
cl. 1. Since 1789, the Constitution has been understood to empower
the President to keep executive officers accountable—by removing
them from office, if necessary. See generally Myers v. United States,
272 U. S. 52. This Court has determined that this authority is not
without limit. In Humphrey’s Executor, supra, this Court held that
Congress can, under certain circumstances, create independent agen
cies run by principal officers appointed by the President, whom the
President may not remove at will but only for good cause. And in
United States v. Perkins, 116 U. S. 483, and Morrison v. Olson, 487
U. S. 654, the Court sustained similar restrictions on the power of
principal executive officers—themselves responsible to the Presi
dent—to remove their own inferiors. However, this Court has not
addressed the consequences of more than one level of good-cause ten
ure. Pp. 10–14.
(b) Where this Court has upheld limited restrictions on the
President’s removal power, only one level of protected tenure sepa
rated the President from an officer exercising executive power. The
President—or a subordinate he could remove at will—decided
whether the officer’s conduct merited removal under the good-cause
standard. Here, the Act not only protects Board members from re
moval except for good cause, but withdraws from the President any
decision on whether that good cause exists. That decision is vested in
other tenured officers—the Commissioners—who are not subject to
the President’s direct control. Because the Commission cannot re
move a Board member at will, the President cannot hold the Com
mission fully accountable for the Board’s conduct. He can only review
the Commissioner’s determination of whether the Act’s rigorous good
cause standard is met. And if the President disagrees with that de
termination, he is powerless to intervene—unless the determination
is so unreasonable as to constitute “ ‘inefficiency, neglect of duty, or
malfeasance in office.’ ” Humphrey’s Executor, supra, at 620.
This arrangement contradicts Article II’s vesting of the executive
power in the President. Without the ability to oversee the Board, or
to attribute the Board’s failings to those whom he can oversee, the
President is no longer the judge of the Board’s conduct. He can nei
ther ensure that the laws are faithfully executed, nor be held respon
sible for a Board member’s breach of faith. If this dispersion of re


4

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Syllabus 

sponsibility were allowed to stand, Congress could multiply it further
by adding still more layers of good-cause tenure. Such diffusion of
power carries with it a diffusion of accountability; without a clear and
effective chain of command, the public cannot determine where the
blame for a pernicious measure should fall. The Act’s restrictions are
therefore incompatible with the Constitution’s separation of powers.
Pp. 14–17.
(c) The “ ‘fact that a given law or procedure is efficient, conven
ient, and useful in facilitating functions of government, standing
alone, will not save it if it is contrary to the Constitution. ” Bowsher
v. Synar, 478 U. S. 714, 736. The Act’s multilevel tenure protections
provide a blueprint for the extensive expansion of legislative power.
Congress controls the salary, duties, and existence of executive of
fices, and only Presidential oversight can counter its influence. The
Framers created a structure in which “[a] dependence on the people”
would be the “primary controul on the government,” and that de
pendence is maintained by giving each branch “the necessary consti
tutional means and personal motives to resist encroachments of the
others.” The Federalist No. 51, p. 349. A key “constitutional means”
vested in the President was “the power of appointing, overseeing, and
controlling those who execute the laws.” 1 Annals of Congress 463.
While a government of “opposite and rival interests” may sometimes
inhibit the smooth functioning of administration, The Federalist No.
51, at 349, “[t]he Framers recognized that, in the long term, struc
tural protections against abuse of power were critical to preserving
liberty.” Bowsher, supra, at 730. Pp. 17–21.
(d) The Government errs in arguing that, even if some con
straints on the removal of inferior executive officers might violate the
Constitution, the restrictions here do not. There is no construction of
the Commission’s good-cause removal power that is broad enough to
avoid invalidation. Nor is the Commission’s broad power over Board
functions the equivalent of a power to remove Board members. Alter
ing the Board’s budget or powers is not a meaningful way to control
an inferior officer; the Commission cannot supervise individual Board
members if it must destroy the Board in order to fix it. Moreover, the
Commission’s power over the Board is hardly plenary, as the Board
may take significant enforcement actions largely independently of
the Commission. Enacting new SEC rules through the required no
tice and comment procedures would be a poor means of micro
managing the Board, and without certain findings, the Act forbids
any general rule requiring SEC preapproval of Board actions. Fi
nally, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is highly unusual in committing sub
stantial executive authority to officers protected by two layers of
good-cause removal. Pp. 21–27.


Cite as: 561 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Syllabus
3. The unconstitutional tenure provisions are severable from the
remainder of the statute. Because “[t]he unconstitutionality of a part
of an Act does not necessarily defeat or affect the validity of its re
maining provisions,” Champlin Refining Co. v. Corporation Comm’n
of Okla., 286 U. S. 210, 234, the “normal rule” is “that partial . . . in
validation is the required course,” Brockett v. Spokane Arcades, Inc.,
472 U. S. 491, 504. The Board’s existence does not violate the sepa
ration of powers, but the substantive removal restrictions imposed by
§§7211(e)(6) and 7217(d)(3) do. Concluding that the removal restric
tions here are invalid leaves the Board removable by the Commission
at will. With the tenure restrictions excised, the Act remains “ ‘fully
operative as a law,’ ” New York v. United States, 505 U. S. 144, 186,
and nothing in the Act’s text or historical context makes it “evident”
that Congress would have preferred no Board at all to a Board whose
members are removable at will, Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Brock, 480
U. S. 678, 684. The consequence is that the Board may continue to
function as before, but its members may be removed at will by the
Commission. Pp. 27–29.
4. The Board’s appointment is consistent with the Appointments
Clause. Pp. 29–33.
(a) The Board members are inferior officers whose appointment
Congress may permissibly vest in a “Hea[d] of Departmen[t].” Infe
rior officers “are officers whose work is directed and supervised at
some level” by superiors appointed by the President with the Senate’s
consent. Edmond v. United States, 520 U. S. 651, 662–663. Because
the good-cause restrictions discussed above are unconstitutional and
void, the Commission possesses the power to remove Board members
at will, in addition to its other oversight authority. Board members
are therefore directed and supervised by the Commission. Pp. 29–30.
(b) The Commission is a “Departmen[t]” under the Appointments
Clause. Freytag v. Commissioner, 501 U. S. 868, 887, n. 4, specifi
cally reserved the question whether a “principal agenc[y], such as”
the SEC, is a “Departmen[t].” The Court now adopts the reasoning of
the concurring Justices in Freytag, who would have concluded that
the SEC is such a “Departmen[t]” because it is a freestanding compo
nent of the Executive Branch not subordinate to or contained within
any other such component. This reading is consistent with the com
mon, near-contemporary definition of a “department”; with the early
practice of Congress, see §3, 1 Stat. 234; and with this Court’s cases,
which have never invalidated an appointment made by the head of
such an establishment. Pp. 30–31.
(c) The several Commissioners, and not the Chairman, are the
Commission’s “Hea[d].” The Commission’s powers are generally
vested in the Commissioners jointly, not the Chairman alone. The


6

FREE ENTERPRISE FUND v. PUBLIC COMPANY 

ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BD. 

Syllabus 

Commissioners do not report to the Chairman, who exercises admin
istrative functions subject to the full Commission’s policies. There is
no reason why a multimember body may not be the “Hea[d]” of a
“Departmen[t]” that it governs. The Appointments Clause necessar
ily contemplates collective appointments by the “Courts of Law,”
Art. II, §2, cl. 2, and each House of Congress appoints its officers col
lectively, see, e.g., Art. I, §2, cl. 5. Practice has also sanctioned the
appointment of inferior officers by multimember agencies. Pp. 31–33.

537 F. 3d 667, affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded.
ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which SCALIA,
KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ., joined. BREYER, J., filed a dissenting
opinion, in which STEVENS, GINSBURG, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.

