Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 10–1399
_________________

DANA ROBERTS, PETITIONER v. SEA-LAND

SERVICES, INC., ET AL. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 

APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

[March 20, 2012]


JUSTICE GINSBURG, concurring in part and dissenting in
part.
Section 906 of the Longshore and Harbor Workers’
Compensation Act (LHWCA or the Act) defines the maximum disability benefit an injured worker may receive
under the Act. Specifically, §906 states that an injured
employee may receive, at most, twice the national average
weekly wage for the fiscal year in which the employee
is “newly awarded compensation.” 33 U. S. C. §906(c).
The Court granted review in this case to answer the
following question: When is an employee “newly awarded
compensation”?
Petitioner Dana Roberts contends that an employee is
“newly awarded compensation” in the year she receives
a formal compensation award. For the reasons cogently
explained by the majority, that argument is untenable.
See ante, at 5–17. Unlike the Court, however, I do not
regard as reasonable respondent Sea-Land Services’ view
that an employee is “newly awarded compensation” in the
year she becomes “statutorily entitled to compensation.”
Ante, at 5–6. Applying the common meaning of the verb
“award” and recognizing the Act’s distinction between
benefits paid voluntarily, and those paid pursuant to a
compensation order, see ante, at 2–3, I would hold that an
injured worker is “newly awarded compensation” when (1)


2

ROBERTS v. SEA-LAND SERVICES, INC.
Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

the employer voluntarily undertakes to pay benefits to
the employee, or (2) an administrative law judge (ALJ), the
Benefits Review Board (BRB), or a reviewing court orders
the employer to pay such benefits.
I
In determining the meaning of a statutory phrase, “we
look first to its language, giving the words used their
ordinary meaning.” Moskal v. United States, 498 U. S.
103, 108 (1990) (internal quotation marks and citations
omitted). As the Court acknowledges, ante, at 5, the verb
“award” ordinarily means “to give by judicial decree” or
“[to] assign after careful judgment.” Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 152 (2002). See also Black’s Law
Dictionary 157 (9th ed. 2009) (defining the verb “award”
as “[t]o grant by formal process or by judicial decree”).
Giving “award” this usual meaning, an employee is “newly
awarded compensation,” if not voluntarily paid, in the fiscal year in which payment is directed by administrative
order or judicial decree.
Under the LHWCA, the Court recognizes, an employee
is provided compensation voluntarily or in contested proceedings. See ante, at 3. Most commonly, an employer
pays compensation voluntarily after receiving an employee’s notice of disabling injury. See Pallas Shipping Agency, Ltd. v. Duris, 461 U. S. 529, 532 (1983); 33 U. S. C.
§912 (describing the form, content, and timing of the
necessary notice and requiring employers to designate a
representative to receive the notice); §914(b). If an employer declines to pay compensation voluntarily, an injured employee can file a claim with the Department of
Labor’s Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs
(OWCP). For employees with valid claims, OWCP proceedings culminate with an administrative or court decision ordering the employer to pay benefits. §919(c). Thus,
an injured worker is given—or “awarded”—compensation


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

through one of two means contemplated by the Act: either
the employer voluntarily pays compensation or is officially
ordered to do so. Logically, then, the worker is “newly
awarded compensation” when one of those two events
occurs.
The Court does not take this approach. After acknowledging that it is not relying on the typical meaning of the
word “award,” see ante, at 5, the Court adopts Sea-Land’s
view that “awarded compensation” is synonymous with
“[became] statutorily entitled to benefits,” ante, at 18. As
a result, a person is “newly awarded compensation” in the
year in which she becomes entitled to benefits—i.e., in the
year the employee “first becomes disabled.” Ibid. Such a
reading is plausible, the Court asserts, because “this Court
has often said that statutes ‘award’ entitlements.” Ante,
at 6 (citing cases).
I do not dispute that statutes are often characterized as
“awarding” relief to persons falling within their compass.
But “a statute must be read in [its] context.” Ante, at 7
(quoting Davis v. Michigan Dept. of Treasury, 489 U. S.
803, 809 (1989)). Section 906 does not address whether
the LHWCA, as a general matter, “awards” disability benefits to injured longshore workers. Rather, it concerns
a more specific question: when has a particular employee
been “newly awarded compensation.” In that context,
equating “awarded compensation” with “statutorily entitled to compensation” is not plausible. A person covered
by the Act would not likely say he was “awarded compensation” the moment he became disabled, if, in fact, his
employer contests liability. Only after some entity—the
employer, an ALJ, the BRB, or a reviewing court—
recognizes the employee’s right to compensation would he
comprehend that he had been “awarded compensation.”
To borrow THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s example: No person who
slips and injures herself on a negligently maintained
sidewalk would tell her friends the next day, “Guess what,


4

ROBERTS v. SEA-LAND SERVICES, INC.
Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

I was newly awarded money damages yesterday.” See Tr.
of Oral Arg. 28.
The inconsistency between the Court’s interpretation of
“newly awarded compensation” and my reading of the
phrase is best illustrated by contextual example. Assume
an employee is injured in 2002 and the employer refuses
to pay compensation voluntarily. Then, five years later,
an ALJ finds in favor of the employee and orders the
employer to pay benefits to the employee. Under the
Court’s view, the employee was “newly awarded compensation” in 2002, even though the employee did not receive
a penny—and the employer was not obligated to pay a
penny—until 2007. Only the most strained interpretation
of “newly awarded” could demand that result.1
The Court’s view, moreover, does not fit the Act’s design.
As explained supra, at 2–3, the Act envisions that an
eligible employee will begin receiving benefits in either
of two ways. The Court’s interpretation disregards this
design, assuming instead that all employees are awarded
benefits in the same way: by the Act at the time they
become disabled.
Section 906(c)’s legislative history further confirms that
Congress intended “newly awarded compensation” to have
its commonsense meaning. In describing §906, the Senate
Committee on Labor and Public Welfare reported:
——————
1 As the Court notes, the maximum rate for a given fiscal year applies
to two groups of injured workers: those who are “newly awarded compensation during such [year],” and those who are “currently receiving
compensation for permanent total disability or death benefits during
such [year].” 33 U. S. C. §906(c). Ante, at 7, n. 5. Contrary to the
Court’s charge, I do not read “newly awarded compensation” as synonymous with “currently receiving compensation.” See ibid. An injured
worker who is “currently receiving compensation” in a given fiscal year
was “newly awarded compensation” in a previous year. My interpretation therefore gives “effect to Congress’ textual shift,” ibid.: It identifies
two distinct groups of workers who are entitled to a given year’s maximum rate.


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

“[Section 906(c)] states that determinations of national average weekly wage made with respect to a [fiscal
year] apply to employees or survivors currently receiving compensation for permanent total disability or
death benefits, as well as those who begin receiving
compensation for the first time during the [fiscal
year].” S. Rep. No. 92–1125, p. 18 (1972) (emphasis
added).
Congress therefore believed an injured worker is “newly
awarded compensation” in the year in which she “begin[s]
receiving compensation for the first time.” Ibid. Again,
an employee begins receiving compensation either when an
employer voluntarily agrees to pay the employee benefits
or when an ALJ, the BRB, or a court orders the employer
to do so. See supra, at 2–3. When the employer resists
payment, the employee will not necessarily begin receiving
compensation in the year in which she becomes disabled.
Finally, interpreting “newly awarded compensation” to
mean awarded through an employer’s voluntary decision
or an official order is consistent with the Act’s goal of
encouraging employers to pay legitimate claims promptly.
See 33 U. S. C. §914(a) (requiring employers to pay compensation “periodically, promptly, and directly”); Estate of
Cowart v. Nicklos Drilling Co., 505 U. S. 469, 498 (1992)
(Blackmun, J., dissenting) (“[T]he Act presumes that employers, as a rule, will promptly recognize their LHWCA
obligations and commence payments immediately.”).
Under my interpretation, an employer who chooses to
contest a valid claim, rather than to pay the claim
voluntarily, runs the risk that it may ultimately have to
pay the injured employee a higher maximum benefit. For
example, if an employer refuses to pay benefits to a worker injured in 2012, and an ALJ issues an order awarding
compensation to the employee in 2015, the fiscal year 2015
maximum rate would apply to the employee’s claim. Had


6

ROBERTS v. SEA-LAND SERVICES, INC.
Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

the employer voluntarily begun paying benefits in 2012,
on the other hand, the 2012 maximum rate would apply.
Under the Court’s reading, by contrast, an employer pays
the prevailing rate for the year the employee became
disabled, regardless of whether the employer in fact pays
benefits immediately or years down the road.2
II
In this case, Roberts was injured on February 24, 2002
and stopped working two weeks later. App. to Pet. for
Cert. 4. Sea-Land and its insurer paid benefits to Roberts
from March 11, 2002 until July 15, 2003. Id., at 101. SeaLand then resumed paying benefits on September 1, 2003
and continued to pay Roberts compensation until May 17,
2005, when it ceased making payments for good. Ibid.
After Roberts filed a complaint with the OWCP, an ALJ,
in October 2006, concluded that Roberts was entitled to
compensation from March 11, 2002 onwards. Id., at 107–
108.
Applying my interpretation of §906, Roberts was newly
awarded compensation three times: in March 2002 when
Sea-Land voluntarily began paying benefits; in September
2003 when Sea-Land resumed making payments after it
had stopped in July 2003; and in October 2006 when an
ALJ ordered Sea-Land to pay benefits to Roberts for the
uncompensated weeks in 2003 and from May 2005 onwards. Roberts was therefore entitled to the fiscal year
2002 maximum rate from March 11, 2002 until July 15,
2003; the fiscal year 2003 maximum rate from September
1, 2003 until May 17, 2005; and the fiscal year 2007 rate3
——————
2 Employers may have a particularly strong financial incentive to
postpone paying claims that implicate §906. That section applies only
to injured workers who qualify for the maximum rate of compensation
under the Act—i.e., to those claimants who are owed the largest possible benefit.
3 For §906 purposes, a year runs from October 1 to September 30. See


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

going forward and for all uncompensated weeks covered by
the ALJ’s order.4
*
*
*
For the foregoing reasons, I would reverse the Ninth
Circuit’s judgment and hold that an employee is “newly
awarded compensation” when her employer either volun——————
33 U. S. C. §906(b)(3). The 2007 maximum rate therefore applies to all
employees “newly awarded compensation” between October 1, 2006 and
September 30, 2007.
4 The Court asserts that an employer could “easily circumven[t]” my
approach by making voluntary payments to an injured worker that are
substantially below the employee’s “actual entitlement.” Ante, at 10,
n. 6. The prospect that an employer could successfully execute, or
would even attempt, such a strategy is imaginary. Employers who
make voluntary payments to employees are required to file a report
with the Department of Labor describing the nature of the employee’s
injury and stating the amount of the payments made. See ante, at 9–
10; 33 U. S. C. §930(a). The employer must also submit the results of
a medical evaluation of the employee’s condition. Dept. of Labor,
Longshore (DLHWC) Procedure Manual §2–201(2)(b) (hereinafter Longshore Procedure Manual), online at http://www.dol.gov/owcp/dlhwc/
lspm/lspm2-201.htm (as visited Mar. 14, 2012, and in Clerk of Court’s
case file). Upon receiving the employer’s report, a DOL claims examiner verifies “the compensation rate for accuracy” and must followup with the employer “[i]f the compensation rate appears low.” Longshore Procedure Manual §2–201(3)(b)(1). The chances are slim that a
claims examiner would validate a substantial underpayment. Employers who underpay benefits, moreover, are subject to a penalty equal to
10% of the amount of the underpayment. See 33 U. S. C. §914(e);
Longshore Procedure Manual §8–202(3)(c) (“If partial payments are
made by the employer, the [10% penalty] appl[ies] . . . to the difference
between the amount owed and the amount paid.”). Employers would
thus risk paying more, not less, were they to attempt to “circumven[t]”
my approach by deliberately undercompensating injured workers. And
while it is true that an employer who controverts an employee’s right to
compensation does not have to pay the 10% penalty, see ante, at 10,
n. 6, the Act does not permit an employer to pay any amount it likes
and controvert the remainder. See 33 U. S. C. §914(a) (requiring
employers either to pay benefits in full or to controvert “liability to pay
compensation” at all).


8

ROBERTS v. SEA-LAND SERVICES, INC.
Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

tarily agrees to pay compensation to her or is officially
ordered to do so.

