(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ROBERTS v. SEA-LAND SERVICES, INC., ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–1399. Argued January 11, 2012—Decided March 20, 2012
The Longshore and Harbor Workers’ Compensation Act (LHWCA) creates a comprehensive scheme to pay compensation for an eligible employee’s disability or death resulting from injury occurring upon the
navigable waters of the United States. Benefits for most types of disabilities are capped at twice the national average weekly wage for the
fiscal year in which an injured employee is “newly awarded compensation.” 33 U. S. C. §906(c). The LHWCA requires employers to pay
benefits voluntarily, without formal administrative proceedings.
Typically, employers pay benefits without contesting liability, so no
compensation orders are issued. However, if an employer controverts liability, or an employee contests his employer’s actions with
respect to his benefits, the dispute proceeds to the Department of Labor’s Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs (OWCP) to be resolved, if possible, through informal procedures. An informal disposition may result in a compensation order. If not resolved informally,
the dispute is referred to an administrative law judge (ALJ), who
conducts a hearing and issues a compensation order.
In fiscal year 2002, petitioner Roberts was injured at an Alaska
marine terminal while working for respondent Sea-Land Services,
Inc. Sea-Land (except for six weeks in 2003) voluntarily paid Roberts
benefits until fiscal year 2005. Roberts then filed an LHWCA claim,
and Sea-Land controverted. In fiscal year 2007, an ALJ awarded
Roberts benefits at the fiscal year 2002 statutory maximum rate.
Roberts sought reconsideration, contending that the award should
have been set at the higher statutory maximum rate for fiscal year
2007, when, he argued, he was “newly awarded compensation” by order of the ALJ. The ALJ denied his motion, and the Department of
Labor’s Benefits Review Board affirmed, concluding that the perti-


2

ROBERTS v. SEA-LAND SERVICES, INC.
Syllabus
nent maximum rate is determined by the date disability commences.
The Ninth Circuit affirmed.

Held: An employee is “newly awarded compensation” when he first becomes disabled and thereby becomes statutorily entitled to benefits,
no matter whether, or when, a compensation order issues on his behalf. Pp. 5−18.
(a) Roberts contends that the statutory term “awarded compensation” means “awarded compensation in a formal order,” while SeaLand and the Director, OWCP, maintain that it means “statutorily
entitled to compensation because of disability.” Although §906 can be
interpreted either way, only Sea-Land and the Director’s interpretation makes §906 a working part of the statutory scheme. Under Roberts’ interpretation, no employee receiving voluntary payments has
been “awarded compensation,” so none is subject to an identifiable
maximum rate of compensation. That result is incompatible with the
LHWCA’s design. Section 906(b)(1) caps compensation at twice the
applicable national average weekly wage, as determined by the Secretary of Labor. Section 906(b)(3), in turn, directs the Secretary to
determine that wage before each fiscal year begins, at which time it
becomes the “applicable national average weekly wage” for the coming fiscal year. And §906(c), in its turn, provides that the Secretary’s
determination shall apply to those “newly awarded compensation”
during such fiscal year. Through a series of cross-references, the
three provisions work together to cap disability benefits. By its
terms, and subject to one express exception, §906(b)(1) specifies that
the cap applies globally, to all disability claims. Because all three
provisions interlock, the cap functions as Congress intended only if
§906(c) also applies globally, to all such cases. Roberts’ interpretation would give §906(c) no application in the many cases in which no
formal orders issue.
Using the national average weekly wage for the fiscal year in
which an employee becomes disabled coheres with the LHWCA’s administrative structure. An employer must be able to calculate the
cap in order to pay benefits within 14 days of notice of an employee’s
disability, see §914(b), and in order to certify to the Department of
Labor whether the maximum rate is being paid. Similarly, an OWCP
claims examiner must verify the compensation rate in light of the
applicable cap. It is difficult to see how an employer or claims examiner can use a national average weekly wage other than the one in effect at the time an employee becomes disabled. Moreover, applying
the national average weekly wage for the fiscal year in which an employee becomes disabled advances the LHWCA’s purpose to compensate disability, defined as “incapacity because of injury to earn the
wages which the employee was receiving at the time of injury.”


Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
§902(10). It also avoids disparate treatment of similarly situated
employees; Roberts’ reading would permit two employees who earn
the same salary and suffer the same injury on the same day to receive different maximum compensation rates based on the happenstance of their obtaining orders in different fiscal years. Finally, applying the national average weekly wage for the fiscal year in which
disability commences discourages gamesmanship in the claims process. If the fiscal year in which an order issues were to determine the
cap, the fact that the national average wage rises each year with inflation would be unduly significant. Roberts’ rule would reward employees who receive voluntary payments with windfalls for initiating
unnecessary administrative proceedings to secure a higher rate,
while simultaneously punishing employers who have complied fully
with their statutory obligations to make voluntary payments. Pp.
5−13.
(b) Roberts’ counterarguments are unconvincing. First, although
the LHWCA sometimes uses “award” to mean “award in a formal order,” the presumption that identical words used in different parts of
the same Act are intended to have the same meaning, readily yields
whenever, as here, the variation in the word’s use in the LHWCA
reasonably warrants the conclusion that it was employed in different
parts of the Act with different intent. See General Dynamics Land
Systems, Inc. v. Cline, 540 U. S. 581, 595.
Second, Roberts argues that, because this Court has refused to
read the statutory phrase “person entitled to compensation” in
§933(g) to mean “person awarded compensation,” Estate of Cowart v.
Nicklos Drilling Co., 505 U. S. 469, 477, the converse must also be
true: “awarded compensation” in §906(c) cannot mean “entitled to
compensation.” But Cowart’s reasoning does not work in reverse.
Cowart did not construe §906(c) or “award,” see id., at 478–479, and
it did not hold that the groups of “employees entitled to compensation” and “employees awarded compensation” were mutually exclusive, see id., at 477.
Finally, Roberts contends that his interpretation furthers the
LHWCA’s purpose of providing employees with prompt compensation
by encouraging employers to avoid delay and expedite administrative
proceedings. But his remedy would also punish employers who voluntarily pay benefits at the proper rate from the time of their employees’ injuries, because they would owe benefits under the higher
cap applicable in any future fiscal year when their employees chose to
file claims. The more measured deterrent to employer delay is interest that accrues from the date an unpaid benefit came due. Pp. 13–
18.
625 F. 3d 1204, affirmed.


4

ROBERTS v. SEA-LAND SERVICES, INC.
Syllabus

SOTOMAYOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, BREYER, ALITO, and KAGAN, JJ.,
joined. GINSBURG, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and dissenting
in part.

