(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

TURNER v. ROGERS ET AL.
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH CAROLINA
No. 10–10. Argued March 23, 2011—Decided June 20, 2011
After a South Carolina family court ordered petitioner Turner to pay
$51.73 per week to respondent Rogers to help support their child,
Turner repeatedly failed to pay the amount due and was held in con
tempt five times. For the first four, he was sentenced to 90 days’ im
prisonment, but he ultimately paid what he owed (twice without be
ing jailed, twice after spending a few days in custody). The fifth time
he did not pay but completed a 6-month sentence. After his release,
the family court clerk issued a new “show cause” order against
Turner because he was $5728.76 in arrears. Both he and Rogers
were unrepresented by counsel at his brief civil contempt hearing.
The judge found Turner in willful contempt and sentenced him to 12
months in prison without making any finding as to his ability to pay
or indicating on the contempt order form whether he was able to
make support payments. After Turner completed his sentence, the
South Carolina Supreme Court rejected his claim that the Federal
Constitution entitled him to counsel at his contempt hearing, declar
ing that civil contempt does not require all the constitutional safe
guards applicable in criminal contempt proceedings.
Held:
1. Even though Turner has completed his 12-month sentence, and
there are not alleged to be collateral consequences of the contempt
determination that might keep the dispute alive, this case is not
moot, because it is “capable of repetition” while “evading review,”
Southern Pac. Terminal Co. v. Interstate Commerce Comm’n, 219
U. S. 498, 515. A case remains live if “(1) the challenged action [is] in
its duration too short to be fully litigated prior to its cessation or ex
piration, and (2) there [is] a reasonable expectation that the same
complaining party [will] be subjected to the same action again.”
Weinstein v. Bradford, 423 U. S. 147, 149. Here, the “challenged ac


2

TURNER v. ROGERS
Syllabus
tion,” Turner’s imprisonment for up to 12 months, is “in its duration
too short to be fully litigated” through the state courts (and arrive
here) prior to its “expiration.” First Nat’l Bank of Boston v. Bellotti,
435 U. S. 765, 774. And there is a more than “reasonable” likelihood
that Turner will again be “subjected to the same action” because he
has frequently failed to make his support payments, has been the
subject of several civil contempt proceedings, has been imprisoned
several times, and is, once again, the subject of civil contempt pro
ceedings for failure to pay. DeFunis v. Odegaard, 416 U. S. 312, and
St. Pierre v. United States, 319 U. S. 41, distinguished. Pp. 5–7.
2. The Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause does not auto
matically require the State to provide counsel at civil contempt pro
ceedings to an indigent noncustodial parent who is subject to a child
support order, even if that individual faces incarceration. In particu
lar, that Clause does not require that counsel be provided where the
opposing parent or other custodian is not represented by counsel and
the State provides alternative procedural safeguards equivalent to
adequate notice of the importance of the ability to pay, a fair oppor
tunity to present, and to dispute, relevant information, and express
court findings as to the supporting parent’s ability to comply with the
support order. Pp. 7–16.
(a) This Court’s precedents provide no definitive answer to the
question whether counsel must be provided. The Sixth Amendment
grants an indigent criminal defendant the right to counsel, see, e.g.,
United States v. Dixon, 509 U. S. 688, 696, but does not govern civil
cases. Civil and criminal contempt differ. A court may not impose
punishment “in a civil contempt proceeding when it is clearly estab
lished that the alleged contemnor is unable to comply with the terms
of the order.” Hicks v. Feiock, 485 U. S. 624, 638, n. 9. And once a
civil contemnor complies with the underlying order, he is purged of
the contempt and is free. Id., at 633. The Due Process Clause allows
a State to provide fewer procedural protections in civil contempt pro
ceedings than in a criminal case. Id., at 637–641. Cases directly con
cerning a right to counsel in civil cases have found a presumption of
such a right “only” in cases involving incarceration, but have not held
that a right to counsel exists in all such cases. See In re Gault, 387
U. S. 1; Vitek v. Jones, 445 U. S. 480; and Lassiter v. Department of
Social Servs. of Durham Cty., 452 U. S. 18. Pp. 7–10.
(b) Because a contempt proceeding to compel support payments
is civil, the question whether the “specific dictates of due process” re
quire appointed counsel is determined by examining the “distinct fac
tors” this Court has used to decide what specific safeguards are
needed to make a civil proceeding fundamentally fair. Mathews v.
Eldridge, 424 U. S. 319, 335. As relevant here those factors include


Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
(1) the nature of “the private interest that will be affected,” (2) the
comparative “risk” of an “erroneous deprivation” of that interest with
and without “additional or substitute procedural safeguards,” and (3)
the nature and magnitude of any countervailing interest in not pro
viding “additional or substitute procedural requirement[s].” Ibid.
The “private interest that will be affected” argues strongly for the
right to counsel here. That interest consists of an indigent defen
dant’s loss of personal liberty through imprisonment. Freedom “from
bodily restraint” lies “at the core of the liberty protected by the Due
Process Clause.” Foucha v. Louisiana, 504 U. S. 71, 80. Thus, accu
rate decisionmaking as to the “ability to pay”—which marks a divid
ing line between civil and criminal contempt, Hicks, supra, at 635, n.
7—must be assured because an incorrect decision can result in a
wrongful incarceration. And because ability to comply divides civil
and criminal contempt proceedings, an erroneous determination
would also deprive a defendant of the procedural protections a crimi
nal proceeding would demand. Questions about ability to pay are
likely to arise frequently in child custody cases. On the other hand,
due process does not always require the provision of counsel in civil
proceedings where incarceration is threatened. See Gagnon v. Scar
pelli, 411 U. S. 778. To determine whether a right to counsel is re
quired here, opposing interests and the probable value of “additional
or substitute procedural safeguards” must be taken into account.
Mathews, supra, at 335.
Doing so reveals three related considerations that, taken together,
argue strongly against requiring counsel in every proceeding of the
present kind. First, the likely critical question in these cases is the
defendant’s ability to pay, which is often closely related to his indi
gence and relatively straightforward. Second, sometimes, as here,
the person opposing the defendant at the hearing is not the govern
ment represented by counsel but the custodial parent unrepresented
by counsel. A requirement that the State provide counsel to the non
custodial parent in these cases could create an asymmetry of repre
sentation that would “alter significantly the nature of the proceed
ing,” Gagnon, supra, at 787, creating a degree of formality or delay
that would unduly slow payment to those immediately in need and
make the proceedings less fair overall. Third, as the Federal Gov
ernment points out, an available set of “substitute procedural safe
guards,” Mathews, supra, at 335, if employed together, can signifi
cantly reduce the risk of an erroneous deprivation of liberty. These
include (1) notice to the defendant that his “ability to pay” is a critical
issue in the contempt proceeding; (2) the use of a form (or the equiva
lent) to elicit relevant financial information from him; (3) an oppor
tunity at the hearing for him to respond to statements and questions


4

TURNER v. ROGERS
Syllabus
about his financial status; and (4) an express finding by the court
that the defendant has the ability to pay.
This decision does not address civil contempt proceedings where
the underlying support payment is owed to the State, e.g., for reim
bursement of welfare funds paid to the custodial parent, or the ques
tion what due process requires in an unusually complex case where a
defendant “can fairly be represented only by a trained advocate,”
Gagnon, supra, at 788. Pp. 10–16.
3. Under the circumstances, Turner’s incarceration violated due
process because he received neither counsel nor the benefit of alter
native procedures like those the Court describes. He did not have
clear notice that his ability to pay would constitute the critical ques
tion in his civil contempt proceeding. No one provided him with a
form (or the equivalent) designed to elicit information about his fi
nancial circumstances. And the trial court did not find that he was
able to pay his arrearage, but nonetheless found him in civil con
tempt and ordered him incarcerated. P. 16.

387 S. C. 142, 691 S. E. 2d 470, vacated and remanded.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which KENNEDY,
GINSBURG, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined. THOMAS, J., filed a dis
senting opinion, in which SCALIA, J., joined, and in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and ALITO, JJ., joined as to Parts I–B and II.

