Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

1

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 08–724
_________________

KEITH SMITH, WARDEN, PETITIONER v. FRANK G.

SPISAK, JR. 

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT

[January 12, 2010] 


JUSTICE STEVENS, concurring in part and concurring in
the judgment.
In my judgment the Court of Appeals correctly con
cluded that two errors that occurred during Spisak’s trial
violated clearly established federal law. First, the jury
instructions impermissibly required that the jury unani
mously reject a death sentence before considering other
sentencing options. Second, the closing argument of
Spisak’s counsel was so egregious that it was constitution
ally deficient under any standard. Nevertheless, for the
reasons set forth in Part III of the Court’s opinion, ante, at
11–15, I agree that these errors did not prejudice Spisak
and thus he is not entitled to relief.
I
The jury instructions given during Spisak’s penalty
phase, described in the Court’s opinion, ante, at 6–8, are
fairly read to require the jury first to consider whether the
death penalty is warranted—i.e., whether the aggravating
factors outweigh the mitigating factors—before moving on
to consider whether instead a lesser penalty—i.e., one of
two available life sentences—is appropriate. Consistent
with Ohio law at the time of Spisak’s trial,1 the jury was
——————
1 Ohio no longer uses the type of jury instructions at issue in this
case. In 1996 the Ohio Supreme Court instructed that “[i]n Ohio, a


2

SMITH v. SPISAK
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

told that it must reach its decision unanimously. The jury
was not instructed on the consequence of their failure to
agree unanimously that Spisak should be sentenced to
death. Spisak and the Court of Appeals both described
these instructions as “acquittal first” because they would
have led a reasonable jury to believe that it first had to
“acquit” the defendant of death—unanimously—before it
could give effect to a lesser penalty.
Following its prior decision in Davis v. Mitchell, 318
F. 3d 682 (CA6 2003), in which it struck down “virtually
identical” jury instructions, Spisak v. Mitchell, 465 F. 3d
684, 710 (CA6 2006), the Court of Appeals concluded that
the instructions given during Spisak’s penalty phase were
impermissible because they “require[d] the jury to unani
mously reject a death sentence before considering other
sentencing alternatives,” id., at 709. In Davis, the court
had explained that an instruction that requires a capital
jury to “first unanimously reject the death penalty before
it can consider a life sentence . . . precludes the individual
jury from giving effect to mitigating evidence . . . .” 318
F. 3d, at 689. The source of this constitutional infirmity,
the court decided, was our decision in Mills v. Maryland,
——————
solitary juror may prevent a death penalty recommendation by finding
that the aggravating circumstances in the case do not outweigh the
mitigating factors. Jurors from this point forward should be so in
structed.” State v. Brooks, 75 Ohio St. 3d 148, 162, 661 N. E. 2d 1030,
1042. Although the Brooks decision signaled a change in Ohio’s capital
jury instructions, it was not a change in state law: One juror had the
power to prevent a death penalty recommendation before Brooks. See
State v. Springer, 63 Ohio St. 3d 167, 172, 586 N. E. 2d 96, 100 (1992)
(holding that an offender must be sentenced to life if the penalty-phase
jury deadlocks). Thus, consistent with our view that “accurate sentenc
ing information is an indispensable prerequisite to a [jury’s] determina
tion of whether a defendant shall live or die,” Gregg v. Georgia, 428
U. S. 153, 190 (1976) (joint opinion of Stewart, Powell, and STEVENS,
JJ.), the Ohio high court laudably improved upon the accuracy of Ohio
capital jury instructions in Brooks.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

486 U. S. 367 (1988). For the reasons cogently examined
in JUSTICE BREYER’s opinion, ante, at 5–9, I agree that
Mills does not clearly establish that the instructions at
issue were unconstitutional. But, in my view, our decision
in Beck v. Alabama, 447 U. S. 625 (1980), does.2
In Beck we held that the death penalty may not be
imposed “when the jury was not permitted to consider a
verdict of guilt of a lesser included non-capital offense, and
when the evidence would have supported such a verdict.”
Id., at 627 (internal quotation marks omitted). At that
time, the Alabama death penalty statute had been “consis
tently construed to preclude any lesser included offense
instructions in capital cases.” Id., at 629, n. 3. Thus, the
Alabama jury was “given the choice of either convicting
the defendant of the capital crime, in which case it [was]
required to impose the death penalty, or acquitting him,
thus allowing him to escape all penalties for his alleged
participation in the crime.” Id., at 628–629. Because of
the unique features of Alabama’s capital punishment
system,3 Beck’s jury believed that either it had to convict
Beck, thus sending him to his death, or acquit him, thus
setting him free. The jury was not presented with the
“third option” of convicting him of a noncapital offense,
thus ensuring that he would receive a substantial pun
ishment but not receive the death penalty. Id., at 642.
We concluded that the false choice before the jury—death
——————
2 Notably,

Beck substantially predates Spisak’s trial and thus my
application of Beck obviates any discussion on when federal law is
established for Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996
purposes, see ante, at 3. Regardless, in accordance with the view I
expressed in Williams v. Taylor, 529 U. S. 362, 379–380 (2000) (opinion
of STEVENS, J.), I would conclude that our decision in Mills, decided
before Spisak’s conviction became final, is also available to him.
3 Under Alabama law, the judge conducts a separate penalty-phase
proceeding after the jury has returned a conviction on a capital offense.
Beck, 447 U. S., at 629. Thus, the jury reasonably believed that its
verdict would set the defendant’s punishment at death.


4

SMITH v. SPISAK
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

or acquit—“introduce[d] a level of uncertainty and unreli
ability into the factfinding process that cannot be tolerated
in a capital case.” Id., at 643. In other words,
“the difficulty with the Alabama statute is that it in
terjects irrelevant considerations into the factfinding
process, diverting the jury’s attention from the central
issue of whether the State has satisfied its burden of
proving beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant
is guilty of a capital crime. Thus, on the one hand, the
unavailability of the third option of convicting on a
lesser included offense may encourage the jury to con
vict for an impermissible reason—its belief that the
defendant is guilty of some serious crime and should
be punished. On the other hand, the apparently
mandatory nature of the death penalty may encour
age it to acquit for an equally impermissible reason—
that, whatever his crime, the defendant does not de
serve death.” Id., at 642–643.
Although Beck dealt with guilt-phase instructions, the
reach of its holding is not so limited. The “third option” we
discussed in Beck was, plainly, a life sentence. Moreover,
the unusual features of the Alabama capital sentencing
scheme collapsed the guilt and penalty phases before the
jury (but not before the judge). Our concern in Beck was
that presenting the jury with only two options—death or
no punishment—introduced a risk of arbitrariness and
error into the deliberative process that the Constitution
could not abide in the capital context. See Spaziano v.
Florida, 468 U. S. 447, 455 (1984) (“The goal of the Beck
rule, in other words, is to eliminate the distortion of the
factfinding process that is created when the jury is forced
into an all-or-nothing choice between capital murder and
innocence”). We held, therefore, that the jury must be
given a meaningful opportunity to consider and embrace
the equivalent of a life-sentence when the evidence sup


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

ports such an option.
The acquittal-first jury instructions used during
Spisak’s penalty phase interposed before the jury the same
false choice that our holding in Beck prohibits. By requir
ing Spisak’s jury to decide first whether the State had met
its burden with respect to the death sentence, and to reach
that decision unanimously, the instructions deprived the
jury of a meaningful opportunity to consider the third
option that was before it, namely, a life sentence. Indeed,
these instructions are every bit as pernicious as those at
issue in Beck because they would have led individual
jurors (falsely) to believe that their failure to agree might
have resulted in a new trial and that, in any event, they
could not give effect to their determination that a life
sentence was appropriate unless and until they had first
convinced each of their peers on the jury to reject the
death sentence.
Admittedly, Spisak has never identified Beck as the
source of the constitutional infirmity at issue in this case,
nor did the courts below cite or rely upon it. But Spisak
has consistently pressed his argument in terms that are
wholly consistent with Beck. On direct appeal he con
tended, for example, that he:
“was severely prejudiced by the erroneous jury forms
because the jurors were never informed of what would
happen if they were unable to reach a unanimous de
cision. That may have led to irreparable speculation
that if they failed to agree, Frank Spisak would be
freed or have a new trial or sentencing hearing. Such
improper speculation may have led those not in
agreement with death to go along with a majority.
The jury should have been instructed that if they were
unable to unanimously agree to death they must re
turn a verdict of one of the life sentences or in the al
ternative, the court would impose a life sentence.”


6

SMITH v. SPISAK
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

Exh. 28D, 16 Record 391 (Brief for Supreme Court of
Ohio).
The untenable choice Spisak describes is perfectly analo
gous to the quandary, discussed above, that we described
in Beck. See also 447 U. S., at 644 (“It is extremely doubt
ful that juries will understand the full implications of a
mistrial or will have any confidence that their choice of the
mistrial option will ultimately lead to the right result.
Thus, they could have no assurance that a second trial
would end in the conviction of the defendant on a lesser
included offense” (footnote omitted)). Spisak and the
Court of Appeals both correctly assailed the jury instruc
tions at issue in this case, but in my view Beck provides
the proper basis in clearly established federal law to con
clude the instructions were unconstitutional.
II
Petitioner defends Spisak’s counsel’s closing argument
as a reasonable strategic decision “to draw the sting out of
the prosecution’s argument and gain credibility with the
jury by conceding the weaknesses of his own case.” Brief
for Petitioner 37. I agree that such a strategy is generally
a reasonable one and, indeed, was a reasonable strategy
under the difficult circumstances of this case. Even
Spisak concedes that his counsel “faced an admittedly
difficult case in closing argument in the penalty phase.”
Brief for Respondent 43. But, surely, a strategy can be
executed so poorly as to render even the most reasonable
of trial tactics constitutionally deficient under Strickland
v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668 (1984). And this is such a
case.
It is difficult to convey how thoroughly egregious coun
sel’s closing argument was without reproducing it in its
entirety.
The Court’s assessment of the closing as
“lengthy and rambling” and its brief description of its
content, see ante, at 10, does not accurately capture the


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

catastrophe of counsel’s failed strategy. Suffice it to say
that the argument shares far more in common with a
prosecutor’s closing than with a criminal defense attor
ney’s. Indeed, the argument was so outrageous that it
would have rightly subjected a prosecutor to charges of
misconduct. See Brief for Steven Lubet et al. as Amici
Curiae 15–16 (observing that counsel’s closing argument
“would have been improper even coming from the prosecu
tor”). A few examples are in order.
Presumably to take the “sting” out of the prosecution’s
case, Brief for Petitioner 37, counsel described his client’s
acts in vivid detail to the jury:
“[Y]ou can smell almost the blood. You can smell, if
you will, the urine. You are in a bathroom, and it is
death, and you can smell the death . . . and you can
feel, the loneliness of that railroad platform . . . and
we can all know the terror that [the victim] felt when
he turned and looked into those thick glasses and
looked into the muzzle of a gun that kept spitting out
bullets . . . And we can see a relatively young man cut
down with so many years to live, and we could re
member his widow, and we certainly can remember
looking at his children . . . There are too many family
albums. There are too many family portraits dated
1982 that have too many empty spaces. And there is
too much terror left in the hearts of those that we call
lucky.”4 465 F. 3d, at 704–795 (internal quotation
——————
4 To make matters worse, these graphic and emotionally charged
descriptions of Spisak’s crimes were irrelevant under state law even for
purposes of the State’s case for aggravating circumstances. See State v.
Wogenstahl, 75 Ohio St. 3d 344, 356, 662 N. E. 2d 311, 322 (1996)
(“[T]he nature and circumstances of the offense may only enter into the
statutory weighing process on the side of mitigation”); see also State v.
Johnson, 24 Ohio St. 3d 87, 93, 494 N. E. 2d 1061, 1066 (1986) (explain
ing that statutory aggravating circumstances should be narrowly
construed); Ohio Rev. Code Ann. §2929.04(A) (2006) (identifying 10


8

SMITH v. SPISAK
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

marks omitted).
Presumably to “gain credibility” with the jury, Brief of
Petitioner 37, counsel argued that his client deserved no
sympathy for his actions:
“Sympathy, of course, is not part of your considera
tion. And even if it was, certainly, don’t look to him
for sympathy, because he demands none. And, ladies
and gentlemen, when you turn and look at Frank
Spisak, don’t look for good deeds, because he has done
none. Don’t look for good thoughts, because he has
none. He is sick, he is twisted. He is demented, and
he is never going to be any different.” 465 F. 3d, at
705 (internal quotation marks omitted).
And then the strategy really broke down: At no point
did counsel endeavor to direct his negative statements
about his client toward an express appeal for leniency.5
On the contrary, counsel concluded by telling the jury that
“whatever you do, we are going to be proud of you,” ibid.
(internal quotation marks omitted), which I take to mean
that, in counsel’s view, “either outcome, death or life,
would be a valid conclusion,” ibid.
Spisak’s crimes, and the seemingly unmitigated hatred
motivating their commission, were truly awful. But that
does not excuse a lawyer’s duty to represent his client
within the bounds of prevailing professional norms. The
mere fact that counsel, laudably, may have had a “strat
egy” to build rapport with the jury and lessen the impact
of the prosecution’s case, does not excuse counsel’s utter
——————
aggravating circumstances but not including heinous circumstances of
offense).
5 Counsel did attempt to appeal to the jury’s sense of humanity, per
haps implicitly suggesting that humane people do not condemn others,
especially those with mental illness, to death. App. to Pet. for Cert.
339a–341a. But counsel never requested a life sentence on behalf of his
client.


Cite as: 558 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

failure to achieve either of these objectives through his
closing argument. In short, counsel’s argument grossly
transgressed the bounds of what constitutionally compe
tent counsel would have done in a similar situation.
III
Notwithstanding these two serious constitutional errors,
I agree with the Court that these errors do not entitle
Spisak to relief. As JUSTICE BREYER’s discussion in Part
III makes vividly clear, see ante, at 11–14, Spisak’s own
conduct alienated and ostracized the jury, and his crimes
were monstrous. In my judgment even the most skillful of
closing arguments—even one befitting Clarence Darrow—
would not have created a reasonable probability of a dif
ferent outcome in this case. Similarly, in light of Spisak’s
conduct before the jury and the gravity of the aggravating
circumstances of the offense, the instructional error was
also harmless because it did not have a substantial and
injurious effect on this record, Brecht v. Abrahamson, 507
U. S. 619, 623 (1993).
Accordingly, I concur in the judgment and concur in the
Court’s discussion of prejudice in Part III of its opinion.

