(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

UNITED STUDENT AID FUNDS, INC. v. ESPINOSA
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 08–1134. Argued December 1, 2009—Decided March 23, 2010
A plan proposed under Bankruptcy Code (Code) Chapter 13 becomes
effective upon confirmation, see 11 U. S. C. §§1324, 1325, and will re
sult in a discharge of the debts listed in the plan if the debtor com
pletes the payments the plan requires, see §1328(a). A debtor may
obtain a discharge of government-sponsored student loan debts only
if failure to discharge that debt would impose an “undue hardship” on
the debtor and his dependents. §§523(a)(8); 1328. Bankruptcy courts
must make this undue hardship determination in an adversary pro
ceeding, see Fed. Rule Bkrtcy. Proc. 7001(6), which the party seeking
the determination must initiate by serving a summons and complaint
on his adversary, see Rules 7003, 7004, 7008. Respondent Espinosa’s
plan proposed repaying the principal on his student loan debt and
discharging the interest once the principal was repaid, but he did not
initiate the required adversary proceeding. The student loan credi
tor, petitioner United, received notice of the plan from the Bank
ruptcy Court and did not object to the plan or to Espinosa’s failure to
initiate the required proceeding. The Bankruptcy Court confirmed
the plan without holding such a proceeding or making a finding of
undue hardship. Once Espinosa paid his student loan principal, the
court discharged the interest. A few years later, the Department of
Education sought to collect that interest. In response, Espinosa
asked the court to enforce the confirmation order by directing the
Department and United to cease any collection efforts. United op
posed the motion and filed a cross-motion under Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure 60(b)(4), seeking to set aside as void the confirmation or
der because the plan provision authorizing discharge of Espinosa’s
student loan interest was inconsistent with the Code and the Bank
ruptcy Rules, and because United’s due process rights were violated


2

UNITED STUDENT AID FUNDS, INC. v. ESPINOSA
Syllabus
when Espinosa failed to serve it with the required summons and
complaint.
Rejecting those arguments, the Bankruptcy Court
granted Espinosa’s motion in relevant part and denied the cross
motion. The District Court reversed, holding that United was denied
due process when the confirmation order was issued without the re
quired service. The Ninth Circuit ultimately reversed. It concluded
that by confirming Espinosa’s plan without first finding undue hard
ship in an adversary proceeding, the Bankruptcy Court at most
committed a legal error that United might have successfully ap
pealed, but that such error was no basis for setting aside the order as
void under Rule 60(b)(4). It also held that Espinosa’s failure to serve
United was not a basis upon which to declare the judgment void be
cause United received actual notice of the plan and failed to object.

Held:
1. The Bankruptcy Court’s confirmation order is not void under
Rule 60(b)(4). Pp. 6–14.
(a) That order was a final judgment from which United did not
appeal. Such finality ordinarily would “stan[d] in the way of chal
lenging [the order’s] enforceability,” Travelers Indemnity Co. v. Bai
ley, 557 U. S. ___, ___. However, Rule 60(b)(4) allows a party to seek
relief from a final judgment that “is void,” but only in the rare in
stance where a judgment is premised either on a certain type of ju
risdictional error or on a violation of due process that deprives a
party of notice or the opportunity to be heard. United’s alleged error
falls in neither category. Conceding that the Bankruptcy Court had
jurisdiction to enter the confirmation order, United contends that the
judgment is void because United did not receive adequate notice of
Espinosa’s proposed discharge. Espinosa’s failure to serve the sum
mons and complaint as required by the Bankruptcy Rules deprived
United of a right granted by a procedural rule. United could have
timely objected to this deprivation and appealed from an adverse rul
ing on its objection. But this deprivation did not amount to a viola
tion of due process, which requires notice “reasonably calculated, un
der all the circumstances, to apprise interested parties of the
pendency of the action and afford them an opportunity to present
their objections,” Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co., 339
U. S. 306, 314. Here, United’s actual notice of the filing and contents
of Espinosa’s plan more than satisfied its due process rights. Thus,
Espinosa’s failure to make the required service does not entitle
United to relief under Rule 60(b)(4). Pp. 7–10.
(b) Contrary to United’s claim, the confirmation order is not void
because the Bankruptcy Court lacked statutory authority to confirm
Espinosa’s plan absent an undue hardship finding under §523(a)(8).
Such failure is not on par with the jurisdictional and notice failings


Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
that define void judgments qualifying for Rule 60(b)(4) relief. Section
523(a)(8) does not limit a bankruptcy court’s jurisdiction over student
loan debts or impose requirements that, if violated, would result in a
denial of due process. Instead, it requires a court to make a certain
findings before confirming a student loan debt’s discharge. ‘That this
requirement is “ ‘self-executing,’ ” Tennessee Student Assistance Cor
poration v. Hood, 541 U. S. 440, 450, means only that the bankruptcy
court must make an undue hardship finding even if the creditor does
not request one; it does not mean that a bankruptcy court’s failure to
make the finding renders its subsequent confirmation order void for
Rule 60(b)(4) purposes. Although the Bankruptcy Court’s failure to
find undue hardship was a legal error, the confirmation order is en
forceable and binding on United because it had actual notice of the
error and failed to object or timely appeal. Pp. 10–14.
2. The Ninth Circuit erred in holding that bankruptcy courts must
confirm a plan proposing the discharge of a student loan debt without
an undue hardship determination in an adversary proceeding unless
the creditor timely raises a specific objection. A Chapter 13 plan pro
posing such a discharge without the required determination violates
§§1328(a)(2) and 523(a)(8). Failure to comply with this self-executing
requirement should prevent confirmation even if the creditor fails to
object, or to appear in the proceeding at all, since a bankruptcy court
may confirm only a plan that, inter alia, complies with the “applica
ble provisions” of the Code. §1325(a). Neither the Code nor the Rules
prevent parties from stipulating to the underlying facts of undue
hardship or prevent the creditor from waiving service of a summons
and complaint. Pp. 14–16.
3. Expanding the availability of Rule 60(b)(4) relief is not an ap
propriate prophylaxis for discouraging unscrupulous debtors from fil
ing Chapter 13 plans proposing to dispense with the undue hardship
requirement in hopes that the bankruptcy court will overlook the
proposal and the creditor will not object. Such bad-faith efforts
should be deterred by the specter of penalties that “[d]ebtors and
their attorneys face . . . under various provisions for engaging in im
proper conduct in bankruptcy proceedings,” Taylor v. Freeland &
Kronz, 503 U. S. 638, 644. And Congress may enact additional provi
sions to address any difficulties should existing sanctions prove in
adequate. Pp. 16–17.
553 F. 3d 1193, affirmed.
THOMAS, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

