Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

Nos. 11–393, 11–398 and 11–400
_________________

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS, ET AL., PETITIONERS
11–393
v.
KATHLEEN SEBELIUS, SECRETARY OF HEALTH
AND HUMAN SERVICES, ET AL.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN

SERVICES, ET AL., PETITIONERS 

11–398
v.
FLORIDA ET AL.
11–400

FLORIDA, ET AL., PETITIONERS
v.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES ET AL.

ON WRITS OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
APPEALS FOR THE ELEVENTH CIRCUIT
[June 28, 2012]

JUSTICE GINSBURG, with whom JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR
joins, and with whom JUSTICE BREYER and JUSTICE
KAGAN join as to Parts I, II, III, and IV, concurring in
part, concurring in the judgment in part, and dissenting in
part.
I agree with THE CHIEF JUSTICE that the Anti-Injunction
Act does not bar the Court’s consideration of this case,
and that the minimum coverage provision is a proper
exercise of Congress’ taxing power. I therefore join Parts
I, II, and III–C of THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s opinion.
Unlike THE CHIEF JUSTICE, however, I would hold, alterna­


2

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


tively, that the Commerce Clause authorizes Congress to
enact the minimum coverage provision. I would also hold
that the Spending Clause permits the Medicaid expansion
exactly as Congress enacted it.
I
The provision of health care is today a concern of na­
tional dimension, just as the provision of old-age and
survivors’ benefits was in the 1930’s. In the Social Security Act, Congress installed a federal system to provide
monthly benefits to retired wage earners and, eventually,
to their survivors. Beyond question, Congress could have
adopted a similar scheme for health care. Congress chose,
instead, to preserve a central role for private insurers and
state governments. According to THE CHIEF JUSTICE, the
Commerce Clause does not permit that preservation. This
rigid reading of the Clause makes scant sense and is
stunningly retrogressive.
Since 1937, our precedent has recognized Congress’
large authority to set the Nation’s course in the economic
and social welfare realm. See United States v. Darby, 312
U. S. 100, 115 (1941) (overruling Hammer v. Dagenhart,
247 U. S. 251 (1918), and recognizing that “regulations of
commerce which do not infringe some constitutional prohibition are within the plenary power conferred on Congress
by the Commerce Clause”); NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin
Steel Corp., 301 U. S. 1, 37 (1937) (“[The commerce]
power is plenary and may be exerted to protect interstate
commerce no matter what the source of the dangers which
threaten it.” (internal quotation marks omitted)). THE
CHIEF JUSTICE’s crabbed reading of the Commerce Clause
harks back to the era in which the Court routinely thwarted
Congress’ efforts to regulate the national economy in
the interest of those who labor to sustain it. See, e.g.,
Railroad Retirement Bd. v. Alton R. Co., 295 U. S. 330,
362, 368 (1935) (invalidating compulsory retirement and


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

pension plan for employees of carriers subject to the Inter­
state Commerce Act; Court found law related essentially
“to the social welfare of the worker, and therefore remote
from any regulation of commerce as such”). It is a reading
that should not have staying power.
A
In enacting the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act (ACA), Congress comprehensively reformed the
national market for health-care products and services.
By any measure, that market is immense. Collectively,
Americans spent $2.5 trillion on health care in 2009,
accounting for 17.6% of our Nation’s economy. 42 U. S. C.
§18091(2)(B) (2006 ed., Supp. IV). Within the next decade,
it is anticipated, spending on health care will nearly dou­
ble. Ibid.
The health-care market’s size is not its only distinctive
feature. Unlike the market for almost any other product
or service, the market for medical care is one in which all
individuals inevitably participate. Virtually every person
residing in the United States, sooner or later, will visit
a doctor or other health-care professional. See Dept. of
Health and Human Services, National Center for Health
Statistics, Summary Health Statistics for U. S. Adults:
National Health Interview Survey 2009, Ser. 10, No. 249,
p. 124, Table 37 (Dec. 2010) (Over 99.5% of adults above
65 have visited a health-care professional.). Most people
will do so repeatedly. See id., at 115, Table 34 (In 2009
alone, 64% of adults made two or more visits to a doctor’s
office.).
When individuals make those visits, they face another
reality of the current market for medical care: its high
cost. In 2010, on average, an individual in the United
States incurred over $7,000 in health-care expenses.
Dept. of Health and Human Services, Centers for Medi­
care and Medicaid Services, Historic National Health


4

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


Expenditure Data, National Health Expenditures: Selected Calendar Years 1960–2010 (Table 1). Over a life­
time, costs mount to hundreds of thousands of dollars. See
Alemayahu & Warner, The Lifetime Distribution of
Health Care Costs, in 39 Health Service Research 627, 635
(June 2004). When a person requires nonroutine care, the
cost will generally exceed what he or she can afford to pay.
A single hospital stay, for instance, typically costs up­
wards of $10,000. See Dept. of Health and Human Ser­
vices, Office of Health Policy, ASPE Research Brief: The
Value of Health Insurance 5 (May 2011). Treatments for
many serious, though not uncommon, conditions similarly
cost a substantial sum. Brief for Economic Scholars as
Amici Curiae in No. 11–398, p. 10 (citing a study indicat­
ing that, in 1998, the cost of treating a heart attack for the
first 90 days exceeded $20,000, while the annual cost of
treating certain cancers was more than $50,000).
Although every U. S. domiciliary will incur significant
medical expenses during his or her lifetime, the time when
care will be needed is often unpredictable. An accident, a
heart attack, or a cancer diagnosis commonly occurs with­
out warning. Inescapably, we are all at peril of needing
medical care without a moment’s notice. See, e.g., Camp­
bell, Down the Insurance Rabbit Hole, N. Y. Times, Apr. 5,
2012, p. A23 (telling of an uninsured 32-year-old woman
who, healthy one day, became a quadriplegic the next due
to an auto accident).
To manage the risks associated with medical care—
its high cost, its unpredictability, and its inevitability—
most people in the United States obtain health insurance.
Many (approximately 170 million in 2009) are insured by
private insurance companies. Others, including those
over 65 and certain poor and disabled persons, rely on
government-funded insurance programs, notably Medicare
and Medicaid. Combined, private health insurers and
State and Federal Governments finance almost 85% of the


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

medical care administered to U. S. residents. See Con­
gressional Budget Office, CBO’s 2011 Long-Term Budget
Outlook 37 (June 2011).
Not all U. S. residents, however, have health insurance.
In 2009, approximately 50 million people were uninsured,
either by choice or, more likely, because they could not
afford private insurance and did not qualify for govern­
ment aid. See Dept. of Commerce, Census Bureau, C.
DeNavas-Walt, B. Proctor, & J. Smith, Income, Poverty,
and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2009,
p. 23, Table 8 (Sept. 2010). As a group, uninsured individ­
uals annually consume more than $100 billion in healthcare services, nearly 5% of the Nation’s total. Hidden
Health Tax: Americans Pay a Premium 2 (2009), available at http://www.familiesusa.org (all Internet material as visited June 25, 2012, and included in Clerk of
Court’s case file). Over 60% of those without insurance
visit a doctor’s office or emergency room in a given year.
See Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics, Health—United States—2010,
p. 282, Table 79 (Feb. 2011).
B
The large number of individuals without health insur­
ance, Congress found, heavily burdens the national
health-care market. See 42 U. S. C. §18091(2). As just
noted, the cost of emergency care or treatment for a seri­
ous illness generally exceeds what an individual can afford
to pay on her own. Unlike markets for most products,
however, the inability to pay for care does not mean that
an uninsured individual will receive no care. Federal and
state law, as well as professional obligations and embed­
ded social norms, require hospitals and physicians to
provide care when it is most needed, regardless of the
patient’s ability to pay. See, e.g., 42 U. S. C. §1395dd; Fla.
Stat. §395.1041(3)(f) (2010); Tex. Health & Safety Code


6

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


Ann. §§311.022(a) and (b) (West 2010); American Medical
Association, Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs,
Code of Medical Ethics, Current Opinions: Opinion 8.11—
Neglect of Patient, p. 70 (1998–1999 ed.).
As a consequence, medical-care providers deliver significant amounts of care to the uninsured for which the
providers receive no payment. In 2008, for example, hospitals, physicians, and other health-care professionals
received no compensation for $43 billion worth of the $116
billion in care they administered to those without insur­
ance. 42 U. S. C. §18091(2)(F) (2006 ed., Supp. IV).
Health-care providers do not absorb these bad debts.
Instead, they raise their prices, passing along the cost
of uncompensated care to those who do pay reliably: the
government and private insurance companies. In response,
private insurers increase their premiums, shifting the
cost of the elevated bills from providers onto those who
carry insurance. The net result: Those with health insur­
ance subsidize the medical care of those without it. As
economists would describe what happens, the uninsured
“free ride” on those who pay for health insurance.
The size of this subsidy is considerable. Congress found
that the cost-shifting just described “increases family
[insurance] premiums by on average over $1,000 a year.”
Ibid. Higher premiums, in turn, render health insurance
less affordable, forcing more people to go without insur­
ance and leading to further cost-shifting.
And it is hardly just the currently sick or injured among
the uninsured who prompt elevation of the price of health
care and health insurance. Insurance companies and
health-care providers know that some percentage of
healthy, uninsured people will suffer sickness or injury
each year and will receive medical care despite their ina­
bility to pay. In anticipation of this uncompensated care,
health-care companies raise their prices, and insurers
their premiums. In other words, because any uninsured


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

person may need medical care at any moment and because
health-care companies must account for that risk, every
uninsured person impacts the market price of medical care
and medical insurance.
The failure of individuals to acquire insurance has other
deleterious effects on the health-care market. Because
those without insurance generally lack access to preventa­
tive care, they do not receive treatment for conditions—
like hypertension and diabetes—that can be successfully
and affordably treated if diagnosed early on. See Institute
of Medicine, National Academies, Insuring America’s
Health: Principles and Recommendations 43 (2004). When
sickness finally drives the uninsured to seek care, once
treatable conditions have escalated into grave health
problems, requiring more costly and extensive interven­
tion. Id., at 43–44. The extra time and resources provid­
ers spend serving the uninsured lessens the providers’
ability to care for those who do have insurance. See Kliff,
High Uninsured Rates Can Kill You—Even if You Have
Coverage, Washington Post (May 7, 2012) (describing a
study of California’s health-care market which found
that, when hospitals divert time and resources to provide
uncompensated care, the quality of care the hospitals
deliver to those with insurance drops significantly), available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/ezra-klein/post/
high-uninsured-rates-can-kill-you-even-if-you-have-coverage/2012/
05/07/gIQALNHN8T_print.html.
C
States cannot resolve the problem of the uninsured on
their own. Like Social Security benefits, a universal
health-care system, if adopted by an individual State,
would be “bait to the needy and dependent elsewhere,
encouraging them to migrate and seek a haven of repose.”
Helvering v. Davis, 301 U. S. 619, 644 (1937). See also
Brief for Commonwealth of Massachusetts as Amicus


8

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


Curiae in No. 11–398, p. 15 (noting that, in 2009, Massa­
chusetts’ emergency rooms served thousands of uninsured,
out-of-state residents). An influx of unhealthy individuals
into a State with universal health care would result in
increased spending on medical services. To cover the
increased costs, a State would have to raise taxes, and
private health-insurance companies would have to in­
crease premiums. Higher taxes and increased insurance
costs would, in turn, encourage businesses and healthy
individuals to leave the State.
States that undertake health-care reforms on their own
thus risk “placing themselves in a position of economic
disadvantage as compared with neighbors or competitors.”
Davis, 301 U. S., at 644. See also Brief for Health Care for
All, Inc., et al. as Amici Curiae in No. 11–398, p. 4 (“[O]ut­
of-state residents continue to seek and receive millions of
dollars in uncompensated care in Massachusetts hospitals,
limiting the State’s efforts to improve its health care
system through the elimination of uncompensated care.”).
Facing that risk, individual States are unlikely to take the
initiative in addressing the problem of the uninsured, even
though solving that problem is in all States’ best interests.
Congress’ intervention was needed to overcome this collective­
action impasse.
D
Aware that a national solution was required, Congress
could have taken over the health-insurance market by
establishing a tax-and-spend federal program like Social
Security. Such a program, commonly referred to as a
single-payer system (where the sole payer is the Federal
Government), would have left little, if any, room for pri­
vate enterprise or the States. Instead of going this route,
Congress enacted the ACA, a solution that retains a ro­
bust role for private insurers and state governments. To
make its chosen approach work, however, Congress had to


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

use some new tools, including a requirement that most
individuals obtain private health insurance coverage. See
26 U. S. C. §5000A (2006 ed., Supp. IV) (the minimum
coverage provision). As explained below, by employing
these tools, Congress was able to achieve a practical, alto­
gether reasonable, solution.
A central aim of the ACA is to reduce the number of
uninsured U. S. residents. See 42 U. S. C. §18091(2)(C)
and (I) (2006 ed., Supp. IV). The minimum coverage
provision advances this objective by giving potential recip­
ients of health care a financial incentive to acquire insur­
ance. Per the minimum coverage provision, an individual
must either obtain insurance or pay a toll constructed as a
tax penalty. See 26 U. S. C. §5000A.
The minimum coverage provision serves a further pur­
pose vital to Congress’ plan to reduce the number of unin­
sured. Congress knew that encouraging individuals to
purchase insurance would not suffice to solve the problem,
because most of the uninsured are not uninsured by
choice.1 Of particular concern to Congress were people
who, though desperately in need of insurance, often cannot
acquire it: persons who suffer from preexisting medical
conditions.
Before the ACA’s enactment, private insurance compa­
nies took an applicant’s medical history into account when
setting insurance rates or deciding whether to insure an
individual. Because individuals with preexisting med——————
1 According to one study conducted by the National Center for Health
Statistics, the high cost of insurance is the most common reason why
individuals lack coverage, followed by loss of one’s job, an employer’s
unwillingness to offer insurance or an insurers’ unwillingness to cover
those with preexisting medical conditions, and loss of Medicaid cover­
age. See Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for
Health Statistics, Summary Health Statistics for the U. S. Population:
National Health Interview Survey—2009, Ser. 10, No. 248, p. 71, Table
25 (Dec. 2010). “[D]id not want or need coverage” received too few responses to warrant its own category. See ibid., n. 2.


10

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


ical conditions cost insurance companies significantly more
than those without such conditions, insurers routinely refused to insure these individuals, charged them substan­
tially higher premiums, or offered only limited coverage
that did not include the preexisting illness. See Dept. of
Health and Human Services, Coverage Denied: How the
Current Health Insurance System Leaves Millions Behind
1 (2009) (Over the past three years, 12.6 million non­
elderly adults were denied insurance coverage or charged
higher premiums due to a preexisting condition.).
To ensure that individuals with medical histories have
access to affordable insurance, Congress devised a three­
part solution. First, Congress imposed a “guaranteed is­
sue” requirement, which bars insurers from denying
coverage to any person on account of that person’s medical
condition or history. See 42 U. S. C. §§300gg–1, 300gg–3,
300gg–4(a) (2006 ed., Supp. IV). Second, Congress required
insurers to use “community rating” to price their insurance
policies. See §300gg. Community rating, in effect, bars
insurance companies from charging higher premiums
to those with preexisting conditions.
But these two provisions, Congress comprehended, could
not work effectively unless individuals were given a pow­
erful incentive to obtain insurance. See Hearings before
the House Ways and Means Committee, 111th Cong., 1st
Sess., 10, 13 (2009) (statement of Uwe Reinhardt) (“[I]mposition of community-rated premiums and guaranteed
issue on a market of competing private health insurers
will inexorably drive that market into extinction, unless
these two features are coupled with . . . a mandate on
individual[s] to be insured.” (emphasis in original)).
In the 1990’s, several States—including New York, New
Jersey, Washington, Kentucky, Maine, New Hampshire,
and Vermont—enacted guaranteed-issue and community­
rating laws without requiring universal acquisition of
insurance coverage. The results were disastrous. “All


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

11

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

seven states suffered from skyrocketing insurance pre­
mium costs, reductions in individuals with coverage, and
reductions in insurance products and providers.” Brief for
American Association of People with Disabilities et al. as
Amici Curiae in No. 11–398, p. 9 (hereinafter AAPD Brief).
See also Brief for Governor of Washington Christine
Gregoire as Amicus Curiae in No. 11–398, pp. 11–14 (de­
scribing the “death spiral” in the insurance market Wash­
ington experienced when the State passed a law requiring
coverage for preexisting conditions).
Congress comprehended that guaranteed-issue and
community-rating laws alone will not work. When insur­
ance companies are required to insure the sick at afforda­
ble prices, individuals can wait until they become ill to buy
insurance. Pretty soon, those in need of immediate medi­
cal care—i.e., those who cost insurers the most—become
the insurance companies’ main customers. This “adverse
selection” problem leaves insurers with two choices: They
can either raise premiums dramatically to cover their
ever-increasing costs or they can exit the market. In the
seven States that tried guaranteed-issue and community­
rating requirements without a minimum coverage provi­
sion, that is precisely what insurance companies did. See,
e.g., AAPD Brief 10 (“[In Maine,] [m]any insurance provid­
ers doubled their premiums in just three years or less.”);
id., at 12 (“Like New York, Vermont saw substantial
increases in premiums after its . . . insurance reform
measures took effect in 1993.”); Hall, An Evaluation of
New York’s Reform Law, 25 J. Health Pol. Pol’y & L. 71,
91–92 (2000) (Guaranteed-issue and community-rating
laws resulted in a “dramatic exodus of indemnity insurers
from New York’s individual [insurance] market.”); Brief
for Barry Friedman et al. as Amici Curiae in No. 11–398,
p. 17 (“In Kentucky, all but two insurers (one State-run)
abandoned the State.”).
Massachusetts, Congress was told, cracked the adverse


12

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


selection problem. By requiring most residents to obtain
insurance, see Mass. Gen. Laws, ch. 111M, §2 (West 2011),
the Commonwealth ensured that insurers would not be
left with only the sick as customers. As a result, federal
lawmakers observed, Massachusetts succeeded where
other States had failed. See Brief for Commonwealth of
Massachusetts as Amicus Curiae in No. 11–398, p. 3 (not­
ing that the Commonwealth’s reforms reduced the number
of uninsured residents to less than 2%, the lowest rate in
the Nation, and cut the amount of uncompensated care
by a third); 42 U. S. C. §18091(2)(D) (2006 ed., Supp. IV)
(noting the success of Massachusetts’ reforms).2 In cou­
pling the minimum coverage provision with guaranteed­
issue and community-rating prescriptions, Congress
followed Massachusetts’ lead.
*
*
*
In sum, Congress passed the minimum coverage provi­
sion as a key component of the ACA to address an econom­
ic and social problem that has plagued the Nation for
decades: the large number of U. S. residents who are
unable or unwilling to obtain health insurance. Whatever
one thinks of the policy decision Congress made, it was
Congress’ prerogative to make it. Reviewed with appro­
priate deference, the minimum coverage provision, allied
to the guaranteed-issue and community-rating prescrip­
tions, should survive measurement under the Commerce
and Necessary and Proper Clauses.
II
A
The Commerce Clause, it is widely acknowledged, “was
the Framers’ response to the central problem that gave
——————
2 Despite its success, Massachusetts’ medical-care providers still ad­
minister substantial amounts of uncompensated care, much of that to
uninsured patients from out-of-state. See supra, at 7–8.


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

rise to the Constitution itself.” EEOC v. Wyoming, 460
U. S. 226, 244, 245, n. 1 (1983) (Stevens, J., concurring)
(citing sources). Under the Articles of Confederation, the
Constitution’s precursor, the regulation of commerce was
left to the States. This scheme proved unworkable, be­
cause the individual States, understandably focused on
their own economic interests, often failed to take actions
critical to the success of the Nation as a whole. See Vices
of the Political System of the United States, in James
Madison: Writings 69, 71, ¶5 (J. Rakove ed. 1999) (As a
result of the “want of concert in matters where common
interest requires it,” the “national dignity, interest, and revenue [have] suffered.”).3
What was needed was a “national Government . . .
armed with a positive & compleat authority in all cases
where uniform measures are necessary.” See Letter from
James Madison to Edmund Randolph (Apr. 8, 1787), in 9
Papers of James Madison 368, 370 (R. Rutland ed. 1975).
See also Letter from George Washington to James Madi­
son (Nov. 30, 1785), in 8 id., at 428, 429 (“We are either a
United people, or we are not. If the former, let us, in all
matters of general concern act as a nation, which ha[s]
national objects to promote, and a national character
to support.”). The Framers’ solution was the Commerce
Clause, which, as they perceived it, granted Congress the
authority to enact economic legislation “in all Cases for
the general Interests of the Union, and also in those Cases
to which the States are separately incompetent.” 2 Rec­
ords of the Federal Convention of 1787, pp. 131–132, ¶8
——————
3 Alexander Hamilton described the problem this way:
“[Often] it
would be beneficial to all the states to encourage, or suppress[,] a
particular branch of trade, while it would be detrimental . . . to attempt
it without the concurrence of the rest.” The Continentalist No. V, in 3
Papers of Alexander Hamilton 75, 78 (H. Syrett ed. 1962). Because the
concurrence of all States was exceedingly difficult to obtain, Hamilton
observed, “the experiment would probably be left untried.” Ibid.


14

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


(M. Farrand rev. 1966). See also North American Co. v.
SEC, 327 U. S. 686, 705 (1946) (“[The commerce power]
is an affirmative power commensurate with the national
needs.”).
The Framers understood that the “general Interests of
the Union” would change over time, in ways they could not
anticipate. Accordingly, they recognized that the Consti­
tution was of necessity a “great outlin[e],” not a detailed
blueprint, see McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 407
(1819), and that its provisions included broad concepts, to
be “explained by the context or by the facts of the case,”
Letter from James Madison to N. P. Trist (Dec. 1831), in 9
Writings of James Madison 471, 475 (G. Hunt ed. 1910).
“Nothing . . . can be more fallacious,” Alexander Hamilton
emphasized, “than to infer the extent of any power, proper
to be lodged in the national government, from . . . its
immediate necessities. There ought to be a CAPACITY to
provide for future contingencies[,] as they may happen;
and as these are illimitable in their nature, it is impossible
safely to limit that capacity.” The Federalist No. 34,
pp. 205, 206 (John Harvard Library ed. 2009). See also
McCulloch, 4 Wheat., at 415 (The Necessary and Proper
Clause is lodged “in a constitution[,] intended to endure
for ages to come, and consequently, to be adapted to the
various crises of human affairs.”).
B
Consistent with the Framers’ intent, we have repeatedly
emphasized that Congress’ authority under the Commerce
Clause is dependent upon “practical” considerations,
including “actual experience.” Jones & Laughlin Steel
Corp., 301 U. S., at 41–42; see Wickard v. Filburn, 317
U. S. 111, 122 (1942); United States v. Lopez, 514 U. S.
549, 573 (1995) (KENNEDY, J., concurring) (emphasizing
“the Court’s definitive commitment to the practical con­
ception of the commerce power”). See also North American


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

15

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

Co., 327 U. S., at 705 (“Commerce itself is an intensely
practical matter. To deal with it effectively, Congress
must be able to act in terms of economic and financial
realities.” (citation omitted)). We afford Congress the
leeway “to undertake to solve national problems directly
and realistically.” American Power & Light Co. v. SEC,
329 U. S. 90, 103 (1946).
Until today, this Court’s pragmatic approach to judging
whether Congress validly exercised its commerce power
was guided by two familiar principles. First, Congress has
the power to regulate economic activities “that substan­
tially affect interstate commerce.” Gonzales v. Raich, 545
U. S. 1, 17 (2005). This capacious power extends even to
local activities that, viewed in the aggregate, have a sub­
stantial impact on interstate commerce. See ibid. See
also Wickard, 317 U. S., at 125 (“[E]ven if appellee’s activity be local and though it may not be regarded as com­
merce, it may still, whatever its nature, be reached by
Congress if it exerts a substantial economic effect on
interstate commerce.” (emphasis added)); Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp., 301 U. S., at 37.
Second, we owe a large measure of respect to Congress
when it frames and enacts economic and social legislation.
See Raich, 545 U. S., at 17. See also Pension Benefit
Guaranty Corporation v. R. A. Gray & Co., 467 U. S. 717,
729 (1984) (“[S]trong deference [is] accorded legislation in
the field of national economic policy.”); Hodel v. Indiana,
452 U. S. 314, 326 (1981) (“This [C]ourt will certainly not
substitute its judgment for that of Congress unless the
relation of the subject to interstate commerce and its ef­
fect upon it are clearly non-existent.” (internal quotation
marks omitted)). When appraising such legislation, we
ask only (1) whether Congress had a “rational basis” for
concluding that the regulated activity substantially affects
interstate commerce, and (2) whether there is a “reasona­
ble connection between the regulatory means selected and


16

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


the asserted ends.” Id., at 323–324. See also Raich, 545
U. S., at 22; Lopez, 514 U. S., at 557; Hodel v. Virginia
Surface Mining & Reclamation Assn., Inc., 452 U. S. 264,
277 (1981); Katzenbach v. McClung, 379 U. S. 294, 303
(1964); Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States, 379
U. S. 241, 258 (1964); United States v. Carolene Products
Co., 304 U. S. 144, 152–153 (1938). In answering these
questions, we presume the statute under review is consti­
tutional and may strike it down only on a “plain showing”
that Congress acted irrationally. United States v. Morrison, 529 U. S. 598, 607 (2000).
C
Straightforward application of these principles would
require the Court to hold that the minimum coverage
provision is proper Commerce Clause legislation. Beyond
dispute, Congress had a rational basis for concluding that
the uninsured, as a class, substantially affect interstate
commerce. Those without insurance consume billions of
dollars of health-care products and services each year. See
supra, at 5. Those goods are produced, sold, and delivered
largely by national and regional companies who routinely
transact business across state lines. The uninsured also
cross state lines to receive care. Some have medical emer­
gencies while away from home. Others, when sick, go to a
neighboring State that provides better care for those who
have not prepaid for care. See supra, at 7–8.
Not only do those without insurance consume a large
amount of health care each year; critically, as earlier
explained, their inability to pay for a significant portion of
that consumption drives up market prices, foists costs on
other consumers, and reduces market efficiency and sta­
bility. See supra, at 5–7. Given these far-reaching effects
on interstate commerce, the decision to forgo insurance is
hardly inconsequential or equivalent to “doing nothing,”
ante, at 20; it is, instead, an economic decision Congress


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

has the authority to address under the Commerce Clause.
See supra, at 14–16. See also Wickard, 317 U. S., at 128
(“It is well established by decisions of this Court that
the power to regulate commerce includes the power to regu­
late the prices at which commodities in that commerce are
dealt in and practices affecting such prices.” (emphasis
added)).
The minimum coverage provision, furthermore, bears a
“reasonable connection” to Congress’ goal of protecting the
health-care market from the disruption caused by individ­
uals who fail to obtain insurance. By requiring those who
do not carry insurance to pay a toll, the minimum cover­
age provision gives individuals a strong incentive to in­
sure. This incentive, Congress had good reason to believe,
would reduce the number of uninsured and, correspond­
ingly, mitigate the adverse impact the uninsured have on
the national health-care market.
Congress also acted reasonably in requiring uninsured
individuals, whether sick or healthy, either to obtain
insurance or to pay the specified penalty. As earlier ob­
served, because every person is at risk of needing care at
any moment, all those who lack insurance, regardless of
their current health status, adversely affect the price of
health care and health insurance. See supra, at 6–7.
Moreover, an insurance-purchase requirement limited to
those in need of immediate care simply could not work.
Insurance companies would either charge these individu­
als prohibitively expensive premiums, or, if community­
rating regulations were in place, close up shop. See supra,
at 9–11. See also Brief for State of Maryland and 10
Other States et al. as Amici Curiae in No. 11–398, p. 28
(hereinafter Maryland Brief) (“No insurance regime can
survive if people can opt out when the risk insured against
is only a risk, but opt in when the risk materializes.”).
“[W]here we find that the legislators . . . have a rational
basis for finding a chosen regulatory scheme necessary to


18

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


the protection of commerce, our investigation is at an end.”
Katzenbach, 379 U. S., at 303–304. Congress’ enactment
of the minimum coverage provision, which addresses a
specific interstate problem in a practical, experience­
informed manner, easily meets this criterion.
D
Rather than evaluating the constitutionality of the
minimum coverage provision in the manner established by
our precedents, THE CHIEF JUSTICE relies on a newly
minted constitutional doctrine. The commerce power does
not, THE CHIEF JUSTICE announces, permit Congress
to “compe[l] individuals to become active in commerce
by purchasing a product.” Ante, at 20 (emphasis deleted).
1
a
THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s novel constraint on Congress’
commerce power gains no force from our precedent and for
that reason alone warrants disapprobation. See infra, at
23–27. But even assuming, for the moment, that Congress
lacks authority under the Commerce Clause to “compel
individuals not engaged in commerce to purchase an
unwanted product,” ante, at 18, such a limitation would be
inapplicable here. Everyone will, at some point, consume
health-care products and services. See supra, at 3. Thus,
if THE CHIEF JUSTICE is correct that an insurance­
purchase requirement can be applied only to those who
“actively” consume health care, the minimum coverage
provision fits the bill.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE does not dispute that all U. S. resi­
dents participate in the market for health services over
the course of their lives. See ante, at 16 (“Everyone will
eventually need health care at a time and to an extent
they cannot predict.”). But, THE CHIEF JUSTICE insists,
the uninsured cannot be considered active in the market


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

19

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

for health care, because “[t]he proximity and degree of
connection between the [uninsured today] and [their]
subsequent commercial activity is too lacking.” Ante,
at 27.
This argument has multiple flaws. First, more than
60% of those without insurance visit a hospital or doctor’s
office each year. See supra, at 5. Nearly 90% will within
five years.4 An uninsured’s consumption of health care is
thus quite proximate: It is virtually certain to occur in the
next five years and more likely than not to occur this year.
Equally evident, Congress has no way of separating
those uninsured individuals who will need emergency medical care today (surely their consumption of medical care
is sufficiently imminent) from those who will not need
medical services for years to come. No one knows when an
emergency will occur, yet emergencies involving the unin­
sured arise daily. To capture individuals who unexpectedly will obtain medical care in the very near future, then,
Congress needed to include individuals who will not go to
a doctor anytime soon. Congress, our decisions instruct,
has authority to cast its net that wide. See Perez v. United
States, 402 U. S. 146, 154 (1971) (“[W]hen it is necessary
in order to prevent an evil to make the law embrace more
than the precise thing to be prevented it may do so.” (in­
ternal quotation marks omitted)).5
——————
4 See Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for
Health Statistics, Summary Health Statistics for U. S. Adults: National
Health Interview Survey 2009, Ser. 10, No. 249, p. 124, Table 37
(Dec. 2010).
5 Echoing THE CHIEF JUSTICE, the joint dissenters urge that the min­
imum coverage provision impermissibly regulates young people who
“have no intention of purchasing [medical care]” and are too far “re­
moved from the [health-care] market.” See post, at 8, 11. This criticism
ignores the reality that a healthy young person may be a day away
from needing health care. See supra, at 4. A victim of an accident or
unforeseen illness will consume extensive medical care immediately,
though scarcely expecting to do so.


20

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


Second, it is Congress’ role, not the Court’s, to delineate
the boundaries of the market the Legislature seeks to
regulate. THE CHIEF JUSTICE defines the health-care market as including only those transactions that will occur
either in the next instant or within some (unspecified)
proximity to the next instant. But Congress could reason­
ably have viewed the market from a long-term perspective,
encompassing all transactions virtually certain to occur
over the next decade, see supra, at 19, not just those oc­
curring here and now.
Third, contrary to THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s contention, our
precedent does indeed support “[t]he proposition that
Congress may dictate the conduct of an individual today
because of prophesied future activity.” Ante, at 26. In
Wickard, the Court upheld a penalty the Federal Govern­
ment imposed on a farmer who grew more wheat than he
was permitted to grow under the Agricultural Adjustment
Act of 1938 (AAA). 317 U. S., at 114–115. He could not
be penalized, the farmer argued, as he was growing the
wheat for home consumption, not for sale on the open
market. Id., at 119. The Court rejected this argument.
Id., at 127–129. Wheat intended for home consumption,
the Court noted, “overhangs the market, and if induced by
rising prices, tends to flow into the market and check price
increases [intended by the AAA].” Id., at 128.
Similar reasoning supported the Court’s judgment in
Raich, which upheld Congress’ authority to regulate mari­
juana grown for personal use. 545 U. S., at 19. Home­
grown marijuana substantially affects the interstate market for marijuana, we observed, for “the high demand in
the interstate market will [likely] draw such marijuana
into that market.” Ibid.
Our decisions thus acknowledge Congress’ authority,
under the Commerce Clause, to direct the conduct of an
individual today (the farmer in Wickard, stopped from
growing excess wheat; the plaintiff in Raich, ordered to


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

21

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

cease cultivating marijuana) because of a prophesied
future transaction (the eventual sale of that wheat or
marijuana in the interstate market). Congress’ actions
are even more rational in this case, where the future
activity (the consumption of medical care) is certain to
occur, the sole uncertainty being the time the activity will
take place.
Maintaining that the uninsured are not active in the
health-care market, THE CHIEF JUSTICE draws an analogy
to the car market. An individual “is not ‘active in the car
market,’ ” THE CHIEF JUSTICE observes, simply because he
or she may someday buy a car. Ante, at 25. The analogy
is inapt. The inevitable yet unpredictable need for medi­
cal care and the guarantee that emergency care will be
provided when required are conditions nonexistent in
other markets. That is so of the market for cars, and of
the market for broccoli as well. Although an individual
might buy a car or a crown of broccoli one day, there is no
certainty she will ever do so. And if she eventually wants
a car or has a craving for broccoli, she will be obliged to
pay at the counter before receiving the vehicle or nour­
ishment. She will get no free ride or food, at the expense
of another consumer forced to pay an inflated price. See
Thomas More Law Center v. Obama, 651 F. 3d 529, 565
(CA6 2011) (Sutton, J., concurring in part) (“Regulating
how citizens pay for what they already receive (health
care), never quite know when they will need, and in the
case of severe illnesses or emergencies generally will not
be able to afford, has few (if any) parallels in modern
life.”). Upholding the minimum coverage provision on the
ground that all are participants or will be participants in
the health-care market would therefore carry no implica­
tion that Congress may justify under the Commerce
Clause a mandate to buy other products and services.
Nor is it accurate to say that the minimum coverage
provision “compel[s] individuals . . . to purchase an un­


22

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


wanted product,” ante, at 18, or “suite of products,” post, at
11, n. 2 (joint opinion of SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and
ALITO, JJ.). If unwanted today, medical service secured by
insurance may be desperately needed tomorrow. Virtually
everyone, I reiterate, consumes health care at some point
in his or her life. See supra, at 3. Health insurance is a
means of paying for this care, nothing more. In requiring
individuals to obtain insurance, Congress is therefore not
mandating the purchase of a discrete, unwanted product.
Rather, Congress is merely defining the terms on which
individuals pay for an interstate good they consume:
Persons subject to the mandate must now pay for medical
care in advance (instead of at the point of service) and
through insurance (instead of out of pocket). Establishing
payment terms for goods in or affecting interstate com­
merce is quintessential economic regulation well within
Congress’ domain. See, e.g., United States v. Wrightwood
Dairy Co., 315 U. S. 110, 118 (1942). Cf. post, at 13 (joint
opinion of SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ.)
(recognizing that “the Federal Government can prescribe
[a commodity’s] quality . . . and even [its price]”).
THE CHIEF JUSTICE also calls the minimum coverage
provision an illegitimate effort to make young, healthy
individuals subsidize insurance premiums paid by the less
hale and hardy. See ante, at 17, 25–26. This complaint,
too, is spurious. Under the current health-care system,
healthy persons who lack insurance receive a benefit for
which they do not pay: They are assured that, if they need
it, emergency medical care will be available, although they
cannot afford it. See supra, at 5–6. Those who have in­
surance bear the cost of this guarantee. See ibid. By
requiring the healthy uninsured to obtain insurance or
pay a penalty structured as a tax, the minimum coverage
provision ends the free ride these individuals currently
enjoy.
In the fullness of time, moreover, today’s young and


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

23

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

healthy will become society’s old and infirm. Viewed over
a lifespan, the costs and benefits even out: The young who
pay more than their fair share currently will pay less than
their fair share when they become senior citizens. And
even if, as undoubtedly will be the case, some individuals,
over their lifespans, will pay more for health insurance
than they receive in health services, they have little to
complain about, for that is how insurance works. Every
insured person receives protection against a catastrophic
loss, even though only a subset of the covered class will
ultimately need that protection.
b
In any event, THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s limitation of the
commerce power to the regulation of those actively en­
gaged in commerce finds no home in the text of the Consti­
tution or our decisions. Article I, §8, of the Constitution
grants Congress the power “[t]o regulate Commerce . . .
among the several States.” Nothing in this language implies that Congress’ commerce power is limited to regulating those actively engaged in commercial transactions.
Indeed, as the D. C. Circuit observed, “[a]t the time the
Constitution was [framed], to ‘regulate’ meant,” among
other things, “to require action.” See Seven-Sky v. Holder,
661 F. 3d 1, 16 (2011).
Arguing to the contrary, THE CHIEF JUSTICE notes that
“the Constitution gives Congress the power to ‘coin
Money,’ in addition to the power to ‘regulate the Value
thereof,’ ” and similarly “gives Congress the power to ‘raise
and support Armies’ and to ‘provide and maintain a Navy,’ in
addition to the power to ‘make Rules for the Government
and Regulation of the land and naval Forces.’ ” Ante, at
18–19 (citing Art. I, §8, cls. 5, 12–14). In separating the
power to regulate from the power to bring the subject of
the regulation into existence, THE CHIEF JUSTICE asserts,
“[t]he language of the Constitution reflects the natural


24

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


understanding that the power to regulate assumes there is
already something to be regulated.” Ante, at 19.
This argument is difficult to fathom. Requiring individ­
uals to obtain insurance unquestionably regulates the inter­
state health-insurance and health-care markets, both of
them in existence well before the enactment of the ACA.
See Wickard, 317 U. S., at 128 (“The stimulation of com­
merce is a use of the regulatory function quite as definitely
as prohibitions or restrictions thereon.”). Thus, the “some­
thing to be regulated” was surely there when Congress
created the minimum coverage provision.6
Nor does our case law toe the activity versus inactiv­
ity line. In Wickard, for example, we upheld the penalty
imposed on a farmer who grew too much wheat, even
though the regulation had the effect of compelling farmers
to purchase wheat in the open market. Id., at 127–129.
“[F]orcing some farmers into the market to buy what they
could provide for themselves” was, the Court held, a valid
means of regulating commerce. Id., at 128–129. In another context, this Court similarly upheld Congress’ author­
ity under the commerce power to compel an “inactive” land­
holder to submit to an unwanted sale. See Monongahela
Nav. Co. v. United States, 148 U. S. 312, 335–337 (1893)
(“[U]pon the [great] power to regulate commerce[,]” Con­
gress has the authority to mandate the sale of real property to the Government, where the sale is essential to the
improvement of a navigable waterway (emphasis added));
Cherokee Nation v. Southern Kansas R. Co., 135 U. S. 641,
——————
6 THE

CHIEF JUSTICE’s reliance on the quoted passages of the Consti­
tution, see ante, at 18–19, is also dubious on other grounds. The power
to “regulate the Value” of the national currency presumably includes
the power to increase the currency’s worth—i.e., to create value where
none previously existed. And if the power to “[r]egulat[e] . . . the land
and naval Forces” presupposes “there is already [in existence] some­
thing to be regulated,” i.e., an Army and a Navy, does Congress lack
authority to create an Air Force?


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

25

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

657–659 (1890) (similar reliance on the commerce power
regarding mandated sale of private property for railroad
construction).
In concluding that the Commerce Clause does not per­
mit Congress to regulate commercial “inactivity,” and therefore does not allow Congress to adopt the practical solu­
tion it devised for the health-care problem, THE CHIEF
JUSTICE views the Clause as a “technical legal conception,”
precisely what our case law tells us not to do. Wickard,
317 U. S., at 122 (internal quotation marks omitted). See
also supra, at 14–16. This Court’s former endeavors to
impose categorical limits on the commerce power have not
fared well. In several pre-New Deal cases, the Court
attempted to cabin Congress’ Commerce Clause authority
by distinguishing “commerce” from activity once conceived
to be noncommercial, notably, “production,” “mining,” and
“manufacturing.” See, e.g., United States v. E. C. Knight
Co., 156 U. S. 1, 12 (1895) (“Commerce succeeds to manu­
facture, and is not a part of it.”); Carter v. Carter Coal Co.,
298 U. S. 238, 304 (1936) (“Mining brings the subject
matter of commerce into existence. Commerce disposes of
it.”). The Court also sought to distinguish activities hav­
ing a “direct” effect on interstate commerce, and for that
reason, subject to federal regulation, from those having
only an “indirect” effect, and therefore not amenable to
federal control. See, e.g., A. L. A. Schechter Poultry Corp.
v. United States, 295 U. S. 495, 548 (1935) (“[T]he distinction between direct and indirect effects of intrastate
transactions upon interstate commerce must be recognized
as a fundamental one.”).
These line-drawing exercises were untenable, and the
Court long ago abandoned them. “[Q]uestions of the power
of Congress [under the Commerce Clause],” we held in
Wickard, “are not to be decided by reference to any formula which would give controlling force to nomenclature such
as ‘production’ and ‘indirect’ and foreclose consideration of


26

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


the actual effects of the activity in question upon inter­
state commerce.” 317 U. S., at 120. See also Morrison,
529 U. S., at 641–644 (Souter, J., dissenting) (recounting
the Court’s “nearly disastrous experiment” with formalis­
tic limits on Congress’ commerce power). Failing to learn
from this history, THE CHIEF JUSTICE plows ahead with
his formalistic distinction between those who are “active
in commerce,” ante, at 20, and those who are not.
It is not hard to show the difficulty courts (and Con­
gress) would encounter in distinguishing statutes that reg­
ulate “activity” from those that regulate “inactivity.” As
Judge Easterbrook noted, “it is possible to restate most
actions as corresponding inactions with the same effect.”
Archie v. Racine, 847 F. 2d 1211, 1213 (CA7 1988) (en
banc). Take this case as an example. An individual who
opts not to purchase insurance from a private insurer can
be seen as actively selecting another form of insurance:
self-insurance. See Thomas More Law Center, 651 F. 3d,
at 561 (Sutton, J., concurring in part) (“No one is in­
active when deciding how to pay for health care, as self­
insurance and private insurance are two forms of action
for addressing the same risk.”). The minimum coverage
provision could therefore be described as regulating activ­
ists in the self-insurance market.7 Wickard is another
example. Did the statute there at issue target activity
(the growing of too much wheat) or inactivity (the farmer’s
failure to purchase wheat in the marketplace)? If any­
thing, the Court’s analysis suggested the latter. See 317
U. S., at 127–129.
At bottom, THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s and the joint dissent­
——————
7 THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s characterization of individuals who choose not
to purchase private insurance as “doing nothing,” ante, at 20, is simi­
larly questionable. A person who self-insures opts against prepayment for
a product the person will in time consume. When aggregated, exercise
of that option has a substantial impact on the health-care market. See
supra, at 5–7, 16–17.


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

27

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

ers’ “view that an individual cannot be subject to Com­
merce Clause regulation absent voluntary, affirmative acts
that enter him or her into, or affect, the interstate mar­
ket expresses a concern for individual liberty that [is]
more redolent of Due Process Clause arguments.” SevenSky, 661 F. 3d, at 19. See also Troxel v. Granville, 530
U. S. 57, 65 (2000) (plurality opinion) (“The [Due Process]
Clause also includes a substantive component that pro­
vides heightened protection against government interfer­
ence with certain fundamental rights and liberty inter­
ests.” (internal quotation marks omitted)). Plaintiffs have
abandoned any argument pinned to substantive due pro­
cess, however, see 648 F. 3d 1235, 1291, n. 93 (CA11
2011), and now concede that the provisions here at issue
do not offend the Due Process Clause.8
2
Underlying THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s view that the Com­
merce Clause must be confined to the regulation of active
participants in a commercial market is a fear that the
commerce power would otherwise know no limits. See,
e.g., ante, at 23 (Allowing Congress to compel an individual not engaged in commerce to purchase a product would
“permi[t] Congress to reach beyond the natural extent
of its authority, everywhere extending the sphere of its
activity, and drawing all power into its impetuous vortex.”
(internal quotation marks omitted)). The joint dissenters
——————
8 Some adherents to the joint dissent have questioned the existence of
substantive due process rights. See McDonald v. Chicago, 561 U. S.
___, ___ (2010) (THOMAS, J., concurring) (slip op., at 7) (The notion that
the Due Process Clause “could define the substance of th[e] righ[t to
liberty] strains credulity.”); Albright v. Oliver, 510 U. S. 266, 275 (1994)
(SCALIA, J., concurring) (“I reject the proposition that the Due Process
Clause guarantees certain (unspecified) liberties[.]”). Given these
Justices’ reluctance to interpret the Due Process Clause as guarantee­
ing liberty interests, their willingness to plant such protections in the
Commerce Clause is striking.


28

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


express a similar apprehension. See post, at 8 (If the
minimum coverage provision is upheld under the com­
merce power then “the Commerce Clause becomes a font of
unlimited power, . . . the hideous monster whose devour­
ing jaws . . . spare neither sex nor age, nor high nor low,
nor sacred nor profane.” (internal quotation marks omit­
ted)). This concern is unfounded.
First, THE CHIEF JUSTICE could certainly uphold the
individual mandate without giving Congress carte blanche
to enact any and all purchase mandates. As several times
noted, the unique attributes of the health-care market
render everyone active in that market and give rise to a
significant free-riding problem that does not occur in other
markets. See supra, at 3–7, 16–18, 21.
Nor would the commerce power be unbridled, absent
THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s “activity” limitation. Congress would
remain unable to regulate noneconomic conduct that has
only an attenuated effect on interstate commerce and is
traditionally left to state law. See Lopez, 514 U. S., at
567; Morrison, 529 U. S., at 617–619. In Lopez, for
example, the Court held that the Federal Government
lacked power, under the Commerce Clause, to criminalize
the possession of a gun in a local school zone. Possessing
a gun near a school, the Court reasoned, “is in no sense
an economic activity that might, through repetition else­
where, substantially affect any sort of interstate com­
merce.” 514 U. S., at 567; ibid. (noting that the Court
would have “to pile inference upon inference” to conclude
that gun possession has a substantial effect on commerce).
Relying on similar logic, the Court concluded in Morrison
that Congress could not regulate gender-motivated vio­
lence, which the Court deemed to have too “attenuated
[an] effect upon interstate commerce.” 529 U. S., at 615.
An individual’s decision to self-insure, I have explained,
is an economic act with the requisite connection to inter­
state commerce. See supra, at 16–17. Other choices


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

29

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

individuals make are unlikely to fit the same or similar
description. As an example of the type of regulation he
fears, THE CHIEF JUSTICE cites a Government mandate to
purchase green vegetables. Ante, at 22–23. One could call
this concern “the broccoli horrible.” Congress, THE CHIEF
JUSTICE posits, might adopt such a mandate, reasoning
that an individual’s failure to eat a healthy diet, like the
failure to purchase health insurance, imposes costs on
others. See ibid.
Consider the chain of inferences the Court would have
to accept to conclude that a vegetable-purchase mandate
was likely to have a substantial effect on the health-care
costs borne by lithe Americans. The Court would have to
believe that individuals forced to buy vegetables would
then eat them (instead of throwing or giving them away),
would prepare the vegetables in a healthy way (steamed
or raw, not deep-fried), would cut back on unhealthy foods,
and would not allow other factors (such as lack of exercise
or little sleep) to trump the improved diet.9 Such “pil[ing
of] inference upon inference” is just what the Court re­
fused to do in Lopez and Morrison.
Other provisions of the Constitution also check congres­
sional overreaching. A mandate to purchase a particular product would be unconstitutional if, for example, the
edict impermissibly abridged the freedom of speech, inter­
fered with the free exercise of religion, or infringed on a
liberty interest protected by the Due Process Clause.
——————
9 The failure to purchase vegetables in THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s hypothet­
ical, then, is not what leads to higher health-care costs for others;
rather, it is the failure of individuals to maintain a healthy diet, and
the resulting obesity, that creates the cost-shifting problem. See ante,
at 22–23. Requiring individuals to purchase vegetables is thus
several steps removed from solving the problem. The failure to obtain
health insurance, by contrast, is the immediate cause of the cost-shifting
Congress sought to address through the ACA. See supra, at 5–7.
Requiring individuals to obtain insurance attacks the source of the
problem directly, in a single step.


30

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


Supplementing these legal restraints is a formidable
check on congressional power: the democratic process. See
Raich, 545 U. S., at 33; Wickard, 317 U. S., at 120 (repeat­
ing Chief Justice Marshall’s “warning that effective re­
straints on [the commerce power’s] exercise must proceed
from political rather than judicial processes” (citing Gibbons v. Ogden, 9 Wheat. 1, 197 (1824)). As the controversy
surrounding the passage of the Affordable Care Act at­
tests, purchase mandates are likely to engender political
resistance. This prospect is borne out by the behavior of
state legislators. Despite their possession of unquestioned
authority to impose mandates, state governments have
rarely done so. See Hall, Commerce Clause Challenges to
Health Care Reform, 159 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1825, 1838 (2011).
When contemplated in its extreme, almost any power
looks dangerous. The commerce power, hypothetically,
would enable Congress to prohibit the purchase and home
production of all meat, fish, and dairy goods, effectively
compelling Americans to eat only vegetables. Cf. Raich,
545 U. S., at 9; Wickard, 317 U. S., at 127–129. Yet no one
would offer the “hypothetical and unreal possibilit[y],”
Pullman Co. v. Knott, 235 U. S. 23, 26 (1914), of a vegetar­
ian state as a credible reason to deny Congress the author­
ity ever to ban the possession and sale of goods. THE
CHIEF JUSTICE accepts just such specious logic when he
cites the broccoli horrible as a reason to deny Congress
the power to pass the individual mandate. Cf. R. Bork,
The Tempting of America 169 (1990) (“Judges and lawyers
live on the slippery slope of analogies; they are not supposed
to ski it to the bottom.”). But see, e.g., post, at 3 (joint opin­
ion of SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ.) (assert­
ing, outlandishly, that if the minimum coverage provision
is sustained, then Congress could make “breathing in and
out the basis for federal prescription”).


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

31

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

3
To bolster his argument that the minimum coverage
provision is not valid Commerce Clause legislation, THE
CHIEF JUSTICE emphasizes the provision’s novelty. See
ante, at 18 (asserting that “sometimes the most telling
indication of [a] severe constitutional problem . . . is the
lack of historical precedent for Congress’s action” (internal
quotation marks omitted)). While an insurance-purchase
mandate may be novel, THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s argument
certainly is not. “[I]n almost every instance of the exercise of the [commerce] power differences are asserted from
previous exercises of it and made a ground of attack.”
Hoke v. United States, 227 U. S. 308, 320 (1913). See, e.g.,
Brief for Petitioner in Perez v. United States, O. T. 1970,
No. 600, p. 5 (“unprecedented exercise of power”); Supplemental Brief for Appellees in Katzenbach v. McClung,
O. T. 1964, No. 543, p. 40 (“novel assertion of federal
power”); Brief for Appellee in Wickard v. Filburn, O. T.
1941, No. 59, p. 6 (“complete departure”). For decades,
the Court has declined to override legislation because of
its novelty, and for good reason. As our national economy
grows and changes, we have recognized, Congress must
adapt to the changing “economic and financial realities.”
See supra, at 14–15. Hindering Congress’ ability to do so
is shortsighted; if history is any guide, today’s constriction
of the Commerce Clause will not endure. See supra, at
25–26.
III

A

For the reasons explained above, the minimum coverage
provision is valid Commerce Clause legislation. See supra, Part II. When viewed as a component of the entire
ACA, the provision’s constitutionality becomes even plain­
er.
The Necessary and Proper Clause “empowers Congress


32

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


to enact laws in effectuation of its [commerce] powe[r]
that are not within its authority to enact in isolation.”
Raich, 545 U. S., at 39 (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment).
Hence, “[a] complex regulatory program . . . can survive a
Commerce Clause challenge without a showing that every
single facet of the program is independently and directly
related to a valid congressional goal.” Indiana, 452 U. S.,
at 329, n. 17. “It is enough that the challenged provisions
are an integral part of the regulatory program and that
the regulatory scheme when considered as a whole satis­
fies this test.” Ibid. (collecting cases). See also Raich,
545 U. S., at 24–25 (A challenged statutory provision
fits within Congress’ commerce authority if it is an “essen­
tial par[t] of a larger regulation of economic activity,”
such that, in the absence of the provision, “the regulatory
scheme could be undercut.” (quoting Lopez, 514 U. S., at
561)); Raich, 545 U. S., at 37 (SCALIA, J., concurring in
judgment) (“Congress may regulate even noneconomic
local activity if that regulation is a necessary part of
a more general regulation of interstate commerce. The
relevant question is simply whether the means chosen are
‘reasonably adapted’ to the attainment of a legitimate end
under the commerce power.” (citation omitted)).
Recall that one of Congress’ goals in enacting the Af­
fordable Care Act was to eliminate the insurance indus­
try’s practice of charging higher prices or denying coverage
to individuals with preexisting medical conditions. See
supra, at 9–10. The commerce power allows Congress to
ban this practice, a point no one disputes. See United
States v. South-Eastern Underwriters Assn., 322 U. S. 533,
545, 552–553 (1944) (Congress may regulate “the methods
by which interstate insurance companies do business.”).
Congress knew, however, that simply barring insurance
companies from relying on an applicant’s medical history
would not work in practice. Without the individual man­
date, Congress learned, guaranteed-issue and community­


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

33

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

rating requirements would trigger an adverse-selection
death-spiral in the health-insurance market: Insurance
premiums would skyrocket, the number of uninsured
would increase, and insurance companies would exit the
market. See supra, at 10–11. When complemented by an
insurance mandate, on the other hand, guaranteed issue
and community rating would work as intended, increasing
access to insurance and reducing uncompensated care.
See supra, at 11–12. The minimum coverage provision is
thus an “essential par[t] of a larger regulation of economic
activity”; without the provision, “the regulatory scheme
[w]ould be undercut.” Raich, 545 U. S., at 24–25 (internal quotation marks omitted). Put differently, the mini­
mum coverage provision, together with the guaranteed­
issue and community-rating requirements, is “ ‘reasonably
adapted’ to the attainment of a legitimate end under
the commerce power”: the elimination of pricing and
sales practices that take an applicant’s medical history
into account. See id., at 37 (SCALIA, J., concurring in
judgment).
B
Asserting that the Necessary and Proper Clause does
not authorize the minimum coverage provision, THE CHIEF
JUSTICE focuses on the word “proper.” A mandate to
purchase health insurance is not “proper” legislation, THE
CHIEF JUSTICE urges, because the command “under­
mine[s] the structure of government established by the
Constitution.” Ante, at 28. If long on rhetoric, THE CHIEF
JUSTICE’s argument is short on substance.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE cites only two cases in which this
Court concluded that a federal statute impermissibly
transgressed the Constitution’s boundary between state
and federal authority: Printz v. United States, 521 U. S.
898 (1997), and New York v. United States, 505 U. S.
144 (1992). See ante, at 29. The statutes at issue in


34

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


both cases, however, compelled state officials to act on the
Federal Government’s behalf. 521 U. S., at 925–933 (hold­
ing unconstitutional a statute obligating state law en­
forcement officers to implement a federal gun-control law);
New York, 505 U. S., at 176–177 (striking down a statute
requiring state legislators to pass regulations pursuant to
Congress’ instructions). “[Federal] laws conscripting state
officers,” the Court reasoned, “violate state sovereignty
and are thus not in accord with the Constitution.” Printz,
521 U. S., at 925, 935; New York, 505 U. S., at 176.
The minimum coverage provision, in contrast, acts
“directly upon individuals, without employing the States
as intermediaries.” New York, 505 U. S., at 164. The
provision is thus entirely consistent with the Consti­
tution’s design. See Printz, 521 U. S., at 920 (“[T]he
Framers explicitly chose a Constitution that confers upon
Congress the power to regulate individuals, not States.”
(internal quotation marks omitted)).
Lacking case law support for his holding, THE CHIEF
JUSTICE nevertheless declares the minimum coverage
provision not “proper” because it is less “narrow in scope”
than other laws this Court has upheld under the Neces­
sary and Proper Clause. Ante, at 29 (citing United States
v. Comstock, 560 U. S. ___ (2010); Sabri v. United States,
541 U. S. 600 (2004); Jinks v. Richland County, 538 U. S.
456 (2003)). THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s reliance on cases in
which this Court has affirmed Congress’ “broad authority
to enact federal legislation” under the Necessary and
Proper Clause, Comstock, 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 5),
is underwhelming.
Nor does THE CHIEF JUSTICE pause to explain why the
power to direct either the purchase of health insurance or,
alternatively, the payment of a penalty collectible as a tax
is more far-reaching than other implied powers this Court
has found meet under the Necessary and Proper Clause.
These powers include the power to enact criminal laws,


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

35

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

see, e.g., United States v. Fox, 95 U. S. 670, 672 (1878); the
power to imprison, including civil imprisonment, see, e.g.,
Comstock, 560 U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 1); and the power
to create a national bank, see McCulloch, 4 Wheat., at 425.
See also Jinks, 538 U. S., at 463 (affirming Congress’
power to alter the way a state law is applied in state court,
where the alteration “promotes fair and efficient operation
of the federal courts”).10
In failing to explain why the individual mandate threat­
ens our constitutional order, THE CHIEF JUSTICE disserves
future courts. How is a judge to decide, when ruling on
the constitutionality of a federal statute, whether Con­
gress employed an “independent power,” ante, at 28, or
merely a “derivative” one, ante, at 29. Whether the power
used is “substantive,” ante, at 30, or just “incidental,” ante,
at 29? The instruction THE CHIEF JUSTICE, in effect,
provides lower courts: You will know it when you see it.
It is more than exaggeration to suggest that the mini­
mum coverage provision improperly intrudes on “essential
attributes of state sovereignty.” Ibid. (internal quotation
marks omitted). First, the Affordable Care Act does not
operate “in [an] are[a] such as criminal law enforcement or
education where States historically have been sovereign.”
Lopez, 514 U. S., at 564. As evidenced by Medicare, Medi­
caid, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 (ERISA), and the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), the Federal Govern­
——————
10 Indeed, Congress regularly and uncontroversially requires individ­
uals who are “doing nothing,” see ante, at 20, to take action. Exam­
ples include federal requirements to report for jury duty, 28 U. S. C.
§1866(g) (2006 ed., Supp. IV); to register for selective service, 50
U. S. C. App. §453; to purchase firearms and gear in anticipation of
service in the Militia, 1 Stat. 271 (Uniform Militia Act of 1792); to turn
gold currency over to the Federal Government in exchange for paper
currency, see Nortz v. United States, 294 U. S. 317, 328 (1935); and to
file a tax return, 26 U. S. C. §6012 (2006 ed., Supp. IV).


36

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


ment plays a lead role in the health-care sector, both as a
direct payer and as a regulator.
Second, and perhaps most important, the minimum
coverage provision, along with other provisions of the
ACA, addresses the very sort of interstate problem that
made the commerce power essential in our federal system.
See supra, at 12–14. The crisis created by the large num­
ber of U. S. residents who lack health insurance is one of
national dimension that States are “separately incompe­
tent” to handle. See supra, at 7–8, 13. See also Maryland
Brief 15–26 (describing “the impediments to effective state
policymaking that flow from the interconnectedness of
each state’s healthcare economy” and emphasizing that
“state-level reforms cannot fully address the problems
associated with uncompensated care”). Far from tram­
pling on States’ sovereignty, the ACA attempts a federal
solution for the very reason that the States, acting sepa­
rately, cannot meet the need. Notably, the ACA serves the
general welfare of the people of the United States while
retaining a prominent role for the States. See id., at 31–
36 (explaining and illustrating how the ACA affords States
wide latitude in implementing key elements of the Act’s
reforms).11
——————
11 In a separate argument, the joint dissenters contend that the min­
imum coverage provision is not necessary and proper because it was not
the “only . . . way” Congress could have made the guaranteed-issue and
community-rating reforms work. Post, at 9–10. Congress could also
have avoided an insurance-market death spiral, the dissenters main­
tain, by imposing a surcharge on those who did not previously purchase
insurance when those individuals eventually enter the health­
insurance system. Post, at 10. Or Congress could “den[y] a full income
tax credit” to those who do not purchase insurance. Ibid.
Neither a surcharge on those who purchase insurance nor the de­
nial of a tax credit to those who do not would solve the problem created
by guaranteed-issue and community-rating requirements. Neither
would prompt the purchase of insurance before sickness or injury
occurred.


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

37

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

IV
In the early 20th century, this Court regularly struck
down economic regulation enacted by the peoples’ repre­
sentatives in both the States and the Federal Government.
See, e.g., Carter Coal Co., 298 U. S., at 303–304, 309–310;
Dagenhart, 247 U. S., at 276–277; Lochner v. New York,
198 U. S. 45, 64 (1905). THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s Commerce
Clause opinion, and even more so the joint dissenters’
reasoning, see post, at 4–16, bear a disquieting resem­
blance to those long-overruled decisions.
Ultimately, the Court upholds the individual mandate
as a proper exercise of Congress’ power to tax and spend
“for the . . . general Welfare of the United States.” Art. I,
§8, cl. 1; ante, at 43–44. I concur in that determination,
which makes THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s Commerce Clause
essay all the more puzzling. Why should THE CHIEF
JUSTICE strive so mightily to hem in Congress’ capacity to
meet the new problems arising constantly in our ever­
developing modern economy? I find no satisfying response
to that question in his opinion.12
——————
But even assuming there were “practicable” alternatives to the
minimum coverage provision, “we long ago rejected the view that the
Necessary and Proper Clause demands that an Act of Congress be
‘absolutely necessary’ to the exercise of an enumerated power.” Jinks
v. Richland County, 538 U. S. 456, 462 (2003) (quoting McCulloch
v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 414–415 (1819)). Rather, the statutory
provision at issue need only be “conducive” and “[reasonably] adapted”
to the goal Congress seeks to achieve. Jinks, 538 U. S., at 462 (internal
quotation marks omitted). The minimum coverage provision meets this
requirement. See supra, at 31–33.
12 THE CHIEF JUSTICE states that he must evaluate the constitution­
ality of the minimum coverage provision under the Commerce Clause
because the provision “reads more naturally as a command to buy
insurance than as a tax.” Ante, at 44. THE CHIEF JUSTICE ultimately
concludes, however, that interpreting the provision as a tax is a “fairly
possible” construction. Ante, at 32 (internal quotation marks omitted).
That being so, I see no reason to undertake a Commerce Clause analy­
sis that is not outcome determinative.


38

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


V
Through Medicaid, Congress has offered the States an
opportunity to furnish health care to the poor with the aid
of federal financing. To receive federal Medicaid funds,
States must provide health benefits to specified categories
of needy persons, including pregnant women, children,
parents, and adults with disabilities. Guaranteed eligibil­
ity varies by category: for some it is tied to the federal
poverty level (incomes up to 100% or 133%); for others it
depends on criteria such as eligibility for designated state
or federal assistance programs. The ACA enlarges the
population of needy people States must cover to include
adults under age 65 with incomes up to 133% of the federal poverty level. The spending power conferred by the
Constitution, the Court has never doubted, permits Con­
gress to define the contours of programs financed with
federal funds. See, e.g., Pennhurst State School and Hospital v. Halderman, 451 U. S. 1, 17 (1981). And to expand
coverage, Congress could have recalled the existing legis­
lation, and replaced it with a new law making Medicaid as
embracive of the poor as Congress chose.
The question posed by the 2010 Medicaid expansion,
then, is essentially this: To cover a notably larger popula­
tion, must Congress take the repeal/reenact route, or may
it achieve the same result by amending existing law? The
answer should be that Congress may expand by amend­
ment the classes of needy persons entitled to Medicaid
benefits. A ritualistic requirement that Congress repeal
and reenact spending legislation in order to enlarge the
population served by a federally funded program would
advance no constitutional principle and would scarcely
serve the interests of federalism. To the contrary, such a
requirement would rigidify Congress’ efforts to empower
States by partnering with them in the implementation of
federal programs.
Medicaid is a prototypical example of federal-state coop­


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

39

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

eration in serving the Nation’s general welfare. Rather
than authorizing a federal agency to administer a uniform national health-care system for the poor, Congress offered States the opportunity to tailor Medicaid
grants to their particular needs, so long as they remain
within bounds set by federal law. In shaping Medicaid,
Congress did not endeavor to fix permanently the terms
participating states must meet; instead, Congress re­
served the “right to alter, amend, or repeal” any provision
of the Medicaid Act. 42 U. S. C. §1304. States, for their
part, agreed to amend their own Medicaid plans consistent
with changes from time to time made in the federal law.
See 42 CFR §430.12(c)(i) (2011). And from 1965 to the
present, States have regularly conformed to Congress’
alterations of the Medicaid Act.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE acknowledges that Congress may
“condition the receipt of [federal] funds on the States’
complying with restrictions on the use of those funds,”
ante, at 50, but nevertheless concludes that the 2010
expansion is unduly coercive. His conclusion rests on
three premises, each of them essential to his theory. First,
the Medicaid expansion is, in THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s view, a
new grant program, not an addition to the Medicaid pro­
gram existing before the ACA’s enactment. Congress, THE
CHIEF JUSTICE maintains, has threatened States with the
loss of funds from an old program in an effort to get them
to adopt a new one. Second, the expansion was unforesee­
able by the States when they first signed on to Medicaid.
Third, the threatened loss of funding is so large that the
States have no real choice but to participate in the Medi­
caid expansion. THE CHIEF JUSTICE therefore—for the
first time ever—finds an exercise of Congress’ spending
power unconstitutionally coercive.
Medicaid, as amended by the ACA, however, is not two
spending programs; it is a single program with a constant
aim—to enable poor persons to receive basic health care


40

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


when they need it. Given past expansions, plus express
statutory warning that Congress may change the re­
quirements participating States must meet, there can be
no tenable claim that the ACA fails for lack of notice.
Moreover, States have no entitlement to receive any Medi­
caid funds; they enjoy only the opportunity to accept funds
on Congress’ terms. Future Congresses are not bound
by their predecessors’ dispositions; they have authority to
spend federal revenue as they see fit. The Federal Gov­
ernment, therefore, is not, as THE CHIEF JUSTICE charges,
threatening States with the loss of “existing” funds from
one spending program in order to induce them to opt into
another program. Congress is simply requiring States to
do what States have long been required to do to receive
Medicaid funding: comply with the conditions Congress
prescribes for participation.
A majority of the Court, however, buys the argument
that prospective withholding of funds formerly available
exceeds Congress’ spending power. Given that holding, I
entirely agree with THE CHIEF JUSTICE as to the appropri­
ate remedy. It is to bar the withholding found impermis­
sible—not, as the joint dissenters would have it, to scrap
the expansion altogether, see post, at 46–48. The dissent­
ers’ view that the ACA must fall in its entirety is a radical
departure from the Court’s normal course. When a consti­
tutional infirmity mars a statute, the Court ordinarily
removes the infirmity. It undertakes a salvage operation;
it does not demolish the legislation. See, e.g., Brockett v.
Spokane Arcades, Inc., 472 U. S. 491, 504 (1985) (Court’s
normal course is to declare a statute invalid “to the extent
that it reaches too far, but otherwise [to leave the statute]
intact”). That course is plainly in order where, as in this
case, Congress has expressly instructed courts to leave
untouched every provision not found invalid. See 42
U. S. C. §1303. Because THE CHIEF JUSTICE finds the
withholding—not the granting—of federal funds incom­


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

41

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

patible with the Spending Clause, Congress’ extension of
Medicaid remains available to any State that affirms its
willingness to participate.
A
Expansion has been characteristic of the Medicaid pro­
gram. Akin to the ACA in 2010, the Medicaid Act as
passed in 1965 augmented existing federal grant programs
jointly administered with the States.13 States were not
required to participate in Medicaid. But if they did, the
Federal Government paid at least half the costs. To qualify for these grants, States had to offer a minimum level of
health coverage to beneficiaries of four federally funded,
state-administered welfare programs: Aid to Families with
Dependent Children; Old Age Assistance; Aid to the Blind;
and Aid to the Permanently and Totally Disabled. See
Social Security Amendments of 1965, §121(a), 79 Stat.
343; Schweiker v. Gray Panthers, 453 U. S. 34, 37 (1981).
At their option, States could enroll additional “medically
needy” individuals; these costs, too, were partially borne by
the Federal Government at the same, at least 50%, rate.
Ibid.
Since 1965, Congress has amended the Medicaid pro­
gram on more than 50 occasions, sometimes quite sizably.
Most relevant here, between 1988 and 1990, Congress
——————
13 Medicaid was “plainly an extension of the existing Kerr-Mills”
grant program. Huberfeld, Federalizing Medicaid, 14 U. Pa. J. Const.
L. 431, 444–445 (2011). Indeed, the “section of the Senate report
dealing with Title XIX”—the title establishing Medicaid—“was entitled,
‘Improvement and Extension of Kerr-Mills Medical Assistance Pro­
gram.’ ” Stevens & Stevens, Welfare Medicine in America 51 (1974)
(quoting S. Rep. No. 404, 89th Cong., 1st Sess., pt. 1, p. 9 (1965)).
Setting the pattern for Medicaid, Kerr-Mills reimbursed States for a
portion of the cost of health care provided to welfare recipients if
States met conditions specified in the federal law, e.g., participating
States were obliged to offer minimum coverage for hospitalization and
physician services. See Huberfeld, supra, at 443–444.


42

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


required participating States to include among their bene­
ficiaries pregnant women with family incomes up to 133%
of the federal poverty level, children up to age 6 at the
same income levels, and children ages 6 to 18 with family
incomes up to 100% of the poverty level. See 42 U. S. C.
§§1396a(a)(10)(A)(i), 1396a(l); Medicare Catastrophic Cov­
erage Act of 1988, §302, 102 Stat. 750; Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1989, §6401, 103 Stat. 2258; Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, §4601, 104 Stat.
1388–166. These amendments added millions to the
Medicaid-eligible population. Dubay & Kenney, Lessons
from the Medicaid Expansions for Children and Pregnant
Women 5 (Apr. 1997).
Between 1966 and 1990, annual federal Medicaid spend­
ing grew from $631.6 million to $42.6 billion; state
spending rose to $31 billion over the same period. See Dept.
of Health and Human Services, National Health Expendi­
tures by Type of Service and Source of Funds: Calendar
Years 1960 to 2010 (table).14 And between 1990 and 2010,
federal spending increased to $269.5 billion. Ibid. En­
largement of the population and services covered by Medi­
caid, in short, has been the trend.
Compared to past alterations, the ACA is notable for the
extent to which the Federal Government will pick up the
tab. Medicaid’s 2010 expansion is financed largely by
federal outlays. In 2014, federal funds will cover 100%
of the costs for newly eligible beneficiaries; that rate will
gradually decrease before settling at 90% in 2020. 42
U. S. C. §1396d(y) (2006 ed., Supp. IV). By comparison,
federal contributions toward the care of beneficiaries
eligible pre-ACA range from 50% to 83%, and averaged
57% between 2005 and 2008. §1396d(b) (2006 ed., Supp.
——————
14 Available online at http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Dataand-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/
NationalHealthAccountsHistorical.html.


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

43

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

IV); Dept. of Health and Human Services, Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services, C. Truffer et al., 2010
Actuarial Report on the Financial Outlook for Medicaid,
p. 20.
Nor will the expansion exorbitantly increase state Medi­
caid spending. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO)
projects that States will spend 0.8% more than they would
have, absent the ACA. See CBO, Spending & Enrollment
Detail for CBO’s March 2009 Baseline. But see ante, at
44–45 (“[T]he Act dramatically increases state obligations
under Medicaid.”); post, at 45 (joint opinion of SCALIA,
KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ.) (“[A]cceptance of the
[ACA expansion] will impose very substantial costs on
participating States.”). Whatever the increase in state
obligations after the ACA, it will pale in comparison to the
increase in federal funding.15
Finally, any fair appraisal of Medicaid would require
acknowledgment of the considerable autonomy States
enjoy under the Act. Far from “conscript[ing] state agen­
cies into the national bureaucratic army,” ante, at 55
(citing FERC v. Mississippi, 456 U. S. 742, 775 (1982)
(O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment in part and dissent­
ing in part) (brackets in original and internal quotation
marks omitted)), Medicaid “is designed to advance cooper­
ative federalism.” Wisconsin Dept. of Health and Family
Servs. v. Blumer, 534 U. S. 473, 495 (2002) (citing Harris
v. McRae, 448 U. S. 297, 308 (1980)). Subject to its basic
——————
15 Even the study on which the plaintiffs rely, see Brief for Petitioners
10, concludes that “[w]hile most states will experience some increase in
spending, this is quite small relative to the federal matching payments
and low relative to the costs of uncompensated care that [the states]
would bear if the[re] were no health reform.” See Kaiser Commission
on Medicaid & the Uninsured, Medicaid Coverage & Spending in
Health Reform 16 (May 2010). Thus there can be no objection to the
ACA’s expansion of Medicaid as an “unfunded mandate.” Quite the
contrary, the program is impressively well funded.


44

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


requirements, the Medicaid Act empowers States to “select
dramatically different levels of funding and coverage,
alter and experiment with different financing and delivery
modes, and opt to cover (or not to cover) a range of particular procedures and therapies. States have leveraged
this policy discretion to generate a myriad of dramatically
different Medicaid programs over the past several dec­
ades.” Ruger, Of Icebergs and Glaciers, 75 Law & Con­
temp. Probs. 215, 233 (2012) (footnote omitted). The ACA
does not jettison this approach. States, as first-line ad­
ministrators, will continue to guide the distribution of
substantial resources among their needy populations.
The alternative to conditional federal spending, it bears
emphasis, is not state autonomy but state marginaliza­
tion.16 In 1965, Congress elected to nationalize health
coverage for seniors through Medicare. It could similarly
have established Medicaid as an exclusively federal pro­
gram. Instead, Congress gave the States the opportunity
to partner in the program’s administration and develop­
ment. Absent from the nationalized model, of course, is
the state-level policy discretion and experimentation that
is Medicaid’s hallmark; undoubtedly the interests of fed­
eralism are better served when States retain a meaningful role in the implementation of a program of such
importance. See Caminker, State Sovereignty and Sub­
ordinacy, 95 Colum. L. Rev. 1001, 1002–1003 (1995) (cooperative federalism can preserve “a significant role for state
discretion in achieving specified federal goals, where the
alternative is complete federal preemption of any state
——————
16 In 1972, for example, Congress ended the federal cash-assistance
program for the aged, blind, and disabled. That program previously
had been operated jointly by the Federal and State Governments, as
is the case with Medicaid today. Congress replaced the cooperative
federal program with the nationalized Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program. See Schweiker v. Gray Panthers, 453 U. S. 34, 38
(1981).


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

45

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

regulatory role”); Rose-Ackerman, Cooperative Federalism
and Co-optation, 92 Yale L. J. 1344, 1346 (1983) (“If
the federal government begins to take full responsibility
for social welfare spending and preempts the states, the
result is likely to be weaker . . . state governments.”).17
Although Congress “has no obligation to use its Spend­
ing Clause power to disburse funds to the States,” College
Savings Bank v. Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Ed. Expense Bd., 527 U. S. 666, 686 (1999), it has provided Medi­
caid grants notable for their generosity and flexibility.
“[S]uch funds,” we once observed, “are gifts,” id., at 686–
687, and so they have remained through decades of expan­
sion in their size and scope.
B
The Spending Clause authorizes Congress “to pay the
Debts and provide for the . . . general Welfare of the
United States.” Art. I, §8, cl. 1. To ensure that federal funds
granted to the States are spent “to ‘provide for the . . .
general Welfare’ in the manner Congress intended,” ante,
at 46, Congress must of course have authority to impose
limitations on the States’ use of the federal dollars. This
Court, time and again, has respected Congress’ prescrip­
tion of spending conditions, and has required States to
abide by them. See, e.g., Pennhurst, 451 U. S., at 17
(“[O]ur cases have long recognized that Congress may fix
the terms on which it shall disburse federal money to the
States.”). In particular, we have recognized Congress’
prerogative to condition a State’s receipt of Medicaid
——————
17 THE CHIEF JUSTICE and the joint dissenters perceive in cooperative
federalism a “threa[t]” to “political accountability.” Ante, at 48; see
post, at 34–35. By that, they mean voter confusion: Citizens upset by
unpopular government action, they posit, may ascribe to state officials
blame more appropriately laid at Congress’ door. But no such confu­
sion is apparent in this case: Medicaid’s status as a federally funded,
state-administered program is hardly hidden from view.


46

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


funding on compliance with the terms Congress set for
participation in the program. See, e.g., Harris, 448 U. S.,
at 301 (“[O]nce a State elects to participate [in Medicaid],
it must comply with the requirements of [the Medicaid
Act].”); Arkansas Dept. of Health and Human Servs. v.
Ahlborn, 547 U. S. 268, 275 (2006); Frew v. Hawkins, 540
U. S. 431, 433 (2004); Atkins v. Rivera, 477 U. S. 154, 156–
157 (1986).
Congress’ authority to condition the use of federal funds
is not confined to spending programs as first launched.
The legislature may, and often does, amend the law, im­
posing new conditions grant recipients henceforth must
meet in order to continue receiving funds. See infra, at 54
(describing Bennett v. Kentucky Dept. of Ed., 470 U. S.
656, 659–660 (1985) (enforcing restriction added five years
after adoption of educational program)).
Yes, there are federalism-based limits on the use of
Congress’ conditional spending power. In the leading
decision in this area, South Dakota v. Dole, 483 U. S. 203
(1987), the Court identified four criteria. The conditions
placed on federal grants to States must (a) promote the
“general welfare,” (b) “unambiguously” inform States what
is demanded of them, (c) be germane “to the federal inter­
est in particular national projects or programs,” and (d)
not “induce the States to engage in activities that would
themselves be unconstitutional.” Id., at 207–208, 210
(internal quotation marks omitted).18
The Court in Dole mentioned, but did not adopt, a fur­
ther limitation, one hypothetically raised a half-century
earlier: In “some circumstances,” Congress might be pro­
hibited from offering a “financial inducement . . . so coer­
——————
18 Although

the plaintiffs, in the proceedings below, did not contest
the ACA’s satisfaction of these criteria, see 648 F. 3d 1235, 1263 (CA11
2011), THE CHIEF JUSTICE appears to rely heavily on the second criterion. Compare ante, at 52, 54, with infra, at 52–54.


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

47

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

cive as to pass the point at which ‘pressure turns into
compulsion.’ ” Id., at 211 (quoting Steward Machine Co. v.
Davis, 301 U. S. 548, 590 (1937)). Prior to today’s deci­
sion, however, the Court has never ruled that the terms of
any grant crossed the indistinct line between temptation
and coercion.
Dole involved the National Minimum Drinking Age Act,
23 U. S. C. §158, enacted in 1984. That Act directed the
Secretary of Transportation to withhold 5% of the federal
highway funds otherwise payable to a State if the State
permitted purchase of alcoholic beverages by persons
less than 21 years old. Drinking age was not within the
authority of Congress to regulate, South Dakota argued,
because the Twenty-First Amendment gave the States
exclusive power to control the manufacture, transporta­
tion, and consumption of alcoholic beverages. The small
percentage of highway-construction funds South Dakota
stood to lose by adhering to 19 as the age of eligibility to
purchase 3.2% beer, however, was not enough to qualify as
coercion, the Court concluded.
This case does not present the concerns that led the
Court in Dole even to consider the prospect of coercion. In
Dole, the condition—set 21 as the minimum drinking age—
did not tell the States how to use funds Congress provided for highway construction. Further, in view of the
Twenty-First Amendment, it was an open question whether
Congress could directly impose a national minimum
drinking age.
The ACA, in contrast, relates solely to the federally
funded Medicaid program; if States choose not to comply,
Congress has not threatened to withhold funds earmarked
for any other program. Nor does the ACA use Medicaid
funding to induce States to take action Congress itself
could not undertake. The Federal Government undoubt­
edly could operate its own health-care program for poor
persons, just as it operates Medicare for seniors’ health


48

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


care. See supra, at 44.
That is what makes this such a simple case, and the
Court’s decision so unsettling. Congress, aiming to assist
the needy, has appropriated federal money to subsidize
state health-insurance programs that meet federal stand­
ards. The principal standard the ACA sets is that the
state program cover adults earning no more than 133% of
the federal poverty line. Enforcing that prescription en­
sures that federal funds will be spent on health care for
the poor in furtherance of Congress’ present perception of
the general welfare.
C
THE CHIEF JUSTICE asserts that the Medicaid expan­
sion creates a “new health care program.” Ante, at 54.
Moreover, States could “hardly anticipate” that Congress
would “transform [the program] so dramatically.” Ante,
at 55. Therefore, THE CHIEF JUSTICE maintains, Congress’
threat to withhold “old” Medicaid funds based on a State’s
refusal to participate in the “new” program is a “threa[t] to
terminate [an]other . . . independent gran[t].” Ante, at 50,
52–53. And because the threat to withhold a large amount
of funds from one program “leaves the States with no real
option but to acquiesce [in a newly created program],” THE
CHIEF JUSTICE concludes, the Medicaid expansion is un­
constitutionally coercive. Ante, at 52.
1
The starting premise on which THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s
coercion analysis rests is that the ACA did not really
“extend” Medicaid; instead, Congress created an entirely
new program to co-exist with the old. THE CHIEF JUSTICE
calls the ACA new, but in truth, it simply reaches more of
America’s poor than Congress originally covered.
Medicaid was created to enable States to provide medi­
cal assistance to “needy persons.” See S. Rep. No. 404,


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

49

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

89th Cong., 1st Sess., pt. 1, p. 9 (1965). See also §121(a),
79 Stat. 343 (The purpose of Medicaid is to enable States
“to furnish . . . medical assistance on behalf of [certain
persons] whose income and resources are insufficient to
meet the costs of necessary medical services.”). By bring­
ing health care within the reach of a larger population of
Americans unable to afford it, the Medicaid expansion is
an extension of that basic aim.
The Medicaid Act contains hundreds of provisions gov­
erning operation of the program, setting conditions rang­
ing from “Limitation on payments to States for expenditures attributable to taxes,” 42 U. S. C. §1396a(t) (2006
ed.), to “Medical assistance to aliens not lawfully admitted
for permanent residence,” §1396b(v) (2006 ed. and Supp.
IV). The Medicaid expansion leaves unchanged the vast
majority of these provisions; it adds beneficiaries to the
existing program and specifies the rate at which States
will be reimbursed for services provided to the added beneficiaries. See ACA §§2001(a)(1), (3), 124 Stat. 271–272.
The ACA does not describe operational aspects of the
program for these newly eligible persons; for that infor­
mation, one must read the existing Medicaid Act. See 42
U. S. C. §§1396–1396v(b) (2006 ed. and Supp. IV).
Congress styled and clearly viewed the Medicaid expan­
sion as an amendment to the Medicaid Act, not as a “new”
health-care program. To the four categories of beneficiar­
ies for whom coverage became mandatory in 1965, and the
three mandatory classes added in the late 1980’s, see
supra, at 41–42, the ACA adds an eighth: individuals
under 65 with incomes not exceeding 133% of the federal
poverty level. The expansion is effectuated by §2001 of the
ACA, aptly titled: “Medicaid Coverage for the Lowest
Income Populations.” 124 Stat. 271. That section amends
Title 42, Chapter 7, Subchapter XIX: Grants to States for
Medical Assistance Programs. Commonly known as the
Medicaid Act, Subchapter XIX filled some 278 pages in


50

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


2006. Section 2001 of the ACA would add approximately
three pages.19
Congress has broad authority to construct or adjust
spending programs to meet its contemporary understand­
ing of “the general Welfare.” Helvering v. Davis, 301 U. S.
619, 640–641 (1937). Courts owe a large measure of re­
spect to Congress’ characterization of the grant programs
it establishes. See Steward Machine, 301 U. S., at 594.
Even if courts were inclined to second-guess Congress’
conception of the character of its legislation, how would
reviewing judges divine whether an Act of Congress, pur­
porting to amend a law, is in reality not an amendment,
but a new creation? At what point does an extension
become so large that it “transforms” the basic law?
Endeavoring to show that Congress created a new pro­
gram, THE CHIEF JUSTICE cites three aspects of the ex­
pansion. First, he asserts that, in covering those earning
no more than 133% of the federal poverty line, the Medi­
caid expansion, unlike pre-ACA Medicaid, does not “care
for the neediest among us.” Ante, at 53. What makes
that so? Single adults earning no more than $14,856 per
year—133% of the current federal poverty level—surely
rank among the Nation’s poor.
Second, according to THE CHIEF JUSTICE, “Congress
mandated that newly eligible persons receive a level of
coverage that is less comprehensive than the traditional
Medicaid benefit package.” Ibid. That less comprehensive
benefit package, however, is not an innovation introduced
by the ACA; since 2006, States have been free to use it for
many of their Medicaid beneficiaries.20 The level of bene­
——————
19 Compare Subchapter XIX, 42 U. S. C. §§1396–1396v(b) (2006 ed.
and Supp. IV) with §§1396a(a) (10)(A)(i)(VIII) (2006 ed. and Supp.
IV); 1396a(a) (10)(A)(ii)(XX), 1396a(a)(75), 1396a(k), 1396a(gg) to (hh),
1396d(y), 1396r–1(e), 1396u–7(b)(5) to (6).
20 The Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 authorized States to provide
“benchmark coverage” or “benchmark equivalent coverage” to certain


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

51

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

fits offered therefore does not set apart post-ACA Medicaid
recipients from all those entitled to benefits pre-ACA.
Third, THE CHIEF JUSTICE correctly notes that the
reimbursement rate for participating States is differ­
ent regarding individuals who became Medicaid-eligible
through the ACA. Ibid. But the rate differs only in its
generosity to participating States. Under pre-ACA Medi­
caid, the Federal Government pays up to 83% of the costs
of coverage for current enrollees, §1396d(b) (2006 ed. and
Supp. IV); under the ACA, the federal contribution starts
at 100% and will eventually settle at 90%, §1396d(y).
Even if one agreed that a change of as little as 7 percent­
age points carries constitutional significance, is it not
passing strange to suggest that the purported incursion on
state sovereignty might have been averted, or at least
mitigated, had Congress offered States less money to carry
out the same obligations?
Consider also that Congress could have repealed Medi­
caid. See supra, at 38–39 (citing 42 U. S. C. §1304); Brief
for Petitioners in No. 11–400, p. 41. Thereafter, Congress
could have enacted Medicaid II, a new program combin­
ing the pre-2010 coverage with the expanded coverage
required by the ACA. By what right does a court stop
Congress from building up without first tearing down?
2
THE CHIEF JUSTICE finds the Medicaid expansion vul­
nerable because it took participating States by surprise.
Ante, at 54. “A State could hardly anticipate that Con­
gres[s]” would endeavor to “transform [the Medicaid pro­
gram] so dramatically,” he states. Ante, at 54–55. For the
notion that States must be able to foresee, when they sign
up, alterations Congress might make later on, THE CHIEF
——————
Medicaid populations. See §6044, 120 Stat. 88, 42 U. S. C. §1396u–7
(2006 ed. and Supp. IV). States may offer the same level of coverage to
persons newly eligible under the ACA. See §1396a(k).


52

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


JUSTICE cites only one case: Pennhurst State School and
Hospital v. Halderman, 451 U. S. 1.
In Pennhurst, residents of a state-run, federally funded
institution for the mentally disabled complained of abu­
sive treatment and inhumane conditions in alleged viola­
tion of the Developmentally Disabled Assistance and Bill
of Rights Act. 451 U. S., at 5–6. We held that the State
was not answerable in damages for violating conditions
it did not “voluntarily and knowingly accep[t].” Id., at 17,
27. Inspecting the statutory language and legislative his­
tory, we found that the Act did not “unambiguously” im­
pose the requirement on which the plaintiffs relied: that
they receive appropriate treatment in the least restrictive
environment. Id., at 17–18. Satisfied that Congress had
not clearly conditioned the States’ receipt of federal funds
on the States’ provision of such treatment, we declined to
read such a requirement into the Act. Congress’ spending
power, we concluded, “does not include surprising partici­
pating States with postacceptance or ‘retroactive’ condi­
tions.” Id., at 24–25.
Pennhurst thus instructs that “if Congress intends to
impose a condition on the grant of federal moneys, it must
do so unambiguously.” Ante, at 53 (quoting Pennhurst,
451 U. S., at 17). That requirement is met in this case.
Section 2001 does not take effect until 2014. The ACA
makes perfectly clear what will be required of States that
accept Medicaid funding after that date: They must extend
eligibility to adults with incomes no more than 133% of
the federal poverty line. See 42 U. S. C. §1396a(a)(10)(A)
(i)(VIII) (2006 ed. and Supp. IV).
THE CHIEF JUSTICE appears to find in Pennhurst a
requirement that, when spending legislation is first
passed, or when States first enlist in the federal program,
Congress must provide clear notice of conditions it might
later impose. If I understand his point correctly, it was
incumbent on Congress, in 1965, to warn the States clearly


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

53

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

of the size and shape potential changes to Medicaid might
take. And absent such notice, sizable changes could not be
made mandatory. Our decisions do not support such a
requirement.21
In Bennett v. New Jersey, 470 U. S. 632 (1985), the
Secretary of Education sought to recoup Title I funds22
based on the State’s noncompliance, from 1970 to 1972,
with a 1978 amendment to Title I. Relying on Pennhurst,
we rejected the Secretary’s attempt to recover funds based
on the States’ alleged violation of a rule that did not exist
when the State accepted and spent the funds. See 470
U. S., at 640 (“New Jersey[,] when it applied for and re­
ceived Title I funds for the years 1970–1972[,] had no
basis to believe that the propriety of the expenditures
would be judged by any standards other than the ones in
effect at the time.” (citing Pennhurst, 451 U. S., at 17, 24–
25; emphasis added)).
When amendment of an existing grant program has no
such retroactive effect, however, we have upheld Congress’
instruction. In Bennett v. Kentucky Dept. of Ed., 470 U. S.
656 (1985), the Secretary sued to recapture Title I funds
based on the Commonwealth’s 1974 violation of a spend­
ing condition Congress added to Title I in 1970. Rejecting
Kentucky’s argument pinned to Pennhurst, we held that
——————
21 THE CHIEF JUSTICE observes that “Spending Clause legislation
[i]s much in the nature of a contract.” Ante, at 46 (internal quotation
marks omitted). See also post, at 33 (joint opinion of SCALIA, KENNEDY,
THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ.) (same). But the Court previously has recognized that “[u]nlike normal contractual undertakings, federal grant
programs originate in and remain governed by statutory provisions
expressing the judgment of Congress concerning desirable public
policy.” Bennett v. Kentucky Dept. of Ed., 470 U. S. 656, 669 (1985).
22 Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965
provided federal grants to finance supplemental educational programs
in school districts with high concentrations of children from low-income
families. See Bennett v. New Jersey, 470 U. S. 632, 634–635 (1985)
(citing Pub. L. No. 89–10, 79 Stat. 27).


54

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


the Commonwealth suffered no surprise after accepting
the federal funds. Kentucky was therefore obliged to return the money. 470 U. S., at 665–666, 673–674. The
conditions imposed were to be assessed as of 1974, in light
of “the legal requirements in place when the grants were
made,” id., at 670, not as of 1965, when Title I was origi­
nally enacted.
As these decisions show, Pennhurst’s rule demands that
conditions on federal funds be unambiguously clear at the
time a State receives and uses the money—not at the time,
perhaps years earlier, when Congress passed the law
establishing the program. See also Dole, 483 U. S., at 208
(finding Pennhurst satisfied based on the clarity of the
Federal Aid Highway Act as amended in 1984, without
looking back to 1956, the year of the Act’s adoption).
In any event, from the start, the Medicaid Act put
States on notice that the program could be changed: “The
right to alter, amend, or repeal any provision of [Medi­
caid],” the statute has read since 1965, “is hereby reserved
to the Congress.” 42 U. S. C. §1304. The “effect of these
few simple words” has long been settled. See National
Railroad Passenger Corporation v. Atchison, T. & S. F. R.
Co., 470 U. S. 451, 467–468, n. 22 (1985) (citing Sinking
Fund Cases, 99 U. S. 700, 720 (1879)). By reserving the
right to “alter, amend, [or] repeal” a spending program,
Congress “has given special notice of its intention to retain
. . . full and complete power to make such alterations and
amendments . . . as come within the just scope of legisla­
tive power.” Id., at 720.
Our decision in Bowen v. Public Agencies Opposed to
Social Security Entrapment, 477 U. S. 41, 51–52 (1986), is
guiding here. As enacted in 1935, the Social Security Act
did not cover state employees. Id., at 44. In response to
pressure from States that wanted coverage for their em­
ployees, Congress, in 1950, amended the Act to allow
States to opt into the program. Id., at 45. The statutory


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

55

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

provision giving States this option expressly permitted
them to withdraw from the program. Ibid.
Beginning in the late 1970’s, States increasingly exer­
cised the option to withdraw. Id., at 46. Concerned that
withdrawals were threatening the integrity of Social
Security, Congress repealed the termination provision.
Congress thereby changed Social Security from a program
voluntary for the States to one from which they could not
escape. Id., at 48. California objected, arguing that the
change impermissibly deprived it of a right to withdraw
from Social Security. Id., at 49–50. We unanimously
rejected California’s argument. Id., at 51–53. By includ­
ing in the Act “a clause expressly reserving to it ‘[t]he
right to alter, amend, or repeal any provision’ of the Act,”
we held, Congress put States on notice that the Act
“created no contractual rights.” Id., at 51–52. The States
therefore had no law-based ground on which to complain
about the amendment, despite the significant character of
the change.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE nevertheless would rewrite §1304
to countenance only the “right to alter somewhat,” or
“amend, but not too much.” Congress, however, did not so
qualify §1304. Indeed, Congress retained discretion to
“repeal” Medicaid, wiping it out entirely. Cf. Delta Air
Lines, Inc. v. August, 450 U. S. 346, 368 (1981) (Rehnquist,
J., dissenting) (invoking “the common-sense maxim that
the greater includes the lesser”). As Bowen indicates, no
State could reasonably have read §1304 as reserving to
Congress authority to make adjustments only if modestly
sized.
In fact, no State proceeded on that understanding. In com­
pliance with Medicaid regulations, each State expressly
undertook to abide by future Medicaid changes. See 42
CFR §430.12(c)(1) (2011) (“The [state Medicaid] plan must
provide that it will be amended whenever necessary to
reflect . . . [c]hanges in Federal law, regulations, policy


56

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


interpretations, or court decisions.”). Whenever a State
notifies the Federal Government of a change in its own
Medicaid program, the State certifies both that it knows
the federally set terms of participation may change, and
that it will abide by those changes as a condition of con­
tinued participation. See, e.g., Florida Agency for Health
Care Admin., State Plan Under Title XIX of the Social
Security Act Medical Assistance Program §7.1, p. 86 (Oct.
6, 1992).
THE CHIEF JUSTICE insists that the most recent expan­
sion, in contrast to its predecessors, “accomplishes a shift
in kind, not merely degree.” Ante, at 53. But why was
Medicaid altered only in degree, not in kind, when Con­
gress required States to cover millions of children and
pregnant women? See supra, at 41–42. Congress did not
“merely alte[r] and expan[d] the boundaries of ” the Aid to
Families with Dependent Children program. But see ante,
at 53–55. Rather, Congress required participating States
to provide coverage tied to the federal poverty level (as it
later did in the ACA), rather than to the AFDC program.
See Brief for National Health Law Program et al. as Amici
Curiae 16–18. In short, given §1304, this Court’s con­
struction of §1304’s language in Bowen, and the enlarge­
ment of Medicaid in the years since 1965,23 a State would
be hard put to complain that it lacked fair notice when,
in 2010, Congress altered Medicaid to embrace a larger
portion of the Nation’s poor.
3
THE CHIEF JUSTICE ultimately asks whether “the finan­
——————
23 Note, in this regard, the extension of Social Security, which began
in 1935 as an old-age pension program, then expanded to include survivor benefits in 1939 and disability benefits in 1956. See Social
Security Act, ch. 531, 49 Stat. 622–625; Social Security Act Amend­
ments of 1939, 53 Stat. 1364–1365; Social Security Amendments of
1956, ch. 836, §103, 70 Stat. 815–816.


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

57

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

cial inducement offered by Congress . . . pass[ed] the point
at which pressure turns into compulsion.” Ante, at 50
(internal quotation marks omitted). The financial in­
ducement Congress employed here, he concludes, crosses
that threshold: The threatened withholding of “existing
Medicaid funds” is “a gun to the head” that forces States to
acquiesce. Ante, at 50–51 (citing 42 U. S. C. §1396c).24
THE CHIEF JUSTICE sees no need to “fix the outermost
line,” Steward Machine, 301 U. S., at 591, “where persua­
sion gives way to coercion,” ante, at 55. Neither do the
joint dissenters. See post, at 36, 38.25 Notably, the deci­
——————
24 The joint dissenters, for their part, would make this the entire in­
quiry. “[I]f States really have no choice other than to accept the pack­
age,” they assert, “the offer is coercive.” Post, at 35. THE CHIEF JUSTICE
recognizes Congress’ authority to construct a single federal program
and “condition the receipt of funds on the States’ complying with
restrictions on the use of those funds.” Ante, at 50. For the joint
dissenters, however, all that matters, it appears, is whether States can
resist the temptation of a given federal grant. Post, at 35. On this
logic, any federal spending program, sufficiently large and well-funded,
would be unconstitutional. The joint dissenters point to smaller pro­
grams States might have the will to refuse. See post, at 40–41 (elemen­
tary and secondary education). But how is a court to judge whether
“only 6.6% of all state expenditures,” post, at 41, is an amount States
could or would do without?
Speculations of this genre are characteristic of the joint dissent. See,
e.g., post, at 35 (“it may be state officials who will bear the brunt of
public disapproval” for joint federal-state endeavors); ibid., (“federal
officials . . . may remain insulated from the electoral ramifications of
their decision”); post, at 37 (“a heavy federal tax . . . levied to support a
federal program that offers large grants to the States . . . may, as a
practical matter, [leave States] unable to refuse to participate”); ibid.
(withdrawal from a federal program “would likely force the State to
impose a huge tax increase”); post, at 46 (state share of ACA expansion
costs “may increase in the future”) (all emphasis added; some internal
quotation marks omitted). The joint dissenters are long on conjecture
and short on real-world examples.
25 The joint dissenters also rely heavily on Congress’ perceived intent
to coerce the States. Post, at 42–46; see, e.g., post, at 42 (“In crafting the
ACA, Congress clearly expressed its informed view that no State could


58

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


sion on which they rely, Steward Machine, found the
statute at issue inside the line, “wherever the line may
be.” 301 U. S., at 591.
When future Spending Clause challenges arrive, as they
likely will in the wake of today’s decision, how will liti­
gants and judges assess whether “a State has a legitimate
choice whether to accept the federal conditions in ex­
change for federal funds”? Ante, at 48. Are courts to
measure the number of dollars the Federal Government
might withhold for noncompliance? The portion of the
State’s budget at stake? And which State’s—or States’—
budget is determinative: the lead plaintiff, all challenging
States (26 in this case, many with quite different fiscal
situations), or some national median? Does it matter that
Florida, unlike most States, imposes no state income tax,
and therefore might be able to replace foregone federal
funds with new state revenue?26 Or that the coercion state
——————
possibly refuse the offer that the ACA extends.”). We should not lightly
ascribe to Congress an intent to violate the Constitution (at least as my
colleagues read it). This is particularly true when the ACA could just
as well be comprehended as demonstrating Congress’ mere expectation,
in light of the uniformity of past participation and the generosity of the
federal contribution, that States would not withdraw. Cf. South Dakota
v. Dole, 483 U. S. 203, 211 (1987) (“We cannot conclude . . . that a con­
ditional grant of federal money . . . is unconstitutional simply by
reason of its success in achieving the congressional objective.”).
26 Federal taxation of a State’s citizens, according to the joint dissent­
ers, may diminish a State’s ability to raise new revenue. This, in turn,
could limit a State’s capacity to replace a federal program with an
“equivalent” state-funded analog. Post, at 40. But it cannot be true
that “the amount of the federal taxes extracted from the taxpayers of a
State to pay for the program in question is relevant in determining
whether there is impermissible coercion.” Post, at 37. When the
United States Government taxes United States citizens, it taxes them
“in their individual capacities” as “the people of America”—not as
residents of a particular State. See U. S. Term Limits, Inc. v. Thornton,
514 U. S. 779, 839 (1995) (KENNEDY, J., concurring). That is because
the “Framers split the atom of sovereignty[,] . . . establishing two orders
of government”—“one state and one federal”—“each with its own direct


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

59

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

officials in fact fear is punishment at the ballot box for
turning down a politically popular federal grant?
The coercion inquiry, therefore, appears to involve political judgments that defy judicial calculation. See Baker
v. Carr, 369 U. S. 186, 217 (1962). Even commentators
sympathetic to robust enforcement of Dole’s limitations,
see supra, at 46, have concluded that conceptions of
“impermissible coercion” premised on States’ perceived
inability to decline federal funds “are just too amorphous
to be judicially administrable.” Baker & Berman, Getting
off the Dole, 78 Ind. L. J. 459, 521, 522, n. 307 (2003)
(citing, e.g., Scalia, The Rule of Law as a Law of Rules, 56
U. Chi. L. Rev. 1175 (1989)).
At bottom, my colleagues’ position is that the States’
reliance on federal funds limits Congress’ authority to
alter its spending programs. This gets things backwards:
Congress, not the States, is tasked with spending federal
money in service of the general welfare. And each succes­
sive Congress is empowered to appropriate funds as it sees
fit. When the 110th Congress reached a conclusion about
Medicaid funds that differed from its predecessors’ view,
it abridged no State’s right to “existing,” or “pre-existing,”
funds. But see ante, at 51–52; post, at 47–48 (joint opinion
of SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and ALITO, JJ.). For, in
——————
relationship” to the people. Id., at 838.
A State therefore has no claim on the money its residents pay in
federal taxes, and federal “spending programs need not help people in
all states in the same measure.” See Brief for David Satcher et al. as
Amici Curiae 19. In 2004, for example, New Jersey received 55 cents
in federal spending for every dollar its residents paid to the Federal
Government in taxes, while Mississippi received $1.77 per tax dollar
paid. C. Dubay, Tax Foundation, Federal Tax Burdens and Expendi­
tures by State: Which States Gain Most from Federal Fiscal Opera­
tions? 2 (Mar. 2006). Thus no constitutional problem was created when
Arizona declined for 16 years to participate in Medicaid, even though
its residents’ tax dollars financed Medicaid programs in every other
State.


60

NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT 

BUSINESS v. SEBELIUS

Opinion of GINSBURG, J. 


fact, there are no such funds. There is only money States
anticipate receiving from future Congresses.
D
Congress has delegated to the Secretary of Health and
Human Services the authority to withhold, in whole or
in part, federal Medicaid funds from States that fail to
comply with the Medicaid Act as originally composed and as
subsequently amended. 42 U. S. C. §1396c.27 THE CHIEF
JUSTICE, however, holds that the Constitution precludes
the Secretary from withholding “existing” Medicaid funds
based on States’ refusal to comply with the expanded Medi­
caid program. Ante, at 55. For the foregoing reasons, I
disagree that any such withholding would violate the
Spending Clause. Accordingly, I would affirm the decision
of the Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit in this
regard.
But in view of THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s disposition, I agree
with him that the Medicaid Act’s severability clause de­
termines the appropriate remedy. That clause provides
that “[i]f any provision of [the Medicaid Act], or the appli­
cation thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter, and the application of
such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not
be affected thereby.” 42 U. S. C. §1303.
The Court does not strike down any provision of the
——————
27 As

THE CHIEF JUSTICE observes, the Secretary is authorized to
withhold all of a State’s Medicaid funding. See ante, at 51. But total
withdrawal is what the Secretary may, not must, do. She has discre­
tion to withhold only a portion of the Medicaid funds otherwise due a
noncompliant State. See §1396c; cf. 45 CFR §80.10(f) (2011) (Secretary
may enforce Title VI’s nondiscrimination requirement through “refusal
to grant or continue Federal financial assistance, in whole or in part.”
(emphasis added)). The Secretary, it is worth noting, may herself
experience political pressures, which would make her all the more
reluctant to cut off funds Congress has appropriated for a State’s needy
citizens.


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

61

Opinion of GINSBURG, J.

ACA. It prohibits only the “application” of the Secretary’s
authority to withhold Medicaid funds from States that
decline to conform their Medicaid plans to the ACA’s
requirements. Thus the ACA’s authorization of funds to
finance the expansion remains intact, and the Secretary’s
authority to withhold funds for reasons other than non­
compliance with the expansion remains unaffected.
Even absent §1303’s command, we would have no war­
rant to invalidate the Medicaid expansion, contra post, at
46–48 (joint opinion of SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, and
ALITO, JJ.), not to mention the entire ACA, post, at 49–64
(same). For when a court confronts an unconstitutional
statute, its endeavor must be to conserve, not destroy,
the legislature’s dominant objective. See, e.g., Ayotte v.
Planned Parenthood of Northern New Eng., 546 U. S. 320,
328–330 (2006). In this case, that objective was to in­
crease access to health care for the poor by increasing the
States’ access to federal funds. THE CHIEF JUSTICE is
undoubtedly right to conclude that Congress may offer
States funds “to expand the availability of health care, and
requir[e] that States accepting such funds comply with the
conditions on their use.” Ante, at 55. I therefore concur
in the judgment with respect to Part IV–B of THE CHIEF
JUSTICE’s opinion.
*
*
*
For the reasons stated, I agree with THE CHIEF JUSTICE
that, as to the validity of the minimum coverage provi­
sion, the judgment of the Court of Appeals for the Eleventh
Circuit should be reversed. In my view, the provision encounters no constitutional obstruction. Further, I would
uphold the Eleventh Circuit’s decision that the Medicaid
expansion is within Congress’ spending power.

