OCTOBER TERM, 2011

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

ARIZONA ET AL. v. UNITED STATES
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 11–182.

Argued April 25, 2012—Decided June 25, 2012

An Arizona statute known as S. B. 1070 was enacted in 2010 to address
pressing issues related to the large number of unlawful aliens in the
State. The United States sought to enjoin the law as preempted. The
District Court issued a preliminary injunction preventing four of its
provisions from taking effect. Section 3 makes failure to comply with
federal alien-registration requirements a state misdemeanor; §5(C)
makes it a misdemeanor for an unauthorized alien to seek or engage
in work in the State; §6 authorizes state and local officers to arrest
without a warrant a person “the officer has probable cause to believe
. . . has committed any public offense that makes the person removable from the United States”; and §2(B) requires officers conducting a
stop, detention, or arrest to make efforts, in some circumstances, to
verify the person’s immigration status with the Federal Government.
The Ninth Circuit affirmed, agreeing that the United States had established a likelihood of success on its preemption claims.
Held:
1. The Federal Government’s broad, undoubted power over immigration and alien status rests, in part, on its constitutional power to
“establish an uniform Rule of Naturalization,” Art. I, §8, cl. 4, and on
its inherent sovereign power to control and conduct foreign relations,
see Toll v. Moreno, 458 U. S. 1, 10. Federal governance is extensive
and complex. Among other things, federal law specifies categories of
aliens who are ineligible to be admitted to the United States, 8
U. S. C. §1182; requires aliens to register with the Federal Government and to carry proof of status, §§1304(e), 1306(a); imposes sanctions on employers who hire unauthorized workers, §1324a; and specifies which aliens may be removed and the procedures for doing so,
see §1227. Removal is a civil matter, and one of its principal features


2

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
is the broad discretion exercised by immigration officials, who must
decide whether to pursue removal at all. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE), an agency within the Department of Homeland
Security, is responsible for identifying, apprehending, and removing
illegal aliens. It also operates the Law Enforcement Support Center,
which provides immigration status information to federal, state, and
local officials around the clock. Pp. 2–7.
2. The Supremacy Clause gives Congress the power to preempt
state law. A statute may contain an express preemption provision,
see, e.g., Chamber of Commerce of United States of America v. Whiting, 563 U. S. ___, ___, but state law must also give way to federal
law in at least two other circumstances. First, States are precluded
from regulating conduct in a field that Congress has determined
must be regulated by its exclusive governance. See Gade v. National
Solid Wastes Management Assn., 505 U. S. 88, 115. Intent can be inferred from a framework of regulation “so pervasive . . . that Congress left no room for the States to supplement it” or where a “federal
interest is so dominant that the federal system will be assumed to
preclude enforcement of state laws on the same subject.” Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., 331 U. S. 218, 230. Second, state laws are
preempted when they conflict with federal law, including when they
stand “as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full
purposes and objectives of Congress.” Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U. S.
52, 67. Pp. 7–8.
3. Sections 3, 5(C), and 6 of S. B. 1070 are preempted by federal
law. Pp. 8–19.
(a) Section 3 intrudes on the field of alien registration, a field in
which Congress has left no room for States to regulate. In Hines, a
state alien-registration program was struck down on the ground that
Congress intended its “complete” federal registration plan to be a
“single integrated and all-embracing system.” 312 U. S., at 74. That
scheme did not allow the States to “curtail or complement” federal
law or “enforce additional or auxiliary regulations.” Id., at 66–67.
The federal registration framework remains comprehensive. Because
Congress has occupied the field, even complementary state regulation
is impermissible. Pp. 8–11.
(b) Section 5(C)’s criminal penalty stands as an obstacle to the
federal regulatory system. The Immigration Reform and Control Act
of 1986 (IRCA), a comprehensive framework for “combating the employment of illegal aliens,” Hoffman Plastic Compounds, Inc. v.
NLRB, 535 U. S. 137, 147, makes it illegal for employers to knowingly hire, recruit, refer, or continue to employ unauthorized workers, 8
U. S. C. §§1324a(a)(1)(A), (a)(2), and requires employers to verify prospective
employees’
employment
authorization
status,


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
§§1324a(a)(1)(B), (b). It imposes criminal and civil penalties on employers, §§1324a(e)(4), (f), but only civil penalties on aliens who seek,
or engage in, unauthorized employment, e.g., §§1255(c)(2), (c)(8).
IRCA’s express preemption provision, though silent about whether
additional penalties may be imposed against employees, “does not bar
the ordinary working of conflict pre-emption principles” or impose a
“special burden” making it more difficult to establish the preemption
of laws falling outside the clause. Geier v. American Honda Motor
Co., 529 U. S. 861, 869–872. The correct instruction to draw from the
text, structure, and history of IRCA is that Congress decided it would
be inappropriate to impose criminal penalties on unauthorized employees. It follows that a state law to the contrary is an obstacle to
the regulatory system Congress chose. Pp. 12–15.
(c) By authorizing state and local officers to make warrantless
arrests of certain aliens suspected of being removable, §6 too creates
an obstacle to federal law. As a general rule, it is not a crime for a
removable alien to remain in the United States. The federal scheme
instructs when it is appropriate to arrest an alien during the removal
process. The Attorney General in some circumstances will issue a
warrant for trained federal immigration officers to execute. If no federal warrant has been issued, these officers have more limited authority. They may arrest an alien for being “in the United States in
violation of any [immigration] law or regulation,” for example, but only where the alien “is likely to escape before a warrant can be obtained.” §1357(a)(2). Section 6 attempts to provide state officers with
even greater arrest authority, which they could exercise with no instruction from the Federal Government. This is not the system Congress created. Federal law specifies limited circumstances in which
state officers may perform an immigration officer’s functions. This
includes instances where the Attorney General has granted that authority in a formal agreement with a state or local government. See,
e.g., §1357(g)(1). Although federal law permits state officers to “cooperate with the Attorney General in the identification, apprehension,
detention, or removal of aliens not lawfully present in the United
States,” §1357(g)(10)(B), this does not encompass the unilateral decision to detain authorized by §6. Pp. 15–19.
4. It was improper to enjoin §2(B) before the state courts had an
opportunity to construe it and without some showing that §2(B)’s enforcement in fact conflicts with federal immigration law and its objectives. Pp. 19–24.
(a) The state provision has three limitations: A detainee is presumed not to be an illegal alien if he or she provides a valid Arizona
driver’s license or similar identification; officers may not consider
race, color, or national origin “except to the extent permitted by the


4

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Syllabus
United States [and] Arizona Constitution[s]”; and §2(B) must be “implemented in a manner consistent with federal law regulating immigration, protecting the civil rights of all persons and respecting the
privileges and immunities of United States citizens.” P. 20.
(b) This Court finds unpersuasive the argument that, even with
those limits, §2(B) must be held preempted at this stage. Pp. 20–24.
(1) The mandatory nature of the status checks does not interfere with the federal immigration scheme. Consultation between federal and state officials is an important feature of the immigration
system. In fact, Congress has encouraged the sharing of information
about possible immigration violations. See §§1357(g)(10)(A), 1373(c).
The federal scheme thus leaves room for a policy requiring state officials to contact ICE as a routine matter. Cf. Whiting, 563 U. S., at
___. Pp. 20–21.
(2) It is not clear at this stage and on this record that §2(B), in
practice, will require state officers to delay the release of detainees
for no reason other than to verify their immigration status. This
would raise constitutional concerns. And it would disrupt the federal
framework to put state officers in the position of holding aliens in
custody for possible unlawful presence without federal direction and
supervision. But §2(B) could be read to avoid these concerns. If the
law only requires state officers to conduct a status check during the
course of an authorized, lawful detention or after a detainee has been
released, the provision would likely survive preemption—at least absent some showing that it has other consequences that are adverse to
federal law and its objectives. Without the benefit of a definitive interpretation from the state courts, it would be inappropriate to assume §2(B) will be construed in a way that conflicts with federal law.
Cf. Fox v. Washington, 236 U. S. 273, 277. This opinion does not
foreclose other preemption and constitutional challenges to the law
as interpreted and applied after it goes into effect. Pp. 22–24.

641 F. 3d 339, affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and GINSBURG, BREYER, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined. SCALIA, J.,
THOMAS, J., and ALITO, J., filed opinions concurring in part and dissenting in part. KAGAN, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of
the case.

