Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

1

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 11–182
_________________

ARIZONA, ET AL., PETITIONERS v. UNITED STATES
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF



APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT



[June 25, 2012] 


JUSTICE THOMAS, concurring in part and dissenting in
part.
I agree with JUSTICE SCALIA that federal immigration
law does not pre-empt any of the challenged provisions of
S. B. 1070. I reach that conclusion, however, for the simple reason that there is no conflict between the “ordinary
meanin[g]” of the relevant federal laws and that of the
four provisions of Arizona law at issue here. Wyeth v.
Levine, 555 U. S. 555, 588 (2009) (THOMAS, J., concurring
in judgment) (“Pre-emption analysis should not be a freewheeling judicial inquiry into whether a state statute is in
tension with federal objectives, but an inquiry into whether
the ordinary meanings of state and federal law conflict”
(brackets; internal quotation marks omitted)).
Section 2(B) of S. B. 1070 provides that, when Arizona
law enforcement officers reasonably suspect that a person
they have lawfully stopped, detained, or arrested is unlawfully present, “a reasonable attempt shall be made, when
practicable, to determine the immigration status of the
person” pursuant to the verification procedure established
by Congress in 8 U. S. C. §1373(c). Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann.
§11–1051(B) (West 2012). Nothing in the text of that or
any other federal statute prohibits Arizona from directing
its officers to make immigration-related inquiries in these
situations. To the contrary, federal law expressly states
that “no State or local government entity may be prohib-


2

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

ited, or in any way restricted, from sending to or receiving
from” federal officials “information regarding the immigration status” of an alien. 8 U. S. C. §1644. And, federal
law imposes an affirmative obligation on federal officials
to respond to a State’s immigration-related inquiries.
§1373(c).
Section 6 of S. B. 1070 authorizes Arizona law enforcement officers to make warrantless arrests when there is
probable cause to believe that an arrestee has committed a
public offense that renders him removable under federal
immigration law. States, as sovereigns, have inherent
authority to conduct arrests for violations of federal law,
unless and until Congress removes that authority. See
United States v. Di Re, 332 U. S. 581, 589 (1948) (holding
that state law determines the validity of a warrantless
arrest for a violation of federal law “in the absence of
an applicable federal statute”). Here, no federal statute
purports to withdraw that authority. As JUSTICE SCALIA
notes, ante, at 12 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part), federal law does limit the authority of federal
officials to arrest removable aliens, but those statutes do
not apply to state officers. And, federal law expressly
recognizes that state officers may “cooperate with the
Attorney General” in the “apprehension” and “detention”
of “aliens not lawfully present in the United States.”
§1357(g)(10)(B). Nothing in that statute indicates that
such cooperation requires a prior “request, approval, or
other instruction from the Federal Government.” Ante, at
18 (majority opinion).
Section 3 of S. B. 1070 makes it a crime under Arizona
law for an unlawfully present alien to willfully fail to
complete or carry an alien registration document in violation of 8 U. S. C. §1304(e) and §1306(a). Section 3 simply
incorporates federal registration standards. Unlike the
Court, I would not hold that Congress pre-empted the field
of enforcing those standards. “[O]ur recent cases have


Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Opinion of THOMAS, J.

frequently rejected field pre-emption in the absence of
statutory language expressly requiring it.” Camps Newfound/Owatonna, Inc. v. Town of Harrison, 520 U. S. 564,
617 (1997) (THOMAS, J., dissenting); see, e.g., New York
State Dept. of Social Servs. v. Dublino, 413 U. S. 405, 415
(1973). Here, nothing in the text of the relevant federal
statutes indicates that Congress intended enforcement of
its registration requirements to be exclusively the province of the Federal Government. That Congress created a
“full set of standards governing alien registration,” ante, at
10 (majority opinion), merely indicates that it intended the
scheme to be capable of working on its own, not that it
wanted to preclude the States from enforcing the federal
standards. Hines v. Davidowitz, 312 U. S. 52 (1941), is not
to the contrary. As JUSTICE SCALIA explains, ante, at 14,
Hines at most holds that federal law pre-empts the States
from creating additional registration requirements. But
here, Arizona is merely seeking to enforce the very registration requirements that Congress created.
Section 5(C) of S. B. 1070 prohibits unlawfully present
aliens from knowingly applying for, soliciting, or performing work in Arizona. Section 5(C) operates only on individuals whom Congress has already declared ineligible to
work in the United States. Nothing in the text of the
federal immigration laws prohibits States from imposing
their own criminal penalties on such individuals. Federal law expressly pre-empts States from “imposing civil or
criminal sanctions (other than through licensing and
similar laws) upon those who employ, or recruit or refer
for a fee for employment, unauthorized aliens.” 8 U. S. C.
§1324a(h)(2) (emphasis added). But it leaves States free
to impose criminal sanctions on the employees themselves.
Despite the lack of any conflict between the ordinary
meaning of the Arizona law and that of the federal laws at
issue here, the Court holds that various provisions of the
Arizona law are pre-empted because they “stan[d] as an


4

ARIZONA v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of THOMAS, J.

obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full
purposes and objectives of Congress.” Hines, supra, at 67.
I have explained that the “purposes and objectives” theory
of implied pre-emption is inconsistent with the Constitution because it invites courts to engage in freewheeling
speculation about congressional purpose that roams well
beyond statutory text. See Wyeth, 555 U. S., at 604 (opinion concurring in judgment); see also Williamson v. Mazda
Motor of America, Inc., 562 U. S. ___, ___–___ (2011) (opinion concurring in judgment) (slip op., at 2–3); Haywood v.
Drown, 556 U. S. 729, 767 (2009) (dissenting opinion).
Under the Supremacy Clause, pre-emptive effect is to be
given to congressionally enacted laws, not to judicially
divined legislative purposes. See Wyeth, supra, at 604
(THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment). Thus, even assuming the existence of some tension between Arizona’s law
and the supposed “purposes and objectives” of Congress, I
would not hold that any of the provisions of the Arizona
law at issue here are pre-empted on that basis.

