18

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

plies to actions seeking penalties under any statute.” Brief
for Petitioner 35–36. See also ante, at 17–18 (STEVENS, J.,
concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (Section
901(b) cannot “be understood as a rule that . . . serves the
function of defining New York’s rights or remedies” because
its “text . . . expressly and unambiguously applies not only
to claims based on New York law but also to claims based on
federal law or the law of any other State.”).
It is true that §901(b) is not specifically limited to claims
arising under New York law. But neither is it expressly
extended to claims arising under foreign law. The rule
prescribes, without elaboration either way, that “an action
to recover a penalty . . . may not be maintained as a class
action.” We have often recognized that “general words”
appearing in a statute may, in fact, have limited applica
tion; “[t]he words ‘any person or persons,’ ” for example,
“are broad enough to comprehend every human being.
But general words must not only be limited to cases within
the jurisdiction of the state, but also to those objects to
which the legislature intended to apply them.” United
States v. Palmer, 3 Wheat. 610, 631 (1818) (opinion for the
Court by Marshall, C. J.). See also Small v. United States,
544 U. S. 385, 388 (2005) (“In law, a legislature that uses
the statutory phrase ‘any person’ may or may not mean to
include ‘persons’ outside the jurisdiction of the state.”
(some internal quotation marks omitted)); Flora v. United
States, 362 U. S. 145, 149 (1960) (The term “ ‘any sum’ is a
catchall [phrase,] . . . but to say this is not to define what
it catches.”).
Moreover, Shady Grove overlooks the most likely expla
nation for the absence of limiting language: New York
legislators make law with New York plaintiffs and defen
dants in mind, i.e., as if New York were the universe. See
Baxter, Choice of Law and the Federal System, 16 Stan.
L. Rev. 1, 11 (1963) (“[L]awmakers often speak in univer
sal terms but must be understood to speak with reference

