Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

19

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

to their constituents.”); cf. Smith v. United States, 507
U. S. 197, 204, n. 5 (1993) (presumption against extrater
ritoriality rooted in part in “the commonsense notion that
Congress generally legislates with domestic concerns in
mind”).
The point was well put by Brainerd Currie in his semi
nal article on governmental interest analysis in conflict-oflaws cases. The article centers on a now-archaic Massa
chusetts law that prevented married women from binding
themselves by contract as sureties for their husbands.
Discussing whether the Massachusetts prescription ap
plied to transactions involving foreign factors (a foreign
forum, foreign place of contracting, or foreign parties),
Currie observed:
“When the Massachusetts legislature addresses itself
to the problem of married women as sureties, the un
developed image in its mind is that of Massachusetts
married women, husbands, creditors, transactions,
courts, and judgments. In the history of AngloAmerican law the domestic case has been normal, the
conflict-of-laws case marginal.” Married Women’s
Contracts: A Study in Conflict-of-Laws Method, 25 U.
Chi. L. Rev. 227, 231 (1958) (emphasis added).
Shady Grove’s suggestion that States must specifically
limit their laws to domestic rights of action if they wish
their enactments to apply in federal diversity litigation
misses the obvious point: State legislators generally do not
focus on an interstate setting when drafting statutes.12
——————
12 Shady Grove’s argument that §901(b) is procedural based on its
possible application to foreign claims is also out of sync with our Erie
decisions, many of them involving state statutes of similarly unquali
fied scope. The New Jersey law at issue in Cohen v. Beneficial Indus
trial Loan Corp., 337 U. S. 541, 544, n. 1 (1949), for example, required
plaintiffs to post a bond as security for costs in “any [stockholder’s
derivative] action.” (quoting 1945 N. J. Laws ch. 131 (emphasis

