Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
concluded in Part II–C that the concurrence’s analysis—under which
a Federal Rule may displace a state procedural rule that is not
“bound up” or “sufficiently intertwined” with substantive rights and
remedies under state law—squarely conflicts with Sibbach’s single
criterion that the Federal Rule “really regulat[e] procedure,” 312
U. S., at 13–14. Pp. 16–22.
JUSTICE STEVENS agreed that Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23
must apply because it governs whether a class must be certified, and
it does not violate the Rules Enabling Act in this case. Pp. 1–22.
(a) When the application of a federal rule would “abridge,
enlarge or modify any substantive right,” 28 U. S. C. §2072(b), the
federal rule cannot govern. In rare cases, a federal rule that dictates
an answer to a traditionally procedural question could, if applied,
displace an unusual state law that is procedural in the ordinary use
of the term but is so intertwined with a state right or remedy that it
functions to define the scope of the state-created right. Examples
may include state laws that make it significantly more difficult to
bring or to prove a claim or that function as limits on the amount of
recovery. An application of a federal rule that directly collides with
such a state law violates the Rules Enabling Act. Pp. 1–13.
(b) N. Y. Civ. Prac. Law Ann. §901(b), however, is not such a
state law. It is a procedural rule that is not part of New York’s sub
stantive law. Pp. 17–22.
SCALIA, J., announced the judgment of the Court and delivered the
opinion of the Court with respect to Parts I and II–A, in which ROBERTS, C. J., and STEVENS, THOMAS, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined, an opin
ion with respect to Parts II–B and II–D, in which ROBERTS, C. J., and
THOMAS, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined, and an opinion with respect to
Part II–C, in which ROBERTS, C. J., and, THOMAS, J., joined. STEVENS,
J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
GINSBURG, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which KENNEDY, BREYER,
and ALITO, JJ., joined.

