Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

renewed the same fray against the same defendant in a
Maryland state court. (Plaintiff chose Maryland because
that State’s limitations period had not yet run.) We held
that Federal Rule 41(b), which provided that an involun
tary dismissal “operate[d] as an adjudication on the mer
its,” did not bar maintenance of the renewed action in
Maryland. To hold that Rule 41(b) precluded the Mary
land courts from entertaining the case, we said, “would
arguably violate the jurisdictional limitation of the Rules
Enabling Act,” 531 U. S., at 503, and “would in many cases
violate [Erie’s] federalism principle,” id., at 504.
In sum, both before and after Hanna, the above
described decisions show, federal courts have been cau
tioned by this Court to “interpre[t] the Federal Rules . . .
with sensitivity to important state interests,” Gasperini,
518 U. S., at 427, n. 7, and a will “to avoid conflict with
important state regulatory policies,” id., at 438, n. 22
(internal quotation marks omitted).2 The Court veers
——————
2JUSTICE

STEVENS stakes out common ground on this point: “[F]ederal
rules,” he observes, “must be interpreted with some degree of ‘sensitiv
ity to important state interests and regulatory policies,’ . . . and applied
to diversity cases against the background of Congress’ command that
such rules not alter substantive rights and with consideration of ‘the
degree to which the Rule makes the character and result of the federal
litigation stray from the course it would follow in state courts,’ Hanna
[v. Plumer], 380 U. S. [460, 473 (1965)].” Ante, at 3. (opinion concurring
in part and concurring in judgment). See also ante, at 4 (“A ‘state
procedural rule, though undeniably procedural in the ordinary sense of
the term’ may exist ‘to influence substantive outcomes,’ . . . and may in
some instances become so bound up with the state-created right or
remedy that it defines the scope of that substantive right or remedy.”
(some internal quotation marks omitted)); ante, at 5 (“When a State
chooses to use a traditionally procedural vehicle as a means of defining
the scope of substantive rights or remedies, federal courts must recog
nize and respect that choice.”). Nevertheless, JUSTICE STEVENS sees no
reason to read Rule 23 with restraint in this particular case; the Fed
eral Rule preempts New York’s damages limitation, in his view, be
cause §901(b) is “a procedural rule that is not part of New York’s
substantive law.” Ante, at 1. This characterization of §901(b) does not

