Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of SCALIA, J.

The concurrence also contends that applying Sibbach
and assessing whether a Federal Rule regulates substance
or procedure is not always easy. See post, at 11, n. 10.
Undoubtedly some hard cases will arise (though we have
managed to muddle through well enough in the 69 years
since Sibbach was decided). But as the concurrence ac­
knowledges, post, at 11, the basic difficulty is unavoidable:
The statute itself refers to “substantive right[s],” §2072(b),
so there is no escaping the substance-procedure distinc­
tion. What is more, the concurrence’s approach does
nothing to diminish the difficulty, but rather magnifies it
many times over. Instead of a single hard question of
whether a Federal Rule regulates substance or procedure,
that approach will present hundreds of hard questions,
forcing federal courts to assess the substantive or proce­
dural character of countless state rules that may conflict
with a single Federal Rule.14 And it still does not sidestep
the problem it seeks to avoid. At the end of the day, one
must come face to face with the decision whether or not
the state policy (with which a putatively procedural state
rule may be “bound up”) pertains to a “substantive right or
remedy,” post, at 19—that is, whether it is substance or
procedure.15 The more one explores the alternatives to
——————
The concurrence’s concern would make more sense if many Federal
Rules that effectively alter state-law rights “bound up with procedures”
would survive under Sibbach. But as the concurrence concedes, post, at
11, n. 10, very few would do so. The possible existence of a few outlier
instances does not prove Sibbach’s interpretation is absurd. Congress
may well have accepted such anomalies as the price of a uniform
system of federal procedure.
14 The concurrence argues that its approach is no more “taxing” than
ours because few if any Federal Rules that are “facially valid” under the
Enabling Act will fail the concurrence’s test. Post, at 11, and n. 10. But
that conclusion will be reached only after federal courts have consid­
ered hundreds of state rules applying the concurrence’s inscrutable
standard.
15 The concurrence insists that the task will be easier if courts can

