6

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

up the question whether Ragan should be overruled; we
held, once again, that Federal Rule 3 does not directly
conflict with state rules governing the time when an ac
tion commences for purposes of tolling a limitations pe
riod. 446 U. S., at 749–752. Rule 3, we said, addresses
only “the date from which various timing requirements of
the Federal Rules begin to run,” id., at 751, and does not
“purpor[t] to displace state tolling rules,” id., at 750–751.
Significant state policy interests would be frustrated, we
observed, were we to read Rule 3 as superseding the state
rule, which required actual service on the defendant to
stop the clock on the statute of limitations. Id., at 750–
752.
We were similarly attentive to a State’s regulatory
policy in Gasperini. That diversity case concerned the
standard for determining when the large size of a jury
verdict warrants a new trial. Federal and state courts
alike had generally employed a “shock the conscience” test
in reviewing jury awards for excessiveness. See 518 U. S.,
at 422. Federal courts did so pursuant to Federal Rule
59(a) which, as worded at the time of Gasperini, instructed
that a trial court could grant a new trial “for any of the
reasons for which new trials have heretofore been granted
in actions at law in the courts of the United States.” Fed.
Rule Civ. Proc. 59(a) (West 1995). In an effort to provide
greater control, New York prescribed procedures under
which jury verdicts would be examined to determine
whether they “deviate[d] materially from what would be
reasonable compensation.” See Gasperini, 518 U. S., at
423–425 (quoting CPLR §5501(c)). This Court held that
Rule 59(a) did not inhibit federal-court accommodation of
New York’s invigorated test.
Most recently, in Semtek, we addressed the claim
preclusive effect of a federal-court judgment dismissing a
diversity action on the basis of a California statute of
limitations. The case came to us after the same plaintiff

