24

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

the allowable damages.” Gasperini, 518 U. S., at 437.14
III
The Court’s erosion of Erie’s federalism grounding im
pels me to point out the large irony in today’s judgment.
Shady Grove is able to pursue its claim in federal court
only by virtue of the recent enactment of the Class Action
Fairness Act of 2005 (CAFA), 28 U. S. C. §1332(d). In
CAFA, Congress opened federal-court doors to state-law
based class actions so long as there is minimal diversity,
at least 100 class members, and at least $5,000,000 in
controversy. Ibid. By providing a federal forum, Congress
sought to check what it considered to be the overreadiness
of some state courts to certify class actions. See, e.g.,
S. Rep. No. 109–14, p. 4 (2005) (CAFA prevents lawyers
from “gam[ing] the procedural rules [to] keep nationwide
or multi-state class actions in state courts whose judges
have reputations for readily certifying classes.” (internal
quotation marks omitted)); id., at 22 (disapproving “the ‘I
never met a class action I didn’t like’ approach to class
certification” that “is prevalent in state courts in some
localities”). In other words, Congress envisioned fewer—
not more—class actions overall. Congress surely never
anticipated that CAFA would make federal courts a mecca
for suits of the kind Shady Grove has launched: class
actions seeking state-created penalties for claims arising
under state law—claims that would be barred from class
treatment in the State’s own courts. Cf. Woods, 337 U. S.,
at 537 (“[T]he policy of Erie . . . preclude[s] maintenance in
——————
14 There

is no question that federal courts can “give effect to the sub
stantive thrust of [§901(b)] without untoward alteration of the federal
scheme for the trial and decision of civil cases.” Gasperini, 518 U. S., at
426. There is no risk that individual plaintiffs seeking statutory
penalties will flood federal courts with state-law claims that could be
managed more efficiently on a class basis; the diversity statute’s
amount-in-controversy requirement ensures that small state-law
disputes remain in state court.

