22

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

380 U. S., at 467–468 (internal quotation marks omitted)).
The “variation” here is indeed “substantial.” Shady Grove
seeks class relief that is ten thousand times greater than
the individual remedy available to it in state court. As the
plurality acknowledges, ante, at 22, forum shopping will
undoubtedly result if a plaintiff need only file in federal
instead of state court to seek a massive monetary award
explicitly barred by state law. See Gasperini, 518 U. S., at
431 (“Erie precludes a recovery in federal court signifi
cantly larger than the recovery that would have been
tolerated in state court.”).13 The “accident of diversity of
citizenship,” Klaxon Co. v. Stentor Elec. Mfg. Co., 313 U. S.
487, 496 (1941), should not subject a defendant to such
augmented liability. See Hanna, 380 U. S., at 467 (“The
Erie rule is rooted in part in a realization that it would be
unfair for the character or result of a litigation materially
to differ because the suit had been brought in a federal
court.”).
It is beyond debate that “a statutory cap on damages
would supply substantive law for Erie purposes.”
Gasperini, 518 U. S., at 428. See also id., at 439–440
(STEVENS, J., dissenting) (“A state-law ceiling on allowable
damages . . . is a substantive rule of decision that federal
courts must apply in diversity cases governed by New
York law.”); id., at 464 (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (“State
substantive law controls what injuries are compensable
and in what amount.”). In Gasperini, we determined that
New York’s standard for measuring the alleged excessive
——————
13 In

contrast, many “state rules ostensibly addressed to procedure,”
ante, at 10 (majority opinion)—including pleading standards and rules
governing summary judgment, pretrial discovery, and the admissibility
of certain evidence—would not so hugely impact forum choices. It is
difficult to imagine a scenario that would promote more forum shopping
than one in which the difference between filing in state and federal
court is the difference between a potential award of $500 and one of
$5,000,000.

