8

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

away from that approach—and conspicuously, its most
recent reiteration in Gasperini, ante, at 11, n. 7—in favor
of a mechanical reading of Federal Rules, insensitive to
state interests and productive of discord.
C
Our decisions instruct over and over again that, in the
adjudication of diversity cases, state interests—whether
advanced in a statute, e.g., Cohen, or a procedural rule,
e.g., Gasperini—warrant our respectful consideration. Yet
today, the Court gives no quarter to New York’s limitation
on statutory damages and requires the lower courts to
thwart the regulatory policy at stake: To prevent excessive
damages, New York’s law controls the penalty to which a
defendant may be exposed in a single suit. The story
behind §901(b)’s enactment deserves telling.
In 1975, the Judicial Conference of the State of New
York proposed a new class-action statute designed “to set
up a flexible, functional scheme” that would provide “an
effective, but controlled group remedy.” Judicial Confer
ence Report on CPLR, reprinted in 1975 N. Y. Laws
pp. 1477, 1493 (McKinney). As originally drafted, the
legislation addressed only the procedural aspects of class
actions; it specified, for example, five prerequisites for
certification, eventually codified at §901(a), that closely
tracked those listed in Rule 23. See CPLR §901(a) (requir
ing, for class certification, numerosity, predominance,
typicality, adequacy of representation, and superiority).
While the Judicial Conference proposal was in the New
York Legislature’s hopper, “various groups advocated for
the addition of a provision that would prohibit class action
plaintiffs from being awarded a statutorily-created penalty
——————
mirror reality, as I later explain. See infra, at 17–24. But a majority of
this Court, it bears emphasis, agrees that Federal Rules should be read
with moderation in diversity suits to accommodate important state
concerns.

