14

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

III
JUSTICE GINSBURG views the basic issue in this case as
whether and how to apply a federal rule that dictates an
answer to a traditionally procedural question (whether to
join plaintiffs together as a class), when a state law that
“defines the dimensions” of a state-created claim dictates
the opposite answer. Post, at 12. As explained above, I
readily acknowledge that if a federal rule displaces a state
rule that is “ ‘procedural’ in the ordinary sense of the
term,” S. A. Healy Co., 60 F. 3d, at 310, but sufficiently
interwoven with the scope of a substantive right or rem
edy, there would be an Enabling Act problem, and the
federal rule would have to give way. In my view, however,
——————
little significance. Hanna did not hold that any seemingly procedural
federal rule will always govern, even when it alters a substantive state
right; nor, as in Sibbach, was the argument that I now make before the
Court. Indeed, in Hanna we cited Sibbach’s statement that the Ena
bling Act prohibits federal rules that alter the rights to be adjudicated
by the litigants, 312 U. S., at 13–14, for the proposition that “a court, in
measuring a Federal Rule against the standards contained in the
Enabling Act . . . need not wholly blind itself to the degree to which the
Rule makes the character and result of the federal litigation stray from
the course it would follow in state courts,” 380 U. S., at 473. And most
of our subsequent decisions that have squarely addressed the frame
work for applying federal rules in diversity cases have not mentioned
Sibbach at all but cited only Hanna. See, e.g., Burlington Northern R.
Co. v. Woods, 480 U. S. 1, 5 (1987).
JUSTICE SCALIA notes that in Mississippi Publishing Corp. v.
Murphree, 326 U. S. 438 (1946), we used language that supported his
view. See ante, at 13. But in that case, we contemplated only that the
Federal Rule in question might have “incidental effects . . . upon the
rights of litigants,” explaining that “[t]he fact that the application of
Rule 4(f) will operate to subject petitioner’s rights to adjudication by
the district court for northern Mississippi” rather than southern Mis
sissippi “will undoubtedly affect those rights.” 326 U. S., at 445–446.
There was no suggestion that by affecting the method of enforcing the
rights in that case, the federal rules could plausibly abridge, enlarge, or
modify the rights themselves.

