12

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

context in the service of simplicity.
Second, the plurality argues that its interpretation of
the Enabling Act is dictated by this Court’s decision in
Sibbach, which applied a Federal Rule about when parties
must submit to medical examinations. But the plurality
misreads that opinion. As Justice Harlan observed in
Hanna, “shorthand formulations which have appeared in
earlier opinions are prone to carry untoward results that
frequently arise from oversimplification.” 380 U. S., at
475 (concurring opinion). To understand Sibbach, it is
first necessary to understand the issue that was before the
Court. The petitioner raised only the facial question
whether “Rules 35 and 37 [of the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure] are . . . within the mandate of Congress to this
court” and not the specific question of “the obligation of
federal courts to apply the substantive law of a state.”11
312 U. S., at 9. The Court, therefore, had no occasion to
consider whether the particular application of the Federal
Rules in question would offend the Enabling Act.12
——————
11 The petitioner in Sibbach argued only that federal rules could not
validly address subjects involving “important questions of policy,” Supp.
Brief of Petitioner, O. T. 1940, No. 28, p. 7; see also Reply to Brief of
Respondent, O. T. 1940, No. 28, p. 2 (summarizing that the petitioner
argued only that “[t]he right not to be compelled to submit to a physical
examination” is “a ‘substantive’ right forbidden by Congress” to be
addressed by the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, “even though in
theory the right is not of the character determinative of litigation”). In
the petitioner’s own words, “[t]his contention. . . [did] not in itself
involve the [applicable] law of Illinois,” ibid., and the petitioner in her
briefing referenced the otherwise applicable state law only “to show
that [she] was in a position to make the contention,” ibid., that is, to
show that the federal court was applying a federal rule and not, under
the Rules of Decision Act, applying state law, see id., at 3.
12 The plurality defends its view by including a long quote from two
paragraphs of Sibbach. Ante, at 15–16. But the quoted passage of
Sibbach describes only a facial inquiry into whether federal rules may
“deal with” particular subject matter. 312 U. S., at 13. The plurality’s
block quote, moreover, omits half of one of the quoted paragraphs, in

