Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

23

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

ness of a jury verdict was designed to provide a control
analogous to a damages cap. Id., at 429. The statute was
framed as “a procedural instruction,” we noted, “but the
State’s objective [wa]s manifestly substantive.” Ibid.
Gasperini’s observations apply with full force in this
case. By barring the recovery of statutory damages in a
class action, §901(b) controls a defendant’s maximum
liability in a suit seeking such a remedy. The remedial
provision could have been written as an explicit cap: “In
any class action seeking statutory damages, relief is lim
ited to the amount the named plaintiff would have recov
ered in an individual suit.” That New York’s Legislature
used other words to express the very same meaning
should be inconsequential.
We have long recognized the impropriety of displacing,
in a diversity action, state-law limitations on state-created
remedies. See Woods, 337 U. S., at 538 (in a diversity
case, a plaintiff “barred from recovery in the state court
. . . should likewise be barred in the federal court”); York,
326 U. S., at 108–109 (federal court sitting in diversity
“cannot afford recovery if the right to recover is made
unavailable by the State nor can it substantively affect the
enforcement of the right as given by the State”). Just as
Erie precludes a federal court from entering a deficiency
judgment when a State has “authoritatively announced
that [such] judgments cannot be secured within its bor
ders,” Angel v. Bullington, 330 U. S. 183, 191 (1947), so too
Erie should prevent a federal court from awarding statu
tory penalties aggregated through a class action when
New York prohibits this recovery. See also Ragan, 337
U. S., at 533 (“Where local law qualifies or abridges [a
claim], the federal court must follow suit. Otherwise there
is a different measure of the cause of action in one court
than in the other, and the principle of Erie . . . is trans
gressed.”). In sum, because “New York substantive law
governs [this] claim for relief, New York law . . . guide[s]

