8

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
Opinion of SCALIA, J.
the Court

that a complaint omitting them could be brought as a class
action would not at all prove that §901(b) is addressed
only to remedies. If the state law instead banned class
actions for fraud claims, a would-be class-action plaintiff
could drop the fraud counts from his complaint and pro­
ceed with the remainder in a class action. Yet that would
not mean the law provides no remedy for fraud; the ban
would affect only the procedural means by which the
remedy may be pursued. In short, although the dissent
correctly abandons Allstate’s eligibility-certifiability dis­
tinction, the alternative it offers fares no better.
The dissent all but admits that the literal terms of
§901(b) address the same subject as Rule 23—i.e., whether
a class action may be maintained—but insists the provi­
sion’s purpose is to restrict only remedies. See post, at 12–
15; post, at 15 (“[W]hile phrased as responsive to the
question whether certain class actions may begin, §901(b)
is unmistakably aimed at controlling how those actions
must end”). Unlike Rule 23, designed to further proce­
dural fairness and efficiency, §901(b) (we are told) “re­
sponds to an entirely different concern”: the fear that
allowing statutory damages to be awarded on a class-wide
basis would “produce overkill.” Post, at 12, 9 (internal
quotation marks omitted). The dissent reaches this con­
clusion on the basis of (1) constituent concern recorded in
the law’s bill jacket; (2) a commentary suggesting that the
Legislature “apparently fear[ed]” that combining class
actions and statutory penalties “could result in annihilat­
ing punishment of the defendant,” V. Alexander, Practice
Commentaries, C901:11, reprinted in 7B McKinney’s
Consolidated Laws of New York Ann., p. 104 (2006) (in­
ternal quotation marks omitted); (3) a remark by the
Governor in his signing statement that §901(b) “ ‘ provides
——————
N. Y. S. 2d 4 (2002) (treble damages under N. Y. Gen. Bus. Law §340(5)
are nonwaivable, wherefore class actions under that law are barred).

