20

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

unnecessary to motivate litigation.17 JUSTICE GINSBURG
asserts that this could not be true because “suits seeking
statutory damages are arguably best suited to the class
device because individual proof of actual damages is un
necessary.” Post, at 9–10. But some people believe that
class actions are inefficient or at least unfair, insofar as
they join together slightly disparate claims or force courts
to adjudicate unwieldy lawsuits. It is not for us to dismiss
the possibility that New York legislators shared in those
beliefs and thus wanted to exclude the class vehicle when
it appeared to be unnecessary.
The legislative history of §901 thus reveals a classically
procedural calibration of making it easier to litigate claims
in New York courts (under any source of law) only when it
is necessary to do so, and not making it too easy when the
class tool is not required. This is the same sort of calcula
tion that might go into setting filing fees or deadlines for
briefs. There is of course a difference of degree between
those examples and class certification, but not a difference
of kind; the class vehicle may have a greater practical
effect on who brings lawsuits than do low filing fees, but
that does not transform it into a damages “proscription,”
post, at 12, n. 6, 21, or “limitation,” post, at 7, n. 2, 8, 9, 12,
25.18
——————
17 To be sure, one could imagine the converse story, that a legislature
would create statutory penalties but dictate that such penalties apply
only when necessary to overcome the costs and inconvenience of filing a
lawsuit, and thus are not necessary in a class action. But it is hard to
see how that narrative applies to New York, given that New York’s
penalty provisions, on their face, apply to all plaintiffs, be they class or
individual, and that §901(b) addresses penalties that are created under
any source of state or federal law.
18 JUSTICE GINSBURG asserts that class certification in this matter
would “transform a $500 case into a $5,000,000 award.” Post, at 1. But
in fact, class certification would transform 10,000 $500 cases into one
$5,000,000 case. It may be that without class certification, not all of
the potential plaintiffs would bring their cases. But that is true of any

