10

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
Opinion of SCALIA, J.
the Court

tential conflict with a Federal Rule arises; the state­
friendly approach would be to accept the law as written
and test the validity of the Federal Rule.
The dissent’s approach of determining whether state
and federal rules conflict based on the subjective inten­
tions of the state legislature is an enterprise destined to
produce “confusion worse confounded,” Sibbach v. Wilson
& Co., 312 U. S. 1, 14 (1941). It would mean, to begin
with, that one State’s statute could survive pre-emption
(and accordingly affect the procedures in federal court)
while another State’s identical law would not, merely
because its authors had different aspirations. It would
also mean that district courts would have to discern, in
every diversity case, the purpose behind any putatively
pre-empted state procedural rule, even if its text squarely
conflicts with federal law. That task will often prove
arduous. Many laws further more than one aim, and the
aim of others may be impossible to discern. Moreover, to
the extent the dissent’s purpose-driven approach depends
on its characterization of §901(b)’s aims as substantive, it
would apply to many state rules ostensibly addressed to
procedure. Pleading standards, for example, often embody
policy preferences about the types of claims that should
succeed—as do rules governing summary judgment, pre­
trial discovery, and the admissibility of certain evidence.
Hard cases will abound. It is not even clear that a state
supreme court’s pronouncement of the law’s purpose
would settle the issue, since existence of the factual predi­
cate for avoiding federal pre-emption is ultimately a fed­
eral question. Predictably, federal judges would be con­
demned to poring through state legislative history—which
may be less easily obtained, less thorough, and less famil­
iar than its federal counterpart, see R. Mersky & D. Dunn,
Fundamentals of Legal Research 233 (8th ed. 2002); Tor­
res & Windsor, State Legislative Histories: A Select, An­
notated Bibliography, 85 L. Lib. J. 545, 547 (1993).

