Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

13

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

Nor, in Sibbach, was any further analysis necessary to
the resolution of the case because the matter at issue,
requiring medical exams for litigants, did not pertain to
“substantive rights” under the Enabling Act. Although
most state rules bearing on the litigation process are
adopted for some policy reason, few seemingly “proce
dural” rules define the scope of a substantive right or
remedy. The matter at issue in Sibbach reflected compet
ing federal and state judgments about privacy interests.
Those privacy concerns may have been weighty and in
some sense substantive; but they did not pertain to the
scope of any state right or remedy at issue in the litiga
tion. Thus, in response to the petitioner’s argument in
Sibbach that “substantive rights” include not only “rights
sought to be adjudicated by the litigants” but also “general
principle[s]” or “question[s] of public policy that the legis
lature is able to pass upon,” id., at 2–3, we held that “the
phrase ‘substantive rights’ ” embraces only state rights,
such as the tort law in that case, that are sought to be
enforced in the judicial proceedings. Id., at 13–14. If the
Federal Rule had in fact displaced a state rule that was
sufficiently intertwined with a state right or remedy, then
perhaps the Enabling Act analysis would have been differ
ent.13 Our subsequent cases are not to the contrary.14
——————
which the Court explained that the term “substantive rights” in the
Enabling Act “certainly embraces such rights” as “rights conferred by
law to be protected and enforced,” such as “the right not to be injured in
one’s person by another’s negligence” and “to redress [such] infraction.”
Ibid. But whether a federal rule, for example, enlarges the right “to
redress [an] infraction,” will depend on the state law that it displaces.
13 Put another way, even if a federal rule in most cases “really regu
lates procedure,” Sibbach, 312 U. S., at 14, it does not “really regulat[e]
procedure” when it displaces those rare state rules that, although
“procedural” in the ordinary sense of the term, operate to define the
rights and remedies available in a case. This is so because what is
procedural in one context may be substantive in another. See Hanna,
380 U. S., at 471; Guaranty Trust Co. v. York, 326 U. S. 99, 108 (1945).
14 Although this Court’s decision in Hanna cited Sibbach, that is of

