12

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

In other words, Rule 23 describes a method of enforcing
a claim for relief, while §901(b) defines the dimensions of
the claim itself. In this regard, it is immaterial that
§901(b) bars statutory penalties in wholesale, rather than
retail, fashion. The New York Legislature could have
embedded the limitation in every provision creating a
cause of action for which a penalty is authorized; §901(b)
operates as shorthand to the same effect. It is as much a
part of the delineation of the claim for relief as it would be
were it included claim by claim in the New York Code.
The Court single-mindedly focuses on whether a suit
“may” or “may not” be maintained as a class action. See
ante, at 4–6. Putting the question that way, the Court
does not home in on the reason why. Rule 23 authorizes
class treatment for suits satisfying its prerequisites be
cause the class mechanism generally affords a fair and
efficient way to aggregate claims for adjudication. Section
901(b) responds to an entirely different concern; it does
not allow class members to recover statutory damages
because the New York Legislature considered the result of
adjudicating such claims en masse to be exorbitant.6 The
fair and efficient conduct of class litigation is the legiti
mate concern of Rule 23; the remedy for an infraction of
state law, however, is the legitimate concern of the State’s
lawmakers and not of the federal rulemakers. Cf. Ely, The
Irrepressible Myth of Erie, 87 Harv. L. Rev. 693, 722
(1974) (It is relevant “whether the state provision embod
ies a substantive policy or represents only a procedural
disagreement with the federal rulemakers respecting the
——————
6 The Court disputes the strength of the evidence of legislative intent,
see ante, at 9, but offers no alternative account of §901(b)’s purpose.
Perhaps this silence indicates how very hard it would be to ascribe to
§901(b) any purpose bound up with the fairness and efficiency of
processing cases. On its face, the proscription is concerned with reme
dies, i.e., the availability of statutory damages in a lawsuit. Legislative
history confirms this objective, but is not essential to revealing it.

