16

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

agree with JUSTICE GINSBURG that courts should “avoi[d]
immoderate interpretations of the Federal Rules that
would trench on state prerogatives,” post, at 3–4, and
should in some instances “interpre[t] the federal rules to
avoid conflict with important state regulatory policies,”
post, at 5 (internal quotation marks omitted). But that is
not what the dissent has done. Simply because a rule
should be read in light of federalism concerns, it does not
follow that courts may rewrite the rule.
At bottom, the dissent’s interpretation of Rule 23 seems
to be that Rule 23 covers only those cases in which its
application would create no Erie problem. The dissent
would apply the Rules of Decision Act inquiry under Erie
even to cases in which there is a governing federal rule,
and thus the Act, by its own terms, does not apply. But
“[w]hen a situation is covered by one of the Federal Rules,
the question facing the court is a far cry from the typical,
relatively unguided Erie choice.” Hanna, 380 U. S., at
471. The question is only whether the Enabling Act is
satisfied. Although it reflects a laudable concern to pro
tect “state regulatory policies,” post, at 5 (internal quota
tion marks omitted), JUSTICE GINSBURG’s approach would,
in my view, work an end run around Congress’ system of
uniform federal rules, see 28 U. S. C. §2072, and our deci
sion in Hanna. Federal courts can and should interpret
federal rules with sensitivity to “state prerogatives,” post,
at 4; but even when “state interests . . . warrant our re
spectful consideration,” post, at 8, federal courts cannot
rewrite the rules. If my dissenting colleagues feel strongly
that §901(b) is substantive and that class certification
should be denied, then they should argue within the Ena
bling Act’s framework. Otherwise, “the Federal Rule
applies regardless of contrary state law.” Gasperini, 518
U. S., at 427, n. 7; accord, Hanna, 380 U. S., at 471.

