22

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

Sibbach’s rule, the more its wisdom becomes apparent.
D
We must acknowledge the reality that keeping the fed­
eral-court door open to class actions that cannot proceed in
state court will produce forum shopping. That is unaccept­
able when it comes as the consequence of judge-made rules
created to fill supposed “gaps” in positive federal law. See
Hanna, 380 U. S., at 471–472. For where neither the Con­
stitution, a treaty, nor a statute provides the rule of deci­
sion or authorizes a federal court to supply one, “state law
must govern because there can be no other law.” Ibid.; see
Clark, Erie’s Constitutional Source, 95 Cal. L. Rev. 1289,
1302, 1311 (2007). But divergence from state law, with the
attendant consequence of forum shopping, is the inevitable
(indeed, one might say the intended) result of a uniform
system of federal procedure. Congress itself has created the
possibility that the same case may follow a different course
if filed in federal instead of state court. Cf. Hanna, 380
U. S., at 472–473. The short of the matter is that a Federal
Rule governing procedure is valid whether or not it alters
the outcome of the case in a way that induces forum shop­
ping. To hold otherwise would be to “disembowel either the
Constitution’s grant of power over federal procedure” or
Congress’s exercise of it. Id., at 473–474.
*
*
*
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed, and
the case is remanded for further proceedings.
It is so ordered.
——————
“conside[r] the nature and functions of the state law,” post, at 11, n. 10,
regardless of the law’s “form,” post, at 4 (emphasis deleted), i.e., what
the law actually says. We think that amorphous inquiry into the
“nature and functions” of a state law will tend to increase, rather than
decrease, the difficulty of classifying Federal Rules as substantive or
procedural. Walking through the concurrence’s application of its test to
§901(b), post, at 17–22, gives little reason to hope that its approach will
lighten the burden for lower courts.

