2

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
Syllabus
(b) Rule 23(b) answers the question in dispute—whether Shady
Grove’s suit may proceed as a class action—when it states that “[a]
class action may be maintained” if certain conditions are met. Since
§901(b) attempts to answer the same question, stating that Shady
Grove’s suit “may not be maintained as a class action” because of the
relief it seeks, that provision cannot apply in diversity suits unless
Rule 23 is ultra vires. The Second Circuit’s view that §901(b) and
Rule 23 address different issues is rejected. The line between eligibil
ity and certifiability is entirely artificial and, in any event, Rule 23
explicitly empowers a federal court to certify a class in every case
meeting its criteria. Allstate’s arguments based on the exclusion of
some federal claims from Rule 23’s reach pursuant to federal statutes
and on §901’s structure are unpersuasive. Pp. 4–6.
(c) The dissent’s claim that §901(b) can coexist with Rule 23 be
cause it addresses only the remedy available to class plaintiffs is
foreclosed by §901(b)’s text, notwithstanding its perceived purpose.
The principle that courts should read ambiguous Federal Rules to
avoid overstepping the authorizing statute, 28 U. S. C. §2072(b), does
not apply because Rule 23 is clear. The dissent’s approach does not
avoid a conflict between §901(b) and Rule 23 but instead would ren
der Rule 23 partially invalid. Pp. 6–12.
JUSTICE SCALIA, joined by THE CHIEF JUSTICE, JUSTICE THOMAS, and
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, concluded in Parts II–B and II–D:
(a) The Rules Enabling Act, 28 U. S. C. §2072, not Erie, controls
the validity of a Federal Rule of Procedure. Section 2072(b)’s re
quirement that federal procedural rules “not abridge, enlarge or mod
ify any substantive right” means that a Rule must “really regulat[e]
procedure,—the judicial process for enforcing rights and duties rec
ognized by substantive law and for justly administering remedy and
redress for disregard or infraction of them,” Sibbach v. Wilson & Co.,
312 U. S. 1, 14. Though a Rule may incidentally affect a party’s
rights, it is valid so long as it regulates only the process for enforcing
those rights, and not the rights themselves, the available remedies,
or the rules of decision for adjudicating either. Rule 23 satisfies that
criterion, at least insofar as it allows willing plaintiffs to join their
separate claims against the same defendants. Allstate’s arguments
asserting §901(b)’s substantive impact are unavailing: It is not the
substantive or procedural nature of the affected state law that mat
ters, but that of the Federal Rule. See, e.g., id., at 14. Pp. 12–16.
(b) Opening federal courts to class actions that cannot proceed in
state court will produce forum shopping, but that is the inevitable re
sult of the uniform system of federal procedure that Congress cre
ated. P. 22.
JUSTICE SCALIA, joined by THE CHIEF JUSTICE and JUSTICE THOMAS,

