10

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

of actual damages is unnecessary. New York’s decision
instead to block class-action proceedings for statutory
damages therefore makes scant sense, except as a means
to a manifestly substantive end: Limiting a defendant’s
liability in a single lawsuit in order to prevent the exorbi
tant inflation of penalties—remedies the New York Legis
lature created with individual suits in mind.3
D
Shady Grove contends—and the Court today agrees—
that Rule 23 unavoidably preempts New York’s prohibi
tion on the recovery of statutory damages in class actions.
The Federal Rule, the Court emphasizes, states that
Shady Grove’s suit “may be” maintained as a class action,
which conflicts with §901(b)’s instruction that it “may not”
so proceed. Ante, at 4 (internal quotation marks omitted
and emphasis deleted). Accordingly, the Court insists,
§901(b) “cannot apply in diversity suits unless Rule 23 is
ultra vires.” Ibid. Concluding that Rule 23 does not vio
late the Rules Enabling Act, the Court holds that the
federal provision controls Shady Grove’s ability to seek, on
behalf of a class, a statutory penalty of over $5,000,000.
Ante, at 12–16 (plurality opinion); ante, at 17–22 (STEVENS,
J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment).
The Court, I am convinced, finds conflict where none is
——————
3 Even in the mine-run case, a class action can result in “potentially
ruinous liability.” Advisory Committee’s Notes on Fed. Rule Civ.
Proc. 23, 28 U. S. C. App., p. 143. A court’s decision to certify a class
accordingly places pressure on the defendant to settle even unmeritori
ous claims. See, e.g., Coopers & Lybrand v. Livesay, 437 U. S. 463, 476
(1978). When representative plaintiffs seek statutory damages, pres
sure to settle may be heightened because a class action poses the risk of
massive liability unmoored to actual injury. See, e.g., Ratner v. Chemi
cal Bank New York Trust Co., 54 F. R. D. 412, 416 (SDNY 1972) (exer
cising “considerable discretion of a pragmatic nature” to refuse to
certify a class because the plaintiffs suffered negligible actual damages
but sought statutory damages of $13,000,000).

