14

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

ple parties) to be litigated together are also valid. See,
e.g., Fed. Rules Civ. Proc. 18 (joinder of claims), 20 (joinder
of parties), 42(a) (consolidation of actions). Such rules
neither change plaintiffs’ separate entitlements to relief
nor abridge defendants’ rights; they alter only how the
claims are processed. For the same reason, Rule 23—at
least insofar as it allows willing plaintiffs to join their
separate claims against the same defendants in a class
action—falls within §2072(b)’s authorization. A class
action, no less than traditional joinder (of which it is a
species), merely enables a federal court to adjudicate
claims of multiple parties at once, instead of in separate
suits. And like traditional joinder, it leaves the parties’
legal rights and duties intact and the rules of decision
unchanged.
Allstate contends that the authorization of class actions
is not substantively neutral: Allowing Shady Grove to sue
on behalf of a class “transform[s] [the] dispute over a five
hundred dollar penalty into a dispute over a five million
dollar penalty.” Brief for Respondent 1. Allstate’s aggre­
gate liability, however, does not depend on whether the
suit proceeds as a class action. Each of the 1,000-plus
members of the putative class could (as Allstate acknowl­
edges) bring a freestanding suit asserting his individual
claim. It is undoubtedly true that some plaintiffs who
would not bring individual suits for the relatively small
sums involved will choose to join a class action. That has
no bearing, however, on Allstate’s or the plaintiffs’ legal
rights. The likelihood that some (even many) plaintiffs
will be induced to sue by the availability of a class action
is just the sort of “incidental effec[t]” we have long held
does not violate §2072(b), Mississippi Publishing, supra,
at 445.
Allstate argues that Rule 23 violates §2072(b) because
the state law it displaces, §901(b), creates a right that
the Federal Rule abridges—namely, a “substantive

