18

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
Opinion of SCALIA, J.

the concurrence’s approach would have yielded the same
result in Sibbach proves nothing; what matters is the rule
we did apply, and that rule leaves no room for special
exemptions based on the function or purpose of a particu­
lar state rule.10 We have rejected an attempt to read into
Sibbach an exception with no basis in the opinion, see
Schlagenhauf, 379 U. S., at 113–114, and we see no reason
to find such an implied limitation today.
In reality, the concurrence seeks not to apply Sibbach,
but to overrule it (or, what is the same, to rewrite it). Its
approach, the concurrence insists, gives short shrift to the
statutory text forbidding the Federal Rules from
“abridg[ing], enlarg[ing], or modify[ing] any substantive
right,” §2072(b). See post, at 9–10. There is something to
that. It is possible to understand how it can be deter­
mined whether a Federal Rule “enlarges” substantive
——————
could not be a clearer rejection of the theory that the concurrence now
advocates.
The concurrence responds that the “the specific question of ‘the
obligation of federal courts to apply the substantive law of a state’ ” was
not before the Court, post, at 12 (quoting Sibbach, supra, at 9). It is
clear from the context, however, that this passage referred to the Erie
prohibition of court-created rules that displace state law. The opinion
unquestionably dealt with the Federal Rules’ compliance with §2072(b),
and it adopted the standard we apply here to resolve the question,
which does not depend on whether individual applications of the Rule
abridge or modify state-law rights. See 312 U. S., at 13–14. To the
extent Sibbach did not address the Federal Rules’ validity vis-à-vis
contrary state law, Hanna surely did, see 380 U. S., at 472, and it made
clear that Sibbach’s test still controls, see 380 U. S., at 464–465,
470–471.
10 The concurrence insists that we have misread Sibbach, since surely
a Federal Rule that “in most cases” regulates procedure does not do so
when it displaces one of those “rare” state substantive laws that are
disguised as rules of procedure. Post, at 13, n. 13. This mistakes what
the Federal Rule regulates for its incidental effects. As we have ex­
plained, supra, at 12–13, most Rules have some effect on litigants’
substantive rights or their ability to obtain a remedy, but that does not
mean the Rule itself regulates those rights or remedies.

