10

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

doing ignores the balance that Congress struck between
uniform rules of federal procedure and respect for a State’s
construction of its own rights and remedies. It also ig
nores the separation-of-powers presumption, see Wright
§4509, at 265, and federalism presumption, see Wyeth, 555
U. S., at ___ (slip op., at 8), that counsel against judicially
created rules displacing state substantive law.9
——————
one might describe as “procedural,” but they nonetheless define sub
stantive rights. Thus, if a federal rule displaced such a state rule, the
federal rule would have altered the State’s “substantive rights.”
9 The plurality’s interpretation of the Enabling Act appears to mean
that no matter how bound up a state provision is with the State’s own
rights or remedies, any contrary federal rule that happens to regulate
“the manner and the means by which the litigants’ rights are enforced,”
ante, at 13 (internal quotation marks omitted), must govern. There are
many ways in which seemingly procedural rules may displace a State’s
formulation of its substantive law. For example, statutes of limitations,
although in some sense procedural rules, can also be understood as a
temporal limitation on legally created rights; if this Court were to
promulgate a federal limitations period, federal courts would still, in
some instances, be required to apply state limitations periods. Simi
larly, if the federal rules altered the burden of proof in a case, this could
eviscerate a critical aspect—albeit one that deals with how a right is
enforced—of a State’s framework of rights and remedies. Or if a federal
rule about appellate review displaced a state rule about how damages
are reviewed on appeal, the federal rule might be pre-empting a state
damages cap. Cf. Gasperini, 518 U. S., at 427.
JUSTICE SCALIA responds that some of these federal rules might be
invalid under his view of the Enabling Act because they may not “really
regulat[e] procedure.” Ante, at 20, n. 13 (internal quotation marks
omitted). This response, of course, highlights how empty the plurality’s
test really is. See n. 10, infra. The response is also limited to those
rules that can be described as “regulat[ing]” substance, ante, at 13; it
does not address those federal rules that alter the right at issue in the
litigation, see Sibbach v. Wilson & Co., 312 U. S. 1, 13–14 (1941), only
when they displace particular state laws. JUSTICE SCALIA speculates
that “Congress may well have accepted” the occasional alteration of
substantive rights “as the price of a uniform system of federal proce
dure.” Ante, at 20–21, n. 13. Were we forced to speculate about the
balance that Congress struck, I might very well agree. But no specula
tion is necessary because Congress explicitly told us that federal rules

