6

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
Opinion of SCALIA, J.
the Court

rather leaves room for laws like §901(b). But Congress,
unlike New York, has ultimate authority over the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure; it can create exceptions to an
individual rule as it sees fit—either by directly amending
the rule or by enacting a separate statute overriding it in
certain instances. Cf. Henderson v. United States, 517
U. S. 654, 668 (1996). The fact that Congress has created
specific exceptions to Rule 23 hardly proves that the Rule
does not apply generally. In fact, it proves the opposite. If
Rule 23 did not authorize class actions across the board,
the statutory exceptions would be unnecessary.
Allstate next suggests that the structure of §901 shows
that Rule 23 addresses only certifiability. Section 901(a),
it notes, establishes class-certification criteria roughly
analogous to those in Rule 23 (wherefore it agrees that
subsection is pre-empted). But §901(b)’s rule barring class
actions for certain claims is set off as its own subsection,
and where it applies §901(a) does not. This shows, accord­
ing to Allstate, that §901(b) concerns a separate subject.
Perhaps it does concern a subject separate from the sub­
ject of §901(a). But the question before us is whether it
concerns a subject separate from the subject of Rule 23—
and for purposes of answering that question the way New
York has structured its statute is immaterial. Rule 23
permits all class actions that meet its requirements, and a
State cannot limit that permission by structuring one part
of its statute to track Rule 23 and enacting another part
that imposes additional requirements. Both of §901’s
subsections undeniably answer the same question as Rule
23: whether a class action may proceed for a given suit.
Cf. Burlington, 480 U. S., at 7–8.
The dissent argues that §901(b) has nothing to do with
whether Shady Grove may maintain its suit as a class
action, but affects only the remedy it may obtain if it wins.
See post, at 8–17 (opinion of GINSBURG, J.). Whereas
“Rule 23 governs procedural aspects of class litigation” by

