Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of SCALIA, J.
the Court

treatment in the first place—a question on which Rule 23
is silent. See 549 F. 3d, at 143–144. Allstate embraces
this analysis. Brief for Respondent 12–13.
We disagree. To begin with, the line between eligibility
and certifiability is entirely artificial. Both are precondi­
tions for maintaining a class action. Allstate suggests that
eligibility must depend on the “particular cause of action”
asserted, instead of some other attribute of the suit, id., at
12. But that is not so. Congress could, for example, pro­
vide that only claims involving more than a certain num­
ber of plaintiffs are “eligible” for class treatment in federal
court. In other words, relabeling Rule 23(a)’s prerequi­
sites “eligibility criteria” would obviate Allstate’s objec­
tion—a sure sign that its eligibility-certifiability distinc­
tion is made-to-order.
There is no reason, in any event, to read Rule 23 as
addressing only whether claims made eligible for class
treatment by some other law should be certified as class
actions. Allstate asserts that Rule 23 neither explicitly
nor implicitly empowers a federal court “to certify a class
in each and every case” where the Rule’s criteria are met.
Id., at 13–14. But that is exactly what Rule 23 does: It
says that if the prescribed preconditions are satisfied “[a]
class action may be maintained” (emphasis added)—not “a
class action may be permitted.” Courts do not maintain
actions; litigants do. The discretion suggested by Rule 23’s
“may” is discretion residing in the plaintiff: He may bring
his claim in a class action if he wishes. And like the rest
of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 23 automati
cally applies “in all civil actions and proceedings in the
United States district courts,” Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 1. See
Califano v. Yamasaki, 442 U. S. 682, 699–700 (1979).
Allstate points out that Congress has carved out some
federal claims from Rule 23’s reach, see, e.g., 8 U. S. C.
§1252(e)(1)(B)—which shows, Allstate contends, that Rule
23 does not authorize class actions for all claims, but

