Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of SCALIA, J.

rules can be reconciled (because they answer different
questions), and second, if they cannot, determining
whether the Federal Rule runs afoul of §2072(b). Post, at
5–7 (STEVENS, J., concurring in part and concurring in
judgment). The concurrence agrees with us that Rule 23
and §901(b) conflict, post, at 15–16, and departs from us
only with respect to the second part of the test, i.e.,
whether application of the Federal Rule violates §2072(b),
post, at 7–13. Like us, it answers no, but for a reason
different from ours. Post, at 17–22.
The concurrence would decide this case on the basis, not
that Rule 23 is procedural, but that the state law it dis­
places is procedural, in the sense that it does not “function
as a part of the State’s definition of substantive rights and
remedies.” Post, at 1. A state procedural rule is not pre­
empted, according to the concurrence, so long
as it is “so bound up with,” or “sufficiently intertwined
with,” a substantive state-law right or remedy “that it
defines the scope of that substantive right or remedy,”
post, at 4, 13.
This analysis squarely conflicts with Sibbach, which
established the rule we apply. The concurrence contends
that Sibbach did not rule out its approach, but that is not
so. Recognizing the impracticability of a test that turns on
the idiosyncrasies of state law, Sibbach adopted and ap­
plied a rule with a single criterion: whether the Federal
Rule “really regulates procedure.” 312 U. S., at 14.9 That
——————
9 The concurrence claims that in Sibbach “[t]he Court . . . had no oc­
casion to consider whether the particular application of the Federal
Rules in question would offend the Enabling Act.” Post, at 12. Had
Sibbach been applying the concurrence’s theory, that is quite true—
which demonstrates how inconsistent that theory is with Sibbach. For
conformity with the Rules Enabling Act was the very issue Sibbach
decided: The petitioner’s position was that Rules 35 and 37 exceeded
the Enabling Act’s authorization, 312 U. S., at 9, 13; the Court faced
and rejected that argument, id., at 13–16, and proceeded to reverse
the lower court for failing to apply Rule 37 correctly, id., at 16. There

