Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

the scope of that claim. See, e.g, Cohen, 337 U. S., at 555
(state “procedure” that required plaintiffs to post bond
before suing); Guaranty Trust Co., 326 U. S. 99 (state
statute of limitations).4 Such “procedural rules” may also
define the amount of recovery. See, e.g., Gasperini, 518
U. S., at 427 (state procedure for examining jury verdicts
as means of capping the available remedy); Moore
§124.07[3][a] (listing examples of federal courts’ applying
state laws that affect the amount of a judgment).
In our federalist system, Congress has not mandated
that federal courts dictate to state legislatures the form
that their substantive law must take. And were federal
courts to ignore those portions of substantive state law
that operate as procedural devices, it could in many in
stances limit the ways that sovereign States may define
their rights and remedies. When a State chooses to use a
traditionally procedural vehicle as a means of defining the
scope of substantive rights or remedies, federal courts
must recognize and respect that choice. Cf. Ragan v.
Merchants Transfer & Warehouse Co., 337 U. S. 530, 533
(1949) (“Since th[e] cause of action is created by local law,
the measure of it is to be found only in local law. . . .
Where local law qualifies or abridges it, the federal court
must follow suit”).
II
When both a federal rule and a state law appear to
govern a question before a federal court sitting in diver
——————
4 Cf. Milam v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 972 F. 2d 166, 170
(CA7 1992) (Posner, J.) (holding that “where a state in furtherance of
its substantive policy makes it more difficult to prove a particular type
of state-law claim, the rule by which it does this, even if denominated a
rule of evidence or cast in evidentiary terms, will be given effect in a
diversity suit as an expression of state substantive policy”); Moore
§124.09[2] (listing examples of federal courts that apply state eviden
tiary rules to diversity suits). Other examples include state-imposed
burdens of proof.

