Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

17

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

Applying Rule 23 Does Not Violate the Enabling Act
As I have explained, in considering whether to certify a
class action such as this one, a federal court must inquire
whether doing so would abridge, enlarge, or modify New
York’s rights or remedies, and thereby violate the Ena
bling Act. This inquiry is not always a simple one because
“[i]t is difficult to conceive of any rule of procedure that
cannot have a significant effect on the outcome of a case,”
Wright §4508, at 232–233, and almost “any rule can be
said to have . . . ‘substantive effects,’ affecting society’s
distribution of risks and rewards,” Ely 724, n. 170. Faced
with a federal rule that dictates an answer to a tradition
ally procedural question and that displaces a state rule,
one can often argue that the state rule was really some
part of the State’s definition of its rights or remedies.
In my view, however, the bar for finding an Enabling
Act problem is a high one. The mere fact that a state law
is designed as a procedural rule suggests it reflects a
judgment about how state courts ought to operate and not
a judgment about the scope of state-created rights and
remedies. And for the purposes of operating a federal
court system, there are costs involved in attempting to
discover the true nature of a state procedural rule and
allowing such a rule to operate alongside a federal rule
that appears to govern the same question. The mere
possibility that a federal rule would alter a state-created
right is not sufficient. There must be little doubt.
The text of CPLR §901(b) expressly and unambiguously
applies not only to claims based on New York law but also
to claims based on federal law or the law of any other
State. And there is no interpretation from New York
courts to the contrary. It is therefore hard to see how
§901(b) could be understood as a rule that, though proce
dural in form, serves the function of defining New York’s
rights or remedies. This is all the more apparent because
lawsuits under New York law could be joined in federal
class actions well before New York passed §901(b) in 1975,

