18

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
Opinion of STEVENS, J.

and New York had done nothing to prevent that. It is
true, as the dissent points out, that there is a limited
amount of legislative history that can be read to suggest
that the New York officials who supported §901(b) wished
to create a “limitation” on New York’s “statutory dam
ages.” Post, at 8. But, as JUSTICE SCALIA notes, that is
not the law that New York adopted.16 See ante, at 7–8
(opinion of the Court).
The legislative history, moreover, does not clearly de
scribe a judgment that §901(b) would operate as a limita
tion on New York’s statutory damages. In evaluating that
——————
16 In its Erie analysis, the dissent observes that when sovereigns
create laws, the enacting legislatures sometimes assume those laws
will apply only within their territory. See post, at 18–20. That is a true
fact, but it does not do very much work for the dissent’s position. For
one thing, as the dissent observes, this Erie analysis is relevant only if
there is no conflict between Rule 23 and §901(b), and the court can thus
apply both. Post, at 17. But because, in my view, Rule 23 applies, the
only question is whether it would violate the Enabling Act. See Hanna,
380 U. S., at 471.
And that inquiry is different from the Rules of
Decision Act, or Erie, inquiry. See id., at 469–471.
The dissent’s citations, moreover, highlight simply that when inter
preting statutes, context matters. Thus, we sometimes presume that
laws cover only domestic conduct and sometimes do not, depending
upon, inter alia, whether it makes sense in a given situation to assume
that “the character of an act as lawful or unlawful must be determined
wholly by the law of the [place] where the act is done,” American
Banana Co. v. United Fruit Co., 213 U. S. 347, 356 (1909). But in the
context of §901(b), a presumption against extraterritoriality makes
little sense. That presumption applies almost only to laws governing
what people can or cannot do. Section 901(b), however, is not directed
to the conduct of persons but is instead directed to New York courts.
Thus, §901(b) is, by its own terms, not extraterritorial insofar as it
states that it governs New York courts. It is possible that the New
York Legislature simply did not realize that New York courts hear
claims under other sources of law and that other courts hear claims
under New York law, and therefore mistakenly believed that they had
written a limit on New York remedies. But because New York set up
§901(b) as a general rule about how its courts operate, my strong
presumption is to the contrary.

