Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

Similarly in Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp.,
337 U. S. 541 (1949), the Court held applicable in a diver
sity action a state statute requiring plaintiffs, as a prereq
uisite to pursuit of a stockholder’s derivative action, to
post a bond as security for costs. At the time of the litiga
tion, Rule 23, now Rule 23.1, addressed a plaintiff’s insti
tution of a derivative action in federal court. Although the
Federal Rule specified prerequisites to a stockholder’s
maintenance of a derivative action, the Court found no
conflict between the Rule and the state statute in ques
tion; the requirements of both could be enforced, the Court
observed. See id., at 556. Burdensome as the security-for
costs requirement may be, Cohen made plain, suitors
could not escape the upfront outlay by resorting to the
federal court’s diversity jurisdiction.
In all of these cases, the Court stated in Hanna, “the
scope of the Federal Rule was not as broad as the losing
party urged, and therefore, there being no Federal Rule
which covered the point in dispute, Erie commanded the
enforcement of state law.” 380 U. S., at 470. In Hanna
itself, the Court found the clash “unavoidable,” ibid.; the
petitioner had effected service of process as prescribed by
Federal Rule 4(d)(1), but that “how-to” method did not
satisfy the special Massachusetts law applicable to service
on an executor or administrator. Even as it rejected the
Massachusetts prescription in favor of the federal proce
dure, however, “[t]he majority in Hanna recognized . . .
that federal rules . . . must be interpreted by the courts
applying them, and that the process of interpretation can
and should reflect an awareness of legitimate state inter
ests.” R. Fallon, J. Manning, D. Meltzer, & D. Shapiro,
Hart and Wechsler’s The Federal Courts and the Federal
System 593 (6th ed. 2009) (hereinafter Hart & Wechsler).
Following Hanna, we continued to “interpre[t] the fed
eral rules to avoid conflict with important state regulatory
policies.” Hart & Wechsler 593. In Walker, the Court took

