2

SHADY GROVE ORTHOPEDIC ASSOCIATES, P. A.
v. ALLSTATE INS. CO.
Opinion of SCALIA, J.
the Court

whether this precludes a federal district court sitting in
diversity from entertaining a class action under Federal
Rule of Civil Procedure 23.2
I
The petitioner’s complaint alleged the following: Shady
Grove Orthopedic Associates, P. A., provided medical care
to Sonia E. Galvez for injuries she suffered in an automo­
bile accident. As partial payment for that care, Galvez
assigned to Shady Grove her rights to insurance benefits
under a policy issued in New York by Allstate Insurance
Co. Shady Grove tendered a claim for the assigned bene­
fits to Allstate, which under New York law had 30 days to
pay the claim or deny it. See N. Y. Ins. Law Ann. §5106(a)
(West 2009). Allstate apparently paid, but not on time,
and it refused to pay the statutory interest that accrued on
the overdue benefits (at two percent per month), see ibid.
Shady Grove filed this diversity suit in the Eastern
District of New York to recover the unpaid statutory in­
terest. Alleging that Allstate routinely refuses to pay
——————
and efficient adjudication of the controversy.
“(b) Unless a statute creating or imposing a penalty, or a minimum
measure of recovery specifically authorizes the recovery thereof in a
class action, an action to recover a penalty, or minimum measure of
recovery created or imposed by statute may not be maintained as a
class action.”
2 Rule 23(a) provides:
“(a) Prerequisites. One or more members of a class may sue or be
sued as representative parties on behalf of all members only if:
“(1) the class is so numerous that joinder of all members is imprac­
ticable;
“(2) there are questions of law or fact common to the class;
“(3) the claims or defenses of the representative parties are typical
of the claims or defenses of the class; and
“(4) the representative parties will fairly and adequately protect
the interests of the class.”
Subsection (b) says that “[a] class action may be maintained if Rule 23
(a) is satisfied and if” the suit falls into one of three described catego­
ries (irrelevant for present purposes).

