Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

21

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

The difference of degree is relevant to the forum shop
ping considerations that are part of the Rules of Decision
Act or Erie inquiry. If the applicable federal rule did not
govern the particular question at issue (or could be fairly
read not to do so), then those considerations would matter,
for precisely the reasons given by the dissent. See post, at
17–24. But that is not this case. As the Court explained
in Hanna, it is an “incorrect assumption that the rule of
Erie R. Co. v. Thompkins constitutes the appropriate test
of . . . the applicability of a Federal Rule of Civil Proce
dure.” 380 U. S., at 469–470. “It is true that both the
Enabling Act and the Erie rule say, roughly, that federal
courts are to apply state ‘substantive’ law and federal
‘procedural’ law,” but the tests are different and reflect the
fact that “they were designed to control very different
sorts of decisions.” Id., at 471.
Because Rule 23 governs class certification, the only
decision is whether certifying a class in this diversity case
would “abridge, enlarge or modify” New York’s substantive
rights or remedies. §2072(b). Although one can argue
that class certification would enlarge New York’s “limited”
damages remedy, see post, at 7, n. 2, 8, 9, 12, 25, such
arguments rest on extensive speculation about what the
New York Legislature had in mind when it created
§901(b). But given that there are two plausible competing
narratives, it seems obvious to me that we should respect
the plain textual reading of §901(b), a rule in New York’s
procedural code about when to certify class actions
brought under any source of law, and respect Congress’
decision that Rule 23 governs class certification in federal
courts. In order to displace a federal rule, there must be
more than just a possibility that the state rule is different
—————— 

procedural vehicle; without a lower filing fee, a conveniently located

courthouse, easy-to-use federal procedural rules, or many other fea

tures of the federal courts, many plaintiffs would not sue. 


