Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of STEVENS, J.

Although the plurality appears to agree with much of
my interpretation of §2072, see ante, at 18–19, it nonethe
less rejects that approach for two reasons, both of which
are mistaken. First, JUSTICE SCALIA worries that if fed
eral courts inquire into the effect of federal rules on state
law, it will enmesh federal courts in difficult determina
tions about whether application of a given rule would
displace a state determination about substantive rights.
See ante, at 15, 21–22, and nn. 14, 15. I do not see why an
Enabling Act inquiry that looks to state law necessarily is
more taxing than JUSTICE SCALIA’s.10 But in any event,
that inquiry is what the Enabling Act requires: While it
may not be easy to decide what is actually a “substantive
right,” “the designations substantive and procedural be
come important, for the Enabling Act has made them so.”
Ely 723; see also Wright §4509, at 266. The question,
therefore, is not what rule we think would be easiest on
federal courts. The question is what rule Congress estab
lished. Although, JUSTICE SCALIA may generally prefer
easily administrable, bright-line rules, his preference does
not give us license to adopt a second-best interpretation of
the Rules Enabling Act. Courts cannot ignore text and
——————
“shall not” alter “any” substantive right. §2072(b).
10 It will be rare that a federal rule that is facially valid under 28
U. S. C. §2072 will displace a State’s definition of its own substantive
rights. See Wright §4509, at 272 (observing that “unusual cases
occasionally might arise in which . . . because of an unorthodox state
rule of law, application of a Civil Rule . . . would intrude upon state
substantive rights”). JUSTICE SCALIA’s interpretation, moreover, is not
much more determinative than mine. Although it avoids courts’ having
to evaluate state law, it tasks them with figuring out whether a federal
rule is really “procedural.” It is hard to know the answer to that
question and especially hard to resolve it without considering the
nature and functions of the state law that the federal rule will displace.
The plurality’s “ ‘test’ is no test at all—in a sense, it is little more than
the statement that a matter is procedural if, by revelation, it is proce
dural.” Id., §4509, at 264.

