Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

9

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

maximum of five days. And that is only to the extent
women use all their available FMLA leave for family-care
reasons. Petitioner’s overly complicated argument about
how the self-care provision works in tandem with the
family-care provisions is unconvincing and in the end does
not comply with the clear requirements of City of Boerne.
In addition petitioner’s first defense of the self-care
provision contradicts his second defense of the provision.
In the first defense, the Court is told employers assume
women take more self-care leave than men. See Tr. of
Oral Arg. 10–12. In the second defense, the Court is told
the self-care provision provides an incentive to hire women
that will counteract the incentives created by the familycare provisions because employers assume women take
more family-care leave than men. But if the first defense
is correct, the second defense is wrong. In other words, if
employers assume women take self-care leave more often
than men (the first defense), a self-care provision will not
provide an incentive to hire women. To the contrary, the
self-care provision would provide an incentive to discriminate against women.
There is “little support in the record for the concerns
that supposedly animated” the self-care provision. Florida
Prepaid, supra, at 639. Only supposition and conjecture
support the contention that the self-care provision is
necessary to make the family-care provisions effective.
The evidence documented in support of the self-care provision is, to a large degree, unrelated to sex discrimination,
or to the administration of the family-care provisions. See
supra, at 7. Congress made no findings and did not cite
specific or detailed evidence to show how the self-care
provision is necessary to the family-care provisions or how
it reduces an employer’s incentives to discriminate against
women. And “Congress . . . said nothing about the existence or adequacy of state” sick-leave policies. Florida
Prepaid, supra, at 644; see Garrett, 531 U. S., at 373.

