Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

The legislative history of the self-care provision reveals a
concern for the economic burdens on the employee and the
employee’s family resulting from illness-related job loss
and a concern for discrimination on the basis of illness, not
sex. See, e.g., S. Rep. No. 103–3, pp. 11–12 (1993); H. R.
Rep., at 23. In the findings pertinent to the self-care
provision, the statute makes no reference to any distinction on the basis of sex. See 29 U. S. C. §2601(a)(4)
(“[T]here is inadequate job security for employees who
have serious health conditions that prevent them from
working for temporary periods”). By contrast, with regard
to family care Congress invoked concerns related to gender. See §2601(a)(5) (“[D]ue to the nature of the roles of
men and women in our society, the primary responsibility
for family caretaking often falls on women, and such
responsibility affects the working lives of women more
than it affects the working lives of men”).
It is true the self-care provision offers some women a
benefit by allowing them to take leave for pregnancyrelated illnesses; but as a remedy, the provision is not
congruent and proportional to any identified constitutional
violations. At the time of the FMLA’s enactment, “ninetyfive percent” of state employees had paid sick-leave plans
at work, and “ninety-six percent” had short-term disability
protection. Texas Brief 13–14 (citing BLS Rept. 17–26).
State employees presumably could take leave for pregnancyrelated illnesses under these policies, and Congress did
not document any pattern of States excluding pregnancyrelated illnesses from sick-leave or disability-leave policies. “Congress . . . said nothing about the existence or
adequacy of state remedies.” Florida Prepaid, 527 U. S.,
at 644. It follows that abrogating the States’ immunity
from suits for damages for failure to give self-care leave is
not a congruent and proportional remedy if the existing
state leave policies would have sufficed.

