6

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
GINSBURG, J., dissenting

fore maintained their commitment to gender-neutral
leave. See Joint Hearing on H. R. 925 before the Subcommittee on Civil Service and the Subcommittee on
Compensation and Employee Benefits of the House Committee on Post Office and Civil Service, 100th Cong., 1st
Sess., 36 (1987) (hereinafter 1987 House Hearing) (statement of Prof. Eleanor Holmes Norton, Georgetown University Law Center) (“[If California Fed.] becomes the
model, employers will provide something for women affected by pregnancy that they are not required to provide
for other employees. This gives fodder to those who seek
to discriminate against women in employment. . . . In the
[California Fed.] case, I would have preferred the interpretation urged by the [equal-treatment feminists].”).
Congress agreed. See infra, at 14–15. Adhering to
equal-treatment feminists’ aim, the self-care provision, 29
U. S. C. §2612(a)(1)(D), prescribes comprehensive leave for
women disabled during pregnancy or while recuperating
from childbirth—without singling out pregnancy or childbirth. See S. Rep. No. 101–77, p. 32 (1989) (A “significant
benefit of the temporary medical leave provided by this
legislation is the form of protection it offers women workers who bear children. Because the bill treats all employees who are temporarily unable to work due to serious
health conditions in the same fashion, it does not create
the risk of discrimination against pregnant women posed
by legislation which provides job protection only for
pregnancy-related disability. Legislation solely protecting
——————
employers from refusing to promote a woman because of pregnancy, it
did not forbid refusing to hire a woman on that basis. See §1. See also
Brief for National Organization for Women et al. as Amici Curiae in
California Fed. Sav. & Loan Assn. v. Guerra, O. T. 1985, No. 85–494,
pp. 14–15. These provisions were all expressly made inapplicable to
employers covered by Title VII, “[i]n the event Congress enacts legislation amending Title VII . . . to prohibit sex discrimination on the basis
of pregnancy,” namely, the PDA. See 1978 Cal. Stats. ch. 1321, §4.

