10

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

Under this Court’s precedents, more is required to subject unconsenting States to suits for damages, particularly
where, as here, it is for violations of a provision (the selfcare provision) that is a supposedly preventive step in aid
of already preventive provisions (the family-care provisions). See Florida Prepaid, 527 U. S., at 642 (“[T]he
legislative record still provides little support for the proposition that Congress sought to remedy a Fourteenth
Amendment violation in enacting the Patent Remedy
Act”); Kimel, 528 U. S., at 88 (“One means by which we
have made such a determination . . . is by examining the
legislative record containing the reasons for Congress’
action”).
The “few fleeting references” to how self-care leave is
inseparable from family-care leave fall short of what is
required for a valid abrogation of States’ immunity from
suits for damages. Florida Prepaid, supra, at 644. These
“isolated sentences clipped from floor debates” and testimony, Kimel, supra, at 89, are stated as conclusions,
unsupported by evidence or findings about how the selfcare provision interrelates to the family-care provisions to
counteract employers’ incentives to discriminate against
women. Congress must rely on more than abstract generalities to subject the States to suits for damages. Otherwise, Congress could choose to combat the purported
effects of the family-care provisions by allowing employees
to sue States that do not permit employees to take vacation time under the FMLA. There is nothing in particular
about self-care leave, as opposed to leave for any personal
reason, that connects it to gender discrimination. And
when the issue, as here, is whether subparagraph (D) can
abrogate a State’s immunity from damages, there is no
sufficient nexus, or indeed any demonstrated nexus, between self-care leave and gender discrimination by state
employers. Documented discrimination against women in
the general workplace is a persistent, unfortunate reality,

