Cite as: 566 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

GINSBURG, J., dissenting

pation in, and fostering of, gender-based discrimination
in the administration of [parental and family-care] leave
benefits.” Hibbs, 538 U. S., at 735. See also id., at 729–
731, and n. 5 (Congress adduced evidence “of a pattern of
constitutional violations on the part of the States” in
granting parental and family-care leave).
Requiring States to provide gender-neutral parental and
family-care leave alone, Congress was warned, would
promote precisely the type of workplace discrimination
Congress sought to reduce. The “pervasive sex-role stereotype that caring for family members is women’s work,” id.,
at 731, Congress heard, led employers to regard required
parental and family-care leave as a woman’s benefit.
Carol Ball, speaking on behalf of the U. S. Chamber of
Commerce, testified that she did not think “there are
going to be many men that take up . . . parental leave.”
See Hearing on S. 345 before the Subcommittee on Children, Family, Drugs, and Alcoholism of the Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources, 101st Cong., 1st
Sess., 39 (1989) (statement of Carol Ball). She frankly
admitted that she herself would choose to hire a man over
an equally qualified woman if parental leave was required
by law. Id., at 30.
Others similarly testified that mandating genderneutral parental leave would lead to discrimination
against women. A representative of the National Federal
of Independent Business stated: “Requiring employers to
provide parental leave benefits creates clear pressures for
subtle discrimination based on . . . sex. When choosing
between two equally qualified candidates, an employer
may be more likely to hire the candidate least likely to
take the leave. It is the wage levels and jobs of women of
childbearing years which are most at risk in such a situation.” Hearing on H. R. 1 before the Subcommittee on
Labor-Management Relations of the House Committee
on Education and Labor, 103d Cong., 1st Sess., 95 (1993).

