8

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MD.
Opinion of KENNEDY, J.

2
As an alternative justification for the self-care provision,
it has been suggested that the provision is a necessary
adjunct to the family-care provisions. Petitioner argues
that employers may assume women are more likely to
take family-care leave than men and that the FMLA
therefore offers up to 12 weeks of leave for family care and
self care combined. According to petitioner, when the selfcare provision is coupled with the family-care provisions,
the self-care provision could reduce the difference in the
expected number of weeks of FMLA leave that different
employees take for different reasons.
The fact that self-care leave could have this effect does
not mean that it would. If, for example, women are expected to take 20 days of family-care leave per year and
men to take 10, and women and men are each expected to
take 5 days of self-care leave per year, the difference in the
expected number of days of leave and cost to the employer
remains the same regardless of the availability of self-care
leave. Congress made no findings, and received no specific
testimony, to suggest the availability of self-care leave
equalizes the expected amount of FMLA leave men and
women will take. Even if women take family-care leave
more often than men, men do not take self-care leave more
often than women; and there is little evidence that employers assume they do. See H. R. Rep., at 15. Petitioner
suggests that some women will be expected to take all 12
weeks of leave under the FMLA for family-care purposes,
and therefore that any amount of self-care leave taken by
men will diminish the difference in the amount of FMLA
leave taken by men and women. But there is little evidence to support petitioner’s assumption about the magnitude of women’s expected FMLA leave for family-care
purposes. And men are only expected to take five days of
sick leave per year, see ibid., so the self-care provision
diminishes the difference in expected leave time by a

