(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2011

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

COLEMAN v. COURT OF APPEALS OF MARYLAND 

ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
No. 10–1016. Argued January 11, 2012—Decided March 20, 2012
The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA) entitles an employee to take up to 12 work weeks of unpaid leave per year for (A) the
care of a newborn son or daughter; (B) the adoption or foster-care
placement of a child; (C) the care of a spouse, son, daughter, or parent with a serious medical condition; and (D) the employee’s own serious health condition when the condition interferes with the employee’s ability to perform at work. 29 U. S. C. §2612(a)(1). The FMLA
also creates a private right of action for equitable relief and damages
“against any employer (including a public agency) in any Federal or
State court.” §2617(a)(2). For present purposes, subparagraphs (A),
(B), and (C) are referred to as the family-care provisions, and subparagraph (D) as the self-care provision. In Nevada Dept. of Human Resources v. Hibbs, 538 U. S. 721, 730−732, this Court held that Congress could subject States to suit for violations of subparagraph (C)
based on evidence of family-leave policies that discriminated on the
basis of sex.
Petitioner filed suit, alleging that his employer, the Maryland
Court of Appeals, an instrumentality of the State, violated the FMLA
by denying him self-care leave. The Federal District Court dismissed
the suit on sovereign immunity grounds. The Fourth Circuit affirmed, holding that unlike the family-care provision in Hibbs, the
self-care provision was not directed at an identified pattern of gender-based discrimination and was not congruent and proportional to
any pattern of sex-based discrimination on the part of States.
Held: The judgment is affirmed.
626 F. 3d 187, affirmed.

