Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

1

SCALIA, J., concurring

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________

No. 09–571
_________________

HARRY F. CONNICK, DISTRICT ATTORNEY, ET AL., 

PETITIONERS v. JOHN THOMPSON

ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF

APPEALS FOR THE FIFTH CIRCUIT

[March 29, 2011] 


JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom JUSTICE ALITO joins,
concurring.
I join the Court’s opinion in full. I write separately only
to address several aspects of the dissent.
1. The dissent’s lengthy excavation of the trial record is
a puzzling exertion. The question presented for our re
view is whether a municipality is liable for a single Brady
violation by one of its prosecutors, even though no pattern
or practice of prior violations put the municipality on
notice of a need for specific training that would have pre
vented it. See Brady v. Maryland, 373 U. S. 83 (1963).
That question is a legal one: whether a Brady violation
presents one of those rare circumstances we hypothesized
in Canton’s footnote 10, in which the need for training in
constitutional requirements is so obvious ex ante that the
municipality’s failure to provide that training amounts
to deliberate indifference to constitutional violations. See
Canton v. Harris, 489 U. S. 378, 390, n. 10 (1989).
The dissent defers consideration of this question until
page 23 of its opinion. It first devotes considerable space
to allegations that Connick’s prosecutors misunderstood
Brady when asked about it at trial, see post, at 16–18
(opinion of GINSBURG, J.), and to supposed gaps in the
Brady guidance provided by Connick’s office to prosecu
tors, including deficiencies (unrelated to the specific Brady


2

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
SCALIA, J., concurring

violation at issue in this case) in a policy manual pub
lished by Connick’s office three years after Thompson’s
trial, see post, at 18–21. None of that is relevant. Thomp
son’s failure-to-train theory at trial was not based on a
pervasive culture of indifference to Brady, but rather on
the inevitability of mistakes over enough iterations of
criminal trials. The District Court instructed the jury it
could find Connick deliberately indifferent if:
“First: The District Attorney was certain that prosecu
tors would confront the situation where they would
have to decide which evidence was required by the
constitution to be provided to an accused[;]
“Second: The situation involved a difficult choice, or
one that prosecutors had a history of mishandling,
such that additional training, supervision, or monitor
ing was clearly needed[; and]
“Third: The wrong choice by a prosecutor in that
situation will frequently cause a deprivation of an ac
cused’s constitutional rights.” App. 828.
That theory of deliberate indifference would repeal the
law of Monell1 in favor of the Law of Large Numbers.
Brady mistakes are inevitable. So are all species of error
routinely confronted by prosecutors: authorizing a bad
warrant; losing a Batson2 claim; crossing the line in clos
ing argument; or eliciting hearsay that violates the Con
frontation Clause. Nevertheless, we do not have “de facto
respondeat superior liability,” Canton, 489 U. S., at 392,
for each such violation under the rubric of failure-to-train
simply because the municipality does not have a profes
sional educational program covering the specific violation
in sufficient depth.3 Were Thompson’s theory the law,
——————
1 Monell

v. New York City Dept. of Social Servs., 436 U. S. 658 (1978).
v. Kentucky, 476 U. S. 79 (1986).
3 I do not share the dissent’s confidence that this result will be
avoided by the instruction’s requirement that “ ‘more likely than not the
2 Batson


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

SCALIA, J., concurring

there would have been no need for Canton’s footnote to
confine its hypothetical to the extreme circumstance of
arming police officers with guns without telling them
about the constitutional limitations upon shooting fleeing
felons; the District Court’s instructions cover every recur
ring situation in which citizens’ rights can be violated.
That result cannot be squared with our admonition that
failure-to-train liability is available only in “limited cir
cumstances,” id., at 387, and that a pattern of consti
tutional violations is “ordinarily necessary to establish
municipal culpability and causation,” Board of Comm’rs of
Bryan Cty. v. Brown, 520 U. S. 397, 409 (1997). These
restrictions are indispensable because without them,
“failure to train” would become a talismanic incantation
producing municipal liability “[i]n virtually every instance
where a person has had his or her constitutional rights
violated by a city employee”—which is what Monell re
jects. Canton, 489 U. S., at 392. Worse, it would “engage
the federal courts in an endless exercise of second
guessing municipal employee-training programs,” thereby
diminishing the autonomy of state and local governments.
Ibid.
2. Perhaps for that reason, the dissent does not seri
ously contend that Thompson’s theory of recovery was
proper. Rather, it accuses Connick of acquiescing in that
theory at trial. See post, at 25. The accusation is false.
Connick’s central claim was and is that failure-to-train
—————— 

Brady material would have been produced if the prosecutors involved in 

his underlying criminal cases had been properly trained, supervised or 

monitored regarding the production of Brady evidence.’ ” Post, at 25, 

n. 17 (quoting Tr. 1100). How comforting that assurance is depends
entirely on what proper training consists of. If it is not limited to
training in aspects of Brady that have been repeatedly violated, but
includes—as the dissent would have it include here—training that
would avoid any one-time violation, the assurance is no assurance at
all.


4

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
SCALIA, J., concurring

liability for a Brady violation cannot be premised on a
single incident, but requires a pattern or practice of previ
ous violations. He pressed that argument at the summary
judgment stage but was rebuffed. At trial, when Connick
offered a jury instruction to the same effect, the trial judge
effectively told him to stop bringing up the subject:
“[Connick’s counsel]: Also, as part of that definition
in that same location, Your Honor, we would like to
include language that says that deliberate indiffer
ence to training requires a pattern of similar viola
tions and proof of deliberate indifference requires
more than a single isolated act.
“[Thompson’s counsel]: That’s not the law, Your
Honor.
“THE COURT: No, I’m not giving that. That was in
your motion for summary judgment that I denied.”
Tr. 1013.
Nothing more is required to preserve a claim of error. See
Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 51(d)(1)(B).4
3. But in any event, to recover from a municipality
under 42 U. S. C. §1983, a plaintiff must satisfy a “rigor
ous” standard of causation, Bryan Cty., 520 U. S., at 405;
he must “demonstrate a direct causal link between the
——————
4 The dissent’s contention that “[t]he instruction Connick proposed
resembled the charge given by the District Court,” post, at 25, n. 18,
disregards his requested instruction concerning the necessity of a
pattern of prior violations. It is meaningless to say that after “the court
rejected [Connick’s] categorical position,” as it did, he did not “assail the
District Court’s formulation of the deliberate indifference instruction,”
post, at 26, n. 18. The prior-pattern requirement was part of Connick’s
requested formulation of deliberate indifference: “To prove deliberate
indifference, a plaintiff must demonstrate ‘at least a pattern of similar
violations arising from training that is so clearly inadequate as to be
obviously likely to result in a constitutional violation.’ ” Record, Doc.
94, p. 18 (emphasis added).


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

SCALIA, J., concurring

municipal action and the deprivation of federal rights.”
Id., at 404. Thompson cannot meet that standard. The
withholding of evidence in his case was almost certainly
caused not by a failure to give prosecutors specific train
ing, but by miscreant prosecutor Gerry Deegan’s willful
suppression of evidence he believed to be exculpatory, in
an effort to railroad Thompson. According to Deegan’s
colleague Michael Riehlmann, in 1994 Deegan confessed to
him—in the same conversation in which Deegan revealed
he had only a few months to live—that he had “suppressed
blood evidence in the armed robbery trial of John Thomp
son that in some way exculpated the defendant.” App.
367; see also id., at 362 (“[Deegan] told me . . . that he had
failed to inform the defense of exculpatory information”). I
have no reason to disbelieve that account, particularly
since Riehlmann’s testimony hardly paints a flattering
picture of himself: Riehlmann kept silent about Deegan’s
misconduct for another five years, as a result of which he
incurred professional sanctions. See In re Riehlmann,
2004–0680 (La. 1/19/05), 891 So. 2d 1239.
And if
Riehlmann’s story is true, then the “moving force,” Bryan
Cty., supra, at 404 (internal quotation marks omitted),
behind the suppression of evidence was Deegan, not a
failure of continuing legal education.
4. The dissent suspends disbelief about this, insisting
that with proper Brady training, “surely at least one” of
the prosecutors in Thompson’s trial would have turned
over the lab report and blood swatch. Post, at 21. But
training must consist of more than mere broad encomiums
of Brady: We have made clear that “the identified defi
ciency in a city’s training program [must be] closely re
lated to the ultimate injury.” Canton, supra, at 391. So
even indulging the dissent’s assumption that Thompson’s
prosecutors failed to disclose the lab report in good faith—
in a way that could be prevented by training—what sort of


6

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
SCALIA, J., concurring

training would have prevented the good-faith nondisclo
sure of a blood report not known to be exculpatory?
Perhaps a better question to ask is what legally accurate
training would have prevented it. The dissent’s sugges
tion is to instruct prosecutors to ignore the portion of
Brady limiting prosecutors’ disclosure obligations to evi
dence that is “favorable to an accused,” 373 U. S., at 87.
Instead, the dissent proposes that “Connick could have
communicated to Orleans Parish prosecutors, in no uncer
tain terms, that, ‘[i]f you have physical evidence that, if
tested, can establish the innocence of the person who is
charged, you have to turn it over.’ ” Post, at 20, n. 13
(quoting Tr. of Oral Arg. 34). Though labeled a training
suggestion, the dissent’s proposal is better described as a
sub silentio expansion of the substantive law of Brady. If
any of our cases establishes such an obligation, I have
never read it, and the dissent does not cite it.5
Since Thompson’s trial, however, we have decided a case
that appears to say just the opposite of the training the
dissent would require: In Arizona v. Youngblood, 488 U. S.
51, 58 (1988), we held that “unless a criminal defendant
can show bad faith on the part of the police, failure to
preserve potentially useful evidence does not constitute a
denial of due process of law.” We acknowledged that
“Brady . . . makes the good or bad faith of the State irrele
vant when the State fails to disclose to the defendant
material exculpatory evidence,” but concluded that “the
——————
5 What the dissent does cite in support of its theory comes from an
unexpected source: Connick’s testimony about what qualifies as Brady
material. See post, at 20–21, n. 13. (“Or Connick could have told
prosecutors what he told the jury when he was asked whether a prose
cutor must disclose a crime lab report to the defense, even if the pros
ecutor does not know the defendant’s blood type: ‘Under the law, it
qualifies as Brady material.’ ” (quoting Tr. 872)). Given the effort the
dissent has expended persuading us that Connick’s understanding of
Brady is profoundly misguided, its newfound trust in his expertise on
the subject is, to the say the least, surprising.


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

SCALIA, J., concurring

Due Process Clause requires a different result when we
deal with the failure of the State to preserve evidentiary
material of which no more can be said than that it could
have been subjected to tests, the results of which might
have exonerated the defendant.” Id., at 57. Perhaps one
day we will recognize a distinction between good-faith
failures to preserve from destruction evidence whose
inculpatory or exculpatory character is unknown, and
good-faith failures to turn such evidence over to the de
fense. But until we do so, a failure to train prosecutors to
observe that distinction cannot constitute deliberate indif
ference.
5. By now the reader has doubtless guessed the best
kept secret of this case: There was probably no Brady
violation at all—except for Deegan’s (which, since it was a
bad-faith, knowing violation, could not possibly be attrib
uted to lack of training).6 The dissent surely knows this,
which is why it leans heavily on the fact that Connick
conceded that Brady was violated. I can honor that con
cession in my analysis of the case because even if it ex
tends beyond Deegan’s deliberate actions, it remains
irrelevant to Connick’s training obligations. For any
Brady violation apart from Deegan’s was surely on the
very frontier of our Brady jurisprudence; Connick could
not possibly have been on notice decades ago that he was
required to instruct his prosecutors to respect a right to
untested evidence that we had not (and still have not)
——————
6 The dissent’s only response to this is that the jury must have found
otherwise, since it was instructed that “ ‘[f]or liability to attach because
of a failure to train, the fault must be in the training program itself, not
in any particular prosecutor.’ ” Post, at 28, n. 20 (quoting Tr. 1098).
But this instruction did not require the jury to find that Deegan did not
commit a bad-faith, knowing violation; it merely prevented the jury
from finding that, if he did so, Connick was liable for a failure to train.
I not only agree with that; it is part of my point.


8

CONNICK v. THOMPSON
SCALIA, J., concurring

recognized. As a consequence, even if I accepted the dis
sent’s conclusion that failure-to-train liability could be
premised on a single Brady error, I could not agree that
the lack of an accurate training regimen caused the viola
tion Connick has conceded.

