Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

15

Opinion of the Court

refusal of Kent County police to enforce court orders for
the appearance of prospective jurors. Ibid.
No “clearly established” precedent of this Court supports
Smith’s claim that he can make out a prima facie case
merely by pointing to a host of factors that, individually or
in combination, might contribute to a group’s underrepre
sentation. Smith recites a sentence in our Duren opinion
that, he says, placed the burden of proving causation on
the State. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 33, 35. The sentence reads:
“Assuming, arguendo, that the exemptions mentioned by
the court below [those for persons over 65, teachers, and
government workers] would justify failure to achieve a fair
community cross section on jury venires, the State must
demonstrate that these exemptions [rather than the
women’s exemption] caused the underrepresentation
complained of.” 439 U. S., at 368–369. That sentence
appears after the Court had already assigned to Duren—
and found he had carried—the burden of proving that the
underrepresentation “was due to [women’s] systematic
exclusion in the jury-selection process.” Id., at 366. The
Court’s comment, which Smith clipped from its context,
does not concern the demonstration of a prima face case.
Instead, it addresses what the State might show to rebut
the defendant’s prima facie case. The Michigan Supreme
Court was therefore far from “unreasonable,” §2254(d)(1),
in concluding that Duren first and foremost required
Smith himself to show that the underrepresentation com
plained of was “due to systematic exclusion.” Id., at 364;
see Smith, 463 Mich., at 205, 615 N. W. 2d, at 3.
This Court, furthermore, has never “clearly established”
that jury-selection-process features of the kind on Smith’s
list can give rise to a fair-cross-section claim. In Taylor,
we “recognized broad discretion in the States” to “pre
scribe relevant qualifications for their jurors and to pro
vide reasonable exemptions.” 419 U. S., at 537–538. And
in Duren, the Court understood that hardship exemptions

