Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
§2254(d)(2). Finding no infirmity in the Michigan Supreme Court’s
decision when assessed under AEDPA’s standards, the District Court
dismissed Smith’s petition. The Sixth Circuit reversed. The Court of
Appeals ruled, first, that courts should use the comparative disparity
test to measure underrepresentation where, as here, the allegedly ex
cluded group is small. The court then held that Smith’s comparative
disparity statistics demonstrated that African-Americans’ represen
tation in County Circuit Court venires was unfair and unreasonable.
It next stated that Smith had shown systematic exclusion. In accord
with the Michigan intermediate appellate court, the Sixth Circuit be
lieved that the district-court-first assignment order significantly re
duced the number of African-Americans available for Circuit Court
venires. Smith was entitled to relief, the Sixth Circuit concluded, be
cause no important state interest supported the district-court-first al
location system.
Held: The Sixth Circuit erred in ruling that the Michigan Supreme
Court’s decision “involv[ed] an unreasonable application o[f] clearly
established Federal law,” §2254(d)(1). Duren hardly establishes—no
less “clearly” so—that Smith was denied his Sixth Amendment right
to an impartial jury drawn from a fair cross section of the commu
nity. Pp. 10–16.
(a) The Duren defendant readily met all three parts of the Court’s
prima facie test when he complained of the dearth of women in a
county’s jury pool. First, he showed that women in the county were
both “numerous and distinct from men.” 439 U. S., at 364. Second,
to establish underrepresentation, he proved that women were 54% of
the jury-eligible population, but accounted for only 26.7% of those
summoned for jury service, and only 14.5% of those on the postsum
mons weekly venires from which jurors were drawn. Id., at 364–366.
Finally, to show the “systematic” cause of the underrepresentation,
he pointed to Missouri’s law permitting any woman to opt out of jury
service and to the manner in which the county administered that
law. This Court noted that “appropriately tailored” hardship exemp
tions would likely survive a fair-cross-section challenge if justified by
an important state interest, id., at 370, but concluded that no such
interest could justify the exemption for each and every woman, id., at
369–370. Pp. 10–11.
(b) Neither Duren nor any other decision of this Court specifies the
method or test courts must use to measure underrepresentation.
Each of the three methods employed or identified by the courts be
low—absolute disparity, comparative disparity, and standard devia
tion—is imperfect. Absolute disparity and comparative disparity
measurements can be misleading where, as here, members of the dis
tinctive group compose only a small percentage of the community’s

