2

BERGHUIS v. SMITH
Syllabus
Court with a jury pool that did not represent the entire County. The
trial court noted two means of measuring the underrepresentation of
African-Americans on Circuit Court venires. First, the court de
scribed the “absolute disparity” test, under which the percentage of
African-Americans in the jury pool (6%) is subtracted from the per
centage of African-Americans in the local, jury-eligible population
(7.28%). According to this measure, African-Americans were under
represented by 1.28%. Next, the court set out the “comparative dis
parity” test, under which the absolute disparity (1.28%) is divided by
the percentage of African-Americans in the jury-eligible population
(7.28%). The quotient (18%) indicated that, on average, AfricanAmericans were 18% less likely, when compared to the overall jury
eligible population, to be on the jury-service list. In the 11 months
after Kent County discontinued the district-court-first assignment
policy, the comparative disparity, on average, dropped from 18% to
15.1%. The hearing convinced the trial court that African-Americans
were underrepresented on Circuit Court venires. But Smith’s evi
dence, the trial court held, was insufficient to prove that the juror
assignment order, or any other part of the jury-selection process, had
systematically excluded African-Americans. The court therefore re
jected Smith’s fair-cross-section claim.
The state intermediate appellate court reversed and ordered a new
trial with jurors selected under the Circuit-Court-first assignment
order. Reversing in turn, the Michigan Supreme Court concluded
that Smith had not established a prima facie Sixth Amendment vio
lation. This Court, the state High Court observed, has specified no
preferred method for measuring whether representation of a distinc
tive group in the jury pool is fair and reasonable. The court noted
that lower federal courts had applied three tests: the absolute and
comparative disparity tests and a standard deviation test. Adopting
a case-by-case approach allowing consideration of all three means of
measuring underrepresentation, the court found that Smith had
failed to establish a legally significant disparity under any measure
ment. Nevertheless giving Smith the benefit of the doubt on under
representation, the court determined that he had not shown system
atic exclusion.
Smith then filed a federal habeas petition. The Antiterrorism and
Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA) prohibits federal ha
beas relief unless the state court’s adjudication “resulted in a decision
that was contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application of,
clearly established Federal law, as determined by the Supreme Court
of the United States,” 28 U. S. C. §2254(d)(1), or “resulted in a deci
sion that was based on an unreasonable determination of the facts in
light of the evidence presented in the State court proceeding,”

