Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

tive jurors who completed questionnaires, the County
granted requests for hardship exemptions, e.g., for lack of
transportation or child care. Id., at 21a. Kent County
then assigned nonexempt prospective jurors to their local
district courts’ venires. After filling the district courts’
needs, the County assigned the remaining prospective
jurors to the Circuit Court’s panels. Id., at 20a, 22a.
The month after voir dire for Smith’s trial, Kent County
reversed the assignment order. It did so, according to the
Circuit Court Administrator, based on “[t]he belief . . . that
the respective districts essentially swallowed up most of
the minority jurors,” leaving the Circuit Court with a jury
pool that “did not represent the entire county.” Id., at 22a.
The Jury Minority Representation Committee, its co-chair
testified, held the same view concerning the impact of
choosing district court jurors first and not returning un
used persons to the pool available for Circuit Court selec
tions. Id., at 64a–65a.
The trial court considered two means of measuring the
extent of underrepresentation of African-Americans on
Circuit Court venires: “absolute disparity” and “compara
tive disparity.” “Absolute disparity” is determined by
subtracting the percentage of African-Americans in the
jury pool (here, 6% in the six months leading up to Smith’s
trial) from the percentage of African-Americans in the
local, jury-eligible population (here, 7.28%). By an abso
lute disparity measure, therefore, African-Americans were
underrepresented by 1.28%. “Comparative disparity” is
determined by dividing the absolute disparity (here,
1.28%) by the group’s representation in the jury-eligible
population (here, 7.28%).
The quotient (here, 18%),
showed that, in the six months prior to Smith’s trial,
African-Americans were, on average, 18% less likely, when
compared to the overall jury-eligible population, to be on
the jury-service list. App. to Pet. for Cert. 215a.
Isolating the month Smith’s jury was selected, Smith’s

