4

BERGHUIS v. SMITH
Syllabus
jury-eligible population. And it appears that no court has relied ex
clusively on a standard deviation analysis. Even absent AEDPA’s
constraint, this Court would have no cause to take sides here on the
appropriate method or methods for measuring underrepresentation.
Although the Michigan Supreme Court concluded that Smith’s statis
tical evidence failed to establish a legally significant disparity under
either the absolute or comparative disparity tests, the court neverthe
less gave Smith the benefit of the doubt on underrepresentation in
order to reach the issue ultimately dispositive in Duren: To the extent
underrepresentation existed, was it due to “systematic exclusion”?
See Duren, 439 U. S., at 364. Pp. 11–13.
(c) Smith’s evidence gave the Michigan Supreme Court little reason
to conclude that the district-court-first assignment order had any
significant effect on the representation of African-Americans on Cir
cuit Court venires. Although the record established that some
County officials believed that the assignment order created racial
disparities, and the County reversed the order in response, the belief
was not substantiated by Smith’s evidence. He introduced no evi
dence that African-Americans were underrepresented on the Circuit
Court’s venires in significantly higher percentages than on the Dis
trict Court for Grand Rapids, which had the County’s largest AfricanAmerican population. He did not address whether Grand Rapids had
more need for jurors per capita than any other district in Kent
County. And he did not compare the African-American representa
tion levels on Circuit Court venires with those on the Federal District
Court venires for the same region. See Duren, 439 U. S., at 367,
n. 25. Smith’s best evidence of systematic exclusion was the decline
in comparative underrepresentation, from 18 to 15.1%, after Kent
County reversed its assignment order. But that evidence indicated
no large change and was, in any event, insufficient to prove that the
original assignment order had a significantly adverse impact on the
representation of African-Americans on Circuit Court venires. Pp.
13–14.
(d) In addition to renewing his “siphoning” argument, Smith urges
that a laundry list of factors—e.g., the County’s practice of excusing
prospective jurors without adequate proof of alleged hardship, and
the refusal of County police to enforce orders for prospective jurors to
appear—combined to reduce systematically the number of AfricanAmericans appearing on jury lists. No “clearly established” prece
dent of this Court supports Smith’s claim. Smith urges that one sen
tence in Duren, 439 U. S., at 368–369, places the burden of proving
causation on the State. But Smith clipped that sentence from its con
text: The sentence does not concern the demonstration of a prima face
case; instead, it speaks to what the State might show to rebut the de

