2

BERGHUIS v. SMITH
Opinion of the Court

representation is due to systematic exclusion of the group
in the jury-selection process.” Id., at 364. The first show
ing is, in most cases, easily made; the second and third are
more likely to generate controversy.
The defendant in Duren readily met all three measures.
He complained of the dearth of women in the Jackson
County, Missouri, jury pool. To establish underrepresen
tation, he proved that women were 54% of the jury-eligible
population, but accounted for only 26.7% of the persons
summoned for jury service, and only 14.5% of the persons
on the postsummons weekly venires from which jurors
were drawn. To show the “systematic” cause of the under
representation, Duren pointed to Missouri’s law exempt
ing women from jury service, and to the manner in which
Jackson County administered the exemption. Concluding
that no significant state interest could justify Missouri’s
explicitly gender-based exemption, this Court held the
law, as implemented in Jackson County, violative of the
Sixth Amendment’s fair-cross-section requirement.
We here review the decision of the United States Court
of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit holding that Smith “sat
isf[ied] the prima facie test established by Duren,” and
granting him habeas corpus relief, i.e., release from im
prisonment absent a new trial commenced within 180 days
of the Court of Appeals’ order. 543 F. 3d 326, 336 (2008).
Despite marked differences between Smith’s case and
Duren’s, and a cogent Michigan Supreme Court decision
holding that Smith “ha[d] not shown . . . systematic exclu
sion,” People v. Smith, 463 Mich. 199, 205, 615 N. W. 2d 1,
3 (2000), the Sixth Circuit found the matter settled. Cog
nizant of the restrictions Congress placed on federal ha
beas review of state-court convictions, the Court of Ap
peals considered that a decision contrary to its own would
“involv[e] an unreasonable application o[f] clearly estab
lished Federal law, as determined by the Supreme Court
of the United States,” 28 U. S. C. §2254(d)(1). 543 F. 3d,

