Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

Opinion of the Court

reduced the number of African-Americans available for
Circuit Court venires. Id., at 342. Smith was entitled to
relief, the court concluded, because no important state
interest supported that allocation system. Id., at 345.2
The State petitioned for certiorari attacking the Sixth
Circuit’s decision on two principal grounds: First, the
State charged that the federal appellate court erred in
adopting the comparative disparity test to determine
whether a distinctive group was underrepresented in the
jury pool. Pet. for Cert. ii. Second, the State urged that,
in any event, “there was no . . . systematic exclusion of
African Americans from juries in Kent County, Michigan,”
id., at 25, and no warrant for the Sixth Circuit’s contrary
determination.3 We granted review, 557 U. S. ____ (2009),
and now reverse the Sixth Circuit’s judgment.
According to the Sixth Circuit, the Michigan Supreme
Court’s rejection of Smith’s Sixth Amendment plea “in
volved an unreasonable application o[f] clearly established
Federal law, as determined by [this Court in Duren].”
——————
2 The Sixth Circuit also found that the Michigan Supreme Court had
unreasonably applied Duren v. Missouri, 439 U. S. 357 (1979), when it
declared that social and economic factors could not establish systematic
exclusion. 543 F. 3d, at 341–342. Because such factors disproportion
ately affect African-Americans, the Sixth Circuit said, Kent County’s
routine grants of certain hardship exemptions “produced systematic
exclusion within the meaning of Duren.” Ibid. The Sixth Circuit held,
however, that the hardship exemptions could not establish a fair-cross
section claim because the State “has a significant interest [in] avoiding
undue burdens on individuals” by allowing such excuses. Id., at 345.
3 Although the question presented by the State homes in on the
proper measure for underrepresentation, it initially and more compre
hensively inquires whether Smith was denied his right to a jury drawn
from a fair cross section of the community. See Pet. for Cert. ii (asking
“[w]hether the U. S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit erred in
concluding that the Michigan Supreme Court failed to apply ‘clearly
established’ Supreme Court precedent under 28 U. S. C. §2254 on the
issue of the fair cross-section requirement under Duren . . . .”). We
therefore address that overarching issue.

