Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

3

Syllabus
tencing Reform Act sets forth a special and different background
principle in §3553(a)(4)(A)(ii), which applies unless ex post facto concerns are present. Thus, new, lower Guidelines amendments apply to
offenders who committed an offense before the adoption of the
amendments but are sentenced thereafter. Third, language in the
Fair Sentencing Act implies that Congress intended to follow the
Sentencing Reform Act’s special background principle here. Section 8
of the Fair Sentencing Act requires the Commission to promulgate
conforming amendments to the Guidelines that “achieve consistency
with other guideline provisions and applicable law.” Read most naturally, “applicable law” refers to the law as changed by the Fair Sentencing Act, including the provision reducing the crack mandatory
minimums. And consistency with “other guideline provisions” and
with prior Commission practice would require application of the new
Guidelines amendments to offenders who committed their offense before the new amendments’ effective date but were sentenced thereafter. Fourth, applying the 1986 Drug Act’s old mandatory minimums
to the post-August 3 sentencing of pre-August 3 offenders would create sentencing disparities of a kind that Congress enacted the Sentencing Reform Act and the Fair Sentencing Act to prevent. Fifth,
not to apply the Fair Sentencing Act would do more than preserve a
disproportionate status quo; it would make matters worse by creating
new anomalies―new sets of disproportionate sentences―not previously present. That is because sentencing courts must apply the new
Guidelines (consistent with the Fair Sentencing Act’s new minimums) to pre-Act offenders, and the 1986 Drug Act’s old minimums
would trump those new Guidelines for some pre-Act offenders but not
for all of them. Application of the 1986 Drug Act minimums to preAct offenders sentenced after the new Guidelines take effect would
therefore produce a set of sentences at odds with Congress’ basic efforts to create more uniform, more proportionate sentences. Sixth,
this Court has found no strong countervailing considerations that
would make a critical difference. Pp. 10−19.
(b) The new Act’s lower minimums also apply to those who committed an offense prior to August 3 and were sentenced between that
date and November 1, 2010, the effective date of the new Guidelines.
The Act simply instructs the Commission to promulgate new Guidelines “as soon as practicable” (but no later than 90 days after the Act
took effect), and thus as far as Congress was concerned, the Commission might have promulgated those Guidelines to be effective as early
as August 3. In any event, courts, treating the Guidelines as advisory, possess authority to sentence in accordance with the new minimums. Finally, applying the new minimums to all who are sentenced
after August 3 makes it possible to foresee a reasonably smooth tran-

