Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

5

SCALIA, J., dissenting

necessary to achieve consistency with other guideline
provisions and applicable law.” §8, 124 Stat. 2374. The
argument goes that, because the Commission implemented
this directive by reducing the Guidelines ranges for
crack cocaine offenses to track the 18-to-1 crack-to-powder
ratio reflected in the new mandatory minimums, see 75
Fed. Reg. 66191 (2010), and because the general rule is
that a sentencing court should apply the version of the
Guidelines in effect at the time of sentencing, see 18
U. S. C. §3553(a)(4)(A)(ii), Congress must have understood
that the new mandatory minimums would apply immediately, since otherwise there would be a mismatch between
the statutory penalties and Guidelines ranges.
That conclusion simply does not follow. For one thing,
the argument begs the very question presented here: What
is the “applicable law” relevant to pre-enactment offenders
who are sentenced after enactment? The Commission
could well have answered this question by concluding that,
in light of §109, the law applicable to such offenders is
the pre-Act mandatory minimums. It might therefore have
retained, as to those offenders, the existing Guidelines
ranges reflecting a higher crack-to-powder ratio. Although
rare, it is not unheard of for the Commission to establish
Guidelines whose application turns on the date of commission of the defendant’s offense. See United States Sentencing Commission, Guidelines Manual §5E1.1(g)(1)
(Nov. 2011) (governing restitution for offenses committed
on or after November 1, 1997, and providing that the prior
version of the Guideline shall govern all other cases); id.,
§8B1.1(f)(1) (same for restitution obligations of organizational defendants). Of course, the Commission did not
interpret the Fair Sentencing Act’s directive in this manner. But the possibility that it could (not to mention
the probability that it should) have done so illustrates the
folly of basing inferences about what Congress intended
when it passed the Fair Sentencing Act on decisions the

