Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

7

SCALIA, J., dissenting

sentencing for non-marijuana federal drug offenses, see
Administrative Office of United States Courts, Judicial
Business of the United States Courts, p. 272 (2010) (Table
D–10), does not establish that prompt issuance of new
Guidelines for post-Act offenders could not have been a
pressing concern. Because that is a median figure, it shows
that half of all drug defendants are sentenced sooner
than 11 months after being indicted. And it is only an
aggregate figure. For drug possession offenses—relevant
here because the Fair Sentencing Act eliminated the
mandatory minimum sentence previously applicable to
simple possession of crack cocaine, see §3, 124 Stat.
2372—the equivalent figure was just 5.4 months from
indictment to sentencing. The pace of criminal cases also
varies considerably from district to district. In the Eastern District of Virginia, for instance, the median time from
indictment to sentencing for all criminal cases was just 3.6
months. See Judicial Business, supra, at 252 (Table D–6).
What is more, without the Fair Sentencing Act’s emergency directive, amendments to the Guidelines to implement
the Act likely would not have been put in place until more
than a year after its passage.2 In the interim, a great
——————
2 In the ordinary course, the Commission may submit proposed
Guidelines amendments to Congress “at or after the beginning of a
regular session of Congress, but not later than the first day of May.” 28
U. S. C. §994(p).
Unless disapproved by Congress, the proposed
amendments “take effect on a date specified by the Commission, which
shall be no earlier than 180 days after being so submitted and no
later than the first day of November of the calendar year in which
the amendment . . . is submitted.” Ibid. As a matter of practice, the
Commission has adopted November 1 as the default effective date for
its proposed amendments. See United States Sentencing Commission,
Rules of Practice and Procedure, Rule 4.1 (amended Aug. 2007).
Because the Fair Sentencing Act was enacted on August 3, 2010—after
May 1—there would have been no opportunity for the Commission to
submit proposed amendments to Congress until January 2011. Given
the 180-day waiting period, the amendments could not have gone into
force until the very end of June 2011 at the earliest. And in all likeli-

