Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

17

Opinion of the Court

requires application of those new Guidelines to all offenders (including pre-Act offenders) who are sentenced
once those new Guidelines take effect. See 18 U. S. C.
§3553(a)(4)(A)(ii). Those new Guidelines must take effect
and apply to a pre-Act 4-gram offender, for such an offender was never subject to a trumping statutory 1986
Drug Act mandatory minimum. However, unless the Fair
Sentencing Act’s new, more lenient mandatory minimums apply to pre-Act offenders, an otherwise identical offender who possessed five grams would have to receive a
5-year sentence. See 21 U. S. C. §841(b)(1)(B) (2006 ed.,
Supp. IV).
For example, imagine that on July 1, 2010, both Smith
and Jones commit a crack crime identical but for the fact
that Smith possesses with intent to distribute four grams
of crack and Jones five grams. Both are sentenced on
December 1, 2010, after the Fair Sentencing Act and the
new Guidelines take effect. Smith’s Guidelines sentence
would be two years, but unless the Fair Sentencing Act
applies, Jones’s sentence would have to be five years. The
difference of one gram would make a difference, not of only
one year as it did before enactment of the Fair Sentencing
Act, but instead of three years. Passage of the new Act,
designed to have brought about fairer sentences, would
here have created a new disparate sentencing “cliff.”
Nor can one say that the new Act would produce disproportionalities like this in only a few cases. In fiscal year
2010, 17.8 percent of all crack offenders were convicted ofoffenses not subject to the 1986 Drug Act’s minimums.
2011 Report 191. And since those minimums apply only to
some drug offenders and they apply in different ways, one
can find many similar examples of disproportionalities.
See Appendix B, infra. Thus, application of the 1986 Drug
Act minimums to pre-Act offenders sentenced after the
new Guidelines take effect would produce a crazy quilt of
sentences, at odds with Congress’ basic efforts to achieve

