14

DORSEY v. UNITED STATES
Opinion of the Court

Third, language in the Fair Sentencing Act implies
that Congress intended to follow the Sentencing Reform Act
background principle here. A section of the Fair Sentencing Act entitled “Emergency Authority for United States
Sentencing Commission” requires the Commission to promulgate “as soon as practicable” (and not later than 90
days after August 3, 2010) “conforming amendments” to
the Guidelines that “achieve consistency with other guideline provisions and applicable law.” §8, 124 Stat. 2374.
Read most naturally, “applicable law” refers to the law as
changed by the Fair Sentencing Act, including the provision reducing the crack mandatory minimums. §2(a),
id., at 2372. As the Commission understood this provision, achieving consistency with “other guideline provisions” means reducing the base offense levels for all crack
amounts proportionally (using the new 18-to-1 ratio), including the offense levels governing small amounts of
crack that did not fall within the scope of the mandatory
minimum provisions. 75 Fed. Reg. 66191. And consistency with “other guideline provisions” and with prior Commission practice would require application of the new
Guidelines amendments to offenders who committed their
offense prior to the new amendments’ effective date but
were sentenced thereafter. See USSG §1B1.11(a); e.g.,
USSG App. C, amdts. 706, 711 (Supp. Nov. 2004–Nov.
2007); see also Memorandum from G. Schmitt, L. Reed, &
K. Cohen, USSC, to Chair Hinojosa et al., Subject: Analysis of the Impact of the Crack Cocaine Amendment if
Made Retroactive 23 (Oct. 3, 2007). Cf. USSG App. C,
amdt. 571 (amendment increasing restitution, which may
present ex post facto and one-book-rule concerns, would
apply only to defendants sentenced for post-amendment
offenses), discussed post, at 5 (SCALIA, J., dissenting).
Fourth, applying the 1986 Drug Act’s old mandatory
minimums to the post-August 3 sentencing of pre-August 3
offenders would create disparities of a kind that Congress

