Cite as: 567 U. S. ____ (2012)

13

Opinion of the Court

background principle when it enacts new criminal statutes. E.g., Great Northern R. Co., supra, at 465; Hertz,
supra, at 217; cf. Marcello, supra, at 310. And the principle requires courts, before interpreting a new criminal
statute to apply its new penalties to a set of pre-Act offenders, to assure themselves that ordinary interpretive
considerations point clearly in that direction. Words such
as “plain import,” “fair implication,” or the like reflect the
need for that assurance. And it is that assurance, which
we shall assume is conveyed by the phrases “plain import”
or “fair implication,” that we must look for here.
Second, the Sentencing Reform Act sets forth a special
and different background principle. That statute says that
when “determining the particular sentence to be imposed”
in an initial sentencing, the sentencing court “shall consider,” among other things, the “sentencing range” established by the Guidelines that are “in effect on the date
the defendant is sentenced.” 18 U. S. C. §3553(a)(4)(A)(ii)
(emphasis added). Although the Constitution’s Ex Post
Facto Clause, Art. I, §9, cl. 3, prohibits applying a new
Act’s higher penalties to pre-Act conduct, it does not prohibit applying lower penalties. See Calder v. Bull, 3 Dall.
386, 390–391 (1798); Collins v. Youngblood, 497 U. S.
37, 41–44 (1990). The Sentencing Commission has consequently instructed sentencing judges to “use the Guidelines Manual in effect on the date that the defendant is
sentenced,” regardless of when the defendant committed
the offense, unless doing so “would violate the ex post facto
clause.” USSG §1B1.11. And therefore when the Commission adopts new, lower Guidelines amendments, those
amendments become effective to offenders who committed
an offense prior to the adoption of the new amendments
but are sentenced thereafter. Just as we assume Congress
was aware of the 1871 Act’s background norm, so we
assume that Congress was aware of this different background sentencing principle.

