Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

Opinion of the Court

barriers to a determination by this Court of the validity
under the federal constitution of state action.” Ibid.
To that end, we announced, in Michigan v. Long, 463
U. S. 1032, 1040–1041 (1983), the following presumption:
“[W]hen . . . a state court decision fairly appears to
rest primarily on federal law, or to be interwoven with
the federal law, and when the adequacy and inde
pendence of any possible state law ground is not clear
from the face of the opinion, we will accept as the
most reasonable explanation that the state court de
cided the case the way it did because it believed that
federal law required it to do so.”
At the same time, we adopted a plain-statement rule to
avoid the presumption: “If the state court decision indi
cates clearly and expressly that it is alternatively based on
bona fide separate, adequate, and independent grounds,
we, of course, will not undertake to review the decision.”
Id., at 1041.2
Under the Long presumption, we have jurisdiction to
entertain this case. Although invoking Florida’s Constitu
tion and precedent in addition to this Court’s decisions,
the Florida Supreme Court treated state and federal law
as interchangeable and interwoven; the court at no point
——————
2 Dissenting

in Michigan v. Long, 463 U. S. 1032 (1983), JUSTICE
STEVENS did not urge, as he now does, inspection of state-court deci
sions to count the number of citations to state and federal provisions
and opinions, or heroic efforts to fathom what the state court really
meant. See post, at 3–7 (dissenting opinion). Instead, his preferred
approach was as clear as the Court’s. In lieu of “presuming that
adequate state grounds are not independent unless it clearly appears
otherwise,” he would have “presum[ed] that adequate state grounds are
independent unless it clearly appears otherwise.” Long, 463 U. S., at
1066; see post, at 2, n. 1. Either presumption would avoid arduous
efforts to detect, case by case, whether a state ground of decision is
truly “independent of the [state court’s] understanding of federal law.”
Long, 463 U. S., at 1066. Today, however, the dissent would require
this Court to engage in just that sort of inquiry.

