(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2009

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

FLORIDA v. POWELL
CERTIORARI TO THE SUPREME COURT OF FLORIDA
No. 08–1175. Argued December 7, 2009—Decided February 23, 2010
In a pathmarking decision, Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U. S. 436, 471, this
Court held that an individual must be “clearly informed,” prior to
custodial questioning, that he has, among other rights, “the right to
consult with a lawyer and to have the lawyer with him during inter
rogation.”
After arresting respondent Powell, but before questioning him,
Tampa Police read him their standard Miranda form, stating, inter
alia: “You have the right to talk to a lawyer before answering any of
our questions” and “[y]ou have the right to use any of these rights at
any time you want during this interview.” Powell then admitted he
owned a handgun found in a police search. He was charged with pos
session of a weapon by a convicted felon in violation of Florida law.
The trial court denied Powell’s motion to suppress his inculpatory
statements, which was based on the contention that the Miranda
warnings he received did not adequately convey his right to the pres
ence of an attorney during questioning. Powell was convicted of the
gun-possession charge, but the intermediate appellate court held that
the trial court should have suppressed the statements. The Florida
Supreme Court agreed. It noted that both Miranda and the State
Constitution require that a suspect be clearly informed of the right to
have a lawyer present during questioning. The advice Powell re
ceived was misleading, the court believed, because it suggested that
he could consult with an attorney only before the police started to
question him and did not convey his entitlement to counsel’s presence
throughout the interrogation.
Held:
1. This Court has jurisdiction to hear this case. Powell contends
that jurisdiction is lacking because the Florida Supreme Court relied
on the State’s Constitution as well as Miranda, hence the decision

