Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

STEVENS, J., dissenting

the Courts of Appeals taking the most flexible approach to
Miranda have found warnings like Powell’s misleading
should caution the Court against concluding that such a
warning reasonably conveyed Powell’s right to have an
attorney with him during the interrogation.
When the relevant clause of the warning in this case is
given its most natural reading, the catchall clause does
not meaningfully clarify Powell’s rights. It communicated
that Powell could exercise the previously listed rights at
any time. Yet the only previously listed right was the
“right to talk to a lawyer before answering any of [the
officers’] questions.” App. 3 (emphasis added). Informing
Powell that he could exercise, at any time during the
interview, the right to talk to a lawyer before answering
any questions did not reasonably convey the right to talk
to a lawyer after answering some questions, much less
implicitly inform Powell of his right to have a lawyer with
him at all times during interrogation. An intelligent
suspect could reasonably conclude that all he was provided
was a one-time right to consult with an attorney, not a
right to have an attorney present with him in the interro
gation room at all times.10
——————
state court’s assessment that warning a suspect solely that “he had the
right to consult or speak to an attorney before questioning . . . might
have created the [impermissible] impression that the attorney could not
be present during interrogation.” Ibid. (internal quotation marks
omitted).
10 The Court supports its analysis by taking note of Powell’s testi
mony at trial, given after the trial judge had overruled his lawyer’s
objection that the warning he received was inadequate. In my view, the
testimony in context is not probative of what Powell thought the
warnings meant. It did not explore what Powell understood the warn
ings to mean, but simply established, as a prelude to Powell’s testimony
explaining his prior statement, that he had waived his rights. Regard
less, the testimony is irrelevant, as the Court acknowledges. “No
amount of circumstantial evidence that a person may have been aware
of [the right to have a lawyer with him during interrogation] will suffice
to stand” in the stead of an adequate warning. Miranda v. Arizona, 384

