6

FLORIDA v. POWELL
STEVENS, J., dissenting

lawyer’s help” under the Florida Constitution. Id., at 540.
Moreover, the state cases relied upon by the Florida
Supreme Court did not themselves rely exclusively on
federal law. The primary case relied upon for the state
law holding, Traylor, rested exclusively upon state law.
See 596 So. 2d, at 961. In that decision, the Florida Su
preme Court embraced the principle that “[w]hen called
upon to decide matters of fundamental rights, Florida’s
state courts are bound under federalist principles to give
primacy to our state Constitution and to give independent
legal import to every phrase and clause contained
therein.” Id., at 962. Elaborating upon the meaning of
Art. I, §9 of the Florida Constitution, the Florida Supreme
Court explained the roots of Florida’s commitment to
protecting its citizens from self-incrimination. Florida has
long “required as a matter of state law that one charged
with a crime be informed of his rights prior to rendering a
confession.” Id., at 964. It has required warnings before
some interrogations since at least 1889, and has for that
long excluded confessions obtained in violation of those
rules. Ibid. In sum, this case looks quite different from
those cases in which we have applied the Long presump
tion in the past.
The Court concludes otherwise by relying primarily
upon the formulation of the certified question and re
statements of that question within the Florida Supreme
Court’s opinion. See ante, at 6. Yet while the certified
question asks whether particular phrases “vitiate[d]
Miranda warnings,” 998 So. 2d, at 532 (capitalization and
footnote omitted), Miranda has become a generic term to
refer to the warnings suspects must be given before inter
rogation, see Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 792
(11th ed. 2003) (defining “Miranda” as “of, relating to, or
being the legal rights of an arrested person to have an
attorney and to remain silent so as to avoid self
incrimination”). Thus, its invocation of Miranda in the

