2

FLORIDA v. POWELL
STEVENS, J., dissenting

ence of state courts” and “avoidance of rendering advisory
opinions.” Michigan v. Long, 463 U. S. 1032, 1040 (1983).
In Long, the Court adopted a novel presumption in favor
of jurisdiction when the independence of a state court’s
state-law judgment is not clear. But we only respect the
independence of state courts and avoid rendering advisory
opinions if we limit the application of that presumption to
truly ambiguous cases.1 This is not such a case.
“[I]f the same judgment would be rendered by the state
court after we corrected its views of federal laws, our
review could amount to nothing more than an advisory
opinion.” Herb v. Pitcairn, 324 U. S. 117, 126 (1945). In
Long we advised every state court of a formula by which it
could assure us that our review would indeed amount to
nothing more than an advisory opinion. The state court
“need only make clear by a plain statement in its judg
ment or opinion that the federal cases are being used only
for the purpose of guidance, and do not themselves compel
the result that the court has reached.” 463 U. S., at 1041.
That advice has sometimes been misunderstood as a com
mand that unless such a plain statement is included in a
state-court opinion, the court’s ruling cannot have rested
on an adequate and independent state ground. But the
real question is whether “the adequacy and independence
of any possible state law ground is . . . clear from the face
——————
1 In my view, this Court would better respect the independence of
state courts by applying the opposite presumption, as it did in the years
prior to 1983. See Long, 463 U. S., at 1066–1067 (STEVENS, J., dissent
ing). But accepting Long as the law, we can limit its negative effects—
unnecessary intrusion into the business of the state courts and unnec
essary advisory opinions—only if we limit its application to cases in
which the independence of the state-law ground is in serious doubt.
See Pennsylvania v. Labron, 518 U. S. 938, 950 (1996) (STEVENS, J.,
dissenting) (“[T]he unfortunate effects of [its] rule” are “exacerbate[d]
. . . to a nearly intolerable degree” when the Long presumption is
applied to cases in which “the state-law ground supporting th[e] judg
men[t] is so much clearer than has been true on most prior occasions”).

