Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

Syllabus
swering any of [their] questions,” the Tampa officers communicated
that he could consult with a lawyer before answering any particular
question. And the statement that Powell had “the right to use any of
[his] rights at any time [he] want[ed] during th[e] interview” con
firmed that he could exercise his right to an attorney while the inter
rogation was underway. In combination, the two warnings reasona
bly conveyed the right to have an attorney present, not only at the
outset of interrogation, but at all times. To reach the opposite con
clusion, i.e., that the attorney would not be present throughout the
interrogation, the suspect would have to imagine the counterintuitive
and unlikely scenario that, in order to consult counsel, he would be
obliged to exit and reenter the interrogation room between each
query. Likewise unavailing is the Florida Supreme Court’s conclu
sion that the warning was misleading because the temporal language
that Powell could “talk to a lawyer before answering any of [the offi
cers’] questions” suggested he could consult with an attorney only be
fore the interrogation started. In context, the term “before” merely
conveyed that Powell’s right to an attorney became effective before he
answered any questions at all. Nothing in the words used indicated
that counsel’s presence would be restricted after the questioning
commenced. Powell suggests that today’s holding will tempt law en
forcement agencies to end-run Miranda by amending their warnings
to introduce ambiguity. But, as the Federal Government explains, it
is in law enforcement’s own interest to state warnings with maxi
mum clarity in order to reduce the risk that a court will later find the
advice inadequate and therefore suppress a suspect’s statement. The
standard warnings used by the Federal Bureau of Investigation are
admirably informative, but the Court declines to declare their precise
formulation necessary to meet Miranda’s requirements. Different
words were used in the advice Powell received, but they communi
cated the same message. Pp. 9–13.
998 So. 2d 531, reversed and remanded.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, KENNEDY, THOMAS, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ.,
joined, and in which BREYER, J., joined as to Part II. STEVENS, J., filed a
dissenting opinion, in which BREYER, J., joined as to Part II.

