2

FLORIDA v. POWELL
Syllabus
rested on an adequate and independent state ground. See Coleman
v. Thompson, 501 U. S. 722, 729. Under Michigan v. Long, 463 U. S.
1032, 1040–1041, however, when a state court decision fairly appears
to rest primarily on federal law, or to be interwoven with federal law,
and the adequacy and independence of any possible state-law ground
is not clear from the face of its opinion, this Court presumes that fed
eral law controlled the state court’s decision. Although invoking Flor
ida’s Constitution and precedent in addition to this Court’s decisions,
the Florida court did not expressly assert that state-law sources gave
Powell rights distinct from, or broader than, those delineated in
Miranda. See Long, 463 U. S., at 1044. The state-court opinion con
sistently trained on what Miranda demands, rather than on what
Florida law independently requires. This Court therefore cannot
identify, “from the face of the opinion,” a clear statement that the de
cision rested on a state ground separate from Miranda. See Long,
463 U. S., at 1041. Because the opinion does not “indicat[e] clearly
and expressly that it is alternatively based on bona fide separate,
adequate, and independent [state] grounds,” Long, 463 U. S., at 1041,
this Court has jurisdiction. Pp. 4–7.
2. Advice that a suspect has “the right to talk to a lawyer before
answering any of [the law enforcement officers’] questions,” and that
he can invoke this right “at any time . . . during th[e] interview,” sat
isfies Miranda. Pp. 7–13.
(a) Miranda requires that a suspect “be warned prior to any
questioning . . . that he has the right to the presence of an attorney.”
384 U. S., at 479. This Miranda warning addresses the Court’s par
ticular concern that “[t]he circumstances surrounding in-custody in
terrogation can operate very quickly to overbear the will of one
merely made aware of his privilege [to remain silent] by his interro
gators.” Id., at 469. Responsive to that concern, the Court stated, as
“an absolute prerequisite to interrogation,” that an individual held
for questioning “must be clearly informed that he has the right to
consult with a lawyer and to have the lawyer with him during inter
rogation.” Id., at 471. While the warnings prescribed by Miranda
are invariable, this Court has not dictated the words in which the es
sential information must be conveyed. See, e.g., California v. Pry
sock, 453 U. S. 355, 359. In determining whether police warnings
were satisfactory, reviewing courts are not required to “examine
[them] as if construing a will or defining the terms of an easement.
The inquiry is simply whether the warnings reasonably ‘conve[y] to
[a suspect] his rights as required by Miranda.’ ” Duckworth v.
Eagan, 492 U. S. 195, 203. Pp. 7–9.
(b) The warnings Powell received satisfy this standard. By in
forming Powell that he had “the right to talk to a lawyer before an

