Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

7

STEVENS, J., dissenting

certified question and in its statement of the issue
presented is entirely consistent with the fact that the
state-law basis for its decision is fully adequate and
independent.
That said, I agree with the Court that the decision below
is interwoven with federal law. In reaching its state-law
holding, the Florida Supreme Court found Miranda and
our other precedents instructive.6 But that alone is insuf
ficient to assure our jurisdiction, even under Long. In my
view, the judgment—reversal of Powell’s conviction—is
supported by the Florida Supreme Court’s independent
and carefully considered holding that these warnings were
inadequate under the Florida Constitution. See 998
So. 2d, at 534–535, 537–538, 540, 542.
The Court acknowledges that nothing in today’s decision
“trenches on the Florida Supreme Court’s authority to
impose, based on the State’s Constitution, any additional
protections against coerced confessions it deems appropri
ate.” Ante, at 7. As the Florida Supreme Court has noted
on more than one occasion, its interpretation of the Flor
ida Constitution’s privilege against self-incrimination need
not track our construction of the parallel provision in the
——————
6 The Florida Supreme Court need not have decided that state-law
sources “gave Powell rights . . . broader than . . . those delineated in
Miranda,” ante, at 6, in order for its judgment to have rested upon an
independent state-law ground. The independence of a state-law ground
may be especially clear when a state court explicitly finds that the state
constitution is more protective of a certain right than the national
charter, but a state constitutional provision is no less independent for
providing the same protection in a given case as does the federal
provision, so long as the content of the state-law right is not compelled
by or dependent upon federal law. Unlike other provisions of Art. I of
the Florida Constitution, §9 does not contain an express proviso requir
ing that the right be construed in conformity with the analogous federal
provision. Compare Fla. Const., Art. I, §9, with Fla. Const., Art I, §12.
Furthermore, under Florida law the scope of Art. I, §9 is clearly not
dependent upon federal law. Rigterink v. State, 2 So. 3d 221, 241 (Fla.
2009); Traylor v. State, 596 So. 2d 957, 962 (Fla. 1992).

