Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

5

STEVENS, J., dissenting

The Florida Supreme Court did not merely cite the
Florida Constitution a time or two without state-law
analysis.5 Rather, the court discussed and relied on the
separate rights provided under Art. I, §9 of the Florida
Constitution. For example, after a paragraph describing
the general scope of Miranda warnings under federal law,
the Court explained the general scope of warnings under
state law. 998 So. 2d, at 534–535 (“[T]o ensure the volun
tariness of confessions as required by article I, section 9 of
the Florida Constitution, this Court in Traylor v. State,
596 So. 2d 957 (Fla. 1992), outlined the . . . rights Florida
suspects must be told of prior to custodial interrogation,”
which includes “ ‘that they have a right to a lawyer’s
help’ ”). The court consistently referred to these state-law
rights as separate and distinct from Miranda, noting that
in its earlier cases, it had explained that “the require
ments of both the Fifth Amendment, as explained in
Miranda, and the Florida Constitution, as explained in
Traylor,” include “the requirement that a suspect be in
formed of the right to have counsel present during ques
tioning.” 998 So. 2d, at 537–538. And when applying the
law to the specific facts of this case, the Florida Supreme
Court again invoked the specific and distinct “right to a
——————
court’s opinion analyzed federal law. 518 U. S., at 939. The Court’s
analysis proved wrong; on remand, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court
reaffirmed its prior holding and “explicitly note[d] that it was, in fact,
decided upon independent grounds, i.e., Article I, Section 8 of the
Pennsylvania Constitution.” Commonwealth v. Labron, 547 Pa. 344,
345, 690 A. 2d 228 (1997). That we have overreached before is no
reason to repeat the mistake again.
5 In examining what the state-court opinion said regarding state law,
and whether the state precedent cited in the opinion relied upon state
law, I am undertaking no effort more arduous than what the Court has
typically undertaken in order to determine whether the Long presump
tion applies: examining how frequently a state-court opinion cited state
law, whether state law is coextensive with federal law, and whether the
cited state cases relied upon federal law. See nn. 2–3, supra.

