Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

9

STEVENS, J., dissenting

tion. Although we have never required “rigidity in the
form of the required warnings,” California v. Prysock, 453
U. S. 355, 359 (1981) (per curiam), this is, I believe, the
first time the Court has approved a warning which, if
given its natural reading, entirely omitted an essential
element of a suspect’s rights.
Despite the failure of the warning to mention it, in the
Court’s view the warning “reasonably conveyed” to Powell
that he had the right to a lawyer’s presence during the
interrogation. Ante, at 10. The Court cobbles together
this conclusion from two elements of the warning. First,
the Court assumes the warning regarding Powell’s right
“to talk to a lawyer before answering any of [the officers’]
questions,” App. 3, conveyed that “Powell could consult
with a lawyer before answering any particular question,”
ante, at 10 (emphasis added).7 Second, in the Court’s
view, the addition of a catchall clause at the end of the
recitation of rights “confirmed” that Powell could use his
right to consult an attorney “while the interrogation was
underway.” Ibid.
The more natural reading of the warning Powell was
given, which (1) contained a temporal limit and (2) failed
to mention his right to the presence of counsel in the
interrogation room, is that Powell only had the right to
consult with an attorney before the interrogation began,
not that he had the right to have an attorney with him
during questioning. Even those few Courts of Appeals
that have approved warnings that did not expressly men
——————
7 This

assumption makes it easier for the Court to conclude the warn
ing conveyed a right to have a lawyer present. If a suspect is told he
has the right to consult with an attorney before answering any particu
lar question, the Court may be correct that he would reasonably con
clude he has the right to a lawyer’s presence because otherwise he
would have to imagine he could consult his attorney in some unlikely
fashion (e.g., by leaving the interrogation room between every ques
tion).

