12

FLORIDA v. POWELL
Opinion of the Court

interview.” App. 3 (emphasis added). Although the warn
ings were not the clearest possible formulation of
Miranda’s right-to-counsel advisement, they were suffi
ciently comprehensive and comprehensible when given a
commonsense reading.
Pursuing a different line of argument, Powell points out
that most jurisdictions in Florida and across the Nation
expressly advise suspects of the right to have counsel
present both before and during interrogation. Brief for
Respondent 41–44. If we find the advice he received ade
quate, Powell suggests, law enforcement agencies, hoping
to obtain uninformed waivers, will be tempted to end-run
Miranda by amending their warnings to introduce ambi
guity. Brief for Respondent 50–53. But as the United
States explained as amicus curiae in support of the State
of Florida, “law enforcement agencies have little reason to
assume the litigation risk of experimenting with novel
Miranda formulations,” Brief for United States as Amicus
Curiae 6; instead, it is “desirable police practice” and “in
law enforcement’s own interest” to state warnings with
maximum clarity, id., at 12. See also id., at 11 (“By using
a conventional and precise formulation of the warnings,
police can significantly reduce the risk that a court will
later suppress the suspect’s statement on the ground that
the advice was inadequate.”).
For these reasons, “all . . . federal law enforcement
agencies explicitly advise . . . suspect[s] of the full contours
of each [Miranda] right, including the right to the pres
ence of counsel during questioning.” Id., at 12. The stan
dard warnings used by the Federal Bureau of Investiga
tion are exemplary. They provide, in relevant part: “You
have the right to talk to a lawyer for advice before we ask
you any questions. You have the right to have a lawyer
with you during questioning.” Ibid., n. 3 (internal quota
tion marks omitted). This advice is admirably informa
tive, but we decline to declare its precise formulation

