Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

3

STEVENS, J., dissenting

of the opinion.” Id., at 1040–1041. Even if a state court
opinion does not include the magic words set forth in
Long, or some similarly explicit sentence, we lack jurisdic
tion if it is nonetheless apparent that the decision is in
deed supported by an adequate and independent state
ground. Contrary to the assumption made by the Court,
we have no power to assume jurisdiction that does not
otherwise exist simply because the Florida Supreme Court
did not include in its decision some express statement that
its interpretation of state law is independent.
In my view, we can tell from the face of the Florida
Supreme Court’s opinion that “the decision rested on a
state ground separate from Miranda,” ante, at 6. This
case is easily distinguished from Long in that regard. In
Long, although the Michigan Supreme Court had twice
cited the Michigan Constitution in its opinion, it “relied
exclusively on its understanding of Terry [v. Ohio, 392
U. S. 1 (1968),] and other federal cases. Not a single state
case was cited to support the state court’s holding that the
search of the passenger compartment was unconstitu
tional.” 463 U. S., at 1043. There was, in short, nothing
to “indicate that the decision below rested on grounds in
any way independent from the state court’s interpretation
of federal law.” Id., at 1044.
Other cases in which we have applied the Long pre
sumption have been similarly devoid of independent state
law analysis. We typically apply the Long presumption
when the state court’s decision cited a state constitutional
provision only a few times or not at all, and rested exclu
sively upon federal cases or upon state cases that them
selves cited only federal law.2 We have also applied Long
——————
2 See, e.g., Illinois v. Fisher, 540 U. S. 544, 547, n. (2004) (per curiam)
(describing decision below as relying upon the portion of a state prece
dent that solely discussed due process under the Federal Constitution);
Ohio v. Robinette, 519 U. S. 33, 37 (1996) (“[T]he only cases [the opin
ion] discusses or even cites are federal cases, except for one state case

