Cite as: 559 U. S. ____ (2010)

11

Opinion of the Court

To reach the opposite conclusion, i.e., that the attorney
would not be present throughout the interrogation, the
suspect would have to imagine an unlikely scenario: To
consult counsel, he would be obliged to exit and reenter
the interrogation room between each query. A reasonable
suspect in a custodial setting who has just been read his
rights, we believe, would not come to the counterintuitive
conclusion that he is obligated, or allowed, to hop in and
out of the holding area to seek his attorney’s advice.6
Instead, the suspect would likely assume that he must
stay put in the interrogation room and that his lawyer
would be there with him the entire time.7
The Florida Supreme Court found the warning mislead
ing because it believed the temporal language—that Pow
ell could “talk to a lawyer before answering any of [the
officers’] questions”—suggested Powell could consult with
an attorney only before the interrogation started. 998
So. 2d, at 541. See also Brief for Respondent 28–29. In
context, however, the term “before” merely conveyed when
Powell’s right to an attorney became effective—namely,
before he answered any questions at all. Nothing in the
words used indicated that counsel’s presence would be
restricted after the questioning commenced. Instead, the
warning communicated that the right to counsel carried
forward to and through the interrogation: Powell could
seek his attorney’s advice before responding to “any of [the
officers’] questions” and “at any time . . . during th[e]
——————
6 It is equally unlikely that the suspect would anticipate a scenario of
this order: His lawyer would be admitted into the interrogation room
each time the police ask him a question, then ushered out each time the
suspect responds.
7 Although it does not bear on our decision, Powell seems to have
understood the warning this way. The following exchange between
Powell and his attorney occurred when Powell testified at his trial:
“Q. You waived the right to have an attorney present during your
questioning by detectives; is that what you’re telling this jury?
“A. Yes.” App. 80.

