(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

KASTEN v. SAINT-GOBAIN PERFORMANCE 

PLASTICS CORP. 

CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–834.

Argued October 13, 2010—Decided March 22, 2011

Petitioner Kasten brought an antiretaliation suit against his former
employer, respondent (Saint-Gobain), under the Fair Labor Stan
dards Act of 1938 (Act), which provides minimum wage, maximum
hour, and overtime pay rules; and which forbids employers “to dis
charge . . . any employee because such employee has filed any com
plaint” alleging a violation of the Act, 29 U. S. C. §215(a)(3). In a re
lated suit, the District Court found that Saint-Gobain violated the
Act by placing timeclocks in a location that prevented workers from
receiving credit for the time they spent donning and doffing work
related protective gear. In this suit Kasten claims that he was dis
charged because he orally complained to company officials about the
timeclocks. The District Court granted Saint-Gobain summary
judgment, concluding that the Act’s antiretaliation provision did not
cover oral complaints. The Seventh Circuit affirmed.
Held: The scope of statutory term “filed any complaint” includes oral, as
well as written, complaints. Pp. 4–15.
(a) The interpretation of the statutory phrase “depends upon read
ing the whole statutory text, considering the [statute’s] purpose and
context . . . , and consulting any precedents or authorities that inform
the analysis.” Dolan v. Postal Service, 546 U. S. 481, 486. The text,
taken alone, cannot provide a conclusive answer here. Some diction
ary definitions of “filed” contemplate a writing while others permit
using “file” in conjunction with oral material. In addition to diction
ary definitions, state statutes and federal regulations sometimes con
template oral filings, and contemporaneous judicial usage shows that
oral filings were a known phenomenon at the time of the Act’s pas
sage. Even if “filed,” considered alone, might suggest a narrow inter


2

KASTEN v. SAINT-GOBAIN PERFORMANCE 

PLASTICS CORP.

Syllabus 

pretation limited to writings, “any complaint” suggests a broad inter
pretation that would include an oral complaint. Thus, the three-word
phrase, taken by itself, cannot answer the interpretive question. The
Act’s other references to “filed” also do not resolve the linguistic ques
tion. Some of those provisions involve filed material that is virtually
always in writing; others specifically require a writing, and the re
mainder, like the provision here, leave the oral/written question un
resolved. Since “filed any complaint” lends itself linguistically to the
broader, “oral” interpretation, the use of broader language in other
statutes’ antiretaliation provisions does not indicate whether Con
gress did or did not intend to leave oral grievances unprotected here.
Because the text, taken alone, might, or might not, encompass oral
complaints, the Court must look further. Pp. 4–8.
(b) Several functional considerations indicate that Congress in
tended the antiretaliation provision to cover oral, as well as written,
complaints. Pp. 8–14.
(1) A narrow interpretation would undermine the Act’s basic ob
jective, which is to prohibit “labor conditions detrimental to the
maintenance of the minimum standard of living necessary for health,
efficiency, and general well-being of workers,” 29 U. S. C. §202(a).
The Act relies for enforcement of its substantive standards on “infor
mation and complaints received from employees,” Mitchell v. Robert
DeMario Jewelry, Inc., 361 U. S. 288, 292, and its antiretaliation pro
vision makes the enforcement scheme effective by preventing “fear of
economic retaliation” from inducing workers “quietly to accept sub
standard conditions,” ibid. Why would Congress want to limit the en
forcement scheme’s effectiveness by inhibiting use of the Act’s com
plaint procedure by those who would find it difficult to reduce their
complaints to writing, particularly the illiterate, less educated, or
overworked workers who were most in need of the Act’s help at the
time of passage? Limiting the provision’s scope to written complaints
could prevent Government agencies from using hotlines, interviews,
and other oral methods to receive complaints. And insofar as the
provision covers complaints made to employers, a limiting reading
would discourage using informal workplace grievance procedures to
secure compliance with the Act. The National Labor Relations Act’s
antiretaliation provision has been broadly interpreted as protecting
workers who simply “participate[d] in a [National Labor Relations]
Board investigation.” NLRB v. Scrivener, 405 U. S. 117, 123. The
similar enforcement needs of this related statute argue for a broad
interpretation of “complaint.” The Act’s requirement that an em
ployer receive fair notice of an employee’s complaint can be met by
oral, as well as written, complaints. Pp. 8–12.
(2) Given the delegation of enforcement powers to federal admin


Cite as: 563 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
istrative agencies, their views about the meaning of the phrase
should be given a degree of weight. The Secretary of Labor has con
sistently held the view that “filed any complaint” covers both oral and
written complaints. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commis
sion has set out a similar view in its Compliance Manual and in mul
tiple briefs. These views are reasonable and consistent with the Act.
And the length of time they have been held suggests that they reflect
careful consideration, not “post hoc rationalizatio[n].” Motor Vehicle
Mfrs. Assn. of United States, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Automobile Ins.
Co., 463 U. S. 29, 50. Pp. 12–13.
(3) After engaging in traditional statutory interpretation meth
ods, the statute does not remain sufficiently ambiguous to warrant
application of the rule of lenity. Pp. 13–14.
(c) This Court will not consider Saint-Gobain’s alternative claim
that the antiretaliation provision applies only to complaints filed
with the Government, since that claim was not raised in the certio
rari briefs and since its resolution is not a “ ‘predicate to an intelli
gent resolution’ ” of the oral/written question at issue, Caterpillar
Inc. v. Lewis, 519 U. S. 61, 75, n. 13. Pp. 14–15.
570 F. 3d 834, vacated and remanded.
BREYER, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and KENNEDY, GINSBURG, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.
SCALIA, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which THOMAS, J., joined as to
all but n. 6. KAGAN, J., took no part in the consideration or decision of
the case.

