Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
2. Richter was not entitled to the habeas relief ordered by the
Ninth Circuit. Pp. 10–24.
(a) That court failed to accord the required deference to the deci
sion of a state court adjudicating the same claims later presented in
the federal habeas petition. Its opinion shows an improper under
standing of §2254(d)’s unreasonableness standard and operation in
the context of a Strickland claim. Asking whether the state court’s
application of Strickland’s standard was unreasonable is different
from asking whether defense counsel’s performance fell below that
standard. Under AEDPA, a state court must be granted a deference
and latitude that are not in operation in a case involving direct re
view under Strickland. A state court’s determination that a claim
lacks merit precludes federal habeas relief so long as “fair-minded ju
rists could disagree” on the correctness of that decision. Yarborough
v. Alvarado, 541 U. S. 652, 664. And the more general the rule being
considered, “the more leeway courts have in reaching outcomes in
case-by-case determinations.” Ibid. The Ninth Circuit explicitly con
ducted a de novo review and found a Strickland violation; it then de
clared without further explanation that the state court’s contrary de
cision was unreasonable. But §2254(d) requires a habeas court to
determine what arguments or theories supported, or could have sup
ported, the state-court decision; and then to ask whether it is possible
fair-minded jurists could disagree that those arguments or theories
are inconsistent with a prior decision of this Court. AEDPA’s unrea
sonableness standard is not a test of the confidence of a federal ha
beas court in the conclusion it would reach as a de novo matter. Even
a strong case for relief does not make the state court’s contrary con
clusion unreasonable. Section 2254(d) is designed to confirm that
state courts are the principal forum for asserting constitutional chal
lenges to state convictions. Pp. 10–14.
(b) The Ninth Circuit erred in concluding that Richter demon
strated an unreasonable application of Strickland by the state court.
Pp. 14–23.
(1) Richter could have secured relief in state court only by
showing both that his counsel provided deficient assistance and that
prejudice resulted. To be deficient, counsel’s representation must
have fallen “below an objective standard of reasonableness,” Strick
land, 466 U. S., at 688; and there is a “strong presumption” that
counsel’s representation is within the “wide range” of reasonable pro
fessional assistance, id., at 689. The question is whether counsel
made errors so fundamental that counsel was not functioning as the
counsel guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment. Prejudice requires
demonstrating “a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s unpro
fessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been differ

