Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

11

Opinion of the Court

ceptions to §2254(d)’s relitigation bar, the exception in
§2254(d)(1) permitting relitigation where the earlier state
decision resulted from an “unreasonable application of”
clearly established federal law. In the view of the Court of
Appeals, the California Supreme Court’s decision on Rich
ter’s ineffective-assistance claim unreasonably applied the
holding in Strickland. The Court of Appeals’ lengthy
opinion, however, discloses an improper understanding of
§2254(d)’s unreasonableness standard and of its operation
in the context of a Strickland claim.
The pivotal question is whether the state court’s appli
cation of the Strickland standard was unreasonable. This
is different from asking whether defense counsel’s per
formance fell below Strickland’s standard. Were that the
inquiry, the analysis would be no different than if, for
example, this Court were adjudicating a Strickland claim
on direct review of a criminal conviction in a United States
district court. Under AEDPA, though, it is a necessary
premise that the two questions are different. For purposes
of §2254(d)(1), “an unreasonable application of federal law
is different from an incorrect application of federal law.”
Williams, supra, at 410. A state court must be granted a
deference and latitude that are not in operation when the
case involves review under the Strickland standard itself.
A state court’s determination that a claim lacks merit
precludes federal habeas relief so long as “fairminded
jurists could disagree” on the correctness of the state
court’s decision. Yarborough v. Alvarado, 541 U. S. 652,
664 (2004).
And as this Court has explained,
“[E]valuating whether a rule application was unreason
able requires considering the rule’s specificity. The more
general the rule, the more leeway courts have in reaching
outcomes in case-by-case determinations.” Ibid. “[I]t is
not an unreasonable application of clearly established
Federal law for a state court to decline to apply a specific
legal rule that has not been squarely established by this

