OCTOBER TERM, 2010

(Slip Opinion)

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

HARRINGTON, WARDEN v. RICHTER
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR
THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 09–587.

Argued October 12, 2010—Decided January 19, 2011

In 1994, deputies called to drug dealer Johnson’s California home found
Johnson wounded and Klein fatally wounded. Johnson claimed that
he was shot in his bedroom by respondent Richter’s codefendant,
Branscombe; that he found Klein on the living room couch; and that
his gun safe, a pistol, and cash were missing. His account was cor
roborated by evidence at the scene, including, relevant here, spent
shell casings, blood spatters, and blood pooled in the bedroom door
way. Investigators took a blood sample from a wall near the bedroom
door, but not from the blood pool. A search of Richter’s home turned
up the safe and ammunition matching evidence at the scene. After
his arrest on murder and other charges, Richter initially denied his
involvement, but later admitted disposing of Johnson’s and
Branscombe’s guns. The prosecution initially built its case on John
son’s testimony and the circumstantial evidence, but it adjusted its
approach after Richter’s counsel, in his opening statement, outlined
the theory that Branscombe shot Johnson in self-defense and that
Klein was killed in the crossfire in the bedroom doorway, and
stressed the lack of forensic support for the prosecution’s case. The
prosecution then decided to call an expert in blood pattern evidence,
who testified that it was unlikely that Klein had been shot outside
the living room and then moved to the couch, and a serologist, who
testified that the blood sample taken near the blood pool could be
Johnson’s but not Klein’s. Under cross-examination, she conceded
that she had not tested the sample for cross-contamination and that
a degraded sample would make it difficult to tell if it had blood of
Klein’s type. Defense counsel called Richter to tell his conflicting
version of events and called other witnesses to corroborate Richter’s
version. Richter was convicted and sentenced to life without parole.

