Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

21

Opinion of the Court

prepare for what appear to be remote possibilities.
Here, Richter’s attorney was mistaken in thinking the
prosecution would not present forensic testimony. But the
prosecution itself did not expect to make that presentation and had made no preparations for doing so on the eve
of trial. For this reason alone, it is at least debatable
whether counsel’s error was so fundamental as to call the
fairness of the trial into doubt.
Even if counsel should have foreseen that the prosecu
tion would offer expert evidence, Richter would still need
to show it was indisputable that Strickland required his
attorney to act upon that knowledge. Attempting to estab
lish this, the Court of Appeals held that defense counsel
should have offered expert testimony to rebut the evidence
from the prosecution. But Strickland does not enact New
ton’s third law for the presentation of evidence, requiring
for every prosecution expert an equal and opposite expert
from the defense.
In many instances cross-examination will be sufficient
to expose defects in an expert’s presentation. When de
fense counsel does not have a solid case, the best strategy
can be to say that there is too much doubt about the
State’s theory for a jury to convict. And while in some
instances “even an isolated error” can support an ineffec
tive-assistance claim if it is “sufficiently egregious and
prejudicial,” Murray v. Carrier, 477 U. S. 478, 496 (1986),
it is difficult to establish ineffective assistance when coun
sel’s overall performance indicates active and capable
advocacy. Here Richter’s attorney represented him with
vigor and conducted a skillful cross-examination. As
noted, defense counsel elicited concessions from the State’s
experts and was able to draw attention to weaknesses in
their conclusions stemming from the fact that their analy
ses were conducted long after investigators had left the
crime scene. For all of these reasons, it would have been
reasonable to find that Richter had not shown his attorney

