Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

5

Syllabus
curate account of counsel’s actual thinking, since Strickland exam
ined only the objective reasonableness of counsel’s actions. As to
whether counsel was constitutionally deficient for not preparing ex
pert testimony as a response to the prosecution’s, an attorney may
not be faulted for a reasonable miscalculation or lack of foresight or
for failing to prepare for remote possibilities. Here, even if counsel
was mistaken, the prosecution itself did not expect to present forensic
testimony until the eve of trial. Thus, it is at least debatable whether
counsel’s error was so fundamental as to call the trial’s fairness into
doubt. Even if counsel should have foreseen the prosecution’s tactic,
Richter would still need to show it was indisputable that Strickland
required his attorney to rely on a rebuttal witness rather than on
cross-examination to discredit the witnesses, but Strickland imposes
no such requirement. And while it is possible an isolated error can
constitute ineffective assistance if it is sufficiently egregious, it is dif
ficult to establish ineffective assistance where counsel’s overall per
formance reflects active and capable advocacy. Pp. 16–22.
(3) The Ninth Circuit also erred in concluding that Richter had
established prejudice under Strickland, which asks whether it is
“reasonably likely” the verdict would have been different, 466 U. S.,
at 696, not whether a court can be certain counsel’s performance had
no effect on the outcome or that reasonable doubt might have been
established had counsel acted differently. There must be a substan
tial likelihood of a different result. The State Supreme Court could
have reasonably concluded that Richter’s prejudice evidence fell short
of this standard. His expert serology evidence established only a
theoretical possibility of Klein’s blood being in the blood pool; and at
trial, defense counsel extracted a similar concession from the prose
cution’s expert. It was also reasonable to find Richter had not estab
lished prejudice given that he offered no evidence challenging other
conclusions of the prosecution’s experts, e.g., that the blood sample
matched Johnson’s blood type. There was, furthermore, sufficient
conventional circumstantial evidence pointing to Richter’s guilt, in
cluding, e.g., the items found at his home. Pp. 22–23.
578 F. 3d 944, reversed and remanded.
KENNEDY, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS,
C. J., and SCALIA, THOMAS, BREYER, ALITO, and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., joined.
GINSBURG, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment. KAGAN, J.,
took no part in the consideration or decision of the case.

