12

HARRINGTON v. RICHTER
Opinion of the Court

Court.” Knowles v. Mirzayance, 556 U. S. ___, ___ (2009)
(slip op., at 9–10) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Here it is not apparent how the Court of Appeals’ analy
sis would have been any different without AEDPA. The
court explicitly conducted a de novo review, 578 F. 3d, at
952; and after finding a Strickland violation, it declared,
without further explanation, that the “state court’s deci
sion to the contrary constituted an unreasonable applica
tion of Strickland.” 578 F. 3d, at 969. AEDPA demands
more. Under §2254(d), a habeas court must determine
what arguments or theories supported or, as here, could
have supported, the state court’s decision; and then it
must ask whether it is possible fairminded jurists could
disagree that those arguments or theories are inconsistent
with the holding in a prior decision of this Court. The
opinion of the Court of Appeals all but ignored “the only
question that matters under §2254(d)(1).” Lockyer v.
Andrade, 538 U. S. 63, 71 (2003).
The Court of Appeals appears to have treated the un
reasonableness question as a test of its confidence in the
result it would reach under de novo review: Because the
Court of Appeals had little doubt that Richter’s Strickland
claim had merit, the Court of Appeals concluded the state
court must have been unreasonable in rejecting it. This
analysis overlooks arguments that would otherwise justify
the state court’s result and ignores further limitations of
§2254(d), including its requirement that the state court’s
decision be evaluated according to the precedents of this
Court. See Renico v. Lett, 559 U. S. ___, ___ (2010) (slip
op., at 11–12). It bears repeating that even a strong case
for relief does not mean the state court’s contrary conclu
sion was unreasonable. See Lockyer, supra, at 75.
If this standard is difficult to meet, that is because it
was meant to be. As amended by AEDPA, §2254(d) stops
short of imposing a complete bar on federal court relitiga
tion of claims already rejected in state proceedings. Cf.

