Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

19

Opinion of the Court

should have had the blood evidence tested. 578 F. 3d, at
956, n. 9. But the court failed to recognize that making a
central issue out of blood evidence would have increased
the likelihood of the prosecution’s producing its own evi
dence on the blood pool’s origins and composition; and
once matters proceeded on this course, there was a serious
risk that expert evidence could destroy Richter’s case.
Even apart from this danger, there was the possibility
that expert testimony could shift attention to esoteric
matters of forensic science, distract the jury from whether
Johnson was telling the truth, or transform the case into a
battle of the experts. Accord, Bonin v. Calderon, 59 F. 3d
815, 836 (CA9 1995).
True, it appears that defense counsel’s opening state
ment itself inspired the prosecution to introduce expert
forensic evidence. But the prosecution’s evidence may
well have been weakened by the fact that it was assem
bled late in the process; and in any event the prosecution’s
response shows merely that the defense strategy did not
work out as well as counsel had hoped, not that counsel
was incompetent.
To support a defense argument that the prosecution has
not proved its case it sometimes is better to try to cast
pervasive suspicion of doubt than to strive to prove a
certainty that exonerates. All that happened here is that
counsel pursued a course that conformed to the first op
tion. If this case presented a de novo review of Strickland,
the foregoing might well suffice to reject the claim of
inadequate counsel, but that is an unnecessary step. The
Court of Appeals must be reversed if there was a reason
able justification for the state court’s decision. In light of
the record here there was no basis to rule that the state
court’s determination was unreasonable.
The Court of Appeals erred in dismissing strategic
considerations like these as an inaccurate account of
counsel’s actual thinking. Although courts may not in

