Cite as: 562 U. S. ____ (2011)

17

Opinion of the Court

a particular client in the same way.” Id., at 689. Rare are
the situations in which the “wide latitude counsel must
have in making tactical decisions” will be limited to any
one technique or approach. Ibid. It can be assumed that
in some cases counsel would be deemed ineffective for
failing to consult or rely on experts, but even that formula
tion is sufficiently general that state courts would have
wide latitude in applying it. Here it would be well within
the bounds of a reasonable judicial determination for the
state court to conclude that defense counsel could follow a
strategy that did not require the use of experts regarding
the pool in the doorway to Johnson’s bedroom.
From the perspective of Richter’s defense counsel when
he was preparing Richter’s defense, there were any num
ber of hypothetical experts—specialists in psychiatry,
psychology, ballistics, fingerprints, tire treads, physiology,
or numerous other disciplines and subdisciplines—whose
insight might possibly have been useful. An attorney can
avoid activities that appear “distractive from more impor
tant duties.” Bobby v. Van Hook, 558 U. S. ___, ___ (2009)
(per curiam) (slip op., at 8). Counsel was entitled to for
mulate a strategy that was reasonable at the time and to
balance limited resources in accord with effective trial
tactics and strategies. See Knowles, supra, at ___ (slip op.,
at 14–15); Rompilla v. Beard, 545 U. S. 374, 383 (2005);
Wiggins v. Smith, 539 U. S. 510, 525 (2003); Strickland,
466 U. S., at 699.
In concluding otherwise the Court of Appeals failed to
“reconstruct the circumstances of counsel’s challenged
conduct” and “evaluate the conduct from counsel’s per
spective at the time.” Id., at 689. In its view Klein’s
location was “the single most critical issue in the case”
given the differing theories of the prosecution and the
defense, and the source of the blood in the doorway was
therefore of central concern. 578 F. 3d, at 953–954. But it
was far from a necessary conclusion that this was evident

