2

HARRINGTON v. RICHTER
Syllabus
He later sought habeas relief from the California Supreme Court, as
serting, inter alia, that his counsel provided ineffective assistance,
see Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668, when he failed to pre
sent expert testimony on blood evidence, because it could have dis
closed the blood pool’s source and bolstered Richter’s theory. He also
offered affidavits from forensics experts to support his claim. The
court denied the petition in a one-sentence summary order. Subse
quently, he reasserted his state claims in a federal habeas petition.
The District Court denied his petition. A Ninth Circuit panel af
firmed, but the en banc court reversed. Initially it questioned
whether 28 U. S. C. §2254(d)—which, as amended by the Antiterror
ism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), limits the
availability of federal habeas relief for claims previously “adjudicated
on the merits” in state court—applied to Richter’s petition, since the
State Supreme Court issued only a summary denial. But it found the
state-court decision unreasonable anyway. In its view, trial counsel
was deficient in failing to consult blood evidence experts in planning
a trial strategy and in preparing to rebut expert evidence the prose
cution might—and later did—offer.

Held:
1. Section 2254(d) applies to Richter’s petition, even though the
state court’s order was unaccompanied by an opinion explaining the
court’s reasoning. Pp. 7–10.
(a) By its terms, §2254(d) bars relitigation of a claim “adjudicated
on the merits” in state court unless, among other exceptions, the ear
lier state-court “decision” involved “an unreasonable application” of
“clearly established Federal law, as determined by” this Court,
§2254(d)(1). Nothing in its text—which refers only to a “decision” re
sulting “from an adjudication”—requires a statement of reasons.
Where the state-court decision has no explanation, the habeas peti
tioner must still show there was no reasonable basis for the state
court to deny relief. There is no merit to the assertion that applying
§2254(d) when state courts issue summary rulings will encourage
those courts to withhold explanations. The issuance of summary dis
positions can enable state judiciaries to concentrate resources where
most needed. Pp. 7–9.
(b) Nor is there merit to Richter’s argument that §2254(d) does
not apply because the California Supreme Court did not say it was
adjudicating his claim “on the merits.” When a state court has de
nied relief, adjudication on the merits can be presumed absent any
contrary indication or state-law procedural principles. The presump
tion may be overcome by a more likely explanation for the state
court’s decision, but Richter does not make that showing here. Pp. 9–
10.

