4

HARRINGTON v. RICHTER
Syllabus
ent.” Id., at 694. “Surmounting Strickland’s high bar is never . . .
easy.” Padilla v. Kentucky, 559 U. S.___, ___. Strickland can func
tion as a way to escape rules of waiver and forfeiture. The question is
whether an attorney’s representation amounted to incompetence un
der prevailing professional norms, not whether it deviated from best
practices or most common custom. Establishing that a state court’s
application of Strickland was unreasonable under §2254(d) is even
more difficult, since both standards are “highly deferential,” 466 U. S,
at 689, and since Strickland’s general standard has a substantial
range of reasonable applications. The question under §2254(d) is not
whether counsel’s actions were reasonable, but whether there is any
reasonable argument that counsel satisfied Strickland’s deferential
standard. Pp. 14–16.
(2) The Ninth Circuit erred in holding that because Richter’s
attorney had not consulted forensic blood experts or introduced ex
pert evidence, the State Supreme Court could not reasonably have
concluded counsel provided adequate representation.
A state court could reasonably conclude that a competent attorney
could elect a strategy that did not require using blood evidence ex
perts. Rare are the situations in which the latitude counsel enjoys
will be limited to any one technique or approach. There were any
number of experts whose insight might have been useful to the de
fense. Counsel is entitled to balance limited resources in accord with
effective trial tactics and strategies. In finding otherwise the Ninth
Circuit failed to “reconstruct the circumstances of counsel’s chal
lenged conduct” and “evaluate the conduct from counsel’s perspective
at the time.” Strickland, supra, at 689. Given the many factual dif
ferences between the prosecution and defense versions of events, it
was far from evident at the time of trial that the blood source was
central to Richter’s case. And relying on “the harsh light of hind
sight” to cast doubt on a trial that took place over 15 years ago is pre
cisely what Strickland and AEDPA seek to prevent. See Bell v. Cone,
535 U. S. 685, 702. Even had the value of expert testimony been ap
parent, it would be reasonable to conclude that a competent attorney
might elect not to use it here, where counsel had reason to question
the truth of his client’s account. Making blood evidence a central is
sue could also have led the prosecution to produce its own expert
analysis, possibly destroying Richter’s case, or distracted the jury
with esoteric questions of forensic science. Defense counsel’s opening
statement may have inspired the prosecution to present forensic evi
dence, but that shows only that the defense strategy did not work out
as well as hoped. In light of the record here there was no basis to
rule that the state court’s determination was unreasonable.
The Court of Appeals erred in dismissing such concern as an inac

