18

HARRINGTON v. RICHTER
Opinion of the Court

at the time of the trial. There were many factual differ
ences between prosecution and defense versions of the
events on the night of the shootings. It is only because
forensic evidence has emerged concerning the source of the
blood pool that the issue could with any plausibility be
said to stand apart. Reliance on “the harsh light of hind
sight” to cast doubt on a trial that took place now more
than 15 years ago is precisely what Strickland and
AEDPA seek to prevent. Cone, 535 U. S., at 702; see also
Lockhart, 506 U. S., at 372.
Even if it had been apparent that expert blood testi
mony could support Richter’s defense, it would be reason
able to conclude that a competent attorney might elect not
to use it. The Court of Appeals opinion for the en banc
majority rests in large part on a hypothesis that reasona
bly could have been rejected. The hypothesis is that with
out jeopardizing Richter’s defense, an expert could have
testified that the blood in Johnson’s doorway could not
have come from Johnson and could have come from Klein,
thus suggesting that Richter’s version of the shooting was
correct and Johnson’s a fabrication. This theory overlooks
the fact that concentrating on the blood pool carried its
own serious risks. If serological analysis or other forensic
evidence demonstrated that the blood came from Johnson
alone, Richter’s story would be exposed as an invention.
An attorney need not pursue an investigation that would
be fruitless, much less one that might be harmful to the
defense. Strickland, supra, at 691. Here Richter’s attor
ney had reason to question the truth of his client’s ac
count, given, for instance, Richter’s initial denial of
involvement and the subsequent production of Johnson’s
missing pistol.
It would have been altogether reasonable to conclude
that this concern justified the course Richter’s counsel
pursued. Indeed, the Court of Appeals recognized this risk
insofar as it pertained to the suggestion that counsel

