4

HARRINGTON v. RICHTER
Opinion of the Court

The prosecution built its case on Johnson’s testimony
and on circumstantial evidence. Its opening statement
took note of the shell casings found at the crime scene and
the ammunition and gun safe found at Richter’s residence.
Defense counsel offered explanations for the circumstan
tial evidence and derided Johnson as a drug dealer, a
paranoid, and a trigger-happy gun fanatic who had drawn
a pistol on Branscombe and Richter the last time he had
seen them. And there were inconsistencies in Johnson’s
story. In his 911 call, for instance, Johnson first said
there were four or five men who had broken into his
house, not two; and in the call he did not identify Richter
and Branscombe among the intruders.
Blood evidence does not appear to have been part of the
prosecution’s planned case prior to trial, and investigators
had not analyzed the few blood samples taken from the
crime scene. But the opening statement from the defense
led the prosecution to alter its approach. Richter’s attor
ney outlined the theory that Branscombe had fired on
Johnson in self-defense and that Klein had been killed not
on the living room couch but in the crossfire in the bed
room doorway. Defense counsel stressed deficiencies in
the investigation, including the absence of forensic support
for the prosecution’s version of events.
The prosecution took steps to adjust to the counterat
tack now disclosed. Without advance notice and over the
objection of Richter’s attorney, one of the detectives who
investigated the shootings testified for the prosecution as
an expert in blood pattern evidence. He concluded it was
unlikely Klein had been shot outside the living room and
then moved to the couch, given the patterns of blood on
Klein’s face, as well as other evidence including “high
velocity” blood spatter near the couch consistent with the
location of a shooting. The prosecution also offered testi
mony from a serologist. She testified the blood sample
taken near the pool by the bedroom door could be John

