12

GOODYEAR DUNLOP TIRES OPERATIONS, S. A.
v. BROWN
Opinion of the Court

n. 11 (1984) (Ohio’s exercise of general jurisdiction was
permissible in Perkins because “Ohio was the corporation’s
principal, if temporary, place of business”).
We next addressed the exercise of general jurisdiction
over an out-of-state corporation over three decades later,
in Helicopteros. In that case, survivors of United States
citizens who died in a helicopter crash in Peru instituted
wrongful-death actions in a Texas state court against the
owner and operator of the helicopter, a Colombian corpo
ration. The Colombian corporation had no place of busi
ness in Texas and was not licensed to do business there.
“Basically, [the company’s] contacts with Texas consisted
of sending its chief executive officer to Houston for a
contract-negotiation session; accepting into its New York
bank account checks drawn on a Houston bank; purchas
ing helicopters, equipment, and training services from [a
Texas enterprise] for substantial sums; and sending per
sonnel to [Texas] for training.” 466 U. S., at 416. These
links to Texas, we determined, did not “constitute the kind
of continuous and systematic general business contacts . . .
found to exist in Perkins,” and were insufficient to support
the exercise of jurisdiction over a claim that neither
“ar[o]se out of . . . no[r] related to” the defendant’s activi
ties in Texas. Id., at 415–416 (internal quotation marks
omitted).
Helicopteros concluded that “mere purchases [made in
the forum State], even if occurring at regular intervals,
are not enough to warrant a State’s assertion of [general]
jurisdiction over a nonresident corporation in a cause of
action not related to those purchase transactions.” Id., at
418. We see no reason to differentiate from the ties to
Texas held insufficient in Helicopteros, the sales of peti
tioners’ tires sporadically made in North Carolina through
intermediaries. Under the sprawling view of general
jurisdiction urged by respondents and embraced by the
North Carolina Court of Appeals, any substantial manu

