Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

3

Syllabus
286, 297; but ties serving to bolster the exercise of specific jurisdic
tion do not warrant a determination that, based on those ties, the fo
rum has general jurisdiction over a defendant. A corporation’s “con
tinuous activity of some sorts within a state,” International Shoe
instructed, “is not enough to support the demand that the corporation
be amenable to suits unrelated to that activity.” 326 U. S., at 318.
Measured against Helicopteros and Perkins, North Carolina is not
a forum in which it would be permissible to subject petitioners to
general jurisdiction. In the 1952 Perkins case, general jurisdiction
was appropriately exercised over a Philippine corporation sued in
Ohio, where the company’s affairs were overseen during World War
II. In Helicopteros, however, the survivors of U. S. citizens killed
when a helicopter owned by a Colombian corporation crashed in Peru
could not maintain wrongful-death actions against that corporation
in Texas, where the company’s contacts “consisted of sending its chief
executive officer to Houston for a contract-negotiation session; accept
ing into its New York bank account checks drawn on a Houston bank;
purchasing helicopters, equipment, and training services from [a
Texas enterprise]; and sending personnel to [Texas] for training.”
466 U. S., at 416. These links to Texas did not “constitute the kind of
continuous and systematic general business contacts . . . found to ex
ist in Perkins,” and were insufficient to support the exercise of juris
diction over a claim that neither “ ‘ar[o]se out of’ . . . no[r] related to”
the defendant’s activities in Texas. Id., at 415–416. This Court sees
no reason to differentiate from the ties to Texas held insufficient in
Helicopteros, the sales of petitioners’ tires sporadically made in North
Carolina through intermediaries. Pp. 9–13.
(c) Neither below nor in their brief in opposition to the petition for
certiorari did respondents urge disregard of petitioners’ discrete
status as subsidiaries and treatment of all Goodyear entities as a
“unitary business,” so that jurisdiction over the parent would draw in
the subsidiaries as well. Respondents have therefore forfeited this
contention. Pp. 13–14.
199 N. C. App. 50, 681 S. E. 2d 382, reversed.
GINSBURG, J., delivered the opinion for a unanimous Court.

