Cite as: 564 U. S. ____ (2011)

7

Opinion of the Court

tion’s in-state activity is “continuous and systematic” and
that activity gave rise to the episode-in-suit. 326 U. S., at
317. Further, the Court observed, the commission of
certain “single or occasional acts” in a State may be suffi
cient to render a corporation answerable in that State
with respect to those acts, though not with respect to
matters unrelated to the forum connections. Id., at 318.
The heading courts today use to encompass these two
International Shoe categories is “specific jurisdiction.” See
von Mehren & Trautman 1144–1163. Adjudicatory au
thority is “specific” when the suit “aris[es] out of or relate[s]
to the defendant’s contacts with the forum.” Helicopteros,
466 U. S., at 414, n. 8.
International Shoe distinguished from cases that fit
within the “specific jurisdiction” categories, “instances in
which the continuous corporate operations within a state
[are] so substantial and of such a nature as to justify suit
against it on causes of action arising from dealings en
tirely distinct from those activities.” 326 U. S., at 318.
Adjudicatory authority so grounded is today called “gen
eral jurisdiction.” Helicopteros, 466 U. S., at 414, n. 9. For
an individual, the paradigm forum for the exercise of
general jurisdiction is the individual’s domicile; for a
corporation, it is an equivalent place, one in which the
corporation is fairly regarded as at home. See Brilmayer
728 (identifying domicile, place of incorporation, and
principal place of business as “paradig[m]” bases for the
exercise of general jurisdiction).
Since International Shoe, this Court’s decisions have
elaborated primarily on circumstances that warrant the
exercise of specific jurisdiction, particularly in cases in
volving “single or occasional acts” occurring or having
their impact within the forum State. As a rule in these
cases, this Court has inquired whether there was “some
act by which the defendant purposefully avail[ed] itself of
the privilege of conducting activities within the forum

