(Slip Opinion)

OCTOBER TERM, 2010

1

Syllabus
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader.
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337.

SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
Syllabus

GOODYEAR DUNLOP TIRES OPERATIONS, S. A., 

ET AL. v. BROWN ET UX., CO-ADMINISTRATORS OF

THE ESTATE OF BROWN, ET AL. 

CERTIORARI TO THE COURT OF APPEALS OF NORTH CAROLINA
No. 10–76. Argued January 11, 2011 —Decided June 27, 2011
Respondents, North Carolina residents whose sons died in a bus acci
dent outside Paris, France, filed a suit for wrongful-death damages in
North Carolina state court. Alleging that the accident was caused by
tire failure, they named as defendants Goodyear USA, an Ohio corpo
ration, and petitioners, three Goodyear USA subsidiaries, organized
and operating, respectively, in Luxembourg, Turkey, and France. Pe
titioners’ tires are manufactured primarily for European and Asian
markets and differ in size and construction from tires ordinarily sold
in the United States. Petitioners are not registered to do business in
North Carolina; have no place of business, employees, or bank ac
counts in the State; do not design, manufacture, or advertise their
products in the State; and do not solicit business in the State or sell
or ship tires to North Carolina customers. Even so, a small percent
age of their tires were distributed in North Carolina by other Good
year USA affiliates. The trial court denied petitioners’ motion to
dismiss the claims against them for want of personal jurisdiction.
The North Carolina Court of Appeals affirmed, concluding that the
North Carolina courts had general jurisdiction over petitioners,
whose tires had reached the State through “the stream of commerce.”
Held: Petitioners were not amenable to suit in North Carolina on
claims unrelated to any activity of petitioners in the forum State.
Pp. 6–14.
(a) The Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause sets the
outer boundaries of a state tribunal’s authority to proceed against a
defendant. The pathmarking decision of International Shoe Co. v.
Washington, 326 U. S. 310, provides that state courts may exercise

